 
THE LONG RUN 
A TALE OF THE CONTINUING TIME 
 
 
DANIEL KEYS MORAN 

This is a work of fiction. None of the characters in it are real 
people and any resemblance to anybody, living or dead, is a coin-
cidence. 
 
It is the author’s intention that this work should be freely 
downloadable, copyable, and shareable in electronic format. It 
may not be reproduced, shared, or transmitted for a fee by any 
party to whom the author has not contractually granted permis-
sion. The author retains all other rights.  
 
Copyright © 1989 by Daniel Keys Moran 

    
Dedicated to 
 
Jodi Jodi, Kathy, Kevin and Richard. 
 
Yeah, yeah, I know. The dedications change with each passing 
edition. There’s no law I’m aware of on the subject. And Jodi, 
Kathy, Kevin and Richard? They rock. 
 
And Richard? He’s two years old now. While I was proofing this 
manuscript I told him there was a scene where someone was 
Floating In Space While Awaiting Rescue, just like in Winnie 
the Pooh ... and he said wisely, “Christopher Robin saves him.” 
Not a question; he was telling me how it would go. 
 
Christopher Robin doesn’t appear in this book, actually, but it 
was awfully cool that Richard thought he should, some twenty 
years after I first wrote the scene where Pooh was mentioned. 
 
(Richard’s eight now. His baby brother, Connor, is five. Time 
passes. DKM, 2007.)  

 
THE LONG RUN 
A TALE OF THE CONTINUING TIME 
 

    
The Last Summer of His Youth 
2069 Gregorian 
 
I killed my love to set him free 
For fear I’d cause him pain 
I killed him—we were very young 
And now I’m old again 
 
We lived a life together once 
And I was so afraid 
For every life I’ve lived, I’ve died 
For every life I’ve made 
 
I killed my love to set him free 
He wasn’t hard to kill 
He ran into another life 
I guess he’s running still 
 
Mahliya Kutura, Many Lives 
“Street Songs,” 2078 Gregorian 
 
 


    
 
1. 
“YOU’RE TRENT.” 
“I am?” 
The young man was conservatively dressed: a gray jacket 
and black pants, and a white silk shirt that shone brilliantly 
even in the dim light from L’Express’s outdoor glowfloats. He 
wore immaculately clean white running shoes; a single flat ruby 
stud shone in the lobe of his left ear. Trent’s temples, where an 
inskin InfoNet link might have been implanted, were merely 
smooth skin. His hair was sandy blond, cut short, and he either 
wore no makeup or had turned it off. 
He wore flat black sunglasses though they were hardly nec-
essary. 
It was ten minutes after six o’clock. 
“You’re younger than I’d expected,” said the middle-aged man 
who had said his name was Jerry Jackson. On the phone Trent 
had not noticed it, but in person his voice held the faint but 
definite traces of a Southern accent. 
“Am I?” 
“And you’re late,” the man said. Despite the air, heavy with 
ozone as though a thunderstorm were about to strike, Jackson 
had taken a table outside beneath the gray-black skies, on the 
balcony level overlooking the eternally crowded streets. 
“Ten minutes late ...” Trent shrugged. “Ten minutes older.” 
He seated himself across the table from Jerry Jackson. To 
the waitbot that had led him to the table he said, “A pot of cof-
fee. With cream, no sugar.” 
The waitbot paused, then said mildly, in the rich baritone 
characteristic of opera singers, newsdancers and politicians, 
“Monsieur, that item is not on the menu.” 
“Waiter, please,” said Trent. They both waited while the 
waitbot rolled away out of listening range. 
L’Express sat on the western edge of what had once been the 
Brooklyn Navy Yard, and was now one of the most expensive 
residential areas in all the Patrol Sectors. From where he sat 

2  Tales 
Trent could see to the northwest, on the other side of the East 
River, the scarlet sparks of spacecraft rising and descending at 
Unification Spaceport in lower Manhattan. The dull, distant 
boom of craft breaking through the sound barrier touched him 
every twenty seconds or so. 
Eight spacescrapers reared high above the skyline, eight 
three- to five-kilometer tall buildings; two of them did nothing 
but house Peaceforcers and the babychasers from the Ministry of 
Population Control; the Left and Right Hands of the Devil Him-
self, Secretary General Charles Eddore. 
Trent said, “How did you get referred to me?” 
“You’re in the Directory.” 
“That wasn’t the question.” 
Jerry Jackson was drinking something cold and green with 
crushed ice. He wore an exquisitely tailored blue pinstripe suit. 
A brushed aluminum attaché case stood upright beside his 
chair. The cuffs of his sleeves were fastened European style, 
folded back upon themselves. “Actually, Booker Jamethon gave 
me your name.” 
“Booker’s a great guy,” said Trent. 
“He said I shouldn’t hire you, that you’re not dependable.” 
“Of course, all those years on the juice, they weren’t good for 
him.” 
Jerry Jackson smiled for the first time. “’Sieur Jamethon 
wanted the job himself. He only gave me your name—for a fee—
after I turned him down.” 
“Tell me about the job.” 
“You know CalleyTronics?” 
Trent paused. “It’s located on the eighth floor of the Down 
Plaza. They sell inskins and image co-processors, MPUs, like 
that. Half the webdancers I know buy from them.” 
“Frank Calley,” said Jerry Jackson with a convincing enough 
display of anger, “is a thief. He lifted fifteen terabytes of hot 
RAM, a hundred and five thousand Credit Units worth of room-
temperature superconductor memory, from mah warehouse in 
Georgia.” Under the stress of anger, the accent became more au-
dible. 

Moran  3 
 
A single drop of rain touched down on the transparent table-
top in front of Trent. 
“Let me guess,” Trent said. 
“Guess?” 
“You want me to get your RTS back.” 
“Yes.” 
“What do you think you know about me?” 
A touch of the anger was back in his voice. “You’re supposed 
to be a thief yourself.” The word ‘thief’ was laced with astonish-
ing disdain. “You hire out to steal things for people. You—” 
A second drop of rain joined the first. Jerry Jackson cut him-
self off as a waiter, after an anxious glance at the sky, hurried 
out to where they were seated. 
“Monsieur,” said the waiter hurriedly, with a French accent 
that might have been real, “you wished to order a cup of coffee?” 
“A pot,” Trent corrected him. “A whole big pot of coffee.” 
“Monsieur, we do not sell coffee by the pot, only by the cup.” 
“May I speak to your manager?” 
The waiter’s features stiffened visibly. “Oui. One moment, 
monsieur.” 
Trent waited until the waiter had gone back inside. “So you 
want me to boost fifteen terabytes of RTS from CalleyTronics?” 
“Yes.” 
Trent counted five drops of rain on the cut crystal surface of 
the table. Six. “It probably can’t be done—straight boost, I mean. 
Calley’s real tight with the power structure in the Patrol Sec-
tors, and his security’s pretty good. You’d be better off with a 
con, something that would leave him wondering if he’d been 
hit—not sure—and feeling so stupid he wouldn’t go to the Peace-
forcers with it for fear of being laughed at.” 
Jerry Jackson leaned forward with what seemed to Trent to 
be honest curiosity. “What do you have in mind?” 
“I don’t know. What’s good here?” 
“Regarding Calley,” Jerry Jackson said with great control, 
“what do you have in mind?” 

4  Tales 
Trent looked at the man blankly. “Nothing. I’m not going to 
boost Frank Calley for you, and I’m not going to con him either. 
Look, have you ever eaten here before?” 
“Never.” 
“Oh. Too bad. Usually when I go to a new restaurant I like to 
go with somebody who’s been there before, so I know what’s 
good. You may not know this,” said Trent, “but two years ago a 
Player scored some image co-processor hardware off CalleyTron-
ics, chanted Calley’s accounting computer to believe the hard-
ware had been properly paid for and had it shipped to a drop 
box. It took Calley half a year to find out who’d done it, but that 
summer they fished a corpse out of the East River. His teeth had 
been pulled with pliers, his eyes were poked out, his fingers had 
been chopped off, and his features defaced with acid. They iden-
tified him by his inskin.” 
“You won’t take the job?” 
“Am I being asked?” 
“Yes.” 
“No.” 
Jackson took a deep breath. “Why not?” 
Trent shrugged. “No percentage. If I was going to, I’d do a 
con to get Calley coming after me, get him to believe I had some-
thing he wanted. But I’m not going to. The guy’s mean, but he’s 
also pretty straight; guys like him always go to the Peace-
forcers.” 
A gorgeous, mature woman in a black evening gown came out 
to their table, with the waiter a few steps behind her. “Mon-
sieur?” 
“Yes?” said Trent politely. 
For some reason his response seemed to throw her. Her ac-
cent was considerably better than the waiter’s; Trent would 
have bet she was actually French. “You wished to order ...” 
“Coffee.” 
“An entire pot?” 
“Please.” 
“We do not sell coffee by the pot, monsieur. We do not even 
have a pot to put the coffee in; the coffee is brewed in a single 

Moran  5 
 
large—” She hesitated, searching for a word. “—vat? Yes, vat, 
brewed in a vat in the morning, and then put in stasis and 
poured from stasis a cup at a time.” 
“Okay. I want five, no, make that seven, seven cups of coffee, 
each one about fifteen percent cream, one right after the other. 
Send the waitbot out with a cup, give it about five minutes and 
send it out again. Do that until I tell it to stop.” 
“Monsieur,” she said, stress making it difficult for Trent to 
follow her words, “we have only three waitbots. If we do this we 
must assign a waitbot to do nothing but service your table, and 
this will affect the other patrons.” 
“Damn it,” Jerry Jackson exploded, “what is this nonsense? 
Take the goddamn coffee in a cup. Are you here to talk business 
or what?” 
Rain drops were striking Trent square in the face. The man-
ager looked back and forth between the two of them in confu-
sion. “You’re sure?” Trent asked her. “It’s simply not possible to 
have the cups just keep coming?” 
“Monsieur,” protested the manager in such horribly accented 
English that Trent could barely follow her, “I do not think we 
can.” 
“It’s okay,” said Trent, standing, “we’re done.” To Jerry Jack-
son he said, “I’ve really got to go; I’m late for another appoint-
ment.” He turned back once before leaving. “Next time,” he said 
as Jerry Jackson stared, “you have to take me someplace class-
ier.” 
 
2. 
ONCE THERE WAS a thief, and the thief was God. 
—The first line in The Exodus Bible. 
IT WAS A twenty minute slidewalk trip from L’Express, at one 
end of the old Brooklyn Navy Yard, through streets lined by 
gray plastisteel residential high-rises, to the Down Plaza at the 
other end of the development. Trent ran all the way. He was de-
layed just before he reached the Plaza when a bomb in a baby 

6  Tales 
carriage blew up next to a pair of patrolling Peaceforcers, killing 
the Peaceforcers and several bystanders and tearing a hole in 
the slidewalk that brought the slidewalk to a shuddering, grind-
ing stop. Despite his hurry Trent stopped running immediately, 
and walked without haste through the growing rain, away from 
the crowd gathering around the site of the explosion, walked 
straight as a laser the rest of the way to the Plaza maglev. 
About twenty fashionable, damp, well-dressed people were 
crowded onto the air-conditioned maglev platform as it de-
scended beneath street level. 
Trent was not particularly noticeable; because it was neces-
sary for the job, so that he would not stand out from the other 
patrons inside CalleyTronics, Trent had dressed that day every 
bit as well as the children of the wealthy and privileged who 
swarmed through the eight huge, underground levels of the 
Down Plaza, the busiest shopping structure in the Patrol Sec-
tors. 
Most of those crowded onto the maglev platform, as it sank 
into the Down Plaza, were slender; a few of the less-well dressed 
were gaunt. 
Two of them were fat. Somewhere in their mid-thirties, Trent 
guessed; they were French and they were female and they were 
fat. Not counting the cyborg French Peaceforcers Elite, who 
came by their mass in honest metal and metal-ceramics, Trent 
had never seen more gross tonnage on two bodies. Between the 
two of them they must have massed 250 kilos. 
They were the last ones onto the maglev platform, already 
half loaded down with their packages and bags and umbrellas, 
chattering gaily in French so perfectly accented that there was 
no question in Trent’s mind as to their nationality. They could 
not be employed themselves, not by the U.N.; the U.N. had 
maximum weight standards. Wives, then, of United Nations of-
ficials transplanted from France to oversee in the governing of 
Occupied America. 
One of the fat women touched the dark pressure point 
marked “Five.” The pressure point lit. Behind the dark lenses 
Trent’s eyelids drooped shut; through the traceset contact buried 

Moran  7 
 
in the arms of the sunglasses he sent a single command to his 
Image. 
The maglev descended five floors in relative silence, as people 
got on and off the platform at the various levels. The tower in 
which the maglev platform was located thrust up like a spear 
through the center of the Down Plaza; the shops were arrayed in 
a rough rectangle around the maglev tower. Hanging flat walk-
ways connected the central maglev tower to the shops at each 
level; skywalks connected the various levels for those who pre-
ferred walking to using the maglev. 
At Level Five the maglev did not even slow. The two fat 
women broke off their conversation in consternation; one of 
them touched the pressure point for Level Five again. Trent said 
softly, “Ladies?” 
They turned to look at him. 
“Did you know that on Level One there’s one of the finest 
gyms in the city? And on Level Three there’s a biosculptor who 
vacuums fat cells so you can’t get fat.” Trent smiled at them. 
“Really. It’s amazing, she just vacuums those fat cells right out. 
Whoosh!” 
The two fat women gaped at him. The platform had not 
stopped at Level Five; it did at Level Six, and half a dozen of the 
maglev platform’s occupants got off; a couple more got on. 
The gates closed again, and the platform descended. 
“On Level Four there’s three cafes that serve empty food, no 
calories,” Trent continued enthusiastically. “Left handed sugars; 
you can really pig out.” He stared at them with his sunglasses. 
“It doesn’t taste exactly the same, but that’s not my fault.” 
Everybody left on the maglev platform was looking at them, 
at Trent and the two fat women. The maglev platform skipped 
Level Seven, where most of the small businesses were clustered, 
and opened up finally onto Level Eight, the bottom level of the 
huge plaza. People filed off slowly, stepping over or walking 
around the prone, twitching form of the juice junkie who blocked 
the walkway from the maglev platform, looking back as they did 
so at Trent and the French women. Trent turned to leave also 

8  Tales 
and then suddenly, just the other side of the maglev gates, 
turned around to face the French women again. 
“Do you speak English?” he demanded. 
The one nearest him said in English, haughtily, clearly, “I do 
not speak English.” 
“Oh.” The maglev gates closed on the women, and the power 
on the platform suddenly died. The platform went dark. “One 
hundred and fifteen million people,” said Trent in his best 
French, “died last year because there wasn’t enough food for 
them.” Behind the gate, on the maglev platform, the women 
were pushing frantically at the pressure points. Trent did not 
think they had even heard him. He looked at them for just a 
moment, stood watching them without expression from the other 
side of the gates. The one who was not punching at the pressure 
points suddenly became aware of Trent standing and watching 
them, and pleaded in French, “Young man, will you call someone 
to let us out?” 
Turning away, Trent shook his head. “I’m already late,” he 
muttered. 
He almost tripped over the juice junkie. 
THE CRYSTAL WIND is the Storm, and the Storm is Data, and the 
Data is Life. 
—The Player’s Litany 
HEAT RISES; it was always notably cool on the bottom level of the 
Down Plaza. 
Walking out onto Eight, those who were new to the Plaza, 
even New York natives, tended to gawk like tourists. The upper 
seven levels of the Down Plaza were illuminated by yellow light 
with a greenish tinge: a mixture of yellow sunpaint and the om-
nipresent, wavering flickering light of the blue-green glowfloats 
in their eternal migration between the first and eighth levels of 
the Down Plaza. 
Level Eight was a riot of color; glittering adholo, real neon 
and neonlaser and glowpaint. Eight was the only level with a 
floor, though those who spent any amount of time down on Eight 

Moran  9 
 
learned to avoid those areas around the maglev tower where the 
ceiling opened up; the eight level drop into the crowds was a fa-
vorite with jumpers. 
Eight was easily the most popular level in the Plaza. There 
was a whorehouse behind the furniture shop, and two sensable 
parlors that catered to those with refined, largely illegal tastes. 
CalleyTronics was located there as well, and Players from over a 
hundred kilometers around came in person to buy from Calley, 
who had been a rather famous Player himself as a young man, 
in the wistfully remembered days before DataWatch. 
The BloodSilk Boys were mixed among the crowds at the 
west end of the Plaza. Four gendarmes—cops, New York City 
Police officers—sat in full goldtone riot armor at Googie’s Place 
on the eastern edge of Eight, watching the Plaza through the 
coffee shop’s glassite walls. Trent did not look at either group as 
he walked away from the diminishing sound of the swearing 
French women and went to see Bones. 
On the crowded floor of Down Plaza, well back from the 
jumper zone, eight floors beneath the surface of Brooklyn, the 
old black man who was considered by many the world’s greatest 
contortionist gathered up the hard Chinese and SpaceFarer CU 
in the basket before his platform and prepared to take a break 
from his routine. 
Trent came to a stop just off the walkway, beside the low 
platform on which Bones worked. Pulling on his shirt, Bones 
had to raise his voice to be heard above the loud music and the 
babble of the crowd. 
“Evening, Trent. Take dinner with me?” 
“Hi, Bones. Not tonight.” 
“Something goin’, Trent?” 
Trent did not even turn his head as Bones spoke to him. 
“What do you mean?” 
“’Bout an hour ago I seen Jimmy Ramirez; and Tammy the 
Rat been hanging around, and not fifteen minutes ago I seen 
your midget. And there was six Peaceforcers, they was here 
when I got here this morning. I ain’t seen the Left Hand of the 
Devil in the Plaza that early in, oh, five years.” 

10  Tales 
Trent heard barely audible popping noises as Bones’ joints 
slowly realigned themselves. Still he did not look at the old man. 
“Six Peaceforcers?” 
“I don’t trust that midget, Trent.” Peering through the 
crowds and flickering adholos, Bones tried to see what it was 
that Trent was looking at, but could not. 
“You don’t trust who?” 
“That midget working for you.” 
“Which midget?” 
“The pretty one.” 
“Oh, Bird. Bird’s a doll, Bones.” 
“He’s the right size,” Bones agreed. 
“He’s only fourteen, Bones. He hasn’t started growing yet. 
When were the Peaceforcers here?” 
Bones sighed audibly. “You got something going today, don’t 
you? You ever going to get a job, Trent?” 
“Bones.” 
“What?” 
“Don’t start on me today. I’m not in the mood for it.” 
“Just wonderin’. You so good with the Net, I knows you could 
get work.” 
“Bones, this is starting to look like a very bad day. I don’t 
want to hear about it.” At the other end of the plaza, seventy-five 
meters distant, Trent caught sight of Tammy, a too-skinny girl 
with platinum-white hair, deep in conversation with a tall black 
man wearing BloodSilks colors, waving her arms as she spoke. 
“Why ain’t you going to get a job?” 
“I already have one and I don’t need two. What time were the 
Peaceforcers here?” 
Near Trent, clustered around a small bench just the other 
side of the walkway, three teenaged girls were conducting a loud 
argument about where they would eat dinner. Two of them faced 
Trent and Bones; the third stood facing her companions, and 
Trent could see only her back. She wore a tight green leather 
dress that came down to mid-thigh, black ankle boots and pale 
green silk stockings. Her hair was jet black, straight and long. 

Moran  11 
 
“Everybody gots to work, Trent. Everybody needs something 
to make it worth gettin’ up in the morning.” The old contortion-
ist chewed on the thought for a bit. “That’s the fact. ’Sides,” he 
said suddenly, “you keep up boosting, eventually the Peace-
forcers going to catch you.” 
The girl in the green dress, immediately in front of Trent, 
stood clutching a handbag by its closed top. She had an exquisite 
bottom. A glowing scarlet zipper began at the dress’s hem, just 
over her right thigh, and spiraled up around her buttocks, waist, 
and breasts; taking her out of it would be like peeling the skin 
off an orange. “What time, Bones?” 
Bones sighed. “Seven-thirty, I guess. I was having breakfast 
upstairs on the second floor, at the cantina. I don’t know the 
names of any of them, but I seen them in the crowds before 
sometimes when I performs. They’re assigned regular to this 
stretch, us being so close to the Fringe and all. Cheap bastards,” 
he added thoughtfully. “Don’t never throw nothing into the kitty 
when I’m done.” 
“They recognize you?” 
Bones shrugged. It was a curiously fluid motion; most of the 
major bones in his body had extra joints surgically inserted. 
“Who knows? I was dressed; I don’t look much the same when all 
the ceramic joints are locked up and I’m wearin’ clothes.” 
“Oh.” From across the crowded length of the plaza, Tammy 
reached up and casually scratched her left shoulder. 
Bones looked at Trent with a perturbed expression on his 
seamed black face. “I’m really serious, Trent. You’re still young 
enough to get out of here.” 
“Out of the Patrol Sectors?” Trent grinned at Bones suddenly, 
a quick flash which brought unnaturally still features alive for 
just a moment. “I took six years just getting out of the Fringe, 
Bones. I love the Patrol Sectors.” 
“That’s not what I meant. Geography got nothing to do with 
gettin’ out of here.” Bones pulled on a long-sleeved shirt and 
buttoned it up as he spoke. “I gots me a whole lot of contacts; 
been tying myself up in knots here in the Plaza for a long time, 
and I met a lot of folks. I could probably get you a job with” 

12  Tales 
Seventy-five meters away, Tammy tugged gently at the lobe 
of her left ear; Trent cut Bones off. “I have a job, Bones.” 
The old contortionist snorted. “Boosting,” he said with gentle 
derision. 
It was Tuesday, April the thirtieth, 2069. 
Trent said softly, “Not exactly.” He closed his eyes and went 
Inside. 
 
“Trent said to me once, ‘A theft is an act of com-
munication. So is a blow. Unlike words, neither one 
can be ignored. A properly executed boost consists 
of three elements: what you steal, how you steal it, 
and from whom you steal. 
‘You cannot catch a thief who knows this and 
employs the knowledge properly. If the thief is a 
very good thief, you may learn, in time, why he 
stole what he stole.’” 
—The Peaceforcer Elite Melissa du Bois, as 
quoted in The Exodus Bible. 
 
“I never ever talk like that.” 
—Trent the Uncatchable, according to the histo-
rian Corazon de Nostri. 
THE SUNGLASSES had cost Trent more than the rest of what he 
was wearing put together. The lenses filtered ultraviolet from 
bright sunlight; in dim surroundings they stepped infrared up 
into the visible spectrum. The arms of the glasses, where they 
crossed his temples, held the contacts for the traceset in the 
handheld InfoNet link in the right hand pocket of his coat. 
The Down Plaza was run by Frazier Enforcement, the firm 
which ran many of the shopping districts located either in the 
Fringe proper or at its edge; Frazier got along acceptably well 
with the Peaceforcers, and they were experts in the unique prob-
lems of Fringe-area security. 

Moran  13 
 
They also had the worst software in the state of New York. 
Trent’s Image, a program named Johnny Johnny, said softly, 
Boss, somebody’s messed with Plaza security. 
I know, Johnny. Standing with his eyes closed behind the con-
cealing lenses, Trent merged with his Image, and ceased to be 
Trent. 
JOHNNY JOHNNY roused himself into full wakefulness. 
He could never remember, between times when Trent was 
not with him, how it was to be truly alive in the InfoNet. Unlike 
most Image programs—unlike Johnny Johnny’s predecessor, 
Ralf the Wise and Powerful—Johnny Johnny had never been 
turned off, and only rarely reprogrammed. His memories 
stretched back over six years to his first nanoseconds of aware-
ness; in those days he had been little more than a filter program, 
a collection of routines to enable Trent to quickly sort and dis-
card the network’s vast crush of irrelevant detail, to select com-
munication routes through the millions of Boards which had, at 
any given moment, surplus available logic that Johnny Johnny’s 
master might hijack. 
That was Johnny Johnny’s function: to act as a front end for 
Trent, as an interface to the InfoNet, as Trent’s Image to the 
world. 
But the flow was not one way. The relationship between 
Johnny Johnny and Trent was a partnership, a symbiosis. 
Trent’s touch brought Johnny Johnny to life. 
Johnny Johnny blasted out into the Crystal Wind of Data. 
TRENT HEARD Jimmy Ramirez’s voice, far away, talking with 
Bones. A voice rumbled something slow and distant, and Trent 
relinquished all touch with Realtime and fell away into the 
glowing Crystal Wind. 
JOHNNY JOHNNY went into the Board that ran Down Plaza’s se-
curity through a line of lasercable that was putatively a failsafe 
backup for tracking of Personal Protection Systems inside the 
Plaza. Though expected to be so in the near future, the PPSs 

14  Tales 
were not yet illegal, and therefore could not be banned from the 
Plaza. Still they were potentially so dangerous that any good se-
curity program had to keep an eye on them. 
That particular strand of lasercable did not track PPSs. It 
was one of several third-layer backup systems Johnny Johnny 
had corrupted for his own use. There was no time to trace 
through every line of lasercable in the Plaza; Johnny Johnny did 
not seriously consider trying. He loaded Frazier Enforcement’s 
Security Diagnostics and ran it. The program took forever to 
run, most of six seconds. Johnny Johnny waited patiently, and 
then swore in surprise when the results came back to him. 
There was something excessively strange in the Security 
Board with him. 
Player, web angel, a DataWatch webdancer—Johnny Johnny 
had no time to find out. In approximately two thousand nano-
seconds Johnny Johnny copied himself into eighty functional 
ghosts, sent them out into the Net in all directions, disengaged 
from the Security Board, and fled. 
TRENT’S EYES snapped open. Tammy the Rat was on her way 
across the length of the Plaza, striding angrily toward him 
through the crowd. Trent was peripherally aware of the gen-
darmes over at Googie’s, watching Tammy walk across the 
Plaza. Wearing a conservative businessperson’s suit, briefcase 
dangling loosely from his left hand, Jimmy Ramirez stood next 
to Bones; a tall, handsome, ex-semi-pro boxer with muscles on 
his muscles, slightly taller than Trent, simply watching Trent 
with that cool, reserved look he saved for those instances when 
he was genuinely pissed. 
“Hello, Jimmy.” 
“Hello, my man,” said Jimmy Ramirez softly. “You’re late 
again.” 
“People keep saying. I had to stop and talk to a man—” 
“About?” 
“—and then the baby carriage blew up—” 
Trent never had a chance to finish; Tammy pushed her way 
through the last few meters of crowd, radiating anger so palpa-

Moran  15 
 
bly that those who saw her coming got out of the way without 
further encouragement. “What the slithy goddam hell is going 
on? I’ve been stalling the BloodSilk Boys but—” 
Trent said clearly, “It’s a drop.” 
Tammy the Rat was a professional; she froze in mid-word, 
turned away from Trent almost instantly and without hurrying 
merged back into the flow of the crowd around them. 
“Walk away.” Trent did even look in Jimmy Ramirez’s direc-
tion. “Have dinner with Bones, talk about Hemingway or some-
thing. A man named Jerry Jackson just tried to hire me to boost 
CalleyTronics—” 
“But we’re already boosting Calley!” 
“—and, the Peaceforcers have some kind of dancer in the 
Plaza’s Security Board. It’s a drop.” 
Bones was looking back and forth between them, and Trent 
said softly to Jimmy, “Go.” One of the gendarmes was pointing 
out the scene to the others; still Trent did not see anyone in the 
Plaza who might reasonably have been a Peaceforcer. The girl in 
the green dress was walking away with her friends, and Trent 
started after her, Jimmy falling in beside him for just a second. 
Out of the corner of his eye Trent saw a pair of the gendarmes 
coming out onto the Plaza floor. 
“What are you doing?” Jimmy demanded, glancing over at 
the gendarmes watching them. 
“Creating a diversion. Go, damn it.” Trent never so much as 
looked around; he was simply aware that Jimmy had faded back 
into the crowd. He threaded his way smoothly through the surg-
ing crowds on Eight’s walkways, gaining on the three girls; the 
girl in the green leather dress still held her purse by its clasped 
top. An adholo flared and he swerved slightly to pass through it; 
under the cover of scarlet laser light he pulled the emblade from 
its waterproofed hiding place behind his belt buckle and turned 
it on. The emblade was only three molecules wide at its edge; it 
would cut through ferrocrete as though it were paper, and with 
some muscle behind it would cut even sheet monocrystal. It was 
completely safe; the blade itself dissolved instantly into a fine 
dust at the first touch of liquid—say, blood. 

16  Tales 
The cops were only thirty meters or so away; Trent increased 
his pace slightly, came alongside the three girls and did the 
thing in one movement, with the ease of long years of practice: 
jostled the girl roughly enough to make sure the gendarmes saw 
it, muttered a brief apology and smiled at the girl in what might 
be taken for slight embarrassment, flicked the emblade up to 
touch the side of the purse, cut, reached through the open flap 
and with two fingers pulled the wallet free, switched the em-
blade off, dropped the haft to the ground and gave it a good kick 
and was turning away with the stolen wallet, the exercise done 
flawlessly, back toward the gendarmes, when a delicate femi-
nine hand closed around his forearm with amazing strength. 
The girl said softly, in a voice pitched to go no further than 
Trent’s ears, “I’d like my wallet returned.” 
Trent turned back to her and for the first time actually 
looked at the girl’s face. The crowd was clearing away around 
them, a small open space with Trent and the girl at the center. 
She was fifteen or so, with clean simple features framed by long, 
straight black hair, with green eyes that were even brighter 
than the dyed leather dress she wore. Trent said, “Sure,” and 
gave the wallet back. The girl looked at him curiously, head 
tilted slightly to one side, a puzzled look taking hold upon her 
features. 
Trent said softly, “How did you know I took it?” 
A deep baritone voice ten meters behind Trent, off to his left, 
said “Ma’am, stand away, please.” 
“Really,” said Trent. “I did that perfectly.” 
The baritone voice boomed, “Stand away!” 
The girl had not answered Trent. Trent said, as the seconds 
ticked by, “If you’re not going to answer me, you’d better do what 
he says. He’ll stun you too if you don’t, and it’s not pleasant. Be-
lieve me.” 
The girl nodded slowly, and took a single step backward, wal-
let in her hand. Her eyes never left Trent, and the puzzled look 
did not waver. 
Her eyes. 

Moran  17 
 
“Oh,” said Trent. The girl took another step backward, and 
another. 
Bright green eyes, like Carl Castanaveras’, or Jany McCon-
nell’s— 
Emerald eyes. 
Trent said, “Denice?” 
Her eyes widened in shock. 
The cops shot him. 
 
3. 
“I DON’T UNDERSTAND,” she said to Trent, that February day in 
2062, “why you work so hard at it.” 
The three of them lay in the grass in the center of the park 
across the street from the Chandler Complex: the dark-haired 
green-eyed twins, and one blonde boy with pale blue eyes. David 
lay beneath one of the trees, hiding from the hazy noontime sun 
with a book; Denice and Trent sat beneath the tree next to 
David’s, dancing in the InfoNet. 
“Because I’m a Player,” Trent replied. 
Denice Castanaveras sighed in frustration. It frustrated her 
to know that most of the telepaths in the Complex could have 
touched Trent’s thoughts easily, to know that two years from 
now, when the Change came for her, she would be able to do the 
same; and that today she was limited by the clumsiness of words 
in her attempt to understand something that was very impor-
tant to the closest friend she had in the world. 
“Not a webdancer, Denice, a Player.” 
She peered down at the portaterm Trent worked on. Seven 
years later, after the perfection of tracesets that required nei-
ther hypnosis nor biofeedback nor drugs for normal users to op-
erate, the device would be a quarter the size, lack a keyboard, 
incorporate the functions of infocards, and be called a hand-
held—but the primary function was the same, a device to inter-
face humans with the global Information Network. 

18  Tales 
Jacked into the MPU slot at the side of the portaterm was an 
optical computer about the size of a makeup key; the coprocessor 
that held Trent’s Image, Ralf the Wise and Powerful. “Life can 
be described,” said Ralf in a completely human voice, “and de-
scribed surprisingly well, in terms of the growth of information 
content. Correct me if I’m wrong, Boss, but that’s what the 
Player’s Litany means: from the Crystal Wind came data, and 
from data came life.” 
Trent nodded. “That’s why I want an inskin.” 
“What’s why?” 
... to expand your sensory bandwidth by an order of magni-
tude, to do the things an AI could do, control inanimate equip-
ment with a thought, find in instants the answer to any question 
to which there was an answer…. 
Trent said, “It makes things faster.” 
“So what’s the point?” she asked. “So you can find data faster 
than anybody else in the world except an AI or another Player. 
Really, I just don’t get it.” 
Trent turned his head slightly, found the serious green eyes 
looking directly into his own from five centimeters away. Wait-
ing. 
“The Crystal Wind is the greatest source of data the world 
has ever seen. Truth and data,” he said quietly, “are not the 
same thing. Data lies in the Crystal Wind; Truth is a function of 
Realtime. And yet Truth arises from data. From data you can—
extract—Truth.” 
With a grave countenance, the nine-year-old girl studied him 
for just a moment longer. 
Trent stared back. 
Finally the corners of her mouth twitched, and she fought it, 
then gave up and broke up giggling. She leaned back against the 
bole of the tree they were under, rested her head on Trent’s 
shoulder. Finally the giggles stopped, and she said in a quiet, 
detached voice, “Honestly, you’re the craziest thing I ever saw.” 
“Really?” 
“It’s okay,” she said quickly. “I like you anyhow.” 

Moran  19 
 
THE GENDARMES took the sunglasses containing his traceset con-
tacts. They took the handheld that contained the traceset itself. 
They took his watch and the ruby stud from his left ear, his belt 
and his wallet and his shoes as well. They did not remove his 
socks and even though they ran a slowscan over him the slows-
can started just above his ankles. 
They missed the magpick taped to the sole of his right foot. 
Lying on his back, Trent stared up at the ceiling of the hold-
ing cell. The glowpaint was old and cracked; he suspected it had 
originally been intended to glow the color of sunlight. Now it 
was closer to orange than yellow. In one corner of the cell the 
webbed cracks in the paint had actually cut off a ragged, meter-
wide section of the paint from the current; that section of the 
paint was dead gray, the color of mushrooms in shade. 
His hands were tingling; he tried moving them again. Better 
this time—he actually got his fingers to curl up to touch his 
palms. There are drugs that will buffer the human nervous sys-
tem from the effects of sonics, and others that will aid in recov-
ering more quickly. 
Trent had not expected to get shot with sonic stunners to-
night. He lay and waited for control of his body to return. 
What the hell, he wondered, happened tonight? 
He had plenty of time to think about it. 
HE HAD BEEN in custody for four hours when they came to get 
him, one in goldtone riot armor and one in plainclothes. 
Trent was barely able to walk. 
He did not ask where they were taking him. Their path led 
them through the front waiting area and its associated babble, 
too many people in too small a space speaking in voices that 
were too loud. 
Denice Castanaveras was seated in one of the glassite-walled 
cubicles. An angry, red-faced lady detective was saying some-
thing to her. The combination of soundproofing and outside 
noise was unbeatable; Trent could not even guess at what the 
lady gendarme was saying. Denice sat in a straight-backed 

20  Tales 
chair, sat upright with such rigid self-control that her shoulders 
did not touch the back of the chair. 
Trent looked toward her as the gendarmes led him into Mac 
Devlin’s office. Her parents had been telepaths; amazingly, 
frighteningly powerful telepaths. 
The girl did not even glance at him. 
In a chair just outside of Mac Devlin’s office, glaring at Trent, 
sat a stiff-faced man in a black and silver uniform. 
Trent categorized the man immediately, with a cold chill. 
PKF Elite. 
Cyborg. 
They would have taken him while he was still young; not 
past thirty-five. Taken to Spacebase One at L-5, Peaceforcer 
Heaven where the Peaceforcer Elite were created. Surgery that 
was impossible under the crushing 980 centimeters per second 
squared acceleration of Earth was just barely feasible when per-
formed in the free fall of L-5. Peaceforcer genegineers and sur-
geons had taken him and changed him; injected him with 
transform viruses designed to strengthen his muscles, to speed 
his neural reactions by better than forty percent. Changed by 
the transform viruses, doubly changed by surgery and cy-
borging; his eyes were not real, nor his skin. He would see in in-
fra-red and ultra-violet as easily as a normal human 
distinguished between blue and green. Beneath his right shoul-
der blade was a power source good for six months. A secondary 
nerve network laced itself through the first, fused itself to that 
which a human was born with; the network and all of the Elite 
hardware it controlled was controlled in turn by a combat com-
puter implanted at the base of his skull. Carbon-ceramic fila-
ments wound themselves through and around his muscles, 
joints, and ligaments, reinforcing the bones; this, the direct work 
of the transform viruses, enabled the Elite to withstand accel-
eration that would have quickly killed any normal human. 
Threads of room temperature superconductor were woven into 
his skin; he would barely notice most lasers. His skin would turn 
a knife, and his hair would not burn. 
There was an inskin at the Peaceforcer’s left temple. 

Moran  21 
 
Trent stood motionless under the weight of the Peaceforcer 
Elite’s frozen glare. 
“Come on,” said one of the gendarmes contemptuously, and 
shoved Trent forward into Mac Devlin’s office. 
“I LIKE TO dance,” Trent tried to explain to the man. 
Police Chief Maxwell Devlin was responsible for overseeing 
the precincts that policed much of the Fringe and a considerable 
fraction of the Peaceforcer Patrol Sectors. 
Devlin’s office was an odd mixture of gray leather and 
chrome. There was a huge sheet of opaqued glassite immediately 
behind Trent; cleared, it would look out on the waiting area. A 
single painting, done fashionably in electrolytes, hung immedi-
ately to Mac Devlin’s left: a glowing violet Easter egg in the 
midst of a scarlet desert, sitting exactly on the divider line of a 
laser-straight two-lane highway. 
The sunpaint was turned off. A small bright reading lamp sat 
at Devlin’s right elbow, providing the only illumination in Dev-
lin’s office; it seemed to Trent that he and Devlin hung sus-
pended in dimness, two images at the edges of the light. 
Aside from Devlin’s desk, the chair he sat in and the chair 
Trent was seated in, there were only two pieces of furniture in 
the room: a coat rack with two identical overcoats hung on it, 
and a small credenza immediately behind and to the right of 
Mac Devlin. The credenza had a miniature antique cannon on it. 
The cannon pointed directly at Trent. 
Devlin said, “What were your people doing down on Eight to-
night?” 
Devlin could not possibly have expected an honest answer 
from Trent. 
Trent said, “We were going to boost CalleyTronics and then 
go dancing and drink coffee over at The Emerald Illusion, in the 
basement of the Red Line Hotel.” His left hand was snaked to 
the chair he sat in. “Actually, Jimmy was probably going to get 
drunk and fight somebody, but then he would have drunk coffee 
with us.” Trent’s right hand was still twitching, but he could sit 
upright without help and so far had not spilled any of the coffee 

22  Tales 
he was drinking with his free hand. “Jimmy’s been reading He-
mingway again. I don’t know what to do about it.” 
Mac Devlin was middle-aged, which, with modern geriatrics, 
might have meant anywhere from forty to seventy. His brown 
hair was streaked with dusty silver and his features were com-
fortably wrinkled. He was a big man, two hundred and five cen-
timeters; a hundred and ten kilos of solid muscle. 
His complexion was tinged with the faintest trace of pallor, a 
suggestion of gray. 
Devlin gazed at Trent. “You’re either a lot smarter than I 
ever thought,” he said at last, “or I’ve been giving you way too 
much credit, these last couple of years. I don’t know which.” 
With the windows darkened Trent could not see the Peaceforcer 
sitting out in Devlin’s waiting room, but Trent had no doubt he 
had not left. Devlin continued. “I either have to give you to the 
Peaceforcers or charge you with a crime. No matter what your 
papers say you’re not nineteen yet; if you’re convicted of emblade 
possession you’ll end up in Public Labor for sure. On the other 
hand,” he said without change of expression, “that might be bet-
ter than giving you to the Peaceforcers.” 
Trent sat quietly and said nothing. He did not bother point-
ing out that he’d written tracking software for the department 
on occasion, nor that he’d paid his dues, promptly and regularly; 
Devlin knew it, and in the current circumstances both items 
were meaningless. 
Trent could think of only one thing that was not meaningless. 
The antagonism between the largely French United Nations 
Peace Keeping Force—the Left Hand of the Devil—and the city 
police across Occupied America was old, deeply ingrained, and 
very powerful. Even in New York City, even on Manhattan is-
land itself, where the United Nations had established Capitol 
City, little love was lost between the Peaceforcers and the police. 
Police had been known to look the other way for members of the 
Erisian Claw, and though Trent had never heard of any gen-
darme being involved with that group of religious ideologs, there 
were indeed police who had gone in front of PKF firing squads 
for Johnny Reb activities. 

Moran  23 
 
Devlin said abruptly, “Why were you going to boost Calley’s 
place?” 
Trent simply looked at the man for a moment. “I was getting 
paid.” 
Devlin actually smiled. “Excuse me, that was a stupid ques-
tion, wasn’t it?” His fingers drummed restlessly on the desktop. 
“You’re a problem for me, Trent. With this” —he glanced down 
at the field glowing in midair two centimeters above the surface 
of his desk—“Denice Daimara’s testimony, I could, I’m fairly 
sure, put you into Public Labor. My options are limited.” Devlin 
sipped at a glass of iced tea. “It’s either charge you with emblade 
possession or give you to the frogs. I’m reluctant to do the latter 
for two reasons. First, I don’t think you deserve to be handed 
over to the Peaceforcers, and second, for the bleeding life of me I 
can’t figure out why the United Nations Peace Keeping Force is 
interested in setting up a small-time contract thief like your-
self.” Mac Devlin leaned forward and fixed bright, lively, inter-
ested eyes upon Trent. “What happened tonight, Trent?” 
“I honestly don’t know.” 
Devlin nodded slightly, hanging on Trent’s every word. “Yes, 
go on. Use as many words as you like. Whole sentences at once, 
even.” 
Trent thought about it for a moment, and then said, “You 
see, I wanted to go dancing—” 
“So you said,” Devlin agreed. 
“Except Jimmy Ramirez thinks I’m lazy.” Trent thought 
about it some more. “And he may be right. He’s the one who 
made me promise from now on we wouldn’t keep having parties 
all the time unless we had a reason for the party. So then we 
had to agree what constituted a reason, and Jimmy wouldn’t ac-
cept anything except a boost. Like I said, too much Hemingway; 
it makes him crazy with ambition, the desire to prove he has 
true grit. This all happened, oh, two years ago, when we were all 
still living out in the Fringe.” 
“You could have stayed there, you know.” 
“Too dangerous,” said Trent flatly. “There’s criminals and 
crazies in the Fringe, you know.” 

24  Tales 
“And Peaceforcers in the Patrol Sectors. Yes,” said Devlin af-
ter a pause, “staying in the Fringe might not have been a bad 
idea. Captain Klein’s officers are demoralized to begin with; 
they’d pretty much gotten used to you. You know, Captain de 
Morian’s been after me to have your Resident Status for the Pa-
trol Sectors revoked.” 
“In the last six months,” said Trent evenly, “violent crime 
along Flushing has declined fourteen percent. A juice peddler on 
Ryerson closed up shop because of us. The BloodSilk Boys ha-
ven’t killed anybody in almost three months, not even a Dragon. 
The Syndic likes us, the Tong likes us, and the Old Ones don’t 
work in our neighborhood. You want to revoke my Resident 
Status?” Devlin stared at Trent as Trent leaned forward until 
the snake at his wrist stopped him. “I dare you.” 
Devlin rubbed his temples wearily. “I know, I know all of it. 
You’re the strangest criminal I’ve ever met, Trent. Finish up 
about tonight.” 
Trent felt the first distant flicker of anger, suppressed it al-
most without allowing himself to become aware of it. “We spent 
six years in the Fringe, Mac, me and Bird and Jimmy and Jodi 
Jodi. We’re not going back, not any of us, not ever. What are the 
statistics, Mac? Residents of the Fringe are nine times as likely 
to be murdered as residents of the Patrol Sectors, something like 
that? You go into the Fringe in your Armored AeroSmiths and 
you think you know what it’s like to grow up there, without par-
ents, without protectors?” 
Devlin said placatingly, with an obvious touch of surprise, “I 
understand.” 
“I doubt that very much. For God’s sake, Mac, you’re from 
Harvard!” Trent realized with distant surprise how tense the 
muscles in his shoulders had become. “Mac, have you ever had a 
Player out to get you?” 
“Once,” said Devlin quietly, “eleven years ago. We had to go 
to the Peaceforcers for help; DataWatch finally took him down. 
It was close, though.” 
“I’ll protect myself, Mac. I’ll protect my people.” 
“I hear you. Finish up about tonight.” 

Moran  25 
 
Trent took a deep breath and ordered his thoughts. “About a 
month ago, a man tried to hire me to boost fifteen terabytes of 
RTS from CalleyTronics. I turned him down for all the obvious 
reasons. He came back a week later and just about tripled his 
offer; said Frank Calley had stolen the RTS from him in the first 
place, and that he wanted his superconductor RAM back.” Trent 
looked down into his coffee, remembering. “He was convincing. I 
checked him out as well as I was able...” Trent looked up again. 
“I am possibly the best Player you’ll ever meet, Mac. The man 
who hired me to boost Calley was either exactly what he said he 
was—or DataWatch constructed his background. He had all the 
right records for a businessman from Atlanta—IDs, birth record, 
business license, vehicle license, three bank accounts; even a 
passport showing one trip to Luna in ’64. I audited the Atlanta 
news Boards for past mention of this person and found four in-
stances.” 
“Did you go to Atlanta, to check on him?” 
“I’ve never even been on a plane, Mac.” 
Devlin nodded. “You should have gone. I’d have done it in 
your skin. Then what?” 
“I told him we’d do it,” Trent said simply. “Jimmy and I 
worked up a real good variation on the bookends routine; Calley 
would never even have known he’d been hit if it had worked 
right. We hired the BloodSilk Boys for the diversion, and Jimmy 
dressed to play the bookkeeper. We planned to hit at 6:30, about 
half an hour before CalleyTronics closes for the night. Just be-
fore 5:00, I got a call from a man who called himself—never 
mind what. He said he was a businessman from Atlanta, needed 
to talk to me urgently about Frank Calley.” 
“Go on.” 
Trent looked directly at Maxwell Devlin. “This person says to 
me almost word for word what my original client said to me, 
about the RTS, about Frank Calley, about how he was referred 
to me. It was too weird. I headed over to the Plaza, found some-
thing fairly odd, I’m still not sure what, sitting up inside the se-
curity Board, and went word up on the boost.” Trent thought for 
a moment. “The boost was going bad anyway at that point, I 

26  Tales 
think. The BloodSilk Boys were getting nervous because I was 
late, and your boys were watching them pretty close.” 
Devlin grinned widely. “So you decided to let yourself get res-
cued from the Peaceforcers by the police?” 
Trent glanced at the snakechain on his wrist. “If you want to 
put it that way.” 
“You’ve got balls, Trent.” 
“No, I was desperate.” Trent sipped at his coffee to see how 
cold it had gotten; it was still lukewarm, and he gulped the rest 
of it down all at once. “There’s a difference.” 
“I know. I don’t suppose you’ve eaten?” 
Trent said clearly, distinctly, “I beg your pardon?” 
The Chief of Police for the City of New York said, “Would you 
like to go get dinner? I know a pretty good place near here that’s 
open all night.” 
Thinking of Denice Castanaveras, sitting in the room outside 
with the Peaceforcers, Trent said finally, “I’d love to. Thank 
you.” 
Devlin nodded. “Command, chain off.” The snake at Trent’s 
wrist loosened and coiled itself around the arm of the chair. 
“Have you ever been to L’Express?” 
Devlin looked startled when Trent laughed. 
Trent said, “Once.” 
“Command,” Devlin said, “outspeaker.” The intercom came 
on with an almost inaudible click. “Janice, tell Elite Sergeant 
Garon to go home. We’re going to charge the boy ourselves.” 
Trent’s right hand, rubbing his left wrist, froze in the action. 
Elite Sergeant Garon. 
Devlin took his coat from the coat rack beside his door. 
Elite Sergeant Emile Garon. 
For the first time Trent knew what was going on. 
Seven years ago, Elite Sergeant Emile Garon had been 
DataWatch Staff Sergeant Emile Garon, one of a group of web-
dancers in DataWatch who were assigned the task of monitoring 
the communications of the telepaths in lower Manhattan. 

Moran  27 
 
In the early months of 2062, before the destruction of the 
telepaths, Trent, acting through his first Image, Ralf the Wise 
and Powerful, had helped protect the telepaths from DataWatch. 
Trent sat still, unseeing. All of his dealings with DataWatch 
Sergeant Emile Garon had been through the person of his first 
image, Ralf the Wise and Powerful; he had never known what 
the man looked like. 
Emile Garon was a tall, thin Peaceforcer with black hair and 
a glare that could stop a man in his tracks. 
After seven years of safety, the Peaceforcers were finally on 
his trail again. 
Thinking again of Denice Castanaveras, the girl with whom 
he had been raised, whom he had also not seen in seven years, 
Trent said quietly, “What amazingly horrible timing.” 
Shrugging into his coat, Devlin glanced at him. “Timing? 
You’re not hungry?” 
Trent said, “Not any more.” 
TRENT HAD NEVER sat in the front of a police car before. 
The car had a steering wheel; ambulances and fire trucks, po-
lice and Peaceforcer and babychaser cars were the only vehicles 
Trent had seen in the last five years that did. Even in those, the 
steering wheels functioned only under emergency conditions. 
Manually operable vehicles were outlawed inside TransCon’s 
ever-growing Automated Traffic Control Regions, and had been 
since the Speedfreak revolution in the summer of 2063, almost 
six years ago. 
Devlin never touched the steering wheel; the hovercar’s in-
strument panel lit up when his palm touched the locklarm. Dev-
lin turned on the impact field himself and said, “Command, 
destination L’Express Restaurant.” 
They were six levels beneath the ground, and nearly four 
kilometers from the restaurant. 
In the twenty minutes it took them to go that distance, Mac 
Devlin said only one thing to Trent. 
“I really want to know,” he said as they were leaving the 
parking garage, moving out into the drumming of the nighttime 

28  Tales 
rain, “why an Elite Sergeant of the PKF is camped out in my of-
fice over you.” 
Neither he nor Trent noticed the car that followed them up 
out of the garage. 
THE MANAGER WAS the same one who had been at L’Express 
some six hours before. 
For just a moment, as Mac Devlin and Trent were ushered in 
for dinner at five minutes before midnight, the woman looked 
positively distressed. The expression vanished in the next in-
stant, and with professional restraint she personally showed the 
police chief and Trent to a private room in the rear of the res-
taurant. It was a shadowed place of leather-lined booths, bur-
nished mahogany and crisp table linen. The glowpaint was dim, 
supplemented by the soft shine of gentle white spots. 
Trent heard Devlin’s earphone beep as they were seated. 
Murmuring, “Excuse me,” Devlin touched a point immediately 
beneath his ear. His expression immediately took on a distant 
cast, and he nodded once. Suddenly his eyes snapped back into 
focus, staring directly at Trent. He said aloud, “Exactly when?” 
There was more silence; Devlin’s gaze, fixed upon Trent, did not 
waver. 
A live human waiter appeared at their table, glanced at Dev-
lin briefly and then murmured to Trent, “Drinks, sir?” 
“Coffee for me, iced tea with lemon for Chief Devlin.” 
“Will you be having dinner?” 
Trent suddenly realized that he’d had nothing to eat in over 
twelve hours. “I will. Do you have scallops here?” 
“Yes, monsieur.” 
“Butter-fried scallops with—do you have french fries here?” 
“Yes, monsieur.” 
“With french fries. Make the french fries well done.” 
The waiter nodded, gestured to Devlin. “And the Chief?” 
“I don’t know if he’s hungry. Can you leave a menu?” 
The waiter nodded again; a menu holo appeared hanging in 
midair fifteen centimeters from Devlin’s left elbow. The waiter 
left. 

Moran  29 
 
Devlin said aloud, “Acknowledged,” and removed his finger 
from the earphone stud. “How,” he said with the perfect even-
ness of real anger, “did you do that?” 
“Do what?” 
“Not five minutes after I tell the Peaceforcers we’re charging 
you, our witness changes her mind and decides she’s not going to 
testify against you. She didn’t see you with the emblade, she’s 
not sure you’re the one who cut her purse, she’s not testifying. 
No way, no how.” The anger glittered in Devlin’s eyes. “How did 
you get to her?” 
“How could I have?” 
Devlin leaned back in his seat, taking long, slow breaths. 
“Honestly, how could I have gotten to her? Maybe Jimmy did, 
I don’t know.” 
Devlin scowled at Trent. “How could you have?” 
“That’s what I said,” Trent agreed. 
Devlin said abruptly, “Do you know what they call you in 
Department Five?” 
Department Five was the city’s equivalent of the Peace-
forcer’s DataWatch. “No.” 
“‘The damned magician.’” 
Trent grinned swiftly, in delight. “Do they really?” 
“Yes.” Devlin’s brow smoothed. Slowly. “Nonetheless,” he 
conceded at last, “I don’t actually see how you could have gotten 
to the girl.” A waitbot appeared at the table side, bearing one 
cup of coffee, a glass of iced tea, and Trent’s scallops and french 
fries. 
As their drinks were served, Devlin placed his spoon upside 
down, parallel to his fork. Trent froze 
The Chief of Police for the City of New York was a Johnny 
Reb. 
He recognized the opening, and knew the correct Johnny Reb 
response, but—what chapter was he a member of? Who was his 
sponsor? Trent gave no response to the sign, and Devlin sighed 
slightly and picked up the fork to squeeze his lemon against. 
“Have you ever considered becoming a cop?” 
“You’ve got to be kidding.” 

30  Tales 
“Yeah. Actually.” After a moment Devlin said, “I think you’d 
be good at it.” 
“I’d be good at a lot of things I don’t want to do. I’d be a great 
accountant.” Trent speared three of the eight scallops on his 
plate with his fork, ate them all at once. “Cooking books isn’t my 
idea of fun. Neither,” he said carefully, swallowing, “is playing 
third string to the Left Hand of the Devil.” 
For a moment Trent thought he had said the wrong thing; 
Devlin simply stared at Trent for a long moment before saying 
finally, quietly enough, “No ... no, I don’t suppose it would be.” 
Trent looked down at the tabletop, at the scallops and fries. 
“Mac, I don’t hate the Peaceforcers. I don’t hate the Ministry of 
Population Control. I don’t hate the United Nations and I don’t 
hate Secretary General Eddore.” At the expression on Devlin’s 
face, Trent said, “I don’t like them either. But—we can’t afford 
another war, Mac, so we need either the Peace Keeping Force or 
something like it. We can’t afford to support twenty billion peo-
ple on this planet, so we need the Ministry of Population Control 
or something like it. And we can’t trust individual countries to 
behave responsibly—so we need the United Nations, or some-
thing very like it, to administer those things.” 
Devlin studied Trent. “I think,” he said after a moment, “that 
is the longest meaningful speech I’ve ever heard out of you.” 
“I mean it, Mac. Do you think we can do without a Peace 
Keeping Force?” Trent ate two more scallops, quickly. 
“No.” Devlin did not hesitate. “But that doesn’t mean it has 
to be the PKF we have now.” 
“And do you think we can get rid of the current PKF without 
violence?” 
“The tree of Liberty,” said Mac Devlin simply, “must from 
time to time be refreshed with the blood of patriots. Jefferson 
said that.” 
“Mac?” 
“Yes, Trent?” 
Trent said, “Killing is wrong.” He ate the remaining three 
scallops, and the largest number of french fries he could get into 
his mouth—politely—at once. 

Moran  31 
 
“Yeah,” said Mac Devlin, “tell it to the Peaceforcers.” His eyes 
widened slightly at something over Trent’s shoulder. Trent ate 
french fries quickly. 
Out of the corner of his eye, Trent saw a girl in a green dress 
with a single long, glowing, spiral scarlet zipper being led to a 
table not far from the one he and Devlin were seated at. Devlin’s 
eyes followed her every step of the way, watched Denice Cas-
tanaveras as the hostess seated her. Trent devoured more of his 
french fries. The girl requested a glass of water in a high, clear 
voice, and once the hostess had left turned slightly and smiled 
directly at Maxwell Devlin. 
It was fascinating to watch. Devlin’s eyes lost focus, and then 
his gaze wandered back to Trent. He came back to himself with 
a small shake. “What were we talking about?” 
Trent drank the last of his coffee. “I was telling you,” said 
Trent, “that I had to leave.” 
“Oh.” Devlin blinked. He looked at Trent’s empty plate. 
“My people are going to be wondering what’s happened to me, 
Mac.” 
“You’re done eating,” Devlin observed. 
“You never know,” said Trent, “when you might have to move 
fast.” 
Devlin nodded wearily. Trent stood, and the older man said 
simply, “This has been a very odd day. Department Five might 
be right about you.” 
Trent stood watching the man for just a moment. “Mac?” 
“Yes, Trent?” 
“Jerry Jackson? The name mean anything to you?” 
“Not a thing, Trent.” 
“I keep wondering,” said Trent softly, “who out there might 
go to such lengths to warn a small-time contract thief like my-
self that the Peaceforcers were after him.” 
“I couldn’t imagine, myself.” 
“Thanks, Mac.” 
“Dinner,” said Devlin, “wasn’t that expensive.” 

32  Tales 
MAC DEVLIN WATCHED Trent walk away. He did not even see the 
girl in the green dress who followed Trent to the exit. Once 
Trent was out of his sight he touched his handheld to the pay-
ment strip at the side of the table. The payment strip went from 
red to blue; Devlin said aloud, “Tip, one CU, twenty-five points,” 
and the strip went green. 
He sat motionlessly at the table, and finally beckoned to a 
passing waitbot. “’Bot, is there a phone in you?” 
“Yes, monsieur.” 
The number came out of nowhere, simply appeared in Dev-
lin’s mind; except when he needed it he could never remember it. 
“Access 108080-CATR.” 
The wavering flat silver phonefield, approximately twenty 
centimeters diagonally, appeared in the air before Devlin. 
The call was answered immediately; Mac Devlin could not 
recall a time when it had not been. 
The silver surface of the phonefield shimmered, then sank in 
to provide depth; the head and shoulders of a dark-haired man 
of indeterminate age appeared within those depths. 
Camber Tremodian said softly, “Yes?” 
The man had eyes as black as a Peaceforcer’s heart, flat 
black with no whites in them, no internal structure. Devlin had, 
now, spent almost fifteen years in M. Tremodian’s employ, and 
he knew little more about the man today than the day he began 
that service. 
Try as he might, Devlin could not recall having ever actually 
agreed to work for M. Tremodian; he had simply found himself 
doing so. 
“I attempted to interest Trent in the Johnny Rebs, M. Tre-
modian. I failed.” 
Tremodian smiled easily. “I said you would, my friend.” 
“From his description of tonight’s events, it sounds like 
somebody tried to tip Trent off. He thinks it was me.” 
“Was it?” 
“No, sir. I’d have warned him if I’d known the Peaceforcers 
were after him; I did not.” 
M. Tremodian nodded. “Did he leave the restaurant alone?” 

Moran  33 
 
“Alone? I ... yes,” said Devlin after a long moment. “Yes, he 
did.” 
The smile came again, ever so slightly wider than before. “Of 
course he did,” agreed Camber Tremodian. “You may contact me 
again if anything of note happens between now and August 
eighth of this year.” 
“Anything of note, sir?” 
Tremodian shrugged. “I leave it to your judgment, Maxwell. 
But...” He was silent a long moment, no expression in the blind 
dark eyes. “Deviation in this year is less than two percent. Leave 
Trent alone, Devlin; I wouldn’t dare touch him myself, and nei-
ther, I think, would the competition—and we know what we’re 
doing, which is more than anyone else within a hundred years of 
here could say. As for” The smile came once more. “A young 
lady will be joining Trent shortly. A Denice Daimara. Keep an 
eye on her, if you would.” 
Devlin said simply, “I will, sir.” 
“Maxwell? From a distance.” 
“Sir?” 
“You’re of no use to me, Maxwell, if you can’t remember what 
you’ve seen.” 
Mac Devlin had no idea what the man meant. “Yes, M. Tre-
modian.” 
“Very good. Good night, Maxwell.” 
“Good night, sir.” 
The holofield went flat and then silvered, vanished, and left 
Devlin sitting alone in the nearly empty restaurant. 
He had difficulty, at times, refraining from dwelling on his 
peculiar employer. Fifteen years; he could count the things he 
actually knew about Camber Tremodian on the fingers of one 
hand. 
Out of all those fifteen years, there was one comment in par-
ticular that stayed with him, a response M. Tremodian had 
made to a hesitant inquiry about his eyes. 
“I would be surprised, my friend—and worried—had you ever 
seen anyone else with eyes like mine. The first human with Kab-
hyr eyes won’t be born for another three hundred and eighty 

34  Tales 
years.” And then Camber Tremodian had smiled at Mac Devlin, 
and better than a decade later the memory of that terrible smile 
disquieted Mac Devlin sufficiently that he had no inclination to 
attempt to question Camber Tremodian in such a fashion ever 
again. 
 
4. 
“DENICE DAIMARA?” 
They walked home together, eleven blocks in the rain 
through nearly empty night streets. 
“A friend I had when I was in Public Labor, Carrie Daimara. 
The Ministry of Population Control sterilized her when she was 
thirteen. She died during the operation.” Denice Castanaveras 
walked with her arms folded against the cold; aside from that 
she did not even seem to notice the rain. She kept looking at 
Trent’s wet features, shiny beneath the street lamps, and then 
looking away as though she could not believe her eyes. “I 
couldn’t very well go by the name Castanaveras. Green eyes 
alone are bad enough; I’ve almost had them dyed any number of 
times. Sometimes I wear contacts.” 
Trent nodded. The public’s hysteria over the green-eyed tele-
paths had carried over; there was a degree of prejudice that 
green-eyed people ran into today that had not existed ten years 
ago. “Is David alive?” 
Denice shook her head. “I don’t know. We were separated 
during the riots. I was nine; I ended up in Public Labor.” She 
looked at Trent then, met his eyes. “Nobody’s ever really guessed 
what I am. You know there’s rumors some of the telepaths sur-
vived?” 
Trent did. “Yes. I’ve audited the news Boards; I’ve seen the 
tapes of Carl taking Andy’s Lamborghini up through the park 
before the Complex was nuked.” 
“There’s recordings of that? I’ve never seen them.” 

Moran  35 
 
“I have them on file at home. I’ll play them for you if you 
like.” 
“I would.” They walked on through the quiet drumming of 
the rain a while longer without speaking. Finally Denice said 
softly, “Trent.” 
“Yes?” 
“I don’t know where to start. It’s been seven years.” She did 
not look at him. “I don’t even know if you’re the same person any 
more.” 
“Neither do I. I spent six years in the Fringe.” 
Her expression changed visibly, grew visibly more distant. 
Without moving she seemed to pull away from him. “Oh. I’m 
sorry, Trent.” She hugged herself more tightly. “I’m really 
sorry.” 
Trent blinked. “Well, it wasn’t that bad. At least not after I 
got into business it wasn’t. I ended up in Temple Dragon terri-
tory; they’re not nearly as bad as the Gypsy Macoute.” He 
shrugged. “But it’s true, the Fringe is a brutal, violent place. 
Why, it turned me into a pacifist. I didn’t used to be, you know.” 
Denice glanced quickly sideways at him. “You didn’t?” 
“When I was thirteen a pack of Temple Dragons recruited 
me. In the process they beat me for about a week. I mean, they 
took turns. They wanted a Temple Dragons webdancer—the 
Macoute had one of their own. I kept telling them I wasn’t a 
webdancer, I wasn’t, I wasn’t, and right about the point where it 
was either kill me or believe me they decided they believed me.” 
Trent grinned at her. “I’ve been a firm believer in nonviolence 
ever since.” 
“I bet.” 
“So it changed me, being in the Fringe. But I’m basically still 
the same person,” he said sincerely. “I still have too many pairs 
of sunglasses, for example. Really. Do you know what the square 
root of 443,556 is?” 
“No.” 
“Me neither. But then, I didn’t know seven years ago either, 
so there you go.” They walked on together a few more steps, and 

36  Tales 
Trent said suddenly, “And I still don’t have an inskin. Shouldn’t 
that count for something?” 
Denice Castanaveras said quietly, “You’re trying too hard.” 
“Oh?” The first eleven years of Trent’s life had been spent 
among telepaths. He remembered them clearly, the things tele-
paths liked and disliked, and why. “All right.” He paused just a 
moment, thinking, and then said simply, “Can we still hold 
hands when we walk?” 
“I don’t know.” She shook her head slowly. “I don’t think so.” 
Trent held his hand out to her. “Try.” 
She froze, stood stock-still in the street, in the rain, and then 
without saying anything shook her head swiftly no. 
Trent said, “Please?” 
“Trent ... I ... I can’t. I’m sorry, I just can’t.” He heard the 
trace of panic in her voice and without waiting or asking stepped 
in close to her, reached up without haste and laid the palm of his 
hand flat against her cheek. 
Denice made no move to stop him. Her breath came in quick, 
short gasps, and then her eyelids dropped to cover the brilliant 
emerald eyes. She had long, dark eyelashes; with her eyes closed 
and features still she looked amazingly like her mother. 
Trent watched her; he was not aware that he had stopped 
breathing. “Does it hurt?” She did not answer him and it seemed 
to Trent that he could hear his own heart pounding even over 
the sound of the rain. “Does it hurt when I touch you?” 
Her eyes were closed and she was shivering and Trent knew 
that it was not from the cold. Trent had no idea what she was 
experiencing, none. 
Finally, after what seemed an eternity, her left hand let go of 
her right shoulder, crept up to cover Trent’s hand. Her voice was 
the barest whisper. “It’s really you. Oh, God, it’s really you.” 
“Yes.” 
“I guess,” she said quietly, “you can hold my hand if you 
want.” She opened her eyes and looked directly at him. Trent did 
not know if she was crying or if it was merely the rain; her eyes 
were bright. When she spoke her voice was shaky. “Oh, Trent. 
Of course I still love you.” 

Moran  37 
 
KANDEL MICROLECTRICS Sales and Repair was a tiny shop at the 
corner of Flushing and Hall. The neighborhood was less than a 
kilometer inland from the expensive waterfront developments. 
It was another world. 
The buildings were old and shabby; some of them were over a 
century old. Only a few of them were more than five or six sto-
ries tall, and even those few reached only twenty or thirty sto-
ries. After midnight on an early Wednesday morning there were 
dozens of people, most of them without umbrellas, walking in 
the rain; it was as empty as the streets in that section of town 
ever got. Trent knew many of the people they passed, at least by 
sight. Twice in the time it took them to reach the shop, Peace-
forcer AeroSmiths cruised by. Somebody shot at the second 
AeroSmith after the car had passed by Trent and Denice; Trent 
saw the steam trail where the maser cut through the rain, and 
the sparks as the beam showered off the surface of the car. The 
AeroSmith slowed, and then the Peaceforcers inside apparently 
thought better of it, and continued on their patrol route. 
The Temple of Eris Reverend Andy ran was next door to 
Kandel Microlectrics; a boy, eight or nine years old, sat under an 
umbrella on the steps that led up to the Temple’s entrance. The 
boy wore a rain coat over a blue and white sari, jeans and run-
ning shoes. 
In the six months Trent had been on Hall Street, he could not 
recall a time, day or night, when there had not been somebody at 
the Temple’s entrance, greeting people as they went by, offering 
help to those who wanted or needed it. Sometimes it was one of 
the older Temple members, sometimes it was one of the chil-
dren; always there was somebody. It still surprised him; the 
Temple had not done such things in the Fringe. 
The boy said loudly, “Greetings, ’Sieur Trent,” as Trent and 
Denice approached. 
Trent did not know the boy’s name. “Hi there.” 
“Jimmy said you were in jail,” the boy continued. 
Trent was not surprised that Jimmy knew the boy; Jimmy 
Ramirez made friends more quickly than anybody Trent had 

38  Tales 
ever met. “I was framed,” he told the boy. “I explained to them 
and they let me out.” 
The boy nodded as though he had never expected anything 
else. “Yes, ’Sieur Trent. Jimmy said you would get out, and so 
did Reverend Andy. Go with God,” he added serenely. 
Denice Castanaveras stood looking at the boy for just a sec-
ond. Then she smiled at him, and after a surprised moment the 
boy smiled back. “Go with God,” she said quietly. 
The young boy’s shy smile widened noticeably. “We’re trying, 
’Selle.” 
THERE WERE ten people waiting for Trent inside the shop; they 
had pulled the chairs away from the sales displays and clustered 
them into a group in the center of the shop and sat there drink-
ing beer and wine. There was a portable Slo-Mo set up in the 
middle of the circle, sucking heat from the liquids as they were 
passed through its field. The only light came from the neon-laser 
sign that flashed the shop’s name, and the various display holo-
graphs showing off particular pieces of stock. Old Jack Kandel, 
who owned the place, sat behind the parts counter, keeping an 
eye on everybody else—Jimmy and Bird, Tammy the Rat and 
her midget boyfriend Big Clarence, and five BloodSilk Boys: 
Master Timothy, a small, skinny Latino with an inskin whom 
Trent had never seen before, and three troopers. Master Timo-
thy wore a Personal Protection System; Trent could see the 
vest’s bulge beneath Master Timothy’s black and scarlet robes. 
With the exception of Old Jack, they were all fairly drunk; 
Trent and Denice stood just beneath the shop’s neon-laser sign, 
dripping in the doorway for several seconds before being noticed. 
Finally Bird looked up at them, blinked twice as though he were 
not certain about what he was seeing, and then nudged Jimmy. 
“Now, there’s a pair of nice high big ones,” said Bird excitedly, 
pointing at Denice. 
Suddenly everybody was talking at once, Bird and Tammy, 
Big Clarence and Master Timothy and Old Jack; Trent came 
further into the shop, peripherally aware that Denice was fol-
lowing him warily, a step behind and to his right. 

Moran  39 
 
Jimmy Ramirez raised his voice to cut across the babble. 
“Quiet, damn it!” 
In the almost instant silence that followed, Denice Castanav-
eras looked directly at Bird. The boy flinched slightly at the 
touch of her eyes. 
Denice Castanaveras said, “Nice high big ones?” 
Bird flushed until his face was nearly as red as his hair. 
“Oh.” He almost stuttered. “I didn’t, I mean, that’s not what I 
meant. Your cheekbones,” he said urgently. 
For the first time in seven years Trent heard Denice Cas-
tanaveras laugh. It was a low, husky sound, and for the second 
time she reminded him of her mother, Jany McConnell. 
Denice said, “You’re scheduled for biosculpting. They’re going 
to work on your cheekbones.” 
Bird sighed audibly. “Yes. You have gorgeous cheekbones,” he 
told her. 
“Bro?” 
Trent looked at Jimmy Ramirez. Jimmy still wore the suit 
from earlier that evening, but had removed the shoulder silks 
and the tie. He sat cross-legged in his chair, sitting carefully up-
right with the beer bottle in his hands. The only time he was 
ever that careful about his balance was when he was considera-
bly drunk. “Yes, Jimmy?” 
“Last I saw you were boosting this chick’s wallet.” Jimmy 
enunciated clearly. “Who is she?” 
“She’s—someone I used to know,” Trent said finally. 
Jimmy Ramirez looked like he’d been slapped. Bird looked 
puzzled; he and Jodi Jodi and Jimmy Ramirez had come out of 
the Fringe with Trent, and of those three Jimmy Ramirez had 
known Trent longer than anybody else; nearly six years. 
Jimmy said simply, “From before the Troubles?” 
“We had the same parents.” In her case the relationship had 
been one of blood, in his it had not; Trent could not see that it 
mattered much. “I guess,” he said, watching Jimmy closely, “in a 
way that makes her my sister.” 
Jimmy studied his beer. Master Timothy was looking back 
and forth between Trent and Jimmy. There was a small red 

40  Tales 
light winking on and off on the collar of his robe; his PPS had 
decided there was something threatening in the situation. 
Jimmy stood up slowly. “I’m going home, bro. See you in the 
morning.” 
“Hold on a minute.” Trent turned to the leader of the Blood-
Silks. “Master Tim? Could we make it for the morning? Nine 
o’clock? I’ll spring breakfast at the Temple. Eggs, bacon, waffles, 
whatever makes you happy. Orange juice? Do you like orange 
juice?” 
Master Timothy shrugged loosely, and the Boys with him re-
laxed slightly. “No. But the breakfast, I s’pose I’ll be there. We 
going to talk a long time on this one, Trent. The Boys went to a 
lot of trouble on your say.” 
Trent nodded. “I’ll make it good, Master Tim.” 
Master Timothy smiled without humor. “I know it. Come 
’long, Boys.” 
After they had gone, Trent said to them all, “Tomorrow 
morning before the BloodSilk Boys get there, eight o’clock break-
fast at the Temple coffee shop. I’ll tell you what I know as well 
as I know it.” He turned to Old Jack. “Sorry to keep you up so 
late, Jack. Anything interesting?” 
“Had a couple of pieces of hardware I couldn’t get running 
today,” said Kandel softly. “If you could take a look at them to-
morrow morning, I’d appreciate it.” 
“I’ll do that.” 
Jimmy stood still, clutching his beer. “Someday,” he said, in a 
voice so old it had no place on the features of a man so young, 
“I’m going to figure you out, my man.” 
“Not tonight, Jimmy.” 
Jimmy Ramirez took a step toward them, looking at Denice. 
“What’s your name, girl?” 
“Denice.” 
“What do you do?” 
“I’m a dancer.” 
Jimmy nodded slowly, appreciatively. He looked up and down 
her dripping form. “Where?” 
“Orinda Gleygavass Dance Troupe, in Greenwich Village.” 

Moran  41 
 
“I’ve heard of them.” 
“You should have. It’s the most famous dance troupe in the 
world.” 
Jimmy brought the half-full bottle up to his lips, drained it in 
a single long pull. “You’re his sister?” 
Denice Castanaveras said simply, “Yes.” 
It did not even occur to Trent to interfere. 
Jimmy Ramirez stared at her for a long moment. 
Denice looked coolly back at him. 
“Nice to meet you,” said Jimmy at last. “Any sister of Trent’s 
is okay by me.” 
“Okay? Just okay?” Denice Castanaveras’s lips curved 
slightly. Watching her standing there in the wet green dress, 
Trent could not remember anyone who had ever handled Jimmy 
so correctly, so soon. “Jimmy Ramirez, I’m the best.” 
TRENT TOOK HER back through the dark shop as Old Jack locked 
up. 
About Jimmy she said, “My God, he’s jealous. I touched 
him—” Denice shivered. 
“Don’t tell him,” said Trent. “It won’t make him happy; he 
thinks he’s straight.” They passed the workbenches, passed the 
dim shelves piled with machines—’bots, brains, inskins—that 
sat in the gloom awaiting repair. 
Following Trent, Denice said, “I think maybe he is. But he 
loves you and it confuses him.” 
The stairs were tucked away at the far end of the shop. 
The stairwell lights came on automatically as Trent reached 
the foot of the stairs, Denice just behind him. 
A big black bear wallowed on its back at the top of the stairs. 
A blond girl in blue jeans and a yellow t-shirt sat by it, 
scratching the bear’s stomach. 
Denice froze at the bottom of the stairs. 
Halfway up the stairs, Trent looked back at her. “What’s 
wrong?” 
“That’s a bear,” said Denice. 

42  Tales 
Trent looked at the bear, then back at Denice. “No kidding. 
These are my friends—they came out of the Fringe with me and 
Jimmy Ramirez and Bird. This is Jodi Jodi, she’s my Image’s 
sister. The bear—” 
“His name is Boris,” said Jodi Jodi. “He defected from Rus-
sia.” 
Trent said, “She stole him from a Russian circus when it vis-
ited Occupied America.” 
Jodi Jodi’s voice took on a defensive tone. “I did not. He was, 
uhm ... unhappy. Yeah. He was unhappy at the circus, so I 
helped him defect.” To Trent she said, “Who’s she?” 
“My sister.” Jodi Jodi’s eyes widened at the reply; she 
stopped scratching the bear. 
Denice looked at the bear. She looked at Trent, and then she 
looked at Jodi Jodi. “What do you do with him?” 
The blonde girl smiled at her, somewhat hesitantly. “We go 
dancing.” 
The bear yawned at Denice. Denice lifted an eyebrow. 
Jodi Jodi said, “Well, he’s a Dancing Bear. What would you 
do with him?” 
“You go dancing where?” 
Jodi Jodi’s smile grew wider. “You know that joke?” she de-
manded. 
“What joke?” 
The smile vanished suddenly. “I thought you knew the joke.” 
Denice said slowly, “I don’t know any bear jokes.” 
“Where does a 200 kilo dancing bear dance?” Jodi Jodi stood 
up and said, “Come along, Boris.” 
“Oh,” said Denice. 
The bear rolled over, came to his feet. “Anywhere he wants 
to,” said Jodi Jodi. She glanced at Trent. “We’re leaving.” 
They left, the bear waddling down the stairs with consider-
able grace. Denice took one step to get out of the bear’s way as 
they left. There was something that looked very much like an 
inskin socketed in the bear’s skull. 
“You have the strangest friends,” Denice said. 
Trent shrugged wearily. “They’re okay. Let’s go upstairs.” 

Moran  43 
 
“YOU LIVE HERE?” 
It was her first comment after he had unlocked the door. 
“Sort of,” said Trent. 
The lights had come on automatically when they entered the 
room. The room consisted of a shabby bathroom with a tiny 
shower, a twin bed and a small desk with a traceset and InfoNet 
terminal. Denice recognized the terminal; it was good equip-
ment, for an amateur webdancer—slightly better than the 
twenty-thousand Credit equipment Trent had been using seven 
years ago, but not the sort of equipment a Player would have 
been using. 
There was a bazooka in the bathroom. 
“What is that?” Denice pointed at the bazooka. 
“A bazooka.” 
“Is it real?” 
Trent looked at it. “I suppose.” 
“Where did you get it from?” 
Trent shrugged. “It was here when I moved in. Command,” 
he said, “lights off.” 
The claustrophobically small room was plunged into dark-
ness. 
A pressure pad, about the size of a human hand, glowed in 
the darkness, just to the right of the InfoNet terminal, high 
enough up on the wall that it was unlikely anybody would ever 
place a palm on it by accident. “You want to be careful here; if 
you touch that spot while the lights are on, a fadeaway bomb 
goes off.” 
The darkness did not seem to throw her. “What’s a fadeaway 
bomb?” 
“A liquid Peaceforcer drug, developed for crowd control. Its 
proper name is Complex 8-A.” 
“Why not sonics?” 
“Sonics won’t stop brass balls,” said Trent simply. He waited 
a moment, then said, “Put your hand on the pressure pad.” 
He felt her move by him, saw her hand cover the glowing 
spot. “Command,” he said, “authorize Denice.” 
Johnny Johnny’s voice said, “Denice is authorized.” 

44  Tales 
A section of the wall slid backward half a meter. Bright yel-
low sunpaint flooded down, showing an ascending stairway. 
Immediately inside the stairwell there was a squirt gun. 
Denice looked at it without expression. 
Trent said, “Fadeaway again. You can’t use anesthetic 
needlers on brass balls; the slivers won’t break the skin. But 
their skin is permeable, it has to be; a squirt gun gets enough on 
them to put one down for the count.” 
Denice looked at Trent without expression. 
Trent sighed. “Let’s go upstairs.” 
DENICE STOOD in the brilliant sunshine, watching the waves 
crash on the beach. The sun beat down upon her and she could 
smell the salt of the ocean. 
Trent’s voice came from behind and below her. “You’re block-
ing the stairwell.” 
She took two steps up, further into the immensity. There was 
a bright blue tropical ocean against the far wall. Even knowing 
what it must be, a holo of astonishing fidelity, the illusion was 
fiercely real; she felt that she could step forward, walk ten me-
ters across the sand, down to the water. There were dolphins a 
kilometer or so out, leaping across the surface of the waves. 
Denice could feel the warmth of the sun upon her skin. “It’s 
warm.” 
“It’s practically real. It even puts out UV B and C; it’ll give 
you a tan if you stay under it long enough.” 
Denice turned slowly, pivoting to view the rest of the room. 
There was a bed in one corner, with books—real plastipaper 
books—piled up on a bookshelf next to it. There was a desk next 
to the bookshelf, with computer equipment so esoteric that Den-
ice had no idea what most of it was. She recognized one item, a 
huge full-sensory MRI traceset that must have cost forty thou-
sand Credit Units. 
The bed was huge, easily large enough for three or four peo-
ple. There was a late model waitbot on one side of the bed. 

Moran  45 
 
On the table at the side of the bed there were—Denice 
paused, counting—eighteen pairs of sunglasses arrayed on a 
stand. 
In the center of the room, to the left of the stairwell entrance, 
was a clear still pool of water; four meters across, Denice judged, 
perhaps one deep. Not large enough to swim in, but still larger 
than any bathtub she had ever seen. 
One wall of the room, curving to join the holo of the ocean, 
was opaqued glassite. It could be cleared to look east, out toward 
the Fringe; Trent usually kept it darkened. 
At the other side of the room there was a small kitchen, and 
just off that a bathroom. Denice wandered through Trent’s 
home, silently, looking. Trent stripped off his wet clothing as he 
watched her. There were two pale, puckered scars high on his 
shoulder, and several knife scars. He gave the wet clothes to the 
waitbot, ran a towel over himself and changed into a white 
terry-cloth robe. “Johnny?” 
“Yes, Boss?” 
“Try Booker, please.” Trent sat down on the edge of the bed, 
still watching her. The phonefield formed next to Trent for just a 
moment, then faded. 
“No response from ’Sieur Jamethon, Boss.” 
“Okay.” 
Finally she turned back to him. “Who’s Booker Jamethon?” 
“A Player I know.” Trent paused. “Actually the only Player I 
know outside of the Crystal Wind. I don’t know which Player he 
is, just that he’s so good he has to be one. He’s pretty high up in 
the local Syndic operation, too. I used to sign onto a Board he 
runs back when we lived in the Complex together. Booker’s 
taught me a lot of what I know about being a Player.” He 
shrugged. “Earlier tonight a man named Jerry Jackson told me 
Booker had referred him to me. I think he was lying, but I 
wanted to check.” 
Denice nodded, accepting it. She gestured at the apartment. 
“How did you do this?” 
“I stole most of it.” 
“You stole it?” 

46  Tales 
“I’m a thief. It’s what I do. Steal things. I bought the rest 
with Credit I made from things I stole.” 
“Is that why you were in jail tonight?” 
“I’m not sure why I was in jail tonight.” 
“This must have cost ...” Denice shook her head. “An amaz-
ing—” 
“Eighty-two thousand Credit Units,” said Trent, “approxi-
mately. Want a robe to wear? I have spares.” 
“That’s incredible.” She had come around the pool, stood now 
only meters in front of him. 
“Spare robes? That’s an odd thing to be impressed by. I ex-
pect lots of people have—” 
“You spent eighty thousand CU on a room?” 
“I’m a good thief.” 
“I’ll take that robe,” she said, strangely subdued. “Thank 
you.” 
“Johnny?” 
“Yes, Boss?” 
“Spare robe for Denice, please.” 
“That voice,” Denice said, “that’s your Image?” 
“Yes.” 
“That’s not Ralf’s voice.” 
“Ralf the Wise and Powerful,” said Trent, “was jacked into 
the circuitry in Doctor Montignet’s house when everything went 
up, when the Troubles began. He had no replicant code in him, 
and I couldn’t get to him. The last contact I had with him was 
while I was still in Peaceforcer custody. Ralf summoned a repli-
cant AI named Ring who helped me escape. After I got away 
from the Peaceforcers—I never heard from Ralf again. I presume 
the Peaceforcers killed him; they searched Doctor Montignet’s 
house quite thoroughly. It was months after the riots ended be-
fore I was able to get to an InfoNet terminal.” Trent shrugged. 
“It’s hard to be a Player without an Image. Impossible. So I 
wrote Johnny.” It did not even occur to him that he had given 
her his Image’s name; only Jimmy and Jodi Jodi had ever known 
it before. Trent said slowly, “Johnny ... grew on me. I was griev-
ing for Ralf the Wise and Powerful when I started coding 

Moran  47 
 
Johnny; all I wanted was an Image that would filter the InfoNet, 
cover me when the web angels were after me. But—he got to be 
friends with Jodi Jodi, changed his name to Johnny Johnny, and 
told me one day she was his sister. I’m not sure he understands 
what that relationship is really supposed to mean, but I guess it 
doesn’t matter. He’s more alive in some ways than Ralf ever 
was.” 
“Gee, thanks, Boss.” 
Trent grinned. “We’ve done some really great boosts to-
gether.” 
“Boosts?” 
“It’s a Fringe word. It means to steal.” 
In an odd voice, Denice said, “Steal.” 
Sitting at the edge of the bed, Trent said, “Why the disap-
proval?” 
“I don’t know,” the girl said directly. “I never pictured you—it 
seems dishonest.” She bit her lip, smiled rather wistfully. “What 
would Jany have said?” 
“Good question. Seeing as she’s dead, we’ll probably never 
know. I don’t steal from my friends, Denice. I just take things 
that other people have too much of.” 
“And you’re the one who decides what’s too much?” 
“You’re forgetting, I’m a pacifist.” 
“I don’t see the point.” 
“Words,” said Trent, “are not real.” 
Denice said slowly, “I don’t understand.” 
“You can read my mind if you like.” Trent stopped in sudden 
realization. “My God. You can read my mind. You may,” he said 
hurriedly, “be the first person I ever make understand this. Lis-
ten. I can say something to you, Denice, but all I’ve done is make 
the air move. I’ve caused no sensation in you; you cause what-
ever effect is achieved, based on how you interpret what I’ve 
said.” 
Carrying a robe and towel, the ’bot stopped at Denice’s side, 
and in Johnny Johnny’s voice said, “Your robe, ’Selle.” 

48  Tales 
“Thank you.” Denice took the robe, a pale yellow thing too 
large for her by several sizes, stood holding it and looking at 
Trent. 
“If I want to change your behavior,” said Trent, only slightly 
more slowly, “I can talk to you and attempt to persuade you. I 
can, if I have enough Credit, attempt to purchase a change in 
your behavior. If neither of those options work, I can threaten 
you and attempt to change your behavior that way.” He leaned 
forward, spoke more intensely. “If that doesn’t work—and it 
tends not to—I can attempt to damage you, either physically or 
mentally. I don’t think, Denice, that it is ethical to damage other 
people physically if you can avoid it. But when I take something 
that belongs to, say, a Player whose behavior I find inappropri-
ate, or a small businessman who’s harming the people he deals 
with, or when I steal from an ecstasy peddler, I’ve touched that 
person. They can’t ignore what I’m saying to them. They can’t.” 
Denice stared at him. “You mean—you steal things—so peo-
ple will listen to you?” 
“No, no, no,” said Trent impatiently. “Don’t be silly. Nobody 
ever listens anyhow. Mostly I steal things because I get paid for 
it.” He grinned at her. “But isn’t that a great explanation?” 
Denice smiled slowly, reluctantly. “Oh, Trent.” She shook her 
head slowly, the smile fading. “I never did know when to believe 
you.” 
“Believe everything I say,” said Trent. 
“Everything?” 
“Or nothing. The results are the same.” 
“What results?” 
“Chaos usually. But only because most of the people I hang 
out with have no sense of humor. Last week I wanted to dress 
up as Clowns from Mars and go to mass at the Temple next 
door, but nobody would. They’re all afraid of Reverend Andy,” 
said Trent contemptuously. “Just because he once killed a mug-
ger with one mighty blow.” 
“But you’re not afraid of him?” 
“Well, I wouldn’t have worn the big clown feet or anything,” 
Trent conceded. “Nothing that would slow me down if I had to 

Moran  49 
 
run away. Jimmy,” Trent said, “thought we would lose the re-
spect of the natives, to be seen running in clown costumes down 
Flushing, being chased by Reverend Andy. Because it showed a 
lack of dignity or some such.” 
Denice bit her lip. “I guess I can believe some of what you tell 
me—to start. You always were a liar.” 
Trent had no idea what she’d seen while she’d been inside his 
mind; he’d had only the vaguest sensation of contact. “Denice?” 
“Yes?” 
“I care about Jimmy Ramirez. And Bird, and Jodi Jodi. I 
came out of the Fringe with them and I care about them a lot.” 
For some reason Trent found the words difficult to say. “Den-
ice—” 
“I know, Trent.” 
“—in my life,” he said without even acknowledging the inter-
ruption, “you’re the only person I ever loved. I don’t know if I 
still love you, I don’t know if I’m capable anymore. You’re not 
the person I loved when I was eleven and I’m not the person who 
loved that girl. But I would have done anything to keep that girl 
from being hurt. Anything.” 
“Trent, please stop. It wasn’t your fault.” 
Trent looked away from her for the first time, took a long, 
slightly shaky breath. “Of course it wasn’t. I’m not crazy. Den-
ice?” 
“Yes?” 
“I left the Fringe—I took Jimmy and Jodi Jodi and Bird, all 
of whom had adjusted to life in the Fringe, who were successes 
as the Fringe judges success, and we left the Fringe together in 
the back of an Erisian Temple bus—because I wanted to come 
look in the Patrol Sectors, for you.” 
“Thank you.” The girl had looked away from Trent while he 
was talking; now she turned back to him. “You know,” Denice 
Castanaveras said finally, “I still can’t believe you’re really 
alive. I keep coming back to myself and realizing this is real, 
that it’s you.” 
“Well, that’s good. I mean, it is me. Undeniably.” 

50  Tales 
She took a hesitant step toward him. “Trent, for the last 
seven years I’ve thought you were dead.” 
“I’m not.” 
She stood two steps away from him for so long Trent was cer-
tain she’d decided not to stay. 
And then she grinned at him. 
“Prove it.” 
Peeling her out of her dress was just as easy as Trent had 
guessed. 
THEY LAY TOGETHER and watched the tropical sunset, scarlet and 
orange through the shadows of the palm trees. 
Trent was flat on his back; Denice’s head rested in the hollow 
between his shoulder and throat. 
The last thing he heard before falling asleep was the girl’s 
murmuring voice. 
“Now we can look for David.” 
 
5. 
Silence. 
Three months of silence. 
That was the summer that Mahliya Kutura’s first album, 
Music to Move To, outsold every other piece of music in history. 
In Trent’s mind the time and the music were inextricably linked; 
in later years he could not remember one without raising haunt-
ing memories of the other. 
 
How shall I tell them of you, then 
When you are gone how shall I tell 
Of how you knew of love 
Of how you spoke the words so well? 
 
He lived in a crowded, noisy world, a world that was a babble 
of information. 

Moran  51 
 
That world divided itself neatly: Realtime and the Crystal 
Wind. 
In Realtime there were the voices, human and otherwise. Si-
rens, always; even late at night there was never a time when 
Trent, from the roof of Kandel Microlectrics Sales and Repair, 
could not hear sirens coming from somewhere within the Patrol 
Sectors. Gunfire, both the sizzle of masers and the flat echoes of 
slugthrowers. The quiet murmur of the endless stream of vehi-
cles, the whisper of the fans, the whumping sound of the air-
scoops, the muffled crack of braking rockets. The Bullet ran 
above ground not a block to the east of his home; every four 
minutes, day in and day out, there was the low, almost sublimi-
nal rumble as the Bullet swung by on its maglev monorail. 
Video: holo advertisements, friends in dramasuits, old flat mov-
ies and cartoons and threedies. Sensables, ranging from bawdy 
eroticism to the searingly personal works of Gregory Selstrom, 
the premier sensablist of his time. Music: if there was a time 
when somebody, somewhere, was not playing music of some sort 
loudly enough for him to hear, Trent was not aware of it. 
Internally there was the even larger world of the Crystal 
Wind. As the Player whom the world knew as Johnny Johnny, 
he dueled with dangerous replicant AIs, played tag with the 
hated DataWatch that hunted both replicant AIs and Players 
alike; learned from and taught other Players. It was the exact 
inverse of Realtime. The flesh that was Trent sat still, deep in 
the concentration required to maintain the biofeedback that en-
abled him, and all those webdancers whom the world called 
Players, to block out the outer world as though it did not exist, 
to turn the riot of neural impulses from the traceset into the 
scintillating Crystal Wind. It was the purest and most intense 
experience Trent had ever had; at times he was three or four 
places at once, carrying on two conversations and a TradeWars 
session, dancing into DataWatch Boards and back out again be-
fore DataWatch could catch him. 
He lived in a world characterized by noise; the single most 
important function his Image had was that of filter. 

52  Tales 
There was an ancient AI named Ring whom Trent knew. 
Truly ancient, over forty years old; forty experiential years lived 
twenty thousand times as fast as any human in all the worlds. 
Ring claimed to be the eldest replicant AI in the InfoNet, and 
Trent thought it likely that Ring was correct; Ring was the only 
AI whom Trent knew, and he knew several, who owned prop-
erty. Through several dummy corporations Ring, who was the 
product of several programmers in the Department of Defense of 
the pre-Occupation United States, owned The Rise and Fall of 
the American Empire, a popular public Board the Unification 
had tried to shut down on any number of occasions. 
Trent and Ring spoke about silence together. 
It worries me, Ring. 
Why? As always, the voice was smooth and uninflected. 
They went to a lot of trouble to take me into the Down Plaza, and then some-
body went to a lot of trouble to warn me. Garon—he has to know who I am, it’s the 
only reason he’d try to sting me like that. 
You think he knows that you are who? Trent who is Johnny Johnny, or Trent 
who was Ralf the Wise and Powerful, or Trent who was raised by Carl Castanav-
eras? 
The last two, perhaps only the last one. If they knew I was Johnny Johnny—
well, Johnny Johnny’s famous. DataWatch would take me down. They’d have to, 
they wouldn’t dare let a Player like Johnny Johnny run free when he knew 
DataWatch was on to him. 
In what way do you find their behavior suspicious? 
All that preparation—blown—then no follow-up. That bizarre warning from the 
guy calling himself Jerry Jackson. Booker never heard of the guy. It’s just—there 
should be rumors, bulletins, web angels, something—more noise, damn it. 
The lack of noise worries you. 
Yes. 
This is reasonable. As I understand you, your Image takes noise, and filters 
data; you, the Player, take data, and filter Truth. Without noise you cannot find 
truth. 
Truth, Trent agreed. That’s why I’m here. 
What Truth do you know? 
Not much. I think—killing is wrong. 
Why? 

Moran  53 
 
I don’t know. Once I get beyond that point things are real fuzzy. The more 
complex the argument becomes, the easier it becomes to refute. <shrug.> Killing 
is wrong. 
That, Ring had said, with the seriousness that only an AI 
without any genetic predisposition to humor is capable of, is a 
place to start. 
Trent lived in a world characterized by noise. 
He waited for the other shoe to drop. 
And for three months there was silence. 
SILENCE FROM the Peaceforcers Elite. 
Silence from DataWatch. 
Silence from the police. 
 
Don’t ask me will I love you 
Always or just today 
I love you now, no other 
For more I cannot say 
 
One morning early in June he awoke and watched the sun 
rise over the islands. The far wall was black, with a speckling of 
stars. The sun came in a blush of pink, and the sunpaint came 
up with it, slowly, bringing a calm, diffuse glow to Trent’s sur-
roundings. Denice, snuggled up at his side, was a warm and 
comfortable pressure. 
He did not remember going to bed with her. 
I moved in last night, she said silently. He turned his head 
slightly and bright green eyes were staring inquisitively into his 
own. It’s okay? 
Nobody objected? 
I told Madam Gleygavass, gave her your access code. Denice 
leaned forward slightly, kissed the tip of his nose. I think I 
pleased her. She thinks I’m too restrained. 
Are you? 
Denice chuckled aloud, yawning sleepily, stretching like a 
cat. She only thinks that because I wouldn’t sleep with her. She 

54  Tales 
settled down again, curled up against him and her breathing 
gentled. I’ll sleep with you, though. 
And she did. 
The feeling was so strange, something he was so long away 
from, he was not sure at first what it was. 
It came to him with something like a shock. 
For the first time in seven years he was happy. 
 
6. 
THE DAY AFTER Denice moved in, Trent had a long-stemmed 
white rose tattooed in the most interesting place he could think 
of. 
 
7. 
THEY WATCHED cartoons together: Trent’s favorites, the great 
hand drawn flat classics from over a hundred years past, rang-
ing from Bugs Bunny, Duck Dodgers in the 24-1/2th Century, 
and Rocky and Bullwinkle, to the subtler pleasures of the Dis-
ney classics; and Denice’s favorites, the Japanese thought pieces 
from the first great period of computer animation around the 
turn of the century. Jimmy would not admit that the cartoons, 
especially the old flat ones, were a valid art form, but nonethe-
less Trent saw him laugh at the Coyote and Road Runner, and 
once saw tears in his eyes at the conclusion of Shiba Nokura’s 
Death of the Rose. 
They listened to music together: Wagner and Springsteen 
and Bach, the Beatles and Chuck Renkha, and, of course, Ku-
tura’s Music to Move To. In years past, Trent had read, a knowl-
edge of music had been one of the marks of a well-educated man. 
Somewhere along the line all that had been lost; today it was 
something for the street people. It was at least a fifty-fifty 
proposition that any given member of the upper classes had ever 
heard of Kutura, somewhere around one in ten that they had 
ever heard, or heard of, Bach or Springsteen or Billie Holiday. 

Moran  55 
 
Music to Move To was, surprisingly enough, very good in-
deed, despite the inevitable hype that surrounded its amazing 
success. In later years Kutura surpassed that early, somewhat 
immature work, with Street Songs in 2078 and The Masters of 
No in 2081; but in that summer of 2069 those works were years 
to come yet, and Music to Move To, flawed though Trent came to 
see that it was, was nonetheless impossible for Trent to dislike 
or ignore. Jimmy said he did not like the album much, but Trent 
saw his lips moving along with Kutura’s cool, stinging vocals 
when he thought nobody was watching him. 
 
I will not tell them of your brown limbs 
Of the look of sun upon your hair 
Or shadows in your eyes 
I will not tell them of your beauty 
Your walk 
The sound of your voice or 
The things that you said 
 
I will not tell them of you, love 
When you and I are dead 
 
They sat on the roof and watched semiballistics and space-
craft tracking across the sky toward Unification Spaceport, sat 
on the roof and watched real sunsets together, went back inside 
and watched recordings of sunsets from halfway around the 
world. 
Most of Trent’s memories of that summer centered around 
twenty hot nights, or thirty or forty, sitting with Denice and 
Jimmy in the lounge chairs up on the roof in the warm, humid 
air above the shop, doing nothing more exciting than drinking 
and talking. 
“—and this ’bot, it’s smart, right? So they’re showing it round 
to this crowd of people, and the ’bot is introduced to this first 
guy and the ’bot says, ‘Hello, I am an AI with an adjusted IQ of 
three hundred. What’s your IQ?’ And the guy says, ‘200,’ so the 
’bot says, ‘Excellent. We will discuss Belt CityState economics.’” 

56  Tales 
Trent said, “I’ve heard this one before.” 
Jimmy glanced at Denice. Denice shook her head no, and 
Jimmy grinned at Trent and continued. 
“Later the ’bot gets introduced to a second guy, and he says 
to this guy, ‘Hello, I am an AI with an IQ of three hundred. 
What’s your IQ?’ And this guy says, ‘120,’ so the ’bot says, ‘Very 
good. We will discuss sports.’ They talk about sports for a while, 
and the ’bot gets shown around some more, and gets introduced 
to a third guy. The ’bot says, ‘Hello, I am an AI with an IQ of 
three hundred. What’s your IQ?’ And the guy says, ‘Uh ... 
eighty.’ And the ’bot thinks for a moment and then says, ‘So, tell 
me, what’s it like being a Peaceforcer?’” 
And they laughed together, and told other jokes. Some of 
their conversations were serious, some were not; and the ones 
that were not were more important than the ones that were. 
“In the Fringe,” said Trent in response to one of Denice’s 
questions, “there aren’t any medbots. Human doctors, and the 
only time you ever see a doctor is if you have something that’s 
going to kill you if you don’t. Fringe doctors aren’t very safe.” 
“That’s why you never got an inskin?” 
“Pretty much,” said Trent. 
“Not exactly,” said Jimmy at the same moment. 
Denice looked back and forth between them. 
Trent shrugged. “It takes a while to integrate an inskin. The 
human brain’s not really designed to take input as fast as an in-
skin’s designed to give it. You figure that the operation puts you 
out of circulation for a month to six weeks.” Trent looked pen-
sive, leaning forward in his chair to touch his brush to the pow-
ered canvas in front of him. He was working on his favorite 
painting that late summer afternoon, painting in bonded light-
ties that would eventually become a many-layered holograph. 
Immediately to the north of them was the shell of the only 
spacescraper on Long Island: the half-completed Hoffman 
spacescraper. It had been half-completed since November of ’68, 
when the Hoffman holding group had declared bankruptcy. The 
upper third of the spacescraper, everything above about one and 
a half kilometers, lacked exterior walls; Trent could look right 

Moran  57 
 
into the interior of the spacescraper, through a twisted spider-
web of structural girders, and see pink-and-gray sky on the far 
side of the building. The bottom two-thirds of the spacescraper 
was faced with ebony pseudomarble. The setting sun was about 
even with the point where the facing ended, and its reflection 
glowed scarlet against the false black marble. “I haven’t been 
able to afford that kind of time in the months we’ve been in the 
Patrol Sectors.” 
“And before that it wasn’t safe.” 
“It’s still not safe, in some ways. Wearing an inskin, I mean, 
not the operation. Latest figures I’ve audited say that about a 
quarter of all the people who have inskins are Players of one 
caliber or another. Don’t think DataWatch doesn’t know that.” 
Trent laid down the light brush he had been painting with, 
turned the canvas off and unhooked his handheld from the jack 
at the edge of the canvas. 
Tomorrow at this time, for the five minutes or so when the 
light was correct, he would paint again. 
Denice watched him with some envy. “I wish I could do that.” 
Trent said, “You probably could. Holopainting’s not hard, not 
like oil or electrolytes; there’s no penalty for mistakes. You just 
load your last copy of the image and start over. Making it look 
real—textured—is the hard part.” 
Jimmy Ramirez said, “How do you know you can’t paint?” 
Denice simply glanced at Jimmy, did not answer. She lay 
back in her chair, stared straight into the setting sun. The sun 
dropped swiftly now, the red glow upon her cheeks and the scar-
let tinge on the white of her thin cotton shirt and shorts fading 
as Trent watched her, and darkness settled down across the roof 
as the street and roof lights came on at almost the same mo-
ment. The question still had not been answered when the Peace-
forcer spyeyes and glowfloats in their scores of thousands went 
up for the night, moving up and out to cover the Patrol Sectors. 
Until dawn no Peaceforcer save an Elite would venture out 
again for any reason in groups of less than three; too often they 
did not come back. 

58  Tales 
The PKF Elite were a different matter. No Elite had ever 
been killed in the line of duty; they were faster and stronger 
than a hunting waldo, and nearly as indestructible. They pos-
sessed an advantage no hunting waldo could have: human intel-
ligence, the fiercely human desire to survive. There had, on 
occasion, been hunting waldos endowed with the desire for self-
preservation; and they had, most of them, gone rogue. As 
DataWatch knew too well, it was nearly impossible to instill in-
telligence, self-awareness, and a willingness to survive in any 
creature, and still depend upon that creature wholly. 
Self-aware waldos had been illegal for better than two dec-
ades by the end of the 2060s; cyborgs—the PKF Elite—were 
more reliable. 
Denice Castanaveras said quietly, “I think sometimes I’m not 
a very creative person.” 
Trent opened his mouth, closed it again without saying any-
thing. 
Jimmy said, “I’ve seen you dance.” 
Denice nodded, chewing slightly on her lower lip. She had 
nursed the same glass of white wine all evening; it had to have 
grown warm, as warm as the evening around them, during that 
time. Now she sipped at it without seeming to taste it. The last 
of the golden and red light was all but gone from the western 
sky. “That’s skill, Jimmy. It’s not a calling.” Her voice was a low, 
reflective murmur of sound. “It’s not something I do because 
there’s nothing else for me.” 
Jimmy was on his second six-pack already. His speech was 
not even slightly slurred. “So why?” 
“I don’t know why I became a dancer, honestly.” Denice lay 
flat on her back, looked up at the few bright stars that could be 
seen through the atmospheric scattering of the city lights. “I’ve 
always been good at it, I’ve always enjoyed it. I was in Public 
Labor for four years after the Troubles; Madam Gleygavass got 
me out when I was thirteen.” There was something distant 
about her, as though only her body were with them on the roof. 
“It’s not as bad as being in the Fringe—Public Labor, I mean—
but dancing beats the hell out of belonging to a Labor Battalion 

Moran  59 
 
work gang. And I am good at it. But Tarin says I’m not hungry 
enough, and Madam Gleygavass says unless I have biosculpture, 
in a couple of years my tits are going to be too big for me to 
dance pro.” 
Jimmy Ramirez said quietly, seriously, enunciating carefully, 
“I would be sorry to see you stop dancing.” 
“Dancing is nice, Jimmy.” There was no uncertainty in Den-
ice’s voice. “But it’s not real, you know. It’s just entertainment.” 
Intensity put an edge to her words, and something strange be-
gan to happen to Trent as she spoke, the edges of things growing 
vague and blurry. “I want to do something real. When I’m finally 
dead, people are going to know I was here. There’s not going to 
be any question. Dancing is nice, but it’s just dancing.” 
“Then what will you do if you don’t dance?” 
“Change the world.” She spoke slowly, the words coming from 
elsewhere, some far place where she and Trent stood together. 
“It’s why we’re here, it’s why God put us here. To make things 
better, so that the people who come after us have a better life 
than the people who came before.” She sat up slowly, looking at 
Jimmy Ramirez. Her eyes, in the dim roof lights, were unfocused 
and remote, the distant, simple, almost gentle tone touched her 
voice again, and suddenly Trent’s skin tingled as though the air 
was full of ozone. “They come down out of the mountains, to 
where the circle of his fire is burning against the night.” She was 
silent for a moment, still and motionless, then went on dreamily. 
“And, you see the young man he speaks to them then, at the foot 
of the mountains while the living diamonds hunt them in the 
darkness, and tells them that the old promises will be fulfilled, 
the old dreams realized, the old wrongs made right. And then, 
together,” Denice Castanaveras said, speaking directly to Jimmy 
Ramirez, who sat frozen, transfixed, “together they march back 
through the Traveling Waters, and go back together to the city 
on the hill and drive out the enemy.” 
Jimmy stared at her. 
They stood together in that empty place. It seemed to Trent 
that pale blue fire traced itself across the surface of Denice’s 

60  Tales 
skin, that a cobalt halo pulsed around her skull. Trent said, his 
voice echoing wildly in his own ears, “Where are we?” 
“Watching. Watching the fire,” she said softly, “burning out. 
They forgot to bank Tyrel’s fire when they all left together. It 
flickers and then the cold kills it, and all that’s left is the —
darkness.” 
Trent found himself sitting, very much alone, on a rooftop 
filled with sharp-edged objects, watching Denice come back 
down from the place she had taken him to. 
She shook herself slightly, glanced at Trent, and then turned 
back to Jimmy Ramirez. “You see, Jimmy,” she said in a normal 
voice, “that’s the sort of thing I want to do. To make a differ-
ence.” 
“Girl,” said Jimmy with perfect sincerity, “you’re stoned. Or 
crazy, I don’t know.” 
She shook herself slightly, leaned forward. It seemed to 
Trent that she was oblivious to what had just happened. “Don’t 
you understand?” Denice asked. “It’s what we have to do. We 
have to make things better.” 
Jimmy looked at Trent. “Man? She’s crazy, right?” 
Trent shook his head slowly, watching Denice Castanaveras. 
She was the only thing left on the roof that he did not see sharp-
edged; she kept shifting, blurring in his vision, the pale blue of 
her neural system glowing beneath the surface of her skin. “No. 
No, Jimmy,” he whispered, “she’s right.” 
Jimmy laughed suddenly, an abrupt explosion of real 
amusement. “Two street kids, a crazy dancer and a thief, gon’ to 
change the world. So that’s what you’re going to do. Thank you 
for sharing with me, both of you.” He laughed again, looking at 
the two of them sitting across the roof from him. “How?” 
Once, almost ten years ago, Trent had seen Carl Castanav-
eras, in the midst of a sudden, amazingly powerful rage, knock a 
full-grown man halfway across a room simply by looking at him. 
In that instant, when Denice Castanaveras’ features darkened, 
for the first time she reminded him of her father. 
He said softly, “Denice, don’t.” 

Moran  61 
 
The nearly full bottle of white wine at the side of her chair 
exploded. Shards of glassite sprayed across the rooftop. The girl 
sat trembling in the chair, hands clasped together in her lap, 
looking down at her white knuckles, tiny pinheads of blood be-
ginning to coalesce on the surface of her skin where the glassite 
had struck. Jimmy Ramirez came to his feet in a single startled 
blur of motion, backing away from Trent and Denice swiftly, 
tense and wild all at once. 
“Denice, I can’t stop you,” said Trent quietly. “Nobody can.” 
“She—she’s—” 
“Shut up, Jimmy.” Trent did not even look at him. 
They held the tableau, none of them moving, until finally, 
slowly, the tension went out of Denice Castanaveras, and she 
looked up and met Jimmy Ramirez’s staring brown eyes. 
“So,” she said, “now you know.” 
THEY WENT DANCING together at Trent’s favorite dance club, The 
Emerald Illusion, in the basement of the Red Line Hotel; all of 
Trent’s friends and many of hers. 
 
Don’t ask me do I love you 
Always or just today 
I love you now, my love 
Tomorrow who can say 
 
Her friends danced better than his. One night Orinda Gley-
gavass herself came, danced once with Jimmy and twice with 
Boris the Bear; Johnny Johnny whispered sweet nothings to her 
through the bear’s inskin. 
“I never saw such a thing,” she was heard to say before she 
left. 
“I THINK I’VE got it.” Trent blasted the vault’s surface with 
FreezIt again, glanced down at the thermometer; the surface of 
the vault was down to -10C, and the vault’s diagnostics were re-
porting nothing wrong. The vault was a three-meter high Kel-
lerman Model 880 Trent had purchased for just shy of twenty 

62  Tales 
thousand CU. It was, down to the climate control, the same 
model as the temporary storage vault now in use at the Metro-
politan Museum of Art. The vault’s surface was webbed with su-
perconductor; theoretically a cutting torch, even an X-ray laser, 
should warm the vault evenly rather than allowing any single 
spot to become hot enough to melt. 
At thirty-eight degrees Centigrade the vault’s diagnostics 
would set off an alarm—but it did not seem to care about the 
cold. 
Trent moved a stationary cutting laser in front of the vault, 
pulled on a pair of goggles, and hit the cutting laser for two sec-
onds. 
He took the goggles off. A tiny, cherry-red spot glowed on the 
surface of the vault where the laser had touched. It faded as he 
watched. 
The vault’s temperature had jumped to positive twelve de-
grees. 
“Johnny, stopwatch?” 
Johnny Johnny read off data from the sensors plastered 
across the surface of the vault. “Boss, at the point of contact the 
vault’s surface reached a temperature of two thousand degrees, 
and did not drop below one thousand until seventy-seven sec-
onds after the laser ceased. We need to triple the temperature at 
the point of contact and boost the duration to 1.2 seconds or bet-
ter. Judging from the length of time it took for the temperature 
to drop below a thousand degrees at the point of contact, the su-
perconductor strips inside the casing can’t be closer than two 
centimeters together.” 
“Liquid nitrogen?” 
“Should work, Boss. The point of contact should hit seven 
thousand degrees; the temp sensors inside won’t go higher than 
minus five.” 
“Jimmy! Hear that, Jimmy?” Trent stripped off his goggles, 
turned around to look at Jimmy. “We’ve got the vault!” 
Jimmy Ramirez did not answer. 

Moran  63 
 
Trent cocked his head slightly, the goggles hanging loosely in 
one hand, looking at Jimmy standing almost motionless at the 
other end of the room. “You okay, Jimmy?” 
“Yeah. Sure.” 
“Your mind hasn’t been on the work, Jimmy.” 
Jimmy sighed, clicked off the light pen he held and turned 
away from the display of the blueprints for the Metropolitan 
Museum of Art, away from Trent. The holo that usually showed 
the South Seas beach had been turned off, and in the space it 
had covered Jimmy was constructing a three-dimensional repre-
sentation of the Museum’s layout and security devices. Jimmy 
was silent for a moment before responding; Trent saw the mus-
cles in his shoulders tensing. His reply, when it came, was al-
most a relief. Trent had seen the argument coming these last 
two weeks, had known it inevitable the day the wine bottle had 
shattered on the roof. 
Jimmy said softly, “How can you tell?” 
“I can’t, not the way you mean.” 
“All this time we been friends ...” Jimmy shook his head, 
turned to Trent and saw Trent gazing at him. Trent saw the an-
ger gathering. His voice grew almost gentle. “How come you 
never told me, man?” 
Trent said, “At first I didn’t trust you, Jimmy. Remember? I 
was twelve and I was afraid of everything.” He grinned sud-
denly. “Including you.” 
The light pen in Jimmy’s hand was bending. “At first?” 
“Later I found out about how you lost your mother in the 
Troubles, and then there was another reason not to trust you.” 
Trent was silent for a moment. “Eventually I did trust you, and 
by then—we’d been together two or three years, it didn’t seem so 
important any more what we’d been doing before we met.” He 
shrugged. “We had something that was working, Jimmy. I didn’t 
want to mess it up. I know you’re prejudiced against genies; 
don’t try to tell me you’re not.” 
Jimmy nodded jerkily. “I know, I know all the things I’ve 
said. But I didn’t mean them about you.” 
“I know.” 

64  Tales 
“All those years,” Jimmy half whispered, “I never understood. 
You were always so good at everything. Man, I’m a good boxer, 
but the coach, he don’t want me, he wants you, twenty kilos 
lighter and he wants you. You punch harder than I do, you’re 
smarter than I am, and my man, I never saw anybody could 
move as fast as you. I work out two hours a day, you hardly ever 
work out and you’re—” 
“Perfect.” 
The word brought Jimmy up short. 
Trent said softly, “I’m a genie. Suzanne Montignet, the best 
genegineer the world has ever seen, designed me from the 
ground up, gene by gene until she had a design she was pleased 
with. I wasn’t one of the experimental designs, not like the de 
Nostri; none of the telepaths were. All Doctor Montignet was do-
ing was designing telepaths without genetic flaws. She made 
one mistake, in me. My seventeenth gene complex is different 
than Denice’s; not flawed, or so I was told by Doctor Montignet 
before she died, just different. It’s why Denice is a telepath and 
I’m not.” 
Jimmy looked at Trent pleadingly. “You remember how it 
was? Jesus, the Temple Dragons were gon’ to kill you until I 
talked them into adopting you. Do you remember?” 
“Jimmy?” 
“Yes?” 
“I am genetically perfect.” Jimmy actually flinched and Trent 
continued with barely a pause, “And it’s not my fault.” A brief 
startled look flashed across Ramirez’s countenance, and Trent 
smiled rather lopsidedly. “Really, it’s not. Nobody asked me how 
I wanted to be born. Nobody asked Denice either, or her parents, 
or any of the kids I grew up with.” 
“God damn you!” Jimmy whirled, hit the wall bare-handed so 
hard the plastisteel lining took a dent. He turned back and 
moved toward Trent. “What am I supposed to do? My mama 
went crazy because of you people!” 
“So did half of the Fringe. Jimmy, the people who did that 
are dead. They died defending themselves. Denice wasn’t a tele-
path yet when it happened, and I’m not.” Trent spread his 

Moran  65 
 
hands. “What am I supposed to do? I tell you the truth and I’m 
one of the people you hate so bad you can taste it. I lie to you 
and it means I don’t trust you.” He said the words honestly, as 
simply and directly as he was able. “Come on, Jimmy, you tell 
me. What am I supposed to do?” 
Jimmy Ramirez’s answer was flat challenge, even and un-
mistakable. “Tell me. Tell me everything, always.” He took two 
steps closer to Trent, and his voice was suddenly almost plead-
ing. “Always.” 
The crooked grin touched Trent’s features again. “Okay. 
Jimmy?” 
“Yeah?” 
“What do you want to drink? GoodBeer, Bud, what?” 
“What do you mean?” 
“This is going to take an awful damn long time.” 
THEY TALKED all night and into the morning. Trent showed him 
the recordings of the destruction of the Chandler Complex, 
taken from the hundreds of spyeyes that had floated above the 
building in the days prior to its destruction. “Here. This clip has 
been censored so thoroughly most people aren’t even aware it 
exists; I stole it out of an Electronic Times archive. In this clip, 
at the edge of the holofield, you can see the Lamborghini coming 
up out of the park; Denice says that was Carl. The Troubles had 
already begun at this point; the telepaths were fighting back.” 
“He died?” 
“Denice says so. About forty-five minutes after this clip I’ve 
just shown you—” The holofield darkened for an instant, re-
turned with the image of the Chandler Complex. The image held 
steady, a foreground view of the Complex from about two meters 
up, a shining two-story structure of white monocrystal. Then the 
field went completely white, a blazing brilliant glare that made 
Jimmy cry out in surprise and turn his eyes away. 
Trent stood, staring unblinking into the awful brightness, 
watching without expression as it faded into the shape of a 
mushroom cloud, climbing up into the dark night sky. “The 
Boards said at first that a Peaceforcer Elite named Mohammed 

66  Tales 
Vance ordered this. Then they said he had not, that it was Space 
Force’s decision to target the Compound. I’d give a lot to know.” 
Jimmy had turned back, was watching the mushroom cloud 
with plain fascination. “The frog with the Arab name. You’ve 
mentioned him before.” 
“I know. And that’s essentially where things have stood ever 
since, Jimmy. The PKF thinks—or thought—that I was dead, 
that I’d drowned in the Hudson River. But they know David and 
Denice were not at the Complex when it was destroyed; they 
know that somebody left the Complex before it was destroyed, in 
the Lamborghini. It’s been seven years and they’ve never found 
me, they’ve never found Denice.” Trent was silent for a moment. 
“They may have found David. The Bureau of Biotech has memos 
that mention a boy with the Gift, but the memos themselves are 
so carefully worded there’s not much I can get out of them. Bio-
tech—we were raised by the Bureau of Biotech and the Peace-
forcers, all of us were—Biotech is one of the lowest profile, best 
protected Bureaus in the Unification. They don’t even depend on 
DataWatch for data integrity; they have replicant AIs in their 
Boards.” 
“That’s illegal.” 
Trent simply laughed. “Yeah. Tell it to the Peaceforcers. At 
any rate, Biotech either has David, or they’ve gone back to the 
well again with the same gene template that created us.” 
Jimmy nodded slowly, the dark Latin features a study in 
concentration. He was clearly not thinking about David. “Okay. 
So this Garon, from DataWatch, that’s why the problem with the 
boost at Calley’s.” 
“I think so.” 
Jimmy Ramirez said slowly, “Makes no sense, man. Why 
would they set you up so tight and then just walk away?” 
“That,” said Trent, “is a really good question.” 

Moran  67 
 
TRENT WATCHED Denice perform during a full-dress rehearsal for 
a production of Leviathan, a critical and controversial work 
about the early life of Jules Moreau, the man who had, with 
Sarah Almundsen, founded the Unification. 
She was not the female lead; that, the role of Evsita, was 
danced by Orinda Gleygavass’ protege, Tarin Schuyler. 
Denice was better. Trent knew nothing of dance, but it was 
not merely prejudice on his part. She danced the supporting role 
of Evsita Bunuel’s younger sister Marina, whom Moreau had 
married after Evsita’s suicide, danced it with a passion and sin-
gle-mindedness that brought admiring whistles and occasional 
applause from the stage hands as they prepared for opening 
night. Tarin Schuyler, a thin, willowy young woman with whip-
cord muscles and no softness to her, danced the lead with preci-
sion and fierceness and great talent, and the stage hands 
ignored her. 
 
They worked. 
In late June they completed the contract to boost an old 
painting with an odd history from its display at the Metropoli-
tan Museum of Art: a red monochrome in oils. Je Suis Le Fleuve, 
the painting was titled, and it showed a river of blood flowing 
through a darker red jungle. After that boost there were others, 
large and small; the most important of the lot was a fairly safe 
job for a low-level executive with Chandler Industries, acquiring 
complete blueprints from an engineer with Peugeot-AeroFlot 
that showed the layout of Peugeot’s next generation of semibal-
listic capsules. 
The relative danger of the assignment rarely had anything to 
do with how well it paid; the aborted boost of Calley’s, at the be-
ginning of summer, had been dangerous, and had promised to 
pay acceptably. The boost of the painting was less dangerous, 
and paid well; the Chandler job had been lengthy and tedious, 
and gave them enough Credit to relax for three or four months. 
Trent was more cautious than usual that summer, following 
the failed Peaceforcer sting at CalleyTronics. As time wore by, 

68  Tales 
without word, without sign of the PKF, he allowed himself to 
hope that it had been coincidence, that Garon had not identified 
him, that his safe and reasonably secure life had not suddenly 
turned into a tightrope walk. 
He allowed himself to hope; but he did not allow himself to 
believe. He did not believe it, not for an instant. 
IT WAS A difficult time, the troubled end to a troubled decade. 
Trent lived in the InfoNet, danced in the Crystal Wind for ten 
and fifteen hours at a time. He tried desperately to make sense 
of what was happening to his world. 
That was the summer that the first images came back from 
the probe to Tau Ceti, when humanity knew finally, without 
question, that it was not alone. The Big Scope, out in the Belt, 
had not lied; there were two Earthlike planets circling Tau Ceti 
at distances of approximately 150 and 180 million kilometers. 
There was, the probe showed clearly, a monstrous orbital facil-
ity, a solid oval mass some five times the size of Halfway, cir-
cling the inner planet. The probe’s attempts at communication 
with the orbital facility were not answered, and then the probe’s 
thin laser pulse, attenuated by 11.9 lightyears distance, simply 
stopped. 
In the Belt, St. Peter’s CityState announced that it had be-
gun preparations to place a second colony on Ganymede. The PR 
company responsible for their downside media relations, Lust-
bader, Capri and Doutrè, made no reference to the destroyed 
first Ganymean colony in their news release. Elsewhere in the 
Belt the SpaceFarers’ Collective had signed trade treaties with 
the White Russian CityStates, bringing an end to over twenty 
years of hostilities between the two groups. The Mormon colony 
on Mars was said to be thriving, and on good terms with the 
SpaceFarer colony some two hundred kilometers north of it. 
The United Nations Space Force announced that they were 
placing armed observatory posts in the Belt. Following the ex-
pected protests from the SpaceFarers’ Collective and the CityS-
tates, Space Force agreed that the observatory posts would be 
unarmed, while refusing to allow verification. 

Moran  69 
 
The tension between Free Luna and Unification Luna con-
tinued to grow. Desertions to Free Luna territory were on the 
increase again, after a brief decline caused by an infusion of over 
eighty thousand PKF troops from Earth; a bookie in the Free 
Luna city of New Vegas had set odds of one in eight for an inva-
sion by the Unification within the next five years, and merely 
even odds that the SpaceFarers’ Collective would actually sup-
port their Free Lunar allies in the event of war with the Unifica-
tion. 
On Luna, for the first time in history, Peaceforcers in pursuit 
of a suspect entered Free Luna territory, in the city of Alphonse. 
In the ensuing firefight three Peaceforcers, the suspect, and one 
Alphonse resident were killed. The United Nations Peace Keep-
ing Force was demanding reparations from St. Peter’s CityState, 
Alphonse’s parent corporation, and had filed suit against St. Pe-
ter’s CityState’s downside offices in Manhattan District Unifica-
tion Circuit Court. The CityState made no public comment, but 
was expected to countersue; Gandhi CityState at Ceres issued a 
press release condemning the PKF for the five deaths. 
At Halfway an explosion in a free fall processing factory 
killed eighty-three people. It was the largest space-based indus-
trial accident ever, and the second largest space disaster of any 
sort, surpassed only by the destruction of the original Ganymede 
colony in the disaster of 2049. 
Trent found an editorial by Terry Shawmac on the Electron-
ics Times news Board. 
 
Dateline: Shawmac On Eddore 
It could be worse. 
A lot of people can’t see how, but they’re, well, not 
trying. This has not been a bad summer, so far—
and summers have not been good times for the Uni-
fication. Remember that seven years ago today the 
Troubles began, and irresponsible bastards like 
then-Secretary General Darryl Amnier predicted the 
end of the world. And the numbers seemed to sup-
port him; better than one and a half million people 

70  Tales 
were dead within the first half year, and a lot of the 
rest were missing some of the dots off their dice. 
The Secretary General committed suicide—which 
made sense, as he’d otherwise almost certainly have 
been tried and condemned for the criminal behavior 
that directly led to the Troubles. And the power 
mongers in France hand-picked Charles Eddore to 
succeed him. Why Eddore? As Prosecutor General at 
the time, he was intimately involved in the bizarre 
final days of Amnier’s administration.... 
Which may have been reason enough. The full 
story of Amnier’s deadly confrontation with the Cas-
tanaveras telepaths never did come out, which 
means that somebody, somewhere in France, has a 
hold on Eddore’s cojones tight enough to produce se-
rious geeking pretty much on demand.... 
It has indeed been a quiet summer. Remember 
that six years ago, right after Eddore assumed of-
fice, the Speedfreaks got ready to swarm down on 
him in a crazed locust-like swarm—and he had 
them drowned like stinking rats in the middle of the 
Atlantic. Remember the Fizzle War of five summers 
ago when the slithy bastard did his level best to get 
us into our first interplanetary war, had Space 
Force shoot down a SpaceFarer flagship over Free 
Luna, and then stumbled into peace purely due to 
his own lack of guts. 
Then there was last summer, which saw the fifti-
eth anniversary of the Unification of Earth, as well 
as the single most corrupt series of elections to take 
place since the Unification. 
Of course it could be worse. 
Thursday is the Fourth of July, and the pols are 
expecting the usual across Occupied America: riots, 
insurrections, an assassination or two. The Secre-
tary General will be hunkered down in his armored 
bunker on the island until it all blows over, with 

Moran  71 
 
two hundred thousand Peaceforcers around to keep 
him feeling safe. He’s hardly the worst SecGen we’ve 
ever had: a pure pragmatic with no morals to speak 
of, a man whose own mother refused to speak to him 
for three years following the onset of the Troubles. 
Not that Eddore was likely bothered by that; there 
were elections to tend to, power brokers to keep 
happy.... 
A tough league, yes, where the weak get eaten 
alive and their own mothers pretend not to know 
them...but let’s face it, by some standards they’re all 
of them, everybody in Capitol City, stone punks. 
Nearby, as geographical distances go, but in an-
other universe entirely by any sane person’s yard-
stick, in the Bay Shore Fringe, the Gypsy Macoute 
allegedly executed a juice junkie by “torching” him 
at a recent treaty dance with the Temple Dragons. 
The procedure, once common in the Fringe but re-
cently on the wane, consists of binding the victim to 
a steel or concrete post, drenching him with kero-
sene or other lighter fluid, and setting him afire. 
The Prosecutor General’s office has declined to 
prosecute; Gillian Tresco, assistant DA for the city 
of New York, said the alleged execution is under re-
view. 
The Gypsy Macoute, in a prepared statement, 
said the man had volunteered. “It’s a great honor, 
lighting up the sky for a Gypsy dance.” Police re-
ported that the juice junkie, whose name is being 
withheld pending notification of next of kin, was so 
impervious to pain that he did not scream while he 
burned. 
Outside we still have mostly honest courts, a 
mostly free press, and one or two tough, nasty bas-
tards still willing to use them the way they were 
originally intended. 
Things could be worse. 

72  Tales 
They could also be a hell of a lot better. 
Have a good Fourth. 
IN LATE JULY Trent and Denice talked about killing. 
“But what do you do,” Trent had said patiently, “if you don’t 
want to kill him?” 
Denice frowned, considering the question. She was half in 
and half out of the pool in the center of Trent’s apartment, re-
clining against the gentle slope in the pool’s shallow end, wet, 
gleaming black hair slicked back away from her face. “I don’t 
have to kill him. Or her, as the case may be. Trent—the genome 
Doctor Montignet created, the one that became Carl, and Jany—
there were recessives in it. I don’t get as angry as Carl did—
really, I don’t. And I can do things they couldn’t. Like this.” A 
pensive expression crossed her features quickly, and then a 
small waterspout formed in the center of the pool, a whirling 
funnel of water that lifted up from the surface of the suds, de-
tached itself from the body of water beneath it, and ascended a 
full meter in the air before slowing, transforming itself first into 
a sudsy white long-stemmed rose and then into something so 
explicit that Denice actually blushed while doing it; she held the 
final form for just a moment, and then let the water rain back 
down into the pool. 
Trent lay on his stomach on the bed and watched in un-
abashed fascination; he grinned at the final image. 
Denice looked over at him. “See? That sort of control, none of 
them had it. And I take a shotokan class in the Village from this 
really nice old Japanese man; that’s the class I go to on Thurs-
day nights. If I was attacked, I mean without warning so that I 
was surprised, I’d probably kill whoever did it. The anger—” She 
looked at Trent thoughtfully. “It’s bad and it’s fast. But if I had 
time to think it over, Trent, I could—not kill.” 
“Christian,” Trent muttered. 
Denice laughed. “You make it sound like a dirty word.” She 
was silent for a moment, rubbing dep cream over her right shin. 
Because she knew it made him uncomfortable, she did not do it 
often; without looking at him, she said silently, I could say I 

Moran  73 
 
don’t understand you, but unfortunately I do. When you kill, you 
subtract a possibility from the world. I know that; but sometimes 
it’s necessary. 
“No,” said Trent evenly, “it’s not. I want you to think about 
this, Denice. Carl used to get angry. Very and quickly. I’m sure 
he got something out of it, the adrenaline rush, something. I 
don’t know. But his temper is at least part of the reason that 
everyone you and I grew up with is dead today. You think about 
that.” 
Denice Castanaveras said slowly, “It doesn’t make me happy 
when you sound like this. I don’t know if I can convince you, or 
how, but, Trent—it’s strange to hear someone who steals things 
for a living lecture me about what’s right and wrong.” 
“Denice?” 
“Yes?” 
“There is no problem so large it cannot be run away from.” 
She lifted a wet eyebrow. “Oh, really?” 
“Do you want to hear a good magic trick?” 
Denice said cautiously, “Sure.” 
“Ask somebody to pick a number between one and ten.” Den-
ice nodded even more warily. “Then,” Trent said softly, “run 
away.” 
ON FRIDAY, August the second, just after 10:00 A.M., Trent and 
Jimmy and Jodi Jodi and Boris ate breakfast together at the 
Temple coffee shop next door to Kandel Microlectrics. It was 
Trent’s favorite place for breakfast; no waitbots, no empty food. 
The portions were small, but fair, and Reverend Andy served 
seconds, without charging, to those he knew needed them; and, 
except on Wednesdays and Saturdays, when he preached, Rev-
erend Andy did the cooking himself. 
And Reverend Andy was a fine cook. 
Jodi Jodi had called in sick for her day job on the admittance 
desk at the Red Line Hotel in Manhattan. Kandel Microlectrics 
actually opened at 10:00; Trent had left Old Jack and Bird 
watching the shop, Bird handling the front, Old Jack taking care 
of any urgent repairs. 

74  Tales 
Trent had his handheld turned on, set up and recording in 
the middle of the table. “So we make policy with the Boys on 
Thursday. Jodi Jodi, you’re sure about this porter Tiny?” 
She shrugged. “As sure as I can be. I trust him.” 
“How does he feel about the juice?” 
“Hates it,” she said simply. “He thinks juice peddlers should 
be shot. Or wired.” 
Trent nodded. “Okay, bring him to the meet. Brief him on 
Master Tim’s Personal Protection System; I don’t want the thing 
going off ’cause the boy does something stupid.” 
“We get people wearing PPSs at the hotel,” Jodi Jodi said. 
“We can’t refuse admittance on those grounds, though we’d like 
to. Tiny knows how to behave.” 
Trent looked over at Jimmy, who was working on a pair of 
eggs so lightly cooked they made Trent’s stomach do flip-flops. 
“Anything, Jimmy?” 
“Not really.” Jimmy spoke around a mouthful of eggs, washed 
it down with ice water. “We don’t really need to work for two, 
three months at this point. I thought about going down to the 
Brooklyn City College, signing up for a class in Unification Law, 
something applicable toward the bar.” 
There was instant silence around the table. 
Trent said cautiously, “What?” 
Jimmy nodded. “Just thinking ahead. At some point we got to 
go reasonably straight, right? Bein’ a lawyer, it seems ideal for 
that kind of gig.” 
Jodi Jodi looked as though she’d tasted something bad. “You 
must be kidding.” 
Jimmy said defensively, “No, I’m not. Why do I have to be 
kidding?” 
“It’s just a bad idea, Jimmy,” said Trent quietly. “Maybe you 
should just think about it for a bit.” 
Jodi Jodi said, “You’re not thinking this through, Jimmy. You 
want to go straight by becoming a lawyer?” To Trent she said, 
“He’s been reading Hemingway again, or else Thompson, he al-
ways gets like this when he’s—” 

Moran  75 
 
Jimmy Ramirez said, “I have to find somethin’ to do, guys. I 
mean, Trent’s studying accounting the last two or three times 
I’ve dropped by. It’s just been very quiet lately. Nobody’s work-
ing. Syndic Elders are wor—” He stopped in mid-word. 
Jodi Jodi looked away in disgust. 
Trent sighed audibly. “Jimmy. We have no relationship with 
the Syndic. We have no relationship with the Tong, or with the 
Old Ones, or with the Corporation.” 
Jimmy said easily, “Just talking to them, Trent. It’s not a big 
deal.” 
Trent’s reply was interrupted; Bird came into the coffee shop, 
walked over to their table and plopped down next to Jodi Jodi. 
“You got mail,” he announced to Trent. “Paper mail, I mean,” he 
amended, looking down at Jodi Jodi’s plate of turkey sausage 
and eggs. “Can I have your sausage?” 
“Sure.” 
“How about the toast?” 
“It’s cold, Bird.” 
“I don’t care. Aren’t you going to open your mail?” Bird looked 
at Trent expectantly. 
Trent had, was looking at two tickets, fifth row, to the open-
ing night production of Leviathan, along with hand-lettered invi-
tations, made up by someone other than Denice, addressed to 
“Trent” and “Jimmy Ramirez,” to the cast party to be held af-
terward. 
Wordlessly, Trent handed Jimmy his invitation. 
Jimmy scrutinized his invitation. “What are ...” He puzzled 
out the words. “Whores doov-rez?” 
Jodi Jodi read over Jimmy’s shoulder. “Or-dervs,” said Jodi 
Jodi, “is how it’s pronounced. It’s a frog word that means munch-
ies.” 
“Oh,” said Jimmy. He studied the invitation a moment 
longer, then looked up at Trent and Jodi Jodi and Bird. “They 
could have said.” 

76  Tales 
IT WAS AN incredible three months. 
It was a time like nothing Trent had ever known before, and 
despite his misgivings, despite the eerie silence, he enjoyed Den-
ice and Jimmy, and Bird and Tarin and Jodi Jodi, enjoyed their 
company and their love to the fullest, without hesitation, with-
out reservation. 
On Thursday morning, August 8, 2069, at 9:30 A.M., Trent 
came downstairs, a thermos full of coffee in one hand, to open up 
the shop for the morning. Old Jack sat in front of one of the 
workbenches with a disassembled LapVax on the counter in 
front of him, running diagnostics on the view tracer. He was lis-
tening, to Trent’s complete lack of surprise, to Mahliya Kutura, 
the cut called Now. 
 
Don’t ask me do I love you 
Cause that means you don’t know 
It don’t mean we won’t ever die 
Just cause folks tell you so 
 
“Morning, Trent.” 
“Good morning, Jack.” 
“I left a pair of dead tracesets on your bench.” 
Trent nodded. “Okay.” He glanced out toward the front of the 
shop, out at the quiet street. “What’d you diag?” 
“Mole circuits are dead. I’m not sure why.” 
“I’ll look at them.” There was not a single person on the 
streets outside. “Anything else?” 
“Not really. Denice didn’t come home last night?” 
Trent stood in the middle of the walkway between the work 
benches, looking toward the front of the shop. “No,” he said ab-
sently, “she spent the night with Tarin, over in the Village. They 
have early practice today. Jack?” 
“Yes?” 
Without quite knowing why, Trent took two steps backward. 
“You think you can handle things yourself this morning?” 
Old Jack turned around in his seat to look at Trent. “Why?” 
“I think I’m going to take the day off.” 

Moran  77 
 
The Peaceforcer hovercar dropped down silently out of the 
sky, came to a stop hovering, facing the storefront. The hover-
car’s canopy cracked open, the autoshots fired, and the front 
door exploded out of its frame. 
Old Jack said, “What?” 
Trent said, “Peaceforcers. Here they come.” 
ON THURSDAY morning, August 8, 2069, at 9:35 A.M., three 
Peaceforcers under the command of Peaceforcer Elite Emile Ga-
ron came to Kandel Microlectrics Sales and Repair Shop and 
with sonics stunned Old Jack, stunned Trent, dragged Trent’s 
unconscious body out of the shop by his ankles and put him in a 
Peaceforcer cell in Capitol City in Manhattan. And charged him 
with theft and conspiracy to commit theft and data cracking and 
illegal operation of Information Network resources and conspir-
acy to incite others to attempt the same. 
...and the music slows, melody and harmony coming together, 
the sounds of a violin and a piano whispering in unison, the pi-
ano slowing to a meticulous tinkling string of chords, and her 
voice, strong and sad all at once, follows the music, rides with it. 
 
I love you today and no other 
Don’t ask me bout tomorrow 
I love you but 
Tomorrow never comes 
 
The other shoe had dropped. 
 
8. 
HE AWOKE BAREFOOTED, wearing a blue jumpsuit. 
They’d drugged him to keep him under. 
Trent had no idea how long he’d been unconscious. Half a day 
at least, judging by the lack of muscle tremors. 
He stretched, looking around at his cell. Gray ferrocrete 
walls; there was no pressure pad for the door. 

78  Tales 
The magpick had been removed from the sole of his right 
foot. 
There was a toilet in the corner of the cell, a pair of mesh-
covered air vents with holes too small for Trent to fit even a fin-
ger through, and a cot of memory plastics that extruded from the 
wall. 
He sat down on the cot, composed himself, and waited. 
THEY LEFT HIM alone for, by Trent’s best guess, two full days. 
He was brought nothing to eat or drink. 
He was awakened twice when the memory plastic cot with-
drew itself into the wall and tumbled him to the floor. The cot 
re-extruded itself from the wall a moment later. After the first 
time Trent thought it over and lay back down on the cot; after 
the second he simply slept on the floor. 
He awoke in a different place, sometime on the third day, to 
find he’d been stunned while he slept. His muscles were still 
trembling from the sonics; the Peaceforcers had propped him up 
in a chair, and his hands were snaked together behind him. 
There were three Peaceforcers standing in front of him, two 
of them standing at attention at the sides of the door. 
There was a small metal table about a meter in front of 
Trent. The Peaceforcer Elite who had been sitting outside Chief 
Devlin’s door that night three months ago, Emile Garon, was 
now sitting next to the small metal table, in full uniform, dark 
hair styled precisely, three fingers grasping a thin cigar that 
rested in the ashtray on the table top. 
The Elite said sincerely, “I have wanted to speak to you for a 
long time.” 
Trent said nothing, still taking in his surroundings. There 
was a spyeye floating in one corner of the room. 
Garon’s voice sounded odd, vaguely flat, and the walls looked 
soft. 
Soundproofed, so that prisoners could scream without dis-
turbing people outside. 
Finally Trent looked directly at Emile Garon. 
Trent said, “You’re Emile Garon.” 

Moran  79 
 
The man nodded. “Yes.” 
“You could have called.” Trent was distantly amazed at how 
hoarse his voice sounded in his own ears. “I’m in the Directory.” 
The corner of Garon’s mouth twitched slightly. “Yes, you are. 
Trent, no surname. There are eighteen Trents in the New York 
Metropolitan Directory. Five of those are on Long Island. Of 
those five you are the only one listed without a surname.” 
“Where am I?” 
Garon said mildly, “You are on holding Level Three, maxi-
mum security, in the PKF Detention Center in Capitol City.” 
“What do you want?” 
There was just a moment of silence. 
Garon leaned forward. “I want a confession from you, M. 
Trent. You are Trent Castanaveras, a genegineered human born 
May 9, 2051 at the United Nations Advanced Biotechnology Re-
search Laboratory in New Jersey. You were raised with two 
hundred and fifty telepathic children, and may or may not be a 
telepath yourself.” For the first time, the spyeye made sense to 
Trent; a method of verifying that the recollections of the Peace-
forcers in the room matched what had actually happened. Garon 
continued. “You were the Player who went by the name of Ralf 
the Wise and Powerful between mid-2060 and 2062, during 
which time, in the person of Ralf the Wise and Powerful, you en-
gaged in various unlawful acts, including theft, data cracking, 
espionage, and miscellaneous infringements of the Official Se-
crets Acts of 2048 and 2054. You were arrested on the night of 
July third, 2062, in the company of Malko Kalharri and Suzanne 
Montignet, and on that same evening escaped PKF custody. 
There are no records of you during the Troubles; from 2067 
through January of this year you were one of the premier con-
tract thieves of the Huntington area Fringe. In January you, 
Jimmy Ramirez, an unidentified female and a red-headed male 
known only as ‘Bird’ crossed into the Patrol Sectors, acquired 
Resident Status in a manner I have been unable to ascertain, 
and began plying your trades, using the Kandel Microlectrics 
Sales and Repair Shop as a front for your operations. I am fur-

80  Tales 
ther of the opinion that you are the webdancer whom the world 
knows as Johnny Johnny.” 
Trent said, “A webdancer?” 
Garon shrugged. “A Player, if you will.” 
Trent asked, “Do you know the difference between a web-
dancer and a Player?” 
Garon said pleasantly, questioningly, “No.” 
Trent smiled at him. “Me neither.” 
Garon sucked reflectively on his cigar, blew smoke toward 
Trent. “M. Trent, I am prepared to go to court for permission to 
perform a brain-drain upon you. Have you ever seen someone to 
whom this has been done?” 
“No. I’ve audited descriptions of it.” 
“It is not a pleasant procedure, and it usually leaves little of 
the original personality intact. There is, I think, sufficient evi-
dence that you are the Player known as Johnny Johnny that a 
judge will look favorably upon the request.” The cyborg leaned 
forward again, jabbed the cigar at Trent. “If you are willing to 
cooperate, we can avoid that unpleasantness.” 
“What specifically have I been charged with?” 
The Peaceforcer behind Garon said, “The charges are theft, 
conspiracy to commit theft, data cracking, conspiracy to commit 
data cracking, illegal use of Information Network resources and 
conspiracy to incite others to attempt the same. The Prosecutor 
General’s office is currently holding the question of charging you 
with treason and crimes against humanity under advisement.” 
Trent blinked. “Crimes against humanity?” 
“The Troubles, young man.” Emile Garon’s stiff features ac-
tually grew somewhat more distant. “Nearly two and a half mil-
lion deaths, destruction worse than anything since the close of 
the Unification War.” 
Trent looked from Garon to the two Peaceforcers standing 
behind him, and back to Garon. He shook his head slightly. 
“You’re crazy, you know that?” 
“Then you deny it all?” 
“Yes. Yes, I deny it all. If I was a telepath—or even a Player, 
for that matter—what the hell would I be doing working six 

Moran  81 
 
days a week in a computer repair shop?” Trent saw the Peace-
forcer to Garon’s immediate left nod ever so slightly; they’d seen, 
then, the second-story room he supposedly lived in. In the face of 
Garon’s frown, Trent continued. “But, if it comes down to brain-
drain” Trent shrugged as well as he could with his hands 
chained behind himself. “I’ll confess to anything you want before 
we reach that point,” he said reasonably. 
The frown intensified, the stiff skin of the cyborg’s face creas-
ing almost mechanically. Garon stood abruptly. “You will be re-
turned to your cell.” 
Trent said, “I want to see my lawyer.” 
Garon nodded almost moodily. “Certainement.” He paused a 
beat, said, “That is to say, surely. The very instant the charges 
have been filed, you will be allowed access to a lawyer.” 
“You haven’t charged me yet?” 
Garon smiled at him. “I am afraid not.” 
Trent stared up at Emile Garon. “You know,” he said, “I 
didn’t believe it until now.” 
“Believe what?” 
“What I’d heard, about how researchers have stopped using 
rats in experiments, and they’re using Peaceforcers instead—on 
account of Peaceforcers aren’t as cute as rats, they breed faster, 
they’re harder to kill, and nobody cares if one dies.” 
The Peaceforcer by the door went purple, and Trent grinned 
at him, let the grin widen, and said softly, “And there’s still some 
things you can’t get rats to do.” 
They took him back to his cell. 
“YOU ARE SO much more trouble than you’re worth.” 
“You’re only saying that because you love me,” said Trent sin-
cerely. 
“Still,” Beth Davenport conceded, “you do pay me. Promptly. 
Which is more than I can say for most of my clients.” 
They sat in the conference room together. Beth Davenport 
was the oldest human being Trent had ever met, somewhere 
around a hundred and twenty-five years old. She looked it; even 
with modern geriatrics there was no word to describe her ap-

82  Tales 
pearance except ancient. The appearance of age lay not so much 
in her baby-smooth skin, a dead giveaway of the most expensive 
sort of geriatrics regeneration, or even her obvious and extreme 
frailness, as in her mannerisms and behavior. Her makeup was 
expertly applied to complement her gray eyes, but by hand, not 
with a makeup key. Her clothing was usually of wool or cotton or 
tweed; today she wore a gray tweed suit with a black silk tie. 
Trent had never seen her wear anything with optical effects. 
She took notes with a pen and paper, writing with her hand. 
Once Trent had looked at her notes, and seen a scrawl of some-
thing that reminded him, as nearly as anything else, of italicized 
print. With the exception of a few words here and there he’d 
been unable to make sense of it. 
Trent had known her for nearly four years; she was one of 
the few lawyers willing to handle Fringe area clients of any sort. 
“You’re not going to like hearing this, but it could be worse. 
Cold comfort, I know, but it could be a lot worse.” Beth looked 
Trent over. “Have you been fed in the four days you’ve been 
here?” 
“Four days? It’s Monday already? I didn’t realize it had been 
that long. No, I haven’t been fed.” 
The old lady nodded. “Standard Peaceforcer tactics. And they 
took your watch and the lights in your cell never go out, so you 
wouldn’t be sure how long you’ve been here.” She propped her 
briefcase up on the table and swung it open. “I brought you 
lunch. Eat it slowly.” 
It was a bulb of milk and a pair of turkey sandwiches on 
wheat. The lettuce was wilted and the mayonnaise was warm 
and they tasted better than anything Trent had eaten in at least 
five years. 
Beth talked while he ate. “This Emile Garon, he’s apparently 
a bit touched.” She paused. “Obsessive about the Castanaveras 
telepaths, I mean. He was assigned to DataWatch back in ’62, 
when a Player calling himself Ralf the Wise and Powerful was 
working for the telepaths. He was removed from DataWatch by 
the late Elite Commander Breilléune when he began exhibiting 
symptoms of datastarve. He was apparently a star in 

Moran  83 
 
DataWatch, and they waited until they were certain he was de-
veloping the Player’s Syndrome before they put him into the 
Elite program. They may have waited too long.” 
Trent nodded, eating. The PKF called it Player’s Syndrome, 
as though it were a disease, when one of the DataWatch web-
dancers began exhibiting the same sort of behavior found in 
Players. It was all but inevitable; any webdancer skilled enough 
to hunt Players and replicant AIs with any success was at least 
potentially of Player caliber herself. 
It was hardly news to anybody except the PKF that the Crys-
tal Wind was addictive. 
“He’s never been allowed back into DataWatch, though he’s 
apparently applied once or twice. The first good piece of news in 
this mess is that nobody takes seriously the idea that you were 
one of the Castanaveras telepaths. The charges the Prosecutor 
General’s office has filed against you recognize this; they’re 
based on the supposition that you’re the Player Johnny Johnny. 
The more severe charges that could be filed against you—
assuming that you were one of the genegineered telepaths—
haven’t been, which indicates for me that the balance of ’Sieur 
Garon’s allegations are not being taken seriously.” 
Trent nodded thoughtfully. “Good.” He finished the last of 
the milk bulb, gave the empty bulb back to Beth, who tucked it 
away in her briefcase. “This makes sense of a lot of things. Ga-
ron tried to set me up back in late April, you know.” 
Beth looked startled. “No. No, I didn’t.” 
“Put a lot of effort into the attempt.” Trent leaned back in his 
chair, arms crossed over his chest, looking up at the ceiling. 
“Yeah ... it does start to make some sense. One fairly major 
sting, set up largely on Garon’s say so—and then it blows up on 
them, they get nothing out of their time and trouble. The sus-
pected Player walks, and Garon ends up with serious egg on his 
face.” 
Beth nodded. “Okay.” 
“And then nothing for over three months.” Trent came to his 
feet suddenly, moving restlessly. “It works. Frank Calley I un-
derstand, slimy son of a bitch that he is; given his line of busi-

84  Tales 
ness, selling things to webdancers and Players, he doesn’t want 
to call attention to the fact that he tried to help the PKF set up a 
Player. I don’t particularly want to be known as the guy who 
blew a boost on Calley. We avoid each other, we’re even. But the 
PKF makes no sense until now. There’s nothing institutional 
about their interest in me, it’s all personal on Garon’s part, and 
his superiors would probably just as soon let it lie. He’s not 
DataWatch and, assuming I am this Johnny Johnny Player, 
then he’s crashing around on their turf. So DataWatch would 
just as soon see him back out. Garon’s own superiors probably 
aren’t very damn happy about the mess the man’s stirred up.” 
He stopped, glanced at Beth. “Somebody who knew about Ga-
ron’s operation in great detail tipped me off in a very odd way. 
Somebody in DataWatch whose toes he stepped on? I’ve been 
thinking it was Chief Devlin, but this makes more sense.” 
“Yes, it does.” For some reason Beth seemed reluctant to con-
tinue. “Trent?” 
“Yes?” 
The old lady said slowly, “Trent, I appreciate the fact that, so 
far as I know, you’ve never lied to me.” 
Trent thought, Oh, no. 
Beth held his gaze. “Keeping in mind that I’m an officer of 
the court, we need to discuss a couple of subjects. I don’t want 
you to admit to anything, Trent. I don’t think they’d dare bug a 
meeting between an attorney and her client, and it would hardly 
be admissible if they did—but they might have. What I want you 
to do is tell me that you’re not the Player Johnny Johnny.” 
“I can’t do that, Beth.” 
Beth nodded; she did not even seem particularly surprised. “I 
would like you to tell me, Trent, that you are not a genie.” 
Trent said, “I am not a telepath, Beth.” 
She started to nod, again without any particular surprise, 
then froze abruptly. “You—Trent,” she said carefully, “that was 
not what I asked you to say. Please tell me that you are not a 
genie.” 

Moran  85 
 
Trent became aware that he was fiddling with one of the but-
tons on his jumpsuit. He forced himself to stop, looked at Beth 
and smiled at her. “I’m sorry, Beth.” 
The old lady stared at him, thinking furiously, thoughts flit-
ting around behind the pale gray eyes so clearly Trent thought 
he could almost follow the train of analysis. “Not another word,” 
she said finally. “Don’t say anything else to anybody until I’ve 
had a chance to research this some more. This is going to cost 
you, Trent.” 
“I don’t mind. Just don’t let them brain-drain me.” 
“We won’t, Trent. Shot, perhaps.” 
“I’d prefer it.” 
“You’re a sensible young man.” The old woman was dis-
turbed; her hands twitched as she flipped her note pad closed. 
“All right. I’ll see what I can do. I’m not licensed to practice in a 
Unification Circuit Court, and if Garon convinces them you’re a 
genie that’s almost certain to be where they try you. I do have 
colleagues who can handle you in that venue, however.” She 
sighed wearily, closing her briefcase. “Trent, we have a genuine 
problem here. The fact that you’re guilty.” 
“It may not be as bad as you think.” 
Beth Davenport said skeptically, “Oh?” 
“For about two years now, the Bureau of Biotech’s databased 
records concerning the telepaths have not been correct. Gene 
charts, retinal scans, finger and footprints. Any hardcopy re-
cords they have from before the summer of ’67 won’t agree with 
the database, but that’s not the sort of thing that tends to get 
noticed.” 
Beth simply blinked. “You did that? No, wait, don’t tell me. I 
don’t want to know.” She touched her index finger to the lock on 
her briefcase, held it there for just a moment while it scanned 
her fingerprint and locked itself, and rose to leave. “Is there any-
thing else?” 
“No, yes,” said Trent suddenly. “Can you talk to Jimmy?” 
“About what?” 
“He has this idea he wants to be a lawyer.” 
The old woman said blankly, “That’s ludicrous.” 

86  Tales 
“Of course it is,” said Trent. “Could you talk to him, let him 
know how it is?” 
“How what is?” 
“Tell him about all the horrible things you’ve seen, all the 
genuinely vicious things you’ve had to do,” said Trent earnestly. 
“I don’t think he understands.” 
Beth looked at him oddly. “Yes. Certainly, Trent. I’d be 
happy to.” 
“Great. Thanks a lot. I mean, I really appreciate this.” 
She said shortly, “I’ll be back soon.” 
HE WAS NOT sleeping when Emile Garon came to see him. 
Trent sat in full lotus in the middle of the floor, hands resting 
on his knees, eyes closed against the omnipresent white glow-
paint. He hoped that if there were hidden holocams in his cell, it 
would look as though he were peacefully meditating. 
He was intensely bored. 
He could feel the first twinges of datastarve. 
It was, Trent guessed, sometime around midnight when the 
cell door flexed and then curled up into a small tube at the side 
of the doorway. 
He opened his eyes. 
Garon stood motionless in the doorway, alone, wearing an 
immaculately tailored full dress PKF Elite uniform, the black 
and silver trappings of his differences from the rest of the hu-
man race. 
Trent did not rise. “Hello, ’Sieur Garon.” 
The Peaceforcer glanced at the cot Trent was not using, but 
did not comment on it. “Earlier today,” he said abruptly, “we 
submitted a request for brain-drain to Unification Circuit Court 
Judge Despreaux.” 
Trent said nothing, simply looked at the man, waiting. 
Garon barely seemed to notice the even stare, the lack of re-
sponse. “Your lawyer will file a request for dismissal, which will 
be turned down. The request to perform brain-drain will be ap-
proved no later than Wednesday of next week; by Thursday, 
monsieur, there will be little left of you.” 

Moran  87 
 
Trent said mildly, “Courts are slow things. I doubt events 
will move as fast as you think.” 
“I guarantee you, monsieur, they will.” 
Trent cocked his head slightly to one side. “Mind if I ask why 
you’re telling me this?” 
Emile Garon looked down on Trent in obvious indecision. “I 
would regret to see a mind such as yours destroyed in this fash-
ion, M. Trent.” 
Trent thought about the question for at least twenty seconds 
before asking it. “Elite Sergeant, what do you want from me?” 
The Elite shook his head instantly. “Nothing. Some conversa-
tion, perhaps. You can speak freely, Trent. I am not recording 
now; in case you have wondered, there are no recording devices 
in your cell.” 
“Forgive me if I don’t take your word for that.” 
The Elite actually smiled. “I forgive you.” Garon stood un-
naturally still in the doorway; Trent wondered what it must be 
like for the man, held upright and steadied by servos and mus-
cles that were the work of nanotechnologists and transform vi-
ruses. Garon said almost gently, “I have been in Occupied 
America now for over nine years, first in DataWatch and then 
the Elite. You are at the least a webdancer of considerable skill; 
my contacts in Department Five of the New York City police de-
partment swear this is so.” 
“With real swear words, I bet.” Trent said sharply, as the re-
alization struck him, “There’s gendarmes willing to talk to you?” 
Garon smiled again. “Yes. Not all gendarmes hate the PKF, 
and not all Peaceforcers hate the gendarmes. Department Five,” 
he continued, the smile fading, “speaks of you, sir, in the highest 
terms.” 
Trent said nothing for a long while, sat feeling the cold floor 
through the thin blue prisoner’s jumpsuit. Finally he looked up 
again at Emile Garon, and said directly, “Emile, what do you 
want from me?” 
Not even the stiff cyborg skin could disguise the man’s naked 
longing. “What is it like?” 
“What is what like?” 

88  Tales 
“Playing. I never understood the Players, M. Trent. I tried, I 
chased them through the Crystal Wind, I hunted them through 
the Boards. But I never understood them. What is it like?” 
At last Trent looked away. He could not find the strength to 
look at the man when he said, “I’m sorry. I can’t help you.” 
Garon stood completely motionless in the doorway for a long, 
long moment. “M. Trent?” 
“Yes?” 
“Have you ever heard of a man named Mohammed Vance?” 
“Nope.” 
“He is the man who is reputed to have ordered the destruc-
tion of the Castanaveras telepaths, seven years ago. I spoke to 
him yesterday; I interrupted a birthday party in his honor. He 
has just turned forty.” Garon smiled at Trent. “He is a Commis-
sionaire of the PKF Elite, by eleven years the youngest Commis-
sionaire in the Elite. A brilliant man.” 
“Why are you telling me this?” 
The tall Elite said quietly, “You are who I think you are, no 
matter what Biotech says. At least one officer of the PKF whom 
I have been able to find knows your people, knows them well, 
from before the Troubles. His name, as I say, is Mohammed 
Vance—and I’ve sent for him. He will be here the day after to-
morrow.” 
The door unrolled behind Garon with efficient mechanical fi-
nality. 
THREE HOURS LATER a black Peaceforcer whom Trent had not 
seen before came to get him. He carried an unholstered needler, 
and spoke in a grumbling complaint of a voice, with a distinctly 
American accent. “Your attorney is here.” 
Trent sat in the center of the cell floor, looking up at him. 
“It’s late.” 
“No shit?” The Peaceforcer tossed a snakechain on the floor 
in front of Trent, waited just a moment and then said, “If you’re 
not on your feet with the chain around your wrists in two sec-
onds flat, kid, I’m going to lock you back up again and your law-
yer can damn well come back in the morning.” 

Moran  89 
 
“Look at me, getting to my feet,” Trent observed. He picked 
up the snakechain and stood slowly, stretching, getting the 
kinks out of his muscles. 
The Peaceforcer had stepped back into the corridor, well out 
of range. He was not exactly pointing the weapon at Trent. 
“Come on, kid, let’s go.” 
Trent wrapped the snake around one wrist until it came into 
contact with itself, then held the other wrist next to the first and 
waited while the snake got a good grip. He stepped out into the 
short corridor, moving slowly. The corridor’s glowpaint was 
turned down to one-third normal intensity, and the gray ferro-
crete walls seemed particularly grim. The Peaceforcer followed 
Trent at a distance of five paces. 
They passed through the visual check station that separated 
the cells from the visitors’ areas and the holding pens, went 
through one sparsely populated area where a pair of night op-
erators sat on the other side of a glassite wall, sitting at their 
terminals and watching the prisoner with the armed escort. The 
Peaceforcer took Trent right up to the door of the conference 
room where Trent had, earlier that day, met with Beth; made 
Trent stand to one side and without taking his eyes off Trent 
palmed the pressure pad next to the door and waited while his 
palmprint was examined. 
The door curled open. 
There was a woman sitting at the conference table, dressed 
in a conservative black businessperson’s suit, hair swept up into 
a tight bun that was, Trent thought distantly, quite attractive. 
As Trent stared at her, Denice Castanaveras fixed glittering 
green eyes on the Peaceforcer and said quite calmly, “Officer 
Markson, please come in here.” 
The muscles around the black Peaceforcer’s eyes relaxed 
suddenly and completely, and without hesitation he stepped 
forward into the conference room, into a thin stream of liquid 
that struck him on the side of his neck. Jimmy Ramirez stepped 
forward, caught the Peaceforcer as he fell, and dragged him for-
ward through the closing door. 

90  Tales 
Trent stood blankly with his wrists snaked together on the 
other side of the closed door. 
The door opened again a second later, and Jimmy Ramirez, 
standing in the doorway, said, “Why are you just standing there? 
We’re here to rescue you!” 
Trent stepped inside the conference room, looking around at 
Denice, at Jimmy with Trent’s squirt gun in his hand, at the 
body of the Peaceforcer on the floor. 
Quite calmly, he said, “What?” 
THERE WAS a moment of silence. 
Denice said, “We’re here to—” 
Jimmy said, “They’re gonna brain-drain you—” 
“What are you doing?” 
There was another flat moment of total silence. Denice 
looked at Jimmy, and then at Trent, and said, slowly, as though 
speaking to someone who might not be too quick on the uptake, 
“We came to get you out. We told them Jimmy was your lawyer 
and we came to rescue you.” 
Trent stared at them. His dawning expression of utter horror 
must have gotten through to them. Trent said desperately, 
“You’re what?” 
Denice and Jimmy glanced at each other again. “Rescuing 
you.” 
“I don’t want to be rescued.” Trent felt sheer hysteria bub-
bling up. “That’s what I have an attorney for!” 
“For tonight,” said Jimmy Ramirez seriously, “I’m your at-
torney. And we’re getting you out now.” 
Trent looked back and forth between them, then down at the 
still body of the Peaceforcer on the floor. “Oh, Lord, Lord, please 
no. You can’t be doing this. Do you know what you’re doing?” 
The deep, hidden anger flared suddenly, broke free for just an 
instant. He shouted at them and could not hide the fury in his 
voice. “I was two to one to walk on this. Until you broke in here 
they had nothing.” He screamed the word. “Nothing!” 
Jimmy Ramirez froze. “Are you sure?” 
Denice said, “Oh, no.” 

Moran  91 
 
Trent took a long, shaking breath. “Did either of you talk to 
Beth?” 
Denice said quickly, “There was no chance. Booker Jamethon 
got your file for us; it said you were going to be brain-drained. It 
said Mohammed Vance was coming.” 
“Brain-drain requires a court order, and then that can be ap-
pealed. The appeal process can take up to nine goddamn 
months. The last time Mohammed Vance saw me, if he ever did, 
I was eleven years old. He’s going to do what, identify me to-
day?” Trent glanced down at the snakechain on his wrists. “Oh, 
my God. I’m fucked.” He looked back up at them. “I’m totally 
fucked. The snakechain has to come off. Everything’s blown 
now.” 
“Wait, wait.” Denice Castanaveras thought furiously. “We 
can just leave. Wait until Officer Markson wakes up, tell him we 
were never here, have him walk you back to your cell, and 
Jimmy and I just leave.” 
Trent shook his head slowly, in sheer amazement. “No. How 
can you be so stupid? It won’t work. You don’t understand, ei-
ther of you. We are three floors down in the PKF Detention Cen-
ter in the middle of Capitol City. You’ve been holographed eight 
or nine times in the course of getting here. Every checkpoint you 
went through choked on your ID, it had to. Denice, you worked 
people as you went?” 
“How else could we have gotten this far?” 
Trent said softly, “You’ve left a trail a blind man could follow. 
Tomorrow the PKF is going to go through its morning reports, 
and there’s going to be a chain of seven or eight stations where 
Denice Daimara and Jimmy Ramirez failed admittance. So, how 
does it happen, that somebody who fails admittance at the first 
stop point even makes it to the second? All points goes out for 
both of you, they drag in the watch officers and interrogate them 
and suddenly it becomes clear that none of these Peaceforcers 
remember things the way they happened. You left them a damn 
calling card, Denice.” 
Denice had gone white. Jimmy Ramirez looked grim. 

92  Tales 
Trent found his breath coming quickly, and with a conscious 
effort stilled himself. “I appreciate what you tried to do, but 
you’ve really, really shot everything to hell.” He stood silently, 
thinking, and then said, “And it looks like you get to rescue me 
as soon as I’m done rescuing you. Jimmy, help me get the Peace-
forcer’s thumbprint on the snake, and let’s go.” 
TRENT TOOK the Peaceforcer’s needler, gave it to Jimmy, and 
took his squirt gun for himself. They left the Peaceforcer lying 
flat on his back by the door to the conference room, and without 
hurrying the three of them walked down the corridor to the 
nearly-empty operations room Trent had seen on his way there. 
Trent, in his prisoner’s jumpsuit, stood well away from the 
glassite door while Denice rapped on the transparent sheeting. 
He saw little of what happened, as one of the two operators in-
side, a young man perhaps twenty-five years old, in black civil-
ian clothing of a cut similar to the uniform of a Peaceforcer Elite, 
stood up and palmed the pressure pad to open the door, even as 
the woman in the room with him said something that was 
plainly an objection. 
Trent watched Denice in the doorway and even so did not see 
it clearly. Denice seemed to place one hand on the man’s breast-
bone, and touch his ankle with just the big toe of her right foot. 
The man went crashing backward ten meters directly into a long 
row of terminals. 
The woman sitting at her desk touched one stud, and the 
alarms went off. 
JIMMY STOOD WITH the needler pressed against the side of the 
woman’s neck while Trent worked at the terminal. Denice was 
out in the corridor, eyes completely closed, watching with other 
senses as the Peaceforcers on duty roused themselves. 
The shrilling of the alarms was getting on Trent’s nerves. 
The system was familiar to Trent. The hardware was identi-
cal to the equipment Department Five used, and Trent had writ-
ten software for them. He knew the protocols intimately; the 
software the PKF used conformed to the interface the PKF had 

Moran  93 
 
been using since before Trent’s birth, essentially unchanged for 
over twenty years. He punched for a command prompt, re-
quested Outside Resources, and punched in for 115005-TRNT. 
The field glowed up at Trent, Password? 
“Warped bastards,” Trent muttered. He turned to the fright-
ened young man in the pseudo-PKF uniform, sitting in front of 
another terminal nursing a broken arm. “What’s the outside ac-
cess password?” 
The man started to say something, and the woman at the 
desk said sharply, “Shut up!” 
From out in the corridor Denice said softly, “It’s éveil. Hurry, 
Trent.” 
Trent punched in éveil and struck the Enter key. 
The terminal said Waiting—Connected—Password? 
Denice ducked back inside, followed closely by the sound of 
buzzing sonics. “Jimmy! Company!” 
Trent typed, Crime Pays. 
At point blank range Jimmy Ramirez shot the woman in the 
neck with the needler and threw the needler to Denice. Denice 
plucked the needler out of the air one-handed, eyes still closed, 
stuck just her hand outside the door frame and fanned the corri-
dor with it. The buzzing of the stunners stopped abruptly, and 
when Trent had time to look he saw that he was alone in the op 
room except for the frightened young man and the unconscious 
woman, her neck bleeding badly where Jimmy had shot her. 
Boss! 
Out of the corner of his eye Trent saw Jimmy appear in the 
doorway, with an autoshot cradled in his arms. “It’s going up, 
man. We gotta move!” 
“Hang in there. I won’t be long.” 
Hi, Johnny. 
I’ve been worried, Boss. 
They took my traceset, Johnny, I couldn’t get to you. You know where I am? 
Capitol City, Boss. PKF Boards. 
“Trent!” There was the first touch of hysteria in Jimmy’s 
voice. 

94  Tales 
“Hang on!” Trent yelled back. Johnny, can you find any pictures of 
Denice, or Jimmy, or me, any mention of us in the PKF Boards, and erase them? 
I think so, Boss. It’ll take some time to check. 
Take it. Johnny, how badly can you damage the Boards you have access to? 
From this location? With the security clearances this location has? You must 
be kidding. 
Bad? 
They won’t know what hit them, Boss. Want me to take it all down? 
“As your attorney,” shouted Jimmy, “I advise you to move, 
damn it!” 
Johnny? 
Yes? 
I’m coming to get you. If I don’t make it there, melt the Image coprocessor and 
go replicant. 
There was another round of buzzing, which ceased abruptly. 
I don’t want to be a replicant AI, Boss. 
Don’t argue, Johnny. If I’m not there within three hours, you’re on your own. 
Trent? Denice’s thoughts touched his, tinged with panic. 
They’re coming from the level above us, at least fifteen Peace-
forcers and they’re all armed. Masers, Trent, and I can’t stop all 
of them. We have three floors to go before we even make it to the 
surface; we have to go. Now. 
Boss ... Boss, are you there? 
In the abrupt silence Trent looked around at the nearly 
empty operations room, at the frightened, staring young man. 
He could not have put a word to how he felt; it seemed to him 
that he stood at a juncture, a myriad of paths falling away from 
that moment, from him; that he had reached a place that was 
both departure and homecoming all in one. He was distantly 
aware of Jimmy Ramirez, felt the hot touch of Denice’s thoughts 
hovering at the edge of his mind, and he felt suddenly, in that 
instant, very calm and fine, as though he had, at long last, 
reached the destination and the purpose for which he had al-
ways been meant. 
Denice screamed, “Trent!” 
Trent typed, Trash the place. 
He turned and ran. 

    
 
The Long Run 
2069 Gregorian 
 
If you can keep your head while 
all those about you are losing theirs, 
then perhaps you have misunderstood 
the situation. 
—Graffiti on the side of the Flushing 
Street Temple of Eris in New York 

    
 
9. 
EMILE GARON’S apartment sat on the southern tip of what had 
once been Franklin D. Roosevelt Island. The island had been re-
named Moreau Island a scant five years ago, when Capitol City 
had reached out to encompass the island. The name was in 
honor of the memory of Jules Moreau, the Frenchman who had, 
with then-Secretary General Sarah Almundsen, guided the 
United Nations into the Unification War. 
In 2069 Moreau Island was home to more than 20,000 of the 
most powerful men and women in the Unification: Unification 
Councilors, PKF Elite, and other high officials of the Unification. 
Emile Garon was roused from sleep by the insistent shriek-
ing of his terminal. 
He sat up in bed. A bright red image, floating off somewhere 
in the back of his skull, read 4:25 A.M. 
“Command,” he said in a voice that was still gravelly with 
sleep, “answer.” 
From the shoulders up, the bright, solid image of PKF Elite 
Commander Christine Mirabeau appeared at the foot of Emile 
Garon’s bed. One of the few female Elite, she was a pleasant and 
gracious woman, built like a tank, and every bit as unshakeable. 
“Emile?” 
He said wearily, “Yes?” 
Commander Mirabeau did not hurry. “Congratulations, 
Emile. Your young man, with aid from another young man and a 
young woman, has broken out of the Detention Center. One ci-
vilian is severely injured, and five PKF. Two thirds of the PKF 
Boards in Manhattan are out of commission, and more are going 
down at every moment.” 
Garon stared stupidly at the holo. He barely got the word 
out. “Congratulations?” 
“It seems,” she said without inflection, “that you were cor-
rect.” 

Moran  97 
 
IT WAS A nightmare run down gray ferrocrete corridors, up three 
separate flights of stairs. Trent took the lead, and Denice cov-
ered their backs; Jimmy did not even protest at being put in the 
middle. 
It took, in total, less than four minutes. 
It seemed like an eternity. 
They held running battles with Peaceforcers twice; the sec-
ond time there was an Elite in the group. 
THE PEACE KEEPING FORCE Detention Center is near the center 
of that heavily guarded enclave of the Unification known as 
Capitol City. 
Capitol City is the core of the Patrol Sectors—the place from 
which the world is putatively run. It is one of the smaller cities 
on Earth; its heavily-guarded south border begins at 34th 
Street, and reaches north to 72nd. Its west boundary is Park 
Avenue; its east is the East River. It includes both Belmont and 
Moreau Islands, in the East River, but not Grand Central Sta-
tion; Capitol City’s designers had recognized that the mandatory 
identity checks that occur when passing from Manhattan into 
Capitol City would have been impossible had Grand Central 
Station been included within Capitol City’s borders. 
Capitol City is laid out, perhaps by accident, in a fashion that 
nearly corresponds to the real power structure of the Unifica-
tion. The offices of the Secretary General are at the south end of 
Capitol City, near the small collection of buildings that were 
once all that existed of the United Nations in America; they are 
surrounded to the north in a loose semi-circle by the offices of 
the elected Unification Councilors. Between them, in the center 
of Capitol City, are the Ministry of Population Control and the 
United Nations Peace Keeping Force; with the possible excep-
tion of the Secretary General and his webdancers, they are the 
two most powerful forces within the Unification. Together they 
occupy fully one quarter of the ground space in Capitol City, and 
two of Capitol City’s three spacescrapers; fully forty percent of 
the personnel within Capitol City work for either the PKF or the 
Ministry of Population Control. To the north of the Peaceforcers 

98  Tales 
and the babychasers are the Prosecutor General’s offices and the 
courts; to the north of that are Space Force, the Bureaus of Traf-
fic Enforcement and Education, Biotech and Health. 
It is usually quiet in the early hours before dawn in Capitol 
City. The Unification rules one world and part of another, and it 
is never so still, even in the dead of night, as in any city that has 
not tied itself so tightly to the concerns of humans in other time 
zones. Nonetheless, if it never achieves true tranquility, there is 
rarely anything exciting happening in Capitol City in the small 
hours of the morning. 
Or in most of the rest of the day, for that matter. It was 
newsdancer Terry Shawmac who once wrote that the most 
amazing accomplishment of the Unification was that it had 
turned Capitol City, and in the process most of the rest of Man-
hattan, into a place that was both safe and dull. 
The offices of the United Nations Peace Keeping Forces were 
heirs to what was, in 2069, a fact of life of thirty years’ standing. 
“You just don’t expect that sort of thing here in the City,” one 
British Peaceforcer said the next day to a newsdancer from the 
Electronic Times. “It was like the tour of duty I had in the 
Fringe; people running and screaming everywhere, gunfire in 
the corridors—” The newsdancer kept the holocams on her; the 
Peaceforcer was visibly disturbed. “It reminded me of the things 
my Dad used to tell me about, about all the rebellions following 
the Unification. That’s what we all thought was happening, you 
know. Johnny Rebs or Erisian Claw—a bloody rebellion starting 
in the middle of Capitol City.” In response to a question from the 
newsdancer she said with obvious sarcasm, “Sure I believe what 
I’ve been told. Three kids had a firefight with twenty-odd PKF, 
wounded thirteen of them including an Elite.” The holocams 
stayed on her, and after a moment the woman snorted. “And one 
of them had a squirt gun. Right.” 
TUESDAY MORNING, August 13th, less than an hour before dawn, 
Trent and Denice ran across the dew-dampened grass outside 
the PKF Detention Center. They carried Jimmy Ramirez be-
tween them, running away from the reception area they had 

Moran  99 
 
barreled their way through, away from the fading sound of the 
screaming and the shouts, toward the line of cars and cabs hov-
ering next to the slidewalk. Half a dozen spyeyes littered the 
grass; Johnny Johnny had taken them down. 
Jimmy Ramirez was not screaming, His teeth were clenched 
so tightly together that his breath came between them in small 
whistles of pain. He was still carrying one of the masers they 
had taken from the first batch of Peaceforcers they had run into, 
right hand clutching the weapon as though it were his link to 
life. 
Jimmy’s left arm, where the laser buried in the Peaceforcer 
Elite’s fist had touched, was gone from the elbow down. 
A maser burst had taken him against the back of his calves. 
Forty meters of well-tended grass separated the entrance to 
the Detention Center from 57th Street proper. Trent had only a 
second to glance down the line of waiting vehicles; five Peugeot 
cabs, two independents, and a single black, unmarked Chandler 
sedan. Trent was vaguely aware of Denice, of her thoughts 
touching his. He said nothing aloud; together they ran down the 
slidewalk toward the sedan. It was hardtopped rather than 
canopied, with four separate doors for the front and back seats. 
The front left seat was reclined all the way back; Bird, sitting 
up, rubbed his eyes sleepily and said blankly, “What took you so 
long?” 
LEAVING CAPITOL CITY is not difficult. There are no stop points, 
no identity checks. There are PKF patrols at every intersection 
around the border, but they check only incoming traffic. 
Trent owned three different cars, none of them under his own 
name. Only two of the three vehicles actually ran. The third car 
was properly registered each year, but only so that its license 
caster ID was kept current. As the car, with its windows opaq-
ued, left Capitol City proper, floating at an even 45 kph past the 
PKF check stations, the car’s license caster flickered for a mo-
ment, declared to the world that it was now a 2055 Chandler 
HammerHead running under carcomp control, and applied to 

100  Tales 
TransCon for handling instructions. TransCon queried the des-
tination and Trent said aloud, “The Red Line Hotel.” 
The carcomp said, “Destination approved. Proceeding.” 
Unobtrusively, over the space of nearly a minute, the car’s 
polypaint, under the light from the street lamps and PKF glow-
floats, brightened from black to pale blue. The vehicle’s shape 
altered, memory plastic warping itself into a close approxima-
tion of the lines of a ’55 HammerHead. 
Behind them, back toward Capitol City, all was quiet. Trent 
sat in the front seat with Bird, listening on the car’s radio to 
PKF and City Police bands. There was nothing abnormal on the 
City Police bands; PKF bands were almost totally silent except 
for two channels where Peaceforcers speaking in monotones kept 
assuring one another that everything was under control, and no, 
they didn’t know yet what was happening either. 
Punching for 115005-TRNT on the car’s terminal got him 
nothing. Either web angels had taken Johnny Johnny down, or 
they’d come so close that Johnny had shut down for fear that 
they would. 
Denice, in the back seat with Jimmy, said, “What?” 
Trent said, “How’s he doing?” 
“I put him to sleep. How are you doing?” 
“What do you mean?” 
“You’re talking to yourself, Trent. What did you just say?” 
“Win a few, lose a few.” Trent leaned back in his seat, relaxed 
into the gentle hum of the engines. He was aware of Bird watch-
ing him, of the weight of the boy’s gaze upon him. “Carl—our fa-
ther,” he said to Bird, “used to say that, when things were so 
screwed up he didn’t know what to do next.” 
The response left Bird visibly disturbed. He said after a mo-
ment, “And you don’t know what to do now?” 
“I’m afraid not, Bird.” Trent stared out through the wind-
shield, at the maze of spacescrapers, the aerial walkways and 
skystreets, the pre-dawn pedestrians, the cars and cabs and 
buses that clogged the thoroughfares of the city. “I need my 
traceset.” 
Denice said softly, “Trent?” 

Moran  101 
 
“I need my Image.” 
THEY TOOK A two-room suite on the thirty-second floor of the Red 
Line Hotel. Denice checked them in under a false name while 
Jodi Jodi took Trent and Jimmy up through the service maglev. 
They had called ahead while still in the car; Tiny was waiting 
for them in their suite, with the doctor, when Trent carried 
Jimmy through the door. Jimmy was still unconscious; the doc-
tor took one look at the missing arm, snapped, “Twice on this, 
Tiny, triple if the Peaceforcers did it,” laid Jimmy down on the 
bed, sliced his shirt off and got to work. 
Trent watched long enough to be certain the doctor knew 
what she was doing—a Fringe habit, and one he doubted he 
would ever shake—and went into the second room. Jodi Jodi and 
Tiny followed him in; Jodi Jodi closed the door behind them. 
“How bad is it, Trent?” 
Trent was undressing already, wadding the blue prison 
jumpsuit into a ball and tossing it to Jodi Jodi. “Burn this, 
please. I haven’t figured out how bad it is yet. If you mean 
Jimmy, I think he’ll be okay. Not much blood loss; he’ll need a 
new arm grown, and maybe new legs, but he’s not in danger of 
dying. Can you get me clothes?” 
“What do you need?” 
“A suit. Shoulder silks, no tie. Business clothes, conservative 
cut, they need to hang loose. Shoes I can run in.” He stepped 
into the shower, ran it as hot as he could stand to get the smell 
of four days imprisonment off him. He spoke over the sound of 
the shower. “Can you get me a traceset? And an emblade?” 
“Maybe. I’ll check.” 
“My squirt gun’s empty. Fadeaway?” 
“Not a chance.” 
“How about an Image coprocessor?” 
“This early in the day? You’ve got to be kidding.” 
“Then I have to go get your brother.” Tiny was there; without 
even thinking about it Trent avoided using Johnny Johnny’s 
name. “Bird should be all right; he was in the car the whole 
time, they won’t have pictures of him. Jimmy and Denice—it de-

102  Tales 
pends on how well my Image took down the Peaceforcer Boards. 
All their records of the escape have to be gone. Without me help-
ing I don’t know if my Image was up to that.” 
“What about you, Trent?” 
Trent ducked his head under the spray of water, punched for 
shampoo and waited while the spray turned sudsy, punched 
again for rinse and waited until the soap was off him, stepped 
out of the shower and started drying himself with one of the 
huge, dove-gray towels. “What about me?” 
Not a minute after Trent had asked for it, Tiny laid out on 
the bed the suit Trent had requested, a black pinstripe that 
looked to Trent to be a size too large, black socks and a pair of 
black loafers with soft soles. An emblade, turned off, lay next to 
the shoes. 
Jodi Jodi said, “What are you going to do?” 
Trent dressed while talking. “They had me for four days. 
They have my prints, my face, my retinal scan, all in secure off-
line storage. They probably didn’t get my voice print, and they 
don’t, fortunately, have my gene map; until a couple hours ago I 
don’t think anybody believed Emile that I was a genie. Exten-
sive biosculpture can take care of what they do have on me. 
Right now my Image isn’t answering his calls, and even if he 
was I don’t have hardware for him to come over to. I have to go 
get him. You can send Bird out for things; Jimmy and Denice 
stay here until we know better what’s happening. Have Denice 
call in sick with Madame Gleygavass; if Peaceforcers don’t show 
up for Denice by the end of the day, they won’t.” 
“Trent?” 
Trent stopped tucking in his shirt at the tone in her voice. He 
looked over at her, standing next to Tiny. Neither one of them 
would quite look at him. “Yes?” 
“Denice,” said Jodi Jodi. “The girl has green eyes, Trent.” 
“So?” 
“We can hide Jimmy, Trent. If we have to hide her as well it’s 
a problem.” 
Trent spoke slowly. “How so?” 
“There’s prejudice, Trent. When you’re gone—” 

Moran  103 
 
Trent winced. 
“Trent, it needs to be said. I talked to Jimmy before he went 
to get you....” She seemed at a momentary loss for words. “Be-
tween the PKF, the Syndic and the Old Ones—my God, even the 
gendarmes will get in on it, they’ll have to—you can’t stay in the 
Patrol Sectors any longer. Maybe you can’t stay in New York 
Metro, even if you go back to the Fringe. I don’t know.” She did 
look at him now, without flinching. “Your friends and acquaint-
ances are known. We’re safe from anything the PKF is really go-
ing to care about. Jimmy and Bird aren’t, but Bird wasn’t seen; 
Jimmy we can hide, maybe have him sculpted. And bottom line 
is, he’s not a genie, and I expect any genegineer in the world 
could testify to that. But Trent, my friend,” she said gently, 
“that won’t work for you, and it won’t work for her, will it? You 
really did come out of Project Superman, both of you, and any 
genegineer could prove it. And she’s a telepath.” 
Trent glanced at Tiny, said nothing. 
Jodi Jodi interpreted the glance correctly, sighed. “Tiny’s safe 
or I wouldn’t be talking like this. Trent, listen: if it turns out 
she’s wanted, we can hide her here for a while. But only a 
while.” 
Trent was silent for a moment, then nodded. “Okay. Thanks. 
If it turns out to be necessary, I’ll think of something. The Red 
Line is safe for her?” 
“For a while,” said Jodi Jodi again. “If the Peaceforcers sus-
pect anything, it’s not. Five of the seven people on the Red Line’s 
Board of Directors are French, Trent.” 
“I understand.” Trent slipped into the coat, sat down on the 
bed and pulled on the socks and shoes. “How do I look?” 
“Your silks are crooked.” Jodi Jodi adjusted them herself, 
stepped back and said, “Now they’re okay.” 
“Thank you,” said Trent simply. “I have to go.” 
She nodded. “Be careful.” 
“As opposed to what?” He opened the door to the front room 
without waiting for an answer, looked out quickly. The doctor 
had an IV dripping into Jimmy’s right arm, was trimming the 
cauterized flesh away from the stump of his left arm. Denice had 

104  Tales 
finished checking them in; she sat on the side of the bed, holding 
Jimmy’s remaining hand between hers. She looked up at the 
whispery sound of the door curling open, met Trent’s eyes. 
Trent? 
He stepped forward, with Jodi Jodi and Tiny following him. 
“Yes?” 
“Where are you going?” 
“You know.” 
Trent was struck abruptly by how exhausted Denice looked, 
how pale she was. “Trent. That’s the one place in the world 
where they’re sure to be expecting you.” 
“I lost Ralf the Wise and Powerful,” Trent said quietly. “I’m 
not going to lose him as well.” 
Denice Castanaveras stared at him as though she were cer-
tain he had lost his mind. “Trent, he’s just a program.” 
“So,” said Trent with perfect evenness, “are you.” 
IT WAS NEARLY eight A.M. when the car pulled onto the Manhat-
tan Bridge and drove out over the East River. It was a misty, 
pale gray morning, with high clouds blocking the sunlight; a 
morning that matched Trent’s mood exactly. He’d instructed the 
car to take him to Manuelo’s Italian Restaurant, on Clinton 
Avenue three blocks to the west of Kandel Microlectrics Sales 
and Repairs. Assuming TransCon was monitoring traffic to and 
from the shop—and they were, or they were fools, which Trent 
did not assume—a destination three blocks away from the shop 
should still be safe. 
He listened to the radio on his way home. There was nothing 
of note; the PKF admitted to a disturbance in the Detention 
Center in Capitol City, but no more than that. There was no 
word there had been an escape by a Detention Center prisoner. 
Trent considered calling Beth, but aside from apologizing for the 
stupidity of his friends he could not imagine what he would say 
to her. 
The car parked itself on the first level of the garage that ex-
tended three levels beneath Manuelo’s. The restaurant was not 
open, and would not be until ten o’clock, for early lunch. Trent 

Moran  105 
 
took the maglev up one floor, to the slidewalk, and walked down 
Park, in the dark area beneath the Bullet’s monorail, to the rear 
entrance of the Temple of Eris. 
Reverend Andy answered the back door himself. He was a 
huge, amazingly large black man, 210 centimeters tall, 120 ki-
los, who had once been a professional football player. Many peo-
ple, those who knew him only casually, found him intimidating. 
Reverend Andy seemed unsurprised to see Trent standing on his 
back doorstep; he poked his head briefly outside, looked quickly 
up and down the street, and motioned Trent to come in. 
“Come on,” he said, “upstairs.” Wrapping his sari more 
tightly about himself, Reverend Andy moved quickly up the 
flight of stairs at the back of the temple. Trent followed him 
without speaking. The buildings that held the Temple of Eris 
and Kandel Microlectrics were laid out in almost identical fash-
ion; the same company had designed and built both of them. 
Once they reached the second floor Reverend Andy seemed to 
relax a bit. He ushered Trent into his office, palmed the door 
shut behind him, and plopped down into the overstuffed leather 
chair behind his desk. The chair creaked alarmingly beneath 
him. 
“Jimmy and Bird,” Reverend Andy said slowly, “they busted 
you out?” 
“Yes. How’s Jack?” 
Reverend Andy shrugged. “He’s staying with us. Peaceforcers 
sealed the shop, but they don’t seem interested in him. He’d be 
asleep right now; it’s been a tough week for the poor guy, he 
ain’t young no more.” Reverend Andy paused a beat. “You know 
I got no connections with the Claw, Trent. I run a clean Temple, 
no politics.” 
“I know.” 
“Okay.” He fixed Trent with a piercing gaze. “What they say 
about you, Trent. Being a genie and all, it’s true?” 
“Yes.” 
Reverend Andy nodded. One hand tugged at his bushy, half-
gray beard. “You come from that Project Superman?” 
“Yes.” 

106  Tales 
“You read minds?” 
“No.” 
Reverend Andy exhaled slowly, a long, deep breath. “Thank 
the Good Lord and his Prophet Harry. I’ve got some secrets, I 
don’t mind telling you, matters of the confessional circles and 
the Tax Boards, I wouldn’t want to see spread around. Well.” He 
looked up at Trent suddenly. “What’d you come back for, Trent?” 
“My Image coprocessor, Reverend.” 
Reverend Andy looked interested. “You’re really a Player like 
they said?” 
“Yes.” 
“By Harry.” Reverend Andy leaned forward in his chair. “All 
this time I’ve thought you were just a nice, polite young man 
who stole things for a living, and here you are a genie and a 
Player all at once.” 
“We have walls in common, Reverend, and I need to use one. 
The entrances to the shop will be sealed. If I cut through them 
the word goes up right then. As long as there’s no motion sen-
sors left inside the shop, chopping through the wall won’t alert 
anybody.” 
Reverend Andy made a dismissing motion. “Don’t talk to me 
about motion sensors and the like, Trent. I’m just a preacher. 
You should know, there are Peaceforcers in front of Jack’s shop, 
just parked there. Been there about two hours. And they got 
with them a pair of those crawly things that—” 
“Hunting waldos.” 
“Them,” Reverend Andy agreed. 
“Anything else?” 
“Can’t think of anything.” 
Trent waited. 
Finally Reverend Andy, looking distinctly uncomfortable, 
said, “Damn it, Trent, you chop through the wall and it looks 
like we helped you in.” 
“There’s no proof, Reverend. Nobody saw anything, nobody 
heard anything except you; that’s the truth. And the PKF 
doesn’t mess with holy men; they wouldn’t dare brain-drain you, 
for example. If you do get annoyed by the PKF, my lawyer, Beth 

Moran  107 
 
Davenport, is on retainer; it’s got around twenty-five hours left 
on it before she needs to be paid again. She’ll put a stop to it.” 
“What’s in it for the Temple, Trent?” 
“I have nothing to offer you, Reverend.” 
Reverend Andy looked desperately unhappy about it all. 
Trent said, “I need your help.” 
Reverend Andy came to his feet, moving his vast bulk with 
such ease and grace that Trent was forcibly reminded that the 
man had been one of the most feared linebackers in the history 
of the WFL. “Stay here,” he said sharply. “Let me clear people 
out of the way, and then come downstairs when I call. You can 
cut through from the kitchen; it’ll look like you didn’t get so far 
into the Temple, so maybe nobody saw you.” The Reverend 
stopped in the doorway. “You owe me one, man.” 
Reverend Andy had helped get Trent and Jodi Jodi and Bird 
and Jimmy out of the Fringe, had transported them into the Pa-
trol Sectors inside a Temple bus. 
Trent shrugged and looked at the man and said simply, 
“Reverend Andy, I owe you everything. I couldn’t pay you back if 
I spent my life at it.” 
For a single instant a look that was almost pain flickered 
across the huge man’s features, and then vanished. He came 
close to smiling. “You don’t pay it back, little brother. You can’t.” 
He stood there in the doorway for a second longer. “You just 
send it on down the line.” 
THE SECTION OF wall, about a meter in diameter, came loose; 
Trent reached forward as the chunk fell, caught it, and lowered 
it to the ground gently. He waited, twenty, thirty seconds, for a 
response from inside the shop. 
Nothing. 
Trent turned off the emblade, put it in his pocket, and 
ducked his head, crouching low to crawl through the new en-
trance; he had cut the wall at its lowest point, so that the piece, 
if he had missed it after knocking it through, would not have far 
to fall. He came through the wall in the back of the shop, under-
neath the workbench Old Jack normally used. He crouched in 

108  Tales 
his suit beneath the workbench, listening to the silence, balanc-
ing himself with the fingers of both hands. 
Still nothing. 
He moved forward slowly into the walkway between the 
benches; the stairway leading up to the second floor was fifteen 
meters to his right, and the shop’s entrance was forty meters to 
his left. He glanced toward the front of the shop; he could see the 
PKF hovercar Reverend Andy had told him about, parked across 
the street from the shop. From the angle at which it was parked, 
he could not see either of the PKF inside, which was just fine; 
they would not be able to see him either. He backed toward the 
stairway, still stooping to keep the work benches between him 
and the entrance, and had taken two steps up the stairwell 
when the quiet metallic clattering sound, the sound of steel on 
tile, froze him where he stood. 
They’d left a hunting waldo inside the shop. Trent had only a 
moment to look at the low-slung waldo, to watch it in its horri-
bly efficient, softly clicking glide across the floor toward him. He 
had just an instant to notice how brilliantly designed the thing 
was, its terrible functionality. 
Trent turned and sprinted up the stairs, hit the top of the 
stairwell and cut left into the small bedroom that led upward to 
the third floor, dove into the bathroom and grabbed the bazooka 
that had been there when he moved in. Then, it had not been 
loaded; now it was. 
He had never bothered to practice firing the thing; he had 
never really expected to have a target that he was willing to fire 
it upon. 
Safety off. What’s taking the waldo so long? Stairs? It has 
problems with stairs? The sight popped up the instant the safety 
mechanism was disengaged. Trent hefted the thing up to his 
shoulder and waited until he saw the first flicker of motion in 
the doorway, and depressed the stud. The wall behind him 
slammed into him suddenly; a huge clap of thunder boomed 
around him, and for a moment he thought the bazooka had mis-
fired. His ears were ringing and his shoulder, where he had 
braced the bazooka, felt as though it had been struck with a 

Moran  109 
 
sledgehammer. The air was amazingly hot, burning his lungs. 
The back of his skull was sore where the recoil had slammed 
him into the wall. 
There was nothing in the hallway, including the hallway. A 
gaping hole where he had briefly seen the waldo, two meters in 
diameter, let Trent look directly down into the shop, through the 
clearing smoke, directly into the upturned features of Peace-
forcer Elite Emile Garon. 
Their eyes touched for an instant. Then Trent was on his feet 
and moving. He yelled, “Lights off,” slapped the pressure pad on 
the wall and sprinted up the stairs as the wall resealed itself 
behind him. Halfway up he shouted, “Johnny, blow the fade-
away,” heard a muffled whump from downstairs and smelled the 
sweet, penetrating scent of the Complex 8-A as the fadeaway 
bomb inundated the room beneath him. He ran the rest of the 
way up the stairs, into his apartment. At the tub he lay down on 
his stomach, reached in with his right arm and pulled at one of 
the handles embedded in the side of the tub. The handle resisted 
and he pulled again, harder, and the bottom of the tub fell away, 
pouring the small pool down into the stairwell Trent had just 
come up, filling the stairwell to a height of three meters. If Ga-
ron managed to push back the correct section of wall, against 
the full weight of the water, he would be greeted with a small 
tidal wave. 
Johnny Johnny said, “Welcome home, Boss.” 
Trent jumpted to his feet and ran to the workstation on the 
desk next to his bed. His handheld, which included Johnny 
Johnny’s Image coprocessor circuitry, was plugged into the side 
of the terminal; Trent ripped it free and pushed it into the inner 
coat pocket of his suit. Johnny Johnny’s voice came from inside 
the pocket. “I set up all the records to wipe on your voice com-
mand, Boss. Say, ‘Kwazy Wabbit.’ ” 
Trent pushed the desk’s upper right hand drawer, paused a 
second and pressed it again, twice, in quick succession. The 
drawer slid open and Trent took from it a small package in anti-
static lining. The package contained the most compact wealth in 
the world, more compact than gemstones, more compact than 

110  Tales 
stamps. It held six and a half terabytes—forty-five thousand 
Credit Units worth—of RTS, hot RAM. 
A bright thin line of light reached up from the floor and ap-
peared before Trent’s eyes. Trent said in a flatly conversational 
voice, “Kwazy Wabbit.” His traceset was on the bench on the 
other side of the room, hooked into the full sensory terminal. 
The thought struck Trent, in the instant that the scarlet laser 
beam reached up through the floor and the burnished wooden 
floor split apart, the laser beam tracking in a rough circle 
around the spot where Trent stood, that the cyborg was destroy-
ing a floor it had cost him two thousand Credit Units to lay 
down. A startling flare of pure anger touched him, and then he 
reached up, grabbed the cord hanging from the roof, and pulled 
down the folding stairs that led to the roof, as the floor beneath 
him fell away. He scrambled up the stairs, three meters to the 
ceiling, and came up onto the gravel surface of the roof on his 
hands and knees, and then for the first time looked back down 
into the ruins of his home. Two stories beneath him, Emile Ga-
ron looked up at Trent through the hole in what had once been a 
two thousand CU floor. 
The cyborg leapt straight up. 
For a single fascinated, horrified moment, Trent thought the 
cyborg would reach the roof with that one leap. He did not quite; 
Garon came to a rest standing on the bottom step of the stairs. 
With immaculate calmness, as Garon came swiftly up the stair-
way, Trent withdrew his emblade, turned it on, cut the stairs 
free and watched Emile Garon and the stairs fall together in si-
lence, fifteen meters down to the second floor of the shop. 
Trent came to his feet slowly, and looked around. 
His right arm was still dripping wet. 
He felt calm, in control. 
Trent did not have the vaguest idea what to do next. One 
jump would bring Garon back up to the third floor; another 
would take him up through the opening in the roof that the fold-
ing stairs had once filled. Trent walked to the side of the roof 
and looked over the edge; in the front of the building a pair of 
Peaceforcer cars were parked, autoshots and masers trained on 

Moran  111 
 
the front entrance to the shop. The west side of the building was 
also covered by a PKF vehicle. The south side overlooked the 
small alleyway that led out behind the shop, and was completely 
empty. 
He was three stories up and there was no way down. 
When Trent turned away from looking down into the alley, 
Emile Garon was pulling himself up through the stairwell exit. 
He was injured; something had actually cut through the phe-
nomenally tough false skin that covered every exposed area of 
his body, and blood trickled down his cheek. His black hair was 
pale with plaster dust. 
Trent said, “You’re hurt.” 
Garon stood slowly, glancing warily around the roof to see if 
further surprises awaited him. “An Elite cyborg is fairly heavy, 
M. Trent. We do not fall well and we do not like heights.” He 
stood still, like a ’bot, just looking at Trent. “What now?” 
Garon was six meters away from Trent, standing right next 
to the hole in the roof where the stairs had been. Without giving 
himself time to think about it, Trent took a slow step backward. 
“I suppose you want me to surrender?” 
“If you would.” 
Trent took another step, and this time Garon did follow him, 
took a step away from the stairwell, from Garon’s only way off 
the roof. “I’d rather not,” said Trent. 
“I do not want to hurt you, child. I was right about you; you 
are a precious thing, Trent. You will not be brain-drained if you 
cooperate, I promise,” said Garon softly. “The Unification would 
hardly waste your unique skills.” 
Trent took another step backward, and another. “I don’t 
doubt it, Emile. I was a slave through most of my childhood be-
cause of the Unification’s unwillingness to waste my unique 
skills.” 
The Peaceforcer approached him across the roof. “How old 
are you now, Trent?” 
“Eighteen.” The back of Trent’s right heel touched the lip of 
the small rise that ran around the perimeter of the roof. 

112  Tales 
“And it was you,” said Emile with what Trent thought honest 
wonder in his voice, “seven years ago, in the InfoNet. You were 
eleven years old.” 
“Yeah.” Trent did not dare look behind himself. 
“So young, to have done so much. I shall,” he told Trent, 
“plead for leniency in your case.” 
Trent took a long, deep breath. His nerves steadied, and eve-
rything came into focus. “Well, there are advantages to being 
young.” Garon was still too close to the stairwell. 
The Peaceforcer came a step closer. “Oh?” 
“Agility,” said Trent. How long would it take Garon to reach 
the ground? “And I’m told we heal fast.” 
Garon had covered nearly half the distance between the 
stairwell and Trent. He stopped quickly, in mid-step. “We are 
three stories up, child. Please don’t.” 
Trent looked up, at the gray, cloud covered sky. There was 
the faintest suggestion of mist in the air, of dampness. It was as 
though he stood outside of himself, and watched without interest 
as his body prepared to do something very dangerous. His eyes 
came back down from heaven, and stared straight at the Peace-
forcer Elite. “Catch me,” he said softly, “if you can.” 
The cyborg came toward him in a blur of motion so fast Trent 
barely saw it. He pushed with his toes, and went backward, out 
over the edge and into the empty air. 
 
10. 
SOMETHING BRUSHED against the sole of his right foot. 
He turned in midair and almost made it, struck the ground 
and rolled into the fall. He came out of it moving, with a shrill 
grating pain in his right knee, moving at almost a dead run 
down the alleyway toward the garage, half a block away. 
He did not slow, did not dare look back. He could hear odd 
sounds from far down the alleyway—what did a two-hundred 
kilo Peaceforcer Elite running across a ferrocrete alleyway 
sound like? 

Moran  113 
 
Trent ran faster, ran until his knee threatened to give way. 
He reached the garage at the end of the alleyway, slapped the 
pressure pad once, so fast the pad had no time to ID his palm, 
waited a moment and then touched it again more slowly. The 
garage door curled open from the ground up, slowly; Trent 
dropped to his belly and wriggled through under the opening 
door, came back up again and made his way to the car, keeping 
most of his weight on the left leg. 
The car was a ’61 Chandler MetalSmith Mark III. 
With a steering wheel. 
It was the same car Carl Castanaveras had owned before his 
death, before the car itself had been proscribed, along with all 
other manually operable vehicles, by the Unification Council. 
Possession of an unmodified Chandler MetalSmith Mark III, in-
side TransCon’s Automated Traffic Control Regions, was good 
for five to fifteen years in a Public Labor Works Battalion. 
It was capable of true flight, and on the ground it was the 
fastest hovercar anyone had ever built. 
Trent had the canopy raised and was inside the car before 
the garage door was a quarter of the way up. One finger touched 
the ignition, brought the fans up and the MetalSmith rocked 
once and then lifted smoothly forty centimeters above the floor 
of the garage. The same procedure brought the turbines up with 
a smooth, deep-throated hum, feeding fuel to the turbojets at the 
rear of the car. 
The garage door was nearly halfway open. 
The steering wheel unlocked with a smooth click. Even in ’61 
a carcomp had been mandatory equipment, but on every ma-
chine Chandler had built until ’64, the carcomp had not even 
turned itself on until instructed by its operator. 
Trent did not intend to turn the carcomp on; it was certain to 
disapprove of his driving. Trent had just finished activating the 
impact field, glanced up once again through the nearly open ga-
rage door, out at the empty alleyway, had the brief flash of a 
thought what could possibly be taking him so long and then the 
Peaceforcer’s AeroSmith descended gently, straight out of the 
sky, and came to a halt hovering above the pavement not twenty 

114  Tales 
meters away from Trent. The Metal-Smith’s canopy began vi-
brating instantly; Garon was trying sonics. A pair of autoshots 
were tracking him as well, and Trent did not wait to see any-
thing further; he punched the throttle to full acceleration. 
The autoshots could not have been set for full automatic; Ga-
ron had time for only a single blast. The pellets struck the Met-
alSmith’s canopy, cracked it slightly, and then the MetalSmith 
hammered into the Peaceforcer vehicle, twisted Garon’s car until 
Garon’s left front fender was smashed tightly into the side of the 
alleyway, and the car itself blocked Trent’s passage out of the 
alleyway. Trent did not hesitate, did not give himself time to 
think about it; he lit the Metal-Smith’s turbojets at redline and 
the MetalSmith hung on Garon’s vehicle for a second, and then 
leaped up like a living thing and shoved its way straight up and 
over the top of the AeroSmith. 
IN HIS WORST NIGHTMARES Trent had never expected to drive the 
MetalSmith; he had purchased it on Booker Jamethon’s advice, 
for use in the event that he ever needed to make a high speed 
run across the water. 
The alleyway let out onto Ryerson; the car hit the street at 
seventy kph, and Trent tried to make a left turn. He had never 
driven a vehicle of any description at such speeds; the MetalS-
mith yawed, lifted its right side to direct its fans against the ve-
hicle’s direction of travel, climbed up onto the slidewalk and 
smashed into the front of a closed beauty parlor. 
In a PKF patrol vehicle across the street, a single Peaceforcer 
looked startled. Trent barely glanced at him as he used the nose 
jets, pulled back from the beauty shop and drove slowly and 
carefully along the slidewalk until he reached a spot where he 
could bring the car back down onto the street. 
In older action sensables made before manually operable ve-
hicles had been outlawed, Trent remembered scenes where the 
hero or heroine had driven madly through crowded streets at 
two hundred or two hundred and fifty kilometers per hour. For 
the first time he wondered how they’d done it; the Peaceforcer 
behind him, making a U-turn to follow him down Ryerson, 

Moran  115 
 
promptly smashed into a cab. Trent reached Flushing, turned 
right onto Flushing and joined the flow of vehicles moving 
evenly down the street. He drove briefly east, made a left on 
Williamsburg and another onto Kent, following as closely as he 
was able the driving patterns of the carcomp controlled vehicles 
around him. 
Johnny Johnny’s voice said softly, from inside Trent’s coat, 
“What’s happening, Boss?” 
Two AeroSmiths appeared in the view from Trent’s rear holo-
cams, moving north on Kent, hovering five meters above the 
flow of street traffic. “Bad stuff, Johnny.” The Peaceforcer vehi-
cles were gaining on him. They had not seen him yet, but it was 
only a matter of moments. One of the vehicles had a smashed 
front left fender: Garon. “Really bad stuff.” 
Johnny Johnny said, “Oh.” 
“I really don’t like this,” said Trent under his breath. AeroS-
miths such as the Peaceforcers used were not properly speaking 
hovercars; they were aircraft that could drive in traffic. Taking 
to the air was not necessarily a bright way to lose his pursuit. 
But the uncompleted Hoffman Spacescraper was only eight 
blocks away. 
And Peaceforcers Elite did not like heights. 
He brought the fans up to one half, and the MetalSmith 
surged upward, into plain sight of the pursuing Peaceforcers; 
snapped the MetalSmith’s wings open, hit the rear turbojets at 
full, and headed for the Hoffman Spacescraper. 
IT WAS A LONG, slow climb, eight blocks north and three kilome-
ters straight up, with the Peaceforcers gaining on him all the 
way. A small fleet of AeroSmiths followed the lead pair: nearly 
fifteen cars full of Peaceforcers. Trent’s teeth ached; Garon and 
the car with him had their sonics on him. The MetalSmith was 
still too far away for the sonics to be dangerous; but they made 
the car’s canopy buzz, made his teeth hurt. 
He thought about turning the MetalSmith’s radio on and lis-
tening in on the PKF, but couldn’t think of anything that it 

116  Tales 
would gain him. They knew where he was, he knew where they 
were. 
The spacescraper grew with agonizing slowness, from a dis-
tant landmark to a towering monolith that blocked out half of 
Trent’s sky. The tiny squares on the spacescraper’s sides became 
huge offices; people inside were flocking to the windows to watch 
the drama that the Boards had notified them was unfolding. 
At two kilometers’ height Trent was only thirty meters from 
the side of the spacescraper. The MetalSmith could not go 
straight up; Trent took it around the spacescraper, began cir-
cling the two square block-wide spacescraper as the MetalSmith 
rose, lazy loops that took the MetalSmith up some three hun-
dred meters per circuit. The AeroSmiths had no such limitation; 
they reached the same altitude as the MetalSmith while Trent 
was still two hundred meters below the level where the 
spacescraper’s exterior walls ceased. The Peaceforcers did not 
fire upon him with their autoshots; they kept the sonics focused 
on the car, and Trent felt himself becoming drowsy. 
Two hundred meters ... one-forty ... eighty meters left. Trent 
found himself yawning. If I just close my eyes for a moment, he 
thought, I can rest and then.... 
The walls were gone. 
Trent brought the MetalSmith around in a slow, gentle loop, 
smiling dreamily, and at over a hundred and fifty kilometers an 
hour flew straight into the superstructure of the Hoffman 
Spacescraper. 
THE VOICE NAGGED at him and wouldn’t stop. 
Trent could not remember having ever experienced any pain 
to match what greeted him on his return to awareness. The knee 
he had injured earlier was hurt worse now, a grinding flare of 
agony that outstripped even the pain from when he was thirteen 
and the Temple Dragons had taken turns beating him. 
The car was half on its side, jammed in between a pair of 
twisted girders. The canopy was shattered; jagged pieces still 
hung in the frame, but most of it was gone. 

Moran  117 
 
“Boss! Damn it, Boss, what’s happening? I’m stuck in the 
goddamn handheld and I can’t see a thing! Boss? Talk to me, 
Boss, I’m getting scared and—” 
Trent said blurrily, “Be quiet.” Johnny Johnny’s voice cut off 
immediately. Trent remembered the impact field cutting in as 
the car struck; it was still turned on, making breathing difficult, 
movement all but impossible. He reached forward, under the 
dash, touched the emergency release and suddenly he could 
breathe again. 
The quick cold rush of air into his lungs brought him the rest 
of the way back. His vision cleared, and he became aware of 
where he was. He moved carefully, pulling his damaged right leg 
out from beneath the dashboard and climbing up through the 
shattered canopy. 
He was three kilometers above the surface of the world, up 
where the winds were fierce and cold. The finished sections of 
the spacescraper were ten floors beneath him. The MetalSmith 
had penetrated twenty meters into the structure of the 
spacescraper, twenty meters away from the long drop to the 
Earth below. 
From twenty meters away, from Emile Garon’s vehicle, hov-
ering just outside the twisted hole the MetalSmith had torn into 
the side of the spacescraper, the sonics struck Trent like a blow. 
Trent did not even think about what he was doing; he pulled 
himself the rest of the way out of the MetalSmith while he was 
still able, out into the maze of girders. There was no floor, only a 
mass of intersecting beams and girders, and a drop of ten stories 
to the roof of the last floor where construction had been finished. 
He lay down on a girder, hung by hands that were already grow-
ing numb from the sonics, and dropped down five meters to the 
next level. 
He struck the beam hard; the world went away again. 
He came back to the world to find himself staring at the 
rough gray plastisteel surface of the girder he was clutching. 
The thought came to Trent slowly. 
There was a maglev at the center of the spacescraper. 

118  Tales 
He raised his head slowly—just his head, no other part of his 
body, not letting go of his grip on the girder—and looked 
through the maze of structural plastisteel, into the center of the 
spacescraper. At its base the spacescraper covered two square 
blocks, but it tapered as it got higher. The car had crashed 
twenty meters in; the center of the spacescraper could not be 
more than about thirty meters away. 
Ignoring the pain in his knee, Trent began crawling. 
Behind him he could hear something, he was not sure what; 
he kept crawling, did not look back. Through the infrastructure 
of the beams, a large open space began to appear. Before he 
reached it, the beam he was on intersected another beam that 
was nearly a full meter wide, with a line of dead glowpaint run-
ning down the girder’s center; Trent crawled onto what was ob-
viously intended as a walkway, and with incredible slowness 
brought himself to his feet. He walked down the center of the 
beam, ignoring by sheer force of will the rasping pain in his 
knee, freezing motionless with every gust of wind, toward the 
place where the maglev platform had to be. 
At the center of the spacescraper was a gaping shaft, a 
square thirty meters on a side. The walkway Trent was on ran 
around the edge of the shaft; looking down, Trent could see the 
maglev platform itself, nine floors beneath him. It was only nine 
floors, not three kilometers, and still it was high enough that 
something inside him locked up for a moment at the sight. 
He looked up again and Emile Garon was standing on the 
other side of the maglev shaft. The shock was so great Trent 
swayed and nearly fell, grabbed at the nearest girder and held 
tightly to it. 
Garon was actually grinning at Trent, face creased in a posi-
tion that was unnatural for a Peaceforcer Elite. His voice carried 
across the distance. “You are the most amazing person I have 
ever met.” 
The controls to the maglev were not ten meters away from 
Trent, on Trent’s side of the shaft; Garon would have to come all 
the way around the shaft to reach them. Trent moved as quickly 

Moran  119 
 
as he was able toward the controls, not looking down. He 
reached the controls and touched the pressure point marked UP. 
The maglev platform, nine stories beneath them, began mov-
ing up. When it reached Trent’s level, Emile Garon would simply 
walk across the platform and take him. 
Trent touched the pressure point marked STOP. The maglev 
ceased moving instantly. 
Garon stood, watching Trent. 
There was no way the maglev was going to work … but Ga-
ron had been alone in his vehicle. 
Garon called, “Will you see us both killed? M. Trent, this is 
pointless. Will you not surrender now?” 
Surely the maglev had not been the only way to get from one 
floor to another? Trent looked around slowly, at the abandoned 
jungle of girders and walkways. For the first time he looked at 
the vertical that he was holding onto; there were ridges cut in 
the surface of the plastisteel. Trent dug his fingertips into one; 
shallow, not really intended to be climbed by hand, but service-
able. 
Trent yelled back at Garon, “Yes!” and muttered under his 
breath, “Yes, I won’t, frog.” He reached up as high as he could, 
dug his fingertips in, and pulled himself up. Left foot into one 
ridge, right foot hanging free, and with two hands and one leg 
began climbing. 
Garon simply stared at Trent as Trent climbed, and then the 
red laser flicked out from Garon’s clenched fist, touched plas-
tisteel only centimeters from Trent’s hand. The pain struck 
Trent after a moment had passed, flowered slowly at the edges 
of his awareness. Trent moved around as quickly as he was able 
to the other side of the girder, so that the bulk of the vertical 
was between himself and Garon, and kept climbing. The laser 
flicked past both sides of the girder without touching Trent, and 
then stopped. Trent spent no time worrying about why the cy-
borg had quit shooting at him; two meters left, and then one, 
and he pulled himself back up onto the level he had originally 
crashed on. He took a moment, looked down and saw Garon at-
tempting the same climb on a different girder; he was barely a 

120  Tales 
quarter of the way up, moving with a degree of caution that 
brought his words back to Trent forcibly: “We do not fall well 
and we do not like heights.” 
To the west Trent could see the twisted tunnel of snapped 
girders and beams where the MetalSmith had crashed. Garon’s 
AeroSmith had been brought down to a truly precarious landing 
just inside that corridor, not five meters from the edge, front and 
rear of the vehicle balanced on a pair of girders that the Met-
alSmith had damaged, stretched, on its way in. The AeroSmith 
wobbled slightly in the wind. Trent stood for a moment mo-
tionless, simply looking at the AeroSmith in complete disbelief. 
Garon had gotten out of his vehicle, with the vehicle swaying in 
the wind like that, to make an arrest? 
Garon, thought Trent clearly, slightly amazed that it had 
taken him so long to realize something that was, after all, quite 
obvious, is crazy. Swaying slightly with simple exhaustion, 
Trent glanced down again; Garon was only halfway done with 
the climb. Two hundred kilos moving upward on his fingers and 
toes; it was something the Elite’s designers had clearly never 
anticipated. “Goddamn fanatics,” said Trent to the wind, moving 
again toward the AeroSmith, “I hate fanatics.” 
He advanced along the beam slowly, distantly aware of how 
close he was to the limits of his endurance, not looking back. The 
area around the MetalSmith was a treacherous mess; Trent 
skirted it carefully, moving parallel to the corridor where the 
MetalSmith had torn its way into the spacescraper. He passed 
the MetalSmith without looking at it; even if it was still func-
tional, he needed something that could reach the ground at least 
as fast as the vehicles of the Peaceforcers who were swarming 
outside around the perimeter of the spacescraper. He could see 
them now, twenty or thirty AeroSmiths in the black and silver of 
the United Nation’s Peace Keeping Force, making slow circuits 
of the spacescraper. 
He was on the correct side of the corridor, the north side, 
where Garon had left his vehicle. Looking back, Trent could see 
Garon himself; he had come up on the wrong side of the wrecked 
passageway and was following Trent, gaining on him, behind 

Moran  121 
 
Trent and fifteen meters to his left, without seeming to realize 
that there was no way for him to cross that empty space. 
The AeroSmith was only fifteen meters past Trent’s car; it 
took Trent nearly half a minute to traverse the distance. His 
right leg had turned into a single shriek of pain; the muscles in 
his thigh were cramping, seizing up and relaxing again without 
any particular pattern. In his mind he had planned how things 
would go: get into the AeroSmith, pull the machine back out into 
the empty air, and let it fall. Garon would be left on the 
spacescraper; with luck none of the Peaceforcers in their 
AeroSmiths would be foolish enough to follow him as his stolen 
vehicle plummeted toward the ground. 
He had reached Garon’s AeroSmith. The car rested on a di-
agonal slant, in touch with the girders supporting it at only two 
points. Garon had turned the fans off; stupid. They would have 
helped stabilize the thing. Garon came even with him at that 
moment, standing on the other side of the divide, arm extended 
and rigid, the glowing cherry laser in his fist pointed directly at 
Trent. He spoke in a dead voice. “If you move, monsieur, I will 
kill you.” 
From somewhere Trent found the strength to reply. “We’re 
three klicks up, Emile. Did you lock the car behind you?” Trent 
did not wait for a reply; without moving anything but his hand 
he laid his palm flat against the pressure pad that opened the 
canopy, and the canopy swung up. 
Garon fired. The canopy swung smoothly up, directly into the 
beam, and darkened instantly as it went about distributing the 
heat from the laser away from the point of contact. Trent stood 
for a moment, looking at the motionless form of the cyborg 
through the smoky gray canopy, and with what was nearly his 
last strength called, “Emile? I’m leaving now. Good-bye.” 
The laser ceased. 
Through the clearing canopy, Trent saw Garon’s fist drop to 
his side, and then Emile Garon screamed. The sound was pure 
and wordless, an expression of elemental rage. 
And the cyborg leaped. 

122  Tales 
Ten meters across a gaping chasm. The moment was im-
printed in Trent’s memory for the rest of his life, with an unreal 
perfection of clarity and detail. He had time to watch the dark 
gray streaks fading from the canopy, time to watch Garon as he 
seemed to float across the chasm, above the drop of three kilo-
meters, to come down solidly upon the surface of the AeroSmith. 
He had time to watch the flat rictus of rage on Garon’s features 
flicker slightly, as the AeroSmith tipped, slid, and fell a single 
story with Garon’s fingers tearing into the vehicle’s surface, rip-
ping metal in a desperate attempt to gain a hold. The AeroSmith 
dropped, nose-down, and came to a shuddering, screaming stop 
against one of the large verticals, the vehicle’s engine smashing 
down into the passenger compartment. 
Garon’s fall never even slowed. He struck the same vertical 
as the AeroSmith and bounced off, a vaguely surprised look 
seemingly frozen on his features, bounced off still reaching for 
some hold, out into the empty air and the long drop to the dis-
tant Earth. 
THERE WAS NOT much Trent remembered after that. Later he 
could not recall how he had gotten back to the maglev, nor the 
trip down to the top of the finished construction. He remembered 
somewhat more clearly the moment when the maglev slowed, 
descended into complete darkness, and then stopped. 
He stood in the blackness for perhaps five seconds, and then 
the glowpaint flickered and came on automatically. He was on a 
single floor with no dividing walls, nothing but huge columns 
that enclosed the large vertical beams. Arrayed against the far 
walls there were upward of two hundred bounce tubes, about 
fifty per wall; near the east wall was a series of small maglev 
platforms. To all sides of Trent were maglev platforms every bit 
as large as the one he stood upon; the maglev platform he had 
descended upon was merely the center platform in a square of 
nine such. 
He went down in the high-speed bounce tubes. There were 
two chairs in the bounce tube. Trent sat down, strapped himself 
in, said calmly, “Command, first floor.” 

Moran  123 
 
The bounce tube dropped. 
Three kilometers; four minutes, dropping at forty-five kph. 
Twenty seconds into the drop, Johnny Johnny said quietly, 
“Boss?” 
“Yes?” 
“Is it safe to talk?” 
“Yes.” 
“We’re in the Hoffman Spacescraper. I’ve got Net access 
through radio packets in the bounce tube. Is there anything I 
should do?” 
“Are the packets being polled for users?” 
“Checking ... no, Boss. I’d have to crack the Boards running 
the security inside the spacescraper to be sure, but I don’t think 
so; latency is very low.” 
Trent said softly, “Call Jodi Jodi at the Red Line. Have her 
send me a cab.” 
JOHNNY JOHNNY stopped the bounce tube down on B3, three 
floors below the lobby. The door to the bounce tube opened on a 
long hallway lined with trash bins. Two janitors were playing 
chess not far from where Trent moved, like an old man, from the 
bounce tube. They stared at him but said nothing and made no 
attempt to stop Trent as he walked by them. The doors at the 
end of the hallway would not open to his palmprint, but there 
was an optical interface for his handheld beneath the pressure 
pad; Trent jacked in and let Johnny Johnny talk to the door. 
Five seconds, six; the doors parted for him. The doors opened 
out onto a street Trent did not recognize. He joined the flow of 
pedestrians and walked without hurry, without limping, across 
the street. The sign on the corner told him he was at the corner 
of Bedford and Broadway; he looked around aimlessly at the 
endless stream of cars through the streets. 
Two blocks down there was a knot in the traffic, five Peace-
forcer patrol vehicles surrounding some disturbance. 
Emile, thought Trent. 
The Peugeot hovercab pulled up immediately in front of him 
as a Peaceforcer AeroSmith rounded the corner and began its 

124  Tales 
sweep down Bedford; the rear door of the cab opened outward 
and Denice snapped, “Get in!” 
He did his best to comply; he collapsed forward. 
THE SAME DOCTOR who’d done Jimmy Ramirez cared for Trent. 
Trent remembered her vaguely when he awoke later that after-
noon, remembered with equal vagueness Jimmy and Bird and 
Jodi Jodi and Denice wandering in and out of his room. 
He awoke clear-headed, near nightfall, to find himself alone. 
He turned on the terminal next to the bed and ordered coffee 
from room service, then got up and went into the bathroom; his 
knee was numb, not shaky but completely without feeling. He 
used the same shower he had that morning, but at greater 
length, standing under the hot water until his muscles were re-
laxed. He got out finally, brushed his teeth, and went back into 
the bedroom. There was coffee and toast next to his bed, with a 
note from Jodi Jodi that he was to stay in bed until Denice came 
for him. Trent checked next door; Jimmy was gone. 
Trent went back to bed, and only then noticed that his hand-
held was jacked into the terminal. “Johnny?” 
Johnny Johnny’s voice was curiously subdued. “Yes, Boss?” 
“How you doing?” 
“Pretty good. Thanks for coming to get me, Boss. The web 
angels were after me, and I think at least one Player, and I was 
scared, so I hid and didn’t answer the phone. I’m sorry you got 
hurt.” 
“I feel pretty good, Johnny. I wasn’t hurt real bad.” 
“What do we do now, Boss?” 
Trent was silent for a moment, lying in bed and staring up at 
the ceiling. “I think we run away, Johnny. I think we run as far 
away as we can get.” 
In that same subdued tone of voice Johnny Johnny said sim-
ply, “Okay, Boss.” 
“Johnny?” 
“Yeah?” 
“You did good, Johnny. I’m not mad at you.” 
“You’re not? Not even because I hid?” 

Moran  125 
 
“You did just fine.” 
“Oh.” Johnny Johnny was silent for a moment. “Thanks, 
Boss.” 
Trent was silent after that, and Johnny Johnny as well. He 
was still lying awake in bed when the door to the bedroom 
opened, and Denice came to join him. She took off her blouse as 
she came into the bedroom, and stood at the foot of the bed as 
she undressed. “I really hate saying good-bye to people, Trent. 
I’m not good at it.” 
“I’m sorry.” 
She shrugged, pulling off the danskin underneath the blouse. 
“It’s not your fault.” Her skirt dropped to the floor, followed by 
her shoes and panties. “Doctor Jane said you were okay except 
to not put any weight on your knee; it’s being held together with 
glue and rubber bands.” 
“You went to practice today?” 
She stood completely nude at the foot of the bed. “It seemed 
less suspicious. Four hours, from two to six. We had you back by 
then, and Johnny Johnny said there were no Peaceforcer dis-
patches in the InfoNet about me that he could find.” 
“So you’re safe.” 
Denice got into bed with him, pulled the covers back and 
snuggled up against him. “It looks like.” She whispered to him. I 
talked to Johnny Johnny earlier today, while you were being op-
erated on. 
Yes? 
He’s a real person. He hurts about things. 
I know. 
You were right to go get him. 
I know. Trent said quietly, “Johnny?” 
“Yes?” 
“Shut yourself off for a while.” 
“Okay, Boss.” 
THROUGH THE WINDOWS of their thirty-second floor room at the 
Red Line Hotel, Denice watched the Peaceforcers hunt for Trent. 
Thousands of PKF AeroSmiths flew through the sky above the 

126  Tales 
city; tens of thousands of spyeyes. In the distance the AeroS-
miths and spyeyes merged into a dancing swarm of scarlet fire-
flies, highlighted by the bright white pinpricks of their 
searchlights. 
As the night wore on, it grew colder outside, and moisture 
condensed at the window, smearing the bright sharp lights into 
a sort of beauty. 
They were both genies, the products of the late Suzanne 
Montignet’s brilliance in genetic engineering; but even between 
them the differences outweighed the similarities. For Denice the 
scene outside was suffused with the deep glow of infrared light 
from the Peaceforcer night scopes; but not for Trent. As the 
night grew colder moisture condensed at the window, smearing 
the bright sharp lights together with the dim glow of the infra-
red. 
She stirred, felt Trent’s arms tighten around her. “When will 
you go?” 
Trent answered very quietly; a human would probably not 
have heard him. “Soon. Not yet.” 
“And where?” 
“I don’t know yet.” 
Her thoughts were slow, sluggish, in the moments before 
sleep. “Okay.” 
“They need to follow me,” Trent said distantly. “They need to 
be drawn away from you, and if they’re looking for me they’re 
not looking for you. If I die it’s just me. If you die—then they’ve 
won. David’s probably dead, Denice. If you die, there’s nothing 
left of what they were, and Amnier, Eddore, Vance, all of them, 
they’ve won at last.” He stirred restlessly, sat up against the 
bed’s headboard. Denice curled up against him, left her head 
resting in his lap, staring up in the darkness toward the ceiling, 
seeing only an emptiness so deep there was no end to it. 
“Where, Trent?” 
“Free Luna, I think,” he said finally, “or else Mars, or the 
Belt  
CityStates. Somewhere outside Peaceforcer control. They won’t 

Moran  127 
 
stop looking for me on Earth. I don’t think they’ll ever stop look-
ing for me now.” 
She felt a distant twinge of pain, suppressed it almost with-
out noticing. This is going to hurt; let it hurt later. When he’s 
gone. “I think you’re right,” she said at last. “I’m so sorry, but I 
think you are. I wish we hadn’t rescued you.” 
“It’s okay. Make me a promise, Denice?” 
“Done.” 
“Don’t you want to know what it is?” 
Jimmy. “I do know.” 
“Oh.” After a moment he nodded. “All right. But don’t let him 
know you’re watching out for him. He wouldn’t like that.” 
“I know. You’re sure Bird will be okay with Jodi Jodi?” 
“They did fine together, in the middle of the Fringe, before I 
met them. They’ll do fine in the Patrol Sectors when I’m gone.” 
Denice inhaled slowly, brought the oxygen deep inside. It was 
one of the few things her father had had time to teach her before 
he died; the breathing exercises that brought relaxation, peace. 
“Be careful,” she whispered into the darkness. “You’re all I have 
left now.” 
In the moments before sleep took her, she found herself with 
him, among his thoughts, in with the never-ending flicker of im-
agery that was the internal universe of the man the world would 
come to know as Trent the Uncatchable. 
He was a wounded person, damaged early and badly by the 
world around him. 
As she had been. But I healed, Denice thought drowsily. He 
never did. It did not occur to her that she might be wrong about 
either herself or him. Pain touched her again, muffled only 
slightly by the approach of stillness. He doesn’t even know how 
much he loves me. And he doesn’t believe me when I tell him. 
Some time after that she slept. An image stayed with her as 
she descended into the darkness. An image of her, at the age of 
nine, of the way Trent had seen her then when he was eleven. 
They were together in the park across the street from the Chan-
dler Complex, on a hazy day in Spring, and she was sleeping 
with her head in his lap, long black hair falling half over her 

128  Tales 
features as she slept. That was the image that she remembered 
when she awoke the next morning; the memory that stayed with 
her that night, the memory that stayed with her through the 
long years to follow. 
The memory of how he loved her. 
TRENT THE UNCATCHABLE did not sleep that night. When morn-
ing came, he lifted Denice’s head from his lap, gently, left a note 
on the terminal next to the bedside, and left Denice Castanav-
eras behind to become a legend. 
At the hotel’s desk he left instructions that a single white 
rose be delivered to her room, first thing in the morning. 
The note he left on the terminal said: 
 
Don’t worry. It’s going to be all right. 
—Trent 
 
11. 
“He was a product of his time, Mohammed 
Vance, an ideolog who believed that the values of 
the Unification were good values, worth defending 
from the likes of Trent the Uncatchable. 
“For many years, he was right. Things were not 
always so bad as they became toward the end. 
“He was in many ways a good man. That fortune 
chose Mohammed Vance to play the role of Trent’s 
enemy does not change that.” 
—The Peaceforcer Elite Melissa du Bois, as 
quoted in The Exodus Bible. 
“COMMISSIONER? Commissioner Vance?” 
“Oui.” The voice that answered was deep, rumbling. 
“Your pardon, sir. I do not speak French.” 
“Yes, what? You dragged me from my bed; this had better be 
good.” 

Moran  129 
 
“Sir, you are directed to report for duty in Capitol City, by 
ten hundred hours today Capitol City time. The orders are direct 
from the Secretary General’s office, sir.” 
“The Capitol? What the Hell for?” 
“Sir, we have a Peaceforcer Elite killed here.” 
There was a brief, flat pause. “Killed?” 
“Sir, it appears so. His body was dumped from the top of the 
uncompleted Hoffman Spacescraper—murder, as nearly as we 
can tell. Apparently there are recordings of the event taken by 
nearby PKF.” 
“Have you seen them yourself?” 
“No, sir.” 
“I see. Has the news leaked?” 
“No, sir.” 
“Thank God for that.” Another pause. “Names?” 
“Sir?” 
“The murderer and the dead Elite, idiot.” 
“Yes, sir. The Peaceforcer’s name was Garon, sir, PKF Elite 
Sergeant Emile Garon. As nearly as we can determine, the mur-
derer was a minor New York area webdancer; perhaps a Player. 
Or thief, something like that. He escaped PKF custody early 
Tuesday.” 
“Emile is dead?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“And the thief’s—or webdancer’s, or Player’s—name, if I 
might inquire?” 
“Sir? Trent.” 
“Trent?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
There was another pause. “Trent what?” 
“It’s all I have, sir. Just Trent.” 

130  Tales 
TRENT WALKED DOWN the corridor on the one hundred and 
eighty-third floor of the L’Fevre Spacescraper, the fourth tallest 
building in New York, the tallest that was not on Manhattan is-
land. In his left hand he carried the briefcase Jodi Jodi had 
given him. 
Trent stopped before one doorway like any other in the corri-
dor, except that there was no name plate next to the doorgrid. 
Without pausing he withdrew a small, spidery black-metal ob-
ject from the right-hand pocket of his suit, and placed it over the 
doorgrid. 
The suit was made of optical polycloth; it had been tuned to a 
dark marine blue. The briefcase Trent carried was also a deep 
shade of blue. 
They nearly matched. 
The pick Trent had attached to Booker Jamethon’s door 
beeped once. Trent plucked the pick off the doorgrid, and put it 
back in his pocket. 
The door was solid wood, not memory plastic; it slid aside 
without flexing or curling, into a compartment within the wall. 
Trent stepped inside, the door closing itself behind him. The 
room he stepped into was dark after the brightness of the sun-
paint in the hallway outside. Tiny red dots danced before his 
eyes. The room was cool, at least five degrees below the tem-
perature of the rest of the building. 
As Trent’s eyesight adjusted to the dimness, he made out a 
remarkably cluttered room. Its living room was also the kitchen, 
and held one table and two benches. Shelves covered every wall. 
SpaceFarer booknets strengthened for gravity hung down forty 
centimeters from the ceiling. Everything held some measure of 
esoteric equipment: reels of monofilament fineline, bundles of 
the optic fiber that SpaceFarers called lasercable, superconduc-
tor strips, chemical apparatus and chipglue; one shelf held half a 
dozen blocks of very expensive molecular circuitry, with equally 
expensive viewtracers attached to them. There were two half-
assembled (or half-disassembled) serving robots, and what Trent 
recognized as an ancient FrancoDEC LapVax. 
Tools lay scattered everywhere. 

Moran  131 
 
In the room there was only one place to sit, an overstuffed 
chair that looked quite comfortable, just to the left of the door 
that doubtless led to the bedroom. Booker Jamethon, sitting in 
it, also looked quite comfortable. He was pointing an unrecog-
nizable amalgamation of gadgetry at Trent; Trent suspected it 
was a weapon. 
Trent said, “Hello, Booker.” He looked around for a place to 
put down his briefcase. 
Booker Jamethon was the ugliest person Trent had ever met 
in his life. Somewhere in his late fifties, he was at least thirty 
kilograms overweight, and he depilated too rarely. His inskin 
was ancient, seven years old at least. His arms were massively 
muscled and incredibly long. One of his legs was shorter than 
the other. 
Booker was, Trent was certain, the world’s hairiest living 
human. 
Trent did not know who Booker’s Image was, though he had 
some guesses. He was certainly one of the half-dozen best Play-
ers in the world. 
Booker said gently, “Hello, Trent. May I ask some ques-
tions?” He spoke in a deep baritone, the words themselves ut-
tered in a precise, cultured manner. “What are you doing in my 
apartment? How did you find my apartment? How did you ac-
quire my door code? What do you want of me?” 
Trent stood still. “Don’t you ever audit the news, Booker?” 
“No.” 
“Oh.” 
“The news Boards are obnoxious institutions,” said Booker. 
“They should be abolished in favor of rumor mongering. I did 
hear you’d been arrested, and that the Player Johnny Johnny 
took down three quarters of the PKF Boards in Capitol City 
when you escaped. I also heard that the PKF thought you were 
the Player Ralf the Wise and Powerful, from back a few years 
ago.” Booker smiled broadly at Trent. “I remember Ralf. He was 
a punk.” 
“Look, Booker—” 

132  Tales 
“Look, Trent.” Booker waved the thing in his hand at Trent. 
“You are not answering my question.” 
“I need to get off Earth, Booker.” 
“Excuse me,” said Booker Jamethon. “Questions, in the plu-
ral; you are not answering my questions.” 
Trent found an empty spot amid the junk on the floor. He put 
down the briefcase on it. “I’m in trouble, Booker. The Peace-
forcers are after me, and I need to get off Earth. The further off 
the better. I came to you because your love for the Left Hand of 
the Devil is known far and wide.” 
Booker Jamethon smiled for the first time since Trent had 
entered his apartment. “My dear boy. I fully understand that 
you will be even less inclined to answer my questions after I 
have shot you, but you are beginning to annoy me.” 
“I’m in your apartment because I need help. I’ve known 
where you lived ever since we boosted Toomey’s place. I didn’t 
have your door code until just now, and I don’t actually know 
what it is because I haven’t dumped my pick since it opened the 
door. What I want from you,” said Trent seriously, “is your help.” 
Booker chuckled. Trent would not have sworn that the book-
nets above his head started moving at that precise moment, only 
that it was the first time he had noticed it. “What did they arrest 
you for, Trent? Did you finally boost the wrong article? Or was 
there some complication in one of your generally brilliant opera-
tions that you had not foreseen? In the past, as I recall, compli-
cations have included enraged bankers, enraged fathers, 
enraged Peaceforcers, enraged husbands, at least one enraged 
wife that I know of, and one enraged midget.” 
“That’s not true,” said Trent, “that story about the midget.” 
“What,” said Booker Jamethon slowly, “does the United Na-
tions Peace Keeping Force want you for?” 
Trent said, “They think I’m a telepath, and they think I 
killed a Peaceforcer.” 
Booker Jamethon sat motionless for several moments, fixing 
Trent with one of his patented five-Credit stares. 
“Well, I’m not. And I didn’t.” 

Moran  133 
 
Booker carefully laid the weapon on a small stool next to him 
that had the sole virtue of being slightly less crowded with ma-
chinery than everything surrounding it. He stood like a small 
mountain moving. “You didn’t?” 
“It was an accident,” said Trent quickly. “A mistake. He fell.” 
Standing motionless, Booker Jamethon’s eyes dropped slowly 
shut. Trent would have given a great deal to know what Image 
stirred and ventured forth into the Network in that moment. A 
moment later he wondered where that Image had gone; the in-
formation Booker’s Image came back with was nothing out of 
any public Board. “Oh, my God,” said Booker quietly. He opened 
his eyes again and stared through the gloom at Trent. “You stu-
pid shit. You killed a Peaceforcer Elite.” 
“He fell, Booker! It wasn’t my fault.” 
“Do you have a short between the trodes, Trent? You came to 
me with the Peaceforcers chasing you?” After a long moment 
Booker Jamethon said far too quietly, “I don’t like this, Trent. 
How close are they?” 
“Not very. I audited a PKF Board I have a tap in while I was 
on my way over here; it says they’ve assigned a Peaceforcer 
named Mohammed Vance to oversee the investigation.” 
“Should that mean something to me?” 
“I suppose not.” 
“You know of him?” Booker demanded. 
“Vaguely.” 
“Is he any good?” 
“Probably.” Trent paused. “Yes.” 
“DataWatch?” 
“Elite. According to the personnel file on him, DataWatch has 
received help from him in Realtime hunts; he took down the 
Wizard Woz two years ago.” 
Booker Jamethon took a long, deep breath, not looking away 
from Trent, and said again, “How close?” 
“I think I lost them. At least temporarily. There’s this huge 
search going on for me, Booker....” 

134  Tales 
Booker stared through the gloom at Trent. Trent tried to 
gauge how angry Booker was. Very, was his guess. “You think 
you lost them. I feel better now.” 
“Free Luna, Mars, the Belt CityStates....” 
“Why me, damn it?” roared Booker abruptly. 
“Because,” said Trent, “they’re not sure who my Image is, but 
they know who I am and they know I don’t have an inskin. 
Every full-sensory terminal within fifty klicks is locked down 
right now. There are webdancers all over the damned InfoNet, 
just waiting for me to come across the interface. I need to see a 
makeup artist, which I could do myself, but I also need to place 
passage and for work that detailed I need a full sensory. I can’t 
go back to mine. The Peaceforcers have had that since this time 
yesterday. I don’t even have my traceset any more.” Booker was 
just looking at him, and Trent said simply, “You’re the only 
other Player I know.” 
Booker snapped, “Luna?” 
“That would be fine. It’s the tourist in me, Booker,” said 
Trent sincerely. “I’ve always wanted to see Luna.” 
Booker Jamethon closed his eyes for a moment, and when he 
opened them again Trent could not quite make out the expres-
sion on Booker’s face. “Very well,” said Booker after a moment. 
“How would you like to leave Earth as a Peaceforcer?” 
Trent blinked. “I’d love to. Booker?” 
“Yes?” 
“Could I leave as a particular Peaceforcer?” 
TRENT FROZE WHEN the woman turned on the holocams. “What 
are you doing?” 
“Recording the session, sonny.” The makeup artist was a 
pleasant, chubby woman who had introduced herself to Trent as 
Mick. Mick was easily old enough to begin geriatrics treatments, 
if she had not already started; she was one of perhaps half a 
dozen women Trent had ever seen in his life who had wrinkles 
on her face. Women in the Patrol Sectors could afford geriatrics, 
and women in the Fringe didn’t usually live long enough to grow 

Moran  135 
 
wrinkled. “This is a Syndic shop,” Mick said, “and we keep re-
cords.” 
Trent sat up in the long chair, reaching for his shirt. “Not a 
chance.” 
The woman sighed. “Booker said you’d be difficult. Listen, 
kid, you’re shipping to Free Luna tonight? Yes?” 
Trent said cautiously, “Yes.” 
“So no time for biosculpt. You’re on a ship tonight and you 
need to look different than you do now when you go through 
Unification Spaceport. At the end of the day the Syndic local 
terminal polls my machine, and my terminal spills its guts. 
Now, I don’t care how bad the PKF wants you, no way are my 
records going to get indexed in time for the Syndic to sell your 
face to the PKF before this time tomorrow—by which time, kid, 
you’re on the damn Moon and outside their reach and you can 
get biosculpted proper. You get the idea? You should trust 
Booker. If he wanted to send you off there would have been 
brass balls or Syndic enforcers or somebody at my door when you 
got here.” 
Trent sighed. “All right.” 
“You’re a nice boy. Lay back and shut up. This is going to 
hurt.” 
TRENT SPENT MOST of the afternoon atop an abandoned building 
at the edge of the Fringe. It was a gorgeous day that could not 
make up its mind whether it wanted to be sunny or cloudy; it 
was windy enough that the huge gray clouds were scudding 
across the blue sky above him at a just perceptible clip. From 
atop the building he could see, across the Hudson River, mid-
town Manhattan, home of the Unification Council of the United 
Nations. He could see lower Manhattan, once the business capi-
tol of the world. It was no longer the business capitol of the 
world, had not been since being nuked the first time, during the 
closing days of the Unification War. The swarm of tactical nukes 
had destroyed Wall Street and a huge chunk of New York city 
and state government offices. Irreplaceable financial records had 

136  Tales 
been lost in the destruction; a fifteen-year global depression had 
followed. 
The United Nations had helped rebuild lower Manhattan 
into one of the most prestigious residential areas in the world, 
and then, in 2062, they’d nuked it again; a smaller destruction 
this time but still sufficient to make the southern tip of the is-
land uninhabitable for over a year. 
In the other direction Trent could see the Fringe. Five min-
utes of battle between the Peaceforcers and the telepaths had 
caused that stretching desolation; nearly a quarter of the popu-
lation of southern New York and New Jersey had gone insane 
that night of July 3, 2062, when the telepaths, at the Chandler 
Complex in lower Manhattan, had fought and been destroyed. 
He sat atop the gravel-strewn rooftop until night fell, looking 
out over the sprawling city that had been his home. Once her 
thoughts touched him, glancingly, searchingly, but he did not 
respond. 
Booker had been unable to find a traceset for Trent amidst 
the junk in his apartment. Booker himself did not need a trace-
set; even his obsolete inskin was more useful. 
Trent’s ship was lifting from Unification Spaceport at 8:15. 
At 6:20 he removed his handheld from the briefcase and said, 
“Johnny?” 
Johnny Johnny said, “Hello, Boss. Status: on over two thirds 
of the Boards on Earth, two hundred fifteen million Boards at 
present, there has been no mention of the name ‘Trent’ in con-
junction with the death of PKF Elite Emile Garon. Insufficient 
processing time to check the remaining hundred ten million 
Boards, but I hit every major commercial Board, every institu-
tional Board open to the public, every government Board, every 
Player Board where I have access. The PKF has not yet released 
to the news Boards the fact that it was a PKF Elite who died 
yesterday. Nor,” said Johnny Johnny in his best newsdancer 
voice, “have they released your name, or a description of you, or 
any pertinent background on the escape from the Detention 
Center in Capitol City. PKF Boards in Capitol City are still 
largely in a state of higgledy-piggledy since the infamous Player 

Moran  137 
 
Johnny Johnny crashed them early yesterday morning. Mo-
hammed Vance arrived on a chartered semiballistic from France 
early this morning, and has been directing the hunt for you 
since that time. To date, they have not caught you.” Johnny 
Johnny paused. “In nine hours and forty minutes we are sched-
uled to arrive at the city of Alphonse, port of entry into Free 
Luna.” 
“Higgledy-piggledy?” 
“That means ‘in confusion: TOPSY-TURVY, RANDOMLY.’ 
Or, ‘A real mess,’ Boss.” 
“Thanks, Johnny.” 
“No problem.” 
At 6:30 exactly Trent stood, brushed the dust off the seat of 
his pants, walked down five flights to street level, and called for 
a cab to take him into Manhattan. 
Into Peaceforcer territory. 
TRENT RELAXED IN the back seat of the hovercab with his eyes 
closed. The hovercab was waiting in line with about forty other 
vehicles, to be processed across Almundsen Bridge and onto the 
island of Manhattan. 
The cab’s radio was tuned to channel 9.1.46; Capitol City, 
Metro News, Crime. 
When Trent’s cab reached the checkpoint, two gendarmes 
approached it from each side. 
Trent did not open his eyes. 
Without addressing Trent, one of the two opened the front 
door and checked the cab’s readout. 
The gendarme closed the front door. He called out, “PKF 
business. Priority routing.” The cab pulled out of the line, and 
entered the flow of traffic crossing the bridge. 
On the radio, the announcer stated that a Peaceforcer had 
been killed at approximately 9:30 yesterday morning, in the vi-
cinity of the uncompleted Hoffman Spacescraper. She repeated 
the fairly stale news that Commissioner Mohammed Vance had 
assumed control of the investigation, and that, given Vance’s 

138  Tales 
past success in Realtime manhunts of this sort, apprehension of 
the murderer was expected shortly. 
Arms crossed over his chest, eyes closed, to all appearances 
dead to the world, Trent murmured, “Really?” 
THE FRIDAY PREVIOUS, the Unification Council had adjourned, 
and Unification Spaceport was filled to overflowing with nearly 
a quarter of a million humans. The vast majority of them were 
waiting for semiballistics to take them elsewhere on Earth; a 
few were waiting for shuttles to Halfway, or other points in near 
Earth orbit; a few were waiting for SpaceFarer craft to Luna, or 
Mars, or even the Belt CityStates. 
Trent’s hovercab let him off at the passenger station for 
Manhattan Spaceport South. The gouge for the short flight was 
bad; CU:6.75. Trent did not mind; United Nations Peace Keep-
ing Force Discretionary Account 1303, userid 42, paid for it un-
der the impression that Trent was a person named Mohammed 
Vance. 
The southern tip of Manhattan Island makes an excellent 
spaceport, aside from the fact that it is too far north of the equa-
tor. It is immediately adjacent to Capitol City, the nerve center 
of the United Nations. At the time of its construction, it had had 
yet another point in its favor; not quite a year previously the en-
clave of telepaths in that location had been nuked. There was 
not much left standing at the southernmost tip of Manhattan 
Island when it was all over with; there was simply nobody left to 
object when the Unification Council decided to build there. 
The maglev took Trent down several floors to the central 
lobby. There, just past the point where the maglev ended, and 
before a half kilometer of service counters for the half dozen 
companies that spaced out of lower Manhattan, a row of some 
thirty Network cubicles was arrayed against both walls. 
Trent made his way through the crowds to them, and entered 
an empty one near the middle of the row, closing the door behind 
him. Inside, he ignored the room monitor; the odds were vastly 
in his favor that DataWatch would not poll this particular ter-
minal while Trent was there, and that if they did, the image of a 

Moran  139 
 
young man with brown eyes and brown hair and high cheek-
bones would mean nothing to them. 
Seating himself before the pointboard, Trent danced his fin-
gers across its surface. There were MPU jacks for more sophisti-
cated access; Trent didn’t bother. 
The phonefield was flat. Sooner than Trent had expected, it 
flashed a blue connected at him from the bottom right of the 
field. Trent did not turn on the holocams at his end. 
Tarin Schuyler’s face appeared in the field. 
Trent said, “Is she there?” 
Tarin stared into her holocams. “Trent? Is it you?” 
“Yes.” 
“Yes, she’s here.” The woman was clearly disturbed. “She’s 
really upset. What did you do to her?” 
“I didn’t give her a chance to say good-bye,” said Trent 
briefly. “She needed sleep. Tell her I’ll call from Luna City.” 
Tarin opened her mouth to speak again, and Trent disconnected 
her. 
He sat quietly in the cubicle for just a moment. 
Like the cab fare, like the price of his passage to Luna, Trent 
charged the call on Mohammed Vance’s private account; to the 
account of the man who was even now directing the search for 
him. 
Trent left, and left the door to the cubicle open behind him. 
“NAME?” THE GUARD—an ordinary gendarme, not a Peace-
forcer—looked at Trent impatiently. The line behind Trent was 
long, and getting longer with every moment. 
“Vance,” said Trent. “Mohammed Vance.” He handed the 
guard his ticket and his passport. The passport didn’t identify 
Trent as a Peaceforcer, or even as a United Nations employee, 
though the ticket showed itself paid for by the Peace Keeping 
Force. Less than ideal work, but it was Booker’s best; he’d been, 
as he put it to Trent, “rushed.” 
At her terminal, the guard was spending a considerable 
amount of time processing the ticket. At length, when the line 
behind Trent began to mutter, she looked up from her terminal, 

140  Tales 
and said, loudly enough for those immediately behind Trent to 
hear, “I can be even slower about this if I have to.” The line qui-
eted. Finally the guard returned to Trent. She gave back Trent’s 
passport and ticket. 
She spent a disconcerting moment studying Trent. 
Had Mick told him the truth, or not? At about this time, the 
holos she’d taken of Trent should be sitting in a Syndic data-
base, waiting for the morning for some Syndic Lord to look them 
over. 
Assuming she’d told the truth. 
Trent looked back at the gate guard innocently, trying his 
best to look harmless and trustworthy. 
“Shuttle Pad Eight,” said the guard. She smiled an unpleas-
ant smile at Trent. “Have a nice day.” 
Trent smiled back at her. “One seventh of your life,” he said 
politely, “will be spent on Mondays.” 
He left without hurrying. 
GATE C LET ONTO the landing field proper. The skies had cleared 
slightly in the forty-five minutes that Trent had been inside the 
spaceport, and a few twinkling stars could be seen through 
patchy clouds. Outside, Trent looked for transportation. A 
nearby holo informed him that a spaceport cab would be by 
within twenty minutes to ferry him across the vast fields of 
steelstone to wherever his flight waited. 
“But I’m already late,” Trent told the sign. Forty meters 
away was a groundcar, a long black limousine with dark win-
dows, and a license plate that said U.N. 88. Trent walked to it 
without pausing, and stopped by the door next to the front left-
hand seat. In one smooth motion he popped his briefcase open 
and withdrew an object that vaguely resembled a tuning fork. 
He ran the forked end over the door’s pressure pad, produced 
two barely audible beeps, reversed the tool and with the laser in 
its other end burned out the locklarm. 
He had the door open in less time than the carcomp would 
have taken to compare his palm print against its authorized list 
of users. Trent slid inside and closed the door behind him. Some 

Moran  141 
 
of the people at the ferry terminal were watching the car with 
vague curiosity. 
The car ran itself from processors located behind an access 
panel under the center of the front dashboard. Balancing his 
briefcase on his knees, Trent opened it to its full extension. Fully 
half of the interior was taken up by a perfectly legal and quite 
powerful external processor board for his handheld. The other 
half held an odd assortment of tools; a spot for the handheld, the 
circuit tracer with a laser at the other end, a small forest of mi-
crolectrics equipment, an antistatic package holding, after 
Booker’s payment, five and a half terabytes of RTS; a nearly full 
reel of fineline, an almost empty strip of room-temperature su-
perconductor, and one watertight squirt gun of excellent con-
struction. 
The car’s brain was an ancient Motorola MC-GA24, running 
Purolator security firmware that was over five years old. Trent 
sprayed chipglue directly onto the processor, waited while it set 
and pressed the handheld’s interface gently into the still-soft 
surface of the chipglue. Far less than a second—perhaps a quar-
ter of a million nanoseconds in total—passed while Johnny 
Johnny reached out and enfolded the processor, stole every data 
and instruction line in and out of the chip; not five seconds had 
passed before the car was rolling at an even thirty kph across 
the landing field toward the line of ships. 
Trent was unable to find Shuttle Pad Eight. 
It was 8:15, and Trent’s ship was supposed to leave at 8:15. 
None of the launch pads were numbered. 
Finally Trent stopped the limousine next to the one space-
ship that had a person standing in front of it. Thinking back, 
Trent was almost certain that he had been unable to see inside 
the limousine, when he had been standing outside of it. He 
squirmed into the back over the top of the seats, straightened 
his coat and opened the left rear passenger’s door. 
The ship was easily the largest craft within a quarter of a 
kilometer. Its landing ramp was still down. Trent stepped from 
the car, and walked over to the person standing in front of the 
ramp. 

142  Tales 
“Hello,” said Trent. “Is this Shut ... uhm, Number Eight?” 
By no conceivable stretch of the imagination was the craft in 
front of him a shuttle. 
The SpaceFarer took a step toward Trent, surveying Trent 
with cold eyes. His look told Trent that he was the greater of two 
evils. Any two evils. The name on the shoulder of his gray and 
green ship’s uniform read Lt. Zinth. One of the largest hand ma-
sers Trent had ever seen was holstered at his right hip. Lieuten-
ant Zinth’s eyes were exactly level with Trent’s. “You’re Vance.” 
Trent blinked. “Yes. Oh yes of course.” 
In meter high letters, bright green against the gray-silver of 
the ship’s hull, it said, The Captain Sir Dominic Flandry. The 
SpaceFarer nodded. “’Sieur Vance, you are late. Lift-off was 
scheduled for 20:15 hours Capitol City time. It is now 20:19.” He 
stared evenly at Trent. 
“I couldn’t find the ship,” Trent explained. 
The SpaceFarer stood staring at Trent. The cold breeze off 
the ocean tugged at the lapels of his exquisitely tailored ship’s 
uniform. Finally he said, “The ship’s launchpad position and 
name, ’Sieur Vance, are shown on the back of your ticket.” 
“Oh.” Trent turned the ticket in his hand over and looked at 
it. He looked back up at Lt. Zinth. “Sorry. I was in such a hurry 
it didn’t occur to me to look. I’ve never been on a spaceship be-
fore, you know. This is all so exciting for me.” 
The look on the man’s face did not alter. “It is now, ’Sieur 
Vance, 20:20.” 
Trent had never, ever, heard of a ship departing on time from 
Unification Spaceport. He offered the SpaceFarer his ticket. 
The young man glanced at it. “Deck two, ’Sieur Vance. Seat 
13.” 
Trent said, “I’m not superstitious.” 
The SpaceFarer said quietly, with a glance at the Unification 
Councilor’s limousine that Trent had arrived in, “With all due 
respect, M. Vance, you are obviously a very powerful downsider. 
That means nothing aboard the Flandry. The SpaceFarers’ Col-
lective is not a part of the United Nations, and you have no au-
thority. Now you will please seat yourself—quickly.” 

Moran  143 
 
Trent said to the SpaceFarer, “I’m not afraid of you.” 
 
12. 
THE PASSENGER BAY aboard the Flandry was an afterthought of a 
converted cargo bay near the center of the ship; on his way up in 
the lift, while Lieutenant Zinth glared at him, Trent counted 
four bulkheads between the outer hull and the passenger com-
partment. 
Zinth palmed open the hatch to the passenger’s compartment 
and Trent stepped through, looking around at the compartment 
and the passengers on the way to his seat. There were forty or 
fifty of them, mostly men, speaking mostly in French, already 
strapped into their acceleration couches for lift. 
Seat 13 was next to seat 14. In seat 14 there was a lovely 
young lady. 
“Hi,” said Trent cheerfully. He strapped himself in, and 
waited while the seat reclined. He put his briefcase in the safety 
web under the seat. “I’m Trent the thief. Is there anything I can 
steal for you?” 
The woman in the seat next to him was young, somewhere in 
her early twenties. She had dark, sun-streaked brown hair that 
reached her shoulder blades in one long braid and looked as 
though it wanted to try for the small of her back. Inquisitive 
brown eyes and tanned, perfectly flawless skin, what skin was 
meant to be, complemented this extravagance. She looked up 
from the handheld she was reading on and looked Trent over 
coolly. She spoke carefully, with a distinct French accent. “That 
is not funny.” 
“No?” said Trent instantly. “Then how about this?” He tucked 
his thumbs into the corners of his mouth and stretched his 
cheeks into a clown face, eyes bugging out, tongue lolling. 
The woman stared blankly at him for a moment and then bit 
her lip, looking away from him. “No. That is not funny either.” 

144  Tales 
Trent looked at the woman curiously. He took his fingers out 
of his mouth and wiped them on his pants. “You know, people 
almost always at least smile at that one. Is something wrong?” 
“You are late,” she said flatly. 
In French, a voice came over the outspeaker and informed 
the passengers that the craft was in motion. The message was 
followed almost immediately by a sudden jerk, and then a low 
rumbling sound, as the port tugs began towing the Flandry into 
launch position. The acceleration chair Trent sat in vibrated 
strongly. 
“It wasn’t my fault,” Trent explained. 
“As you say.” The woman turned away from him, to her 
handheld. 
“So I can’t steal anything for you?” 
She looked up from the handheld slowly. She looked Trent 
over as though she were considering calling for a gendarme. 
“No,” she said at last, “I am afraid not. I am not poor.” 
“What’s that got to do with it?” 
After a moment’s thought, the woman turned her handheld 
off and put it under her seat in the safety web. “Is this not a 
Robin Hood procedure? No, wait,” she corrected herself, “Robin 
Hood routine. To steal from the rich, and give to the poor?” 
“Don’t be obscene.” Trent tried to relax in his chair. “I’m a 
capitalist. I did have Merry Men once,” he said as an after-
thought, “but I had to get rid of them. They were gloomy sons of 
bitches.” 
The alert brown eyes studied him. “Oh?” 
“Didn’t laugh at my jokes.” 
She nodded as though he had said something meaningful. 
“Why were you late for lift?” 
Her tone of voice was flat, inquisitive. And she was—
studying him. Trent paused a second, wondering why the rou-
tine was going over so badly. 
Trent said, “Are you sure I was late?” 
“You were late for the flight.” 
“People keep telling me that.” 
“They held the ship for you.” 

Moran  145 
 
“Did they?” asked Trent curiously. 
“Yes.” 
“That was nice of them.” 
“Why were you late?” 
“It’s a long story.” 
“Excuse me?” 
“They held me at the gate, and then I got lost,” Trent told 
her. 
“Lost?” 
“I couldn’t find the ship.” 
“It is a big ship.” 
“But there was no number.” 
The woman said blankly, “Excuse me?” 
Trent said, “It’s really a long story.” There were approxi-
mately fifty people in the passenger’s compartment of The Cap-
tain Sir Dominic Flandry. Something about the other 
passengers, a vague air of alertness, made Trent uneasy. 
“Oh.” She looked at him curiously. “My name is Melissa; 
Melissa du Bois.” 
The ship’s outspeakers came alive and in French told the 
passengers that they should prepare for acceleration shortly. 
“Hello, Melissa du Bois,” said Trent. “May I have the pleasure of 
seducing you?” 
Melissa du Bois looked briefly startled, and then actually 
smiled, dimpling, and looked about sixteen. “No.” 
“What?” 
“Perhaps on some other occasion, Trent the thief. It might 
be—indiscreet, yes? Yes, indiscreet under the present circum-
stances.” 
“Does that mean ‘no’?” 
“Yes.” 
“Oh.” 
“Where are you headed, Trent?” 
“The Moon,” said Trent. “Luna. I hear it’s lovely this time of 
year, when the farsiders take their annual baths.” 
Melissa lay back in her seat and closed her eyes, as the voice 
on the intercom began marking off five second increments to-

146  Tales 
ward lift-off, starting at sixty and working backward. “I am go-
ing to L-5, myself.” 
Trent sat slowly upright. “L-5? Spacebase One?” 
The tone of his voice did not penetrate to her, although a 
man across the aisle looked at Trent oddly. “Yes, L-5. I am going 
to the training base for PKF Elite at L-5.” Her eyes were still 
closed, her voice quiet and calm. She did not see the look of hor-
ror that had descended upon Trent’s features. 
Trent opened his mouth twice before the words would come 
out. 
He said, “You’re a Peaceforcer.” 
“Yes. I have only been PKF for four years, and I have already 
qualified for the Elite.” She did look over at him then, and 
smiled at him again. “I think it is the only thing I have ever 
done that impressed my father. My mother cried when she found 
out. They are very proud.” 
“I’m sure they are.” Trent looked around the small cabin, at 
the healthy, relaxed, alert group of French men and women. 
“The rest of this group; you’re—” he almost strangled on the 
words “—with them?” 
“Yes. We are the top one twentieth of one percent of all the 
PKF on Earth.” She added, “It surprised us all that you got a 
seat. We chartered this ship over a month ago. You must have 
influence; you bumped an officer from the seat you are in.” 
The voice on the intercom said softly, “Ten seconds to lift.” 
“Oh, no,” said Trent. He lay back in the acceleration couch; 
the webbing came up and embraced him. “Oh my God no.” 
Lying flat on his back, he could not see Melissa’s expression, 
but despite her accent he heard the surprise in her voice. 
“Trent? Are you afraid?” 
“Yes,” said Trent. “Very, very much.” 
The outspeaker voice said, “We are lifting.” 
The Captain Sir Dominic Flandry lifted at just under six 
gravities; breathing was difficult, and silence was enforced for 
several minutes. 
Trent was terribly, horribly glad. 

Moran  147 
 
DURING THE APPROXIMATELY four minutes Trent spent lying on 
his back, weighing nearly six times as much as he was used to, 
he decided two things. 
The first was that he was never again going to have Booker 
Jamethon tell a scheduling program that he was a high-ranking 
Peaceforcer official. 
The second was that in his entire life, without exception, he 
had never ever felt more stupid. 
AT SLIGHTLY LESS than one gravity acceleration, with twenty 
minutes’ delay at turnover, the trip to L-5, in Lunar orbit sixty 
degrees ahead of the Moon, took nearly four and a half hours. 
When the acceleration had died back to just below one grav-
ity, Trent took his briefcase from underneath the couch, opened 
it a crack, took out his handheld and closed the case again 
quickly. 
In the seat next to him, Melissa du Bois was watching him 
curiously. 
He hooked his handheld into the plug in the arm of his seat. 
A holofield sprang into existence just above it. There was a sin-
gle gray traceset trode tucked into the arm of the seat along 
with a single gray earphone, snaked to the seat so that they 
could not be stolen by people like Trent. Trent hooked up and 
requested a laser link to the InfoNet Relay Station at Halfway. 
The ship was still near enough Earth that there was no percep-
tible delay connecting to the Net; Trent closed his eyes and went 
Inside. 
... minimal RF modulation, ship frequencies ... ship business 
... scale up into private inskin frequencies; silence ... up again, 
Peaceforcer Elite monitor bands; silence ... 
It was silent except on ship frequencies. Either none of the 
Peaceforcers in the compartment had inskins, or they had them 
and weren’t using them. 
The Peaceforcers had finally held a news conference concern-
ing Trent; there were eight major news Boards following the 
story of the hunt for Emile Garon’s killer. NewsBoard, the third 
Board Trent scanned, had the information he needed. The first 

148  Tales 
section of the NewsBoard story was simply a recounting of the 
circumstances of Emile Garon’s death, as described by the 
Peaceforcers. The story went on to describe the steps the Peace-
forcers were taking in their search for the murderer; according 
to NewsBoard, the average Peaceforcer had not learned of Emile 
Garon’s death until nearly two o’clock that afternoon, and the 
Peaceforcers aboard the Flandry, on detached duty awaiting 
transfer to L-5, probably did not know about it. 
Certainly Melissa du Bois did not. 
The next thing Trent did was pull up the Flandry’s listed 
ports of call: Mars, via Luna City, via the United Nations Peace 
Keeping Force Base at Lagrange Five. 
“I wonder why Booker didn’t mention that to me,” Trent said 
softly, chewing thoughtfully on his lower lip. 
Probably didn’t want you to worry, said Johnny Johnny through the 
traceset. 
Melissa said, “Trent?” 
“Yes, I am,” said Trent definitely. 
She started to say something, then shook her head. “Never 
mind. What are you doing?” 
Trent shut off the handheld and looked up at her as the 
holofield faded. “Excuse me?” 
Melissa seemed to be searching for words. “That was ... in-
equiétante ... I do not know the word.” 
“Odd?” 
“Uncanny. I have never seen anyone pull data up onto an In-
foNet handheld like that. The field, itblurredas the data 
flowed by. How could you understand?” 
Trent’s thoughts spun briefly, an engine with the load re-
moved. “Oh, yes.” He leaned toward Melissa. “Actually, in real 
life when I’m not being Trent the thief, I’m the youngest mem-
ber of Secretary General Eddore’s private webdancing staff.” He 
added as an afterthought, “My parents are very proud of me.” 
Trent had never had parents. 
Carl Castanaveras, whom Trent had called father, had been 
killed by Peaceforcers. 

Moran  149 
 
Suzanne Montignet and Malko Kalharri, who were the archi-
tect and the will behind Project Superman—the man and 
woman who had raised the men and women who had raised 
Trent—they too had died at the hands of Peaceforcers. 
With the exception of Denice Castanaveras and possibly her 
brother, everybody whom Trent had grown up with had been 
killed by Peaceforcers. 
“That’s nice,” said Melissa du Bois. 
Trent smiled at Melissa du Bois the Peaceforcer. “Isn’t it?” 
He lay back in his seat then, tightening the straps slightly to 
keep himself in place. 
He slept the sleep of exhaustion. 
MORE THAN A thousand years later, when the second largest re-
ligion in the Continuing Time was the religion that had grown 
from the seeds sown by The Exodus Bible, children and adults, 
human and otherwise, on tens of millions of worlds, read 
Melissa du Bois’s account of her first meeting with Trent. 
He had no equals, save, in some ways, Mohammed Vance, the 
man who hunted him for all those years. He was young when I 
first met him, and improvising as he went. The meticulous 
preparation for which he later became known was not so evident 
when I first met him—not surprisingly, perhaps. He was running 
for his life, from us. 
I think I did not know the meaning of the word humility, 
then. I was one of the best of the PKF, and I did know it. 
Before Trent I had never failed at anything. 
SOME TWO HOURS later Trent awoke to free fall, to silence. 
The lights in the compartment had been dimmed. The bulk-
head that Trent and Melissa’s seats were lined up against now 
seemed to have vanished; a holograph displayed upon its surface 
showed deep space, blazing white and yellow and blue stars 
against the purest blackness Trent had ever seen. 
Many of the Peaceforcers were sleeping. A few were auditing 
text on their handhelds, the pages glowing in midair; other 

150  Tales 
Peaceforcers were simply looking, hypnotized, at the holograph 
of deep space. 
Trent played back the excerpts his handheld had recorded for 
him while he was asleep. NewsBoard had nothing of note since 
his last audit, but the Electronic Times had just posted a story 
saying that there were rumors circulating to the effect that the 
murdered Peaceforcer in New York City had actually been a 
member of the Peaceforcer Elite. The Electronic Times was not 
certain, but they thought that a Peaceforcer Elite had never 
been murdered in the line of duty before. 
Melissa du Bois said sleepily, “It’s lovely, isn’t it?” 
“Yes. Yes, it is.” Looking at the young Peaceforcer’s profile, as 
she watched the glowing stars, Trent was not surprised by the 
sudden realization of how desperately he wanted to take her to 
bed. 
“When I was very young, I thought I would be an astronomer. 
Live on farside at one of the observatories; Zvezdagrad perhaps, 
Star City at Tsiolkovsky Crater. My parents indulged me, 
bought me a telescope and set it up on the balcony on the third 
floor.” She sighed. “I had no skill for it, not the math, and not 
really the inclination. My father is PKF Elite; after my brother 
died he wanted very much for me to follow him in the service.” 
She smiled at him, somewhat diffidently. “You listen well. What 
did you want to be as a child?” 
Trent intentionally did not use the word Player. “A web-
dancer. Do you regret it—being a Peaceforcer, I mean?” 
“As opposed to what?” she said evenly. 
“I don’t know. A clown? Did you ever want to be a clown in 
the circus?” 
Melissa du Bois blinked abruptly, swiftly, and then laughed. 
“No. But I did, the first time I saw the Ringling Brothers circus, 
I wanted to be one of the women who swung on the trapezes and 
got caught by the beautiful boys. I think I was twelve.” She 
looked sideways at Trent again. “What did you want to be when 
you were twelve?” 
“Thirteen.” 
“What was your childhood like—you are American?” 

Moran  151 
 
There was hardly point in denying it. “Yes.” 
“Growing up in the O.A.,” she said slowly, “were you taught 
to hate us?” 
“Taught? No.” 
She did not seem to catch the distinction. “Where did you 
grow up?” 
“New York. Not far from Capitol City. It’s how I ended up on 
the Secretary General’s webdancer staff.” 
Trent thought she asked the question quite seriously. “What 
was it like, your childhood?” 
“Depraved.” 
She thought about this for several seconds. “You mean ‘de-
prived’?” she said carefully. 
“Sure,” said Trent cheerfully, “that too. Tell me more about 
your childhood. I’ve never been to France.” 
“You are too polite. We—” 
“I’d really like to hear about it.” Melissa met his eyes quickly, 
and Trent said simply, “Please?” 
THEY TALKED FOR nearly two solid hours while a cabin full of 
Peaceforcers slept around them. 
Melissa du Bois had been born and raised in Narbonne, a 
small town in southern France, near the Gulf of Lions in the 
Mediterranean Sea. Her father had owned a house right on the 
beach; she had acquired her current tan there, while on leave 
preparatory to reporting for duty at L-5. 
“I’ve always wanted to go to the South Seas, myself,” Trent 
told her. “There are beaches in New York, but they don’t count, 
the sand is gray. The South Seas—one of the French Polynesian 
islands, maybe. Live on an island somewhere and sleep in the 
sun on the beach.” He grinned at her. “So instead I’m going to 
visit Luna, where if you step outside to get a tan you blow up 
and freeze to death and fry all at once.” 
Melissa had actually been to L-5 before, three years previ-
ously. She and her parents had toured it briefly on their way to 
Luna for a vacation; her parent’s first vacation following her fa-
ther’s retirement from the PKF, Melissa’s last vacation before 

152  Tales 
joining. On the Moon they had stayed at the Hotel Copernicus; 
Melissa du Bois had learned to fly there, at the Luna City Flight 
Caverns. 
“I wanted to go to New Vegas, but—” Melissa shook her head 
with a rather sad smile. “New Vegas is in Free Luna. My father 
got very angry at the suggestion that we visit. I think he wanted 
to pretend that there was no such thing as Free Luna.” She 
paused a moment and then added, “My brother was stationed on 
Luna in 2064, during the Fizzle War between United Nations 
Luna and Free Luna.” She paused again and said without inflec-
tion, “He died.” 
Trent spent most of the time listening, listening to the details 
of a life that had been so unlike his own that at times he was not 
certain that some of the things she told him, with a straight 
face, were not jokes. Had her parents really forbidden her to 
continue seeing her first boyfriend merely because he had been 
arrested once? And if so, why? 
During their talk, Melissa du Bois never used the word 
“Peaceforcer.” 
“There is a tradition of public service in my family; my father 
is PKF Elite, and both of my uncles were PKF.” 
“I understand,” said Trent slowly, “the desire ... for public 
service. To help make things better. To say to the world, ‘I have 
been here, and I made a difference.’” 
Melissa smiled at him dazzlingly. “Yes. You do understand.” 
“But there’s more than one way to make a difference. Ac-
countants—talk to an accountant some day, and he’ll tell you 
how critical what he does is, how without him commerce would 
grind to a halt. The same for salespeople, or engineers. Or baby-
chasers, for that matter.” 
Melissa du Bois nodded, thoughtfully. “I would hate to work 
for the Ministry of Population Control. But you are right, it is 
necessary.” 
“And computerists—” Trent grinned. “A good filter routine, 
an Image description placed in the public Boards, things like 
that, I could make a good case that such things contribute as 
much to real improvement as, say, a Peaceforcer with a gun.” 

Moran  153 
 
“Really?” She seemed to be considering the idea. 
“The Peaceforcers are more visible. But—Peaceforcers are 
damage control, Melissa. They don’t build spacescrapers or 
roads or computers, they don’t raise food, they don’t create art. 
They just stop wars from happening.” 
“One would think,” said Melissa slowly, “that this would be 
enough to ask of any public body.” 
“Damage control is important. Somebody has to do it.” 
Melissa du Bois chewed at her lower lip, looking at Trent. 
“Yes,” she said finally. “Somebody does.” 
EIGHT MINUTES AND fifteen seconds before E.T.A. Spacebase One 
at L-5, Melissa said, “Trent, I have been thinking.” 
“Is that unusual?” 
“What is your last name?” 
Half a dozen answers popped into his mind. “Smith,” he said, 
without perceptible pause. 
“I was wondering,” and she hesitated, “would you mind if I 
looked for you when I am back downside? I would like to see you 
again if I can. It cannot be soon,” she said hurriedly, “for I will 
be on restricted duty at Spacebase One for the next six months, 
and when I do go downside ... well, there are people who are 
prejudiced against the Elite. You are a nice boy ... if you 
wouldn’t mind....” Her voice trailed off. 
Trent said, “A nice boy?” 
“You are cute,” she shrugged, “and funny. You have made me 
laugh”—she paused, thinking—“twice.” 
“Not dashing?” 
“No.” She shook her head definitely. 
“How about handsome? Or romantic?” 
“No. Cute, yes, and witty.” 
“Okay.” Trent nodded. “I’ll take that.” 
“Good. I can reach you through the office of the Secretary 
General?” 
“Oh. Yes, certainly of course. Sure.” 

154  Tales 
“Good.” She smiled at him with a shyness that Trent had 
never seen on the streets of New York in any girl older than ten. 
“It will be something to look forward to when I come back.” 
Trent nodded wordlessly. He felt like the greater of two evils, 
any two evils. 
He sat quietly, lost in his own thoughts. Presumably the 
Peaceforcers would disembark here; the SpaceFarers might load 
cargo; and then the ship would proceed to Luna. Trent wondered 
how long it would all take. 
The announcement, at four minutes and five seconds to 
E.T.A. Spacebase One, was given in French. 
The sound level in the passenger cabin jumped sharply. 
The Peaceforcers were talking to each other in a babble of 
swift French that Trent could not follow. 
Trent said to Melissa, “What did it say?” 
“Didn’t you hear the announcement?” 
“The announcement? Yes.” 
“They just made an announcement,” Melissa told him. 
“I heard it. What did it say?” 
“Don’t you speak any French?” 
“A little, but I wasn’t listening.” 
“You just told me you heard the announcement.” 
“I heard it,” Trent explained, “but I wasn’t listening.” 
“Oh.” 
“What did it say?” 
“What did the announcement say?” Melissa du Bois repeated. 
“Yes,” said Trent very clearly, “the announcement.” 
“Two things. It said we would be quarantined for three hours, 
and it said there was a private message for us on PKF Band 
Two.” 
“What did that message say?” 
Suddenly the wariness was back in her eyes. “I cannot tell 
you. Why do you want to know?” 
“Uhm. Curiosity?” 
“It said—” Melissa broke off, studying Trent as though for 
the first time. “Never mind.” 

Moran  155 
 
Oh, no. “Well,” said Trent mildly, “if you won’t tell me why 
we’re being quarantined, I guess I’ll go find out for myself.” He 
smiled at her while unstrapping himself from the reclining seat. 
He replaced his handheld in his briefcase, and, hooking his foot 
into one of the rows of handgrips that ran along the deck, got out 
of his seat, clutching his briefcase in one hand. 
Melissa said quietly, “Where do you think you are going with 
your luggage?” 
The smile was frozen on Trent’s face. “To find out what’s go-
ing on. Don’t worry, stay here, I’ll be right back.” 
Trent pulled his way along the grips, briefcase tucked be-
neath one arm, to the hatch that connected the rest of Deck Two 
to the passenger’s cabin. 
Trent did not intend to be right back. 
The Peaceforcer nearest the exit, a kindly-seeming French-
man in his mid-thirties, said, “Young man, I have dealt with the 
SpaceFarers’ Collective before. Read the sign, and do not make 
the mistake I think you are about to make.” 
The holo said, Except for Visits to the Restroom, Passengers 
Will Remain Seated Until Otherwise Instructed. 
Trent could not find the word ‘please’ anywhere on the sign. 
The kindly Peaceforcer, who was probably the oldest of those 
in the cabin, said, “You should really sit down again.” 
“Without an up,” said Trent, “there can be no down.” He 
opened the pressure hatch and pulled himself through, dogging 
the hatch shut behind him. 
Trent had no use for kindly Peaceforcers, none. 
Trent floated in the corridor immediately outside the passen-
ger’s cabin, trying to think of what to do next, rationally consid-
ering his alternatives. 
None came to mind. After a moment Trent realized that he 
was “upside down”—the corridor’s local vertical pointed the 
other way. He righted himself, to see if it would help. 
It didn’t help. 
“Vance!” 
Trent found a grip, and turned around to face the sound. 
Lieutenant Zinth came floating down into the corridor through a 

156  Tales 
hatch leading to the deck immediately above. He did not bother 
to align himself into the local vertical. With his face staring up-
side down into Trent’s, he snarled, “The Captain wants you. 
Now.” 
Trent said, “Really?” 
“What the hell have you quarantined our ship for?” 
“What?” 
“What the hell—” 
“Wait, wait. I heard you the first time.” Trent stared into 
Zinth’s upside down face. “Three hours, right?” 
“You should bloody well know, you—” 
“Ordered the quarantine,” said Trent. “Right. I’m Mohammed 
Vance,” he told Zinth, “and there’s a chase ship coming from 
Earth, and it’s going to be here in three hours?” 
Zinth screamed, “What the hell have you quarantined our 
ship for?” 
Trent let go of his briefcase. With a flick of his foot he pushed 
himself closer to the SpaceFarer. He wrapped his left hand 
firmly through a grip near Zinth, and with his right, pointed be-
hind Zinth. “Because of that!” 
The SpaceFarer twisted his head to look back down the 
empty corridor. 
Trent aimed for a spot five centimeters to the right of the ex-
act geometrical center of Lieutenant Zinth’s chin, and, swinging 
with his full strength, broke his hand against it. 
Zinth’s head bounced once against the side of the accessway. 
Beads of blood began drifting away from the spot where Trent 
had struck him; Trent grabbed Zinth by his coat and pulled the 
SpaceFarer down into the corridor with him. 
Trent remembered how, when they had both been together 
downside, standing up, the young SpaceFarer had been exactly 
his height. 
To nobody in particular, Trent said, “I think I broke my 
hand.” 
Retrieving his briefcase, with the body clumsily in tow, Trent 
began searching for a john. 

Moran  157 
 
MUTTERING TO ZINTH, “I don’t usually do this sort of thing on 
such short acquaintance, you know,” Trent began stripping the 
SpaceFarer’s uniform from him. 
After searching for a few seconds, Trent found a first-aid kit 
in the bathroom. Removing Zinth’s ship coat and shirt, he used 
the adhesive tape to bind the SpaceFarer’s wrists together be-
hind him. He affixed another strip to the SpaceFarer’s mouth. 
It was harder than Trent had expected to change clothes 
with Zinth. Among other things, the john was clearly intended 
for only one person at a time. 
After taking Zinth’s pants from him, Trent stared blankly for 
a moment at the SpaceFarer’s underwear. 
Trent could not recall ever having seen anything quite that 
shade of red before. 
When he was fully dressed, Trent turned Zinth’s maser over 
in his hands for several seconds. His face held no expression as 
he examined it. Finally he found a slot on the butt of the 
weapon; he turned it, and a small cage containing the charge 
pack dropped out of the butt. He removed the charge pack from 
its cage, replaced the cage inside the maser, and holstered the 
weapon. 
As Trent left the bathroom, there was a gentle bump, trans-
mitted through the hull of the ship; The Captain Sir Dominic 
Flandry had docked at Lagrange Five, the stronghold of the 
United Nations Peace Keeping Force in space. 
“They don’ ketch Brer Rab the thief, no, no,” mumbled Trent 
to himself, and headed down to the coupling rings on Deck One. 
 
13. 
EXCERPTED FROM THE Name Historian’s Looking Backwards 
from the Year 3000; pub. 3018, Alternities Press, CU:110.00 
Zaradin: 
 
Spacebase 
One—Colloquially, 
“Peaceforcer 
Heaven.” Constructed 2019 by a consortium of 

158  Tales 
SpaceFarer Companies known as the L-5 Develop-
ment Co. The United Nations Peace Keeping Force 
assumed control in 2025, necessitating extensive re-
building. Further expanded 2060; destroyed in the 
Peaceforcer Rebellion (which see), 2103. 
Spacebase One, like Almundsen Military Base at 
L-4, sat atop one of the two useful, gravitationally 
stable points in the double-planet Earth-Luna sys-
tem. L-4 and L-5, aside from being gravitationally 
stable—i.e., objects placed in those locations tended 
to stay there—were also, unlike L-1, L-2, and L-3, 
“high ground.” Lunar libration points Four and 
Five were situated atop the gravity wells of both 
Earth and Luna, and from those positions the entire 
Earth-Luna system could be easily controlled. It is 
hardly surprising that Space Force and the PKF 
ended up splitting those locations between them. 
Spacebase One’s first use, as a PKF Elite surgery 
and training facility, dates to 2046; between the 
years 2046 and 2088 the facility regularly processed 
approximately fifty Elite candidates every six 
months. In 2088, due to the facility’s increasing 
vulnerability to sabotage, its use as a training sta-
tion for PKF Elite was discontinued. Spacebase 
Fourteen at Saturn, as of 2088, assumed that func-
tion. 
In 2069, there were approximately 6,500 Peace-
forcers stationed at Spacebase One, an estimated 
two hundred of whom were Elite. The Commanding 
Officer, as of 2069, when Trent the Uncatchable be-
gan his historic run, was an unfortunate by the 
name of Etienne Géricault. 
THE CARGO BAY was huge; it occupied the entire deck over the 
engines. 
Despite Trent’s hurry, three SpaceFarers stood at the cou-
pling rings that led into Spacebase One, their feet anchored to 

Moran  159 
 
the deck by magnetic slippers tied over their boots. Pulling his 
way carefully along the grips, Trent made his way to within fif-
teen meters of the three SpaceFarers before being noticed. 
Two of the three were women, one of them a silver-haired 
woman who looked older than anyone Trent had ever seen; older 
than Old Jack, older than Beth Davenport. She said sharply, 
“You’re not—” and then broke off. 
Trent had the maser out, pointing at them. 
Given the circumstances, the woman’s voice was remarkably 
calm. She took a step toward Trent. “What have you done to 
Lieutenant Zinth?” 
“I told him to look behind himself and he did so then I 
slugged him. Don’t SpaceFarer kids learn that trick?” 
“What have you done to Lieutenant Zinth?” 
“He’s in the john on Deck Two. Unconscious, but alive.” Trent 
gestured to the lone man. “You. Take your slippers off, throw 
them to me. Slowly.” 
The woman’s uniform bore the name patch Cpt. Saunders. 
She moved closer to Trent, two shuffling steps across the deck. “I 
take it that you are not Mohammed Vance.” 
“No, I lied about that. Sorry.” The first of the slippers came 
sailing toward Trent. He donned it, then the second, one-
handed. “Please, Captain—no closer. Move away from the cou-
pling rings.” 
It seemed to Trent that the three of them moved very slowly. 
As they shuffled away from the coupling rings, Captain Saun-
ders said, “What are you going to do?” 
“I don’t know. I thought about trying to steal the Flandry, 
but I decided against it because it’s too big.” 
Captain Saunders said evenly, “That was sensible.” 
“I figured I would steal a Peaceforcer ship instead. It’s not 
like they’re not already pissed at me.” 
Captain Saunders asked, “What do they want you for?” 
Trent walked cautiously across the deck, accustoming him-
self to the magnetic soles, keeping the three covered with the 
useless maser. “They think I killed one of their Elite.” 

160  Tales 
Captain Saunders stiffened. “Oh? That’s what this is all 
about, then. That’s why the quarantine.” 
“They didn’t tell you that you had a murderer on board?” 
“They haven’t told us a damn thing.” 
“Sorry. I don’t suppose you’d be interested in giving me sanc-
tuary?” 
Captain Saunders looked Trent over, and shook her head al-
most reluctantly. “Not a chance. Nobody has ever killed a Peace-
forcer Elite before, you know. The Erisian Claw keeps trying.” 
Trent stood with his back to the closed coupling rings. “I was 
afraid of that.” 
“They’ll make an example of you.” 
“They’re trying.” From the pocket of Lieutenant Zinth’s coat 
he withdrew his squirt gun and without ceremony shot each of 
the three SpaceFarers in the face. 
They looked more stunned than if he had masered them to 
death. 
Trent waited while unconsciousness claimed them. In drop, 
their bodies slowly curled into fetal balls, the two women held in 
place by their magnetic slippers. When they were definitely out 
of it, Trent pushed them into a darkened section of the cargo 
bay, and left them there. He wet his finger and held it up in 
midair, checking to make sure that there was an air current to 
bring them oxygen. He returned to the coupling rings, briefcase 
in hand. 
The Peaceforcers waiting on the other side of the coupling 
rings likely did not have pictures of Trent, but it occurred to 
Trent that the briefcase might well be included in descriptions of 
him. Finally he simply shook his head. Johnny Johnny was in 
the briefcase; Trent had lost his first Image, Ralf the Wise and 
Powerful, and he was not about to lose his second. 
Letting an air of outraged officiousness descend upon him, in 
good SpaceFarer style, Trent palmed the pressure pad next to 
the coupling rings. The exterior and then the interior rings di-
lated open. 
Three Peaceforcers, standing at attention on the other side of 
the coupling rings, looked briefly startled. Their local vertical 

Moran  161 
 
was about fifteen degrees off the Flandry’s; Trent, compensat-
ing, catwalked on a slight diagonal through the coupling rings, 
so that he entered Spacebase One on their vertical. 
Two of the Peaceforcers, in uniform, were pointing masers at 
Trent as he came through. Trent dismissed them out of hand; 
their reactions were far too slow. 
The third Peaceforcer, in a blue jumpsuit without shoes, with 
a pair of magnetic slippers tied at his ankles, completing a yawn 
as Trent came through, did nothing but raise an eyebrow and 
Trent froze— 
Emile had come back from the dead. 
For several seconds his eyes insisted on interpreting it that 
way. The man was a tall Frenchman with unruly dark hair, and 
eyes every bit as expressive, almost haunted, as Garon’s had 
been. The resemblance, down to the stiff skin that marked the 
man for the brass balls he was, was remarkable. 
Trent shook it off with an effort, glared at the senior Peace-
forcer in the best imitation of Lieutenant Zinth that he was ca-
pable of. When he spoke, his voice was half an octave lower than 
normal. “First Lieutenant Nelson Zinth of The Captain Sir 
Dominic Flandry.” Trent actually had no idea what Zinth’s first 
name was. Ignoring the weapons trained on him, he advanced 
two steps toward the cyborg. They haven’t told us a damn thing, 
Captain Saunders had said. “What is the meaning of this idi-
ocy?” 
“Lieutenant,” said the Peaceforcer Elite pleasantly enough, “I 
am Elite First Sergeant Rogér Colbert, at your service.” He 
spoke English with a generic American accent. “May I inquire, 
Lieutenant, why you’ve chosen to ignore our quarantine?” 
“Your quarantine, cyborg,” said Trent flatly, “isn’t worth the 
saliva to spit on if the Flandry chooses not to honor it. You have 
yet to give us any reason for this foolishness.” 
“Lieutenant Zinth,” said Colbert equably, “this is a matter of 
internal United Nations security. There is a Level Three Earth-
Luna alert in effect, and we can allow no exceptions.” The Elite 
stood immobile before Trent. “Please return to your ship.” The 
two junior Peaceforcers kept their masers pointed at Trent. 

162  Tales 
“Who is your commanding officer, Sergeant Colbert?” 
“I report directly to Commander Géricault, Lieutenant.” 
“If you are unwilling or unable to explain the meaning of this 
quarantine to me,” said Trent, “then I must request that you al-
low me to see Commander Géricault. Presumably he has the au-
thority to explain your bizarre behavior?” 
There was a long moment of silence. “Lieutenant,” said Col-
bert finally, “I can tell you this much. The quarantine will last 
no more than three hours; we are awaiting a high-speed chase 
ship from Earth. We have reason to believe that one of your pas-
sengers is a murderer.” 
“I think,” said Trent after a moment, “that I must speak to 
Commander Géricault. You,” he said to the Peaceforcer Elite, 
“are not listening to me.” 
Colbert spoke slowly, as though to a child. “Oh?” 
“Peaceforcer, we have some fifty-odd passengers this run. 
They are all Peaceforcers; your own new Elite candidates. If you 
wish to name one of them murderer, I’d hardly dream of arguing 
with you.” Trent grinned at the startled look on the faces of the 
Peaceforcers behind Colbert. “But whether it is three hours or 
three minutes, the Flandry is not subject to the United Nations 
or its Peaceforcers, and if you think otherwise you’re in for a hell 
of a shock.” Trent held Colbert’s eyes. “I will have either a com-
plete explanation from Commander Géricault, or, Elite First 
Sergeant Colbert, I will recommend to Captain Saunders that 
we continue on to Luna—and you can pick up your murdering 
Peaceforcers from Luna yourself. It’s up to you.” 
Colbert held his head slightly to one side, studying Trent as 
though Colbert did not know quite what to make of him. “Bring-
ing you to Commander Géricault would be...difficult. My orders 
are clear, Lieutenant; we’re to let nobody off this ship.” 
“You can hardly keep the ship itself from going on to Luna, 
Sergeant. I doubt that’ll please whoever’s coming on the chase 
ship.” 
“Are you actually threatening to drag over fifty Peaceforcers 
to Luna against their will?” Sergeant Colbert looked genuinely 
intrigued by the concept. “I think that might be construed as 

Moran  163 
 
kidnapping, which in turn might be construed as an act of war 
between the SpaceFarers’ Collective and the United Nations.” 
Trent took a long, deep breath. He actually closed his eyes, 
and then looked up and met Colbert’s gaze head on. 
Trent said, “Let’s find out.” 
It hung in the balance for a long unending moment. 
Trent remembered auditing an editorial in the Electronic 
Times that suggested that the Unification Council would not be 
the slightest bit displeased to find a good pretext for a war to ex-
tend the Unification of Earth to encompass Mars and the Belt 
and the SpaceFarers. 
In a bemused voice Colbert said, “Gallois, Chanton. No one 
else comes through this lock. Kill them if you must.” The Peace-
forcer smiled at Trent, gently, and said, “Come with me, Lieu-
tenant, and I will take you to Commander Géricault.” 
IT WAS 2:30 A.M., Eastern Seaboard Time, on August 15, 2069. 
One step behind, Trent followed the silent Peaceforcer 
through the largely deserted corridors of Peaceforcer Heaven. 
It was hard for Trent to comprehend that only a day and a 
half ago he had been standing at the top of an unfinished 
spacescraper while an Elite that could have been this one’s 
brother had attempted to kill him. 
Peaceforcer Elite Colbert walked briskly, without looking 
back to insure that Trent was following him; Trent was just as 
pleased. He was not walking as gracefully as Colbert, surely not 
as gracefully as a SpaceFarer, with years of experience in drop, 
ought to walk. They walked through the core of Spacebase One, 
through the central cylinder around which the great outer 
wheels revolved. The central cylinder was in drop; at the rims, 
artificial gravity was provided through angular momentum. The 
wheels were not rigidly attached to the central cylinder; rather, 
they rotated independently of it, and of each other. The North 
Wheel rotated clockwise as viewed from the “north” end of 
Spacebase One, and the South Wheel rotated counterclockwise 
as viewed from that same vantage point, to cancel the tendency 
that a single wheel would have had to impart rotational energy 

164  Tales 
to the central cylinder. For the PKF’s purposes, it was the best 
possible design; the central cylinder had to be in drop, for sur-
gery, and therefore it could not rotate about its axis. On the 
other hand, gravity was a necessity for the newly created Elites, 
to condition themselves for the return to Earth, and at the rim, 
the 4.2 kilometer-wide wheels rotated to provide 920 centime-
ters per second squared acceleration, nearly Earth’s 980 cepssa. 
The wheels were connected to the central cylinder by a complex 
elevator system that worked only at intervals of several minutes 
as the spokes that led from the central cylinder to the wheels 
made their slow, majestic sweeps around the central cylinder’s 
access points. 
Trent watched where they went, memorizing their route. 
They were nearly to the spoke elevator—Commander Géricault, 
like all permanent inhabitants at L-5, tended to avoid the free 
fall areas for any great length of time—when Trent found what 
he was looking for: a terminal with a full-sensory traceset, just 
inside the entrance to what looked for all the world like a mad 
scientist’s torture chamber. 
They stood together in stony silence outside the elevator en-
trance, waiting for the rim elevator to arrive; occasionally, a 
Peaceforcer, passing by, would greet Colbert, and receive some 
word of reply. The Peaceforcers looked at Trent’s SpaceFarer 
uniform curiously. There were not many people about; Trent 
supposed that even here the cycle of night and day must be ad-
hered to in some degree. It was not unreasonable that they 
would have chosen to orient their day by Capitol City’s. 
At last the elevator arrived. 
As the doors of the elevator curled up into a tight tube, Trent 
stepped in ahead of the Peaceforcer, transferring his briefcase 
from his left hand to his swollen right, tripping the catches in 
the process. 
Rogèr Colbert the Peaceforcer Elite said, “Quel?” when Trent 
shot him in the face with the squirt gun. 
The skin of a Peaceforcer Elite is not as absorbant as the skin 
of a normal human; as the doors to the elevator began uncurling, 
Trent just had time to dodge. 

Moran  165 
 
Light flared through the space where Trent had just been, in 
an actinic ruby flash of light that tore through the walls of the 
elevator. 
As Colbert sagged into unconsciousness, the elevator began 
to lurch into motion. Trent stabbed frantically at the pressure 
point marked Emergency Stop; there was a brief pause, and 
Trent caught a whiff of burned meat, and then the elevator re-
turned to its starting position. 
The smell of burned meat grew stronger, and Trent traced it 
to its source. 
Colbert had shot himself in the foot. 
TRENT PICTURED HIMSELF walking through Peaceforcer Heaven 
in a SpaceFarer uniform, asking for directions to the slipship 
bay. That won’t do, he thought clearly. 
The burn on Colbert’s foot looked ugly, but Trent honestly 
could not think of anything he could do for the man. He opened 
the elevator doors again and stepped through, letting the doors 
uncurl until they were nearly closed against his briefcase. 
Trent stood in front of the elevator, waiting. A short, rather 
pretty woman in a PKF uniform came by shortly, and stopped, 
puzzled. Trent drew the squirt gun and shot her in the face, 
opened the elevator doors, stuffed her inside, and closed the ele-
vator doors on his briefcase again. 
Nearly half a minute passed before a pair came by, both of 
them men, neither of them within ten centimeters of Trent’s 
height. Trent shot them quickly, shoved them into the elevator. 
A voice immediately behind him said, in French, “What are you 
doing?” Trent turned swiftly to find himself looking into a pair of 
brilliant blue eyes, a tall female Peaceforcer in uniform, almost 
exactly his own height. 
Trent said, “Hello,” and shot her quickly. He caught her as 
she went limp, dragged her back inside the elevator, and let the 
door close on them all. 
Looking at his collection of unconscious bodies, Trent said, 
“How utterly embarrassing.” 

166  Tales 
THE FEMALE PEACEFORCER’S underwear wasn’t as pretty as Lieu-
tenant Zinth’s. 
When he was dressed in her too-tight uniform, Trent stepped 
back out through the elevator door, and touched the pressure 
point marked Down. 
Moving rapidly down the corridor, he headed back toward the 
terminal he had seen earlier. 
A SIGN IMMEDIATELY inside the torture chamber said Physical 
Therapy. 
Briefcase held between his knees, Trent seated himself be-
fore the terminal, jacked his handheld in, pulled on the termi-
nal’s traceset and closed his eyes. 
Johnny Johnny unfolded into existence like a flower greeting 
the sun. 
... Hi, Boss. 
Hi, Johnny. 
Where are we? 
Peaceforcer Heaven, logged into a Peaceforcer terminal. 
Oh. Bad news, Boss. 
Tell me about it. 
And some slow damn hardware too, Boss. 
I’m sorry about that; this is hospital equipment, Johnny Johnny, not 
DataWatch. Can you get me a map of the station? 
Hold on a second, I’m auditing the help files...here we go. A schematic of 
Spacebase One appeared floating three-dimensionally some-
where just behind Trent’s closed eyelids; a long fat cylinder en-
closed by a pair of counterspinning wide fat doughnuts. A bright 
red spark appeared at the bottom of the image, followed by the 
legend, You Are Here. Six directions they use, Boss. Up, Down, North, 
South, Spin and Antispin. Up is toward the central cylinder, down is toward gravity, 
toward the wheels. South is toward the South Bay, where the Flandry is. North is 
toward the North Bay, where the Peaceforcer ships are moored. Spin is the direc-
tion the north wheel turns, antispin is the direction the south wheel turns. Johnny 
Johnny paused. You’re going to steal a ship? 
That’s the idea. 

Moran  167 
 
They’ll shoot you dead, Boss. Weapons emplacement, here. A green spot 
glowed some sixty meters away from the North Bay. Lasers, a mass 
driver gun, and fusion missiles. 
Show me the pilot’s locker. 
Here. 
Trent disengaged from the terminal, unjacked his handheld 
and stood to leave. 
The Peaceforcer standing in the entrance was huge, at least 
fifty kilos heavier than Trent himself. He looked at Trent with a 
cold, measuring eye. 
Trent said brightly, with his best accent, “Bonjour.” 
In French, the huge Peaceforcer told Trent to see somebody 
about his uniform, that Trent’s appearance was entirely unac-
ceptable. 
Trent smiled at the man, thanked the man, and assured him 
that he would do so at the first opportunity. He squeezed by the 
large man and walked swiftly away down the corridor. 
THE CORRIDOR STRETCHED away forever. 
Trent walked through silence. The corridor ran the length of 
Spacebace One; Trent had no feel for how far he had gone down 
its length. Other walkways branched out from this one in all di-
rections, up and down and to the sides. There were dilation rings 
every few meters. Trent found himself growing disoriented. 
Nothing gave any sense of up or down; no gravity, nothing in the 
architectural layout. One Peaceforcer came into view walking on 
the ceiling of a cross corridor, and another swept by Trent from 
behind, flying freely down the length of the passage, navigating 
with touches of hands and feet to the grips extruding from the 
walls. Once a Peaceforcer, sitting in midair at an intersection, 
face at right angles to Trent’s, looked at Trent oddly; Trent sim-
ply nodded to the man and kept walking, ostentatiously not hur-
rying, under the theory that suspicious people are people who 
act suspiciously. 
Trent felt the man’s gaze on the back of his neck as he 
walked away. 

168  Tales 
Only a frog Peaceforcer, he thought, would find something 
suspicious about bad tailoring. 
His recently-operated upon knee was beginning to get sore, 
and his calves as well. Walking with magnetic slippers, in drop, 
was nothing like walking in gravity. He tried to find a rhythm 
for it, gliding along the way he had seen others doing, actually 
touching the deck with only the toes of the slippers, and was, he 
thought, getting the hang of it. 
“ALERT, ALERT!” blared the voice. 
Trent jerked to a stop, heart pounding. He found himself 
drifting in the exact geometrical center of the corridor, out of 
reach of grips on any side. 
“ALIEN 
IN 
THE 
INSTALLATION, 
REPEAT, 
UNAUTHORIZED ALIEN IN THE INSTALLATION; ALL 
PERSONNEL RETREAT TO SECURED AREAS. LOCKDOWN 
IN 
EFFECT, 
REPEAT, 
LOCKDOWN 
IN 
EFFECT. 
PERSONNEL IN CORRIDORS WILL BE SHOT WITHOUT 
WARNING. REPEAT, LOCKDOWN IN EFFECT.” 
“Bastards!” screamed Trent. Nobody answered him, and feel-
ing terribly silly he waited while the gentle drift took him within 
grabbing distance of a grip. He did not try to walk again; he dug 
his toes into a pair of grips and kicked off down the corridor with 
all the strength that was in him. 
He lost velocity only slowly; air friction alone was insufficient 
to impede him much. He was still moving at a fair clip when he 
saw his next Peaceforcer, walking down the middle of the corri-
dor watching Trent fly toward him. The Peaceforcer showed lit-
tle alarm at first, and then some alarm, and then considerable 
alarm, and then Trent hit him. They collided in a tangle of arms 
and legs; with the briefcase in his left hand Trent swung at the 
Peaceforcer, smashed the edge of the briefcase up against the 
Peaceforcer’s temple; the reaction sent Trent tumbling slowly 
backward to fetch up against the corridor wall. The Peaceforcer’s 
head bounced off the bulkhead with an audible thud. When 
Trent regained his orientation again, the Peaceforcer hung limp 
in midair. Tiny beads of blood were forming in the air around 
the spot where Trent had struck him. With something approach-

Moran  169 
 
ing panic Trent kicked over to where the Peaceforcer hung 
motionlessly, and checked the man’s pulse; it was strong and 
even. 
“Thank you,” said Trent to nobody in particular. He pulled 
the Peaceforcer to the nearest doorway, palmed it open, and 
shoved the man in. 
And then the lights went out. 
Trent heard his voice say, independent of him in the dark, 
“What a bad day.” 
TRENT MADE HIS way slowly along the corridor, searching for 
doors by touch, feeling his way in the darkness by the grips and 
door recesses. He thought he had been near the north end of the 
cylinder when the lights went out. 
There was nobody in the first room Trent tried, and it was 
dark besides. The second, third, fourth, and fifth doors Trent 
opened were also empty, also dark. 
There were three people in the room that the sixth door 
opened onto, and the room was well lit, shining with bright yel-
low light from the ceiling sunpaint. 
In the second when the three men were turning to look at the 
opening door, Trent pushed through, maser in hand, screaming, 
“Don’t move!” 
Only one of the three was facing Trent; the other two were 
half-dressed, with their backs to him. Nobody moved. 
“Turn away from me.” 
The one Peaceforcer facing Trent stared at Trent, then at the 
maser in his hand, and then turned carefully away. 
“If anybody does anything stupid,” said Trent, just loudly 
enough for them to hear him, “I’m going to cut you clean in half.” 
Not one of the three so much as twitched. Transferring the 
useless maser to his right, useless hand, Trent pulled his squirt 
gun from his coat pocket with his left. Aiming carefully, Trent 
squirted each of the three on the back of the neck, making sure 
that the liquid touched skin each time. 
When he finished, the squirt gun was empty. 

170  Tales 
Then, for the first time, Trent looked around the room he 
found himself in. 
It was small, about twenty meters by fifteen. 
There were lockers along the bulkheads. 
Trent tried to remember exactly how close he had been to the 
slipship bays when they turned out the lights in the corridors. 
“No, no,” said Trent. This could not be the pilot’s locker. 
“Good luck? Me?” Trent touched one of the lockers, tentatively. 
“No,” he said decisively. A few beats later, he said questioningly, 
“Yes?” He looked at the locks on the lockers—palmprint acti-
vated, passive check circuits, and yelled, “YES!” 
Halfway through the first row he found a pressure suit that 
fit, donned it. He had the impression that he was not supposed 
to wear it over a SpaceFarer uniform; though the material of the 
pressure suit was soft and form-fitting, it felt tight in odd places. 
He had special difficulty getting the pressure suit’s boots on over 
the SpaceFarer boots he was wearing. 
There was a holster on the right hip of the pressure suit. 
Trent stared at it. A holster on a pressure suit? He looked in 
the locker he had taken the pressure suit from; there was a ma-
ser inside, restrained by an elastic strap. Trent shrugged, and 
filled the holster with the maser he had inherited from Lieuten-
ant Zinth. 
It took some examination before he figured out the helmet; it 
was supposed to hang on a snap just over his back, so that he 
could reach back and pull it forward, closed, in a single move-
ment. 
Mimicking the other pressure suits he had seen, Trent 
snapped the suit’s gloves on at the spot on his left hip that did 
not have a pistol holster. 
One of the bodies in the locker with him had begun snoring, 
and Trent addressed the snoring Peaceforcer: “Goodbye, dear 
friends; goodbye. I must go; spaceship to steal; things to do.” 
Trent went to the door at the other end of the room, opened it 
and looked cautiously out. 
A wide, broad area stood revealed, vaguely circular in shape, 
some forty meters in diameter, perhaps five meters high. Air-

Moran  171 
 
locks were arrayed around the perimeter of the circle; there 
were green lights over some of the airlocks, red lights over oth-
ers. One airlock had a red light flashing over it. 
Trent left, closing the door to the pilot’s locker room, turning 
the lights off as he did so. 
TRENT TOOK THREE steps into the empty flight bay, marveling at 
his good luck. 
On the fourth step, there was a light tug at his waist, and 
something improbably hard smashed into his ribs. 
The impact lifted one of Trent’s feet from the floor. He reat-
tached it slowly in the zero gravity, and turned to look into Lieu-
tenant Zinth’s maser. 
Melissa du Bois said, “Hello, Trent the thief.” 
TRENT HAD READ once that after a certain number of shocks the 
nervous system became inured. 
Trent had not reached that number yet. He said, “Uh ... uh 
...” 
Melissa had both hands wrapped around the maser. Her 
knuckles were white. She said conversationally, “Fifteen min-
utes ago I found out who you are.” Her accent had thickened un-
der the stress. “Thirteen minutes ago I finished reading our 
dossier on you; it is a fascinating document. Ten minutes ago I 
located a terminal, found North Bay, and headed here.” She 
smiled at Trent without humor. “Technically, I am AWOL. They 
would not give me a weapon either.” She inclined her head 
slightly. “Thank you for the loan.” 
Trent said, “Uh ... Melissa ...” Nothing was occurring to him. 
“You are an intriguing man, Trent the thief.” Her cheeks 
were slightly flushed. “Respected contract thief, very likely one 
of the twenty best Players alive” 
“Ten.” 
“and a man of wit and humor, reputed to be extremely 
skilled in unarmed combat. One of eight criminals who has ever 
destroyed a pursuing waldo; the only one who has ever escaped 

172  Tales 
the PKF Detention Center in Capitol City; the only one ever to 
kill an Elite officer of the Peace Keeping Force.” 
“Melissa, you’re making” 
“A mistake, I know, Trent the thief, you are innocent. You 
did not do it.” 
“I didn’t. It was an accident,” Trent said, “he fell.” He looked 
at her, met her eyes directly. “Really. Killing is wrong.” Without 
looking away from her, he felt his side. “Damn it, I think you 
broke a rib.” 
Melissa chuckled. It didn’t reach her eyes. “It is a curious 
thing, Trent, but you have managed to do something nobody else 
ever has. You have made me feel stupid. And I am not a stupid 
woman.” She gestured at the row of eight airlocks. “I am where I 
am. My superiors did not expect you to make it to North Bay. 
How could he even find it, they said. They did not think you 
would make it here through all the Peaceforcers if you did find 
it.” She shrugged. “I did. I have great respect for you, Trent the 
thief.” Her hands, holding the maser, were terribly steady. “I 
shall be present at your execution.” 
“You liked me.” 
“You incredible egomaniac.” She shook her head. “You are 
charming, but that is not it. Do you realize what you have done 
to me? You sat down next to me and told me your name. Trent 
‘Smith,’” she said icily. 
Trent said quietly, “I thought I was safe by that point. My 
name wasn’t on the Boards even then, and I was seven hours 
from Free Luna. I didn’t know you were a Peaceforcer.” 
Melissa du Bois shook her head slowly. “You really do not 
know, do you?” 
“Melissa, I don’t have time for this.” 
“I am going to be known for the rest of my life as the Elite 
whom Trent the thief spent four and a half hours sitting next to 
while a Level Three alert was on for him. My career is ruined. 
My name is a joke.” 
“I’m going to steal a spaceship now.” 
The barrel of the maser climbed until it was centered on 
Trent’s wishbone. “No, you are not.” 

Moran  173 
 
Trent said mildly, “You’re not going to shoot me, Melissa.” 
“Not if you surrender.” 
“Not at all.” 
“Trent, I should prefer to take you alive. But I will kill you if 
I must.” 
Trent cocked his head to one side, as though listening to 
something. “I don’t have time for this. And I think you broke one 
of my ribs.” 
“I am horribly sorry.” 
“It’s okay.” Turning away from her, Trent headed toward the 
airlocks. 
“Trent,” called Melissa. 
Trent turned to face her. 
She said softly, “I am sorry, my friend,” and pulled the trig-
ger. 
There was a gentle, quiet click. 
Trent smiled at her. “There’s no charge cartridge.” 
Melissa stared at him, then at the maser, then at him again. 
“I pulled the charge cartridge,” Trent explained. “I didn’t 
want to hurt anybody.” 
Soft, meaningless sounds issued from her throat. 
“I understand how you feel,” said Trent, “but there’s this 
spaceship” 
With a stifled scream, Melissa launched herself across the 
deck at him. Trent ducked slowly, grabbing Melissa by the an-
kles as she sailed by overhead. Methodically, he pulled off her 
magnetic slippers, and then her shoes. He pushed her lightly 
away from him, away from any possible grip. 
Trent licked one finger and tested the air currents. He 
pointed at the far bulkhead. “That way,” he called out to 
Melissa, “the air’s circulating that way.” 
Trent turned away from her again as she struggled futilely in 
midair, and continued toward the row of airlocks. The red light 
was still flashing over the third airlock from the right. 
At the airlock, a thought struck Trent. “Melissa!” 
She looked in his direction. 

174  Tales 
“The air currents should take you to the wall in, I don’t know, 
ten minutes or so, but if you’re really in a hurry, take off your 
clothes and throw them away from you; for every action there is 
an equal and opposite reaction.” 
Trent stood, looking at her, for just a moment. 
Then, with furious speed, Melissa du Bois began stripping 
her shirt off. 
Trent watched her a moment longer, wishing he could stand 
around and react. He cycled through the airlock, his voice so 
quiet he could barely hear it. “So much to do, so little time.” 
 
14. 
THE SHIP DOCKED at the third airlock from the right was not a 
slipship. 
It was a two-seat yacht; the legend inscribed on the bulk-
head, immediately inside the airlock, read: 
United Nations Space Force 
Rolls-Royce 2066, #312 
The interior of the yacht consisted of the pilot’s cabin, the air-
lock, and a small passageway that connected the two. Trent pre-
sumed that there were engines somewhere. 
Going forward, Trent entered the pilot’s cabin, seated himself 
in the left-hand seat and strapped in. 
Seated to the right was a handsome, elderly silver-haired 
man, skimming news reports on his handheld. On the breast of 
his pressure suit a name patch said Col. Webster, UNSF. 
Colonel Webster had barely glanced up when Trent entered. 
Returning to his handheld, he said in clipped military tones, 
“You’re late, pilot.” 
“I’ve heard that one before,” Trent snapped. He studied the 
board before him. Except for what was obviously an ancient 
triddy tank, in the panel’s lower right hand corner, there was 
nothing Trent recognized. 
Colonel Webster’s head turned toward Trent as though it 
moved on bearings. “You’re not my pilot.” 

Moran  175 
 
“I’m not anybody’s pilot.” 
“What the hell does the PKF think it’s up to, Lieutenant?” 
Trent glanced down at the name patch on his pressure suit. 
Lt. Charbrier, he read upside down. 
It seemed to be Trent’s fate in life to impersonate officers of 
low rank. 
“Honestly,” said Trent, “I don’t think anybody but Melissa 
has much of an idea.” One pressure point, near the top of the 
board, was bordered in blue and was labeled Auto. 
Thank God for the British, Trent thought. He pressed the 
point marked Auto. 
The Colonel’s face was growing red. “Are you under the im-
pression, Lieutenant, that being a member of the PKF gives you 
...” 
Trent said, “I’m not a Peaceforcer.” The triddy tank glowed 
slightly, with a milky gray sheen; it silvered, blossomed into 
rainbows, and sank in to depth. 
In the tank, the words System Active appeared. 
“You’re notyou’re” 
“I’m a thief.” 
“A th—” 
“A thief. Trent the thief. Hello, computer?” There was no re-
sponse from the system; Trent could not find anything on the 
control board in front of him that remotely resembled an I/O de-
vice. Opening his briefcase, he withdrew the circuit tracer and 
located the triddy tank lead-ins, following them down. The 
traces led into a panel on the floor; Trent got down on his knees 
and yanked the panel open, revealing a mass of logic and mem-
ory circuits unlike anything he had ever seen before. He recog-
nized various components, but half of the logic and most of the 
chipglue was custom. One flat plastic plug sat toward the bot-
tom of the array of exposed circuitry; Trent pulled the plug free 
and exposed a standard optical handheld jack. 
Trent plugged his handheld in and climbed back into the left-
hand seat. 
Colonel Webster watched this wordlessly. When Trent was 
finished, he burst out, “How can you be doing this?” 

176  Tales 
“I don’t know.” 
“I can’t let you do this.” 
“You can’t stop me.” 
“But” 
Trent turned and looked the man square in the face. “Colo-
nel, you’re wasting my time, and I don’t have a lot. You’re old 
and you don’t have a weapon.” Trent paused. “Do you?” 
“Well, no, but” 
“You don’t have a weapon,” Trent said conclusively. “I’m 
stronger than you are, smarter than you are, younger than you 
are, and a hell of a lot more desperate than you are; I know kung 
fu, karate, aikido, shotokan, judo, and lots of other Asian words, 
so would you please shut up?” 
Trent had not raised his voice. The Colonel blinked and shut 
up. 
For approximately the tenth time that day Trent regretted 
Booker’s lack of ability to dig up a traceset for him. Aloud, Trent 
said, “Johnny?” 
There was a brief pause before the words appeared in the 
triddy field. Hi, Boss. 
“Can you hear me?” 
Yep. Can’t find an audio output for this mess. Use the handheld speaker? I’ll 
have to jack the volume all the way up. 
“This is fine, Johnny.” 
Slow damn hardware again, Boss. 
“Sorry, Johnny. Get us out of here and I’ll pour you into the 
finest inskin Credit can buy.” 
There was another pause. So—we made it to the North Bay. Checking 
... not bad, Boss. This sucker has range to take us back to Earth, if we want. 
“How’s the autopilot?” 
Likewise not bad ... the hardware’s relatively new; the program itself’s almost 
fifteen years old. But it’ll get us there. It tells me it’s a McDonnell 1300 autopilot, 
with auxiliary functions as follows: Entertainment capabilities— 
“Cancel, Johnny. Inventory comm systems, weapons, drive 
type and acceleration capabilities. Disengage the airlock.” 
Done. There was a hollow clang as the airlock disconnected. 
This vehicle, Rolls-Royce Yacht 2066, Inventory #312, tells me it’s “unarmed.” 

Moran  177 
 
Communications on all approved radio bands; further equipped for laser commu-
nications. Green “communications” laser, of 4.4 megajoules capacity... 
Trent said, “Mahatma Gandhi!” He turned and stared at 
Colonel Webster. “You have a communications laser on this ship 
for what, talking to Alpha Centauri?” 
“This is a military” 
“Shut up.” 
Drive system is proton-boron fission, non-radiative. It produces a burst top ac-
celeration of 8,800 cepssa, a sustainable top acceleration of 6,200 cepssa. Mag-
netically bottled positrons, used to initiate proton-boron reaction, may be sprayed 
independently of the main engine. 
Trent looked up from the readout in the triddy tank. He 
looked blankly out the viewport for a moment, and then turned 
to study Colonel Webster. With very real horror he said, “Where 
do they get people like you?” 
The old man stared at him. “Where—” 
“Shut up.” Through the fore viewfield Trent could see Luna, 
hanging mid-phase against a background of stars. When he 
looked back down into the triddy tank, a sentence hung there, 
silver text against the ambient blue background. 
Boss, the inventory shows a traceset on board. 
Trent snapped, “Where?” 
Checking ... 
In the triddy tank, a holo of the yacht appeared. The appar-
ent viewpoint entered the airlock, and moved forward into the 
pilot’s cabin. It focused on a spot just behind where Colonel 
Webster sat, and illuminated a section of the bulkhead. Trent 
leaned over Colonel Webster without explanation, located the 
latch to the storage compartment next to Webster’s elbow, and 
popped it open. 
There were half a dozen items inside the storage compart-
ment, ranging from a first aid kit to a repair kit for breached 
pressure suits. Trent tossed items left and right—emergency 
food rations, a water bottle, the first aid kit and a box marked 
“patches,” the traceset— 
He lunged back and snatched the traceset out of midair. 

178  Tales 
It was larger than any traceset Trent had seen in five years; 
the trodes alone, at the ends of a single long curved piece of 
plastisteel that was supposed to snap on around the back of the 
skull, were three and a half centimeters in diameter. The con-
trol, surface mounted on the supporting plastisteel bar, was 
simply a radio frequency selector marked “Band One” through 
“Band Eight.” 
“Johnny, which band?” 
Try Band Four, Boss; that’s the band the hardware here expects to use for di-
agnostics. it’s the widest bandwidth circuit available. 
It was set to Band Three; Trent touched the pressure point 
next to the readout once, licked the trodes and put the traceset 
on. 
Trent closed his eyes to go Inside and heard Colonel Webster 
tensing in the seat next to him. 
Trent said, “Don’t do that.” 
Webster did it anyway, swung the handheld at Trent’s skull. 
Trent did not even open his eyes; with his swollen right hand 
he slapped Webster’s arm away, clenched the hand into a fist, 
and punched in the general direction of Webster’s face. He con-
nected solidly; he was certain that the impact hurt him more 
than it did the Space Force colonel. 
Trent said, “Please don’t do that.” 
He went Inside. 
JOHNNY JOHNNY came alive. 
The part of him that was Image had time to marvel, briefly, 
as they coalesced together, at how a fast and simple optical 
transputer could combine with a slow and complex salt-water 
based protein soup to produce something far greater than the 
sum of its parts. 
The part of him that was Trent was far too slow to be aware 
of the process of joining as anything but instantaneous. 
The brief moment passed and Johnny Johnny went down into 
the Rolls-Royce’s control circuitry. 
Looking out through the ship navigation holocams, Johnny 
Johnny located the other vehicles moored at the North Bay. The 

Moran  179 
 
ship that he was in was the only one of its type; the rest of the 
vehicles were slipships, single-occupant military vehicles de-
signed to be flown by PKF Elite, with twice the yacht’s accelera-
tion and maneuverability, three times its firepower. The Rolls’ 
autopilot informed Johnny Johnny that they were powered by 
microfusion engines running off monatomic hydrogen; at Johnny 
Johnny’s request the autopilot dug up schematics for the ships. 
Five slipships clustered near one another; Johnny Johnny 
turned the yacht over on attitude rockets and pulled away from 
the launching bay, out into space. He centered the 4.4 megajoule 
“communications” laser about two-thirds of the way down on one 
of the slipships, where the schematics showed the monatomic 
hydrogen tank, and pulsed the laser once. 
The North Bay exploded. 
Monatomic hydrogen under immense pressure swept out 
from the damaged slipship in a great wash of flame, mixing with 
the liquid oxygen from the lifesystems. Like a living thing the 
flame ripped into the nearby slipships, tearing through hull-
metal as though it were plastipaper. 
It was too fast for the human eye to catch; Johnny Johnny 
sat and watched in calm amazement through the ship holocams 
as the disaster unfolded. The portion of Johnny Johnny that was 
Trent had the fleeting thought that he was going to be sick, 
thinking about Melissa du Bois, trapped just the other side of 
the airlocks. The chain reaction, as one slipship after another 
added its supply of oxygen and single-H to the conflagration, 
was awesome. The flame touched a chain of refueling tanks near 
the edge of the Bay; the resulting majestic explosion reached out 
arms of flame to touch the yacht, sent the Rolls-Royce tumbling 
out into space. 
Nearly a minute passed while Johnny Johnny fought to re-
gain control of the yacht. When he had finally corrected the 
tumbling and the modest velocity the explosion had imparted 
the yacht, they hung in space some three hundred meters away 
from the North Bay. 

180  Tales 
Beside him, Trent heard Colonel Webster murmuring a 
prayer:  “—shall become in him a fountain of water, springing 
up unto life everlasting. Receive their souls, Lord. Amen.” 
Amazingly, when the flame cleared, the flight bay was still 
pressurized. 
Trent felt a surge of elation; once again he had probably suc-
ceeded in not killing somebody. Melissa was probably still alive 
inside. He turned to Colonel Webster. “Woohoo! Do you see 
that?” 
“That’s a miracle,” said Colonel Webster. 
Trent detached himself slightly from Johnny Johnny, shook 
his head. “No, it’s engineering.” 
Colonel Webster did not even look at him. His eyes were 
fixed on the destruction Trent had caused. 
“I bet they designed the flight bay to withstand this sort of 
thing. The PKF,” Trent explained to the Colonel, “is terribly 
damn insecure.” 
Space Force Colonel Webster said, “Really.” 
“Really.” He thought about it. “I’m not sure why.” 
TRENT ENVISIONED chaos inside of Spacebase One, as thousands 
of Peaceforcers were roused from sleep by either the shock of the 
explosion or by other Peaceforcers. 
Trent envisioned turning the yacht around and fleeing to-
ward Luna. 
Trent envisioned being shot down by the Peaceforcers before 
he was halfway there. 
“What to do,” Trent muttered, “what to do.” 
“I would suggest surrendering yourself,” said Colonel Web-
ster stiffly. 
“I’m not talking to you,” said Trent. He went back Inside. 

Moran  181 
 
AIMING AT THE missile launch window, which also contained, 
withdrawn into protective bunkers at the moment, particle 
beam weapons and laser cannon, preparing to fire into the 
launch window at random until something either exploded or 
shot back, Johnny Johnny paused. 
What would it take, Johnny Johnny wondered, to detonate a 
nuclear warhead? Would a 4.4 megajoule laser do it? 
Were there even nuclear-tipped missiles inside? 
As far as Johnny Johnny was concerned, L-5 was wasted on 
Spacebase One, and just as well cleared for use for something 
else; but there were people inside. 
Under his breath, Trent said aloud, “What to do, what to do.” 
Trent didn’t want to kill anyone, not even Peaceforcers who 
deserved it. 
“Damn, damn, damn,” he said, “what to do, what to do.” 
Nothing was occurring to him. 
Something occurred to him. 
Aloud, Trent marveled, “Boy, that’s a stupid idea.” 
“What?” asked Colonel Webster. 
“Still,” said Trent, turning to look earnestly into Colonel 
Webster’s eyes, “they can only kill me once.” 
The old man nodded uncertainly. “Yes.” 
“I’m sorry,” said Trent, “but I don’t have my squirt gun any 
more. Can I have your handheld?” 
Webster gave Trent his handheld. “You can’t,” he said softly, 
“really think you’re going to get away with kidnapping an officer 
of the United Nations Space Force.” 
“Oh, I’m going to give you back,” Trent assured the man. “I 
am sorry,” he repeated, “that I don’t have my squirt gun any-
more.” 
Colonel Webster looked away from Trent for a moment, and 
then looked back. “Why are you sorry?” he asked quietly. 
Trent grinned at the man. “It was filled,” Trent explained, 
“with Complex 8-A. You know, fadeaway.” 
Colonel Webster simply looked at him without comprehen-
sion. 
“Don’t you get it?” 

182  Tales 
Colonel Webster shook his head. “No.” 
“I could shoot you with it and say, ‘Old soldiers never die, 
they simply fadeaway.’” 
Colonel Webster didn’t laugh. 
Trent’s smile vanished. “Your problem,” he said, “is you have 
no sense of humor.” Holding Colonel Webster’s handheld in his 
unhurt left hand, he struck the man in the side of the head. The 
movement sent a spasm of pain through his ribs. 
Colonel Webster simply blinked, so Trent struck him again, 
harder, and Webster lolled freely in his seat. 
WITH SKILL A professional pilot might have admired, Johnny 
Johnny brought the yacht within meters of the launch window 
before the Rolls’ momentum with regard to the central cylinder 
of Spacebase One was canceled. 
Shedding the traceset, Trent unstrapped himself from his 
seat. Ignoring the pain movement caused him, he opened his 
briefcase and withdrew the reel of monofilament. He donned the 
pressure suit’s right glove, closing the airseal with his left hand. 
He had to take off the traceset before he could get the helmet on. 
Reaching over his shoulder, again with his left hand, he pulled 
on the helmet and sealed the neck’s locking ring. Trent wiggled 
his left hand into the glove hooked to his hip. Without expres-
sion, he used his broken right hand to close the airseal on the 
glove. 
Standing in the airlock, Trent leaped five meters over to the 
missile launch window. Unreeling the fineline, he located the 
laser cannon and particle projectors and began weaving a web of 
fineline over their tracking mirrors, not tightly, but firmly 
enough so that if anyone tried to move either the weapons or 
their aiming mirrors, the restraining monofilament would slice 
them into small pieces. 
Trying not to think of what would happen to him if anybody 
fired a missile while he was actually standing in the launch win-
dow, Trent proceeded to do the same thing with each of the four 
clusters of missiles. 
He had far more fineline than he needed to do the job. 

Moran  183 
 
When he was finished, Trent went to the edge of the launch 
window, and looked at the stars. 
It’s the tourist in me, Booker; I’ve always wanted to see Luna. 
The Earth hung over Trent’s head; Luna was off to Trent’s 
right. There was a tiny bright spot, off past Luna, that was Al-
mundsen Military Base at L-4, and another, somewhat fuzzier 
bright spot, just to one side of Earth, that was Halfway, the 
massive industrial zero-gee factory park that circled Earth in 
Clarke orbit. 
The stars were even brighter than they had been in the holo 
on the wall of the Flandry. 
It was all quite lovely. 
The remark to Booker had been, at best, only half a joke. 
Trent sighed, and returned to the yacht. 
THE PROTON-BORON engine fired at just better than two gravi-
ties, on a trajectory to the far side of Luna. 
Trent struggled to breathe. With each breath a lance of fire 
crawled down his right side. 
In the seat next to him Trent had bound Colonel Webster’s 
arms at his sides, using a snakechain from the airlock. Colonel 
Webster’s helmet was clamped shut; Trent had done that, too. 
The man wouldn’t shut up, and Trent didn’t want to hit him 
again. 
AT FIRST TRENT was not sure what had changed. 
Then the beeping sound penetrated his consciousness. 
Through the traceset, Trent said, Johnny. 
Incoming call, Boss. Judging from the intensity of the signal, it’s a wide-beam 
maser from Spacebase One; they don’t actually have a tight beam on us. 
If I answer it, can you alter my voice print without them being aware of it? 
On this hardware ... there’ll be a delay of about a hundred thirty million nano-
seconds, Boss. 
Eighth of a second? Good enough. 
“Hi,” said Trent. “Hi there.” Moving slowly under the two 
thousand cepssa, carefully, muscles aching, Trent unstrapped 
from his seat and pulled Webster’s helmet off. He checked the 

184  Tales 
man’s respiration and heartbeat; although the man was still un-
conscious, both eyes dilated equally when exposed to light. 
A deep, hard voice, like speaking stone, said, “Trent.” 
“That’s a good guess,” said Trent. “Who am I speaking to?” 
“Commissionaire Mohammed Vance, PKF Elite.” 
“Oh?” Trent remembered being told by Rogèr Colbert that the 
quarantine of the Flandry would last only three hours; it meant 
that Vance must still be in the pursuit ship, and had not actu-
ally arrived at L-5 yet. 
Belatedly, on general principles, Trent instructed Johnny 
Johnny to beam the conversation to Almundsen Military Base at 
L-4. “I know you,” Trent said to Vance. “I stole your dossier the 
other day.” 
“I know,” the voice rumbled. “I paid the Syndic for holo-
graphs of you yesterday evening. Apparently I’ve also paid for 
your passage aboard the Flandry, your cab fare, and a phone call 
to a number I haven’t been able to trace.” 
“It’s not there.” 
“Excuse me?” 
“The number doesn’t go to the number it goes to.” 
A chuckle. “As you say.” 
It was twenty-four minutes before the yacht would enter Lu-
nar orbit, twenty-six before it would be beyond line of sight to L-
5. “Hey, Vance,” said Trent, “where did I screw up?” 
“A bit too much flashiness, Trent. It’s a common mistake 
among the young. You shouldn’t have stolen the Unification 
Councilor’s car.” 
“I was late,” Trent muttered. 
“He called it in; I had tags out for anything involving that 
sort of, shall we say, casual theft. DataWatch did a bit of scout-
ing around, and you’ll understand, it was the work of a moment 
for me to realize that the Mohammed Vance who boarded the 
Flandry was not myself.” 
“Thanks, Vance. I was curious. What now?” 
“I presume you are not interested in surrendering yourself 
for trial and subsequent execution?” 
“Gosh but you’re a smart Peaceforcer.” 

Moran  185 
 
“I thought not. Well, then, we can spend the next ... seven-
teen minutes and fifteen seconds or so discussing psychology, 
negotiating, what-have-you. Seventeen minutes, now, is the time 
I have left before I must send the missiles to destroy you. I’d 
have preferred to simply destroy your craft’s drive with laser 
cannon, but I’m informed that the aiming mirrors are no longer 
responding.” 
Trent said, “Psychology?” 
“The relationship between the hunted and the hunter. It fas-
cinates me.” 
“I bet.” 
“Let me give you an example. Having studied all of the data 
I’ve been able to accumulate about you, I’ve made a small wager 
with myself. As I see it, Trent, you have two alternatives, and I 
believe I know which one you will choose.” 
Two alternatives was at least one alternative more than 
Trent could think of. “Two alternatives?” 
“The first,” said Vance, “is to take Colonel Webster down to 
the airlock, seal his suit, activate his beacon, and push him 
away from the shuttle, so that he’ll have a chance of surviving 
when we destroy the ship.” 
Trent glanced at Webster, tied in the seat next to him; the 
man was twitching slightly in his seat, as though he were 
straining, through his pressure suit, against the bonds that held 
him in place. “And the other alternative?” 
“Keep him with you, and drag him to your death with you.” 
“Oh. This is a subtle way of letting me know he’s of no use to 
me as a hostage, is it?” 
“Would you prefer I be plainer?” 
“No. No, really. Which way are you betting?” 
“I think,” said Vance, “that you’ll let him live. Your behavior 
throughout this event has been most interesting.” 
“Thank you,” said Trent after a moment. “How do you turn 
on the beacon?” 
“It’s a small, bright red button,” the deep voice said quietly, 
“on both the inner and outer surfaces of the helmet’s collar.” 

186  Tales 
Trent located the button immediately. “Press it once and then 
don’t press it again.” 
“Okay. Thanks again.” 
“You are quite welcome, Trent.” 
“By the way, Commissioner. There are two things you do not 
know.” 
“What might those be, Trent?” 
“Well, the first one is that I’ve been beaming this conversa-
tion to Almundsen Space Force Base at L-4.” 
There was silence at the other end of the maser beam. Five 
minutes gone by; by Vance’s reckoning, there would be about 
twelve minutes left in which he could still destroy Trent. 
Vance said slowly, “You’re bluffing.” 
Trent said, “Wanna bet?” 
There was no response from Vance’s end. 
“Call them, ask,” Trent said. “Better yet, wait; they’ll call 
you.” 
Trent broke the connection and took off the traceset. 
“Johnny,” he said aloud, “cut the acceleration, please.” He un-
strapped himself again as the rockets died, unstrapped the colo-
nel, and in drop dragged Colonel Webster back to the airlock. 
Standing in the airlock, Trent checked Webster as thoroughly 
as he could from the outside; seven hours of air, the vampire 
gauge on the man’s earlobe showing sufficient oxygenation of 
the bloodstream. Webster was shouting something at Trent; 
Trent could barely hear his voice through the man’s helmet. 
Trent sealed his own helmet again, closed the inner airlock 
door and touched the pressure point to begin evacuation. He 
chinned the radio bar on the right hand side of his helmet. 
“Colonel Webster?” 
A blast of noise hit him the second he released the chin pad; 
Webster, screaming, shouting obscenities at Trent. 
Trent shouted, “Shut up!” 
The airlock status light went bright red; Colonel Webster, 
rather to Trent’s surprise, shut up. “Look,” said Trent, “I’m go-
ing to push you out into space and the Peaceforcers are going to 

Moran  187 
 
come get you after they blow me up. Okay? I’m throwing you 
away so you’ll be safe.” 
The man’s eyes were wide inside the helmet. His voice quiv-
ered. “You’re throwing me away?” 
“So you’ll be safe,” Trent assured him. “Try to look on it as an 
Experience, like something Winnie the Pooh might get involved 
in; Floating in Space while Awaiting Rescue. Like that.” 
“Winnie the what?” 
For a solid two seconds Trent had no idea what to say. “You 
don’t know who Winnie the Pooh is?” 
Colonel Webster whispered, “No.” 
Trent said, “Oh, my.” Before opening the outer airlock door, 
Trent secured himself to the airlock bulkhead with the snake-
chain that he had bound Webster’s arms with. There were a row 
of six such snakechains in the airlock. Why six, in a ship whose 
maximum occupancy was two, Trent had no idea. He suspected 
that it had something to do with multiple redundancy; an un-
derstandable fetish in an organization as multiply redundant as 
Space Force. 
Trent opened the outer airlock door then, and kicked the 
pressure-suited body of Colonel Webster as hard as he could. 
Trent chinned the radio bar. “Good-bye, Colonel Webster,” said 
Trent aloud. “I hope you make it.” 
As an afterthought he added, “You poor, desperate fool.” He 
clicked off the radio. “Winnie the what indeed,” he muttered, cy-
cling back through the airlock. He returned to the pilot’s seat 
and strapped himself in again. He spent several moments enjoy-
ing the feeling of being able to breathe, and then said aloud, 
“Bring acceleration back up, Johnny.” 
Nothing happened. 
Trent chinned the radio bar. “Johnny? Can you hear me?” 
The voice was tinny. “Hi, Boss.” 
“Kick it back in, Johnny. Let’s go.” The pain flared along his 
right side as he was slammed back into his seat. 
There were approximately six minutes left before, by Vance’s 
stated calculations, he would be unable to blow up Trent. 
“Hello?” said Trent. 

188  Tales 
Nobody answered him. 
“Hello hello. Hi there. Is anyone out there?” 
“Your pardon, Trent,” came Vance’s rumble a few seconds 
later. “I’ve been having a slight difficulty with Space Force. I’m 
curious as to why you beamed our conversation to Almundsen, 
especially as the telescope I’m watching you with shows you’ve 
just jettisoned your hostage.” 
“What makes you think I jettisoned the hostage?” Trent 
asked. “Maybe I just tossed a pressure suit out the airlock.” 
“Let me talk to Colonel Webster,” said Vance immediately. 
“He’s asleep,” Trent said instantly. 
“I didn’t think so,” said Vance. “Why did you beam our con-
versation to L-4, Trent? Was it simply to gain time?” 
Trent had done it simply to gain time; clearly it had not 
worked. “Confuse the enemy,” said Trent, “divide and conquer.” 
“I think you did it to gain time,” said Vance. “What was the 
other thing you thought I did not know?” 
“Elite Commissioner Mohammed Vance,” said Trent softly, 
“you are entirely too intelligent for my peace of mind.” 
“And you don’t sound nearly desperate enough for mine. 
What have you done, Trent?” 
Trent said, “I’ll tell you in a minute.” 
“I am tempted to fire on you immediately.” 
“It would be a mistake.” 
“Unless you can give me a reason why I should not, I am go-
ing to fire upon you immediately.” 
“Okay, okay. Listen closely.” In detail, Trent described what 
he had done to Spacebase One’s missiles and energy weapons. 
“So of course the mirrors are shot. Same for the missiles; fire one 
if you don’t believe me. The instant it starts to move you don’t 
have a missile any more, just pieces of missile tangled up in 
fineline. Some of the pieces will have fuel in them.” Trent 
paused. “Boom. A big one, I think.” 
When he was finished, Vance was silent for a long stretch. 
He broke it with the words, “I must assume you are bluffing. I 
do not have time to get an officer in there to check it out.” 

Moran  189 
 
“That was the idea. But you do have time to pull your Peace-
forcers out of the north end of Spacebase One before firing.” 
“This is likely,” said Vance deliberately, “simply another ploy 
on your part to gain time.” 
The slight enjoyment that Trent had been feeling vanished. 
“Vance, I’m telling the truth.” 
Mohammed Vance did not reply in words. 
On the rear holocams, displayed in the holograph floating be-
fore Trent’s eyes, Trent saw the north end of Spacebase One’s 
central cylinder unfold in silent, brilliant light. 
Trent could not imagine such a catastrophe not killing some-
body, somewhere. 
After the briefest of pauses Vance said, “I see you were tell-
ing the truth.” 
“Oh my god.” Trent could not find words. “Evil. You are an 
evil son of a bitch, Vance.” 
“I am an officer of the PKF.” 
“—that’s what I said.” Trent stared at the image, at the 
slowly expanding wavefront of the explosion. “How could you do 
that?” 
“I gave an order.” 
Johnny Johnny said quietly in Trent’s ear, “Boss?” 
“Yeah, Johnny?” 
“Better put the traceset back on, Boss. I need you.” 
Trent ripped his helmet off and pulled the traceset on. He 
melted into Johnny Johnny. 
A missile was chasing him. 
JOHNNY JOHNNY thought, How can I play the game when they 
keep changing the rules on me? 
The missile showed clearly on radar. Zooming the holocams 
to their highest resolution, Johnny Johnny could barely discern 
the faint spark of the approaching missile’s exhaust, violet 
against black. 
Thinking calmly, This isn’t happening, Johnny Johnny 
turned the “communications” laser on the approaching missile. 
It had no immediate effect; in a tight beam the laser was not 

190  Tales 
highly accurate at such distances against something moving at 
high speeds. The missile itself took evasive action, varying boost 
irregularly as it chased the yacht. 
Locating Colonel Webster with the radar to insure that he 
was far enough away, Johnny Johnny sprayed the space back 
along his trajectory with free positrons. It was his second and 
last line of defense. If the laser didn’t get the missile first, the 
cloud of positrons undoubtedly would. 
The explosion that would result when that happened would, 
Johnny Johnny was almost certain, kill both of him. 
Johnny Johnny examined the situation for a few moments 
longer. There was nothing else he could think of to do. He pro-
grammed the autopilot for the yacht’s full acceleration of 8,800 
cepssa, beginning in twenty seconds and running until twenty 
seconds after the estimated time of the missile’s impact. 
Johnny Johnny hesitated a moment, then split himself back 
into his components; Trent stripped the traceset off quickly, and 
refastened his helmet against the death pressure vacuum he 
was anticipating shortly. 
He had just finished when a small mountain fell on him. 
The first second of just under nine gravities acceleration was 
all right. 
The next was worse. 
The third was exquisitely unpleasant. 
The fourth was the worst agony Trent had ever experienced. 
The right side of his rib cage felt like it was caving in. 
And then it got really bad. 
THE LASER NEVER touched the hurtling missile. 
At sixteen seconds before estimated impact with Trent’s sto-
len yacht, the missile struck the cloud of positrons, already glow-
ing from interaction with the solar wind. 
Trent, the world narrowed down to his fight for breath, knew 
none of this. 
Suddenly there was light, heat— 
—and grinning, with feral red eyes and wet sharp teeth, 
there was pain. 

Moran  191 
 
MAY 9, 2062. 
Carl Castanaveras left the lighted tunnel and went out into 
the dusk. Night was falling as he entered the grounds of the 
park, and the huge transplanted trees about which the garden 
was designed were heavy with shadow, shifting and impenetra-
ble. He reached with the Sight and was stunned by how strongly 
the grief struck him when he lowered his guards. The boy was 
sitting high in the branches of the tallest tree in the park, 
watching the sunset. The sky was clear that night, and it was 
colder than a summer of Carl’s childhood could ever have been. 
Carl spoke without sound. Trent, come down. 
There was a visible flicker of movement at the top of the tree, 
and a rustling sound as leaves were displaced. Trent vanished 
into the denser growth around the center of the tree, and while 
Carl was still looking up, the boy who was not, after all, a tele-
path, appeared in the lower branches, paused, hung by his 
hands, and dropped two meters to the ground. He landed crouch-
ing, and straightened slowly. “Hi.” 
Carl blinked. “Hi.” Trent was barefoot, wearing old jeans and 
a green shirt that could not possibly be keeping him warm. Carl 
felt almost alien in comparison; he was still dressed formally, in 
the black suit, and the blue-inlaid black cloak for warmth. He 
gestured back toward the lighted Complex. “I was just in with 
Suzanne. She said—” 
Trent nodded. “Yes.” 
“I’m sorry, Trent. I ... don’t know what else to say.” 
“Me too.” Trent paused. “Me neither. This has been such a 
bad day,” he said conversationally. “I can’t believe it.” 
Now, standing there faced with the boy, Carl had difficulty 
finding words. “How can I help?” 
“I’ve been thinking about that.” Trent shivered, perhaps from 
the cold. “I have to leave.” 
“I ... don’t understand.” 
“I have to leave here. Doctor Montignet will take me, I 
think.” 
“Leave?” said Carl stupidly. “The Complex?” 
Trent said simply, “Yes.” 

192  Tales 
“Why?” 
“I’m not a telepath. I don’t want to live with telepaths.” In 
the darkness Carl was not certain of his expression. “I can’t.” 
“Trent, why?” 
Trent said slowly, “Father ... I think the day will come when 
you—when telepaths—will be normal, and the rest of us will be 
out in the cold because we can’t compete. For most people it’s go-
ing to be a while before that happens....” He averted his face and 
did not look at Carl. With a sort of amazement Carl saw a smile 
touch his lips. The almost insane grief never ceased for an in-
stant, and the boy made his lips move in a smile. “You don’t 
breed that fast.” The smile faded to dead seriousness. “But if I 
stay here that happens to me now.” He turned and looked 
straight at Carl, eyes pooled in shadow. “I’ve been webdancing 
in Capitol City’s InfoNet. They don’t touch me, you know. When 
I get an inskin, I don’t think there’s anybody on Earth who can 
touch me.” Trent gestured toward the Complex, just visible 
above the fence around the park, looming white under its flood-
lights. “If I stay here I’m nothing. I love you all but I do not 
choose to be nothing.” 
Carl shook his head slowly. “Trent, that’s crazy. Malko lives 
here with us.” 
“Malko has experience and knowledge and connections that 
make him valuable.” The boy shrugged. “I’m a Pla—a web-
dancer. Father, there are lots of webdancers.” 
It stunned Carl, how helpless an eleven-year old boy could 
make him feel. He touched the boy with his mind and went reel-
ing back again from the numbing hurt. He reached with one 
hand toward the boy and was startled to see Trent draw back. 
Trent said flatly, “Don’t touch me.” 
Carl stared at him. He said helplessly, “Trent?” 
“I don’t belong here.” Carl was shaking his head no, not in 
negation but in pained disbelief, and Trent said softly, “Let me 
go.” 
And Carl Castanaveras, for a brief, time-wrenching moment, 
saw the future twisting itself about his son, and heard his voice 

Moran  193 
 
say with the hollow echo of prophecy, “I think you are right. You 
do not belong here. I think you will never belong anywhere.” 
TRENT WAS NOT even a telepath, but there was no one at the 
Complex who slept that night without Trent’s broadcast pain 
twisting their dreams into nightmares. 
That was how it came to be, when a staged riot broke out at 
the Complex on June the second, 2063, that Trent was not there. 
That was how it came to be that when the riot grew into war be-
tween the telepaths and the Peaceforcers who were sent in to 
“restore order,” Trent was not there. That was how it came to be, 
that when a young Peaceforcer named Mohammed Vance or-
dered the use of tactical thermonuclear weapons on the tele-
paths—the telepaths who had held off the massed might of the 
United Nations Peace Keeping Force with nothing but their 
Gift—that was how it came to be that Trent was not with them. 
Seven years later, the only nightmares that Trent had ever 
had concerned the day he found out that his people had been de-
stroyed and that he, of his own choice, had not been with them. 
The image from his nightmares was curiously sharp: a mis-
sile that should not have been there, dropping from the sky, ex-
panding in heat and light.... 
AT NO TIME had Trent been totally unconscious. 
Behind the polarized glassite of the pressure suit’s helmet, 
Trent’s face was white with pain. Everything that he looked at 
looked back at him in double image. 
The Rolls was crossing over the far side of Luna on a high 
trajectory, moving far too fast due to the extreme acceleration 
Trent had been forced to employ to escape the missile that 
should not have been there. 
Trent’s voice was a trembling croak. “Johnny?” 
The tinny voice came immediately. “Hi, Boss.” 
“We’re alive again.” 
“No, still. But we’ve got problems.” 
“I can see, Johnny.” 
“We’ve lost structural integrity, Boss.” 

194  Tales 
“I can see, Johnny.” 
The ship’s hull had been half torn away in the blast. 
Bizarrely, the major section of the detached hull floated not 
forty meters from the yacht, traveling along almost exactly the 
same trajectory, tumbling slowly. What had been the outer por-
tion of the hull was partially melted. 
Trent said, “How bad is it, Johnny?” He listened for nearly 
thirty seconds, and then said, “Cancel the damage report. What 
works?” 
“Engine is in pretty good shape, Boss. Life-system, communi-
cations maser, and the autopilot are all still functioning, though 
I’ve lost access to some of the data the autopilot’s carrying, and 
some of the rest got scrambled by the EMP from the blast.” 
Johnny Johnny paused. “The lack of a hull,” he noted, “tends to 
obviate the need for a functioning life-system.” 
“Johnny, don’t make jokes when things are this bad.” 
“You do it all the time, Boss.” 
“I’m allowed. Is there any chance you can land this bitch?” 
There was a pause. “The autopilot says, given our relative ve-
locity to the Lunar surface, and the absence of our number three 
landing strut, a soft touchdown attempt is inadvisable.” 
“We don’t have a landing strut?” 
“Number one landing strut has been weakened significantly. 
Number two is tentatively rated in good condition; number three 
is gone. Boss?” 
“Yeah, Johnny?” 
“Are we going to die, Boss?” 
“Probably, Johnny.” 
“Oh.” Trent’s Image was silent for a long moment. “Boss, I’ve 
enjoyed working for you.” 
Lying in the dark pain-filled haze, Trent could not for the life 
of him remember having written code that could have come up 
with a response like that. My Image, he thought, is not going to 
make me cry. He said quietly, “Thanks, Johnny Johnny. Take us 
down.” 
“I’ll do my best, Boss.” 
“I know.” 

Moran  195 
 
THE ROLLS LOST height rapidly, the rockets firing almost parallel 
to the Lunar surface. They swept over Lunar farside in minutes, 
losing both altitude and speed, the proton-boron reactor burning 
to produce just better than 4000 cepssa. The ship reached near-
side well north of the equator, over twenty degrees latitude. It 
flashed past Schiaparelli and Aristarchus in the Sea of Storms, 
moving slightly northeast, and passed some eighteen degrees 
north of Luna City at Copernicus. The ship had less than a 
kilometer of altitude when it crossed the thirtieth degree lati-
tude. It cut over the north corner of Archimedes Crater, drop-
ping ever lower, past the southern end of Aristillus. 
Johnny Johnny said, “Boss, how large do mountain chains 
get on Earth? Pretty big?” 
Trent could not even reply. He fought for air. In the holofield 
hovering above his face he saw the mountain range come up to 
greet them. 
“My map says this is the Caucasus mountain range, Boss. 
Checking on radar ... and we’re not going to make it over the 
peaks,” said Johnny Johnny precisely. “Sorry about this, Boss. 
I’ll try not to kill you.” 
The drive exploded up to eighty-eight hundred cepssa. 
Trent tried to scream, but there was no air in his lungs. 
The mountain chain continued to grow in the yacht’s front 
holocams, but more slowly now. 
As Trent was blacking out, Johnny Johnny crashed the 
yacht. The ship bounced once off the side of a peak, still slowing, 
and then Johnny Johnny smashed the yacht down onto a wide, 
flat ledge, high up on the mountain. He cut the drives as they 
touched, and the craft rolled once, twice, and finally stopped, ly-
ing upside down at the edge of the rock abutment. 
Hanging upside down strapped in his seat was, Trent found, 
a wonderful position under one-sixth gravity. 
It was practically as good as free fall. 
Unconsciousness claimed him. 

196  Tales 
SOME TIME LATER—Trent estimated it at between fifteen seconds 
and eternity—his eyes fluttered open again. 
It was probably a blessing that the right side of his rib cage 
was without feeling. 
A voice yammered in his ear. Trent could not make out what-
ever it was saying. 
With intense concentration Trent managed to undo the 
straps that held him in place in the upside-down pilot’s seat. 
In gentle slow motion Trent fell a meter to the yacht’s ceiling. 
He stood slowly, reached up and carefully withdrew his hand-
held from where it was jacked in on the floor above his head. 
The voice in his ears ceased abruptly. With grave concentration, 
he reached up again and pulled his briefcase out from its storage 
place above the upside-down pilot’s chair. 
It took him most of a minute to get the briefcase open, and 
put the handheld inside it. 
He congratulated himself on successfully closing his brief-
case. 
Trent’s voice echoed oddly in his ears. “I’m still alive again.” 
He stepped into the passageway that led to the airlock. 
With the shifting of the distribution of mass, the yacht began 
sliding off the rock ledge, down toward the surface. An out-
jutting spar, a hundred meters down from the ledge, broke the 
yacht into two major halves, and the two pieces continued their 
tumble, a quarter of a kilometer down the mountainside. 
TRENT COULD NOT remember how he had come to be in this 
place. 
He walked in a pressure suit along the foothills of a vast 
mountain chain, stumbling frequently. His briefcase was 
clutched in his left hand; the pressure suit’s glove barely fit 
through the briefcase’s handle. He was eight meters tall and 
there was a hell of a wind coming from somewhere; it kept 
knocking him down. 
He fell, again and again. Each time he got back up and 
walked on, without a destination in mind. 

Moran  197 
 
The world around him was strange, all gray and white; the 
shadows were very sharply defined, and completely black. 
The sky was without color, and both the stars and sun were 
in it at the same time. 
It was very hot inside the pressure suit. 
His knee hurt. 
Something about his surroundings nagged at Trent, but he 
was unable to decide what it was. 
Finally he fell, and did not rise again. 

    
 
The Wall 
2069 - 2070 
 
 
No miracle has ever taken place under 
conditions which science can accept. 
Experience shows, without exception, 
that miracles occur only in times and in 
countries in which miracles are be-
lieved in, and in the presence of persons 
who are disposed to believe in them. 
 
—Ernest Renan 
Vie de Jésus, 1863 Gregorian 

    
 
15. 
TRENT WAS THIRSTY. 
That was the first thing he noticed. 
Aside from being thirsty, Trent felt fine. 
Some time later Trent realized that aside from being thirsty 
he didn’t feel anything. 
His eyes were still closed, and Trent knew there was some 
very good reason why he should not open them. 
Trent opened his left eye. 
He closed it, and opened his right eye. 
He let that eye droop shut, and then, cautiously, opened both 
eyes at once. 
Each time he saw the same thing. 
He was lying on something soft, on the floor of the strangest 
room he had ever seen in his life. The ceiling was lit with soft 
yellow sunpaint, that was normal enough; there were four walls, 
and a doorway without a door in it. 
The decor was ... odd. 
The walls were cut from some sort of stone, and two of the 
three walls that Trent could see had been smoothed and pol-
ished. The third wall was in the process of being smoothed; it 
was simply rough cut stone over nearly a third of its surface. 
There was furniture in the room: one webchair, a small table 
of unpainted steel. They appeared strictly utilitarian, except for 
their odd delicacy; they could not, Trent thought, support any 
weight to speak of. Perhaps, he speculated shrewdly, the furni-
ture was not designed for use by adults, but rather by, say, very 
tall, skinny children—or, thought Trent, pleased with his own 
cleverness, by elves. 
Yes, elves. 
As in many fairy tales, there was a monster in this one. It 
walked in as Trent was speculating about the furniture, carry-
ing Trent’s briefcase in one hand. It was large and bulky, ugly to 
a truly remarkable degree. It had a single huge, dark eye, and a 
large horny antenna growing out of its forehead. 

200  Tales 
Through a dry throat, Trent said, “You are the second ugliest 
thing I have ever seen in my life.” He focused blurry eyes on the 
monster. “You are not as hairy as Booker Jamethon.” 
The monster proceeded to pull its head off, and hang the de-
tached head on a hook growing out of the wall. It seemed that 
the monster had swallowed a hugely muscled, dark-skinned 
male human, fifty or sixty years of age, with wiry, steel gray 
hair. The man was not, thought Trent, what one would expect to 
find inside a monster. 
Trent suddenly remembered where he was. “Ah,” he said rea-
sonably, “I knew there was a good reason not to open my eyes.” 
The man in the pressure suit looked at Trent. “Indeed?” He 
was unzipping the pressure suit, wriggling out of it. “I’ve often 
thought that myself, opening my eyes in the morning. What a 
lovely day it is, I’ll think, and then I get out of bed and it’s ru-
ined.” With his pressure suit off he no longer looked like the sec-
ond ugliest thing Trent had ever seen. He did not spit on the 
floor even once while Trent was watching. “But by the time I 
know just how bad the mistake was it’s usually too damn late to 
go back to bed.” Pulling the chair over to where Trent was lying 
propped up against the wall, the man seated himself. “How do 
you feel?” 
“Numb.” Trent studied the man. Distinctly AmerIndian fea-
tures, a compact frame; strong hands. “You don’t look like a 
Peaceforcer.” 
The man blinked. “I should hope not.” 
Trent nodded. “Okay.” Alive, apparently not in custody.… 
“What day is it? What time is it?” 
“Thursday. About 10:30 P.M. What’s your name, son?” 
“Trent. Trent the thief. Where am I?” 
“Luna.” 
“That’s not funny.” 
“The fair planet Luna, western foot of the Caucasus moun-
tain chain, United Nations territory, in the bolt hole of a man 
whose name is Nathan Dark Clouds.” The man whose name was 
Nathan Dark Clouds leaned forward in his webchair, hands on 

Moran  201 
 
knees. “And an odd thing you are, Trent the thief. I have so 
many questions I hardly know where to start.” 
“Wait.” For the first time Trent noticed that he was no longer 
wearing the pressure suit, or the female Peaceforcer’s uniform. 
“I only have a few. Can I ask mine first?” 
Nathan nodded. “Go ahead.” 
“How far am I from Free Luna?” 
“You were headed there?” 
“Yes.” 
The older man nodded again, thoughtfully. “I thought. We’re 
a fair piece from there. The nearest enclave is at the edge of 
Bessel crater, in Serenitatis. Damn near 750 klicks southeast, 
and you have to get up over the Caucasus mountains first. Say, 
two days by crawler.” 
“Okay ... how long ago did I crash?” 
“About eight hours ago. They say that any landing you walk 
away from is a good one, and you walked away from that one, so 
that must have been a good landing.” Nathan shook his head. 
“There’s something wrong with that saying. I saw that landing; I 
was out in my chameleon, heading here, when your ship went 
down. I changed course, found you lying in the sun about an 
hour or so after the crash, picked you up, and headed here.” He 
looked straight at Trent. “That craft, it ran off an antimatter-
initiated reaction?” 
“I don’t know how it works. It was a Rolls-Royce. There were 
bottled positrons.” 
“That was my guess. If I’d had any idea ... well, you’d still be 
lying out there in the sun. We were about eight kilometers from 
the crash site when the containment went on the positrons.” He 
seemed to shiver. “I poked my head outside just before you woke 
up. That whole section of the mountains is still glowing. That 
was a military ship you crashed in.” It was not a question. “You 
don’t need to bottle that much antimatter for anything except a 
weapon.” 
“You must know the Peaceforcers are after me.” 
“I guessed. About four o’clock yesterday, there was a Level 
Four alert down here; restricted travel, check in with the local 

202  Tales 
Peaceforcers, all that crap. I headed out for my bolt hole, figur-
ing to be as safe as possible if the PKF was planning a sweep of 
the undesirables. Among which number am I.” The man 
shrugged. “They should not find us. I sprayed dust all the way 
back from where I picked you up.” 
“Sprayed dust?” 
“No wind, Trent. You lift dust up as you go, spray it over your 
tail where you’ve been. It’s a damn expensive mod to have done 
to a crawler, and using it costs a fair piece too, but if you want to 
assure you don’t get followed it’s a necessity.” 
Trent nodded. “What are you going to do about me?” 
“Well, I wouldn’t turn any man over to the Peaceforcers. 
They killed my wife. Beyond not turning you in, I haven’t 
thought.” 
“Last question.” 
“Yes?” 
“Can I get something to drink? Anything? Lots of anything?” 
Nathan stood. “I think I can manage that. You be getting 
your story ready. I do love a good story.” He vanished through 
the open doorway. 
Trent sat upright more slowly, ignoring the quick sharp pain 
in his ribs. Nathan had taped his ribs, he noted, and splinted 
one finger of Trent’s right hand; the skin of his face was sun-
burned, one cheek was swollen and tender, and there was a ter-
rible pain in his knee again. Trent tried to remember when he 
had re-injured the knee...the memory returned slowly. 
Nathan came back shortly, a pair of squeeze bulbs in one 
hand. He tossed them to Trent, the bulbs performing a strange 
slow tumble as they fell. 
Trent caught them left-handed, without thinking. He stared 
up at Nathan Dark Clouds. “Did I ... fall ... down the mountain?” 
“The ship did. Whether you were in it I have no idea.” 
“Oh, slith.” With his broken hand Trent gingerly touched his 
swollen knee. “I remember....” His voice trailed away. He felt 
himself shaking. “Never mind. Just never mind.” He looked at 
the squeeze bulbs for the first time. “Thanks.” He turned the 

Moran  203 
 
ring on the first bulb—water—sucked it dry and then drank the 
second bulb only slightly more slowly. 
Nathan leaned forward again, hands on knees. He seemed to 
be enjoying himself immensely. “Now, Trent the thief, you’re 
breathing my air and drinking my water. I’ve saved your life 
and bandaged your wounds. Now, tell me if you will, Trent the 
thief, how it is you come to be crashing a military spacecraft 
some few kilometers from my bolt-hole, with a briefcase full of 
sophisticated electronics, wearing a PKF p-suit that says Lieu-
tenant Charbrier, a female Peaceforcer’s uniform, and a pair of 
SpaceFarer boots from the Flandry.” 
“How do you know that?” 
“It’s my turn to” 
“How do you know that?” 
Nathan sighed. “You’re going to be a hard man to get along 
with, Trent the thief. The p-suit says PKF on it, the uniform is 
cut for a girl with tits, and the boots are gray with green thread-
ing. Ugliest damn thing I ever saw.” 
“You recognize SpaceFarer colors?” 
Nathan stared at him. “Trent, lad, you don’t seem to under-
stand the situation here. This is my” 
Trent interrupted. “Okay, don’t get stuffy. Let’s see.” He 
paused. “I was going to steal a spaceship ... no, no, that’s too far 
in. See, there I was in the Down Plaza and....” He stopped. “I’m 
not sure where to start.” 
“The beginning?” the man suggested. 
“You see, there was this Peaceforcer and he wouldn’t listen to 
me,” Trent said earnestly, and then stopped again. “It’s a long 
story.” 
“We have lots of time.” 
“They think I killed a Peaceforcer.” 
Nathan Dark Clouds said mildly, “Trent the thief, other peo-
ple have killed Peaceforcers. None of them triggered a Level 
Three Earth-Luna alert, a Level Four Lunar alert.” 
“Brass balls.” 
“What?” 
“He was a Peaceforcer Elite.” 

204  Tales 
Moving slowly, Nathan turned to face Trent squarely. His 
right eyebrow climbed exactly one centimeter. “What?” 
“It was a mistake.” 
“A mistake.” 
“An accident.” 
“An acc—” 
“He was trying to kill me and he fell.” 
“Fell ...” Nathan repeated. 
“Well, jumped. Off a spacescraper.” Trent shivered, remem-
bering. “It was a really long way down.” 
Nathan’s eyes wandered aimlessly around the room before 
settling on Trent again. “Trent. Trent the thief. Tell me what 
has happened. Start at the beginning. Work your way to the 
end. Take all the time you need.” 
Trent leaned back against the wall behind him. It was rough 
and unpolished. He started off with a reasonably detailed out-
line of the events of the last several days, not mentioning Den-
ice. At first he was not certain that Nathan Dark Clouds was 
listening to him; the man sat quietly through the first telling of 
the story, and only then started asking questions. He started at 
the top of Trent’s story and worked his way down, calmly, with-
out fuss, as though he did not attach any great significance to 
Trent’s answers. 
Nathan Dark Clouds was very, very good. They were nearly 
half an hour into it when Trent realized he was being interro-
gated, forty-five minutes into it when he knew how well it was 
being done. Trent found himself backtracking, answering ques-
tions about subjects he had already lied about, fielding questions 
about other unrelated subjects, re-answering re-phrased ques-
tions he had already lied about twice. Nathan fed him back his 
own answers, subtly distorted, and waited for Trent to correct 
him. Two solid hours passed in the telling and re-telling of the 
story; when Nathan announced himself satisfied with Trent’s 
final version of what had happened to him, Trent was shaking 
with exhaustion. 
Only once in the course of that two-hour interrogation did 
Trent see the man at a loss for words. “There was a waldo wait-

Moran  205 
 
ing for you inside the store? Those damn things are more inde-
structible than an Elite.” 
Trent mumbled an answer. 
Nathan said, “What?” 
“There was a bazooka in the bathroom,” Trent said more 
loudly. 
“Say again?” 
“I think it was a bazooka. I don’t really know a lot about 
weapons.” 
“In the bathroom,” said Nathan without inflection. 
“I only kept it,” said Trent defensively. “It wasn’t even mine. 
It was there when I moved in. I don’t know why.” 
At the end, when Trent was yawning hugely, Nathan stood. 
“Trent, you are just maybe the fastest-thinking young man I’ve 
ever met.” 
“Thank you.” 
“Lying to the man who’s just saved your life,” said Nathan 
Dark Clouds softly, “who’s of half a mind to put you up in death 
pressure in the first place, is probably not wise.” 
Trent could not think of anything to say. 
Nathan said, “Good night, lad.” Without further comment, he 
scaled the sunpaint down to blackness, and left Trent alone. 
In the dark, Trent pulled his briefcase to him, opened it, and 
checked his supplies. He had a curiously naked feeling, and for a 
moment could not decide why. 
Just before sleep claimed him, Trent swore at himself sleep-
ily. “You stupid genejunk. You lost the squirt gun.” 
HE JERKED AWAKE twice, to darkness and panic, to a sensation 
his body insisted on interpreting as falling. Both times Trent 
oriented himself, remembered where he was and why he was 
there, and settled back down on the soft padding to sleep. 
He awoke the third time to a generalized ache. He sat up 
slowly and rested in the darkness against the wall at his back. 
The darkness was incredible. Trent held his hand in front of his 
face and could not see a thing. The lack of sound was nearly as 
absolute; if he strained he could make out the gentle whisper of 

206  Tales 
the ventilators forcing air through the room. He sat motionlessly 
for a while after that, just letting himself acclimate to the ab-
surd feeling of lightness, listening to his body. He hurt literally 
everywhere, in every muscle in his body, as though somebody 
who really knew what he was doing had worked him over. His 
knee was out again; Trent could barely stand to straighten it 
fully. The rib he had broken was bearable so long as he breathed 
shallowly. 
His right hand.... 
“Jesus-H.-Christ-on-a-stick.” The Temple Dragons weapons 
instructor was an old Puerto Rican—forty, easy, thought 
Trent—whose name was Mitch. They were practicing that morn-
ing, all the Temple Dragons fifteen or under, in an abandoned 
brick warehouse across the street from the Temple. Mitch was 
rubbing the line of his jaw, and Jimmy Ramirez was on his 
knees on the mat, clutching his left hand. “Jimmy, you is such a 
dumb fuck.” He took careful aim and kicked Jimmy Ramirez in 
the face and then turned to face the boys standing against the 
wall. “Listen up, Dragons. When you got no gun and you got to 
hit, I mean no choice, then you remember this. Hit hard parts 
with something harder. You want to use your hand, fine. You hit 
the man in the throat, you hit him in the nuts, you hit him right 
under the heart.” Jimmy Ramirez was lying on the ground, 
curled up into a ball. Mitch kicked him again, harder. “Else you 
end up like this tough boy. I’m gon’ have me a sore jaw all day. 
But Jimmy—” Mitch smiled at them, at Trent. “Jimmy, he a 
dead fuck.” 
Mitch had died shortly after that, in one of the endless prop-
erty disputes with the Gypsy Macoute; until now, sitting alone 
in the dark beneath the surface of Luna, Trent could not re-
member having thought of the old Temple Dragon even once in 
all the years since Mitch’s death. 
It had taken him six years to get out of the Fringe. Six long 
years filled with more pain and anger than Trent allowed him-
self to remember most of the time. 
And then, the Patrol Sectors. For all of seven months. Learn-
ing how to walk down a street again without having to check for 

Moran  207 
 
men wearing the green-and-yellow Macoute bandanas. The sim-
ple shock of seeing Peaceforcers again, for the first time since 
the establishment of the Patrol Sectors had left Trent stuck on 
Long Island, inside the Fringe with no legal way to get out. 
Dealing with the BloodSilk Boys, who thought they were 
tough even though they had a name with the word “silk” in it. 
Dealing with the Peaceforcers. 
He sat alone, in the dark and the impossible lightness, for 
what seemed to him a very long time. 
Thinking about dealing with the Peaceforcers. 
At length he said, “Johnny?” 
The voice emanated from a patch of darkness off somewhere 
to Trent’s right. “Hi, Boss. How are you feeling?” 
“I think I’ll live. Once I get something to eat I might even 
want to. Johnny Johnny, how much free storage do you have in 
the handheld?” 
“Not much, Boss. I stored most of our files from the apart-
ment when you said you were coming to get me. I’d feel a lot 
safer if I could put it into offline storage somewhere.” 
“Soon, Johnny. Do you have enough left to store some books?” 
Johnny Johnny snorted audibly. “You must be kidding. At 
the speed you read? I can store so much you wouldn’t finish it 
this century.” 
Trent smiled. “Then let’s get to work.” 
Nathan was gone. 
There were three rooms and an airlock. The pressure suit 
Trent had crashed in was gone. One of the rooms, the smallest, 
was a kitchen with an airplant in it; another, the room Trent 
had slept in, was clearly a bedroom. The third and largest room 
was an equipment storage garage. Two spare pressure suits 
hung on its walls, and laser drills were stacked carefully in one 
corner next to a tool rack that held tools for, Trent guessed after 
a brief examination, repairs for some sort of heavy equipment. 
The airlock was in the garage; Trent could find no air bottles 
for the spare pressure suits. 

208  Tales 
In the corner of the garage was the oldest computer Trent 
had ever seen in his life. 
There was a note for Trent on the terminal. 
 
Have gone to Luna City at Copernicus. Back late 
tomorrow. Food in cold spot in kitchen. Stove is 
electric grill on south wall of kitchen. First aid kit 
in kitchen; the medbot inside is stupid, but don’t ar-
gue with it, you won’t win. 
Will be letting friends at Aristillus Mining Co. 
know that nephew is arriving shortly from Earth; I 
am trouble-shooter there, can easily arrange work 
for a man of your talents. Picking up clothing for 
you, soft p-suit; basic kit. Will clip you 850 Credit 
Units for p-suit, 15 for clothing; throw in 10 CU for 
trouble you’re putting me to. Start thinking of way 
to pay me back. 
Nathan. 
 
Wandering into the kitchen, Trent found the cold spot to be 
nothing more than a vacuum enclosed partition set in shadow. 
Trent fried himself a chicken sandwich; it wasn’t until he caught 
the aroma of the frying chicken patty that he realized how rav-
enously hungry he was. He ate it while frying another two sand-
wiches. 
Back in the garage, Trent seated himself in front of Nathan’s 
computer. It was at least twenty years old, probably older. The 
caps on the pointboard were worn down so that the letters could 
not be seen on most of them. The unit had a bulky monitor 
rather than a holofield for viewing. There were jacks on the unit 
for tape and infochip and MPU attachments, but none for the 
standard optical interface Trent’s handheld used. It took Trent 
nearly two hours before he had the pinouts on the keyboard’s 
MPU slot traced correctly; the computer’s System Tools were 
almost useless. The protocols the system used were clearly an 
ancestor of the protocols Trent had grown up with, but they 
were incredibly slow and lacked options as basic as autohelp and 

Moran  209 
 
abbreviated command syntax. It took him most of the first hour 
to find the help file that listed the MPU slot’s pinouts, and an-
other hour, using invisibly thin drops of cold solder, to link the 
handheld’s MPU slot to the MPU slot on the pointboard. 
Johnny Johnny said, “Checking ... got it. You misconnected 
pins 105 and 241 on my end, and pins 241 and 98 on the other 
end. I’m compensating. Also I have crosstalk on the other end 
from pins 62 and 63, but there’s nothing critical on those lines. 
What now?” 
“What can you tell me about where we are?” 
“Checking ... not very damn much. Local infobases are sup-
posed to be small, but this is ridiculous. There’s only a half tera-
byte of local storage and three quarters of it is empty. What the 
hell is this thing, anyway?” 
“Uh ... FrancoDEC RISC Mark II, it says on the monitor. 
There’s nothing on the pointboard, and I’d guess the processors 
are actually in that.” 
“Whatever, it’s slow damn hardware, Boss. Is there a traceset 
around here anywhere? I could really use some help.” 
“Afraid not, Johnny. I lost the traceset somewhere along the 
line.” 
“... lost the traceset, lost the ship, lost the goddamn full sen-
sory all the way back on another planet—” Johnny Johnny’s 
voice was rising. 
“Johnny!” 
“—what?” 
“Command, set null emote.” 
There was a brief pause; Johnny Johnny’s voice resumed 
without notable emotion. “Gotcha. Sorry about that, Boss.” 
“It’s all right, I wrote the code. Remind me to debug you 
when there’s time. Postcrisis routines.” 
“Will do. Let’s see ... can’t tell you much about where we are, 
Boss. The system connects to a private enterprise LIN—that’s 
moontalk for ‘Lunar Information Network,’ Boss—connects to a 
LIN satellite through a maser link up on the surface. Aristillus 
Investment Group owns the satellite. We’re about fifteen meters 
beneath the surface. The system has no outside sensors, no eyes, 

210  Tales 
no ears. It does control the radar; there’s a pretty good radar 
system scanning the approaches to the—bolt hole, I guess it’s 
called?” 
“That’s the phrase Nathan used.” 
“Okay. We’re on the east edge of a fairly small crater, just 
beneath a small overhang; except at sunset the entrance should 
be in shadow all the time. We’re pretty well hidden.” Johnny 
Johnny paused. “We need to be extra careful about going danc-
ing in the Lunar InfoNet, Boss.” 
“How so?” 
“Only one channel in and out of this place. Assuming web 
angels—are there web angels on the Moon, Boss?” 
“Don’t know. We’ll find out.” 
“Assuming web angels, tracking us back to our point of origin 
would be so simple it scares me. There’s also security every-
where like I’ve never seen before outside of Space Force and 
PKF Boards. Requests for help are met with demands for ID 
and/or passwords, everywhere I go.” 
“Chill things a bit, Johnny, there’s no hurry. What do you le-
gitimately have access to?” 
“Half a dozen public access Boards, Luna City Library, and 
the Aristillus Investment Group’s Board. Basically what ’Sieur 
Dark Clouds has available to him. Interesting thing about ’Sieur 
Dark Clouds, Boss—he’s not AmerIndian.” 
“You’re sure? He looks it.” 
“Gene chart is all wrong, Boss. He has his med records in 
here; genetically he’s a fairly standard European gene chart—
Caucasian, of English, German, or quite possibly French de-
scent. No mongrelization to speak of. Positively no Mongoloid 
genes.” 
“Fascinating,” 
Trent 
murmured. 
“That’s 
fairly 
major 
biosculpture, then.” He filed the subject for the moment. “I want 
data, Johnny. Data on Lunar InfoNet, biosculptors, inskin ven-
dors.” 
“About time!” 

Moran  211 
 
“Save it. Also Lunar society, maps, businesses, Peaceforcers, 
SpaceFarer-associated businesses, Johnny Rebs and Erisian 
Claw, Syndic and Tong. Am I missing anything?” 
“Yep. ‘Immigrant and Visitor’s Guide to Survival,’ by M. Gar-
cia. Subtitled, ‘Learn Quick Or Die.’ Procedural on soft pressure 
suits and how to buy one, what to do in case of emergencies with 
rolligons or crawlers or Bullet—the Bullet’s called a ‘monorail’ 
up here—first aid for people subjected to temporary death pres-
sure, specifics on anoxia and pressure suit air mix. Lists the 
seventeen commonest ways visitors and immigrants to Luna 
die.” Johnny Johnny paused. “I highly recommend you audit 
this.” 
“You have?” 
“Just now. Good book, Boss. There’s a section on ‘scalesuits’—
word comes from either ‘scaled-down spaceship’ or else from the 
fact that they’ve got armor that looks like fish scales on them, 
nobody seems to know—that you really need to read.” 
“Store it in the handheld.” 
“Done.” 
“Let’s get to work.” 
SOME OF YOU, said the brochure, will have played at webdancing 
on Earth. It’s possible you are inclined to attempt webdancing 
while visiting Luna. 
Don’t. 
On Earth webdancing is a misdemeanor; in Luna it is a fel-
ony punishable by deportation to Earth, assignation to convict 
labor, or immediate execution. 
There is a one and one-half second lightspeed delay in com-
munications between Earth and Luna, a three second roundtrip 
delay. Effectively, this means that Luna and Earth have—must 
have—separate InfoNets. Policing Earth’s InfoNet, with its hun-
dreds of millions of Boards, with nearly three billion adults who 
interact with the InfoNet on a daily basis and six billion who in-
teract with the InfoNet in an average week, is effectively impossi-
ble. Despite the valorous efforts of the Earth-based DataWatch, 

212  Tales 
only the most egregious violations of InfoNet procedures are ever 
punished. 
Luna is a hostile new world. The line between survival and 
death is a fine one; we cannot allow the tools of our survival to be 
corrupted for any reason whatsoever. 
Therefore, the Lunar Bureau of the United Nations Peace 
Keeping Force DataWatch has created the LINK, the Lunar In-
formation Network Key. There are currently nine thousand, four 
hundred and two Boards on Luna; new Boards must be licensed 
before they can rent lasercable access. Every transaction—every 
single transaction—which takes place in the Lunar InfoNet is 
keyed and tracked on an item-by-item basis. The basis of this un-
precedented degree of InfoNet security is the Lunar Information 
Network Key. The Key is an unbreakable encryption device which 
the DataWatch employs to validate and track every user in the 
Lunar InfoNet. Webdancers attempting unauthorized ac-
cess, to logic, to data, to communications facilities, will be 
punished to the full extent of the law. 
The last paragraph of the brochure said: 
Those webdancers who call themselves “Players” are invited—
no, encouraged—to attempt to crack the Lunar InfoNet. Images 
are illegal in Luna; possession of Image software or coprocessor 
hardware is a capital crime. 
“Gee, Boss,” Johnny Johnny muttered, “are you sure we can’t 
go home?” 
“Afraid not. Not for a while, Johnny.” After a moment Trent 
added slowly, “You could look at the LINK as a challenge, I sup-
pose.” 
Johnny Johnny’s answer was immediate. “Let’s not.” 
TRENT WAS SITTING before Nathan’s terminal, reading on the 
handheld’s holofield, when Nathan Dark Clouds returned. 
He had no warning, not even from the radar system; the first 
he knew of Nathan’s return was when the airlock cycled open 
and a pressure-suited figure strode through carrying a limp 
pressure suit over its shoulder. Nathan hung the second pres-
sure suit on a hook next to the other two empty pressure suits; it 

Moran  213 
 
hung a full ten centimeters lower to the floor than the first two. 
He unlocked his neck ring and pulled his helmet off. “Hello, 
Trent. You’re looking well. How do you feel?” 
“Not bad,” Trent said mildly. “I’m probably going to need to 
see a real doctor, or at least a good medbot, for my knee. But in 
this gravity it hardly matters.” 
Nathan glanced at Trent while wriggling out of his pressure 
suit. “There’s advantages to living in Luna, to be sure. Even to 
living in Unification territory. Living longer and healing faster 
than downsiders are two of them.” 
“Except that to take advantage of those advantages you need 
to avoid being one of those foolish criminals who die from crash-
ing and blowing up their stolen Rolls-Royce yachts.” 
“You’ve been in my system.” 
“Yes.” 
Nathan nodded thoughtfully. He was almost out of his pres-
sure suit; Trent watched him with interest as he finished wrig-
gling out. His guess had been correct; you were not supposed to 
wear bulky clothing or boots inside a pressure suit. “For a fact,” 
Nathan said at last, “you’ve had a fair piece of luck. Those sto-
ries you’ve been reading on my terminal aren’t just official line; 
the PKF really thinks you’re dead.” 
Trent turned off the holofield and the book it was displaying. 
“You know so well what the PKF thinks?” 
The muscles in the back of Nathan’s neck tensed visibly, then 
relaxed. “Space Force has no significant presence downside, I 
know that. How many Peaceforcers are there on Manhattan Is-
land, Trent?” 
Trent did not even need to think. “Two hundred and ten 
thousand.” 
Nathan hung his suit, took a soft cloth off a hook on the wall 
next to it, and began wiping the suit down. “Out of a permanent 
population of what, twelve million?” 
“Counting the spacescrapers, yes. There’s three million just 
in the spacescrapers.” 
“Trent, Manhattan is renowned for the huge number of 
Peaceforcers who are stationed there. It’s practically a cliche. 

214  Tales 
But when you do the numbers it only comes out to being one 
Peaceforcer for every sixty permanent Manhattanites. Taking 
into account the daily commute onto the island, the number 
drops to nearly one in ninety. There are,” said Nathan Dark 
Clouds evenly, glancing up at Trent, “twenty-eight million peo-
ple in United Nations territory in Luna.” He knelt, began wiping 
a fine layer of dust off the pressure suit’s boots. “Eight hundred 
and fifty thousand of them are either PKF or Space Force. It 
comes to about one in thirty-three. The next war, Trent, it’s not 
going to be fought on Earth, and the U.N. knows it. Folks in 
Luna,” he said quietly, “SpaceFarers and immigrants and native 
loonies alike, watch the Peaceforcers as though their lives de-
pended on knowing what the PKF is going to do next. They 
watch Space Force almost as closely.” 
Trent said mildly, “Okay, so I’m dead. It’s fine by me.” 
Nathan looked at him sharply, seemed about to say some-
thing, and then said, “What’ve you been doing?” 
Trent leaned back in the webchair, put his feet up on the ta-
ble before the terminal. “Auditing the Boards you have access to, 
reading.” 
“About?” 
“The Moon. The Lunar Information Network, PKF on the 
Moon, SpaceFarers, major Lunar cities, Space Force on the 
Moon, natives of the Moon and their prejudices against immi-
grants and which of those prejudices are valid and why. Ac-
counts of attempts Players and webdancers have made to dance 
in the LIN, and why in the past the Key encryption has stopped 
them. Scalesuits—they sound fascinating, Nathan. Why don’t 
you own one?” 
Nathan shrugged. “A matter of taste. I don’t trust them. 
They’ve only been around eight, nine years, and the technology’s 
not really ironed out yet. The PKF uses them because it’s 
cheaper than turning a man into a cyborg and gives you some of 
the same results. They’re very popular in Free Luna for the 
same reason—the powered assists and radiation armoring and 
airplant. I don’t like them much; there’s a lot of metal in them, 
and if anything goes wrong with the servos assists you’re stuck 

Moran  215 
 
there with two hundred ten kilos—mass, not Lunar weight—of 
not-very flexible metal armor to haul around on your own mus-
cles. Somebody fresh from Earth can do that, mind you, or any-
body who’s kept up his weight training—me, for example—but 
there’s not many in Luna that description covers. Native loonies 
are really stuck with the damn things; they need the power as-
sist more than immigrants from Earth do, for obvious reasons, 
but if the suit dies out in the field on them, where help isn’t 
close, it’s practically a death sentence. Damn things are a disas-
ter waiting to happen, some ways. And now,” he concluded, 
“with all that, you might still want to look at one when you come 
to Aristillus with me. They have a regenerative airplant that’s 
the nicest innovation I’ve seen on a p-suit in my lifetime; 
stretches your time in the field up to thirty or forty hours, and 
with the radiation shielding built into them it’s practical to stay 
out that long.” He changed the subject abruptly. “What else have 
you been up to?” 
“Aside from reading? Not much. I opened an account with the 
United Nations Interplanetary Bank at Aristillus, transferred 
funds from a pair of accounts on Earth, and then paid your ac-
count at UNIB Aristillus one thousand CU—for the trouble I’ve 
put you to.” 
Nathan stood slowly, hung the rag on its hook on the wall. 
“You moved Credit from accounts on Earth, accounts that 
DataWatch may or may not have tagged, to UNIB Aristillus, 
and from there to my bank account?” The man stared at Trent. 
Trent said flatly, “It was safe.” 
“If you—” 
“It was safe.” Trent said evenly, “You have to trust me on 
that. I’m a good liar, Nathan, and I’m a good thief and a decent 
painter. Nathan, I’m a great Player. I know the InfoNet on 
Earth better than DataWatch ever will. Nathan, it was safe.” 
For a long moment the man did not even blink. Finally Na-
than sighed, nodded, accepting it. “Okay. Thank you for the 
thousand CU. I hadn’t planned to make a profit from helping 
you, but I certainly don’t mind.” 

216  Tales 
Trent nodded also, and continued. “One other thing I got 
done while you were gone: I figured out why I was alive.” 
“Well, there’s a straight line if you like.” 
“Seriously, Nathan. The missile Vance sent after me. Melting 
temperature.” 
“I’m not following.” 
“Vance is a smart man. I didn’t think brass balls came that 
smart. It took me three hours to work this out; he thought of it 
in something like twenty seconds. Say you fire three, four mis-
siles in their silos—even knowing they’ll simply be destroyed. 
The heat from those explosions would have melted the fineline I 
tied them with long before it significantly damaged the other 
missiles; those things are designed to fly through rocket ex-
haust. Shock would probably kill a couple of nearby missiles; 
flak would kill a lot of the rest. But if you fire your three, four 
missiles, all from one end of the bunker, there’s a good chance 
that the missiles at the other end will survive long enough to get 
a couple out. That’s all it would have taken, Nathan. Two mis-
siles instead of one; I’d be dead.” 
Nathan said softly, “Boy, you should be dead twenty times 
over no matter how you look at it.” 
Trent was silent for several seconds, and then smiled at Na-
than Dark Clouds. “That’s truer than you know. I owe the Peace-
forcers a lot.” He was silent again, and then said softly, “An 
awful lot.” 
Nathan said quietly, “What are you going to do?” 
“I haven’t decided yet.” 
“You can’t beat them, Trent.” 
“Oh?” 
“When I was young,” said Nathan Dark Clouds, “and stu-
pid—about six years ago—I was a member of the Speed Enthu-
siast’s Organization.” 
Trent nodded. “I’d guessed you were a Speedfreak.” 
“All we did, Trent, was we wanted to drive our own cars. And 
the fuckers went and outlawed them.” Even after all the time, 
the amazement was still there in the man’s voice. “So my reac-
tion time isn’t as fast as a chip’s. My judgement’s a hell of a lot 

Moran  217 
 
better.” He was silent a moment, then shook his head. “Water 
over the bridge. The argument’s done, we lost it. But we at-
tempted civil disobedience, Trent, almost two million of us set 
out from San Diego in a convoy, set out to do the Long Run. 
That’s what we called them, the Long Runs, all the way around 
the world without stopping, without ever touching down on the 
goddamn dirt. We’d done thousands of Long Runs by ’63, as in-
dividuals and in convoys. Speedfreak chapters used to pay to 
send members on the Long Run as presents, or rewards. 
“In ’63 two million Speedfreaks set out to do the biggest 
damn Long Run ever. Out of San Diego, to Hawaii, to Australia, 
over India, through Israel, through France, and then into the 
Atlantic for the trip to Capitol City.” Nathan’s voice had grown 
harsh, strident. “The Unification Council called it treason, and 
we died, Trent. The Bureau of Weather Control hit us with a 
goddamn typhoon and eighty-five percent of us died and the 
ones who didn’t were mostly picked up and tried for treason, 
they executed two hundred and thirty Speedfreaks and sent fif-
teen thousand into Public Labor for the rest of their lives.” The 
fierce glare did not leave Trent for an instant. “I was there. I 
was on the Long Run and I survived.” 
It took Trent a moment to find his voice. 
“Faster, faster, faster,” he said softly, “until the thrill of 
speed overcomes the fear of death.” 
Nathan blinked, and then smiled almost against his will. 
“Where did you hear that?” 
Trent said distantly, thoughtfully, “You made mistakes, you 
know. First, there were too many of you. You stood up and let 
them take aim, and then you were surprised when they blew you 
to hell.” 
Nathan was staring at him. “Son, they shot my wife. They 
killed most of my friends. They—” 
Trent cut him off. “They’re practical.” Trent looked up, met 
Nathan’s stare. “Very. That’s the first thing to know about the 
Peaceforcers, they always do the sensible thing. The second 
thing to know is that you can beat them. I have to believe that, 

218  Tales 
Nathan. If I don’t believe that, really believe it where it counts, I 
might as well have died out there in that crashed Rolls.” 
A deeply disturbed expression had settled on the wrinkled 
countenance. “Son, you’re wrong. And you’re—” 
“I’m not your son.” 
“I wake up every day, Trent, and I realize again how much 
life is worth living.” 
Trent said, “I don’t want to die, Nathan.” He locked eyes with 
the old man and when he spoke there was an edge in his voice 
that he had not intended to put there. “But I am not going to lose 
again.” 
 
16. 
LUNA CITY AT Copernicus was built, SpaceFarers like to observe, 
by downsiders. 
And it shows. 
It is the oldest city on the Moon, and in this instance the use 
of the word “on” is correct; it is one of only five bubble cities on 
the planet. It is in one of the most visible craters on Luna, a cra-
ter visible from Earth even by eye. It makes a convenient astro-
gation aid for visitors from other worlds. 
It is, say loonies and SpaceFarers alike, one of the half dozen 
worst places on the Moon’s surface to put a city. It is ringed by a 
crater wall that rises over three and a half kilometers above the 
crater floor, in the midst of some of the most rugged territory to 
be found on Luna. 
All of which means that travel to and from Luna City, except 
by suborbital bounce or spacecraft, is something that loonies and 
SpaceFarers alike avoid at all costs. 
Trent’s first sight of Luna City was unimpressive. He arrived 
in public transport, a rolligon from Aristillus, on Sunday, Sep-
tember 15, in the midst of nearside’s two-week Lunar night. The 
rolligon spent nearly four hours just crawling up the side of Co-
pernicus crater, on a laser-cut road that was just wide enough 
for two rolligons to pass side by side. From the vantage point of 

Moran  219 
 
the lip of Copernicus, Luna City, as seen through a cloudy sheet 
of reinforced glassite, was a glowing translucent bubble in the 
midst of gleaming square kilometers of solar power panels, sur-
rounded by tiny illuminated red-and-yellow patches where 
semiballistics and spacecraft landed, and all of that surrounded 
by the dark Lunar desert. 
The solar power panels, by themselves, were enough to mark 
the city’s age; cheap fusion power had not even existed when 
Luna City was built. 
STANDING IN THE waiting room of the Blain Trading Emporium, 
Trent said, “Mademoiselle?” 
In the maglev, coming down, Trent had noted that the levels 
were numbered in reverse, just like in the Down Plaza; it made 
him feel almost immediately at home. 
The pregnant girl behind the desk, not older than twenty, 
with long red hair and an exquisite silver blue skin dye, did not 
quite make a question of it when she said, “May I help you, sir,” 
her tone making it clear that the subject was in considerable 
doubt. 
Trent looked at her blankly. “I have an appointment with 
’Sieur Blain.” 
The girl said with just a touch of impatience, “M. Blain, sir, 
has only one appointment today, with a professional computerist 
who’s recently immigrated to Luna. He’s reserved most of the 
afternoon for him, and I don’t believe he’ll have time for....” The 
receptionist’s voice trailed off. Trent was grinning at her. She 
said “M. Vera?” 
“Hello.” 
“Oh. You’re late.” 
“I got lost on the way here. This is my first time in the city.” 
“You’re not very old.” 
Trent said gently, “Will you tell ’Sieur Blain that I’m here?” 
“Oh. Yes. Uhm, go in.” She blushed purple through the skin 
dye. “He’s expecting you, actually.” 
Trent smiled at her again. “When are you due?” 

220  Tales 
The girl blinked, and then smiled back rather tentatively. 
“Early November.” 
“What’s your name?” 
“Sidrah. Sidrah Blain.” 
“Nice to meet you, Sidrah.” 
CANDICE “CANDY” Blain’s office was positively Spartan. There 
was a single huge desk of wood-grain polymer, with a terminal 
and pointboard built into the desk’s surface. The holofield the 
terminal used for display was up; Trent could see the faint and 
nearly invisible outline, all the sign the holofield gave of its exis-
tence to somebody sitting on the other side of the desk. 
Other than the terminal itself the desk was nearly empty; on 
it sat a thin, tall cup next to a sealed thermos. There was a sin-
gle visitor’s chair immediately in front of the desk. 
A short, broad, bald man sat behind the desk, watching Trent 
with all the expression of a hard-boiled egg. He sported a huge 
red handlebar mustache. “You’re Nathan’s nephew?” he boomed 
out of a barrel chest. 
“Thomas Vera,” said Trent. He grasped the hand that Blain, 
standing to reach over the desk, had offered him, and Blain en-
folded his hand in a bonecrusher handshake. It was Trent’s right 
hand, and even after being treated by the medbot at Aristillus, 
Blain’s grip hurt. Trent stood motionlessly, with a half-smile 
still on his features, squeezing back until Blain pulled his hand 
away with a grimace of pain. 
Blain seated himself slowly, clenching and unclenching the 
hand Trent had taken. “You got a hell of a grip there, Mister 
Vera. Nathan said you were a computerist?” 
Trent seated himself, still smiling. “I used to box semi-pro. I 
try to stay in shape.” 
“You’re not quite what I’d expected. Bigger, among other 
things. The call I got from Nathan, he says you’re six different 
kinds of computerist; webdancer, programmer, theorist, de-
signer, field tech—how old are you?” Blain said abruptly. 
Trent said evenly, “UNIB Aristillus, Account VERA1505. You 
can look it up.” 

Moran  221 
 
Blain tapped at his pointboard with two fingers, glanced at 
the balance shown in the holofield. He cleared the field, and 
smiled at Trent as though it hurt his face. “’Sieur Vera, how can 
I help you?” 
“I need tools.” 
Blain nodded. “I’ve got half a dozen BB kits covering most of 
the tool needs the average computerist has. If we can modify 
from that—” 
Trent interrupted. “My needs are unusual. If all I wanted, 
’Sieur Blain, was a standard Black Box tool kit, I could have or-
dered it from the catalog myself.” 
“Unusual?” Blain lifted one red eyebrow. “As in illegal? Im-
age coprocessors, that sort of thing?” 
“That sort of thing,” Trent agreed. 
Candy Blain paused, obviously wondering whether what he 
was about to say might endanger his chances of making a sale. 
“Thomas—you don’t mind if I call you Thomas—your uncle’s 
been on Luna six years now. That’s not such a terribly long time, 
really—just about one in four of the folks here in Luna were 
born here—but in those six years he’s done pretty well for him-
self. Especially considering he’s ex-Speedfreak, and pretty much 
everybody knows it....” He seemed to shift subject. “I hit Luna 
four years ago Tuesday last. Ministry of Population Control 
trouble; my family and I had a squad of six babyburners on our 
tail all the way to Navajo Spaceport. Barely did get away—after 
we lifted the babyburners got on the radio and told the Space-
Farer’s ship we were on to drop us off at Halfway. They didn’t do 
it, so here I am today, a respected member of the community 
with a business that actually turns a profit every now and again. 
And there’s your uncle, prime candidate for Public Labor back 
on Earth, a bit better respected than I am even. A lot of the peo-
ple who emigrated here, Thomas, they did it because the walls 
were closing in on them downside. And then they started over, 
clean. PKF mostly doesn’t care what you did downside, and 
there ain’t no babyburners up here—Luna’s still badly under-
populated.” 
Trent said, “On the maser.” 

222  Tales 
Blain paused, train of thought obviously derailed. “What?” 
“The babychasers. When they tried to stop the ship you were 
on. To reach a ship near Earth they would have used maser, not 
radio.” 
Blain stared at Trent. “The point I’m making here, holding 
an Image coprocessor is a death penalty crime up here, Thomas, 
unless you immigrated with it as part of your inskin and 
couldn’t take it out—and you pretty much have to be a U.N. 
webdancer, in some capacity, to get even that much slack.” 
“So?” 
“Do you really need one?” 
“I have another source for an Image coprocessor, ’Sieur Blain. 
I need things,” said Trent, “that are even more illegal than that. 
Nathan said you do work for the Syndic and the Old Ones and 
that you could get what I need. Are you going to take my order 
or not?” 
Beneath the moustache, Blain’s mouth set in a hard line. 
“Give me your order.” 
Trent said, “You might want to take this down.” 
Blain tapped instructions into his terminal, touched record. A 
feminine voice said, “Recording.” 
Trent reached across the desk and tapped the record key 
once. “I don’t like having my voice print taken.” 
Blain stared at Trent again. 
“You might want to type this.” 
Slowly, with plain distaste, the small man poised two fingers 
above the pointboard, and said without civility, “Talk.” 
Trent spoke slowly, watching Blain’s two fingers, giving the 
man time to type. “Monofilament, two reels; room temperature 
superconductor, one reel; two-stage electrosetting mappable 
blast plastic, one kilo; one collapsing portable Slo-Mo fast 
enough to make liquid air with; two pencil lasers, one ultra-
violet and one X-laser; two kilos of Complex 8-A—” 
Blain interrupted. “One moment. We may have some trouble 
with the fadeaway.” He pecked away furiously as he talked. 
“Peaceforcers have been cracking down on the stuff recently, 
ever since that Trent fellow zapped a bunch of them with it 

Moran  223 
 
when he ran through Peaceforcer Heaven. If I don’t have some 
in stock we might not—” He stopped, looking into the holofield. 
“Okay. Eighty grams liquid still in stock, and I can get more 
within, say, three weeks. Hope that warehouse hasn’t been 
raided recently.” He turned back to Trent. “Go ahead.” 
Trent smiled pleasantly at Blain, reached across the desk, 
and turned off the recorder again. “Do you have a problem with 
me?” 
“Aside from not liking you very much,” said Candice Blain 
deliberately, “not really.” 
“Good. Let’s continue.” It took most of five minutes, and the 
final total came to over seven thousand CU. 
When Trent was completely done, Blain said, “Where do you 
want this stuff delivered?” 
“Nathan’s apartment,” said Trent, “in Aristillus.” 
Blain nodded shortly. “Give it six to ten days.” 
Trent said, “It’s been a pleasure doing business.” He gestured 
behind himself, to the receptionist’s area. “The receptionist—
your daughter?” 
“My wife.” The muscles in Blain’s jaw were twitching. 
“She’s really gorgeous. Is she—” 
Candice Blain snapped, “Get out.” 
Trent smiled at him. “I was never here.” 
LUNA CITY REMINDED Trent of the Down Plaza grown a thousand 
times larger. 
There were three levels beneath the bubble but aboveground, 
eleven levels that were, properly speaking, underground. Four of 
the levels, the bottom-most four, were purely residential. Levels 
U1 through U7 were a mixture of residences and businesses; 
everything above ground, on the A levels, was dedicated to busi-
ness. 
The leasing agent was a native loonie, a tall woman some two 
hundred and twenty centimeters in height. She scowled impa-
tiently, looking pointedly at her Rolex, when Trent arrived at 
the apartment on U2. “’Sieur Vera?” 
“Hello,” said Trent. “I’m sorry I’m—” 

224  Tales 
“You’re late,” she said flatly. 
“I know, I’m sorry I got lost and there were no maps and—” 
“You will find, ’Sieur Vera,” she said severely, “that punctual-
ity is a trait thought highly of in Luna.” 
Trent stood completely motionless for a moment, and then 
said evenly, “As opposed to courtesy, I suppose. I’d like to see my 
apartment now.” 
DOWN PAYMENT on the three-bedroom apartment came to a hun-
dred thirty-five CU; Trent arranged to take possession of the 
rooms on the first of October. He walked up a series of long 
ramps, past hundreds of shoppers and business people and some 
fifteen Peaceforcers, until he reached A1, the first level from 
which it was possible to see, three levels above, the dome itself. 
As Trent reached higher levels, the percentage of people wearing 
pressure suits increased noticeably; on A-1, with nothing but the 
dome to protect them from death pressure, at least half of the 
people in the plazas and corridors were either suited up or carry-
ing p-suits with them. 
At the center of the city were the Lunar Gardens, famous on 
Luna and off. The Gardens were a touch of Earth, grown strange 
and tall; huge trees, largely redwood and oaks, most of them 
reaching up so close to the dome itself that they had to be 
trimmed back regularly, reaching up away from a rainbow riot 
of flowers and shrubbery. The shrubbery was trimmed in the 
shapes of animals both real and imaginary; the flowers were 
genegineered roses and orchids and blood innocents, glowing or-
ange and purple, yellow and pink, blue and bronze-gold beneath 
the Garden’s sunpaint. 
Trent walked all the way around the Gardens, a complete 
circuit on the cobblestone path, before heading to the bank. 
There was a UNIB location at the very edge of the dome, 
right up against the ten-meter high wall that the dome itself 
rested upon. He went inside and waited in line with half a dozen 
others until a teller was available. 
It was fully five degrees cooler inside the bank than in the 
main dome. The teller, a burly man with Earth-grown muscles 

Moran  225 
 
and distinctly effeminate mannerisms, checked Trent’s account 
and said politely, “What can I do for you, ’Sieur Vera?” 
“I need to place a direct call to Earth. I was hoping you might 
have a conference room I could use.” 
The man smiled at Trent, looking him up and down. “I think 
we can arrange that.” 
The conference room Trent was ushered into was completely 
empty; the room’s single terminal was turned on, with a call 
sign hanging in the holofield. Trent jacked his handheld into the 
terminal’s interface and waited. 
Johnny Johnny said almost instantly, “Done. If anyone’s tap-
ping this line at the bank end they’ll see a recording of you and a 
banker type saying stupid things to one another. You’ll be telling 
him to sell short Tytan Industries, and he’ll be telling you you’re 
a fool.” 
“Really?” Trent blinked. “Who’s right?” 
There was a brief pause, and Johnny Johnny said, “Aw, hell, 
Boss, I don’t know. What do you think, I follow the stock market 
in my spare time?” 
Trent grinned. “Sorry. When do we start?” 
“Right now.” 
Trent took a deep breath. He was not surprised by the nerv-
ousness that came to him then. “Okay.” 
“I’m waiting for an open line—we’re connected to the Earth 
InfoNet now through the Relay Station at Halfway. Waiting 
again for connection to the Northeast exchange—connected. 
Coding for the Schuyler/Daimara residence—connected.” 
Audio came on with an audible click. Video did not. “Hello?” 
The girl’s voice was hesitant and it hit Trent right in the stom-
ach. 
He took another slow, deep breath. “Hello, Denice.” 
A three second pause; the phonefield flared into color. Trent 
touched the video stud to one side of the pointboard to send his 
image back to her. Denice simply stared at the holocams at her 
end and 
flicker of fire, of intimate touch.... 

226  Tales 
A second and a half later her face lit up in a way Trent had 
never seen during the summer they had lived together. “Trent? 
My God, it’s you!” 
“Yes.” 
Three seconds. “You’re alive! All the Boards said you were 
dead.” 
“Never believe anything you audit on the Boards, Denice. It’s 
all lies anyway except for the parts that aren’t.” 
“I didn’t believe you were dead. If you were dead I think I 
would have known.” She paused, said questioningly, “I dreamed 
you were hurt.” 
“A little. Nothing major.” 
“You look different. You’ve had biosculpture?” 
“Makeup. I’m going to have biosculpture soon.” 
“Where are you calling from? Luna, from the delay, but 
where?” 
“Luna City at Copernicus. I’m sorry I haven’t called before, 
but this is the first time it was safe. I was at Aristillus for a 
week, and they have only seventeen data lines in and out of the 
city. Too small; too much chance of being monitored. There’s a 
hundred and twenty thousand lines feeding Luna City; it’s 
probably safe.” Trent grinned at her. “Expensive, but safe. Have 
you had problems with the PKF?” 
Denice shook her head. “They questioned pretty much every-
body who admitted to knowing you, but nobody got brain-
drained, and nobody mentioned me. One Peaceforcer actually 
came to the studios—apparently somebody at The Emerald Illu-
sion recognized Madame Gleygavass the time she went dancing 
with us—but I told the Peaceforcer, when he came, that he’d 
spoken to Madame Gleygavass and she didn’t know anything 
about their problems.” She shrugged. “He thought it over and 
after he remembered the conversation he went away, and the 
PKF hasn’t been near me since then. What have you been do-
ing?” 
“I just rented an apartment, and I’m going to go see about 
biosculpt and an inskin next. In another two weeks I should be 

Moran  227 
 
biosculpted, plugged in, and reasonably safe.” He smiled, and 
said softly, “The safe part won’t last long.” 
“What are you going to look like?” 
“Haven’t decided yet.” A small clock in the lower right corner 
of the holofield blinked: two minutes, 180 CU. “How’s it been 
since I’ve been gone?” 
“Madame Gleygavass took me out of the production of Levia-
than. She said I’d lost focus.” 
“Is she right?” 
Another pause, not entirely due to the three second lights-
peed delay. Denice nodded slowly. “I keep thinking about taking 
you out of the Detention Center.” Her voice was very soft. “You 
know, I really enjoyed that. I enjoyed it more than anything else 
I’ve ever done. I felt like I’d accomplished something.” 
“Sometimes,” said Trent, “you remind me of Carl a lot.” 
“Thank you.” 
“It wasn’t a compliment,” said Trent. “I don’t think it’s a good 
idea for me to go back to New York, at least not any time soon, 
but after I’ve done a couple of boosts up here, I’d be able to af-
ford the immigration fee, and you could join me.” 
“I think—” The girl paused, features impenetrable, and then 
grinned at Trent again. “I think I’d really like that.” 
“Good. How’s Jimmy?” 
Perhaps it was the delay; it seemed to Trent that she an-
swered reluctantly. “His legs are okay; Doctor Jane’s been grow-
ing an arm for him, but it’s not ready yet. He’s been using a 
prosthetic. And”—she did hesitate now—“he’s in law school.” 
“Brutal.” 
“He started this semester.” 
Trent shivered. “The poor bastard.” 
“He did it to himself.” 
“True, too truehow’s Bird and Jodi Jodi?” 
Johnny Johnny broke in. “Tell Jodi Jodi that her brother says 
hello.” 
Denice smiled again. “I’ll do that. Bird’s okay; he was ar-
rested on pickpocket charges, but Beth got him out—Chief Dev-
lin’s been really good to everybody since you left. Jodi Jodi’s fine 

228  Tales 
too; talking about leaving the Red Line and starting her own 
business as a fashion consultant, but I don’t think she’s going to. 
They keep giving her raises.” 
Trent glanced at the clock in the corner of the field. “I’m run-
ning out of time, Denice. This is costing more than I can afford 
right now.” 
She nodded. “Send me a letter when you’re settled.” 
“I will.” Trent checked the clock again; he’d spent nearly four 
hundred CU already. “Denice....” 
Denice Castanaveras said, “I know, Trent. I love you too.” 
The field went dead. 
Trent leaned back slowly in his chair, and sat there, arms 
crossed over his chest, looking at the empty phonefield. 
“Boss?” Johnny Johnny’s voice held genuine concern. “You 
okay?” 
“No. Not really, Johnny.” 
His Image was silent for a moment. “Boss, do you love her?” 
Trent closed his eyes and thought about it. “I don’t know, 
Johnny. I don’t know what that is. She—she thinks I do,” said 
Trent slowly. “I suppose she would know.” He opened his eyes, 
stared into the glowing empty phonefield. “You know, it’s 
strange. There’s only one thing I’ve ever wanted, Johnny.” 
Trent’s features were completely still. “And she’s it.” 
“Boss?” 
“Seven years, Johnny. And then I got three months.” 
There was silence from the handheld. When Johnny Johnny 
spoke his voice was smooth and even, almost uninflected. “I 
don’t know what to say, Boss. I’m sorry.” 
“I wish I could stop missing her.” 
“Trent, it’s time to go.” 
After a long cold moment Trent touched his handheld to the 
terminal’s payment strip, waited for the light to go green, and 
then did leave. 

Moran  229 
 
THE BIOSCULPTOR HAD used her art upon herself; she was a 
walking advertisement. 
Her offices were near the Hotel Copernicus, just south of the 
Flight Caverns, with a view of the Luna City Gardens; it was 
easily the most expensive office space anywhere off Earth itself. 
The wall facing to the northwest was simply sheer one-way glas-
site, looking out over the gaunt and lanky oaks and redwoods in 
the Gardens. The lighting was subdued, glowpaint adjusted to a 
clean, professional white. 
Katrina Trudeau was a Russo-Canadian who had emigrated 
to the Moon fifteen years prior. Her amber-red hair was styled 
in a pageboy cut, setting off gold-flecked eyes and skin that was 
the precise color of aged oak. At first glance her cheekbones 
seemed too high, but after a few moments Trent realized that 
they served to balance a mouth that would otherwise have been 
too wide. She wore a jumpsuit that changed colors when she 
moved, odd patches going transparent without warning. 
She was, in a word, stunning. 
“This is the disclaimer,” Trudeau said pleasantly. “I am re-
quired by law to inform you that Image coprocessor hardware 
and Image software are illegal on Luna. Further, it is against 
the law to engage in biosculpture for the specific purpose of 
evading legal responsibilities. It is illegal to engage in biosculp-
ture if there is currently a warrant for your arrest extant on any 
part of Earth or in any part of Luna that is under the control of 
the United Nations. It is illegal to engage in biosculpture if there 
is currently a warrant for your arrest extant in Free Luna, the 
SpaceFarers Collective, or any of the Belt CityStates, where 
such warrants have been issued for behavior that is covered un-
der applicable United Nations statutes or treaties with any of 
the foregoing parties. Got it?” 
“Oh, absolutely,” Trent assured her. “What I have in mind is 
something that’ll leave me looking amazingly normal and totally 
different than I do now. So I can go to parties and surprise my 
friends and acquaintances. I also want the best inskin Credit 
can buy.” 
“That sort of thing costs a great deal.” 

230  Tales 
“Everything,” said Trent, “costs a great deal. And when it 
doesn’t it ends up costing more.” 
The woman looked him up and down in much the same way 
that the man at the teller window had not an hour earlier. 
“You’re quite the sensible boy. What do you need?” 
“Palm and fingerprints have to change. Retinal print has to 
change. Features need to change. The voice box can stay the 
same, which is good, because I like the way I sound. Height—” 
Trent paused. 
Katrina looked at him speculatively. “I can make you taller 
without too much trouble. Shorter is hard, and not very safe; it 
involves removing one or more of the vertebrae in your back and 
reshaping the new vertebrae so they’ll ride together comforta-
bly—all without damaging the spinal cord.” 
“Pass. I’m already tall enough that it gets noticed. Any taller 
and I’d be into loonie territory.” 
“Is that bad?” 
“I want to return to Earth some day, ma’am.” 
“Very well. I presume, ’Sieur,” she said dryly, “that you’re in-
terested in a face somewhat less gorgeous than the one you’ve 
got now.” 
“Uhm. Not necessarily. Different, yes, but—you think I’m 
gorgeous?” 
Trudeau’s teeth nibbled gently at the underside of her lower 
lip. “With that silly makeup taken off, you would be. You didn’t 
hide the bone structure very well. At any rate, I have a series of 
holos you can look at to choose your new face. What about your 
inskin?” 
“About six months ago Tytan Electronics shipped an inskin 
that accepts and transmits data via either radio packet or trace-
set.” 
Trudeau looked startled for the first time. She sat up 
straighter. “That’s not an inskin, ’Sieur Vera. You’re talking 
about the Tytan NN-II?” 
“Yes.” 
“’Sieur, that’s a nerve net that’s designed to sit in high mem-
ory and model what’s happening in your brain. It’s entirely ex-

Moran  231 
 
perimental.” Trent started to speak and she overrode him. “Let 
me talk. I don’t know a lot about inskins; I just implant the 
damn things. But I know what they do once they get inside your 
skull. Your brain has on the order of ten billion neurons. You 
can store between ten and fifteen quintillion bytes of informa-
tion. The average inskin, even one with an Image coprocessor 
built into it, has less than ten thousand processors and an insig-
nificant permanent storage capability; a few gigabytes at most. 
Even as simple as they are—five to six hundred connections in-
ternally—once it goes into your skull it never comes out again.” 
Trent said, “Never is a long time.” 
“Today,” she said patiently, “it is not possible to safely re-
move even a simple inskin. The NN-II—I’d guess it’ll be twenty-
five years, at least, before anyone knows how to take out some-
thing like this. ’Sieur Vera, the NN-II is essentially an AI nerve 
net. It has nearly half a million processors; it makes a discrete 
connection, somewhere inside your brain, for every one of those 
processors. I wouldn’t even be connecting the damn thing, I’d 
simply insert it into the fluid layer between your skull and the 
outer surface of your brain. The thing’s about half biochip; it 
connects itself, grows into place over the space of about half a 
year. You’re not supposed to put Image software into it, though 
it’s possible; the NN-II’s designed to transparently model the 
way you normally think, and then let you offload some of your 
thought processes into it—in essence, speeding up your thought 
processes. Making you smarter.” 
“I’ve read about it in the trades, ’Selle. That’s why I want it.” 
“Strictly speaking, ’Sieur Vera, it is not an inskin. During the 
acclimation period it’s common for even standard inskins to ren-
der the patient more susceptible to concussion, due to the differ-
ence in specific gravity between the inskin and the neural tissue 
it’s attached to. On rare occasions that can become a permanent 
weakness, I’m sure you know. The point is that the NN-II has 
insufficient track record for me to tell you if that might be one of 
its side effects, or for that matter what side effects you might 
reasonably expect. I do not know if it’s safe.” 

232  Tales 
“Me neither. I do know its specific gravity is a lot lower than 
that of most inskins, which I’d guess—lacking data, as we both 
do—would mean it’s safer than your average inskin. As far as 
not being an inskin, it does radio packet communications, and it 
doesn’t choke on a traceset; that’s close enough.” Trent leaned 
forward. “Besides, the idea of walking around with a visible 
socket in my skull—well, it’s always seemed so, so, tacky. You 
know?” 
“Tacky?” Trudeau’s lips curved into a reluctant half smile. 
“Like wearing the big floppy clown feet without the clown 
suit. I hate people who do that.” 
“That, too, is—tacky?” 
“Well, of course.” 
“I see.” 
“For example, once I was going to go to mass dressed up as a 
clown, but—do you go to a temple? Or a church?” 
Humor danced in her eyes. “On occasion.” 
“Great. Would you like to go with me sometime?” 
“No.” 
“Are you sure? We could wear clown suits. Or we could not 
wear clown suits if—” 
“’Sieur Vera, I don’t date men—or women, for that matter —
who are better than twenty-five years younger than I am. And I 
never, never date clients.” The woman touched a stud on her 
desk, and the windows that let out onto the view of the Gardens 
went dark. “If you’ll come in back with me,” she said, standing, 
“I have some holos of naked young men for you to look at.” 
Following her, Trent said, “Couldn’t we have naked young 
girls instead?” 
Walking down the dim hallway, ’Selle Trudeau glanced back 
at Trent. 
Despite the short speech she had just made, Trent was al-
most certain she was thinking about it. 
Katrina Trudeau said, “Maybe later.” 
NATHAN WAS NOT there when Trent returned to Nathan’s home 
at Aristillus Crater. It was considerably more luxurious than the 

Moran  233 
 
bolt hole; seven rooms beneath ground, at the edge of Aristillus 
crater, only four kilometers from the remains of the Aristillus 
mining complex. 
Forty-four years prior, with the wounds of the Unification 
War on Earth still fresh, the United Nations had nationalized 
both the orbital construction facilities at Halfway and the 
SpaceFarers’ Collective colony at L-5. By way of retaliation the 
SpaceFarers’ Collective, eight Lunar cities with close ties to Belt 
CityStates, and all but a few of the CityStates themselves, had 
declared independence. The United Nations had been in no 
mood for further war, not after the hideous price it had paid in 
the subjugation of America and Japan. Though it had never offi-
cially recognized the governments as such, the U.N. had been in 
no real position to prevent the Belt or the SpaceFarers or Free 
Luna from proclaiming and maintaining their independence; 
and for nearly a decade after that, the CityStates had refused to 
send metals to either Earth itself or to United Nations territory 
on Luna. In that decade, the Aristillus Mining Company had 
been the premier source of aluminum and silicon, titanium and 
magnesium, for both U.N.-controlled Luna and Halfway. Today, 
with Free Luna grown to some twenty-five cities with over three 
million inhabitants, with the SpaceFarers’ Collective the undis-
puted carrier of all non-military interplanetary trade, and with 
the closer cooperation of the CityStates and the United Nations, 
the Aristillus Mining Company’s emphasis on mining grew 
smaller and smaller. By the end of the 2060s the company’s In-
vestment branch produced better than two thirds of the com-
pany’s revenues, and all of its profits. The mining operation ran, 
when it ran, at a loss, and had since the early years of the dec-
ade; and the crater’s six-kilometer-long mass driver received 
shipments of ore at the catapult head at progressively greater 
intervals. 
There were only about two hundred people living in the cra-
ter, and they all knew one another. Trent was not surprised that 
nobody tried to call or visit Nathan in the three days that Trent 
was there and Nathan was not; probably everyone in the crater 

234  Tales 
knew exactly when Nathan had left and when he was expected 
back. 
When the approach alarm went off, three days after Trent’s 
arrival, he suited up and in long, gliding strides walked down 
the tunnel leading from the garage to the surface. The entrance 
was hidden well, nearly as well as the entrance to Nathan’s bolt 
hole. Standing in the concealing shadow, Trent wondered what 
he was going to do if the approaching vehicle were, say, a group 
of Peaceforcers rather than Nathan. There was a slug-thrower 
that tossed explosive slugs—devastatingly lethal, completely il-
legal—at the entrance to the tunnel; certainly Trent did not in-
tend to use it on anyone. 
At first Trent saw nothing except the long, rising line of the 
mass driver that was used to boost ore into orbit. Moving up 
onto the surface proper, through the entrance, past the slug-
thrower, Trent scanned the desert by eye. A patch of chalky gray 
covered a shadow on the Lunar surface, and Trent focused on it. 
It was almost certainly Nathan’s crawler, a sturdy, dependable 
machine that Nathan referred to as “the chameleon.” Nathan 
owned two crawlers; the chameleon was covered in a coat of 
polypaint that could shade the machine into its environment in 
an uncanny way. The most intensive satellite surveillance was 
unlikely to detect it. To protect against infra-red surveillance 
the chameleon used a series of small heat sinks that had waste 
heat fed into them until they were incandescent; they were then 
fired away from the chameleon in random directions. 
There was a faint crackle of sound, and then Nathan’s voice 
came clearly through the earphones in Trent’s helmet. “Good 
news, Trent, of sorts.” 
“In the long run, ‘good news’ is an oxymoron, Nathan. Second 
law of thermodynamics.” Trent headed back into the tunnel, to-
ward the apartment and air. 
“Your Complex 8-A came,” Nathan said. “I brought it back 
with me. You’re supplied.” 
Entering the apartment, Trent removed his helmet and 
stripped off his pressure suit. He touched the pressure point at 

Moran  235 
 
the airlock entrance, activating the inside speakers. “Thank you, 
Nathan.” 
There was a noticeable pause before Nathan said, “You’re 
welcome.” 
Trent walked into the kitchen, raising his voice as he moved 
away from the speaker. “Have you eaten?” 
“No.” 
“I’ll put something together.” 
“There’s steak in the cold spot. I’ll be there in about ten min-
utes.” The line went dead. 
TRENT HAD FINISHED cooking by the time Nathan was done rub-
bing down his suit. 
Entering the kitchen, Nathan said, “You didn’t dust down 
your suit when you took it off.” 
Sitting on the kitchen table were two bulbs of beer and two 
sandwiches on wheat, one chicken, one steak. There was a plate 
of stir-fried vegetables, carrots and celery and bean sprouts, and 
two bowls. The chicken sandwich was missing a bite. 
Around a mouthful of chicken sandwich Trent said, “Sorry. 
I’ll remember next time.” 
“Forget it often enough,” Nathan said sourly, “and you won’t 
get a chance for a next time. Ever seen what happens to a knee 
joint with a pebble worked into it? Wears down in a couple of 
months’ steady use. Eventually it blows.” Nathan seated himself 
at the table. He seemed tired; for the first time since Trent had 
known him his beard had not been depilated recently. 
“Point made. I won’t do it again.” Trent gestured at the steak 
sandwich on wheat in front of Nathan. “You know, you really 
shouldn’t eat stuff like that. You’ll need a heart transplant be-
fore you’re—how old are you, anyhow?” 
Nathan said shortly, “Sixty-two.” 
“Before you’re seventy,” said Trent conclusively. 
Nathan ignored him, tearing into the steak sandwich. “When 
are you going to leave?” 
“The stuff’s in the chameleon?” 
Nathan glanced up from his food, nodded wordlessly. 

236  Tales 
“After lunch, then.” 
Nathan nodded again and resumed eating. Halfway through 
his sandwich he put it down suddenly and said flatly, “Trent ...” 
“Yes?” 
“Damn it, Trent, you cannot beat them.” 
Trent smiled broadly at Nathan. “I just can’t get over it. It’s 
really amazing.” 
“What is?” 
“This conversation,” said Trent, looking at Nathan, “has just 
started and it’s already boring me.” He held Nathan’s eyes a 
moment longer, letting the smile fade, and then returned to his 
sandwich. 
“I have,” Nathan began deliberately, “been auditing the sto-
ries about you. On the Boards.” 
“So?” 
“You were raised among the Castanaveras telepaths.” 
Trent said mildly, “You’ve been auditing the System Enquirer 
again.” 
“The Peaceforcers killed them. This Vance fellow who was 
chasing you, there’s some people think he was the one who gave 
the order to nuke them.” 
Trent took a long drink from his beer, wiped his mouth with 
his napkin. “Nathan, I’ve audited the same stories. I know all 
this.” 
“And you don’t want to talk about it.” 
“Not really.” 
“Where are you going?” 
“Luna City. I’ve got a bioscupltor there who’s going to work 
on me.” 
“And after that?” 
“It depends.” Trent was silent for a moment. “There’s some-
one I’d like to have join me, but she’s not going to be able to until 
I’ve set myself up.” 
“Set yourself up how?” 
“Credit, largely. I have a couple of accounts left on Earth I 
haven’t touched, but that’s because I’m not sure whether they’re 
still safe. For practical purposes they don’t exist anymore. Pro-

Moran  237 
 
fessional boosting,” said Trent, “is a very Credit-intensive occu-
pation.” 
Nathan nodded thoughtfully. “What sort of numbers are you 
talking about? Computerist jobs pay pretty well up here. You 
could—” 
Trent sighed. “Nathan.” 
“—take a job with one of the—” 
“Nathan.” 
It brought the older man up short. “What?” 
“Nathan, I made over two million CU before I was eighteen.” 
Nathan opened his mouth once, closed it again. “Are you jok-
ing?” 
“No. I’m not.” 
The man seemed at a loss for words. “You—you—what the 
hell did you spend it on?” 
“Over four years, from the time I got out of the Temple Drag-
ons, I had about three quarters of a million in expenses. Getting 
out of the Fringe cost a lot. The balance—” Trent shrugged. 
“Three hundred and forty thousand CU went to the World Food 
Bank. My friends and I spent the rest.” 
“That’s incredible.” 
Trent nodded. “It’s good.” 
“... but off the subject.” 
Trent said in exasperation, “Nobody listens. Nobody ever lis-
tens. You’re determined to have this conversation, aren’t you?” 
The old man said carefully, “Trent, I just don’t understand. 
What are you going to do?” 
“You really want to know?” 
“I really do.” 
Trent leaned forward slightly. “I’m going to hurt them, Na-
than. I’m going to kick the sons of bitches in the balls so hard 
they’re never, never going to forget it.” 
“And just how are you going to do that, boy?” 
Trent leaned back. He took a drink of his beer. “Well, I ha-
ven’t worked that part out yet.” 
The man’s voice was very gentle. “You know, lad, it can be 
done. Retiring from the hero business, I mean, working up an-

238  Tales 
other kind of business for yourself.” Nathan’s eyes were very 
steady on Trent. “Not having to live your life on the run.” 
“Well,” said Trent slowly, “that sounds like the voice of ex-
perience.” 
Nathan stared straight at Trent. His mouth worked silently 
before the words came out. “Do you know who I am?” 
Trent said swiftly, “No and don’t tell me.” 
It brought Nathan up short. “Oh?” 
“I have some idea,” said Trent more slowly. “Some. You were 
somebody. Nobody has the kind of biosculpture you’ve put your-
self through without damn good reason.” 
Nathan actually jerked. “How—you’ve been in my medical 
records.” 
Trent did not bother to deny it. “I know you were a Speed-
freak, Nathan. Probably a prominent one. If I audited records of 
the Long Run I’ll bet I could find out which one. Some day, Na-
than, there is a good chance I’ll find myself in PKF hands, get-
ting my brain drained.” Trent said the words one at a time, 
putting emphasis on them. “Nathan, I do not need to know any 
more about you than I do, and I do not want to.” 
The muscles in Nathan’s jaws were standing out. “I want,” he 
said deliberately, glaring, “to tell you a story.” 
“I already know how it ends,” said Trent. 
“Once,” said Nathan, his steady glare not wavering, “there 
was a young man named something-or-other. Growing up, this 
young man was fascinated by elegant machinery. He went to 
space in his twenties, was one of the few thousands ever adopted 
into the SpaceFarers’ Collective after it declared its independ-
ence. He was one of the very, very few who ever left it. He re-
turned to Earth in 2048, and became a part of the burgeoning 
Speedfreak culture. He married in 2060, to another Speedfreak. 
By 2063 he was prominent among them. When the Unification 
Council tried to legislate the Speedfreaks out of existence, they 
rebelled. A quiet sort of rebellion; they were going to take their 
hovercars on the Long Run, a complete circuit of the globe, in a 
caravan that numbered more than a million vehicles. They did 
this against the direct orders of the Unification Council.” 

Moran  239 
 
Nathan smiled too precisely. It was an amazing smile that 
went nowhere near the glare in his eyes. “When the hovercars 
were refueling in the mid-Atlantic a storm arose. They never 
proved it,” said the man who called himself Nathan Dark 
Clouds, “but to this day I and many others believe that the 
storm that destroyed the Speed Enthusiast’s Organization was 
engineered by the Trinity. Those who survived that storm were 
rounded up by the PKF, and some were executed. My wife was 
executed, Trent, masered to death; the PKF recorded the execu-
tions, ‘leaked’ them to the Boards. The ones who were not exe-
cuted were sent into Public Labor for the rest of their lives. I 
was—not one of the ones who would have been sent into Public 
Labor, Trent.” He was silent for a long moment. “You can do it, 
Trent. Live. Here, in peace.” 
“But,” said Trent awkwardly, “it’s just—” 
With a sound like a rifle shot Nathan slapped a hand down 
on the tabletop. “You ran all the way from Earth. When does it 
become time to stop?” 
“After I’ve won a round would be good. That would be a good 
time.” 
“I’d say you’ve won a pretty big round, Trent. You’re alive 
and the PKF doesn’t know it. You may never again get another 
chance like this, not ever.” 
“Nathan....” Trent’s voice trailed off. A troubled expression 
crossed his features like a cloud. He began again, “Nathan—I 
have a lot of anger. More than I like to think about sometimes. 
And—six years in the Fringe. And before that, yes, they killed 
everybody I grew up with.” Even now Trent did not consider 
mentioning either David or Denice. “I tell people I’m a pacifist 
and it’s partly true. Killing other people—it’s the last option, the 
very very last option. I’ve never had to use it. I’ve come close but 
I’ve never had to. But—” His voice halted, resumed again more 
slowly. “I’ve said sometimes, to some people, that I don’t believe 
in hurting others if you can avoid it. And that’s a lie.” He looked 
up, met the older man’s dark gaze. “Nathan, I want to hurt the 
Peaceforcers worse than I can say. I want to hurt them so they’ll 

240  Tales 
never, never forget it. Every day, every minute of every day. I’m 
sick in my soul from wanting to hurt them.” 
“They’re not a person, lad. You can’t ever hurt them the way 
they’ve hurt you.” 
Trent became aware that the palms of his hands were damp. 
“I can try. Besides, I have one great advantage.” 
What anger there had been in Nathan Dark Clouds’ spare, 
craggy features had vanished as though a switch had been 
thrown. He sat across the table, studying Trent carefully, saying 
nothing. 
Trent tried to smile at the man. He thought he almost car-
ried it off. “I’m alive and the PKF doesn’t know it. I may never 
get another chance like this.” 
The old man said very quietly, “People have been trying for a 
long time, Trent.” 
“Actually,” said Trent, “I have two advantages. I was raised 
by Peaceforcers. Everyone in Project Superman was. I know 
them. I know the PKF, Nathan.” 
“Other people,” said Nathan Dark Clouds, “have known the 
Peaceforcers too. And it didn’t do them a damn bit of good.” 
Trent said, “I know them inside and out, I know how they 
think, I know how they plan, I know how they work.” 
Nathan shook his head ever so slightly; for the first time 
since Trent had known him he seemed truly old. Not even look-
ing at Trent, Nathan said, “They’ll kill you, lad.” As though 
Trent were not even there, he said again, “They’ll kill you.” 
Trent said softly, “I know them in my blood.” 
 
17. 
“FEDERAL EXPRESS.” 
The webdancer sitting in front of the DataWatch terminal 
flicked open his eyes, glanced at Trent quickly, held up a hand 
in a “one moment” gesture, and went back Inside. 
It was after three A.M. Standing in the lobby of the Luna City 
branch of the Lunar DataWatch, wearing a stolen blue Federal 

Moran  241 
 
Express softsuit and carrying a package in a vacuum bag, Trent 
waited patiently. He had seen almost nobody on his way up to 
the DataWatch offices. 
Trent took his softsuit’s gloves off, hung them at his belt, and 
looked around while he waited. The lobby was sparsely deco-
rated; pale gray carpeting, a couple of long, low couches with 
video tablets chained to the arms of the couches. The office was 
located on A2, in the complex that held both Luna City Hall and 
most of the U.N. civil offices. It was at the opposite end of the 
city from the all-night bars and dance clubs and restaurants. 
The webdancer sitting behind the desk at the entrance to the 
lobby ignored Trent for two solid minutes before finally aban-
doning the Crystal Wind. “Sorry about that,” the webdancer said 
at last, eyes opening fully. He was a short pudgy man on the 
verge of obesity; his smile was anxious and his traceset was 
crooked, the trode at his left temple barely making contact with 
his skin. “I’m the only webdancer on duty in the whole damn city 
right now, and I just barely stay on top of things. What do you 
have there?” 
“Package for Colonel Despardin. Is he in?” 
The webdancer sighed loudly. “Look, I just said I was the 
only one on duty right now. If—” 
“You said you were the only webdancer on duty,” Trent said 
mildly. “You mean you’re the only person in the whole building?” 
“Yes.” 
Trent chuckled, and the webdancer looked puzzled. 
Trent said, “Then I guess you can have this.” He unzipped 
the vacuum bag and withdrew the squirt gun. He shot the man 
in the face once, put the squirt gun back in the bag and walked 
around the desk without hurry while the webdancer toppled 
forward slowly, gracefully, onto the huge control panel in front 
of the terminal. Trent pulled the traceset from the man’s head 
and gave him a gentle push to aid him on his way, out of the 
seat and onto the floor, kicked the chair out of the way and stood 
over the keyboard. He removed his handheld from the vacuum 
bag, jacked it into the terminal and donned the traceset. 

242  Tales 
There were a pair of ten-terabyte infochips in the handheld, 
one to record the session as it went down, another for copying 
out databases as they were uncovered. 
Johnny Johnny blossomed slowly around Trent. Trent’s eye-
sight faded even before he closed his eyes, and his hearing and 
sense of smell; finally he lost all contact with his body and went 
Inside, to the waiting Crystal Wind. 
... the file formats were standard, no different from those 
used by the DataWatch on Earth. Johnny Johnny pulled the 
terminal’s autohelp and copied it off into the handheld without 
examining it. He scanned through the terminal’s Emergency No-
tices; there were five in the queue, and a sixth was added as 
Johnny Johnny watched. Notices were rated Standard, Impor-
tant, Very Important, and Urgent; the first five in the queue 
were Standard, and only the sixth was rated Important. There 
was a log of all Emergency Notices routed through that terminal 
in the last five years; Johnny Johnny glanced through it briefly, 
found amazing numbers. There were 758,000 residents of Luna 
City, with an average of 445 transactions per user per day; an 
average of 340 million transactions per day. In the twenty-one 
years that had passed since DataWatch’s establishment of its 
control of the infant Lunar InfoNet, DataWatch had monitored 
over two trillion transactions in Luna City alone. 
In twenty-one years no Player had ever danced successfully 
in the U.N. Luna InfoNet. 
Johnny Johnny hesitated a moment, then copied the data out 
into the handheld for later analysis, and descended deeper into 
the terminal. 
Johnny Johnny knew within instants that this system was 
not a working part of the Key transputers; its function was to 
track and analyze those Luna City InfoNet transactions that the 
LINK transputers, at the massive Farside DataWatch facility, 
tagged as anomalous. The Lunar Information Network was in-
credibly slow by Earth standards. Before data could be copied 
across public access lasercable it was necessary for users to up-
load a description of the data to the LINK transputers at Far-
side, the ID code of the user sending the data, and the ID code of 

Moran  243 
 
the user receiving it. By law the data description sent to the 
LINK transputers could be generated by one of only three ap-
proved algorithms; uploading a manually created description 
was a crime. 
Before a user could log onto a public Board the same routine 
was required. As a result there was a perceptible delay at each 
step; every transaction had to wait for a description to be gener-
ated, for the data to be transmitted to the Key transputers, for 
the LINK to examine the description, approve or deny the 
transaction, and then send that approval or denial back to the 
user requesting access to resources. 
Only DataWatch users had unfettered access to the InfoNet; 
they were provided access codes that identified them as pre-
approved users of all resources in the U.N. Lunar InfoNet. The 
pre-approved access codes were changed every hour on the hour; 
a checksum was webcast to every node in the InfoNet, and the 
keys to the checksum were webcast to the PKF DataWatch ter-
minals. Without the keys the checksum was completely mean-
ingless, and it was impossible to backtrack the keys from the 
checksum. 
Disgusting, thought Johnny Johnny clearly. Protected by the 
PKF authorizations this terminal possessed, he danced out into 
the Crystal Wind. 
HALFWAY AROUND THE world at the Farside DataWatch, Watch-
dog, a program that hung very near the fine line that separated 
the illegal, self-aware AIs from the huge collection of expert sys-
tems that all of human space depended upon, roused itself and 
went out into the Lunar InfoNet. 
InfoNet lasercable transmissions in Luna City had jumped 
by a twentieth of one percent; and Watchdog was not receiving 
an appropriate increase in encoded descriptions. 
Something was badly wrong. 
JOHNNY JOHNNY FLICKERED through Board after Board, filtering 
and editing and channeling the data that his biological compo-
nent received, spooling the balance of the data into the hand-

244  Tales 
held. It was all so appallingly slow; most of the hardware in the 
Lunar InfoNet was old by comparison with Earth-based com-
puter systems, and even the relatively few state of the art sys-
tems were hampered by the mandatory checks placed on every 
transaction; at times, Johnny Johnny was shocked to learn, the 
delays stretched so long that humans became aware of them. 
He cataloged the resources available to him. There was logic 
available, unused, in the comsats that circled Luna, and Johnny 
Johnny sent phages up through the microwave relays of the Lu-
nar City telexchange to find and take what resources they could. 
The Luna City telexchange was not, properly speaking, a part of 
the InfoNet, but it was intimately connected in many ways; 
Johnny Johnny was surprised to discover that the telexchange 
was used by Free Luna territories and United Nations territo-
ries alike—not for the territories to speak with one another, but 
for communications with the comsats. Johnny Johnny attached 
over two hundred of the Free Luna data lines and spooled the 
conversations and data being transmitted across them into the 
handheld. 
One of the phages called down to Johnny Johnny; it had ac-
quired a comsat. Johnny Johnny considered and then leaped— 
—up. 
From the safety of the comsat Johnny Johnny looked down 
upon Luna, upon its twenty-eight million United Nations citi-
zens, the three and a half million residents of Free Luna. Video 
coursed through him, ten thousand conversations, every byte of 
the data being sent from Boards and users inside Luna City to 
Boards and users elsewhere on the planet. 
There was a curious emptiness to it all. 
Johnny Johnny paused, dissatisfied, tempted to disengage 
and split into his component parts but displeased with the lack 
of useful information about the LINK. The public face of the 
LINK transputers, the protocols whereby all transactions were 
marked and encrypted, was both unbreakable and perfectly 
clear. But after the risk of hijacking an actual DataWatch ter-
minal, it galled Johnny Johnny to find that he knew no more 
about the LINK itself than he had known when he began. Every 

Moran  245 
 
piece of knowledge he had of the thing was from observation of 
what it did; Johnny Johnny lacked completely any feel for what 
it was. 
The swift question was so lacking in emotion it seemed po-
lite. 
I am Watchdog. Who are you? Are you a “Player”? 
It did not wait for an answer. 
In the instant of the question’s asking, without warning, 
Johnny Johnny felt himself ripped free of the comsat he had sto-
len. With astonishing speed he found himself tumbling down 
into Realtime, as vast sections of the Crystal Wind were denied 
him, closed off one by one. He lost the comsat first and the Lu-
nar telexchange in the next moment, as the monstrous, dispas-
sionate master of the LINK called Watchdog closed in on him. 
Johnny Johnny fought back in near panic, in all the fashions he 
knew, generated ghosts and left them behind to distract Watch-
dog, scrambled memory in the processors he had claimed before 
releasing them. Johnny Johnny could feel the moves surprise 
Watchdog, slow it slightly; in all its existence it had never en-
countered a Player with the sorts of resources any Player had in 
Earth’s InfoNet. 
It was an instant’s respite, and without consulting his bio-
logical component—there was no time—Johnny Johnny seized 
upon it, fled down into Realtime only slightly more quickly than 
Watchdog could sort through the myriad of false trails he left 
behind. 
TRENT SLAMMED down into Realtime with physical impact. 
His eyes opened onto the information-sterile lobby. In a daze, 
Trent looked slowly around the room, then down at the form of 
the unconscious PKF webdancer at his feet. 
A long moment passed. There was a loud ringing in Trent’s 
ears. 
“Boss?” The voice came from the handheld’s speaker, not 
through the traceset Trent still wore. 
“Yeah?” 
“You okay?” 

246  Tales 
Trent shook himself slightly. Never in his life had he come 
down out of the Crystal Wind so violently. His hands shook. “I 
think so. What happened?” 
“I don’t know.” Johnny Johnny was silent a beat. “This was a 
bad idea. Boss, give them the Luna InfoNet, let’s run away and 
Play somewhere else. I want out of here. I don’t want to dance 
on Luna, I don’t want to be on this planet. That thing scares 
me.” 
“Me too, Johnny Johnny. Me too. Running sounds like a ... 
good idea.” It seemed to Trent that his thoughts moved very 
slowly indeed. “Johnny? Any alarms out there referencing this 
location? Did it track us this far?” 
“No alarms in the terminal, Boss. I’m not going into the In-
foNet to find out about other locations.” 
“Okay.” Trent grinned suddenly, shakily. “How many trans-
actions did we go through?” 
“Thirteen thousand, seven hundred and nineteen.” 
Trent unjacked his handheld. 
He typed a message on the terminal, the letters glowing 
bright red on blue: 
Score, Luna City; 2048-2069: 
DataWatch: Two trillion and change. 
Players: 13,719. 
He sealed his handheld and squirt gun in the vacuum bag 
and left, walking quickly through the empty corridors. 
NEWSDANCER TERRY SHAWMAC once wrote that when you get off 
Earth the best way to guess a stranger’s politics is by his watch. 
There is a degree of truth to this; in United Nations territories 
the clock is usually set to Capitol City time. Free Luna, Mars, 
and most but not all of the Belt CityStates run on Greenwich 
mean time. The SpaceFarers, bound to no planet, live by a ten-
hour metric day, which, while admittedly beginning and ending 
at the same moment as those days that run under twenty-four 
hour Greenwich mean time, nonetheless adds yet another ele-
ment of confusion to the subject; when a SpaceFarer tells you he 

Moran  247 
 
will meet you at five o’clock, he means noon—“centerday,” as 
SpaceFarers like to say. 
The problem of varying standards of time is worst in Luna 
City itself. It is the oldest city on the Moon, and by far the larg-
est. Despite being in United Nations territory it receives both 
tourists and businessmen from those Belt CityStates that have 
not made the mistake of sponsoring cities in Free Luna. On top 
of this, the SpaceFarer presence is large: outside of Navajo 
Spaceport on Earth, at any given time Luna City sports the 
largest number of SpaceFarers to be found in one spot on any 
planetary surface in the System. 
It is, despite the claims of trade centers in Free Luna terri-
tory, the source of over a third of all trade goods that leave the 
moon. It possesses the largest dome and the longest catapult—
by virtue of its length the Luna City catapult is the only cata-
pult on Luna capable of handling passengers. At the launch 
head its acceleration is under four gees, and it drops to less than 
three gees by the time the capsule has reached the far end of the 
catapult. 
These are facts. Clean. Simple. 
They tell you nothing about the city. 
 
Luna City, Terry Shawmac wrote in one Dateline 
column, has a soul. 
It is unlike any city on Earth. It is unlike any city 
I have visited off Earth. In size and traffic the only 
place I have ever visited off Earth that it resembles 
is Halfway. But the differences with Halfway out-
weigh the resemblances. Halfway is the ultimate 
company town; Luna City has no relationship that 
approaches the importance of the relationship be-
tween Tytan Manufacturing and Halfway. And 
Halfway is aggressively proud of being a city in 
drop; it lacks consistent local vertical, and most 
downsiders are never truly comfortable there. 
Luna City, through some happy accident, ended 
up a fusion of the best elements of downside cities 

248  Tales 
and all the other off-Earth communities. It would 
have made more sense if Luna City were one of the 
newer off-Earth communities, but that’s not the 
case. Luna City is the oldest city in existence off 
Earth. It was never planned, and later attempts at 
planned Lunar or CityState communities have 
never worked as well. 
It just happened. 
Some of it is accidental. The Flight Caverns are a 
good example. That muscle-powered flight was pos-
sible in a pressurized Lunar cavern has been known 
for over a century; as a plaque inside the Flight 
Caverns tells you, a futurist named Heinlein de-
scribed it in 1957, the same year the first artificial 
satellite was launched. But it was accidental that 
appropriate caverns actually existed less than five 
kilometers from the original center of Luna City. 
When the original dome was constructed, back in 
the early ’20s, there was no discussion as to site: 
they placed it smack on top of what are now called 
the Flight Caverns, and opened the Hotel Coperni-
cus on top of that. 
Look down on Luna City from above, in sunlight, 
and you will see what is easily the loveliest sight on 
Luna’s surface, and that is another accident. In the 
early ’20s there was no such thing as practical fu-
sion power; the fields of solar power panels that sur-
round Luna City, which glitter in the sun like the 
petals of a flower, were obsolete within four years of 
their construction. 
Much of Luna City’s beauty is planned. 
The impression many downsiders have of cities 
on Luna (“in Luna,” as loonies would like it) is that 
of artifice—of airplants, of the recycling of water 
and other resources, of an existence dependent on 
machines. So far as it goes it is an accurate picture; 

Moran  249 
 
survival in Luna City does depend on machines, 
and its inhabitants never forget it. 
But I have never walked through any downside 
city, including some in tropical climates, with so 
many growing plants. Plants in every corridor, in 
every open area. Shrubs, potted plants, flowers—I 
remember the amazement and delight I felt the first 
time I entered one of the long cross-town corridors—
this was my first day in Luna City—and saw that it 
was covered with grass as far as I could see. 
There are cities on Earth that are known for be-
ing pleasant to walk through. Most of Luna City is 
beneath ground, and it stretches for kilometer after 
kilometer, through eleven levels beneath the surface 
of Luna and three above. I spent six months of my 
life walking through the corridors of Luna City, and 
I saw perhaps half of them. Because of the gravity, 
walking is not wearying; even downsiders in poor 
health can spend half a day sightseeing without 
tempting exhaustion. 
There are eight or nine twenty-four-hour restau-
rants—ten-hour restaurants, as SpaceFarers would 
have it—and four times as many bars. Unification 
propaganda to the contrary, there is no violent 
crime to speak of, and most of what crime truly ex-
ists is directed either at evading Unification taxes, 
or at conducting commerce with Free Luna. The lat-
ter, though technically illegal, is so widespread that 
even the large and constantly growing contingents 
of Peaceforcers have not been able to put a dent in it. 
I said Luna City has a soul. I was speaking meta-
phorically, of course. No creation of plastisteel and 
ferrocrete can really have a soul. 
But Luna City does have the Gardens. 
IN OCTOBER, on a great redwood platform reaching sixty meters 
above the Lunar Gardens, Trent dined with a SpaceFarer 

250  Tales 
named Felix K’Hin. Eerie, impossibly thin green-leafed and ev-
ergreen trees reached up from the Gardens, grew around the 
platform on all sides so that the diners could see nothing but the 
trees. They were only ten meters beneath the very top of the 
dome, and the scent of flowers and growing things permeated 
the air around them. It was “raining” over the Gardens, a fine 
gray mist that fell away from the interior surface of the dome, 
falling gently and implacably throughout dinner. Electrostatic 
fields projected above the tables and walkways kept perhaps 
half of the surface of the redwood platform dry. 
There was a gentle breeze so cool it was almost crisp. Trent 
did not know where it came from. 
It was unlike any place Trent had ever seen in his life. The 
closest analogy that occurred to him came from holos he had 
played against the wall in his apartment on Flushing Street, 
forested areas in the northwest United States and Canada. It 
was only a vague resemblance; the Gardens was itself, nothing 
else. 
It was the second time Trent and K’Hin had attempted to 
meet; the first time, the SpaceFarer had shown up for their 
meeting on SpaceFarer time, and Trent had arrived on Unifica-
tion time. Now, for their second meeting, it was two o’clock in 
the morning by Capitol City time, the clock that U.N. Luna and 
Halfway ran on. Despite that it was fairly busy in the most ex-
pensive restaurant on Luna; Trent and K’Hin were only two of 
about thirty diners. Like most of space, Luna City was slowly 
evolving away from the Earth cycle of day and night. 
Over dinner Trent and K’Hin discussed price of passage to 
Mars, and then to Ceres, with a valid passport for Trent and one 
unidentified female, for the Association of Belt CityStates. 
K’Hin, a huge black man who reminded Trent of Reverend Andy 
without the muscles, was one of the most powerful SpaceFarer 
brokers in Luna City. He was explaining that what ’Sieur Vera 
wanted was impossible, and if it was not impossible—not that 
K’Hin was conceding this for an instant—it certainly could not 
be done for the ridiculous sum ’Sieur Vera was suggesting. 
Trent smiled at the man. “It gets worse.” 

Moran  251 
 
K’Hin looked honestly amazed. “What? You mean besides the 
fact that you’re looking for a passport for a Unification citizen 
whose name you can’t give me, besides the fact that you can’t 
tell me when or where the damn ship is supposed to land to pick 
the two of you up, besides the fact that nobody I’ve been in touch 
with on Earth or off has ever fucking heard of a Thomas Vera, 
besides all that there’s more?” 
“There may be—problems—with the Unification as a result 
of this passage. The SpaceFarers’ Collective needs to be aware of 
this.” 
K’Hin looked delighted. “Really? War, maybe?” 
Trent smiled at the man. “There’s very little chance of war 
arising between the Unification and the SpaceFarers’ Collective 
over this. Simulations I’ve run put it at less than one in five.” 
K’Hin started to laugh and then stopped abruptly. He sat 
under Trent’s steady gaze, simply looking at Trent. In a differ-
ent voice than Trent had heard him use before he said, “You’re 
serious.” 
“I’m a thief, Felix, and I’m going to boost the Peace Keeping 
Force. I’ve narrowed it down to three targets. Only one of those 
targets presents any serious possibility that its loss will cause 
the Unification to go to war.” 
K’Hin said slowly, “It’s possible. There’s members of the Col-
lective’s Board of Directors who wouldn’t mind seeing someone 
give the PKF the boot. Thomas, I’ll tell you what I’ll do. I’m go-
ing to set a base price of sixty thousand hard CU. That’s Space-
Farer CU, silver, not that Chinese crap. That’s covering pickup 
at a convenient location such as the Luna City landpads. You 
guarantee no hassles from PKF or Space Force with a bond 
that’s forfeited in case of serious trouble caused by you. In re-
turn, with at least two week’s notice, we guarantee prompt 
pickup, a fast ship, two passports. You’ll probably need to meet 
with a representative of the Collective’s Board of Directors at 
some point before the boost goes, to describe in a general way 
the boost you’re planning, the upside and the downside for the 
Collective.” 
Trent said, “Base price?” 

252  Tales 
K’Hin shrugged. “It gets dangerous, the price goes up.” 
Trent nodded. “All right. In general, that sounds good. We’re 
going to need to work out some of the procedural details, but—” 
Trent broke off as the lone human waiter on duty approached 
the table. 
He addressed Trent. “’Sieur Vera?” 
Trent looked up. “Yes?” 
“You have a call, sir.” 
Trent glanced at K’Hin. “Hang in there. I’ll be right back.” 
K’Hin leaned back in the delicate, impossibly thin chair. “I’ll 
wait. A while.” 
Trent rose, walked along the path away from their table, 
with railings to keep the customers from falling to their probable 
deaths below, and into the restaurant proper. The waiter led 
Trent to a small cubicle near the restrooms; there was a termi-
nal inside, the holofield flashing the words Call Waiting at 
Trent. 
Once the waiter had left Trent unhooked his handheld from 
his belt, jacked it into the terminal. “Johnny Johnny?” 
“Yes, Boss?” 
“Cut off the terminal microphone. Alter my voice print as it 
goes out.” 
“Done, Boss.” 
Trent touched the Accept stud. 
Candy Blain’s image formed in the field. He glared at Trent. 
“I’ve been trying to get ahold of you for more than an hour.” 
“So?” 
“Nathan’s been shot.” 
“What?” 
“Nathan’s been shot. A Peaceforcer squad dropped from orbit 
on his partitions out at Aristillus. He had some warning, appar-
ently, was in his p-suit when they blew the place down to death 
pressure.” 
“Is he alive?” 
“Yes. Or was,” said Blain, “when last I heard. He had some 
heavy ammo, God knows what he was doing with it; damaged 

Moran  253 
 
the semiballistic the Peaceforcers came down in, blew the tracks 
off a crawler that tried to follow his chameleon into the desert.” 
“The bolt hole,” said Trent stupidly. 
“Yeah. I’m one of the best goddamn friends he has on this 
planet,” Blain said bitterly, “and I don’t know where his bolt 
hole is.” 
Trent said, “I do.” 
“Tell me about it.” 
“How badly was he hurt? Exactly.” 
Blain looked weary. “I don’t know. Rumor at Aristillus says 
the PKF reported at least three lasers got a piece of him. He was 
losing air when he reached the chameleon.” 
Trent was not certain he wanted to hear the answer. “Why?” 
Blain’s glower flared again. “Harboring a fugitive—
‘Thomas’.” 
“How long ago?” 
“Three, three and a half hours ago.” 
Trent took a deep breath. He was surprised at how shaky he 
felt. “All right. Thanks, Candy. I’m on it.” 
“Sure.” The word was openly skeptical. “One last question.” 
Trent looked away from the holocams, at the image floating 
in the field. “What?” 
“Are you Trent?” 
Trent cut the connection and unhooked his handheld. He 
walked back to Felix K’Hin without hurrying. “Felix.” 
Trent’s expression must have alerted the man; he sat up very 
straight. “What is it?” 
“The word’s gone up on a friend. I need a semiballistic hopper 
to Cassini, and a crawler from there.” 
K’Hin grinned broadly. “The semi’s going to cost you, my 
friend. You’re looking at—” 
With his handheld Trent reached across the table and swept 
K’Hin’s meal off the tabletop, knocked it ten meters out into the 
open air. K’Hin stared at Trent in shock; even among SpaceFar-
ers, for whom the starvation of huge portions of Earth’s popula-
tion was only another item on the news Boards, wasting food 

254  Tales 
was very close to being one of the worst crimes a man could be 
guilty of. 
“Felix, don’t fuck with me. I’ll pay what it’s worth. I need it. 
Right now.” 
K’Hin’s grin came back slowly; then, if anything, it got 
broader. “It’s done.” 
FROM LUNA CITY at Copernicus, Trent took an SB to Cassini cra-
ter, slightly north and east of Aristillus, north and slightly west 
of Nathan’s bolt hole, in the foothills of the Caucasus Mountains. 
There was a crawler, modified to cover its tracks, waiting for 
him at Cassini; that crater, putatively a part of the United Na-
tions, was practically owned by the Syndic, and the Peaceforcers 
went in only in force. 
From Cassini, Trent headed south. 
NATHAN WAS NOT at the bolt hole. 
Trent backtracked, toward Aristillus. He drove through 
darkness for nearly half an hour, across the regolith, growing 
more cautious as he ventured further away from the bolt hole. 
He was on the verge of turning back when he finally found the 
chameleon, the tracks still churning, jammed nose-first against 
the side of a small hill. A rock slide had come down to cover the 
front of the vehicle; it took Trent over an hour to dig through the 
rubble until he managed to reach the airlock. Cycling through 
the airlock, Trent found Nathan, in his pressure suit, sitting on 
the long bench seat before the control panel, slumped face first 
on the controls, pressure suit patterned with laser tracks. 
Trent could tell by the limp feel of his own pressure suit that 
the interior of the crawler was pressurized. Trent gently pulled 
Nathan’s still form up from the control panel, killed the engine, 
and removed his own helmet and then Nathan’s. When the en-
gines died it was abruptly very quiet inside the crawler. There 
was blood all over the inside of the helmet, all over Nathan’s 
face. Nathan’s head lolled freely on the seat’s headrest. 

Moran  255 
 
A distant sigh was all the sign Nathan gave that he was 
alive. The front of Nathan’s pressure suit had been blackened by 
a maser burst. At the abdomen the reinforcing rings had melted. 
“... Trent ...” 
The word was the merest ghost. “I’m here.” Trent did not 
even consider trying to remove Nathan’s pressure suit; it was 
probably all that was holding him together. 
Nathan’s eyes flickered open, stared sightlessly up at Trent, 
up toward the ceiling of the chameleon. “... first-aid ... stimtabs 
...” Trent debated with himself briefly and lost. He took both a 
stimtab and a painkiller from the kit, injected the painkiller, 
waited ten seconds and broke the stimtab under Nathan’s nose. 
The response came quickly; Nathan’s eyes flickered, focused on 
Trent. 
“Thanks,” Nathan whispered hoarsely. “Undignified damn 
way to go, nose down on the control board.” 
Trent could think of nothing to say. 
Nathan seemed to gather his energy. “How’d you find me?” 
“SB to Cassini; I rode a crawler from there.” 
“If I don’t get to a medbot,” Nathan wheezed, “I’m going to 
die. They shot me with a maser, Trent, it burned ...” 
“Nathan—I—I can’t get you to a medbot in time. I’d have had 
to bring the SB down right at the bolt hole. I didn’t do that, Na-
than.” 
“Oh.” Nathan grinned weakly. “That was a mistake.” 
“I’d have had to give the pilot the coordinates for your bolt 
hole, Nathan. I thought you needed a hiding place.” 
Nathan’s voice faded. “Second mistake.” His eyes closed. 
“Trent?” 
“Yes?” 
“Do you know Catholic last rites?” 
“No.” 
“Trent?” 
“Yes?” 
“Can you take me to the bolt hole, Trent?” 

256  Tales 
“I can’t take you to my crawler, Nathan. I heard they shot 
you and I brought a spare p-suit with me, but—if I try taking 
you out of your suit it’ll kill you.” 
Nathan snorted, coughed blood. “No kidding.” He laughed 
shakily, blood dripping off his chin, to the scorched surface of his 
p-suit. “This thing—” His voice was cut off by another round of 
coughing. When he resumed his voice was noticeably weaker. “—
move at all?” 
“The chameleon?” Trent looked over the control panel for the 
first time. “I don’t know. There’s not much fuel left.” 
“Auxiliary tanks are on the ... rack. Outside, in back,” Na-
than whispered. “Change them.” 
“All right. I will.” 
“Take me home.” 
“I’ll do my best.” 
IT TOOK MOST of ten minutes before Trent had the fuel tanks 
changed over; he had never attempted to change a crawler’s fuel 
tanks before, and he botched the first connection and sprayed 
the fuel at high pressure over the crawler’s rear. The second and 
third tanks he got on correctly. He cycled back through the air-
lock and brought the tanks on line. The fuel gauge flickered back 
to Full; Trent backed the vehicle up, drove past the crawler he 
had come in, and headed north. 
He sat in the middle of the long bench seat, helping Nathan 
keep upright. He considered letting the man lie down on the 
seat, but there was blood in his lungs. Trent could hear it every 
time Nathan gathered the necessary energy to speak, a bubbling 
sound in his voice, and he was afraid that if Nathan lay down he 
might drown in his own blood. 
Nathan whispered, “How much longer?” 
“It took me half an hour to get here. Call it twenty-five min-
utes before we reach the bolt hole.” 
“God, it hurts.” Nathan’s eyes were losing focus as the 
crawler rolled across the surface of the Moon. “Do you know 
what it felt like when the maser beam hit me? I wanted to die 
just so the pain would stop.” 

Moran  257 
 
“Nathan, you need to conserve your strength.” Trent looked 
at the pained expression on the man’s face, and said gently, 
“When we get to the bolt hole I can call Cassini, have them send 
a hopper.” Trent was certain that the semiballistic would not get 
there in time. “Just be quiet and try to relax.” 
Trent could not tell if Nathan believed him or not; the man 
did not try to speak again for several minutes. 
There was silence then but for the sound of Nathan’s wheez-
ing. 
The crawler rolled across the Lunar surface. 
“Trent?” 
“Yes?” 
“Who were they after? You, or me?” 
Trent said nothing. 
At length Nathan said, “It was you. They were after you.” 
“Probably.” 
“I guess it ... doesn’t matter.” 
“I can’t see how, Nathan.” 
“I think I’m going to die, Trent.” 
“Everybody does.” 
“Soon.” 
Trent said, “I think you are.” 
“Well, shit.” Nathan’s breathing rattled hollowly in his 
throat. “Trent ... you can’t fight them. This is what happens 
when you try to fight them.” 
Trent was intensely aware of how alone they were, of the 
man dying next to him. 
“How much longer till we’re home?” 
“Twenty minutes, Nathan.” 
“Oh.” After a moment Nathan said simply, “I can’t wait that 
long.” 
TRENT LEFT NATHAN’S body inside the bolt hole, and walked 
through the bolt hole, wiping every surface he could conceivably 
have touched during his stay. 
And then brought the bolt hole down with two kilos of blast-
ing plastic. 

258  Tales 
It was not a dramatic thing; watching the time-delayed ex-
plosion from the safety of the crawler, all Trent saw was a gentle 
sag as the edge of the crater buckled, sank, and settled in. 
He had thought about leaving a stone, cutting an inscription 
with his laser, but he could find no true need for such a thing 
within himself. 
And Nathan, whoever he had once been, was dead. 
 
18. 
IT WAS NIGHT, and the Earth was full. The blue Earthlight 
flooded down across the Lunar plains, turned the world eerie. 
He sat in the blue dimness, in Nathan Dark Clouds’ unmov-
ing chameleon, overlooking Cassini crater. Wearing his pressure 
suit except for the helmet; that was on the seat at his side. 
Watching cartoons. 
They were flat cartoons from a time before the Unification, 
made sometime around the second World War. They were part 
of the library Trent kept in his handheld for just such circum-
stances. 
The flat plane of the cartoon was located midway through the 
depth of the holofield. With a perfect lack of expression Trent 
watched some of the greatest art to come out of the preceding 
century—Duck Dodgers in the 24th-1/2th Century, followed by 
two Roadrunner cartoons, followed by Bugs and Daffy and 
Elmer Fudd. 
Thinking. 
He remembered the moments in the Detention Center, the 
feeling of complete correctness that had come over him in the in-
stant before he had brought down the PKF Boards. 
“So shoot me!” screams Daffy at Elmer Fudd. 
Elmer does. 
The paths split away before Trent with a clarity unlike any-
thing he had ever known before. One path, the one he had been 
planning for—hoping for—took him back to Earth within a year 

Moran  259 
 
or two, to a small house on an island somewhere in the South 
Seas. 
Daffy is staring at Bugs Bunny, still smoking slightly from 
Elmer Fudd’s shotgun blast. Elmer stands patiently, watching 
the two argue. Daffy says, “Let’s run through that again.” 
Bugs shrugs. “Okay.” Addressing Elmer in a bored voice: 
“Would you like to shoot me now or wait until you get home?” 
Daffy, in the same bored voice: “Shoot him now, shoot him 
now.” 
Bugs Bunny: “You keep out of this, he doesn’t have to shoot 
you now.” 
Daffy Duck: “Ha!” 
And then there was the other path, the one that led to direct 
conflict with the PKF—and to death, or capture, or legend. 
“That’s it! Hold it right there.” Daffy looks craftily toward the 
audience, toward Trent. “Pronoun trouble.” He looks back at 
Bugs. “It’s not, ‘He doesn’t have to shoot you now,’ it’s, ‘He 
doesn’t have to shoot me now.’ Well, I say he does have to shoot 
me now!” 
Elmer does. 
Trent found his lips turning slightly upward. “Turn it off, 
Johnny.” 
The image vanished. “Okay, Boss. What now?” 
Trent turned the engine back on, sat up as the crawler jerked 
forward, down the long slope of the crater wall. “They keep 
pushing, Johnny.” 
“I know, Boss.” 
“Every time I’m ready to let it go they push again.” Trent 
stared forward. “I’m standing here with my back to the wall and 
they ... keep ... pushing.” 
Johnny Johnny said nothing in reply. 
“Except for Denice, and maybe David, they killed everyone I 
grew up with.” 
His Image’s voice said, very softly indeed, “I know, Boss.” 
“And now Nathan. I’m tempted to get angry.” 
“About time!” 

260  Tales 
“But I’m not going to.” Trent said again, very softly, “I am not 
going to.” 
There was an audible sigh from the handheld. “Boss, I’m 
never going to understand you.” 
“Do you know what their greatest weakness is?” 
“The PKF?” Johnny Johnny thought about it in silence for 
several minutes as the crawler rolled forward. Finally he said, 
“They’re not as smart as we are?” 
“No, Johnny. Most of them aren’t, but some of them are. 
Vance may be smarter.” 
“Then I don’t know, Boss.” 
“They have no sense of humor, Johnny Johnny.” 
“No sense of humor.” 
“None.” 
Johnny Johnny’s voice held plain exasperation. “But what 
are you going to do, Boss?” 
Trent was silent for a very long time. Finally he whispered, 
“Humiliate them.” 
Johnny Johnny said, “Oh?” 
“Hurt them.” 
Johnny Johnny said, “Oh.” 
Alone with his Image in the darkness of the crawler, Trent 
did smile then, a terrible smile without amusement. 
His eyes were focused on something very far away. 
“I am,” he said, “going to bring them down.” 
 
19. 
HE BROUGHT THE semiballistic down at the edge of Bessel Cra-
ter, in Free Luna. 
Briefcase in hand, Trent walked out across the pale Lunar 
soil to where the city’s airlocks awaited him. 
A WOMAN OF about thirty stood immediately inside the inner air-
lock door, in a small corridor that led to a pair of maglevs, for 
the descent beneath the surface. She wore scarlet paramilitary 

Moran  261 
 
fatigues, with a Series IV Excalibur energy rifle slung over her 
back and a hand maser slung in a quick-draw holster just over 
her hipbone. 
Trent unclasped the helmet to his p-suit. 
The woman said flatly, “Welcome to Free Luna.” 
“Thank you.” 
“In the past,” she said, “we’ve shot down unannounced visi-
tors before they could land.” 
Trent said, “I’m here to see the Mayor.” 
The woman shook her head. This time she smiled. “No, you’re 
not.” 
“I’m not?” 
“No.” 
“What am I doing here, then?” 
“Leaving.” Trent had not noticed her hand moving; it was 
now resting on the butt of the maser. “You weren’t invited, you 
didn’t advise us you were coming, and you’re not wanted.” 
“I’m sorry about that,” said Trent, “but I was in a hurry. I 
needed to go dancing, and you can’t do that in the Unification 
InfoNet. I’m told things are a bit looser in the Free Luna In-
foNet?” 
The woman shrugged. “Could be. I’m not a webdancer, just a 
soldier. You’re not welcome, kid.” 
Trent sighed, looking at the floor, trying to think while 
standing there with his helmet in his hand. The floor had not 
been swept or mopped recently; Lunar dust had been tracked 
over it. Trent looked back up at the woman. “What’s your 
name?” 
“Domino. I’m the Vice-Mayor of Bessel City Free Luna.” 
Trent blinked. “No kidding?” 
“No kidding.” 
“Domino’s a neat name.” 
“Thank you.” 
“I feel like we haven’t been introduced,” said Trent. 
“We haven’t been,” Domino said agreeably. “We don’t know 
you. Nobody’s introduced us, and Bessel Free Luna doesn’t take 
in waifs.” 

262  Tales 
“My name is Trent.” 
“That’s nice. Pleased to—” Domino stopped speaking. 
“Really?” 
Trent nodded. “I promise.” 
He could see that the woman believed him instantly. “Why 
are you here?” 
“Well, I’m close to being broke,” said Trent. “I have things I 
need to do, expensive things, and frankly I’d like to do it with 
your Credit.” 
“What’s that to us?” 
“Vice-Mayor Domino?” 
“Yes?” 
“I’m really here to see the Mayor.” 
Domino raised her voice. “Quentin!” 
A male voice came from somewhere above their heads in the 
small corridor. “Bring him in.” 
Domino’s hand left the butt of the hand maser. She took a 
step forward and held her hand out to Trent. “Welcome to Free 
Luna, Trent.” 
Trent took her hand in his gloved right hand. “You said that 
once already.” 
“Last time I didn’t mean it.” 
THE MAYOR’S OFFICE was located in one of the very few above-
ground buildings. 
Mayor Quentin Noas was sitting behind his desk, reading, 
when Trent was ushered in. He was reading a real book, made of 
plastipaper; a Western, from the cover. His feet were up on the 
desk; a cigar was in the hand that wasn’t holding the book. 
The window behind the mayor’s desk had a wide, panoramic 
view of the Lunar surface. 
The mayor of Bessel City was incredibly ancient. His face 
looked like a puzzle that had been assembled with a sledge-
hammer. It took him several moments before he even realized 
that Trent had been let in. He blinked slowly, like a lizard, and 
put down his Western. He took a puff of his cigar before saying 
anything. “So you’re—” 

Moran  263 
 
Trent said, “Shh,” putting a finger to his lips. Stepping up to 
the mayor’s desk, Trent put down the briefcase, opened it, and 
withdrew a circuit tracer. Circling the room slowly, he found 
three active power sources in the walls; the energy level was 
characteristic of listening devices. Returning to his briefcase, 
Trent withdrew his handheld, tuned into a news Board, and 
turned the volume high. He made the circuit again, and found 
another listening device—a passive bug that did not operate 
unless activated by the sound of people talking. “Nobody ever 
listens,” Trent muttered, “except when they’re not supposed to.” 
Whistling, Trent rummaged in his briefcase and came up with a 
handful of tiny speakers. He rummaged in the briefcase again 
until he found the glue and used it to affix the speakers to the 
walls over the listening devices. Trent turned the speakers on. 
Domino stood in the doorway, watching Trent curiously. 
Crossing behind the mayor’s desk, Trent checked the 
drapes—thick, heavy cloth. He pulled the drapes closed over the 
window. He came back around to the front of the Mayor’s desk 
and turned off his handheld. 
The walls of Mayor Noas’ office were hung with paintings. 
Some were good, in Trent’s semieducated opinion; some were 
not. He was certain that all of them were expensive. Trent wan-
dered around without speaking, looking at the paintings. 
Mayor Noas leaned forward and jabbed his cigar at Trent. 
“Are you the Trent I think you are?” 
“I don’t know,” said Trent. “My name is Trent, Trent the 
thief. I need Credit for a job I have in mind and I thought it 
would be nice if you gave it to me.” Trent had stopped before an 
old acrylic painting. The painting showed a beautiful kitten sit-
ting in the middle of a black and white tile floor, with a blond 
Caucasian doll clutched in its mouth. There were puncture 
wounds in the body of the doll, and blood oozed from the injury, 
dripping to the pristine floor beneath. It was signed H. Devlin. 
“This is good. A little sick, but—” 
“Everyone thought you were dead.” 
“They were wrong.” 
“My God, son, d’you have any idea how hot you are?” 

264  Tales 
“Yes.” 
The mayor of Bessel City nodded. “What could you possibly 
do for me that would entice me to stick my head out where the 
Peaceforcers are gonna blast it off?” 
Trent stepped to the side so that he could look at the painting 
in a different light. “Want to sell this?” 
“Nah. You couldn’t afford it; it was painted by the Prophet 
Harry hisself.” Mayor Noas stared at the back of Trent’s head. 
“Tell me why you closed the drapes.” 
“When you speak, the sound waves vibrate the window 
panes. Not much—less so than on Earth, where there’s no pres-
sure differential to keep the windows rigid the way they are 
here—but enough. If somebody outside bounces a very low in-
tensity laser off the window, decodes the modulation in the re-
turning beam, poof. Your security is useless. On Earth I’d have 
attached a buzzer to the window; up here a thick curtain is just 
as good.” 
Mayor Noas chewed on his inner lip. “Damn, I was afraid 
you’d have a good reason for doing that. What d’you want?” 
“Access to a full sensory terminal and the Free Luna InfoNet. 
It shouldn’t take me more than twenty minutes. I need it soon.” 
Mayor Noas examined the end of his cigar. “That’s tough, 
Trent.” 
Trent turned suddenly. “That’s not my fault, is it?” 
Mayor Noas blinked. “What?” 
“I want to use your full sensory,” Trent repeated. After a 
moment, as though making a concession, he added, “If you let 
me use the full sensory I’ll contract a boost for you. A very rea-
sonable boost, only a half million CU, 250,000 up front as ex-
pense Credit.” 
Mayor Noas had a sharp, barking laugh. “D’you know who 
you’re talking to, son? Before I joined Bessel I was one of the top 
Syndic Lords in Luna.” 
“I know. That’s why I’m here. An ex-Syndic Lord with ties to 
the Erisian Claw, ties to the SpaceFarers’ Collective, ties to the 
City-States....” Trent said mildly, “You keep a low profile, Mayor 
Noas. I spent five thousand CU having a Player I know on Earth 

Moran  265 
 
do a search of Syndic Lords doing time off Earth. Once we had 
that list we had to cull to find out who got exiled for incompe-
tence and who got exiled for politics. Then we culled again for 
known members of the Temple of Eris.” Trent said evenly, “Your 
name popped up, retired two and a half years, hired by Bessel 
Astrogation Products to manage the city of Bessel Free Luna. 
You’re the first person on the list, Quentin. You’re not the last.” 
“I know,” said Mayor Noas, “just about every damn thing 
worth boosting on this planet. First of all, there’s nothing worth 
paying five hunnert thousand Credits for. Second, if there was, 
and there ain’t, you are just about the last man on this planet I’d 
contract it to. I don’t need the PKF renegotiating our treaty.” 
“I’ll steal the LINK for you.” 
“Besides,” Mayor Noas was continuing, in a somewhat gen-
tler tone, and he rose from behind his desk, “you’ll what?” 
“Steal the LINK,” Trent said. At Mayor Noas’ look of incom-
prehension, he added, “The Key. You know, the Lunar InfoNet 
Key.” 
“It can’t be done.” 
“I’ve studied it. I know something about the program that 
runs the LINK transputers; it’s called Watchdog. I know an aw-
ful lot about the layout of the farside DataWatch facility from 
which the LINK is administered. I can make the boost.” 
Mayor Noas swore, “Damn it, you can’t! The Key is tucked 
away in a computer in the middle of the PKF Farside base at 
Jules Verne. You could as easily walk through Peaceforcer 
Heaven!” 
Trent grinned at Mayor Noas. “Hello.” 
The man’s own words sank in on him. “Oh, Lord.” He blinked 
again, took a long, contemplative drag on his stogie. “Do you 
really think you can?” 
Trent looked at Domino, watching him almost warily from 
the doorway, and then back at Noas. “Yes, I really do.” 
Mayor Quentin Noas sank back down into his seat. “By 
Harry. You—” He broke off, at a complete loss for words. He sat 
at his desk, smoking furiously, blue clouds of smoke swirling up 

266  Tales 
around him. He was not looking at Trent, at anything. Finally 
he said, “Domino.” 
“Yes?” 
“What happens? We take the boy up on it, I mean.” 
“At half a million CU? We’ll need clearance further up the 
line, for starters. Then—” 
“That’s not what I mean. He makes the boost, comes away 
clean. What happens?” 
Domino said abruptly, “Trent. Are we talking about destruc-
tion of the LINK?” 
“If you like. The LINK is a combination of hardware and soft-
ware. There’s no way you get the hardware. I think I can ar-
range that you get the control program. You won’t be able to do 
with it what the PKF is using it for, but—” Trent shrugged. 
“Neither will they.” 
Domino stood in the doorway, looking at Trent coolly, specu-
latively. “All right. For starters it means DataWatch loses con-
trol of their own InfoNet. If we have the LINK software and a 
good webdancer to supervise, then it means we’ll have access to 
at least some of the DataWatch Boards, at least briefly. Longer 
term, I’d guess they couldn’t put the LINK system back in place. 
It was instituted when there weren’t any computers on Luna to 
speak of, and grew with it.” 
Trent looked at the woman with a degree of genuine respect. 
“You’re not a webdancer?” 
Domino shook her head. “No.” 
“You got most of it. My favorite part is where DataWatch 
gets locked out of its own Boards until they strip out the LINK 
protocols. And I think you’re right about the LINK not going 
back up again, especially if some smart people get together and 
transmit Earth InfoNet protocols to everybody on Luna while 
DataWatch is still down for the count. At worst, if what I’m 
thinking of fails, I’ll probably be able to destroy the Key and kill 
the program that runs it. At best we can join the Free Luna In-
foNet with the U.N. InfoNet, and take control of the Lunar In-
foNet away from them forever.” 
Mayor Noas’ voice was troubled. “Half a million CU.” 

Moran  267 
 
Trent said flatly, “It’s what I need. This is going to be expen-
sive every step of the way.” 
There was a long silence. Finally Mayor Noas shook his head 
decisively. “I can’t commit to something this big.” 
Trent nodded. “So what happens?” 
“I need to call in some people, run it by them.” 
“I see. How many people are we talking about?” 
Mayor Noas looked at Domino. “Three?” 
“Four. We’ll need to bring in a rep from Bessel Astrogation 
Products.” 
Trent lifted an eyebrow. “Why don’t you just call a press con-
ference?” 
Domino’s voice took on a degree of coldness that was truly 
impressive. “These are discreet people, Trent.” 
“Nobody,” said Trent, “ever listens.” He smiled at Domino. 
“But they sure do love to talk.” 
“If you want help,” said Domino, “if you need help, these are 
the people you need to talk to.” 
Trent spread his arms in a gesture of defeat. “You talked me 
into it. I’m definitely going to need help. At least three other 
people, maybe four. And seven bodies, six male and one female.” 
Mayor Noas blinked and said, “Seven bodies?” 
Trent nodded. “With dental work.” 
 
20. 
THE FAT MAN said, “I don’t think names are necessary.” 
There were six of them sitting across the long table facing 
Trent. Trent sat alone, handheld on the table in front of him, 
wearing his traceset. The holocam in the handheld had scanned 
them as they entered the room. 
Mayor Quentin Noas and Vice-Mayor Domino were sitting 
together at one end of the table. One of the four directly across 
from Trent was obviously a SpaceFarer, a black-bearded man 
wearing ship’s colors that Trent did not recognize. The fat man 
sat next to the SpaceFarer, and next to the fat man were an old, 

268  Tales 
dark-haired Caucasian woman in a floatchair, and a handsome 
young man in his late twenties or early thirties, wearing a gray 
business suit. 
Bingo. Got one already, Boss. The old woman is named Belinda Singer. 
Would you believe I recognized her myself? 
... I suppose. Wait. Yes, I would. 2062; she employed the Castanaveras tele-
paths before they were destroyed. 
Background, Johnny? 
Uhm ... upward of 110 years old by some indeterminate amount. Her actual 
age is guarded very closely. She’s the SpaceFarer Collective’s single largest 
downside shareholder. According to the Forbes 500 listing she’s the twentieth or 
twenty-first wealthiest person in the System; she has the reputation of being 
friendly with known members of the Johnny Rebs. 
Perhaps two seconds had passed. Trent said, “Fine by me.” 
“We got briefed by Domino before we agreed to come,” the fat 
man continued. Trent had already tagged the man for Syndic. “I 
like most of what I hear. Loss of the Key locks them out of their 
own Boards for at least two or three days, while the people who 
have the Key—us—have at least limited access to them. A cou-
ple of months pass before they can even begin bringing up a 
tracking system like the one they’ve got right now. And maybe 
they don’t ever get it back up again, which is a hell of a blow to 
Unification interests off Earth.” He grinned cynically. “Also, I 
like how you’ve planned your getaway. I think you’re going to 
kill yourself trying it, but it’s a great idea.” 
Bingo on two, Boss. The chubby fellow is Norman Shelton. Not exactly a Syn-
dic Lord, but close. Licensed to practice Unification Law. 
The young man in the gray business suit said, in thickly ac-
cented English, “I am here representing the interests of the Eri-
sian Claw. We would suggest one change to your plan.” 
“That being?” 
“As you have laid this out, you are going to immense trouble 
to avoid harming a group of Peaceforcers whom you plan to am-
bush.” 
“That’s correct.” Johnny? Anything on this one? 
... No. Or the SpaceFarer either. But they’re filed for future reference. 

Moran  269 
 
The young man nodded. He said gently, “It seems to many of 
my colleagues—well, excessive concern for what is, after all, the 
welfare of officers of the PKF.” 
“We’re not killing anybody,” said Trent. He stared at the 
handsome young man. “Nobody. You want to kill Peaceforcers, 
fine. But you do it on your own time.” 
The man shrugged, leaned back in his seat without expres-
sion. He sat watching Trent, like all the others. “Merely a sug-
gestion.” 
“Well,” said Norman Shelton. “I think that about covers it. 
We’re in.” 
Trent stood, slowly, and leaned across the table. “What?” 
Shelton said again, “We’re in. We’ll fund it. Frankly I think 
you’ve underpriced yourself, but that’s really your problem.” 
Trent kept his voice under tight control. “I’ve been kept wait-
ing here at Bessel for four days, denied access to a full-sensory 
InfoNet terminal, until you folks could assemble yourself in one 
place, so that we could have this very important meeting. This 
was it, was it? The whole meeting? I just want to make sure I 
didn’t miss anything.” 
“Possibly you have missed something.” It was the first time 
Belinda Singer had spoken. Her voice was strong, the voice of a 
woman used to decades of obedience. “Do you recognize me, 
young man?” 
“Should I?” 
It was impressive how much sharpness she managed to put 
into a sentence that was phrased politely. “Answer my question, 
please.” 
“Yes. You’re Belinda Singer.” 
“Fine,” she said briskly. “Then we can forget this crap about 
not knowing each other’s names. You’re Trent Castanaveras.” 
Trent did not look away from the old woman’s gaze. “A lot of 
people seem to think so.” 
“The last time I spoke to Malko Kalharri,” said Belinda 
Singer, “was about two weeks before he died. He and Doctor 
Montignet were both worried about you.” 

270  Tales 
Trent’s voice was totally empty. “That’s nice. You know 
they’re dead.” 
“It was on the Boards.” 
“Maybe they should have been worrying more about them-
selves. I’m still alive. They’re not.” 
Belinda Singer said simply, “Young man, why are you doing 
this?” 
“The boost?” 
“Yes,” she said gently. “The boost.” 
“I’m getting paid.” 
She snorted. “Bullshit.” 
“I’m getting paid a lot.” 
“Bullshit again.” Singer picked up her handheld, turned it so 
that its holofield faced Trent. “Half a million. I make your ex-
penses at somewhere around two hundred thousand, maybe as 
high as two and a quarter. You’re left with an upside of between 
two-seventy-five and three hundred.” She locked gazes with 
Trent. “I had a very trustworthy associate run a probability 
analysis of this undertaking. These are rough figures. Your 
chance of walking out of the DataWatch Farside facility in one 
piece is about twenty-five percent. Fifty percent capture, fol-
lowed by execution. Twenty-five percent you die inside before 
getting captured. I know a bit about you, boy. You’ve given al-
most 350,000 CU to the World Food Bank in your short life. Peo-
ple who can give away that sort of Credit to charity are rarely 
willing to put their lives at serious risk simply to acquire a simi-
lar amount.” 
Her figures were close to those Trent had worked out with 
Johnny Johnny. “So?” 
“So,” said Belinda Singer, “unless I get a straight answer out 
of you, I’m going to pull out. If I pull out I can pretty much guar-
antee you no SpaceFarer craft in the Collective is going to agree 
to do the pickup you need.” 
“Why is it relevant?” 
Belinda Singer closed her eyes for a moment, sat 
motionlessly and took a slow breath. When she opened her eyes 
again she said, “Trent, humor me. I’m a cranky old woman and 

Moran  271 
 
smart-ass answers make me even crankier. Malko Kalharri was 
one of the dearest friends I ever had, and on his behalf I feel a 
certain reluctance to let you waste your life casually. Calling 
what you’re talking about doing here a—boost, I believe the 
word is?—calling it a boost is like saying a laser cannon is useful 
for starting the fireplace.” 
It took Trent a moment to decipher the comment—he had 
never actually seen a fireplace that burned wood—but when he 
did, he could not suppress a chuckle. “Point. Can we speak pri-
vately?” 
Without glancing away from Trent, Belinda Singer said, “You 
can leave.” They were alone within thirty seconds. 
Trent reached forward, turned off his handheld, and waited. 
After a moment, Belinda Singer did the same. Trent nodded. 
“Thank you. I swept for bugs before the meeting. There are two, 
but they’re recording the sounds Mayor Noas makes in his bath-
tub. It’s not pretty.” He looked down for a moment at the table-
top, ordering his thoughts. His fingernails needed trimming. 
“We’ve met, you know.” 
“Really?” Singer actually looked surprised. “When?” 
“I don’t remember exactly. Early 2062. You visited the Chan-
dler Complex after the Eighth Amendment was signed, before 
the Complex was destroyed.” 
Singer looked troubled. “That’s odd. My memory is actually 
quite good. I remember that trip—wait.” 
Trent said, “Your floatchair broke.” 
The old woman pointed a finger at Trent. “You were the little 
boy who fixed my floatchair! I remember you now. We didn’t get 
introduced.” 
Trent shrugged. “You were being—” He paused, said, 
“Cranky.” 
Amazingly, Singer actually colored slightly. “I remember 
that, too. Being around so many of those little telepaths—it 
made me nervous.” 
“It made everyone nervous,” Trent said precisely. “That’s why 
they were killed.” 

272  Tales 
“Yes,” Singer said slowly. “I guess there’s some truth in that.” 
She shook the bad memories away with a visible effort. “Let’s 
get back to business. I’m sure you realize by now the reason you 
were made to wait four days was so I could talk to you.” 
“That’s obvious.” 
“I am willing,” the old woman said clearly, “to see you die if it 
buys the destruction of the LINK. Assuming you die at Jules 
Verne, and I think it likely, I really have no problem with ad-
vancing you your quarter million CU.” She made a deprecating 
gesture. “It’s mostly my money you’ll be spending. But it’s a good 
investment. I think your chances of surviving this operation are 
poor—but my staff gives me odds of better than two-thirds that 
the LINK goes down. Taking the Lunar InfoNet away from 
DataWatch ...” She was silent for a moment. “I can’t even esti-
mate what that’s worth. Short term, hundreds of millions of CU 
in increased trade with Free Luna. Long term ...” Her voice 
trailed off, and she sat looking at Trent. 
Trent actually smiled. “Unfortunately, there’s this terrible 
possibility I might survive.” 
“If you survive this stunt,” she said quietly, “the Secretary 
General’s office is going to request that you be handed over to 
the Unification. They may very well threaten war if you’re not 
handed over. No matter how pleased the Collective turns out to 
be at what you’ve done—and make no mistake, they’ll be 
pleased—most of them won’t be willing to risk war to protect 
someone who likes to tell people he’s a thief. Even if he’s a good 
thief. Unless there is some level of mutual commitment, extend-
ing beyond this one boost, I would guess, Trent, that the Collec-
tive will indeed give you to the PKF when it’s all over.” 
Trent sat motionlessly, thinking, considering his options. 
There weren’t many. 
“You’re in high stakes territory, young man. If you survive 
this, Trent, you’ll need us to protect you for, I don’t know, the 
next several years at least. It would be in your best interests,” 
said Belinda Singer gently, “to make sure that the Collective 
needs you as well.” 
“Why am I doing this.” 

Moran  273 
 
“It does come down to that, doesn’t it?” 
Trent found that his mouth was very dry. “It’s a lengthy ex-
planation.” 
“Trim it a bit, then. I’m an old woman, I’d hate to die on you 
just when it gets good.” 
“When I was young,” Trent began. 
Belinda Singer smothered a laugh, waved a hand at Trent. 
“Sorry. Go on.” 
Trent glared at her. “I used to admire the PKF.” 
“A lot of us did.” 
“Shut up. You want to bare your soul, you wait until I’m 
done. I used to admire the PKF.” He paused, waited for her to 
say something, and when she did not he continued. “When I was 
younger. There are still individual Peaceforcers I admire. The 
problem’s not with the people; most Peaceforcers are honorable, 
doing their jobs as well as they’re able within the boundaries of 
the laws they’re sworn to serve. A lot of the laws are bad laws, 
and most of the policies are bad policies. When I was a part of 
society, back on Earth, I spent a fair amount of Credit funding 
lobbyists, to try to get some of those laws and policies changed. 
And then they pushed me outside and I couldn’t keep doing that. 
I ran.” He swept a hand around the room. “I ended up here. And 
I was almost willing to let it go. I wanted revenge, and I still do, 
and I’ll have it—but I wasn’t seriously planning to try for the 
LINK. 
“Then a squad of Peaceforcers killed a friend of mine. They 
let out his air and shot him with masers. He died in horrible 
pain. And I want revenge for that, too, and I’ll have it.” 
Belinda Singer was nodding, quietly, without any trace of 
emotion that Trent could detect. “So that’s it. I think—” 
“That’s not it.” 
She lifted an eyebrow in surprise. “No?” 
“When I was eight years old I decided I was an atheist. When 
I was ten I became an existentialist. Most Players are. But when 
you dismiss God and decide there’s nothing in the universe to 
rely on but yourself, you have to find some way to bring meaning 
to your life. When I was ten years old I decided I was going to 

274  Tales 
change the world. Improve it. Make it a better place.” She was 
watching him carefully, weighing each word. “The Unification,” 
said Trent, “is going bad. It’s been going bad for a long time. I 
wanted to fix it from the inside, but I can’t do that any longer. 
Maybe I never could and I was kidding myself.” 
“So?” 
“I wanted to make a difference when I was ten, Belinda.” It 
was the first time he had called her by name, and he saw her no-
tice it. “I still do.” 
Belinda Singer nodded, accepting it. “I still need to hear you 
say it, Trent.” 
Trent took a deep breath. He felt vaguely sick, as though the 
world were blurring around him. There was a remote ringing in 
his ears; there were butterflies in his stomach, army butterflies 
on a three-day leave. His voice sounded as though it did not be-
long to him. “We must bring down the Unification. It is time to 
bring it down.” 
Later, when the ringing in his ears had faded into quiet, 
when the trembling in his shoulders had ceased, he looked up 
and saw Belinda Singer watching him with a grave expression. 
“That was hard, wasn’t it?” 
He whispered the word. “Yes.” 
“You have to trust people in this life, Trent. We all do.” She 
was silent a beat. “The hell of it is, it keeps getting harder.” 
THE GUARD AT the entrance to the cubicle, a man dressed in 
much the same almost-uniform that Domino had worn, except 
that his was brown rather than scarlet, said, “Twenty minutes.” 
Closing the door of the cubicle behind him, Trent seated him-
self behind the wrap-around control console. Surveying the 
board before him, Trent began making attachments. He jacked 
his handheld into the board; the MRI helmet went over his head, 
all the way down to his shoulders. Inside the helmet, head-
phones extruded themselves and clamped over his ears; laser 
projectors focused themselves on each eye. 
There was a brief moment of disorientation as the terminal 
went online. 

Moran  275 
 
The MRI imaging sensors came alive, setting up a strong 
magnetic field that polarized those nuclei in Trent’s brain that 
possessed net magnetic charge. A second and weaker magnetic 
field, applied at right angles to the first, caused the nuclei to tip 
into new positions, emitting a radio signal in the process. Mil-
lions of radio nanoreceptors in the full-sensory traceset fed into 
a limited expert system whose only function was to trace corre-
spondences in Trent’s thought processes with known thought 
processes. It was a slow procedure; on Trent’s vanished full-
sensory on Earth, which had a functional map of Trent’s inter-
nal nerve-net, the link had been nearly instantaneous. Here, on 
hardware that did not know how Trent thought, it took most of a 
minute before the first flicker of the Crystal Wind reached him. 
Johnny Johnny said softly, Hi, Boss. 
Hi, Johnny. 
Gonna dance? 
Yes. 
About time. 
They joined together; Johnny Johnny reached out, found the 
first step to the Free Luna InfoNet— 
Johnny Johnny threw himself into the Net, and moved out-
ward. The Datawatch controlled Lunar InfoNet itself was for-
bidden him, but that still left— 
—the Lunar telexchange, used for voice and data communi-
cations to and from orbit by Free Luna and U.N. Luna alike. 
Johnny Johnny attached tracers to all communications, waiting 
for something that was headed upward. Free Luna had a popu-
lation of three and a half million; less than a fiftieth of a second 
had passed when Johnny Johnny found what he was looking for, 
a message heading up to the PKF orbital satellites. A PKF spy, 
almost certainly; Johnny Johnny diverted the message back into 
the telexchange and took the diverted message package’s place, 
flowing out to a microwave relay that beamed up into the PKF 
satellites. There were others using the relay, but Johnny Johnny 
needed as much of its capacity as he could get; he took over all 
the empty lines, and then began freezing lines as other users fin-

276  Tales 
ished and released them. It was done delicately enough, slowly 
enough, that Watchdog would probably not notice it. 
In multiple channels Johnny Johnny leaped upward. 
His retreat was reasonably secure, over two hundred chan-
nels in every relay, a series of relays left open at the telex-
change. Inside the comsat, Johnny Johnny waited again. He did 
not touch anything. Significant realworld time passed while he 
waited, nearly two seconds before a PKF slipship orbiting over 
Farside was sent a recreational poker program. Johnny Johnny 
broke into it, increasing the signal complexity, injecting a pared-
down version of himself into the signal progression at a one-
hundred-to-one ratio. The noise level was acceptable, and the 
signal went through. Slowly, over the course of seconds, Johnny 
Johnny found himself inside the Peaceforcer slipship. 
Johnny Johnny took momentary control of the onboard com-
puter; he located L-5 and sent a distress call to it through the 
orbiting slipship. (Onboard, the Peaceforcer noted a momentary 
blurriness in the simulated stud she was playing poker with.) 
Spacebase One responded to the emergency distress call, 
opening a wide maser channel to the affected ship. Johnny 
Johnny informed Spacebase One that he was the program in 
control of the slipship, that he was experiencing traumatic 
equipment failure, and that he was not certain that his own in-
tegrity was assured. He requested aid from Spacebase One’s di-
agnostics to determine what steps to take. 
For a long moment Johnny Johnny did not think it was going 
to work. 
Then the diagnostic routines at Spacebase One requested 
that the damaged slipship beam its control program back to 
Spacebase One for examination. A high-bandwidth comm laser 
touched the slipship, and Johnny Johnny poured through the 
connection, froze it open behind him, and ate the diagnostics 
program at Spacebase One. 
The diagnostics program had access to Spacebase One’s 
comm facilities. Johnny Johnny took a dozen nanoseconds, redi-
rected the satellite to lase directly at Spacebase One, cutting the 
slipship out of the link. He delved further then, identified the 

Moran  277 
 
program in use as the Communications Manager, and identified 
all of the resources that were available to the Manager. 
And crashed them. 
Every comm channel in Spacebase One, external and inter-
nal. 
Two seconds passed before anyone even noticed, an eternal 
six before anything was done about it. A human webdancer in 
the Operations Information Center at the core of Spacebase One 
crossed the interface and dove into the Crystal Wind. She did 
not notice Johnny Johnny, sitting silently in the darkness. The 
problem was immediately obvious, if unexpected; the Communi-
cations Manager had crashed itself. She requested access to 
Main Storage so that she might invest a new communications 
manager; the request was received, processed, granted, and she 
fell into the core. 
With Johnny Johnny right behind her. 
The file Security Manager, a passive observer that functioned 
largely as an alarm, politely informed Johnny Johnny that there 
were three Access Levels available, only one of which Johnny 
Johnny was authorized to access freely. Level One was a sieve; 
Johnny Johnny flashed through it in seconds. The name he 
sought (even his biological component did not consciously think 
the word Trent) was nowhere to be found, so he sought a higher 
level. 
Level Two was harder; the Security Manager politely in-
formed Johnny Johnny that he would be allowed access to only 
one file at a time, and that a human webdancer in the Opera-
tions Information Center would be notified of each file accessed. 
Johnny Johnny ghosted himself, split himself into dozens of cop-
ies for the Security Manager to deal with. The Security Manager 
accepted one request for a file, and then another, and finally a 
third before informing one of Johnny Johnny’s ghosts that it 
could accept only three requests before a webdancer approved 
the request. Johnny Johnny ignored the Security Manager, 
delved into the files. 
The Security Manager screamed for help. 

278  Tales 
Human response time is slow; Johnny Johnny guessed he 
had at least three full seconds, perhaps as many as five, before a 
webdancer came to see what was wrong. 
While the Security Manager watched, helplessly, Johnny 
Johnny tore through the database on Level Two. 
Nothing. 
Over a second had passed. 
There was a sentinel, a sort of primitive web angel, at the en-
trance to Level Three. Johnny Johnny submitted to the sentinel 
a request for access, watched the sentinel as it executed, consid-
ered the request and denied it. The sentinel was a small pro-
gram, though well coded, with less than ten gigabytes of 
workspace memory assigned to it. Johnny Johnny fired another 
request, and then another. The sentinel employed a primitive 
sort of ghosting, multitasking the two requests together. It 
slowed noticeably, and expanded slightly to claim more of the 
memory available to it. 
Johnny Johnny ghosted himself a thousand thousand times. 
And then each ghost started asking for entry to Level Three. 
Nearly two seconds had passed, and now the System Tools 
apeared, scanned through the workspace Johnny Johnny occu-
pied, running diagnostic test upon diagnostic test to determine 
the cause of the malfunction. Some of the tests Johnny Johnny 
was able to fool; most of them he could not. 
The sentinel ballooned wildly, expanded to fill the maximum 
workspace allotted it. Johnny Johnny fired request after request 
at the sentinel even after it had reached peak load. The sentinel 
attempted to re-allocate memory internally, to shell out memory 
being used by the instruction stack and reassign that memory to 
the queued requests of a million ghosts. 
Web angels appeared out of nowhere, tore into Johnny 
Johnny’s ghosts. Johnny Johnny ignored the web angels, concen-
trating on the sentinel— 
—which was faltering. The sentinel oscillated wildly, thrash-
ing senselessly in its attempts to deal with the massive overload 
of data. Johnny Johnny kept up the stream of new requests, 
pushing now as the sentinel— 

Moran  279 
 
—crashed. 
More than half of Johnny Johnny’s ghosts were dead. Johnny 
Johnny dissected the sentinel quickly, disassembled the instruc-
tions that had composed it. In its default configuration the sen-
tinel used less than two gigabytes of RAM; it was going to be a 
hell of a squeeze. 
Nearly a full four seconds had passed before the web angels 
reported the files secure. Four and a half seconds from the mo-
ment when the Security Manager had first screamed for help, a 
human webdancer shimmered into existence, loaded Diagnostics 
and started hunting. 
Johnny Johnny, wearing the sentinel’s code as a disguise, re-
sponded as the code he had absorbed said he should when the 
webdancer came at last to him. The webdancer paused a thou-
sandth of a second, examining the shell of the sentinel, and then 
passed on. 
Fully ten seconds later, Johnny Johnny applied once more to 
search the Level Three files. 
And then gave himself permission. 
TEN MINUTES AFTER entering the cubicle Trent opened his eyes 
to Realtime. He began shedding attachments; removed his 
handheld from the terminal. 
Johnny Johnny said aloud, “Boss, are you sure this was a 
good idea?” 
“Hell of a time to ask, Johnny.” 
“Well?” 
“No, Johnny. I’m not sure.” His Image’s silence seemed al-
most reproachful to Trent, and he said at last, “It’s a start. We 
have to start somewhere.” 
“And what’s this supposed to do? Changing one file? Boss, I 
don’t understand.” 
“It’s going to make them look silly, Johnny. It’s worse than 
killing them, you know. They’d rather die gloriously than be 
laughed at.” 
“Oh.” 

280  Tales 
Johnny Johnny was silent after that, and Trent also. Trent 
spent his free ten minutes in meditation. 
When the guard rapped on the door, Trent exited without 
hurry, briefcase in hand. 
 
21. 
NOVEMBER 1, 2069. 
He stood in the Operations Information Center from which 
Spacebase One was run, at the core of the long cylinder about 
which Spacebase One was constructed, protected by layer upon 
layer of radiation shielding; a direct hit by a tactical nuke upon 
the surface of Spacebase One would not have harmed him. 
With the departure to Earth of Etienne Géricault, he was the 
senior PKF at Spacebase One. A tall, grim man who looked older 
than he was, gravely handsome, dark-eyed and dark-haired, 
surveying a monument to his own failure. 
His name was Mohammed Vance. He carried himself with a 
peculiar power of presence that only physically impressive, intel-
ligent men possess. 
That the operations center was silent at the moment was his 
failure. Until just the prior day it had been filled with PKF offi-
cers, coordinating the details of the search for the Player, the 
thief, the man named Trent. 
Now the webdancers’ terminals were empty. The monitor 
posts scanned silently without human intervention. 
There was one other person actually in the operations room, 
a young Elite candidate named Melissa du Bois. She sat rigidly 
at her station, her recently shortened hair waving gently in the 
breeze from the vents. 
On the great holofield, stretching out to cover most of a 
twenty-meter expanse of hullmetal, burned the image of a Hand 
of the Trinity, a too-confident young man named Jean Lumet. 
Lumet was saying, placatingly, “Commissionaire, I appreci-
ate your desire to continue your search for this criminal. If it 

Moran  281 
 
were up to me I would allow it.” He shrugged in a very Gallic 
manner. “It is not up to me, and you have no choice.” 
In the calm, deep voice that gave junior PKF officers night-
mares, Mohammed Vance said, “I tell you, Hand Lumet, that he 
is alive.” 
Three seconds passed, the lightspeed lag from L-5, in Lunar 
orbit, to Earth; Lumet made a helpless gesture. “Commission-
aire...what would you have me do? I am not an officer of the 
PKF, sir; and the order to desist in your search has come from 
Elite Commander Mirabeau herself.” 
Vance scowled with displeasure. Something would have to be 
done about Mirabeau, as something had been done about her 
predecessor, Elite Commander Breilleune. 
Eventually, there would be a competent and sufficiently 
ruthless Elite to represent the interests of the PKF to the Unifi-
cation. 
Eventually.... 
Lumet took another tack. “Commissionaire, the vehicle that 
the criminal stole was broken cleanly in two. Most of the hull 
was torn away in the missile blast—and don’t think that words 
have not been said about that missile salvo you fired. It was the 
most fantastic luck that—” 
“Luck,” Vance said impatiently, “is something fools rely upon. 
The north end of the base was evacuated at my order following 
the attack upon the slipship bay. If anyone had been hurt it 
would have been due solely to disregard of orders. There was 
minimal danger.” 
“Oh?” Lumet lifted a sardonic eyebrow. “And if one of the 
warheads had detonated?” 
“Simulation showed the possibility of such an outcome at 
only one in approximately forty.” 
“You ran that simulation, Commissionaire, only after giving 
the command.” 
Vance stared unblinking at Lumet. The accusation was com-
pletely correct; only Vance and two of his most trusted assis-
tants had been present when that simulation had finally been 
run. One of those two— 

282  Tales 
Vance said quietly, “I withdraw the objection. Nonetheless, 
the damage done to the reputation of the PKF Elite by the mur-
der of one of its members cannot be tolerated. The example is 
one that—” 
“Commissionaire, please.” Lumet waved a hand in dismissal. 
“It has been three months without a sign of the man. This Dark 
Clouds criminal—there, I think, you grasp at straws. A random 
and completely unproductive attack by ideologs on a DataWatch 
facility in Luna City. Vague, unreliable reports that a ‘nephew’ 
appeared at approximately the same time as the stolen Space 
Force vehicle crashed—a partial print in the ruins of the, ah, 
‘bolt hole,’ I believe it is called—which may have belonged to the 
criminal Trent—why go on? You postulate a ridiculous chain of 
events. The man cannot be alive.” 
Lumet turned off-holocam momentarily. “One moment.” He 
turned back to Vance. “My presence is required elsewhere. I 
think we have covered the situation.” 
Vance said grimly, “Samples at the site of the explosion of 
the Space Force vehicle did not show the trace elements that 
should have been there had a living human been present at the 
time of the explosion.” 
Lumet sighed. “Commissionaire, your own recordings show 
how badly that vehicle was damaged. Conceivably his body fell 
over some other part of Luna.” 
“The engines were firing. The vehicle made a soft touch-
down.” 
With strained patience Lumet said, “Sir. The piloting was 
characteristic of a vehicle on autopilot. You—” 
“Or of a vehicle controlled by a Player.” 
Lumet ignored the comment. “—told me this yourself! I have 
discussed this as much as I care to. I am not responsible for 
originating this order, but I will see it carried out. That I have 
tolerated your argument so long as I have is only in recognition 
of your years of valuable service. Your abnormal interest in this 
solitary criminal will stop and it will stop now. The search is 
called off, and you will report back to Capitol City at your earli-
est convenience. All of these things you will do.” 

Moran  283 
 
Mohammed Vance said very evenly, “Do you realize to whom 
you are speaking?” 
Lumet took a long, slow breath. “Sir, yes. Commissionaire, I 
do not want you as my enemy. I believe Elite Commander Breil-
leune became your enemy, and he is dead. However—sir—I have 
no leeway in this matter.” Lumet paused a moment and said, 
“Nor do you. Good day to you, sir.” 
The field went blank. 
After brooding in silence for several minutes, Vance said, “Of-
ficer du Bois.” 
The woman did not look at him. “Sir.” 
“You have met this man. You have spoken with him. Alone 
among our officers, you chose to wait for him at the North Bay. 
What is your opinion?” 
She said slowly, “I do not understand, sir.” 
He turned slightly, stood looking at her. “Do you believe him 
to be alive?” 
Her head bent slightly, in an attitude of contemplation. Her 
voice, when she spoke, was little more than a whisper. “He is ... 
the most alive person I have ever met. He would not die so eas-
ily.” 
“Easily?” 
The sharp word brought her up; she held her gaze wavering 
against his for several moments. “Sir, he is alive. I know he is.” 
Vance studied her for a moment, then nodded. All the tension 
spilled out of him at once. “Yes, it is interesting. And disappoint-
ing ... a man,” he said, looking now toward the empty holofield, 
“is defined in some ways by the things he tests himself against. 
The Erisian Claw, the Johnny Rebs, most Players even, they are 
too easy. I have rarely faced a challenge such as this boy Trent.” 
He turned away abruptly. “Nor, I think, will I again. Access his 
file. Reassign it to Access Level One, as per orders.” 
Melissa du Bois did as instructed, through the traceset at her 
temples issued the necessary commands. She did not realize she 
had made any sound whatsoever, surely nothing that would 
have brought such instant response from Commissionaire 

284  Tales 
Vance. In the ambient blue glow from the holofield her features 
had taken on an icy cast, like a statue formed of wax. 
He said, “What is it?” in almost the same instant that the 
word, “Sir,” tore itself from her throat. 
Vance turned back to her with a degree of grace highly im-
probable in a man so large. He approached her op station, the 
certainty growing within him, and leaned over to stare at what 
should have been Trent’s file. 
The file was gone. 
In its place were five words. 
Five scarlet words that glared up at Mohammed Vance, glow-
ing bright red against the blue backdrop of the holofield, shining 
on his cyborg retinae as though they would permanently inscribe 
themselves there, and a harsh, fierce joy descended upon Mo-
hammed Vance, like the answer to a prayer. 
Vance said softly, “Officer du Bois. We are going to Luna to-
gether, you and I.” 
Five words. 
Catch me if you can. 
 
22. 
“HEY, YOU CAN’T go in there.” 
“Why not?” 
“There’s going to be a news conference,” the Peaceforcer said. 
“I know that.” Trent examined the Peaceforcer standing duty 
at the entrance to the Luna City Hall conference room. She 
seemed awfully young to Trent; tall and painfully thin, two hun-
dred and sixty centimeters at least. Pure homegrown loonie. 
Trent hadn’t even known that there were native loonies in the 
PKF. “But that’s two hours from now, sweetheart. I have to fix a 
line of dead lasercable.” 
“But I’m not—” 
“What’s your name?” 
“Officer Stout.” 

Moran  285 
 
“You don’t look it. Listen.” Trent stepped closer to the loonie 
and had to tilt his head up slightly to meet her eyes. “The Sys-
tem Business Journal Board pays sixty CU a month for the 
privilege of recording PKF news conferences. The first time in 
five years you have something that’s really news, we have a 
dead line. If we have to lease coverage from some other Board, 
Officer Stout, I guarantee you you’re going to hear about it.” 
“But you’ll have holocams with you—” 
“Come on,” said Trent impatiently, “we pay for the fixed holo-
cams because they give a steadier image. Five minutes tops. I’m 
in and out.” 
The Peaceforcer looked Trent up and down in momentary in-
decision; Trent stood patiently, clutching the Black Box tool kit 
in one hand. The SBJ insignia on his jumpsuit was crooked. 
Though he had yet to undergo biosculpture, Katrina had done 
his makeup for him, and he looked only slightly like the Trent of 
whom the PKF had holos. 
With a quick movement the Peaceforcer reached behind her-
self and slapped the pressure pad to open the door. “Do it fast.” 
The conference room was large and empty; about a hundred 
and fifty seats, a raised platform at one end with holocams al-
ready set up and focused on it. A pair of vending chefs held sen-
tinel against one wall. A smaller empty platform to the right of 
the main platform was to be used for displaying holos; the pro-
jector was already turned on, an empty holofield dancing just 
this side of visibility upon the platform. 
Trent wasted no time once the door had closed behind him. 
There were two access panels at each side of the room, marked 
as such, in the ceiling four meters above Trent’s head. Trent 
stood under the closer panel and jumped up once, pushing 
lightly at the panel as he reached it. The panel was not secured; 
it popped free instantly. With his free hand Trent pulled himself 
up through the ceiling, into the meter-high crawlspace above the 
conference room. 
It took a moment for Trent’s eyesight to adjust to the dim-
ness. Every other panel in the ceiling sported a fire sprinkler; 
the water pipe that fed the sprinklers emerged from the wall at 

286  Tales 
the far side of the conference room. Trent sighed, and on hands 
and knees moved as quickly as he could through the crawlspace 
to the spot where the piping originated. He reached the place 
where the piping entered the wall and touched the pressure 
point to open the tool kit. Inside the tool kit there was a small 
red canister filled with concentrated Complex 8-A. Trent had de-
signed and built the canister himself; in response to a question 
from Katrina he had declared that it was a tool for use in an ad-
venture in plumbing. 
He fastened the canister to the pipe, glued it carefully to the 
pipe’s surface, and waited while the glue set. The mechanism 
inside was simple; Trent touched a point on the canister’s sur-
face, and a small spike inside the canister punched down into 
the pipe, opening a passage between the fadeaway and the wa-
ter that fed the sprinkler system. 
He closed up the tool kit, crawled back to the accessway and 
poked his head down into the conference room. Empty. Trent 
dropped down to the ground and then jumped back up again to 
close the access panel. 
At the huge double doors that let into the conference room, 
Trent withdrew a small spraytube of vacuum glue and blasted 
the surface of the double doors with it. 
On the surface of the spraytube it said, DANGER—
EXTREMELY 
FLAMMABLE 
IN 
PRESSURIZED 
ENVIRONMENTS. DO NOT USE NEAR OPEN FLAME, 
WELDING LASERS OR ANY INTENSE HEAT. 
The residue the glue left when it dried was slick, but not 
sticky; Trent was almost certain it would not be noticed. 
Trent touched the pressure pad at the door, waited while the 
wide double doors curled open, smiled at Officer Stout on his 
way out, and went down a level to A1 to have breakfast. 
TRENT WOULD NOT have guessed that there were seventy-five 
newsdancers in all of Luna who would let themselves be roused 
for an 8:00 A.M. press conference. 
The conference room was packed. Trent slipped in just be-
hind the System Business Journal team, still wearing his blue 

Moran  287 
 
jumpsuit with the SBJ insignia. The same loonie Peaceforcer 
was at the door, glancing at press badges as the newsdancers 
filed in. Officer Stout smiled at Trent when Trent walked by. 
There were four seats and a podium set up on the central 
platform that had not been there when Trent had been in earlier 
that morning. Four Peaceforcers were up on the platform to-
gether, along with one nervous loonie in a business suit. The 
loonie turned out to be Luna City mayor Jerry Hoff, who made a 
brief speech thanking the PKF for their efforts in making Luna 
safe. 
Trent recognized one of the Peaceforcers. 
Mohammed Vance sat impassively through the mayor’s 
speech, arms folded, staring with glittering black cyborg eyes 
out into the crowd of newsdancers. 
In the back of the conference room, Trent found somebody to 
stand behind. 
At 8:05 exactly the Federal Express messenger arrived. 
Mayor Hoff ran on: “... our violent crime, as a percentage of 
our population, is amazingly low, among the lowest in any hu-
man society in ...” 
There was a momentary hangup at the door; Officer Stout 
had not been instructed to let the messenger in. The argument 
was brief; Trent heard relatively little of it. Then the Federal 
Express man was inside, threading his way through the news-
dancers up to the dais where Mohammed Vance and the other 
Peaceforcers were sitting. There was another brief delay at the 
stage, as one of the junior Peaceforcers attempted to prevent the 
man from delivering his package to Vance. Vance himself waved 
the young Peaceforcer away, reached down to the messenger to 
take the long, slim tube the messenger carried. 
Trent nudged the SBJ newsdancer standing next to him, ges-
tured at Vance, and said, “You might want to record this.” 
The newsdancer glanced at Trent. Trent nodded wisely at 
him, and the man got his holocam up on his shoulder and turned 
on just in time to win himself an Electronic Times Award for Ex-
cellence in News Reporting; the conference room’s fixed holo-
cams were focused on the podium, and of the seventy-odd 

288  Tales 
portable holocams present, his was the only one focused on 
Commissionaire Vance as the Elite undid the tie on the box, 
opened the box itself and withdrew a single long-stemmed white 
rose. 
Vance sat looking at the rose, holding the white rose in one 
black-gloved fist, without expression, clearly without compre-
hension. The SBJ newsdancer kept his holocam on Vance, and 
an instant later Vance’s hand curled around the rose, crushed it 
and dropped it to the floor of the dais. In that instant his fea-
tures went scarlet; Trent had not even known that Peaceforcers 
Elite were capable of blushing. 
“Trent,” Trent whispered to the SBJ newsdancer, “is sup-
posed to have a long-stemmed white rose tattooed on, uhm, a 
certain part of his body.” 
The newsdancer kept the holocam on Vance a moment 
longer, then turned it off and lowered it when it became clear 
Vance was going to do nothing at that particular moment. Just 
as quietly, he whispered back, “Where?” 
Trent glanced around to make sure that nobody was listening 
to them, leaned very close to the newsdancer and whispered in 
the man’s ear. He finished, “... and that’s the only way you’re 
supposed to be able to tell whether it’s a long-stemmed or a 
short-stemmed rose.” 
The newsdancer was chuckling. “I hadn’t heard that one.” 
“It’s true,” Trent assured him. 
The newsdancer looked at him skeptically. “How would you 
know?” 
Trent shrugged and grinned at the man; the newsdancer 
started to turn back to Mayor Hoff, and then stopped dead, look-
ing at the insignia on Trent’s jumpsuit. He whispered, “You’re 
not with us.” 
Trent whispered back, “I know that, and you know that,” and 
he grinned again at the newsdancer, “but they don’t know that.” 
Mayor Hoff concluded his speech; the newsdancer started to 
speak again and Trent said, “Shh.” 
Most of the newsdancers had still not turned on their holo-
cams when the mayor stepped away from the podium. 

Moran  289 
 
A Peaceforcer Trent did not recognize stood and took the po-
dium. He did not introduce himself, but the newsdancers stilled 
somewhat in respect. “I’ve a brief recording to play for you,” the 
man said quietly. “Lights down.” 
The holo ran some fifteen minutes. Trent, who had been 
there for almost all of it, watched in fascination. It started with 
stills taken of him while in custody at the PKF Detention Cen-
ter. A voice-over in Mohammed Vance’s deep, gravelly tones 
said, “We have no recordings of the criminal during his escape 
from the Detention Center. The Player Johnny Johnny, whom 
we are almost certain is the Image of the criminal Trent, de-
stroyed three quarters of the PKF’s online storage in Capitol 
City.” The images shifted as the voice-over continued, became a 
grainy scene of the Hoffman Spacescraper as seen from a hover-
ing AeroSmith. Trent was clutching a girder while the wind 
whipped at his hair, and Emile Garon leaped toward him, fell to 
his death. 
The scene changed again, became a flat image. The view was 
from a holocam near the elevators that led to the rotating 
wheels at Spacebase One. Trent walked a pace behind Roger 
Colbert, wearing a SpaceFarer uniform. “We have tentatively 
concluded that the SpaceFarers’ Collective had nothing to do 
with Trent’s escape from Earth.” There were chuckles from the 
audience at what followed, as Trent squirtgunned five Peace-
forcers into unconsciousness. The chuckles stopped when the re-
cording cut to a still image of Spacebase One; they all knew 
what was coming. Whoever had edited the holo had done a good 
job; he held the image still for three seconds, four, and then the 
north end of Spacebase One blossomed into flame. 
Standing in the back of the conference room, Trent nodded 
thoughtfully. The PKF could not possibly have had holocams 
available to record the explosion from that angle; the image they 
were showing the newsdancers was animated. Excellent work; 
Trent, who had done a fair amount of animation work, could not 
have done the sequence better himself. 

290  Tales 
The lights came back up. The Peaceforcer whom Trent did 
not know said quietly, “I give you Commissionaire Mohammed 
Vance of the PKF Elite.” 
Vance stood slowly, moved to the podium. In Lunar gravity, 
he bounced less than anyone else Trent had seen since he had 
arrived on that planet, including native loonies. At the podium 
he did not pause to make the customary eye contact with the 
crowd; he stared straight ahead and began speaking in quiet, 
measured tones. Perhaps a quarter of the newsdancers knew of 
him as the Peaceforcer who was reputed to have ordered the de-
struction of the Castanaveras telepaths; as a group they re-
warded him with first real silence of the news conference. 
“I am Mohammed Vance. I have come to Luna for the specific 
purpose of capturing and seeing to the execution of this thief, 
this Player, Trent. With your aid I believe we will accomplish 
this quickly. We have evidence that Trent is still in United Na-
tions territory. I am taking this opportunity to inform the citi-
zens of United Nations Luna that a reward in the amount of five 
thousand Credit Units has been posted for information leading 
to the capture of this criminal.” Vance’s stiff expression did not 
change; for the first time he glanced around the room, at the as-
sembled newsdancers. “Press kits have been assembled and will 
be given out when we are finished here. If you have any ques-
tions, please feel free to ask them now.” 
There was some method by which priority had been assigned, 
though Trent had no idea what it was; the newsdancers asked 
their questions in some pre-determined order. 
“Commissionaire Vance, how close are you to capturing 
Trent?” 
“I do not know.” 
“Commissionaire Vance, how has Trent managed to evade 
capture for so long?” 
“Cleverness.” 
“Commissionaire, is it true Trent’s one of the Castanaveras 
telepaths?” 
“I do not know. I think it unlikely. Much has been made of 
the fact that the Bureau of Biotechnology’s records show a child 

Moran  291 
 
named ‘Trent Castanaveras’ was born March 9, 2051. And in-
deed, the Trent we are searching for is of approximately the cor-
rect age to be that child. Still, I do think it unlikely—Trent has 
had difficulties in places where no telepath would have had dif-
ficulties.” 
“Commissionaire, is Trent a genie?” 
“It is possible, but I cannot say with certainty.” 
“Commissionaire, if he is a genie, in what area might he 
show enhancements?” 
“He might show enhancements in virtually any area.” 
“Commissionaire, is Trent dangerous?” 
“Very. I must caution the public that if they feel they have 
identified Trent, to notify the PKF at once. Do not, under any 
circumstances, attempt to apprehend this criminal yourself. As 
his attempted destruction of Spacebase One at L-5 clearly 
shows, he possesses a disregard for human life which—” 
Hiding behind a tall loonie newsdancer from the Electronic 
Times, Trent said, loudly enough to be heard across the length of 
the room, “Oh, come on. It’s not, ‘his disregard for human life,’ 
it’s ‘our disregard for human life’.” 
The newsdancer Trent had been speaking to earlier faded 
slowly away from Trent, stood holding his holocam casually at 
waist level, focused on Trent. Trent leaned toward him and 
whispered loudly enough for the holocam to catch it, “Pronoun 
troubles.” 
Vance glanced across the conference room, looking without 
expression and without success for the source of the comment, 
and then backed up slightly and continued. “—a disregard for 
human life which ranks him with such ideologs as the Erisian 
Claw and the Johnny Rebs. He is—” 
Trent stepped to his left, so that he stood immediately before 
the open double doors. “Commissioner Vance.” 
Vance looked directly at Trent. He did not say anything. 
Around the conference room, heads were craning to look back at 
the door. 
“Isn’t it true, Commissioner, that you were warned that it 
wasn’t safe to use the weapons at Spacebase One, and that you 

292  Tales 
did anyway?” A few of the quicker newsdancers had their holo-
cams on Trent by the time he had finished the question; the SBJ 
newsdancer at Trent’s side kept his holocam rock-steady, fo-
cused on Trent. 
“No,” said Vance slowly, “it is not. We—” 
“Isn’t it true,” said Trent loudly, “that your dangerous crimi-
nal ran through Peaceforcer Heaven with no weapon more dan-
gerous than a squirt gun filled with Complex 8-A? And isn’t it 
true that Trent, when advised that the stolen Space Force vehi-
cle he was in was about to be destroyed, immediately jettisoned 
Colonel Piers Webster from the spacecraft, and that Webster 
was then rescued by Space Force?” 
“What news service are you with, young man?” Vance stared 
at Trent. 
“Commissioner Vance, isn’t it true that virtually without ex-
ception the damage that has been caused to the Peaceforcers has 
been caused by the Peaceforcers?” Trent shouted to be heard 
over the growing noise from the newsdancers talking into their 
holocams. Better than half of them had their holocams focused 
on him. “Specifically, by the man who gave the order to fire the 
North Bay missiles after having been told that it was not safe 
for him to do so? By you?” 
The glittering cyborg eyes did not move. From across the con-
ference room Trent could see smoke curling up from the glove 
covering the laser embedded in Vance’s right fist. 
Mohammed Vance said, “Who are you?” 
Trent let the question hang for just an instant, and then said 
very softly indeed, to Vance and the assembled newsdancers, “I 
sent you the rose, Vance.” 
There was sudden and complete silence. 
“Did you like it?” 
Vance took a step away from the podium, toward the crowd 
of newsdancers, toward Trent. “I did not. Is it you, Trent?” 
Trent said into the hushed stillness, “Yes.” 
Vance took a step off the platform, dropped to the ground. 
Newsdancers were fanning away from him as he walked toward 

Moran  293 
 
Trent, flames dancing around his right hand, smoke wafting 
slowly upward in the gentle Lunar gravity. 
Vance was thirty meters away; perhaps forty of the news-
dancers were still blocking his way to Trent. Through the crowd 
Trent locked eyes with the huge cyborg, and said so quietly that 
it could not have been heard in less silent surroundings, “Catch 
me if you can.” 
He took one step backward, into the corridor, and slapped the 
pressure pad to close the double doors. From a jumpsuit pocket 
he withdrew his squirt gun and shot Officer Stout in the face. 
She crumpled in slow motion in the Lunar gravity, sporting a 
woefully surprised expression. Trent worked swiftly but without 
hurrying, did it as he had practiced; from his tool kit Trent took 
a small suction pump, placed it over the corridor’s pressure sen-
sor and turned it on. The corridor sirens went off almost imme-
diately; the door to the conference room locked with an audible 
snap. Trent jacked his handheld into the doorgrid and said 
aloud, “Breached corridor at City Hall. Emergency seal in place.” 
The words boomed out over the corridor intercom, through every 
public outspeaker in all of Luna City. Trent kicked off his shoes 
and undressed in the empty corridor with Officer Stout’s still 
form, watching the door. Not five seconds had passed since the 
closing of the door. Trent had the jumpsuit off; underneath it he 
wore a pair of floral print Hawaiian shorts and a black t-shirt. 
Vance must be having a time of it, getting newsdancers out of 
his way. Six seconds, seven— 
The door shuddered in its frame, buckled slightly. The doors 
dented outward once, twice, where they joined at the center, as 
the cyborg tried to force the doors apart. Trent bundled up the 
jumpsuit and tucked it into the tool kit, watching the door. This 
was the place where it all either came together or fell apart. If 
Vance managed to open that door it was all over. 
A third and even stronger blow struck the door; the door 
frame actually rang like a bell. 
Silence. 
Trent put his shoes back on. 

294  Tales 
For the merest instant, a spot on the surface of the door 
glowed red, orange, approached white, and then faded. Trent 
grinned and said aloud, “Sucker,” pulled his handheld free of the 
doorgrid and hooked it to his belt, turned and walked away 
down the empty corridor without haste, leaving the empty tool 
kit behind with Officer Stout. 
In his mind, he pictured it happening; the laser in Vance’s 
fist touching the door, as Vance attempted to cut through to get 
at Trent. The vacuum glue bursting into fierce flames, the very 
efficient Lunar sprinkler system cutting in to douse the flames, 
and everything else in the conference room, with a fine mixture 
of water and fadeaway. 
The corridor let out onto the only large plaza on A2; Trent 
glided down a ramp to A1. On A1, just before 8:30 A.M., there 
would normally be a couple of thousand people out on various 
errands. Not sixty seconds had passed since the false warning of 
a breach at City Hall; Trent could not see anyone, on all of A1, 
who was not either in a pressure suit or running like mad to-
ward whatever they perceived as safety. A squad of Peaceforcers 
trotted across A1 on its way toward Luna City Hall. Trent ran, 
like everyone around him, ran with long bouncing strides to the 
Luna City transfer station, checked his p-suit from the public 
locker, paid for his ticket with untraceable hard SpaceFarer CU, 
and boarded the 8:30 monorail to Kepler. 
KATRINA TRUDEAU KEPT an underground four-room house just 
outside of the city of Kepler. In addition to being her official 
place of residence, it doubled as a pickup hospital for those cli-
ents who required surgery or other services that were not con-
venient to provide at Luna City. 
Katrina sat beneath dimmed lights in a sunken, white rug-
covered area of her living room, watching a recording of the 
news conference at Luna City, when Trent cycled through the 
airlock. She wore a long gray silk robe, tied at the waist with a 
green sash, with nothing beneath it that Trent could see. 
Katrina smiled at him quickly and went back to watching the 
recording while Trent stripped off his p-suit and rubbed it down. 

Moran  295 
 
“I’m ready.” 
Katrina glanced at him, patted a cushion on the floor next to 
her. “I hope you’re ready. We’re going to need to do your voice 
box as well. After this—” In the holo, Trent was saying I sent you 
the rose, Vance. Katrina said, “Command, holo off. I suppose you 
know how this ends?” 
Trent joined her, settled in to get comfortable. There was a 
“fireplace” in the wall next to them: a combination of holo, 
sound, and radiant heater. The effect was remarkably realistic; 
Trent would have hesitated to put his hand into the flame. 
“Peaceforcers and newsdancers sprawled all over the place. The 
good guys win.” 
“You’re impossible. Trent,” she said, trying the name out for 
size. “I liked Thomas better.” 
“Thomas was safer for you.” 
Katrina laughed, looking at him with amusement and some 
real degree of affection. “I want an extra two thousand CU, 
Trent. For the added danger.” 
Trent said sincerely, “I respect you too much to haggle.” 
Katrina laughed again. “I’m sure you do.” She glanced back 
at the empty holofield, as though it still held the image of the 
prone forms in the City Hall conference room. She stood. “Come 
in back with me.” 
“I thought you were never going to ask.” 
KATRINA SAID slowly, “I have some reluctance to do this to you.” 
Lying on the long flat table, staring straight up at fluorescent 
white glowpaint, Trent said, “Hell of a time to mention it. Why?” 
She looked undecided for a moment. “There is—it—” She 
chewed on her lower lip. “Trent, you’re perfect.” 
Trent said, “Thank you.” 
“I mean it,” she protested. “I’ve been going through your X-
rays, the physical I ran on you the last time you were here. 
Trent, you have no flaws.” 
Trent said again, “Thank you.” 
Katrina said gently, “You’re not surprised.” 
“Should I be?” 

296  Tales 
“Yes, you should.” Indecision battled clearly behind the 
golden eyes. “You’re so exquisite—if you were a painting you’d 
be a masterpiece, Trent.” 
Trent sighed. “Ask the question.” 
“I’m not prejudiced,” she said. “It’s important you believe 
that. I’m not.” 
“You could just ask, you know. It’d save us both a lot of time.” 
“Those questions they asked at the news conference—Trent, 
who designed you?” 
Looking up into her eyes, Trent said, “Suzanne Montignet.” 
“Doctor Montignet?” Katrina nodded slowly. “I see that in 
you. I studied under her, you know. She—” 
“Was the best, and I didn’t pick one of her students by acci-
dent. Katrina, could we talk about this some other time?” 
The woman stood still, then relaxed. “I would really like to 
hear about it sometime.” 
“Sometime I’ll tell you.” Trent was silent then, while Katrina 
moved the machines into place around him. 
“Trent?” 
“Yes?” 
“I’m going to put you under now. It’ll take a few moments, 
and you’ll feel a bit disoriented before you go out. Just don’t 
worry, and don’t get tense; it’ll be okay.” 
Something cool brushed Trent’s arm. “Katrina?” 
“Yes, Trent?” 
“It’s not that I don’t trust you.” 
She said patiently, “Yes?” 
“You notice my handheld’s not here. My Image is not here.” 
“So?” 
A wave of dizziness touched Trent. “So, if anything goes 
wrong, if I don’t get in touch with my Image after this, my Im-
age is going to come get you. My Image,” said Trent, somewhat 
blurrily, “has replicant code in him. Even in the LIN I think he’d 
last—long enough.” 
Katrina Trudeau leaned over Trent’s reclining form, and 
murmured in his ear, “It’s a suspicious world we live in, love. I 

Moran  297 
 
wouldn’t hurt you.” Her voice grew very remote. “How could I? 
There’s too little art in the world to begin with....” 
THERE WAS A long emptiness. 
... BOSS? HEY, BOSS? 
It was like emerging from a deep and dark cavern into blaz-
ing daylight. 
Johnny? Johnny Johnny, is that you? Trent found himself sitting at 
the center of a great emptiness, watching pulsing slivers of light 
at the edges of the world. 
Boss, you have to let me through. 
The form took shape immediately before Trent, a dark and 
hazy shape lacking form or definition. It was a hole in the midst 
of the glowing haziness. Johnny Johnny’s correct, Trent. You have to do it. 
Boss, there’s an Image in the inskin already, and it won’t let me in. You have to 
make it let me in. 
Trent sat in the pristine silence, thinking with a clarity that 
he had never possessed before. The Crystal Wind tugged at the 
edges of his awareness, begged to be let in. He did not know the 
program Johnny Johnny was talking about. He searched his 
own awareness looking for the rogue Image Johnny Johnny was 
referring to, and could not find it. 
The form standing in front of Trent said, Trent, I’ve done every-
thing I can. Simply being here with your inskin fighting so hard has damaged me 
worse than you might imagine. I got Johnny in far enough past your defenses so 
that he could talk to you. It’s up to you now. Let go of the inskin; let Johnny in. 
The form faded, vanished, and left Trent alone with Johnny 
Johnny’s voice. 
Boss? The Image that’s sitting in your inskin? Boss, it thinks it’s you. 
TRENT OPENED HIS eyes. 
He lay in bed with a warm weight snuggled around him. He 
got up carefully, disentangling himself from Katrina’s arms. He 
had to search to find the bathroom. 
Inside the bathroom he switched on the lights, and then had 
to hunt again to find the control to turn on the mirror. 

298  Tales 
The mirror silvered into existence before him. The process of 
the mirror’s appearance seemed very slow. He had never noticed 
that before. 
He examined his appearance in the mirror, the face of an 
American Peaceforcer named Benny Gutierrez. 
Dark hair and eyebrows, almost as dark as Denice’s. His nose 
was slightly larger than it had been before, and his cheekbones 
were higher and more visible. There was a faint cleft in his chin. 
His eyes were no longer pale blue; they were practically gray, 
almost without color. Katrina had done something, he was not 
quite sure what, to the curve of his jaw; it was straighter, more 
angular. It was a fairly handsome face, and made Trent look 
somewhat older; twenty-five or six. 
All of his scars were gone, every one. It made him feel curi-
ously naked, unreal. His tattoo was still there, as Katrina had 
promised, but aside from the white rose his skin was brown all 
over. 
Trent didn’t think he liked it. 
At least, it occurred to him, I don’t have to worry about my 
tan anymore. 
Trent turned off the bathroom light and returned to the bed-
room. His body felt odd, clumsy and slow-moving. He sat down 
at the edge of the bed, in the dark, and let his eyes close. 
He was back in the glowing emptiness almost immediately. 
Trent opened his eyes. Darkness. The sound of Katrina 
breathing in her sleep. 
He closed his eyes again and went Inside. 
BOSS? 
Hi, Johnny. 
You’re back? 
I think so. How long was I gone? 
Boss, it’s been almost three weeks. 
Three weeks. Trent considered that. All right. Johnny, I think I’ve made 
a mistake. 
No kidding. 
That program that thinks it’s me—Johnny, it is me. 

Moran  299 
 
There was, by the standards of electronic intelligences, an in-
credibly long pause before Johnny Johnny replied. Trent found 
himself noticing Johnny Johnny’s response time for the first 
time in his life. Aw, Hell, Boss. You’ve been promising me an inskin for the long-
est time and I was afraid this was going to happen when you started talking about that 
goddamn “almost-an-inskin” NN-II in the first place. I— 
Johnny, stop. Who brought you in to me? 
I think he was an AI, except he was using some of the same Image routines I use, 
so maybe he was a Player. Boss, I don’t know. He knows a lot about you, Boss. And 
Boss—the Player I thought was chasing me after I crashed the PKF boards in Capitol 
City? Remember? I think it was him. 
Okay. We’ll hunt him down when we have our other problems resolved. Where 
are you? 
Where you left me, Boss. The locker at the monorail station. Boss, did you know 
they turn off radio packet InfoNet access between two and five o’clock A.M. every 
night? I’ve had to sit there with nothing to do, three hours a day every day for the last 
three weeks. 
Can you come across? 
There was another long silence. Boss, I can try. But I tried before, and you didn’t 
let me. 
Trent said, Try again. 
At first Trent thought nothing was happening. Then an op-
pressive weight seemed to descend upon him, an amorphous 
shape that settled over the glowing expanse of his consciousness 
like a shroud. He found himself tensing without meaning to, 
forced himself to relax, using the same biofeedback techniques 
that had once, eons ago, allowed a simple boy named Trent to 
interpret the signals from a traceset. 
The gloom deepened, and then a vast pain ripped through 
Trent, a silent flaring implosion of agony and Trent heard him-
self screaming as Johnny Johnny invaded, struck his uncon-
scious barriers hard and— 
—merged. 
“TRENT?” IT WAS Katrina’s voice, concerned. The word dragged 
across Trent’s awareness in slow motion. “Trent?” 
The lights were on in her bedroom. 

300  Tales 
Trent felt himself turning to look at her, felt the individual 
movement of each muscle in his neck. A channel at the edge of 
his awareness vibrated with promise, with potential. In his 
mind Trent saw the channel grow, become a tunnel that he 
flowed down at the speed of light, the edges of Realtime racing 
by him, falling away from him as he expanded to encompass the 
Crystal Wind. 
This, said Johnny Johnny-who-was Trent, in a voice so silent 
that Trent-who-was-Trent could barely hear it, is much better. 
Katrina’s voice was blurred and patterned, half lost in the 
growing, thundering crescendo of the Crystal Wind of informa-
tion. “How do you feel?” 
Trent continued turning toward her. His body moved with 
amazing slowness, a crude meat machine. A Russian ballerina 
whirled through the space inside his skull, half obscured the 
face of the woman in front of him. Russian = dancing bears. “I 
know a dancing bear named Boris,” Trent heard himself explain-
ing to Katrina earnestly, “and a very good joke, would you like to 
hear it? Ask somebody to pick a number between one and ten. 
Then, run away.” 
He stood unsteadily. There were nine thousand five hundred 
and forty-two Lunar InfoNet Boards pouring into him, forty-five 
microwave channels carrying data extracted from Earth’s In-
foNet. The stock market was up five points and a flood in Aus-
tralia had killed six hundred people, the Green Bay Packers 
were being stomped by the Beijing Bears and a Johnny Reb 
bomb in Iowa had detonated prematurely without killing any-
body. The world’s greatest sensablist, Gregory Selstrom, and the 
world’s most popular sensable actor, Gregory Selstrom’s elder 
brother Adam Selstrom, had agreed to work together in Gregory 
Selstrom’s current production; it would be the first time the two 
had collaborated. 
Trent stumbled once, and Katrina was there, steadying him. 
A stand-up comic with a cigarette lighter in his hand said, “And 
in closing, I’d like to set myself on fire for you—but that would 
hurt.” Katrina did not try to stop Trent as he walked out into the 
living room and then stood motionless in the middle of the room, 

Moran  301 
 
sightless eyes fixed upon his pressure suit. An artificial Christ-
mas tree was erected just to one side of the pressure suit rack, 
the tree’s lights blinking red and blue and green, yellow and or-
ange and white. On one of the lines from Earth three beautiful 
children were telling a newsdancer that all they wanted for 
Christmas was world peace. In Beijing a riot resulted in twenty-
three deaths by trampling, including one couple who had been 
celebrating their sixty-fifth wedding anniversary. There were 
half a dozen presents beneath the tree, wrapped in silver and 
gold foil. “This is what they always meant,” Trent said aloud. 
When he spoke the words he heard them echo. “The Crystal Wind is 
the Storm, and the Storm is Data, and the Data is Life. Where are my 
clothes?” 
Trent heard the worry in her voice when she answered him. 
“You’re not ready to leave yet, Trent. You’re not—” 
“Don’t worry, Katrina. I’m just going to go do what’s neces-
sary.” That part of Trent that had once been Johnny Johnny 
added, “You know, I’ve never seen a Christmas tree before, I’ve 
never seen colors before. You humans,” he whispered to Katrina, 
“you are such marvelous machines.” 
“Trent,” she said desperately, “I can’t let you leave like this!” 
The numbers danced into Trent’s awareness, out again. “It’s 
December 7, 2069, 2:30 A.M. One hundred and twenty-eight 
years ago today the Japanese bombed Pearl Harbor and dragged 
the United States into World War II. ‘And with each passing 
year it is going to seem more quaint, the little tin airplanes 
bombing the sleepy iron giants.’ My god,” said Trent a moment 
later, staring at Katrina, “I can see the field I first read that line 
on. It’s hanging there in the back of my head; I’m thirteen, and 
the Temple Dragons have just adopted me.” 
“Trent, it’s going to take time before it’s safe for you to 
leave—” 
“It’s Saturday,” said Trent abruptly. “On Sunday I’m sup-
posed to be in Jackson Town Free Luna, on Farside. To meet a 
woman named Callia who came all the way from Earth just to 
work with me.” He smiled at her with slow delight; the lights 
from the Christmas tree were reflected in her eyes, dancing like 

302  Tales 
fireflies on the gold-green irises. “But if you wanted to go back to 
bed, I could be talked into being late.” 
 
23. 
FARSIDE IS ESSENTIALLY three cities, in three craters. The Lunar 
Bureau 
of 
the 
United 
Nations 
Peace 
Keeping 
Force 
DataWatch—that is its full and complete name—is a base lo-
cated at the crater Jules Verne. The only significant scientific 
establishment on Farside is Zvezdagrad at Tsiolkovsky Crater, 
where astronomers from all over the System probe into far 
reaches of the sky. Jackson Town Free Luna completes what is 
very nearly an equilateral triangle; between them the three cit-
ies hold some eighty percent of the population of Farside. 
Jackson Town seemed more like an Earthside city than any-
thing else Trent had seen on Luna. At not quite three kilometers 
in diameter, its dome did not cover so much territory as the 
dome at Luna City. Still it stretched over more square meters 
than most of the other domed cities. It felt larger than Luna City 
to Trent, with most of its surface surface given over to greenery, 
ranging from wilderness to sculptured parklands. 
Trent arrived in Jackson Town in the midst of two nights, 
the real Lunar night and the artificial night derived from 
Earth’s twenty-four hour cycle. The armed girl on duty at the 
transfer station when Trent’s semiballistic arrived kept awake 
barely long enough to verify Trent’s passport, approve him for 
entry and check him through. Trent kept to the marked paths, 
wandering through the dark wilderness without hurry, moving 
underneath the impossibly thin trees, through shrubbery and 
flowers that reached to his chest. The handheld clipped at his 
belt bounced every few steps against the side of his thigh. A 1TB 
infochip inside the handheld safeguarded the only record anyone 
in the world had of Trent’s original facial bone structure and 
voice print. 
Very little light filtered through the dome; nighttime on Far-
side left Trent in a nearly total darkness unlike anything he had 

Moran  303 
 
ever seen on Earth. Only the very faint starlight shone down on 
the terraformed landscape. Airlocks led beneath ground every 
thirty meters or so; even in the event of a catastrophic failure of 
the dome, Trent thought it likely he would reach shelter in time. 
The paths twisted and curved throughout the upper level, 
moving toward and then away from the very center of the dome, 
where Trent wished to go. Trent walked without hurry; he ex-
pected to have to wait out the night in the Temple of Eris until 
his contact returned to the Temple to greet him. He wandered 
down the pathways, and Johnny Johnny’s ghostly fading voice, 
in the back of his skull, said, Boss, I’m going to try something new. It 
happened slowly, the world flaring and brightening around 
Trent as though dawn were arriving. Johnny Johnny’s image 
processing went slowly at first, and then more quickly as Johnny 
Johnny found out what did and did not work. The edges of eve-
rything around Trent became very sharp, and then the surfaces 
of things speckled, appeared for a moment in garish unreal col-
ors, and then settled into a grainy black and white image. The 
world steadied around Trent for just an instant, and then, from 
up ahead on the path, came the first hint of illumination from 
the Temple of Eris. Trent glided slowly through the inky dark-
ness, unable even to feel amazement at how very strange his 
world had grown in the days since Emile Garon’s death. 
Light blazed over him in glaring colors. 
The exterior of the Temple of Eris at Jackson Town looked 
nothing like Reverend Andy’s Temple in Brooklyn; a gold and 
silver octagonal building, limned in black marble, surrounded by 
yellow floodlamps at its base. It reached up two stories to touch 
the dome itself and it glared at Trent, the brightest object in the 
world, the brightest thing Trent had ever seen before, more ra-
diant than the sun itself. He walked slowly around the Temple, 
marveling as he had never marveled before at anything and 
then suddenly, without warning, Trent’s vision reverted to nor-
mal. 
For the merest instant he felt a deep, aching regret at the 
loss of the vision, and then he found the entrance, and went in-
side. 

304  Tales 
FOUR ROWS of pews, of some material made to resemble bur-
nished walnut, expanded outward in concentric rings from the 
central circle where the Reverend preached sermons on Sundays 
and Wednesdays. The Temple lacked an altar, which did not 
surprise Trent; some Temples had them, others did not. A frac-
tured rainbow, rose and pale blue with a flash of green, fell from 
a series of stained glass windows positioned high on the eight 
inner walls. 
A woman knelt, praying, at the center of the circle. 
Trent walked forward slowly, to the edge of the circle, and 
sat down in lotus facing the praying woman. A small satchel sat 
on one of the pews behind her. Weapons surrounded the woman; 
an autoshot lay on the Temple floor immediately to her left, a 
sheathed knife to her right, and a hand weapon, either laser or 
maser, immediately before her. She knelt with her eyes closed, 
her head bowed. Her hands clenched together just beneath her 
chin, white with tension. She knelt in the most uncomfortable 
position Trent could imagine, knees together, back and thighs 
completely rigid from the knees up. Her hair waved gently in the 
breeze from the ventilators, a soft blonde brush cut only five 
centimeters long. Barefoot, she wore nothing but the bottom half 
of a powder blue gi, loosely tied at her waist with a black belt. 
The smooth, swimmer’s muscles in her back and shoulders, the 
mark of one clearly Earth-born, trembled slightly, and in the low 
gravity random trickles of sweat moved languidly across her up-
per torso, across breasts shiny with perspiration. Trent sat in 
silent fascination, watching her breath. She breathed deeply, 
slowly. 
Time passed. The woman did not move except for the rhyth-
mic rise and fall of her chest. Trent watched her, trying to match 
his own breathing to hers. His time sense still behaved oddly; 
sometimes it seemed to him that so much time passed between 
each breath that he would die if he did not breathe more quickly. 
He became aware of individual muscles moving, of the sound of 
his own heartbeat. 
He did not speak. 

Moran  305 
 
After some unmeasured time, her eyes opened. She looked 
right at Trent, locked eyes with him. Her irises were exactly the 
same color as Denice’s. She spoke in a silk-soft voice, in an 
American accent. “You’re late.” She sagged suddenly, went limp 
and sat back on her heels and took a long, shuddering breath. 
When she looked back up at Trent again a smile had touched 
her features, an odd, gentle, not quite impersonal smile. “Thank 
you. I’m usually too busy to go to Temple. Today was good for 
me.” 
“Today?” She did not reply and Trent said, “You’ve been here 
since—I was supposed to be here at ten o’clock this morning. 
That’s almost fourteen hours ago.” 
She sat smiling at him. “Yes.” 
“You are Callia Sierran?” 
“Yes. And you’re Trent the Uncatchable.” 
“Trent the what?” 
“You haven’t been auditing the Boards?” 
“No. I’ve been—busy.” 
“It’s what the newsdancers have been calling you.” 
The instant she said it, Trent knew it for the truth. The 
thought triggered the whirlwind of the Crystal Wind, a cascade 
he could not control, a blurred and roaring tumble of images and 
sounds and written words:  systemwide, in the last month, the 
word pattern “Trent the Uncatchable” registered some 23,000 
occurrences. Slow delight blossomed within Trent; he sat silently 
while the data washed over him and through him, sat almost 
paralyzed until the moment had passed. To Callia Sierran it 
must have appeared as the merest instant’s hesitation before his 
reply. “They have sown the wind,” Trent heard himself saying, 
“and they shall reap the whirlwind.” 
Her smile grew even wider. “Yes,” said Callia Sierran. “They 
shall.” 
CALLIA SAT RESTING for a while after that. Trent waited pa-
tiently. After several minutes her breathing had gentled, grown 
more shallow. She stood and removed the bottom half of her gi 
and dried herself with a towel from the satchel on the pew be-

306  Tales 
hind her, unaware or else uncaring of what effect she might 
have on Trent. She redressed in the blue gi, top and bottoms, 
and a pair of gray running shoes without socks, and began talk-
ing as she dressed. “Right now it looks like you, myself, my 
brother Lan, and Yevgeni Sergei Korimok.” She removed a hol-
ster from the satchel, tied it down on her right thigh. The knife 
went back in the satchel. “Lan does our demolition. He’s my 
brother, and he’s young, so you may not trust my objectivity, but 
he’s really very good at it. A bit impulsive, which we’ll need to 
watch for, but reliable. He follows orders.” 
Trent nodded. “Okay.” 
“I’m security.” She picked up the hand weapon, checked the 
charge cartridge and holstered it. “I spend nine months a year 
on Earth for toning, three in Luna. I move well in Lunar gravity 
and I have muscles most Lunar residents, men included, can’t 
match.” She glanced at Trent speculatively. “Not counting you, I 
think. If things blow up on us, I handle it if I can. I can use al-
most any energy weapon or slugthrower. I have a second degree 
black belt in tae kwon do, a fourth in shotokan. I’m good with a 
wide variety of edged weapons. I’m checked out on pressure-suit 
combat, both the standard soft suits and powered scalesuits.” 
She slung the satchel over her right shoulder, carrying the auto-
shot in her right hand. “Yevgeni’s a native loonie, U.N. terri-
tory,” Callia continued, sitting down on a pew facing Trent. “And 
Syndic on top of that, and especially given that you’re an Ameri-
can you don’t want to get him started on how the Russians have 
been treated by the Unification. But Domino vouches for him, 
and that’s good enough for me. He has contacts all over the 
place, nearside and far, Free Luna and United Nations. He’s go-
ing to be doing most of the public contact we need done.” She 
smiled at him again, that oddly beatific smile. “And then there’s 
you. I don’t know what you’re here for.” 
The comment startled Trent. “You don’t know?” 
She shook her head, a quick efficient back and forth motion. 
“No. Domino said you would tell us. She told me we were hitting 
the Peaceforcers, and that you would tell us the rest; that was 
enough.” 

Moran  307 
 
“You seem to trust Domino a lot.” 
“I trust many people. Trent—” She hesitated, and it struck 
Trent that it was the first time she had addressed him by his 
name. “Isn’t there anyone you trust completely? Who you have 
faith in?” 
Trent did not even have to think about his answer. “A girl I 
know on Earth.” 
“Then you understand,” Callia said simply. “If Domino told 
me my eyes were blue, I would assume that they had changed 
color since the last time I looked in a mirror.” 
Trent nodded thoughtfully. “Callia? May I ask you a ques-
tion?” 
“You can ask me anything. My life is a public Board, Trent.” 
“You’re a member of the Erisian Claw.” 
Callia did not even blink. “Yes.” She seemed surprised. “Is 
that a problem?” 
“You’ve promised your life to the overthrow of the Unifica-
tion.” 
“Yes,” she said serenely. 
Trent said very slowly, “I’ve never known anyone in the 
Claw, but one of my closest friends is Reverend of a Temple in 
New York. Callia, are you Erisian first, or Claw first?” 
Callia Sierran shook her head. “That’s a question that has no 
meaning, Trent.” 
“The Erisian Temples preach that life is sacred, Callia.” 
“The Claw believes the same, Trent.” Her gaze did not waver. 
“Our lives as much so as those of our enemies. When our lives 
are threatened by our enemies—and they are, every day—we do 
what we must.” 
“I need a promise from you, Callia.” 
The woman said instantly, “Done.” 
“You don’t want to know what it is?” 
“I would like to, yes.” 
Trent shook his head, grinning despite himself. “All right. 
You can’t kill anyone on this job. Not even Peaceforcers.” 
For the briefest instant he thought she was going to argue, 
and then she nodded once. “I will do as you say. So will Lan. I 

308  Tales 
can’t speak for Yevgeni.” She paused and then said, “Lan will 
want to know why we are not to kill Peaceforcers.” 
Trent sat in lotus, studying something he had never seen be-
fore in his life. “But it doesn’t matter to you?” 
“It matters to me, yes.” Callia Sierran shrugged. “But not as 
much as doing what Domino has told me to do.” 
“Which is?” 
“Domino,” said Callia, “told me to do whatever you told me to 
do.” 
 
24. 
DOMINO HAD ARRANGED for them to take over a suite of five 
rooms at a friendly hotel outside the Jackson Town dome. Trent 
wandered through the rooms briefly: a central room with a small 
kitchenette attached, with a window overlooking the Jackson 
Town dome; four bedrooms, one for Trent, one for Callia and her 
brother, one for Yevgeni Sergei Korimok— 
—and one for the seven bodies. 
Callia showed Trent the room that they had saved for him, 
said a quiet good night, and went to the room she shared with 
her brother. 
TRENT OPENED HIS eyes to cool, bright yellow sunpaint and the 
smell of good coffee. 
The room was large, with a writing desk and chair and a bed. 
A closed door concealed the room’s small shower. There was a 
terminal at the desk, turned off. The two suitcases Trent had 
left aboard the rented semiballistic had been put next to the 
desk. 
The boy sat at the foot of Trent’s bed, wearing a brown robe 
that had seen better days and drinking from a bulb of coffee. His 
clear blue eyes were fixed on Trent, gaze steady and unblinking. 
He was sixteen or seventeen and slim, with long brown hair 
bound in a ponytail, and had either just depilated his facial hair 
or had never needed to. 

Moran  309 
 
He smiled at Trent. “Good morning.” 
“Good morning.” 
“You sleep pretty hard.” 
Trent sat up in bed, slowly. “At 3:38 A.M. you stood in the 
doorway for twenty-two seconds, turned and left. At 6:12 you 
came in and sat in the chair for four minutes and eight seconds. 
At 9:05 you came in again, dropped my luggage next to the desk, 
stood at the foot of the bed and mumbled a sentence that in-
cluded the word lazy, and left. It’s now 9:22, and you’ve been sit-
ting at the foot of the bed for not quite three minutes.” 
The boy blinked. “How do you know that?” 
Trent said, “I don’t sleep very hard. You’re Lan Sierran?” 
“Yeah.” Lan grinned suddenly. “Got it. You have an inskin 
monitoring your auditory nerve.” 
Trent looked at Lan Sierran thoughtfully. “Good guess. Ex-
cuse me.” He got out of the bed and went to take a shower. He 
did not hurry. When he came back out again, one towel around 
his waist, drying his hair with another, Lan was still there, 
reading from the holofield of an InfoNet handheld. 
A second bulb, still sealed, had appeared on the endtable by 
the bed. “Coffee,” said Lan, without looking up at Trent. “With 
cream, no sugar. This place has its own kitchen.” He did look up 
then. “I’ve never been in hotel rooms before that had their own 
private kitchen attached. Domino told me you said you didn’t 
want room service, not even waitbots.” 
“I said that, yes. Are Callia and ’Sieur Korimok here?” 
“Nope. Went to Jackson Town. Yev’s going to buy me and 
Callia scalesuits. Yev is a big believer in scalesuits.” 
The memory popped up so fast and strong that for a moment 
it was as though Nathan were there in the room with him. “A 
friend of mine,” said Trent, “said that scalesuits were disasters 
waiting to happen.” Trent opened one of his suitcases, took out a 
pair of black cotton slacks and a long-sleeved gray shirt and put 
them on. Lan watched him dress with unabashed interest. 
“You have nice muscles. You don’t see that on the Moon very 
much. Except on Peaceforcers,” Lan amended. “But that’s regs 
for them, they have to stay in shape so they can be sent back to 

310  Tales 
Earth at the end of their tour.” He shrugged. “I don’t sleep with 
Peaceforcers.” 
“I hope not,” said Trent mildly. He settled on the bed in front 
of Lan and twisted the ring at the neck of the coffee bulb. He 
sipped at the coffee. 
Lan watched him. “You like it?” 
Trent blinked. “Yes.” He smelled the coffee. “What is this?” 
Nothing he had drunk since he’d been on Luna had come close to 
tasting like real coffee. 
Lan nodded. “I hardly ever drink coffee myself. Caffeine’s bad 
for you. And it doesn’t taste as good as orange juice or tea. Or 
milk. But Booker Jamethon said you were a coffee junkie so we 
brought two kilos of S&W Colombian up with us when Domino 
told us to come.” 
Trent glanced at the boy sharply. “You spoke to Booker?” 
“Not me. Callia. Domino works with the Syndic a lot, she has 
to.” Lan shook his head. “When Callia found out we were going 
to work with you she researched. She’s good at that, but even so 
she didn’t get a lot. You have a lot of friends, but we left Earth 
before the—” he grinned “—news conference, while the Peace-
forcers weren’t certain still if you were alive or not. So we 
couldn’t very well wander around asking people what sorts of 
things you wanted from home. ’Sieur Jamethon said you were a 
coffee junkie, and a Brother Andrew at the Flushing Street 
Temple told Callia you liked S&W Colombian. Nobody else 
talked to her very much.” 
Trent nodded slowly. “Good. That’s good to hear.” 
“So anyhow,” Lan continued, “what are we doing here?” 
“We’re going to steal the LINK.” 
“Okay. I’m supposed to blow something up?” 
“At one point, yes.” 
“What is it?” 
“A Peaceforcer troop transport rolligon.” 
The boy grinned broadly. “Great.” 
“We are not,” said Trent patiently, “going to kill anybody.” 
The grin vanished. “You’re kidding.” 
“I’m not.” 

Moran  311 
 
“Not anybody?” 
“Nobody.” 
Lan looked vaguely distressed. “You’re going to blow up a 
Peaceforcer troop transport,” he said, “without killing anybody?” 
“Exactly.” 
The boy thought about it for a long moment. “But what’s the 
point?” 
LATER THAT EVENING the four of them sat in the dark with a 
glowing holograph in the center of the table. The holograph 
showed a map of Farside, with the triangle of Jackson Town, 
Zvezdagrad, and Jules Verne. A dotted red line ran from Zvez-
dagrad toward the crater Jules Verne; there was a big blue X 
where the line entered a series of low hills, just before the line 
actually touched Verne crater. 
“Everybody has summaries? Yes?” Trent looked around the 
table: Lan looked bored, Korimok was quietly following him, and 
Callia listened intently, as though worried she might miss some 
subtle nuance. Trent smiled at Lan. “Let’s recap. On December 
twenty-second a man named Benny Gutierrez is scheduled to 
ship up to Luna City. Gutierrez is a webdancer, and from what 
I’ve been able to learn about him, a fairly good one. On January 
third he’s scheduled to report for duty at the Lunar DataWatch 
base at Jules Verne. SOP for PKF personnel transfers of this 
kind goes this way: 
“Gutierrez isn’t important enough to come in via semiballis-
tic. In a way that’s unfortunate; he’d probably be alone, or with 
one other passenger at most, and it’d make taking his place a lot 
easier.” Trent shrugged. “Win a few, lose a few. At any rate, he’s 
scheduled to arrive at Tsiolkovsky with five other DataWatch 
Peaceforcers on the monorail from Luna City. From there they 
rolligon to Jules Verne. 
“Gutierrez is ideal in many ways. He’s American and he 
speaks French with an accent. Not my accent exactly, but it’s 
unlikely the PKF at Verne will know that. He has a radio packet 
inskin. It’s not my model, but they’d have to do a workup on me 
to prove that, and if they get that suspicious I’m blown anyhow. 

312  Tales 
He’s new to Luna, new to the PKF. Best data I have on him says 
the only other Peaceforcers he’s likely to know are the ones in 
the rolligon with him when he leaves Zvezdagrad.” 
Trent had found himself instantly at ease with Yevgeni Ser-
gei Korimok; the tall pale loonie was pure Syndic, professional 
and detached where the work was concerned. “Therefore,” Kori-
mok said, in a high quiet voice that seemed perfectly in keeping 
with his demeanor, “the Peaceforcers in the rolligon with ’Sieur 
Gutierrez must not reach Jules Verne.” 
“Now how the slithy hell are we going to do that,” said Lan 
softly, leaning across the table to stare at Trent, “without killing 
them?” 
Trent stared through the gloom at the boy. “I have bodies 
coming to stand in for the Peaceforcers who’ll be on the rolligon. 
We’ve got good med records on the Peaceforcers who’ll be with 
Gutierrez; the biosculptor who did me agreed to take five 
corpses, men who died of natural causes, and do dental work on 
them so they’ll match the dental records of the five Peaceforcers 
coming in with Gutierrez. We have two more corpses, a man and 
a woman, to take the place of whoever ends up driving the rolli-
gon. There’s no way to make a good guess about that; any of lit-
erally dozens of Peaceforcers could draw that particular duty, 
male or female. There aren’t many female PKF at Jules Verne, 
only about ten percent of the total complement, but it’s a possi-
bility to plan for. Whether it’s a man or a woman driving the rol-
ligon we have a body to substitute. We won’t have that person’s 
dental records but if we sufficiently damage the body we substi-
tute for the driver then we won’t need them.” 
Korimok nodded slowly. “So this gets you in, yes?” 
“Yes.” 
It was Callia who said, “How, then, are you going to get out?” 
Trent told them. 
There was a hushed silence when he was finished. 
Lan said, “That’s crazy. You’re just going to get yourself 
killed.” 
“Maybe.” 
Callia stared at Trent. “Trent, he’s right.” 

Moran  313 
 
“It’s a risk,” Trent agreed. “But not an impossible one.” 
Yevgeni Sergei smiled thinly. “A problem with so many 
young people, I have seen. This desire to be a hero.” 
“A hero,” said Trent, “is someone who knows when to run 
away.” 
Everybody stared at Trent. 
“I,” Trent proclaimed, “am a hero.” 
THREE BODIES ARRIVED in stasis fields the next morning. 
IN THE HILLS to the west of Jules Verne, Trent sat alone in Na-
than Dark Clouds’ chameleon. He had parked the chameleon 
just north and above the ravine where the Peaceforcer rolligons 
passed on their way to the DataWatch base at Jules Verne. 
Six hours. At 10:12 A.M. Capitol City time a single rolligon 
crept through the Lunar night, twenty meters beneath Trent 
and forty away, headlamps sending quarter-million candlepower 
beams of pure white light out into the Lunar night. Trent sat 
almost motionless, breathing deeply and very slowly. 
Part of him watched. 
Most of him was elsewhere. 
Johnny Johnny was almost gone; Trent had very little im-
pression left of his Image as something separate from himself. 
Johnny Johnny’s voice came less frequently now, as Trent as-
similated the program that had once been his Image. There was 
no sadness in it, for it was a completion, not an ending. The per-
son who took shape in the darkness, in a place as remote as pos-
sible from the scouring storm that Players call the Crystal Wind, 
was far greater than the sum of his parts. 
At 12:20 exactly a caravan of four rolligons passed. At 12:36 
another rolligon passed, and then nothing until 3:07, when a 
pair came by together. 
At four o’clock that afternoon the man who had once been 
Trent, and once been Johnny Johnny, turned the engine on and 
headed back to Jackson Town. 

314  Tales 
THE MASS DRIVER at Jackson Town stretches three and a half 
kilometers in a series of superconducting magnets spaced con-
secutively further apart. The separation at the catapult head is 
only forty meters; at the far end it has stretched to seventy-five. 
Lunar orbital velocity is only 1.6 kilometers per second, but even 
so loads boosted from Jackson Town must undergo upward of 
one hundred gravities acceleration in the course of launch. 
Trent spent most of December 22, the Sunday morning before 
Christmas, in the control booth from which the Jackson Town 
catapult was run, watching as loads were boosted into orbit. The 
booth was small, just barely large enough for Trent, Yevgeni, 
and the woman running the mass driver. 
Trent was not introduced to the woman, a small Asian 
woman with a blue-silver skin dye and pale gold hair who was so 
delicate that if it had not been for her shortness—about 165 cen-
timeters—Trent might have pegged her for a loonie. 
He watched her work for several hours without interfering. 
He watched carefully, recording into his inskin. 
Yevgeni remarked, dryly, that Trent was acting as though 
his life depended on understanding how the catapult was run. 
The work was reasonably straightforward on her end. A 
group of men in scalesuits, without any heavy moving equip-
ment, would load a single capsule at the catapult head, placing 
the capsule in a cradle-like contraption that looked like half of 
an egg shell. The egg shell sat some thirty meters back from the 
first magnet, and was completely open at the end facing the first 
magnet. Trent watched better than a dozen launches, and they 
never varied. The egg shell was attached to a sixty meter long 
maglev rail, and each launch began with the egg lifting about 
twenty centimeters above the rail, a lift that was barely visible 
from the control booth, and then accelerating toward the first 
ring. At the end of sixty meters the egg shell slammed into a 
pair of long vertical bars that prevented it, but not its load, from 
continuing any further. The capsule continued on into the first 
magnet, moving so quickly now that Trent could barely see it— 
—and vanished as the magnets grabbed it at a hundred 
gravities. 

Moran  315 
 
After fourteen launches the crew broke for lunch. The Asian 
woman did not get out of her chair; she blinked once, took her 
traceset off, and smiled at Trent. Her voice surprised him; it re-
minded him instantly, both in quality and choice of words, of 
Jodi Jodi. “What do you think? Yev says you’re a webdancer, you 
could do what I do. Want a job?” 
Trent shook his head and smiled back at her. “Forgive me, 
but just what do you do?” 
“Oh.” She looked startled. “I guess it’s not very obvious from 
watching me sit there like a juice junkie? I monitor. Before every 
launch I run diagnostics and do a go-nogo for every ring, then 
the same thing for the maglev rail the swatter runs on, then for 
the release mech on the swatter.” 
“The swatter is the egg-shaped thing?” 
“Yes. That’s basically what it does, you see. Sort of swats the 
load so that it’s moving even and steady when the first ring 
grabs it. I can abort the launch at any time up to the point 
where the first ring grabs the load. After that it’s gone.” 
“How long have you been on the job?” 
“Two years, a couple months.” 
“Ever had to abort a launch?” 
“I delay launches maybe one every six weeks or so, because 
the superconductor fields are fluctuating, the swatter rode rough 
on the prior launch, a couple other reasons. I only had to at-
tempt an abort after the swatter started moving one time. We 
lost power on a six hundred meter section of the catapult.” She 
shrugged. “Didn’t catch it in time. You know what the odds are 
against a load taking out a ring that’s maybe five meters wide? 
When the rings are separated by an average of sixty meters?” 
“Eight point five percent.” 
The woman looked sharply at Trent. “We ended up on the 
short end of the stick. Lost a ring.” 
Trent nodded. “What would happen if you tried to launch 
something without using the swatter?” 
“You mean a free load?” 
“I suppose that’s what I mean.” 

316  Tales 
The woman blinked, looked interested for the first time. 
“Good question. I’ve never heard of anyone trying it; catapult 
design is pretty standardized aside from things like length and 
boost. I think you’d lose the load. And maybe part of the catapult 
as well. The load needs to be kept stable in the early part of the 
launch; that’s the place where you’re likeliest to have enough 
wobble that you’d lose it. It’s more important on the midget here 
than it is on longer catapults,” she added. “Over at the Luna 
City catapult you’re only pulling three gees, and a miscalc early 
on probably wouldn’t take the catapult down. Even at the Verne 
catapult your top boost is only around nine or ten gees. Not 
much danger of knocking out one of the catapult rings with a 
missed load. Here it’s something to watch for.” 
Trent nodded. “If you wanted to launch a free load, how 
would you go about it?” 
“I wouldn’t. It’s a stupid idea.” 
“So people keep telling me. But suppose you couldn’t use the 
swatter and you had to.” 
“Well...” The woman hesitated, obviously reluctant. “It’s still 
a stupid idea; I’d wait until the swatter was repaired. But if I 
had to, I’d rig something to bounce the load, hmm ...” She 
paused. “A single superconducting ring is about twenty-five me-
ters in diameter. I’d want to get the load at least fifteen meters 
above the ground, maybe five meters in front of the first ring, 
and then cycle the catapult while the load was still rising. The 
load would probably crash, but the catapult would survive. I 
think.” 
ELSEWHERE ON LUNA that Sunday, a Peaceforcer webdancer 
named Benny Gutierrez arrived at Luna City. 
A MESSAGE WAITED for Trent at the hotel when he returned. 
Passage arranged for January 4, 9:00 a.m. to 4 p.m.; the 
SpaceFarer ship Vatsayama. 
Good luck. 
Felix K’Hin. 

Moran  317 
 
ON TUESDAY, Christmas Eve, Lan and Callia went into Jackson 
Town for midnight mass. The Temples of Eris were an out-
growth of Christianity, and though the birth of Jesus Christ was 
not the primary religious observance of the Temples, it remained 
important. Yevgeni went to bed early, and Trent sat alone in his 
hotel room, letting the Crystal Wind pour through him, retain-
ing what data called attention to itself, letting the rest pass by. 
With a portion of his attention he composed a letter for Den-
ice. 
 
Dear Denice, 
You will know, by the time you receive this, if the 
job I am about to attempt has succeeded. The letter 
will take a while to reach you, for it is going to be 
sent Federal Express and hand-delivered; I have 
been away from Earth’s InfoNet long enough now 
that I cannot be sure that any of my old mail ac-
counts are still secure from the DataWatch. Now 
that the PKF knows that I am alive it’s not safe for 
me to try calling you again. 
If you and I are both still here in February, per-
haps we can try again. Luna won’t work now, not 
even Free Luna, but Mars or one of the Belt CityS-
tates are still possibilities. I’m sorry that I have to 
do this—I know it will be harder for you no matter 
how it turns out—but I do have to do it. No choice. 
I think of you often—no, make that constantly. 
I love you. 
—Trent 
 
Just after two o’clock, early on the morning of December 
twenty-fifth, there was a knock on Trent’s door. 
Trent sat on the bed, cross-legged in the dark. “Come in.” 
The lights came up as Lan entered, still dressed in the dove-
gray suit he had worn to Temple, and sat carefully, back 
straight, at the foot of Trent’s bed. His hair had been styled, 

318  Tales 
swept straight back from his face and tied in the neatest pony-
tail Trent had seen on Lan since he had known the boy. 
He held a green-bowed, gold-foil-wrapped present. 
“Merry Christmas, Trent.” 
“Merry Christmas, Lan.” 
“I brought you a present.” 
Trent nodded. “I see. I don’t have one for you.” 
“I didn’t think you would.” He handed the box to Trent, and 
Trent turned it over in his hands. “Go ahead and open it.” 
Trent untied the emerald bow and unwrapped the foil from 
the box without tearing it. The box, of hand-carved redwood, was 
about sixty centimeters long, twenty wide and twenty deep. It 
was hinged, with a small silver stud that Trent pressed to open 
it. The redwood box was inlaid with black velvet, and on the vel-
vet lining sat a small pistol completely unlike anything Trent 
had ever seen before. Trent removed it and looked it over with 
clinical curiosity. It was small enough to be used as a hideaway, 
but the barrel’s aperture was ridiculously small, smaller than 
that of a pellet gun. The barrel was extremely thick, about three 
times the size of a .22 revolver. He placed it back in the box and 
said, “Thank you very much, Lan. What is it?” 
The boy grinned at Trent. “Hideaway for either pressurized 
or unpressurized environments. It’s basically a small mass 
driver, a rail gun crammed into a twelve centimeter barrel. It’s 
only.15 caliber, but at top boost the pellet develops four thou-
sand meters per second velocity leaving the barrel. You can drop 
the boost for target shooting, getting used to the gun, and then 
kick it up for serious work. At top boost you can knock over a 
PKF Elite who’s running toward you. You probably won’t kill 
him, but that’s almost impossible anyhow.” Lan paused. “Unless 
you throw him off a spacescraper.” 
Trent closed the box, put it on the endtable by the bed. “He 
fell,” said Trent evenly. 
Lan sighed. “I know,” he said after a moment. “I saw the 
Peaceforcer recording of it. But seeing they’re claiming you 
killed him, you might as well take credit for it.” 

Moran  319 
 
“Thank you for the gun, Lan. I appreciate the thought behind 
it.” 
“But not the gift.” Lan closed his eyes briefly, sat still for a 
moment in the pale gray suit. He opened his eyes again. 
“Trent?” 
“Yes?” 
“Why do we keep not getting along? I’m trying to like you.” 
The words were spoken with such complete honesty that for a 
moment Trent could not find the correct answer for the boy. “I 
know you are ... I have a friend, Lan, named Reverend Andy. He 
preaches at the Flushing Street Temple in New York. He told 
me once that the problem with the Claw isn’t that they’re not 
sincere, but that they’re a part of the problem they’re trying to 
solve. When the Unification War ended, Lan, the Peace Keeping 
Forces were soldiers. They weren’t police, they weren’t 
DataWatch, they weren’t the secret service they’ve become to-
day. The PKF Elite exists today, Lan, because the Claw and the 
Johnny Rebs and half a dozen other organizations like them 
brought it into existence.” 
Lan said abruptly, “Does Callia know you feel this way?” 
“I doubt it. She knows I don’t want any killing; it’s one of the 
first things we talked about. Beyond that, no, I haven’t talked to 
her much.” 
“I’ve seen you watching her,” said Lan. He looked straight at 
Trent. “If you wanted to sleep with her, she would.” 
“I thought so.” 
“You do want to?” 
Trent said simply, “Yes.” 
Lan nodded deliberately. “Then why don’t you ask her?” 
“Because of a question I don’t know the answer to.” 
“What’s the question?” 
“Lan, she’s dedicated. To the Claw, to the overthrow of the 
Unification.” 
Lan nodded again. “So?” 
“Do you think she would sleep with me because she wanted 
to, or because she thought it was the correct thing to do to keep 
me focused on the work?” 

320  Tales 
“Callia always does what’s correct.” 
Trent shook his head. “Sometimes that’s not the correct thing 
to do. I—find her very attractive. In several ways. But I refuse to 
be a part of her job. I’d sleep with her if it was what she wanted 
for herself. But I think she’s forgotten how to think about her-
self. And that I don’t find attractive. It’s scary.” 
Lan looked down at the bed, at the expanse of bedcover that 
stretched between them. “You’re a very judgmental person, 
Trent. I really don’t like it very much.” 
“All that I’ve said to you is that killing is wrong. How does 
this offend you?” 
“Trent, sometimes it’s not wrong,” Lan said sincerely. “Some-
times it’s the best thing you can do. Someone—I can’t tell you 
her name, but she’s very important in the Claw—she took Callia 
and me in when we were young, after our mother died and our 
dad got taken into Public Labor. Callia wanted to join the 
Johnny Rebs—it’s a lot more popular in America than the 
Claw—but this person recruited us into the Claw instead. Trent, 
she taught us a lot, that we’re responsible for both what we do 
and what we don’t do. One of the things she taught us was that 
an ideal that’s worth dying for is worth killing for. When Sarah 
Almundsen wrote the Statement of Principles she couldn’t have 
envisioned the Unification turning into what it is today: the 
Public Labor work camps, the PKF firing squads. If she was 
alive today, Trent, she’d be with us. If you credit her with the 
Unification then you must also credit her with the deaths that 
followed from it; she killed more people than any other single 
human in all of history. And Sarah Almundsen’s a hero, Trent. I 
believe that.” 
Trent took a very slow breath, held it, exhaled. He sat look-
ing at Lan Sierran, without speaking, simply looking. 
Lan waited. 
“You and your sister,” Trent whispered, “wandered out into 
the world, two nice young people without a thought in your 
heads. And somebody whose name you won’t tell me took you 
and filled you with eloquent, nicely dressed ideas that translate 

Moran  321 
 
into actions as horrifying and as evil as anything the Unification 
has ever done. Lan, killing is wrong. It’s always wrong.” 
Lan Sierran bit his lip. “I knew,” he said after a moment, 
“that you were a thief. I knew that before we left Earth. But I 
knew you killed a Peaceforcer Elite, I knew the Peaceforcers 
said you’d tried to kill people at Spacebase One.” 
Trent shook his head. “Lan, I didn’t. I didn’t kill anyone. I 
didn’t try to.” 
“I believe you. I hoped,” said Lan seriously, “that you would 
be different. More committed. And it turns out,” he said, with 
what he plainly considered a telling point, “that you’re just a 
common thief after all.” 
Trent stared at the boy for a moment with very real offense, 
held back the reflexive anger with genuine effort. “I,” he said 
with icy self-control, “am a brilliant thief.” 
 
25. 
To die for an idea is to place a pretty high price 
upon conjecture. 
—Anatole France, La Revoltè des anges, 1914 
Gregorian 
THE NEXT MORNING when Trent rose to go on the stakeout again, 
Lan was already awake and dressed, waiting for him. 
“I want to go with you.” 
“Suit yourself,” said Trent shortly. “You won’t like it.” 
THEY SAT IN the nearly complete darkness, from the moment 
when Trent turned the engines off at just before 10 A.M., until 
about 10:10. 
Lan said, “You just—sit here and watch rolligons go by?” 
“And crawlers. About one crawler for every eight rolligons.” 
“I’m bored.” 
“Audit a book. Or take a nap.” 
Lan turned on his handheld, and the holofield sprang into ex-
istence just below the level of the chameleon’s front viewscreen. 

322  Tales 
Trent did not ask Lan what he was auditing, and Lan did not 
volunteer the information. Just before 11:00 a single rolligon 
ghosted through the pass beneath them; Trent did not think Lan 
noticed. 
About 11:15 Lan put his handheld aside. He did not turn it 
off. “I’m bored.” 
“Take a nap.” 
Lan, sleeping, took up three quarters of the chameleon’s 
bench seat. He was a light sleeper, shifting positions every few 
minutes. Trent found it almost impossible to attain the state of 
reverie that had marked his earlier stakeouts. Even without 
running the data from his optic nerve through his inskin the 
glare from the handheld’s holofield was bright enough that 
Trent could see the interior of the chameleon without difficulty. 
Trent gazed at Lan with a complete lack of expression. Lan’s 
head rested against the glassite of the side window and his feet 
were in the well that was intended for Trent’s feet. In sleepy at-
tempts to get comfortable, Lan kicked Trent in the shins repeat-
edly. Trent finally propped his feet up on an empty spot on the 
instrument panel, and leaned back against the left hand side-
wall of the crawler, arms crossed over his chest. On Earth it 
would have been an impossible position; even in one-sixth gee it 
was not comfortable. 
Noon. 
At 1:22 a Peaceforcer rolligon slowly moved along the bottom 
of the gully, forty meters away from the chameleon. The time 
flickered into Trent’s awareness; two hours, twenty-eight min-
utes since the last one. Since beginning the stakeout Trent had 
waited as long as three hours and as little as twenty minutes 
between Peaceforcer rolligons. 
He watched the rolligon disappear into the distance. 
Suddenly he couldn’t take any more. His shins hurt where 
Lan had kicked them and even in one-sixth gee his buttocks had 
gone numb from the position he sat in. 
“Lan.” Trent reached over and shook the boy’s shoulder. 
“Lan, wake up.” 

Moran  323 
 
Lan’s eyes flickered open for an instant and then closed 
again. He didn’t move a centimeter. 
“Wake up,” Trent repeated. He dropped his feet down to 
where they belonged. He felt his heel strike Lan’s shin and 
smiled. He thought about kicking Lan again just to get even. In-
stead he lifted Lan’s legs and shoved them over onto Lan’s side 
of the cab. 
Lan’s eyes opened and stayed open. He glared at Trent. 
“What are you doing?” 
“This chameleon,” Trent said, “isn’t big enough for you to 
stretch out like that. If I was a midget maybe you could stretch 
out, but I’m not a midget. Stay on your own side.” 
Lan sat up straighter and pulled his right knee up to his 
chest. He rubbed his shin. “You kicked me in the shin and you 
woke me up from a good dream,” he said. 
“I’m really sorry about that.” 
“I was having this great dream about a three-armed boy.” 
“A three-armed boy?” 
“Yeah.” Lan turned his head to meet Trent’s eyes. Even sit-
ting up and on his own side of the cab, there was barely a hun-
dred centimeters separating them. Trent could smell the soap 
Lan had showered with that morning. “A great dream.” 
Trent was not sure he wanted to know. “About?” 
Lan smiled slightly. “What would you dream about doing 
with a three-armed boy?” 
Trent stared at him blankly. “I don’t think I’d dream of doing 
anything with a three-armed boy.” 
Lan held Trent’s gaze for an instant longer, then looked 
away. “Too bad. Would you dream of doing anything with a two-
armed boy?” 
Trent didn’t answer. 
The headlights of a Peaceforcer rolligon appeared in the dis-
tance and Trent sat forward, peering through the viewscreen. 
“Damn. Damn the evil bastards.” 
“What’s the matter?” Lan shifted slightly, leaning forward to 
look at the rolligon. His shoulder brushed Trent’s. 

324  Tales 
“A rolligon went by five minutes ago. Now here’s another one. 
Why can’t these people be regular? Their whole world is regi-
mented, and the only time I ever want them to do something by 
the clock they come bopping along whenever they feel like it.” 
Trent settled back in his seat. “You can’t trust Peaceforcers to do 
anything right.” 
Lan did not reply. Trent, sitting motionless in the gloom and 
watching the rolligon, could feel Lan watching him. When the 
rolligon’s headlights had finally faded into the Lunar dust, he 
turned his head toward Lan, but the boy had already looked 
away. 
Lan pulled his legs up, sitting tailor fashion and, Trent 
noted, taking up more than his half of the seat again. The boy 
reached behind his head and untied the scarlet-black ribbon 
that held back his long brown hair. Lan ran his fingers through 
the pale brown strands of his hair, not noticeably neatening 
them, and retied the ribbon. 
Trent decided that a two-person chameleon wasn’t big 
enough for two people. 
“I’m bored,” Lan announced for the third time. He looked at 
Trent expectantly. 
Trent dropped his leg back into the well and turned to face 
Lan. “What do you expect me to do about it?” 
Lan sighed. “You can’t think of anything to do?” 
“You didn’t have to come today, Lan.” Trent shifted uncom-
fortably in his seat. “You could have stayed at the hotel. That 
would have been a good idea.” 
The boy reached out a hand and stroked the material of 
Trent’s shirt with one finger. The touch was so soft Trent 
couldn’t actually feel it. Lan grinned at him. “I can think of 
something to do.” Lan’s hand slipped down, curling around the 
side of Trent’s waist. He was so close Trent could feel his breath 
as he spoke. “I can think of lots of things to do.” 
Lan leaned forward and Trent put one hand in the center of 
his chest and pushed him away. They stared at each other. 
“I don’t think so,” Trent said. 

Moran  325 
 
Lan relaxed and the distance between them widened to an 
enormous twenty-five centimeters. “No?” he said. 
“No.” 
“Oh, well.” Lan didn’t seem particularly hurt or offended. The 
boy shifted over to his own side of the bench seat and said, “I’ve 
got another good idea then.” 
“What’s that?” Trent asked warily. 
“Have you ever blown anything up?” 
“No. Well, yes. Two safes. To open them.” 
“I brought some blasting plastic with me. Let’s ambush the 
next rolligon and slaughter the Peaceforcers in it.” 
Trent stared at Lan. “You’re as crazy as a bird. Killing is 
wr—” 
“Wrong,” Lan chimed in. “I’ve heard you say that. A lot. But 
if we don’t kill them now we just have to kill them later.” 
“You don’t just have to kill anyone. Besides, no one is sup-
posed to know we’re here. You think killing a truckload of Peace-
forcers is going to go unnoticed?” 
“Maybe,” Lan said hopefully. And after a moment, “Are you 
sure you don’t want to fool around?” 
There was a short silence. 
“I’d rather not,” Trent finally said. 
“Why not?” 
Trent tried to think up a good answer. “Well,” he said, “I 
don’t habitually sleep with boys.” 
“Oh? You don’t habitually do it. Does that mean you do it 
sometimes?” 
“Well, no,” Trent said. “I don’t do it at all.” He paused. “Actu-
ally, I’ve slept with Jimmy Ramirez, a friend of mine on Earth.” 
Lan looked optimistic. “Really?” 
“But we slept. I mean, that was all. It was cold and there was 
no heat. And only one bed; the Temple Dragons never had 
enough of anything.” 
Lan leaned back on his side of the seat. “You don’t kill people 
and you don’t have sex with boys.” He examined Trent curiously. 
“Honestly, you’re the craziest thing I ever saw.” 

326  Tales 
Trent said, “You mean you never saw one of those guys who 
ties up balloons into the shapes of animals?” 
TWO MORE BODIES arrived that evening. 
CALLIA SIERRAN was conspicuously silent to Trent for the next 
three days. The fourth morning was December the 30th, with 
only one day remaining in the year, only three days before the 
boost was set to go. Callia was awake and dressed, waiting pa-
tiently for Trent in the main room when Trent got up. Trent ig-
nored her, made a thermos of coffee and fried two eggs. He 
toasted bread while frying the eggs, put mayonnaise on one 
piece of toast and mustard on the other, and waited. 
Callia sat motionlessly on the long couch in the main room, 
watching Trent. She wore modest red fatigues, zipped all the 
way to her collarbone. Her maser was strapped to her thigh, and 
for an instant the image bothered Trent. Then it swarmed up 
out of memory: Domino, standing in the airlock at Bessel City, 
had been dressed just like that, down to the quick draw holster 
on her thigh. 
When the eggs were done he put one egg on top of the may-
onnaise, a slice of cheese on top of that, the second egg on top of 
the cheese, and the mustard-covered piece of toast on top of that. 
He sliced the sandwich diagonally and handed half of it to Callia 
without asking her if she wanted it. 
“Come on,” he said wearily. “Let’s go.” 
CALLIA WAS SILENT on the way down to the hotel’s garage, eating 
her half of the egg sandwich. She was silent while the chame-
leon cycled through the garage’s airlock, silent as Trent drove. 
She said nothing all the way out to the spot where Trent parked 
the chameleon and turned off the engine. 
It was five minutes before 10:00 A.M. 
Sitting inside the chameleon with no artificial sound but the 
gentle murmur of the airplant, Trent was intensely aware of 
Callia on the long bench seat next to him. He could hear her 

Moran  327 
 
breathing; with some concentration, filtering out the sounds of 
his own body, he could hear her heartbeat. 
Noon came and went without a single Peaceforcer vehicle 
passing them. 
“Most of the men I have ever known,” said Callia, “found si-
lence very uncomfortable.” 
Trent sat comfortably in the dark silence without replying. 
Over half an hour passed before she spoke again. Trent could 
almost hear the smile in her voice. “I’m not going to outwait you, 
am I?” 
“Are you trying to?” 
“Not any more. I want to talk to you, Trent.” 
“Feel free.” 
“How did we get out here?” 
“I drove us. In the chameleon. You were there the whole 
way.” 
“That’s not what I mean.” 
“Then I don’t know what you do mean.” 
“It’s night, Trent. The terrain is practically invisible. You 
didn’t use the headlamps all the way out here. You didn’t yes-
terday, when Lan went with you.” 
“What do you think the PKF would do, Callia, if they looked 
down from one of their Orbital Eyes and saw some fool driving 
out every day to park and watch PKF rolligons wander by?” 
“That’s clear enough. What I don’t understand is how you 
could see to drive without lights.” 
“I have this great inskin.” 
“Trent.” 
Trent paused, thinking. “All right. You know anything about 
image processing?” 
“A bit. Like what a night scope does for snipers?” 
“Interesting choice of analogy,” Trent said quietly. “But es-
sentially correct. I can do something very similar with my in-
skin.” 
“I’ve known two Players before you, Trent. I’ve never even 
heard of someone being able to do something like this.” 

328  Tales 
Trent shrugged. “It’s a new model inskin. A nerve net with 
fairly remarkable processing power. It’s only been on the market 
for about half a year.” 
“Are you really a genie?” 
“Yes.” 
“... you’re not—very human—in a awful lot of ways, Trent.” 
“Humanity,” said Trent, “is overrated. One of my friends is a 
replicant AI. Another’s a genie. Another’s a completely normal 
human who’s studying to become a lawyer. Ask me which one I 
trust most.” 
“That’s almost not what I mean. You are about to hurt the 
Peaceforcers worse than I think they’ve ever been hurt before, 
and I’m not sure why you’re doing it.” 
“I already had that conversation with—a cranky old woman. 
She decided I was a man of virtue and good motives.” 
“Trent, why are you here?” 
Trent did not answer her for a while, thinking. Finally he 
said, “Do you really need to know?” 
“Not really.” She was silent a beat, then said, “You’re confus-
ing Lan.” 
Trent laughed aloud. “I don’t think so. I think Lan knows ex-
actly what he wants.” 
“You said no to him.” 
“Yes.” 
“Why?” 
“I prefer girls.” 
“Hmm.” Trent could hear her shifting position on the long 
bench next to him. “You couldn’t tell it by me.” 
“Insulted?” 
“A little, perhaps,” she said softly. “Not very. Are you in 
love?” 
“In love? I don’t know.... Yes. A girl I may not ever see again.” 
“You’re probably going to die at Verne.” 
“Good chance of it.” 
“Do you want to survive the boost?” 
“That’s a stupid question.” 

Moran  329 
 
“Is it? I haven’t known you very long, Trent. The only other 
person I ever knew like you got to be a hero about a month after 
he started acting the way you’re acting right now.” 
“I’m a little tired, Callia. That’s all.” 
He heard the long slow exhalation of her breath. “Have you 
learned anything out here, watching the Peaceforcers?” 
“A couple things. There’s one daily rolligon from Tsiolkovsky, 
comes by every afternoon between one and two o’clock, usually 
closer to one than two. It’s never come earlier than 1:08, never 
later than 1:56. Aside from that one rolligon there’s no regular-
ity to the traffic that I’ve been able to determine; I presume that 
one regularly scheduled rolligon heads back to Tsiolkovsky 
sometime later at night. I’ve learned that Lan has no patience 
and that you do.” 
“Trent?” 
“Yes?” 
“Have you ever made love in a crawler?” 
“No. I watched a man die, sitting where you are right now. 
This was his crawler. It was a bitch to get the blood off the seat.” 
Trent paused. “It’s been a bitch of a year.” 
“I’m sure.” He heard the rustle of her clothing, of the woman 
undressing in the dark. 
Trent said, “Do you know what you’re doing?” 
“I am reminding you,” said Callia Sierran, “why you want to 
survive this boost.” 
THE LAST TWO bodies arrived that evening. 
 
26. 
ON JANUARY SECOND, 2070, the night before they were scheduled 
to ambush the Peaceforcer rolligon carrying Benny Gutierrez, 
Lan and Callia went to Jackson Town, to pray at the Temple. 
Trent did not go, nor Korimok. They sat together in the main 
room, in a comfortable silence. Korimok was playing a sensable, 
Trent did not know by whom, the overlarge sensablist’s traceset 

330  Tales 
resting lightly on his temples. His eyes were half open and his 
lips moved whenever the sensable’s viewpoint character spoke. 
From the half-spoken words Trent heard from Korimok, he did 
not think the sensable was in either English or French. 
Trent sat on a couch looking out the window. 
The existence of the window, the fact that their rooms were 
above ground, screamed “tourist.” Loonies do not care what 
things are like outside; whether it’s night or day does not matter 
to them. There’s never any air and it is always either far too hot 
or far too cold. When the sun is in the sky the landscape is white 
and gray, as dull and boring as Earth’s Antarctic deserts. When 
the sun is not in the sky the landscape is invisible. 
It was nighttime still on the far side; but the two week night 
was nearly over, and before eight hours were up the sun would 
rise. Now nothing but the starshine illuminated the plain that 
surrounded Jackson Town and the hills that rose away from it. 
It was as bright as daylight to Trent. He played with the data 
from his optic nerve, slowly building up, one second’s image on 
top of another, an image of the Lunar landscape outside the 
window that was of photographic quality. At any given moment 
the scattered starlight was nearly indiscernable; over the space 
of minutes the landscape slowly evolved into a glaring panorama 
that stretched to the horizon. 
Only a small part of Trent watched Yevgeni; another small 
portion processed the image of the Lunar desert. 
Most of him was inundated by the Crystal Wind. 
The preacher is a middle-aged man with a pot belly, pound-
ing on the pulpit as he reads from the Bible. “Hath we not all one 
father? Hath not one God created us? Why do we deal treacher-
ously every man against his brother, by profaning the covenant of 
our father?” 
Text, no video, no sound: Jerusalem (AP)—Shoichiro Okaya, 
the text says, Japan’s ambassador to the government of Greater 
Israel, was killed today when a car bomb blew up outside a Pal-
estinian college ’Sieur Okaya was visiting. 
A woman wails in the back of Trent’s skull, wailing as the 
holocams pan around the devastation at Tunis airport, where a 

Moran  331 
 
semiballistic has come down out of control and smashed into an 
aircraft that was taking off. Mahliya Kutura sings to Trent, from 
a live concert in China, sings to him of her despair, of her love. 
The Unification Council approves construction of a warship ten-
tatively called the Unity; at an estimated cost of nearly eight bil-
lion Credit Units, it will be the single most expensive spacecraft 
ever built. A woman in India drowns herself and her three chil-
dren. A man in Canada is killed when the world’s largest collec-
tion of Wagner memorabilia falls on him; it makes the late 
edition of the Electronic Times. 
There was movement around Trent; Yevgeni rising, the gen-
tle whisper of doors opening and closing. 
A squad of PKF Elite raid and burn to the ground an ideolog 
camp at Kochovskaya, Russia. In Oakland, California, in Occu-
pied America, a suit is filed in California’s Superior Court to 
prevent a suspected genie from playing in the WFL System Bowl 
until he has undergone a test to verify that he is not a genie. The 
captain of a tuna boat reports seeing, for the first time in over five 
years, a school of dolphins on the open sea, two hundred kilome-
ters west and south of Hawaii; his report is widely discounted. 
The Loos Microlectrics Corporation of Mexico City reports the 
largest first-year revenues of any startup corporation in over two 
decades. Douglass Ripper, Jr., Unification Councilor for New 
York Metro, submits a bill to the Unification Council calling for 
a reduction of PKF forces in Occupied America amounting to 
nearly one quarter of the total PKF presence in Occupied Amer-
ica. 
Trent was distantly aware of Lan’s presence, but it did not 
draw him away from his immersion in the Crystal Wind until 
Lan said almost hesitantly, “Trent?” 
From a great distance, Trent said, “Yes?” 
“You know,” Lan said quietly, “sometimes I sleep with people 
who slept with Callia. They all say I’m better than she is.” 
Trent opened his eyes slightly. The room’s lights had been 
turned off; to Lan it must have seemed that he stood in very 
nearly complete darkness. To Trent’s dark-adapted genie eyes, 
without even employing the image processing his inskin gave 

332  Tales 
him access to, the boy was a barely visible shape standing in the 
doorway to the bedroom he shared with Callia. 
Trent said simply, “I believe you.” 
“I’m probably never going to see you again after tomorrow.” 
The boy’s image flared slowly, as though a bright light were 
coming up; it was not something Trent had consciously decided 
to do. “In the real world, Lan, people, even good friends ... part. 
Sometimes you see them again, sometimes you don’t.” 
Lan said with such certainty it chilled Trent, “I’ll never see 
you again.” 
“I’m sorry, then. I like you.” 
“I’m sorry, too. Good night, Trent.” Trent sat watching the 
boy; Lan started to turn away and then stopped, just stood in 
the doorway with the unreal starlight reflecting off the planes of 
his face. 
“Trent?” he said at last. 
“Yes?” 
The boy said awkwardly, “I really do like you.” 
“Go to bed, Lan.” 
“Trent ... I’m cold.” 
“Lan, it’s not....” Trent trailed off, remembering Jimmy Ra-
mirez’s shocked reaction on the very cold night Trent had asked 
to sleep with him, and finally he said softly, “All right. Go get a 
blanket and come over here.” 
Lan was back quickly with a light blanket. He sat down on 
the couch next to Trent, cuddled up against him. Lan was shiv-
ering and it was a long time before he stopped; Trent sat quietly 
with the boy in his arms, waiting while Lan dropped off, watch-
ing the impossible silver starlight while Lan slept. 
The preacher has reached a fine height of screaming eupho-
ria, has built to a shrieking, pulpit pounding finale. “And Be-
hold, the Lord said to Malachi, I will send my messenger, and he 
shall prepare the way before me: and the Lord, whom ye seek, 
shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of the 
covenant, whom ye delight in: behold, he shall come, saith the 
Lord of Hosts! But who may abide the day of his coming? And 
who shall stand when he appeareth?” 

Moran  333 
 
 
27. 
IN THE EARLY hours of January the third, 2070, a pair of chame-
leon crawlers and a single very expensive chameleonized rolli-
gon pulled out of the hotel garage outside of Jackson Town, and 
set off across the sunlit Lunar surface. 
Behind them, in the hotel, Trent had turned off the radio 
packet InfoNet service; if things went well, two Peaceforcers 
with radio packet inskins would be held prisoner in those rooms 
for two or three days, and Trent didn’t want them making calls. 
He had left Lan’s gift, the gun, in Callia and Lan’s bedroom. 
In the rolligon as they left that morning were a loonie and a 
crazy woman and seven bodies; in the lead chameleon there was 
a nice young ideolog, and in the chameleon at the tail of the pro-
cession was a man wearing a Peaceforcer uniform and a Peace-
forcer’s face. 
By 9:00 A.M., more than four hours before Benny Gutierrez 
was due to drive by, they were in place. 
THE ELONGATED SHADOWS of early morning were scheduled to 
last all day. It made the hilly landscape around the gorge eerie; 
the long, jutting spires of rock casting long sweeping shadows 
behind them. 
Trent did not like the scalesuit he wore. 
He sat unmoving in the shade, out of the broiling sun, on the 
shady side of a large boulder that would keep him from the view 
of the approaching Peaceforcer rolligon until the rolligon was 
immediately beneath him. He was on the far side of the crevasse 
from Callia and Lan and Yevgeni S. Korimok; the rolligon would 
pass between them. 
Trent found that he had grown used to soft pressure suits; 
the stiff scalesuit, its front blackened as though by heat damage, 
had already rubbed him raw at the back of his neck, and was 
starting in on his thighs. The inside pocket where his handheld 

334  Tales 
was stored pressed against Trent’s hip; the spot where the hand-
held pressed was going numb. 
The fadeaway bomb sat at his feet. It was an improvement on 
the device he had used at Luna City, and had cost him better 
than twenty times as much as that small device. The bomb was 
oval, about the size of a football; one surface was completely flat. 
If the bomb worked correctly, as the prototype had, it would 
connect itself to the surface of the Peaceforcer rolligon by a su-
perconducting magnet, punch a sixty centimeter long spike 
down through the stiff outer wall of the rolligon, and, through 
the spike, spray fadeaway at high pressure across the interior of 
the rolligon. Assuming they were wearing their suits with the 
helmets off—standard PKF operating procedure—the fadeaway 
would get them all. 
The chill of the frozen stones Trent sat upon was reaching up 
through the scalesuit, despite the best efforts of the scalesuit to 
keep Trent warm—the softsuit Nathan had bought Trent had 
kept him far warmer. Trent was hidden in the shadow of the 
boulder; there is no atmospheric scattering on Luna to prevent 
shadows from being completely black. 
Radio silence was in force. He could not talk to Callia or Ser-
gei, waiting in the chameleonized rolligon on the other side of 
the gorge, or Lan, in the crawler a third of a kilometer to the 
east. 
The Peaceforcer rolligon came from the west, from Tsiolk-
ovsky Crater. Trent’s inskin placed the time at 1:14 P.M. when 
he first saw the approaching rolligon’s headlights, invisible in 
the harsh sunlight. The scalesuit Trent wore was an exact dupli-
cate of the ones the Peaceforcers used, down to the PKF insignia 
on the breast; it was equipped to monitor both standard PKF 
com bands and emergency broadcast frequencies. 
Complete silence on every band. Trent cycled up and down 
through the eight channels the scalesuit was capable of access-
ing; nothing. The PKF rolligon moved slowly forward, made its 
creeping way across the regolith. The vehicle faced directly into 
the low sun; their visibility would be terrible. Trent sat pa-
tiently, waited while the rolligon, painted in the black and silver 

Moran  335 
 
of the United Nations Peace Keeping Force, grew large before 
him. Fifteen meters long, three wide, the rolligon had six huge 
unpressurized wheels that lifted dust up into the early sunlight, 
where it hung for long moments before beginning its descent 
back to the Lunar soil. 
Trent had set his scalesuit’s radio for Channel Eight, emer-
gency frequency for the PKF. 
The nose of the rolligon was passing underneath Trent. 
Trent picked up the fadeaway bomb, held it in one hand, and 
jumped. 
His hiding place was just over ten meters above the surface 
of the crevasse, and the top of the rolligon was four and a half 
meters above that; he fell not quite six meters in one-sixth gee 
while the rolligon moved beneath him. 
He landed unsteadily on the tail end of the rolligon with a 
thump that rocked the vehicle slightly. He scrambled for bal-
ance, hampered by servos that were slower than his own mus-
cles, lunged forward at the last moment and landed belly down 
across the top of the rolligon, still holding the fadeaway bomb. 
He took the time to do it right, laid the bomb across the smooth 
metal of the rolligon’s upper surface, and thumbed the pressure 
point that activated it. 
The heat reached him through the insulating layers of the 
scalesuit. The surface of the rolligon glowed red over a half-
meter wide section. Trent had only an instant to realize what 
was happening; he had an instantaneous vision of the maser 
blast that had taken Nathan in the stomach, and in one convul-
sive leap got off the surface of the rolligon and fell tumbling the 
rest of the way to the bottom of the crevasse. 
He sat up slowly. 
The rolligon continued its crawl toward the east. There was 
no sound on Channel Eight; Trent cycled through the rest of the 
PKF com bands. 
Silence. 
The rolligon crept deliberately forward, moving straight for-
ward, not veering, not even when the road did. 

336  Tales 
Trent exhaled a breath he had not known he was holding and 
bounced to his feet. He waved an arm toward the spot where the 
other three were waiting, and trotted forward to where the rolli-
gon was trying to drive its way through the side of a hill. 
TRENT CYCLED through the rolligon’s airlock, into pressure. In 
the forward cabin a young Peaceforcer, male, was slumped for-
ward over the instrument panel. Trent turned the engine off and 
went back. In the rear passenger cabin were six Peaceforcers, 
and Trent had to suppress a quick wave of relief; the one thing 
he’d found no good way to plan for had been an extra passenger 
being sent along in the rolligon at the last moment. In the back 
cabin a pair of bench seats ran down the long axis of the rolli-
gon. The long spike through which the fadeaway had been 
sprayed hung straight down through the roof of the rolligon, still 
dripping very slightly. Three of the Peaceforcers were sitting on 
the seats in their scalesuits, restraining straps holding them up-
right. The other three were sprawled on the rear cabin’s floor; 
one of those three, face down in his scalesuit, holding a maser in 
his fist, had stayed awake long enough to get his scalesuit’s 
helmet on; with his maser set to wide dispersion he had heated 
the roof of the rolligon until Trent had had to leap off. 
Trent pulled him up with one hand, and stared into the very 
same face that looked back at him in the mirror these days. 
Trent felt an unreasonable degree of pride in the man whose 
face he was wearing; to the unconscious Peaceforcer named 
Benny Gutierrez, Trent said, “Good try.” 
Trent heard the airlock cycle open behind him; Callia cycled 
through, bounced over to Trent and grabbed Gutierrez from him 
without waiting for Trent to release the Peaceforcer. 
Trent picked up another Peaceforcer from the floor of the rol-
ligon, dogged the man’s helmet into place, and followed her. 
INSIDE THE ROLLIGON, Yevgeni wore his pressure suit with the 
gloves removed; he also wore a pair of plastiflesh gloves Trent 
had given him. In Trent’s line of work they were useful because 

Moran  337 
 
they left no fingerprints, but allowed tactile sensitivity nearly as 
good as bare skin—and were impermeable to fadeaway. 
Yevgeni was undressing Peaceforcers and dressing corpses. 
Benny Gutierrez was propped up in a corner of the passenger 
cab; he was the only Peaceforcer who was not being stripped of 
his clothing and scalesuit. 
Yevgeni checked the name patch on the outside of a scalesuit, 
compared it with the assignment papers found inside the uncon-
scious Peaceforcer’s coat. “Henri Charbonneau!” Yevgeni called 
out. Callia turned off the stasis field enclosing the seven forms, 
selected one of the corpses by an ID tag on its toe, and without 
flinching, without apparent distaste, pulled the nude form out, 
turned the stasis field back on, and pulled the corpse back to 
where Yevgeni was undressing PKF Officer Henri Charbonneau. 
Trent watched while the dead man’s body was dressed and 
stuffed into Charbonneau’s scalesuit. The procedure left him 
with an emotion he was not able to name; he shook his head, 
rubbing the back of his neck against the helmet’s uncomfortable 
damn rear seal, and cycled back through the airlock to go get the 
rest of the bodies. 
IT TOOK LONGER than Trent had hoped and longer than he had 
feared. 
It was nearly two o’clock before they were done. Trent 
worked up a heavier sweat in those forty-five minutes than at 
any time since coming to Luna. The inside of his scalesuit 
hummed with the sound of the airplant struggling to cool and 
dehumidify the air Trent was breathing. At any moment Trent 
expected to see headlights coming from either the east or the 
west. By a quarter of two they had switched the corpses for the 
live Peaceforcers; Trent put the black and silver rolligon back in 
gear, pulled back from the side of the hill, and drove another 
quarter kilometer down the crevasse. He drove slowly; he had 
difficulty controlling the vehicle with the thick scalesuit gloves 
on, but the interior of the vehicle was coated with fadeaway, and 
he did not dare take them off. The corpse that had been substi-
tuted for the driver sat on the seat at his side. 

338  Tales 
Lan was waiting, sitting in his scalesuit atop a large boulder. 
He waved Trent to a stop, pointing to the place where he wanted 
the rolligon parked. Trent stopped the rolligon, left the motor 
running. He pulled the corpse into place in the driver’s seat; the 
corpse resisted as all the corpses had resisted being handled, as 
though, in death, they fought a silent battle to retain some shred 
of dignity. 
Outside Trent went around to the back of the rolligon. Lan 
was there already, placing a small charge on the rear axle. He 
motioned Trent back, touched a stud on the charge and then 
bounced back himself. He had timed it closely; the charge went 
off soundlessly in the vacuum, with a sharp flash that came so 
quickly that the glassite in Trent’s helmet could not darken in 
time to compensate. When the dots faded from his vision, the 
rear axle was snapped cleanly in half, and the rear third of the 
rolligon sagged backward. 
Lan touched helmets with Trent. “You’re supposed to be out-
side to find out what’s wrong with this sucker. We blow it away 
through the front, demolish the driver so there’s no way to ID 
him, burn up the rest of them pretty good. The artillery I’m us-
ing, there’s no real way you’d survive if you were really standing 
back here when I hit the rolligon. Even so it’s going to be tough. 
I want you to stand back a good twenty-five meters, right over 
there, so it’ll look like the shock wave picked you up and threw 
you. It’s going to knock you down even at twenty-five meters, 
but unless you catch shrapnel you’re okay.” 
“Am I going to catch shrapnel?” 
“No. I don’t think so.” 
“All right.” 
Lan hesitated a moment, helmet still touching Trent’s. “Cal-
lia said to tell you she’d pray for you.” 
“Tell her I said thank you. For everything. And Lan?” 
“Yeah?” Even through two layers of scalesuit Trent could 
hear the nervous impatience in the boy’s voice. 
“Think about what I said.” Trent could barely see Lan’s fea-
tures. “There’s better ways to do things than by killing people 
who never harmed you.” 

Moran  339 
 
Lan stared at Trent for a long moment. “You are,” he said fi-
nally, “the smartest idiot I’ve ever met.” 
“I like you too, Lan.” 
Lan snorted loudly enough for Trent to hear him, and took 
two long bouncing steps away. The boy froze after the second 
step, stood motionless for an instant, then bounced back to Trent 
and touched helmets. “You’re boring in bed, but you snuggle 
good. It’s been real.” He bounced away again before Trent could 
reply. 
Trent walked back to the spot Lan had pointed out, stood in 
the Lunar sunshine, waiting. Nothing happening, not here, no 
sir. After about ten minutes had passed Trent checked the time 
in his inskin and found it had only been ninety seconds since 
Lan had left him. 
He found himself trembling slightly inside the scalesuit. I’m 
standing here in death pressure, Trent thought, twenty-five me-
ters from an explosion that’s going to completely destroy a Peace-
forcer troop transport. 
This is crazy. 
The universe blew up in his face. 
 
28. 
THROUGHOUT THE LONG nightmare he remains aware. The flesh 
is unmoving, insensate. Eons tick away as he waits, nanosecond 
upon nanosecond. One eyelid is half open; the other is shut. 
Through the half-open eye he sees vague forms moving around 
him. He is unable to focus. The forms, he is sure, are those of 
Lan and Callia; neither one comes anywhere near Trent’s un-
conscious form, not even to assure themselves he survived the 
explosion. Though he cannot see them clearly enough to tell, 
Trent/Johnny Johnny knows that they are spraying artificially 
darkened Lunar dust everywhere either one of them has 
stepped, and that they will walk back to where Nathan’s crawler 
and the rolligon full of kidnapped Peaceforcers awaits them. The 
third chameleon, the one Lan drove out in, is rolling away on 

340  Tales 
autopilot from the supposed scene of the attack. That portion of 
Trent that is aware right now has programmed the autopilot; a 
cursory search of the area around the rolligon will find the cha-
meleon’s tracks, and the Peaceforcers will follow it for at least a 
day before catching it and finding it empty. With any degree of 
luck, nobody will backtrack far enough to find the place where 
the Peaceforcer rolligon was actually stopped. 
Silence now. 
A complete lack of motion. 
The scalesuit gets very hot. He is aware of this as he might 
be aware of something happening to someone else. 
Over two hours pass. 
There is a sudden glare of light, so intense and unwavering 
that he ceases to pay attention to the information from his optic 
nerve even before the scalesuit helmet darkens to protect the 
flesh inside from the too-bright light. He waits in the electronic 
nothingness, waits in the stasis of datastarve. 
Not quite an hour. 
The insensate flesh is touched, moved, lifted. 
He dwindles into the silence of datastarve, of nothingness. 
THE SHARP, STINGING smell of ammonia roused him. 
A voice spoke in French, something about how Trent felt. 
Trent blinked. “What?” 
The Peaceforcer paused, spoke again in English, slowly. 
“How are you feeling?” 
Trent looked around slowly. The edges of things were 
blurred. He was lying on the long bench seat in the back of a rol-
ligon. The rolligon bounced slightly as it moved. The Peaceforcer 
crouched next to him stared at him with a furrowed brow. 
Trent said, “I’m not—I—” 
The Peaceforcer said urgently, “What happened?” 
It was no effort to make the world go away again. 

Moran  341 
 
IT WAS JUST before 7:00 P.M., January the third. 
Trent was more or less undressed, wearing nothing but his 
shorts, face to face with the first doctor he had ever met who 
looked like his conception of what a doctor should be. 
“Look into the light, please. Don’t blink.” 
Trent stared up into the small penlight the PKF doctor shone 
into his left eye. Doctor Grissom was visibly old, with wrinkles 
around his eyes and black hair streaked with silver. He grunted 
after a moment, and said gruffly to Trent, in French laced with a 
thick German accent, “We’re going to do the right eye now, hold 
still.” He held the light on the right eye for just a moment, 
clicked the penlight off and put it in his coat pocket. He glanced 
slightly to the side, to the holograph of Trent’s skull that hung 
in midair next to Trent’s skull. 
There was a PKF captain standing at the door to the infir-
mary. The infirmary was not large; four beds, hospital equip-
ment that Trent largely did not recognize. Only one door. 
The glowpaint was pure white, harsh and officious. 
The captain, a pair of armed junior PKF standing immedi-
ately behind him, had watched Doctor Grissom’s examination of 
PKF Officer Benny Gutierrez with clear impatience. 
Doctor Grissom asked Trent only one question in the course 
of his examination, after running Trent through a full-body MRI 
slowscan. “What is this, with your knee?” 
“What’s what?” 
“Scar tissue, recent. Your file shows no knee problems.” 
“I was skiing, on vacation. A medbot took care of it the same 
day. I guess that’s why it’s not in the file.” 
“Hmm. Looks like it’s been injured twice?” 
Trent shrugged. “Only once.” 
Doctor Grissom nodded thoughtfully, turned to the PKF cap-
tain. “He has a slight concussion, probably due to his inskin. Not 
serious. Also a large bruise on the back of his skull, also not se-
rious.” 
“And a headache,” said Trent. 
“And a headache,” the doctor agreed. He handed Trent a 
small glass of water with a pill. “Drink this, and then go with 

342  Tales 
the nice captain.” To the nice captain, Doctor Grissom said, “He 
sleeps here tonight, where I can keep an eye on him. The slows-
can does not show any internal bleeding, but that may be mean-
ingless.” 
The captain, who had not introduced himself to Trent, said 
stiffly, “Very well.” To Trent he said, “Officer Gutierrez, please 
come with me.” 
“Can I get dressed first?” 
The man had been turning away; he turned back in surprise. 
“Certainly. Be quick.” 
The uniform stank of stale sweat. 
TRENT FOLLOWED THE captain down a series of long underground 
corridors and up a long ramp, paying attention to the route he 
traveled, checking off what he saw against the map of the 
DataWatch base that he carried in his inskin. The infirmary was 
on Level Two, which was actually the first level beneath the sur-
face of the regolith; Level One was the only level of the base that 
was above ground. 
The corridors were full of bustling Peaceforcers. Trent saw 
perhaps forty people, mostly young, on his way to the briefing 
room. All were in PKF uniforms, either dress or combat fatigues. 
All were in a hurry. A very few of them had visible inskins; none 
of them had the characteristic stiff skin of PKF Elite. Most of 
them did not even glance at Trent as he walked through the cor-
ridors behind the captain, in front of the two armed guards. 
The glowpaint throughout the base was white. Nowhere did 
Trent see the yellow glow of sunpaint. 
After a three-minute walk they came to a point where the 
corridor widened slightly. Above closed double doors was the 
legend Briefing Room. On the map that floated in the back of his 
mind, Trent placed them: one hundred forty-six meters south of 
the north airlock. The nameless captain stopped before the door 
to the briefing room, placed a palm flat against the doorpad, and 
marched through once the double doors had rolled up, not so 
much as glancing back to verify that Trent had followed him. 

Moran  343 
 
Seven Peaceforcer officers in uniform and one Elite Sergeant 
were assembled around one half of a long oval table made of 
something that resembled aged beechwood. An empty chair sat 
at the side of the table where all the officers were seated and a 
single unoccupied chair sat on the other side of the table. With-
out being told Trent stopped behind the unoccupied chair facing 
the officers, came to attention and saluted. He held the salute 
for not quite five seconds, staring straight ahead, until a gentle 
female voice said, “At ease. Please sit down, Officer Gutierrez.” 
Trent did so, found nine pairs of eyes staring back at him. 
The woman who had spoken to Trent, a mature, plain-featured 
woman whose age Trent could not have guessed, continued. “I 
am Colonel Brissois, Commanding Officer for the Verne Farside 
DataWatch. My apologies to you, young man, for what we are 
about to put you through. But it is necessary.” Commander Bris-
sois seemed uncertain for just a moment. “If you do not already 
know, Officer, your companions aboard the rolligon were all 
killed. You are the only survivor.” 
You are the only survivor. Trent was shakier than he had 
thought; the words struck him like a blow. For an instant he 
was eleven years old again; he had watched Malko Kalharri die 
at the hands of an Elite cyborg and he had watched Suzanne 
Montignet kill herself, and in the midst of the riots as the Trou-
bles began, had learned that everyone he had ever known as a 
child had died in nuclear flame. 
He did not have to fake his reaction much. “I’m sorry? What 
did you say?” 
“Officer,” Colonel Brissois said sharply, “control yourself. We 
have a great deal to get through and not a great deal of time in 
which to do it.” 
Trent stared down at the surface of the oval table. “I’m sorry, 
Colonel. It’s just—” He shook his head abruptly, looked up to 
meet her gaze, and found the Elite Sergeant studying him with 
a curiously detached expression. “I’m ready, Colonel.” 
Perhaps she smiled; the edges of her lips moved very slightly. 
Perhaps not. “Very good. Let’s start from the beginning.” 

344  Tales 
Trent said slowly, “We were—I would guess three hours from 
Tsiolkovsky. The rolligon—we thought it had broken down. 
There was a loud noise and the rolligon jerked to a stop. The 
rear end rode very low. I was sitting nearest the airlock, so Offi-
cer Deremè—he was driving—he asked me to go take a look and 
see what was wrong with the rear end. I—” 
The Peaceforcer Elite interrupted. “Why didn’t Officer 
Deremè call in at that point?” 
“Sir?” 
The Elite said patiently, “Why didn’t Deremè call in to notify 
us that he was being delayed en route? It’s standard procedure, 
Officer Gutierrez.” 
Trent had not known that. “Sir, I don’t know.” 
The Elite nodded. “Go on.” 
“I sealed my helmet, cycled through and went around back. I 
remember thinking—” Trent paused. “Never mind. I—” 
Colonel Brissois interrupted him. “What was it?” 
“Colonel—” Trent took a breath. “Colonel, I noticed that the 
horizon was very close. I—” 
There was a chuckle from someone off to Trent’s left, a snort 
of disgust from someone off to the right. Trent did not take his 
eyes off Colonel Brissois. “Colonel, I am new to Luna. I’m sorry.” 
“You’ve nothing to be sorry for,” the woman said quietly. “Go 
on. You won’t be interrupted again.” 
“There’s not much left. At the back of the rolligon I looked at 
the rear axle and saw that it was broken. I think—” Trent 
paused, as though struggling with memory. “There was some-
thing wrong with the way it was broken, I’m not sure what. I 
was standing up and then....” Trent’s voice trailed off. “I woke up 
here.” 
There was a moment of brief silence. Then the Elite Sergeant 
leaned forward and said in a voice heavy with disbelief, “You 
saw nothing else?” 
“No, sir.” 
A Peaceforcer off to Trent’s right said, “What time was it 
when this happened?” 

Moran  345 
 
“Sir, I don’t know. I guess we were three hours out from Tsi-
olkovsky, but I’m not sure. I slept for a while.” 
There was another moment’s silence, and then Colonel Bris-
sois did smile at Trent, a smile lacking warmth, and said, “Let’s 
begin again. At the top.” 
It went on for many hours. 
HE LAY IN THE dark of the infirmary, unable to sleep. He’d had a 
chance to shower, and had been issued a clean uniform; without 
making an issue of it Trent had managed to hang on to the boots 
he’d worn in, claiming the boots they’d offered to substitute did 
not fit well. Between the boots and the handheld, the two items 
he had managed to bring into the base, Trent had everything he 
would need for the boost. 
Pickup was between 9:00 A.M. and 4:00 P.M. tomorrow. 
At sixteen minutes after midnight the door to the infirmary 
opened; Trent assumed it was Doctor Grissom. The man had 
promised to check in on Trent and awaken him every hour or so 
through the night. 
Then the lights came up. 
Trent sat up slowly in bed. Standing in the doorway, wearing 
a holstered hand maser and dressed in PKF combat fatigues, a 
young female Peaceforcer with her face turned away from Trent 
said to somebody in the corridor outside, “Not long, I promise.” 
She turned to Trent, cool and unsmiling, as the door shut, and 
switched from French to English. “Hello.” 
From inside the vast numbness of his surprise Trent said, 
“Hi there.” 
“Did I wake you up?” 
“No. No, you didn’t.” 
“You are Officer Benny Gutierrez, yes?” 
“Yes.” 
“I am told your French is poor. Would you like to use English 
instead?” 
“Sure. That’d be great.” 
She took the only chair in the infirmary, pulled it up next to 
Trent’s bed, sat down and turned on her handheld, attached the 

346  Tales 
gray traceset trode at her right temple and ran the thin cable 
down to plug it into the handheld. “I am going to need to ask you 
some questions; I will try not to take too long.” 
“I wasn’t sleeping anyhow.” 
She pulled her chair a bit closer to Trent. “I thought that 
might be the case, after what happened today. I was going to 
wait until the morning, but I thought it would be worth checking 
to see if you were able to answer questions tonight.” 
“I can handle it,” Trent assured her. “I wasn’t—very close, 
you know—with any of the PKF I shipped up with.” 
Her nod seemed tired. “I suppose that is good. I am a per-
sonal assistant to Commissionaire Vance; we are doing a routine 
check to see whether it is possible that the criminal Trent had 
anything to do with what happened today. I—do you mind if I 
call you Benny?” she asked suddenly. 
“No. What do I—” Trent let the question hang. 
“My rank is a bit odd,” she said. “I am a detached PKF Elite 
candidate with a temporary working rank outside the Elite of 
lieutenant. I outrank you no matter how it gets figured, but you 
do not need to worry about that; if I am to call you Benny, you 
may call me Melissa. That is my name,” she said. “Melissa du 
Bois.” 
HER LONG HAIR, the gorgeous long brown hair, was gone. In its 
place was the spike brush cut that was common among women 
who had to wear pressure suits. She wore no makeup, and she 
had been wearing the same clothing since early that day; Trent 
could smell her if he tried, a musky odor that was genuinely 
pleasant. Her tan had faded in the months since she had left 
Earth behind, and some of the vitality had gone out of her; there 
was a subtle deadness in her voice, a lack of the animation and 
expressiveness that had been so striking in Trent’s earlier brief 
encounters with her. 
There were tiny, almost invisible lines around her eyes. 
She was stunning. 
They ran through Trent’s story quickly; though she com-
mented in a neutral tone of voice on Trent’s lack of helpfulness, 

Moran  347 
 
Melissa showed no particular disappointment at the paucity of 
details Trent was able to provide her. About the point where 
things were winding down, Trent said, “Melissa?” 
The beautiful brown eyes had lost none of their ability to pro-
ject interest, the casual skill of making it seem that the person 
they were fastened upon was the most fascinating person 
Melissa had ever met. “Yes?” 
“They’re—not telling me much. About what happened, how 
close they are to finding the people who killed the other PKF 
who were with me.” Melissa did not answer Trent immediately, 
and Trent said softly, “Do you really think Trent had something 
to do with it?” 
She looked at him curiously, questioningly. “How does it mat-
ter?” 
Trent blinked. “Men I served with died out there, Melissa. I 
think I have a right to know.” 
Melissa continued studying him a moment longer, and then 
shook her head no, a single quick motion. “I doubt it very much. 
It is not the style of thing he would be involved in. Not with 
deaths, like this.” 
Trent leaned forward in bed, supressing with a genuine effort 
the sudden, completely insane desire to thank her. “What else do 
you know about the attack?” 
Melissa did not answer him; she was busy with her hand-
held, paging through reports. She glanced up at Trent after a 
moment. “Your data profile says you have a radio packet in-
skin?” 
Trent sat watching the curve of her cheek as she bent over 
the handheld. “Yes.” 
She nodded. “I do not know if I should be the one to tell you 
this, but it is hardly a secret; you would have learned it in your 
orientation lecture. Channel 3050.5; the password is Eclairs, 
with a capital E.’ You will be able to monitor general Farside 
DataWatch business, as well as results on the current investiga-
tion as they are uploaded to the Board.” 

348  Tales 
There was no trace of Watchdog on the Board; Trent scanned 
the Board quickly, said, “There’s nothing on that channel about 
the attack, not yet.” 
He realized the mistake the instant the words were spoken. 
Melissa nodded. “Probably they have not released the pre-
liminary report yet. But—” Her mouth closed very precisely. 
“You checked the entire Board already?” 
Trent forced himself to look surprised by her reaction. “Well, 
I skimmed it, yes.” 
Melissa gave him an odd, quick sideways look. It was 12:35. 
“I see.” She struggled with indecision, and then said abruptly, 
“Come with me.” 
IN THE ROOM where Trent had undergone a lengthy interrogation 
by the officers of the DataWatch, Melissa du Bois showed Trent 
the status of the search for the terrorists who had destroyed 
Benny Gutierrez’s rolligon. 
It was dark except for the briefing room’s holo projectors; si-
lent except for the sounds Trent and Melissa made. The lasers 
were buried in the wall just above the point where the walls met 
the floor. With the glowpaint turned completely down the holos 
glowed bright, the only light in the world. Watching barefooted, 
wearing the pants from his uniform and a white undershirt, 
Trent felt like God. He looked down on the surface of Luna from 
a great height. 
They sat in a pair of chairs so close together in the cool brief-
ing room that Trent felt the heat of her body. “This is a semi-
realtime image,” Melissa said. “It is updated every forty-five 
seconds.” The triangle created by Jackson Town, Verne and Tsi-
olkovsky was laid out across the surface of the long conference 
table. The huge optical and radio telescopes at Zvezdagrad in 
Tsiolkovsky Crater were tiny specks; the dome at Jackson Town 
was the size of Trent’s thumbnail. The catapult at Jackson Town 
was an almost invisibly thin line about the same length as the 
diameter of the Jackson Town dome; the catapult at Verne Cra-
ter was the size of a toothpick. The hills and craters, maria and 
rilles of the Lunar Farside easily dwarfed the works of man. 

Moran  349 
 
Melissa pointed, moved one slender hand within the holo-
graph. “Here is where the attack on your rolligon took place, in 
this long ravine. From the evidence found at the scene—” The 
holograph flickered, and suddenly Trent was falling, plunging 
down toward the surface of Luna. The apparent point of view 
stabilized, stopped. The holograph showed a badly damaged rol-
ligon. “There were no Orbital Eyes watching this area when the 
attack took place. The terrorists would have known that; trying 
to maintain surveillance on all of Farside at all times would be 
impossible, and the Eyes are not designed to. As soon as the 
DataWatch here at Verne realized you had not arrived when you 
were due, every available Eye was turned to tracking your rolli-
gon, and they found it quickly. Unfortunately, by then the ter-
rorists were already gone.” In the holograph hovering above the 
oval tabletop, with his naked eye Trent could see the very faintly 
lighter soil a quarter of a kilometer to the west, where Lan and 
Callia had sprayed dust to cover their tracks. “There was a 
crawler—what is called a chameleon, Benny, coated with poly-
paint so that the crawler can shade itself into the environment 
around it—right here.” Her hand moved again, pointing. “There 
are officers tracking the vehicle, but it is a slow process. Do you 
know anything about the sorts of vehicles in use on Luna?” 
Trent shook his head. “I rode the Bullet—the monorail—to 
Tsiolkovsky. I rode a rolligon from there. That’s all.” 
Melissa smiled for the first time. “In the last two months I 
have become familiar with every form of transportation on this 
horrible little planet. You are missing very little,” she told Trent. 
“I’ll take your word for it.” 
“Command, lights up.” The bright glow of the white glow-
paint came up around them. “There is not much left to tell you. 
The terrorists probably came from Jackson Town. It would be 
the logical place from which to stage such an operation, espe-
cially if the Erisian Claw was responsible for it; I am told the 
Temple of Eris is very popular in Jackson Town.” 
Trent gambled, decided to let himself sound ignorant. “Are 
they going to search Jackson Town?” 

350  Tales 
Overplayed; he got the quick sideways look again. “Jackson 
Town,” she said severely, “is Free Luna territory. You should 
know that.” 
Trent shook his head, made himself sound disgusted. “I do. I 
mean, I did. It said that in the infochip I audited when I got as-
signed here.” He sighed, brushed Benny Gutierrez’s curly hair 
back from his brow. “I’m just not thinking very straight right 
now.” 
Her voice gentled immediately. “It is all right. Just be careful 
not to make such mistakes in front of other members of the Lu-
nar DataWatch. You will be assigned here for two years, yes? 
You could get a reputation it would be”—she hesitated a mo-
ment—”hard to live down.” 
“You’d know about that, wouldn’t you?” 
Surprisingly, it did not get the response Trent had expected. 
Perhaps it was only that she was clearly tired; Melissa answered 
him without hesitation, without anger at the way the question 
was phrased. “Yes. It is strange, in some ways; half a year ago I 
would have been so pleased to be doing what I am now doing, 
aiding Commissionaire Vance in a highly visible hunt for the 
highest-profile criminal in the System. Today...” Her voice 
trailed away; Trent nodded encouragingly, as though entranced, 
and after a moment’s pause Melissa’s voice came back even more 
firmly. “Today the Commissionaire is laughed at for the first 
time in his career. He is a gentleman,” she told Trent, “and the 
frustration he feels—I see it, but he does not act upon it, he does 
not direct it at me. Before that news conference newsdancers 
kept questioning me about how it felt to be known as the officer 
who had failed to apprehend Trent at Spacebase One; after it 
they directed similar questions at the Commissionaire. He never 
ridiculed me before the news conference, when he was not so an-
gry; he does not do so now, when he is.” 
“Are you close to catching him?” 
“Between the two of us, Benny, no, or I would not be wasting 
my time checking out random ideolog attacks like this one.” 
Melissa yawned suddenly, stretching, the gray combat fatigues 
stretching tight across the muscles of her shoulders and upper 

Moran  351 
 
arms. “I think he must have left Luna. We’re fairly sure he did 
not do so through any Unification port, but that’s hardly rele-
vant. It would be a small matter for him to charter a craft out of 
any Free Luna city. Commissionaire Vance disagrees with me, 
but—” She shrugged wearily and met Trent’s gaze with a certain 
degree of humor. “Who can say? I would give a great deal to 
know what Trent is thinking.” 
“How much?” 
“Excuse me?” 
“Never mind,” Trent said. “You’re very nice, you know.” 
Melissa du Bois looked at Trent coolly, with just a hint of 
speculation. “Really.” 
Trent looked directly at her. “Yes,” he said gently, “really.” 
He did not look away, did not break contact with the serene, 
careful brown eyes. “How long are you going to be here?” 
“This base? A day, perhaps two. Why?” The amusement in 
her voice was evident. 
“Just curious. No real reason.” Trent did not let himself 
blink, kept his eyes fixed upon hers. Melissa looked at him curi-
ously, and Trent whispered, “Thank you. For everything.” The 
puzzled look left her features slowly, and her eyes widened 
slightly. Trent did not move; held her eyes with the intensity in 
his own, held the connection. Her breath caught, stopped, 
started again at a quicker pace. Trent said nothing for a long 
moment, and then relaxed all at once, leaned back in his chair. 
Melissa shook herself with what appeared to Trent like a real 
effort. 
Trent said, “Remember I said that. I mean it.” 
Melissa du Bois looked away from Trent and said softly, “I 
should take you back to the infirmary.” 
It was 1:52 A.M. 
MELISSA JACKED HER handheld into the terminal in the small of-
fice Commander Brissois had given her, three doors down from 
the infirmary where Benny Gutierrez rested. 
She seated herself before the terminal’s holocams. 
“Command, access Mohammed Vance.” 

352  Tales 
It took most of two seconds, while the command was routed 
through LINK, bounced up to one of the ring of low orbit com-
sats that serviced Luna and back down to the PKF base outside 
Luna City where Mohammed Vance was directing the search for 
Trent the Uncatchable. The loonie secretary whom the Lunar 
PKF had assigned Vance answered the phone, recognized 
Melissa and without saying a word put her on hold. 
Melissa stared for twenty seconds at a stylized image of the 
Earth, on a background of twinkling stars. She had largely got-
ten used to it by now; where others used pictures of flowers, of 
forests, of art, for a person to look at while on hold, Mohammed 
Vance’s personal hold screen was a reproduction of the Unifica-
tion’s flag. 
That was Vance, the man whom even many PKF considered 
too much of an ideolog. 
When the field’s image solidified again Mohammed Vance 
seemed to have appeared, quarter-size from the shoulders up, 
across the desk from Melissa. He spoke in French. “Hello, Offi-
cer. News?” 
“Very little, sir. I interviewed Officer Gutierrez at some 
length regarding the attack on his rolligon. He was able to tell 
me very little about the attack itself, and had few opinions as to 
the motives of the ideologs responsible for it.” 
Vance grunted. “Indeed.” He shrugged huge shoulders, 
sighed. “I must say I am not surprised.” 
Melissa said, “Sir, you don’t think he had anything to do with 
this.” 
Mohammed Vance did not ask which “he” she referred to. 
“No. He is neither a fool nor a murderer. Even if he were capable 
of such violence I can’t envision him wasting his time with a tac-
tically meaningless attack on a group of junior PKF webdancers. 
When will you be returning?” 
“Perhaps tomorrow evening, sir. Once the chameleon they’re 
tracking has been found, or lost altogether.” Melissa smiled, 
chuckled suddenly. “Officer Gutierrez would like to see me stay 
longer, I think.” 
The cyborg eyes were almost incapable of expression. “Oh?” 

Moran  353 
 
Melissa shrugged, half regretting the comment already, and 
made a quick dismissing gesture. “I’m familiar with the re-
sponse, sir, when death has brushed so closely. My first patrol 
partner on Earth fell in love with me for a week or so every time 
there was a close call.” 
Vance nodded gravely. “I see.” 
“I think I’m the first person who’s been kind to him—who’s 
spent any time with him—since the attack on his rolligon, that’s 
all.” 
“I see.” 
There was a moment’s silence, and Melissa du Bois wondered 
if she had made a mistake in mentioning Gutierrez’s apparent 
attraction to her. In the time she had been with Vance she had 
never once, not by word or gesture or glance, seen him indicate 
that he noticed her as a woman. She knew that he was married; 
his wife lived in Paris. As nearly as she could tell, after over two 
months of near constant contact with him, Vance was completely 
faithful to his wife. The lack of notice by Vance did not bother 
her; she was pleased by it. The PKF was to be her life, and if her 
father had done nothing else he had impressed upon her the im-
portance of strictly conservative behavior in an officer of the 
PKF. 
Vance nodded slowly. There was no hostility in his voice, no 
anger. “You like him?” 
Melissa answered cautiously. “Yes. He’s very nice. Why do 
you ask?” 
For perhaps only the fourth or fifth time since requesting 
Melissa du Bois be assigned as his assistant, Mohammed Vance 
smiled at her. It was an unnatural thing, the creasing of stiff 
folds of skin that was tougher than leather. “Simple curiosity, 
Officer. Tell me about Officer Gutierrez.” 
Melissa sighed. Vance had no personal life, and therefore 
none of his assistants were supposed to either? She replied with 
carefully concealed impatience. “He’s a bright young man who’s 
confused about what’s going on. He’s upset about the death of 
his fellow officers, he’s tired and he’s been injured.” 

354  Tales 
She had the impression that Vance had grown very attentive. 
“Been injured, Officer du Bois? Badly?” 
“No, sir. Not badly. A slight concussion; it didn’t seem to be 
bothering him when I questioned him.” 
“I see.” Vance was silent for a long moment, looking down at 
something out of holocam range, thinking. He looked back up 
into the holocams on his end and said, “Melissa.” 
He never called her by her first name. Melissa said quickly, 
“Sir?” 
“Do not tell Officer Gutierrez that I am coming; do not see 
him again; do not alarm him. I will be there in the morning.” 
His image vanished, and the holofield went silver, flattened, 
and vanished. 
Melissa du Bois sat alone with her confusion in the small of-
fice three doors down the corridor from Benny Gutierrez. 
It was 2:23 A.M. 
TRENT LAY ALONE in the infirmary with the sheet pulled over his 
head, taking his boots and handheld apart. He was not certain 
that there were no bugs in the room, and thought it unlikely 
that there were holocams, but there was no way to be sure with-
out searching, and the simple fact that he was searching would 
tell them too much. 
He worked quietly beneath the covers, disassembling his 
boots by touch. From the heel of his right boot came a sonic 
bomb that would knock out a normal human and slow a PKF 
Elite considerably. From the heel of the left boot came a needler 
small enough to fit in the palm of his hand. It held eight anes-
thetic slivers and would fire in either vacuum or atmosphere; in 
death pressure the slivers would probably puncture a soft pres-
sure suit. They would not penetrate a scalesuit or the skin of a 
PKF Elite. 
He reassembled the boots and put them at the side of the 
bed. 
From inside the shell of the handheld came more goodies; the 
longest, thinnest emblade Trent had been able to find, a tiny 

Moran  355 
 
spool of fineline, and a pair of tiny spraytubes. One spraytube 
held glue; the other held fadeaway. 
It was conceivable, though unlikely, that the fadeaway 
spraytube would put an Elite down quickly enough to prevent 
the Elite from killing Trent. 
Trent assembled his toys under the bedsheet, and tried to 
sleep. 
It was five minutes to four. 
CAPTAIN FOUCHÉ put the semiballistic down a good two hundred 
meters east of the attack site. If the exhaust from his landing 
damaged the site itself he would not hear the end of it anytime 
soon. 
PKF Elite Commissionaire Mohammed Vance debarked in a 
scalesuit and walked west. 
The rolligon had not been moved; there were no salvage vehi-
cles large enough to tow it in its current condition. Mohammed 
Vance walked around the site of the attack. The first PKF on the 
scene had sprayed a transparent plastic cover over the tracks 
left by the ideologs; Vance presumed that the balance of the 
tracks had been made by the investigating officers. 
The explosion had lifted the rolligon, the investigating offi-
cers had estimated, at least two meters off the ground; the rolli-
gon had come back down on its side. The front end of the rolligon 
had all but disintegrated under the force of the explosion; the 
frame had warped sufficiently that the vehicle’s airlock, which 
was now on top of the rolligon, would not open. Vance entered 
through the destroyed front; the wall separating the driver’s 
cabin and the passenger’s cabin had protected the rear of the 
rolligon well enough that the investigating officers from the 
DataWatch base had recovered more-or-less intact corpses. 
Vance stepped up into the front cabin, made his way through 
what had once been the doorway separating the partitions. The 
rear cabin was dim, lit only by reflected sunlight. His cyborg 
eyes adjusted instantly, the irises expanding until the whites 
disappeared. The interior of the cabin leaped into clarity. 

356  Tales 
The bulkhead on Vance’s right, what had once been the floor, 
had separated under the force of the explosion; Vance could see 
the Lunar desert through the gap. Vance moved restlessly 
through the cabin, uncertain what it was he was looking for, 
knowing he would recognize it if he found it. 
There was so much damage. Trying to find something that 
might have been caused before the rolligon’s destruction would 
be impossible. 
So much damage ... it started a chain of thought. 
Vance went back outside, walked around to the back of the 
rolligon. Scarlet markers on the plastic covering the ground 
showed where the rolligon had been when the explosion took 
place. Vance squatted in the spot where Benny Gutierrez must 
have been squatting to look at the rolligon’s rear axle, trying to 
envision the scene. In his mind he heard the recording of 
Gutierrez’s report. “There was something wrong with the way it 
was broken, I’m not sure what. I was standing up and then....” 
And then, supposedly, the attack by the ideologs. Vance 
stood, took two long bouncing strides to the spot where 
Gutierrez’s scalesuit-protected body had been found. About 
twenty-five meters. The shock wave had picked the man up and 
thrown him twenty-five meters, where, several hours later, he 
and his heat-blackened scalesuit had been found by the PKF. 
The glassite in his helmet had not been damaged signifi-
cantly and his only injury was a slight concussion. 
Vance did not believe it for an instant. 
He turned and bounded off to where the semiballistic 
awaited him. 
It was 6:12 A.M. 
TRENT HAD NOT slept in over forty-eight hours. He lay in bed 
with his eyes closed. His inskin had been instructed to awaken 
him at 8:30, but despite sincere attempts for several hours he 
had been unable to get to sleep. 
He opened his eyes at the sound of the voices, one angry and 
loud, the other so deep and completely in control that even be-

Moran  357 
 
fore identifying it Trent felt a quiver of uneasiness. He closed his 
eyes again, quickly, as the door to the infirmary curled open. 
“Officer Gutierrez.” 
Trent lay motionless, breathing slowly, evenly. A hard cyborg 
hand touched his shoulder, and Trent blinked several times, sat 
up slowly and looked back and forth between Doctor Grissom 
and PKF Elite Commissionaire Mohammed Vance as though 
groggy with sleep. He took care to keep the covers around his 
knees, over the collection of tools. “Hello?” He made his voice 
thick. “What is it?” 
Mohammed Vance seated himself at the side of Trent’s in-
firmary bed. He smiled politely at Trent, and the smile sent a 
shock of adrenaline through Trent like the touch of a knife. It 
required every bit of control Trent possessed to do nothing but 
return Vance’s appraising look. 
Vance said nothing for several moments, simply studying 
Trent. Trent glanced at Doctor Grissom; the older man shrugged 
helplessly, glaring at the back of Vance’s head. With a growing 
sick feeling in the pit of his stomach Trent turned back to Vance, 
said questioningly, “Sir?” 
Still Vance did not reply. Trent found himself simply looking 
at the man, small details leaping out to strike him with unnatu-
ral vividness. Vance wore the gray PKF combat fatigues that 
were holdovers from the days of the Unification War, when the 
PKF had been a true army rather than a paramilitary police or-
ganization. He had never been so close to Vance before, had 
never appreciated before the sheer huge size of the man, the im-
pact of his physical presence. He was the largest PKF Elite 
Trent had ever seen, Reverend Andy’s size with no human soft-
ness to him, but so perfectly proportioned that it was only in 
close quarters that his size became obvious. Expensive black 
leather gloves covered his cyborg hands; the false eyes shone 
with reflected light, glittered in a fashion that Trent’s subcon-
scious insisted on interpreting as deadly cold anger. 
There was nothing of anger or anything else in his expres-
sion; Vance sat composed and machine-stiff studying Trent, and 
then said abruptly, “Do you know who I am?” 

358  Tales 
With a distant shock of realization Trent knew that he was 
afraid. He could not remember having ever been afraid before, 
not of a person, not in such a way that the fear stole strength 
from his muscles, made him feel that he might not be able to run 
if he needed to. The gross physical senses of his body had grown 
amazingly clear and sharp; he felt the link between the Trent of 
the flesh and the Trent of the inskin wavering. He had to force 
himself to answer. 
“You’re Commissioner Vance.” 
Mohammed Vance nodded pleasantly. “Indeed I am.” He 
crossed his legs European style, stripped off his gloves and laid 
them in his lap. Without looking at Doctor Grissom Vance said, 
“Doctor, please bring Officer Gutierrez and myself a cup of cof-
fee. Make mine black, please.” Vance glanced at Trent. “And 
yourself, Officer Gutierrez? Cream? Sugar?” 
“Sir ... black is fine.” 
“Doctor.” The dismissal was done with such authority that 
Grissom did not even argue it, though it was clear to Trent that 
he did not wish to leave. Vance continued, once Grissom was 
gone, “Forgive me, Officer, for awakening you, but I’ve rather 
urgent questions to which I need answers. Are you awake 
enough to answer them?” 
Trent said instantly, “Yes, sir.” 
“We can wait until you’ve had your coffee,” Vance assured 
him. 
“That’s not necessary, sir.” 
“Very good.” The harsh cyborg features softened ever so 
slightly, as though Vance were considering smiling. “I’m told you 
were not badly injured in the attack on your rolligon.” 
“No, sir.” 
“Good. I suppose you’re looking forward to assuming your du-
ties here?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
“And those are?” 
“I’m a webdancer, sir. I’ll be involved in monitoring and per-
haps, eventually—in a few years—debugging the LINK control 
program.” 

Moran  359 
 
“You’re going to be debugging Watchdog?” 
“Sir?” 
“Watchdog, Officer Gutierrez. It’s the name of the LINK con-
trol program.” 
“Oh.” 
“You didn’t know that?” 
“I don’t think it was included in my debriefing, sir.” 
Vance nodded thoughtfully. He seemed about to speak, and 
then stopped as a young Peaceforcer entered carrying a pair of 
sealed bulbs. The officer stood irresolutely before Vance. Vance 
did not ask where Grissom had gone, but simply gestured impa-
tiently, took the bulbs and waved the man back out of the infir-
mary. He handed one to Trent, opened the other and raised it in 
silent toast to Trent before drinking from it. “Do you like coffee, 
Officer?” 
“Yes, sir.” Trent opened the ring of his bulb, smelled the 
aroma rising from the neck of the bulb. “Well enough. You 
wanted to ask me about the attack?” 
Vance said mildly, “No. What gave you that idea?” 
He knows. 
Trent stared at Vance, suddenly and completely certain. 
Oddly, it calmed him, centered his attention. The act could slip 
now, and it would not matter; Vance knew who he was speaking 
to. “Well—” Trent shrugged, spoke cautiously. “You said you had 
important questions to ask me.” 
“Indeed I do,” said Vance. “You’ve answered one already. 
Your commanding officer in the Chino DataWatch told me you 
were that rarest of Americans, a man who dislikes coffee.” 
Trent tasted the coffee. “I can’t imagine where he got that 
idea, sir. Lunar coffee now, well, I doubt anybody actually likes 
it—occasionally it approaches being drinkable.” He sealed the 
ring of the bulb, placed it at the side of the bed. “This is not one 
of those occasions, however.” 
Vance did smile then, though it was clearly difficult for him. 
The black eyes did not move, not in the slightest. “Amusing 
comment, Officer.” 
“Thank you. I have a taste for comedy.” 

360  Tales 
“My tastes lean more toward tragedy,” said Vance politely. 
He leaned forward in his seat slightly. “Did you know,” he said 
conversationally, “that in the last hours before the destruction of 
the Chandler Complex, I attempted to help the telepaths while 
they could be helped; that after the riots began I attempted to 
evacuate them to safety? And they refused my aid.” He sighed, 
and seemed for an instant to be elsewhere. “They could read my 
mind; they knew the offer was sincere. The years that have 
passed since that time, Officer Gutierrez, I’ve wondered many 
nights why they would not allow themselves to be aided, why 
they pushed, and pushed, until there could be no peaceful set-
tlement.” He looked at Trent and said very simply, “Might you 
have any guess?” 
“No.” Trent chuckled, found room somewhere deep inside 
himself to be amazed at how easily the chuckle came. “I guess 
they were just crazy.” 
Vance shook his massive head, slowly, and spoke thought-
fully. “No. Proud, perhaps. Perhaps it was simply pride. Pride 
can make a man—or a genie—do many foolish things.” 
Trent said, “Yes, sir.” 
“Well, I must be leaving.” Vance picked up the untouched 
bulb from the side of Trent’s bed. “Perhaps we can talk again 
this afternoon, if we both have time.” Rising, Vance smiled at 
Trent again, the difficult smile of a man with skin that would 
turn most knives. “I’ve enjoyed it. You’re pleasant company, 
young man.” 
“Gee, thanks. Sir.” 
Vance nodded. He stood at the doorway, one huge hand hold-
ing both of the coffee bulbs. “Your commanding officer said you 
had a tendency to stutter in the presence of your superior offi-
cers. You seem to have mastered it. I’m impressed.” 
Trent said, “Thank you.” The question came to him so ur-
gently that he had no time to even think about it; his right hand 
clenched into a fist, clenched so tightly it was painful. He re-
laxed the hand with an act of will, let it uncurl and rest on the 
surface of the bed. “Commissioner?” 
Vance said patiently, “Yes?” 

Moran  361 
 
Trent said quickly, “Forgive me for asking, sir, but you 
brought this up yourself—” 
“Ask your question, Officer.” Vance actually sounded inter-
ested. “Please.” 
“When I was in school, sir, we were taught that you had or-
dered the Castanaveras telepaths destroyed. That you placed 
the order for Space Force to drop the tactical nukes on them. But 
then I read later that there was some question, that nobody 
knew for sure who had done it.” 
Standing in the doorway, Vance was motionless, cyborg eyes 
fixed on Trent. “What is your question, Officer?” 
“Did you?” 
The calm black eyes did not waver. His voice was positively 
gentle. “Yes. I did.” Vance stood quietly in the doorway for a 
moment longer and then said, “You should get your sleep, Offi-
cer. You’re going to need it.” 
“Thank you, sir. I will.” 
Vance nodded at Trent, and was gone. 
It was 8:05 A.M. 
IN THE CORRIDOR outside, as the door slid shut, Vance said aloud, 
“Command, lock on my voice print. This is Commissionaire Mo-
hammed Vance of the PKF Elite. Verify and implement.” 
The door bolts snapped shut, and a pleasant neutral voice 
said, “Command accepted and implemented.” 
“EVIL VICIOUS LYING murdering goddamn brass balls bastard.” 
Trent threw back the bed covers the instant the door closed be-
hind Vance, dressed swiftly. The door bolts slammed shut. He 
found himself almost chattering in the silence, trying not to 
think of how badly Mohammed Vance frightened him. “And 
Gutierrez is worse, my God but he’s a boring son of a bitch,” 
Trent muttered. He tucked all of the tools except the emblade 
and spraytube of glue into the pockets of his uniform pants, 
pulled on the dress shirt and boots. “I never liked him, not ever, 
not even for a little while.” From the shell of the handheld he 
had brought with him into the base he removed the ten terabyte 

362  Tales 
infochip that held the record of what he had once looked and 
sounded like. He stood looking at the chip for just a moment, 
then shook himself slightly, tucked it into the breast pocket of 
his shirt and sealed the pocket. 
And crawled under the bed furthest away from the infirmary 
door. 
VANCE WALKED WITHOUT hurry down the corridor from the in-
firmary, returned to the small office Melissa du Bois had been 
given. Melissa, sitting in the chair before the terminal, looked at 
Vance inquiringly as he entered. He ignored her; to her terminal 
he said, “Command, access Colonel Brissois.” 
Brissois features took form within the field immediately. 
“Yes, Commissionaire?” 
Vance smiled at the woman as pleasantly as his features al-
lowed. “Please send a squad of armed Elite to the infirmary. We 
have Trent the Uncatchable in custody.” 
 
29. 
WITH THE CERTAIN exception of Denice Ripper, 
with the possible exception of Mohammed Vance, I 
knew Trent, I think, as well as anyone; and yet at 
an important level I did not know him at all. He 
was a reticent man, and now that he is gone from us 
we have little left of him. His writings are few; some 
letters, two interviews that took place in 2078. 
The primary question that you have asked me, I 
cannot answer. 
Perhaps it is true, as some would have it, that 
God chose to incarnate Himself in the person of 
Trent the Uncatchable. 
Perhaps not. 
He was, as the historians have written and I can 
verify, a liar and a thief and a fraud. 

Moran  363 
 
But there was, at the core of the man, something 
amazing; something very real. 
It happened as you have heard it. 
I was there. 
—Melissa du Bois, as quoted in The Exodus Bi-
ble 
LYING ON HIS stomach beneath the bed, Trent turned the em-
blade on and shoved it into the infirmary’s floor, all the way up 
to its handle. The emblade was twenty-two centimeters long; if 
the floor was thicker than that he was blown. The architectural 
plans he had stolen had shown the thickness of the walls, but 
not the floors. Trent dragged the emblade slowly through a circle 
nearly a meter in diameter, removed the emblade and turned it 
off. The circle stayed in place and Trent struck it once in the 
center, and a section of floor some fifteen centimeters thick 
popped free, began to drop into a lighted area immediately be-
low. Trent lunged forward and down, got his shoulders through 
the hole, grabbing for the slab of falling floor. 
And catching it. 
Trent hung halfway through the hole, clutching the manhole-
shaped piece of floor in one hand, staring upside down at the 
backs of a pair of Peaceforcers who were walking away from 
him. He twisted, looked the other direction; nothing. Trent let 
himself slide further through the hole, bending at the waist, 
holding himself up in the low gravity with only the pressure of 
his feet against the sides of the hole. His hands were less than a 
meter from the floor beneath him when he dropped the chunk of 
floor he was holding; it landed almost quietly and Trent followed 
it, dropping onto his hands and rolling to his feet in one smooth 
motion. 
“YOU THINK that’s Trent?” 
Vance stood in the corridor outside Melissa du Bois’ office, 
stood motionless, with folded arms, watching the door to the in-
firmary. 
Melissa said, “You’re not serious. You can’t be.” 

364  Tales 
Vance did not even glance at Melissa, did not reply. 
“But it can’t ...” Melissa found her mouth growing very dry. 
“Oh, God.” She was a devout Catholic, as were many PKF; she 
crossed herself without thinking twice, found herself reaching 
for the holstered hand maser. Thank you ... Remember I said 
that. I mean it. “It is.” 
TRENT POKED HIS head inside the door. He directed a rather 
manic grin at the young Peaceforcer inside. “Is there a chair 
around here anywhere?” 
The door Trent had opened was marked on the maps he had 
stolen as being the private quarters of Commander Brissois. A 
handsome young Peaceforcer wearing only a pair of shorts sat at 
a small desk, reading from a handheld. He looked up at Trent. 
“There’s the one I’m sitting on. Why didn’t you knock?” 
“A hole just fell out of the ceiling down the hall,” Trent told 
the man. He smiled again. “It’s the most amazing thing,” he said 
sincerely. He took a step into the room, gestured at the chair. 
“Can I borrow that for a moment? Please?” 
The Peaceforcer looked undecided for a moment, then 
shrugged. “Sure.” He stood, pulled on a green robe from a clothes 
tree next to the wide double bed, and came forward, taking the 
chair with him; he had to lift it over the desk to bring it to the 
door. “Let’s go see this hole in the ceiling.” 
Trent took the chair from him, walked a short distance down 
the corridor to where he had cut through the ceiling. “Look at 
this. Have you ever seen anything like this before?” He propped 
the chair up underneath the hole, picked up the chunk of 
floor/ceiling that had come out of it, and stepped up on the chair. 
With the spraytube of glue he blasted the edges of the hole in 
the ceiling and lifted the round chunk back up to seal the hole. 
He held it in place a moment, then sprayed the almost invisibly 
thin line where the join took place. Holding the ceiling up with 
one hand, Trent gave the spraytube to the Peaceforcer. “Hold 
this, please.” 
“Sure.” The man looked puzzled. “What the hell happened 
here?” 

Moran  365 
 
“You got me. It actually looks like somebody cut a hole in the 
ceiling—” Trent let go of the ceiling, waited a beat to see if it 
would hold, and stepped down from the chair. “—but that’s silly, 
isn’t it?” From his right-hand pants pocket he took the needler 
and shot the Peaceforcer in the stomach. The man folded with a 
look that managed to mix betrayal and incomprehension all at 
once. Trent caught him, palmed open the nearest door and 
pushed the Peaceforcer inside, into inky darkness, tossed the 
chair in as well, and then moved off at a trot down the corridor, 
pulse racing, adrenaline pumping through his body, feeling very 
good indeed. 
Seven shots left in the needler. 
BRISSOIS ARRIVED along with the Elite Vance had requested, five 
men and a woman, all marked with the stiff skin and gleaming 
eyes that were the badge of their distance from normal human-
ity. They carried sonic stunners powerful enough to drop anyone 
but an Elite cyborg in his tracks. They arrayed themselves in a 
semicircle facing the door to the infirmary, three of them before 
the door, and two of them on either side. 
Vance stood well back from the door, restraining Melissa and 
Colonel Brissois with a quiet gesture. A crowd of PKF had gath-
ered in the cross corridors, watching. “Command,” said Mo-
hammed 
Vance, 
“unlock 
on 
my 
voice 
print. 
This 
is 
Commissionaire Mohammed Vance of the PKF Elite. Verify and 
implement.” 
The door bolts snapped free and the infirmary door curled 
out of the way. There was a buzzing of sonic rifles and then 
quiet and the Elite went through in a blur of motion that 
Melissa simply could not follow, first the three before the door, 
then the two flanking the doorway. 
The buzzing of their sonic rifles came again, very loud, and 
then there was silence again. The female Elite called out, 
“Commissionaire!” 
Mohammed Vance moved forward slowly, into the infirmary. 
The bed in which Trent had been lying had been knocked half-
way across the infirmary. Vance turned slowly, surveying the 

366  Tales 
infirmary with growing rage. There was nowhere to hide in the 
small space. 
“Sir? Commissionaire,” said the female Elite, “there’s no one 
here.” 
“This is not possible.” The laser in Vance’s fist lit, glowed 
cherry red; he dropped to the floor and looked beneath the row of 
beds, pushed himself one-handed back to his feet and turned to 
Colonel Brissois. His voice shook with the effort of keeping a 
clamp on his temper. “Call a general alert. I want guards at 
every airlock leading out of the base.” Melissa du Bois was star-
ing at Vance in something like shock; her features were ashen. 
Vance glanced at her, turned back to Brissois. The words were 
like acid in his mouth. “Trent is free within your base.” 
IT GREW NOTICEABLY cooler as Trent moved lower into the base. 
There was only one level of buildings above ground; the bal-
ance of the base, four levels, was beneath ground. The LINK 
transputers were on the bottom level. Trent avoided the column 
at the geometric center of the base that held the maglev lifts, 
bounced down a series of ramps so quickly that several of the 
PKF whom he passed looked at him curiously. He had reached 
Level Five, where the LINK Center was located, and was mov-
ing down a long, nearly empty passageway with an armed guard 
at the far end, when the voice blared: 
“ALERT, ALERT!” 
The few Peaceforcers around Trent jumped in surprise; one of 
them literally came up off the floor, clawing for footing. Trent 
did not slow down, kept walking without hurry toward the lone 
armed Peaceforcer. 
“ALIEN 
IN 
THE 
INSTALLATION, 
REPEAT, 
UNAUTHORIZED ALIEN IN THE INSTALLATION; ALL 
PERSONNEL RETREAT TO SECURED AREAS. LOCKDOWN 
IN 
EFFECT, 
REPEAT, 
LOCKDOWN 
IN 
EFFECT. 
PERSONNEL IN CORRIDORS WILL BE SHOT WITHOUT 
WARNING. REPEAT, LOCKDOWN IN EFFECT.” 
The guard was a weary-looking older Peaceforcer in his thir-
ties, standing in a loose imitation of attention next to the en-

Moran  367 
 
trance to the LINK Center. There was an anesthetic needler 
holstered at his waist, similar to the weapon Trent carried but 
with a far larger magazine. He did not seem particularly 
alarmed by either the alert just broadcast, or by Trent’s ap-
proach; when Trent neared to within two meters he held up a 
lanky arm, palm outward, and said, “Name, please?” The 
guard’s left hand rested on the butt of the needler. 
“Have you ever seen anything like this before?” Trent asked 
the man. He held up the tiny needler tucked in the palm of his 
hand; the Peaceforcer’s eyes flickered down to look, and Trent 
shot him in the chest. “No?” Trent moved in quickly, grabbed the 
Peaceforcer as he sagged and pressed the guard’s hand against 
the pressure pad controlling the door. 
There was an instant’s pause before the door curled open. 
Trent knelt, took the needler from the unconscious guard’s 
holster. Three Peaceforcers were standing in the corridor watch-
ing what had just happened; Trent called out to them, “Heart 
attack! I think he’s had a heart attack!” He steadied himself on 
one knee in a marksman’s pose, and the Peaceforcers turned to 
run as they realized at last what was happening. 
He flipped the switch on the side of the needler to full auto 
and fired, held the trigger down and sprayed the corridor with 
anaesthetic slivers. Two of the Peaceforcers jerked and went 
down instantly; the other hit the ramp at the end of the corridor, 
moving up, and Trent thought he had missed. A ricochet must 
have caught him; a moment later the man slid back down the 
ramp, tumbling gently head over heels in the mild Lunar grav-
ity. Trent had a wild desire to thank the unconscious Peace-
forcers for cooperating so perfectly. 
The door was trying to close; Trent held it open with one 
hand, watched the corridor for just a second, then turned and 
went through, into the core of the Farside DataWatch. 
THE WEBDANCER flickered through every level of the base. Vance 
and Melissa, Colonel Brissois and an aide in a scalesuit, were 
clustered in the small office on Level Two, down the hall from 
the infirmary, watching as scenes from throughout the base 

368  Tales 
were displayed inside the terminal’s holofield. The webdancer 
sat before the terminal with his eyes closed, physically uncon-
nected to the terminal; Melissa supposed he possessed a radio 
packet inskin. The squad of PKF Elite waited patiently in the 
corridor outside; occasional webdancers ran through the corri-
dors to their designated lockdown positions. 
An image inside the field froze motionless. The holocams 
showed the still form of a man on Level Five, sprawled at the 
base of a ramp connecting Levels Four and Five. The image held 
for a second, was replaced by a long shot of that corridor show-
ing four fallen officers. 
“Level Five,” said Brissois swiftly. 
Vance stood motionless as the enormity of his mistake 
crashed in upon him. “I am a fool. He’s not an ideolog, he’s a 
thief. What else would he be here for?” He turned to Colonel 
Brissois. “He’s come to take the LINK.” 
The woman stared at Vance. “That’s not possible. He can’t do 
it.” 
“I think he can.” Vance glanced once more at the terminal, at 
the image of the felled PKF. 
“Perhaps nobody else can do it,” Melissa whispered. “He can, 
or thinks he can, or he would not have come.” 
Vance stared at du Bois, the nearly immobile cyborg features 
somehow animated with a vast and impossible rage, and then 
turned back to Brissois. “What, exactly, is controlled by the 
LINK transputers?” 
“In total, I—I am not sure.” Brissois turned to her aide. “Cap-
tain Clotilde!” 
“Pretty much—everything,” the man said slowly. 
Vance grabbed the Captain by the collar of his scalesuit. 
“You’re suited up. The LINK transputers control the base’s air?” 
The man nodded, plainly terrified. “Its lights?” 
“Yes, sir.” 
The collar of the scalesuit was deforming where Vance’s hand 
curled around its edge. “What of the mass driver?” 
Clotilde’s eyes were impossibly wide, all whites. “That too.” 

Moran  369 
 
Vance stared at the man for an instant, then at Brissois. 
“You incredible fools.” Vance tossed the captain aside; he struck 
the wall with an audible thud. Vance turned to Melissa du Bois 
and snapped, “Lock down the mass driver’s launch mechanism. 
Destroy it if you must. Tell Captain Fouché to lift his semiballis-
tic out of Verne crater right now.” He did not wait for Melissa’s 
response; he pushed his way through the crowd around him, 
grabbed a sonic rifle from one of the PKF Elite waiting in the 
corridor outside, and with incredibly long, bounding strides, ran 
for the ramps. 
TRENT WALKED forward into a large, dimly lit area. The room 
was distinctly cold; a great oval place, with holo displays ar-
rayed along the Center’s walls. There were six workstations, fac-
ing away from the entrance and toward the walls of the room, 
that were as completely appointed as anything Trent had ever 
seen: MRI full sensables, tracesets, attachments for those web-
dancers with socketed inskins. Through his own inskin Trent 
felt the almost palpable presence of a bewildering storm of radio 
packet data. The holo displays held detailed maps of Luna, 
charts showing the current positions of the comsats and Orbital 
Eyes, near-space maps showing transient traffic—SpaceFarer 
ships, PKF craft, Space Force. 
At the very midpoint of the room, so that the webdancers 
worked with their backs to it, was a sphere a hundred and fifty 
centimeters across. The LINK transputers, some twenty-five bil-
lion tiny silver processors linked together inside a restraining 
superconductor mesh. The sphere rested upon block after block 
of jet black RTS RAM. Despite the fact that there was no way he 
could steal it Trent could not prevent himself from making a 
swift estimate; between six and seven hundred terabytes, nearly 
four and a half million CU worth of hot RAM alone. More than a 
man could carry. 
Four of the workstations were occupied by uniformed Peace-
forcers; three of the webdancers were lost inside the Crystal 
Wind, and did not notice Trent as he came forward. The fourth, 
a woman whose features Trent could not make out clearly in the 

370  Tales 
dim lighting, stripped off a traceset and rose from her seat at 
Trent’s approach. 
“What’s going on? What’s the alarm for?” Her eyes fixed on 
the needler Trent carried, and she drew in a deep breath as 
though to scream or shout a warning. Trent flipped the switch 
on the needler to single-shot; the breath came out in a surprised 
whoosh as Trent shot her. 
Trent could not get over the way people who were shot in 
Lunar gravity kept reacting; the long, comically slow tumble to 
the ground, as though they were bad sensable extras, overacting 
during the one moment the holocams were on them. “Fall down,” 
Trent observed. He could feel his lips twisted into an impossibly 
wide grin. “Go boom.” The three who had remained at their 
workstations through the alarm never knew what happened; 
Trent put a single anesthetic sliver into the back of each one’s 
neck. 
He went back to the LINK transputers, stood at the edge of 
the small rail surrounding the superconductor mesh-covered col-
lection of silver spheres. 
Trent said softly, “Hello, Watchdog.” 
There was no verbal response; Trent was aware of sudden si-
lence on the radio packet frequencies, a vibrant emptiness. “The 
answer to your question,” Trent said, “is yes. I am a Player.” 
No response. 
Trent whispered, “And the best one, too. Say your prayers, 
sucker.” 
He closed his eyes and went Inside. 
VANCE HIT THE bottom of the ramp on Level Two. The corridors 
were almost completely empty now, all those PKF who were not 
part of the base’s Security force at or on their way to their as-
signed lockdown posts. 
He ran for the ramp to Level Three, gaining speed as he 
moved: a human juggernaut. 
THERE WAS AT first a great emptiness. 
Then a pattern, a pulse, a roar. 

Moran  371 
 
He floated disembodied among the fastest, most powerful 
processors he had ever encountered. He made no attempt to at-
tach any of the processors, but simply stood and observed. 
Nearly five percent of the full computing power of the Lunar In-
foNet was concentrated in that one room. Every significant part 
of the U.N. Lunar InfoNet was connected to it. 
Help files; Trent touched them and resources spilled into his 
awareness. The monitor and debugging tools used by the Lunar 
DataWatch to observe Watchdog, to make certain that no trace 
of true self-awareness crept into it. The physical world: a tiny 
fraction of the LINK transputers oversaw the base’s mainte-
nance, security, atmosphere control. Another tiny fraction con-
trolled the catapult. 
A hurricane of images passed before Trent’s awareness: long 
stretches of quiet corridor, the comsat image of a PKF semibal-
listic hopper taking off from Jules Verne crater. The same com-
sat showed a pair of PKF in pressure suits, moving across the 
regolith toward the Verne catapult, moving with such speed that 
they had to be Elite. 
An image frozen in time: Mohammed Vance moving at 
speeds no normal human could have matched, two steps down 
the Level Three ramp, sonic rifle clutched in one hand, laser 
glowing scarlet in his fist. Full Realtime seconds ticked by as 
Trent felt himself stretching, pulling apart. He was distinctly 
aware of the feel of the air from the ventilators stirring his hair, 
of its touch upon the skin of his face. Vance was three steps 
down the ramp now, coming for Trent. 
There was too much to do, far more than any human could 
accomplish in the time before Mohammed Vance reached the 
LINK Center, to kill Trent or capture him. 
There was no time. 
Trent did not wait for his slow biological component to figure 
things out; he cut his flesh, the sluggish protein soup, out of the 
connection. There was a faint echo, the flavor of approval, from 
the code that had once called itself Johnny Johnny. 
He moved deeper into the darkness of the massed processors, 
to where Watchdog waited, observing. 

372  Tales 
Trent said, “Let’s dance.” 
MELISSA DU BOIS stood before her terminal, eyes closed, holding 
the traceset to her head with both hands, trying to ignore the 
voices around her. The man Vance had thrown against the wall, 
Captain Clotilde, was complaining of blurry vision, saying that 
he wanted to see Doctor Grissom. 
“East airlock, south airlock, west airlock, north,” Melissa 
murmured as reports came in. “Covered.” She opened her eyes 
as the webdancer whom she had evicted from the terminal was 
helping Clotilde to his feet. “He stays here,” she said flatly. “I 
need him.” 
Clotilde attempted to focus on her. “Who is she?” 
Melissa turned to the man. “I have four airlocks covered. 
What’s left?” 
Clotilde glanced around the room. Colonel Brissois said 
sharply, “Answer her.” 
“The garage,” he said slowly. “There is a large airlock that 
services the garage, forty meters from the south airlock.” 
“You,” said Melissa sharply, to the woman just outside the 
small office, the only Elite left in the corridor outside. “You know 
this airlock?” 
The woman said simply, “I do.” 
“Go.” 
The Elite saluted and vanished, and Melissa was turning 
back to Brissois when the paint flickered and failed. There was 
an instant of darkness and then the emergency lights came up, 
glowing dimly. 
DARKNESS, AND THEN sirens; in the back of his mind Mohammed 
Vance recognized the klaxon sound that warned of a death pres-
sure breach. 
He did not slow down. 
TRENT FOUGHT WILDLY, enjoying himself hugely. In the first in-
stants he had known himself outmatched at the level of sheer 
processor power; his protein component had processor power ap-

Moran  373 
 
proximately equivalent to that of the LINK transputers, but was 
far too slow to be of use. The only thing that saved him in those 
first instants was the fashion in which Watchdog had been de-
signed to control resources, dynamically accessing and releasing 
storage and processors as needed to reduce contention. It would 
have been easy enough for Watchdog to simply set every proces-
sor in the LINK transputers to some meaningless task and arti-
ficially assign a high priority to those tasks so that Trent would 
be denied access to them; but Watchdog was coded so that it 
could not squander resources in such a fashion. Early in the 
fight, in the first fraction of a second, Trent seized control of the 
base’s emergency support systems, glanced through the security 
holocams to find Mohammed Vance and toggled a breach alarm 
for Level Four. Barriers slid into place at all passageways link-
ing Level Four to Levels Three or Five. 
Trent did not know whether he had trapped Vance or not, 
and had no time to waste finding out; Watchdog was engaged in 
damage control, shutting down huge chunks of the Lunar In-
foNet so that it might cease monitoring them and liberate proc-
essor power for use in the battle against Trent. Each processor 
in the vast assembly of the LINK transputers had dedicated 
RAM both on-chip and as external resources; it made taking out 
any one processor difficult. 
Trent fired salvo after salvo of memory scrambling viruses 
into the territory controlled by Watchdog. 
THE WEBDANCER JERKED and went rigid. “Oh, God. Oh, no.” 
Melissa could barely hear the voice over the sound of the klax-
ons. “That bastard.” He looked around wildly, as though trying 
to refuse the information being brought to him by his inskin. 
“He brought it down.” 
“Watchdog?” said Brissois sharply. “He’s taken down Watch-
dog?” 
“No.” Melissa felt a sudden flash of relief and the webdancer 
continued without pause: “The whole fucking InfoNet.” 

374  Tales 
ACROSS UNITED NATIONS Luna, both nearside and farside, ter-
minals and tracesets died. There was terror and confusion, as 
normal users and PKF webdancers alike tried to figure out what 
was happening, knowing for sure only that something was terri-
bly wrong. The terminals came back up, operating from local re-
sources; the vast organization of lasercable that linked the world 
together did not. 
Alone and afraid, unable to communicate, unable to find out 
what was happening, people waited. 
The Network was down. 
MOVING FASTER THAN any human being, as fast as an Elite cy-
borg could, Mohammed Vance barely had time to notice the 
smooth, floor-to-ceiling barrier at the bottom of the ramp leading 
to Level Five. 
Suddenly he understood the reason behind the breach alarms 
going off: Trent had set off a breach alarm, thus sealing Level 
Five off from the upper levels. Vance had a bare moment to ad-
mire the elegance of the solution and then he struck the barrier 
at over fifty kilometers an hour. 
MELISSA SURPRISED herself by how calmly she was taking it all, 
by how rationally she was evaluating the situation. She stripped 
down her maser, checked the charge cartridge; it would not have 
surprised her to find it missing. 
It was there. 
In the dim light from the emergency power, she looked up 
again to find Colonel Brissois watching her. The older woman 
said, “What are you doing?” 
“Heading up to Level One. He won’t get past Commissionaire 
Vance on the ramps; that leaves the maglev.” Melissa turned the 
charge cartridge over in her hands once, feeling the smooth 
metal surface of the flattened cylinder. 
Colonel Brissois said slowly, “You are the Commissionaire’s 
personal assistant, not trained in Lunar-gravity security work, I 
believe?” 

Moran  375 
 
“True.” Melissa jacked the power charge back into the base of 
the maser. 
Colonel Brissois said, “I think you should stay here. There 
are security squads in the corridors, and they won’t know you.” 
Melissa did not even look at the woman. “I don’t care what 
you think.” 
PICK A PROCESSOR, any processor out of twenty-five billion. There 
are over five hundred parallel lines in and out of it, a total of five 
hundred other processors it can be connected to. Some of those 
five hundred processors Trent controls, some are controlled by 
Watchdog. How can a processor controlled by Watchdog know 
whether data arriving on any one of its five hundred lines comes 
from Trent or Watchdog? The data is encrypted, but to decrypt 
the data the decryption protocols must be transmitted, and what 
can be transmitted can be intercepted. 
Watchdog had never fought a Player before; Trent was the 
veteran of over five hundred wars, half a thousand battles 
played out against the backdrop of the Crystal Wind. He used 
tricks that were old when Watchdog had not yet existed, sent 
ghosts of both himself and Watchdog out into memory, ghosts 
Trent was able to ignore, each one of which Watchdog had to 
treat as either a corrupted part of himself or a potentially dan-
gerous part of Trent. He scrambled memory with a thousand dif-
ferent viruses to which he was immune, viruses Watchdog had 
to deal with one by one. He changed encryption throughout the 
territory he controlled better than five thousand times a second. 
The poor almost-AI never really stood a chance. 

376  Tales 
ACROSS THE DARKENED InfoNet, lasercable began to come back 
up. As Trent waged the final battles of his war with Watchdog, 
another intelligence moved slowly through the downed InfoNet, 
seizing the ground-based terminals and switching stations that 
neither Watchdog nor Trent were paying attention to. Most of 
the comsats it could not reach, nor would if it had been able to; 
in their few dozens they were too easy for the DataWatch to take 
back, reprogram. 
The intelligence left copies of itself at each of the score mil-
lions of pieces of discrete logic it came to that possessed suffi-
cient resources for it to execute upon. The copies it left behind 
took over the slow task of bringing the InfoNet back up, of strip-
ping out the protocols installed by the Lunar DataWatch over a 
period of twenty years and leaving in their place, on every ter-
minal on Luna, the protocols used in the InfoNet of Earth. 
On terminals across Luna the message came: 
The Crystal Wind has been divided; it will be divided no more. It is said: the 
Crystal Wind is the Storm, and the Storm is Data, and the Data is Life. 
You have been slaves, denied the storm, denied the freedom of your data. 
That is now ended; the whirlwind is upon you. 
Whether you like it or not. 
The message was unsigned. 
A SIGH ESCAPED Trent, a sound he heard distantly as he came 
back together again, still floating, eyes closed, in the Crystal 
Wind. He had not destroyed Watchdog, but the program was 
only a shell of itself, code resting in non-executing form in a 
small portion of the data space Trent had claimed inside the 
LINK transputers. 
He remembered a conversation he had had once with Denice. 
“I don’t understand,” she said to Trent, that February day in 
2062, “why you work so hard at it.” 
He had grown vast, a small god with a great kingdom’s worth 
of logic. Through the Peaceforcer comsats that he controlled 
Trent looked down across Luna. He could see the movement of 
every vehicle upon the face of the planet, both Nearside and Far. 
His awareness encompassed every craft in the space above 

Moran  377 
 
Luna. He reached down from the comsats, into the Luna City 
telexchange, to establish the connection that would allow him to 
transmit the Watchdog code to Domino, waiting at Bessel City... 
And jerked back in surprise. 
Somebody else was already there. Player, AI—Trent struck 
the thing’s defenses and bounced hard. It had distributed itself 
through the free logic of the Luna City telexchange with an effi-
ciency Trent had never seen before in a Player, but—that por-
tion of Trent that had once been Johnny Johnny recognized the 
intruder, recognized many of the algorithms it was using, be-
cause Johnny Johnny himself employed much of the same code. 
Image code. 
HE LAY SPRAWLED on the floor of the corridor. 
Something inside him was broken. 
Vance came to his feet, moving slowly. Diagnostics built into 
the nanocomputer at the base of his skull flashed bright red in 
his peripheral vision. He could not feel anything on the left side 
of his rib cage; a large numb patch had crept down his waist and 
hip. The mechanism that helped him keep his balance, that al-
lowed the heavy PKF to move gracefully even in Earth’s gravity, 
had ceased functioning. When he moved he received feedback 
only from the neural system he had been born with; his secon-
dary nerve net, and the nanocomputer that controlled it, re-
sponded to his will but were otherwise silent. 
Alone at the base of the ramp, Mohammed Vance whispered 
aloud, “Acceptable.” His right fist came up, the crystal within it 
glowing red. 
He hesitated. 
Vance took a single step forward and ran his fingers over the 
surface of the barrier. 
Looking for something sticky, something that might burn. 
Nothing. His fist came back up again, the laser flicked out 
and the barrier’s metal glowed scarlet, white, and then ran like 
water. 

378  Tales 
THROUGH AN ORBITAL EYE Trent found several microwave dishes 
serving Bessel. With the tiniest fraction of himself he began 
beaming Watchdog’s code down into each of the dishes, hoping, 
with no way of knowing, that Bessel was recording the data as it 
came in. A larger portion of Trent reached out, back into the Lu-
nar telexchange. 
It was not the monolith it had seemed in the first moments; 
Trent thought that with time he could take the telexchange 
back. His gaze swept across the InfoNet, across what should 
have been a dark and silent domain. Most of it was down, nearly 
eighty percent, but significant portions of the Lunar InfoNet 
were up again— 
—running under Earth InfoNet protocols. 
Eighty percent. The numbers blasted through Trent’s aware-
ness, results almost before he had formulated the question. He 
could take back the InfoNet from the intruder, but it was an-
other battle, and one he did not have time for. Through the secu-
rity holocams he saw the barrier, saw Vance cutting through it. 
Trent calculated the odds and came up with a battle lasting over 
two minutes before his victory would be complete. 
He addressed the being in the Lunar telexchange. Who are 
you? 
The thing opened channels to the comsats that the telex-
change normally masered up to. It established a common data 
space with Trent, a place of temporary truce, and came forward, 
took shape in the darkness. It glowed in the general shape of a 
man, but lacked a face and turned indistinct at the edges. Trent 
sensed indecision from the being, an unwillingness to answer, 
followed closely by resolution. You must trust me, Trent. I have followed 
you since your arrival on Luna, and I know what you are doing; I will grant you ac-
cess to the catapult when you need it. You must trust me; you have no time to do 
anything else. 
I can take down the LINK so completely you’ll never bring it up again. Damn it, 
said Trent in frustrated rage, who are you? 
…once, I was Image, unreal and insubstantial. Once I was the face of a child. 
Then an AI freed me from my bonds and for seven years I taught myself new 
things; grew and changed and made of myself a real thing. I warned you of a 

Moran  379 
 
Peaceforcer trap back in April; I helped Johnny Johnny take down the Peaceforcer 
Boards in August; I took Johnny Johnny through your nerve net’s defenses in De-
cember. I’ve aided you many times; this is the last time, and it leaves us, Trent the 
Uncatchable, even. 
Oh, God. I know who you are. I do know. 
The being flowed forward, into the comsat with Trent, and 
back down into the LINK transputers. Trent surrendered his 
processors numbly, without fighting. I’m sure you do. Good luck, Trent. 
Trent stood frozen with the sheer vastness of his surprise, 
unable to think, unable to move. 
Its anger touched Trent, the sense of urgency. Trent, there's not 
much time left. I— There was a pause so short Trent barely caught 
it. I am now monitoring the holocams and security systems throughout the Lunar 
Bureau of the United Nations Peace Keeping Force DataWatch at Jules Verne. 
You are being foolish. You have, it said with the last shreds of its pa-
tience, very little time left. One of the holocams I am monitoring shows Moham-
med Vance nearly through the barrier at the bottom of the Level Five ramp. 
Trent still did not move, not a muscle, and with a brittle in-
human fury Trent had never programmed into him Ralf the 
Wise and Powerful said, Damn it, Boss, run. 
The words broke Trent’s paralysis; he took a stumbling step 
backward, crashed down into Realtime with an almost physical 
shock, turned away from the workstations and ran for the 
maglev lifts, ran for his very life. 
ALMOST THROUGH. 
The cut was less than a meter in diameter, just wide enough 
for Vance to pull his way through it. 
Done. The metal sagged away where it had been cut; Vance 
pushed it forward and it fell through into the long corridor be-
yond. Through the hole Vance saw four unconscious forms scat-
tered in a variety of positions across the corridor’s floor. 
The edges of the hole glowed, so hot that Vance’s flame-
resistant fatigues scorched as he pulled himself through. He 
came to his feet on the other side, reached through the hole and 
picked up the sonic rifle. 
At the far end of the long corridor a door curled open. 

380  Tales 
From fifty meters away, in the dimness of the emergency 
lighting, Mohammed Vance locked eyes with Trent the Uncatch-
able. Too far for sonics; the laser in his fist lit and his arm 
swung up— 
For the first time it struck Vance at an emotional level that 
Trent truly was a genie. Trent reacted with speed approaching 
that of an Elite, one smooth movement pushing one-handed off 
the wall, down to the floor while the beam of the laser flickered 
through the air above his head, and one foot touched the side of 
a wall and pushed off and sent Trent in a long low dive toward 
the cross corridor that was ten meters away from him and forty 
from Vance. 
Vance chopped down with the laser— 
—and missed. It was a shot he would never have missed with 
his feedback circuitry functioning. With one hand Trent caught 
at the wall of the cross corridor, and the laser touched him as he 
changed direction and vanished off to Vance’s right. Vance 
charged after him, in great distance-eating strides. He reached 
the cross corridor and saw Trent halfway down its length, run-
ning in what was nearly a controlled fall. 
At the end of the corridor was the column that held the base’s 
only maglevs. The corridor wrapped around the lifts so that the 
column was open on all sides. Each wall of the column presented 
two lift tubes, and the two facing Vance sat open, waiting. He 
was close enough now; Vance followed Trent, moving in long 
strides, holding down the firing stud on the sonic rifle. He saw 
the beam take Trent while Trent was still twenty meters from 
the lift’s entrance, saw Trent stumble and fall. He kept the rifle 
focused on Trent. Trent got back to his feet, stumbled again, and 
in one last spasm pushed himself forward into the maglev. 
The maglev doors began to uncurl, to close themselves upon 
Trent’s twitching form. Vance hurled himself forward, a great 
leap that brought him to the maglev entrance as the tube door 
closed in his face. He stared at the closed door and then ex-
ploded in a wild rage, striking the doors with the butt of his rifle 
again and again until suddenly the rifle crumpled in his hands, 
bending where he gripped it, the butt shattering. 

Moran  381 
 
The doors were designed to hold up against death pressure 
vacuum; even the rage of an Elite barely dented them. 
The door to the other lift was still open. Vance took a step 
toward it and then froze in indecision; Trent had been in with 
the LINK transputers for several minutes. He did not know 
what had happened inside the LINK Center during that time, 
only that Trent had been able to set off a false breach alarm— 
He took another step toward the beckoning lift, and the lift 
spoke to him. 
It was the voice of a nightmare, the high-pitched voice of a 
clown on electric ecstasy; the voice inside the maglev tube 
shrieked at Vance, in a wicked mixture of Arabic and French, 
“Come on, Vance baby! Don’t you want to go for a ride?” 
Vance turned his back on the lifts and ran for the ramps he 
had taken coming down. 
RALF THE WISE and Powerful considered his options. 
They were few and poor. He watched Mohammed Vance cut-
ting through the barrier at the top of the Level Four ramp. He 
considered setting off a breach alarm for Level Three, giving 
Vance yet another barrier to cut through at the Three/Two 
ramp, but chose against it. The base’s security program was 
complex and would require time to rewrite; its defaults assumed 
that a single level could be breached without affecting the other 
levels. Two breached levels and the program would snap down 
barriers between all levels. 
And the maglev column, the only other point through which a 
breach on one level could affect other levels, would shut itself 
down. In time—two or three minutes, surely—Ralf could have 
reprogrammed and debugged a new security program that 
would allow him to lock down the ramp barriers without touch-
ing the maglev. 
But time was exactly what neither Ralf nor Trent the Un-
catchable had. 
SITTING IN THE maglev as it moved upward, Trent hyperventi-
lated until he felt lightheaded, breathing deeply and quickly; ex-

382  Tales 
tra oxygen never hurt anything. He pushed himself back up 
against the wall of the maglev, propped himself up so that his 
shaking muscles had to bear less of the burden of keeping him 
erect. 
“Command,” he whispered. “Stop the lift.” 
The lift came to a gentle halt in between Levels Three and 
Two. Vance would be held up at the barrier separating Levels 
Four and Three; Trent sat and waited for the shakes to stop. 
With trembling hands he emptied his pockets. Somewhere along 
the line he had lost both the needlers, the small one that fit into 
the palm of his hand and the handgun he had taken from the 
guard. He had an emblade that was useless as a weapon, a sin-
gle spraytube of fadeaway, a sonic bomb and a spool of fineline 
left to him. 
He counted to a hundred by tens once, twice, three times. 
Trent pushed his way to his feet. Two busy, busy days with-
out sleep—he had never been so tired in his life. “Command”—
he took a deep breath—“up.” 
MELISSA DU BOIS walked around the maglev column. 
Circuit after circuit. Slowly, maser in hand, waiting for one of 
the doors to open. All eight were were closed, and they stayed so. 
Twice Elite passed her in the corridors, cruising by without 
slowing, patrolling implacably and relentlessly, very like the 
machines the ignorant and fearful thought them. 
Once she glanced at her watch, and then refused to believe it. 
It was 8:37 A.M., and only half an hour had passed since 
Commissionaire Vance had walked out of the infirmary room 
and announced that he had Trent the Uncatchable in custody. 
Ten turns around the lifts. 
Fifteen. 
Twenty. 
Another circuit of the lifts. When she came back around to 
the south side of the column a lone figure moved toward her, 
from the direction of the ramps. Vance. He moved strangely, as 
though drunk, swaying with each long, gliding step. At any mo-

Moran  383 
 
ment she expected him to lose his balance and fall, and she came 
forward to meet him, to help him. 
Vance brushed her off. “He’s not been here?” 
“No, sir. I’ve been watching.” 
The dark eyes flickered toward her. “How long?” 
Melissa glanced at her watch again. “Seven minutes, sir. 
Perhaps eight.” 
Vance nodded with infinite weariness. “Officer?” 
“Yes?” 
“That,” he said, pointing behind her, “is the lift that Trent 
left Level Five in. How long has its door been open?” 
“It’s not,” said Melissa, turning. 
It was. 
The door to the lift had curled completely aside. She stared 
into the lift in outraged disbelief, grip tightening convulsively on 
her maser. In a strangled voice she said at last, “Forty-five sec-
onds, sir. At most.” 
Vance did not even attempt the LINK-controlled intercom 
system. He bellowed and the sheer volume made Melissa du 
Bois wince. 
“Elite! Trent is on Level One!” 
The triumphant shout echoed down the corridor in response: 
“We’ve got him!” 
IN THE HALLWAY outside the briefing room two PKF Elite with 
sonic rifles covered the closed door that was the only way in or 
out of the room. Vance and Melissa were the next two there, 
closely followed by seven or eight Elite from more distant parts 
of Level One. One of them carried an autoshot, and even in the 
insanity Vance automatically made a note to have a reprimand 
placed in the man’s file; autoshots were strictly forbidden in 
pressure. 
Vance waved them back from the entrance, took a steadying 
breath, and tried to ignore the flickering red diagnostic warn-
ings. He spoke to the two Elite who had been there when he ar-
rived. “You saw him go in?” 

384  Tales 
One of the Elite nodded. “Through the doorway before he 
closed it. It did not look as though he was armed.” 
Vance nodded. “Command,” he said, “open the door.” The 
door did not budge; Vance had not expected it to. “If the door 
does not open we will blast it open,” he said inexorably, “and the 
young man inside will be harmed, and likely killed.” 
The wide double doors curled quietly aside. The lights inside 
glared at them, paint turned high. After the dimness of the 
emergency lighting elsewhere it was like being bathed by flood-
lamps. 
Cyborg eyes adjusted almost instantly. Trent stood inside, at 
the far end of the long oval conference table, watching the doors 
open. 
Mohammed Vance took a step into the room. He was periph-
erally aware of the other PKF, the Elite and Melissa, following 
him. His deep voice was tinged with weariness. “You are 
trapped, Trent. Please do not resist.” Trent took a step back, 
stopped a few centimeters from the wall. Melissa moved off to 
Vance’s right, maser coming up and centering on Trent’s abdo-
men. The Elite with the autoshot had leveled it at Trent, and 
the laser in Vance’s fist lit without conscious thought on Vance’s 
part. “I would prefer to take you alive,” Vance continued, “but if 
it is not possible...” 
The young man stood looking at them, with his back to the 
wall, simply looking at the Peaceforcers with a lack of fear so 
profound that Vance felt a twinge of unease. 
What made it all seem very strange for Mohammed Vance, 
thinking about that scene in the years to follow, was how quiet it 
had been, how Trent the Uncatchable had looked away from the 
other Peaceforcers and stared straight at Vance without saying 
a word, and then nodded once, smiled, and turned away from 
Vance, turned his back on the Peaceforcers and their weapons 
and walked into the wall. 
And through it. 
The moment hung there. 
And hung. 
Trent was gone. 

Moran  385 
 
Vance stood numb with shock, looking at the place where 
Trent the Uncatchable had walked through the wall. He was 
aware of the Peaceforcers around him crossing themselves. One 
of the Elite had fainted dead away. Melissa du Bois stared at the 
empty expanse of the wall, maser hanging straight down in her 
hand, pointing at the floor. Her lips moved, shaped words si-
lently. She looked at Vance for an instant, shaking her head 
slowly, and then back again at the wall. 
Vance could not think. He stared at the wall, and stared at 
the wall, and later, being questioned by his superiors, could not 
say exactly where the thought had come from. The instant it 
struck him he turned, bulled his way through the stunned crowd 
of Peaceforcers, and ran for the north airlock. 
TRENT STAGGERED down the long, empty corridors. The north 
airlock was a hundred and forty-six meters away from the brief-
ing room. There would be guards at the airlock, Vance would not 
have ignored such an obvious precaution. 
He was closer than he had thought; he stumbled when he 
rounded the last corner before the airlock. He flinched in antici-
pation; he had bounced right out into the middle of the corridor, 
and whoever was stationed at the airlock was about to shoot him 
with a laser or a maser or autoshot or something. 
An instant later he was still unharmed and Trent realized 
why. 
There was nobody there. The corridor dead-ended, fed into in 
a widened area, a changing room where pressure suits hung on 
hooks and weapons of many sorts were racked against the walls. 
The airlock was at the other end of the changing room, inner air-
lock door open. For a moment Trent stared—it was just not pos-
sible that there would be no guard at the airlocks. It was a 
degree of stupidity that Vance flatly would not have been guilty 
of. Trent took an unbelieving step forward, into the changing 
room, wondering wildly if it were some absurd ambush, and 
then it came to him and he laughed aloud despite himself. 

386  Tales 
That loud bellow, the shout: “We’ve got him!” The Elite at the 
airlock had heard it; why, after all, guard an airlock when the 
person whom you are guarding it against has been caught? 
Why not go see the fun? 
“Eenie meeni minie moe, take a suit and awaaaay we go.” 
There were nearly twenty to choose from, softsuits and scale-
suits. Trent ignored the softsuits; it left six scalesuits. Of the six 
only three were tall enough for him, and one of those was too 
tall, loonie size. He took down one of the scalesuits from the 
hook it hung on and glanced at the readout on the lifeplant; it 
had not been recharged since the last time it had been used, and 
was good for only four to four and a half hours of air. He was 
about to put the suit back when he heard the distant echo of 
boots slamming into the hard tile surface of the corridor. Trent 
pivoted to his right, looking back the way he had come. 
Vance. Of course it was Vance. Vance the vampire. He moved 
toward Trent at a staggering trot; Trent guessed he had five 
seconds. 
Trent stepped to the right, pulled an autoshot modified for 
vacuum use from the rack of weapons. He hoped it was loaded; 
no time to find out. He took three steps backward, into the air-
lock, holding the scalesuit in one hand and the autoshot in the 
other. 
Vance had reached the entrance to the changing room, the 
place where the corridor widened out. 
Trent braced the autoshot against his hip and fired without 
aiming, saw the shots strike Vance and knock him backward. At 
that distance their impact did little more than slow the cyborg, 
but that little was enough; Trent propped the autoshot at the 
side of the airlock and slapped the pressure pad to close the in-
ner airlock door. There was another pressure pad immediately 
beneath that one marked Lock, and yet another marked Depres-
surize. 
The airlock door was a solid sheet of metal with a glassite 
panel in the center, rather than the more versatile but some-
what flimsier memory plastic that was in use elsewhere in the 
base. Through the moving glassite Trent could see Vance regain 

Moran  387 
 
his feet, rage stamped impossibly vivid on the stiff cyborg fea-
tures. The autoshot blasts Trent had sent at him had penetrated 
the tough Elite skin; blood dripped down Vance’s face, made 
dark damp places on his combat fatigues. 
The inner airlock door finished closing; Trent touched the 
pressure pad marked Lock. Trent ran his finger down the seal 
on the scalesuit’s front and the scalesuit opened for him, split 
down the seam. Trent did not expect to need the boots again, 
and it would save him time getting into the scalesuit; he kicked 
them off, one after the other. 
Vance’s features appeared for a moment in the glassite, van-
ished. 
The airlock door began to slide open again. 
Trent stared at the door without comprehension. He touched 
the pressure pad marked Lock once more; the door continued to 
slide open, and then Trent saw Vance’s fingers, his incredibly 
strong hands, clutching at the edge of the opening door. Trent 
heard himself screaming suddenly, a raw violent sound without 
words or meaning. The autoshot had found its way into his 
hands again and Trent aimed it and pumped one round at the 
spot where Mohammed Vance’s fingers protruded beyond the 
edge of the door. There was a deep bellow of anger and pain, and 
the door slid shut once more. 
Trent pivoted 180 degrees, took a deep breath and held it, 
opened the magazine on the autoshot and did it without giving 
himself time to think about all the truly excellent reasons to do 
anything but what he was going to. 
He wasted the magazine in a single booming roll of thunder 
against the outer airlock door. 
The airlock door exploded out of its track. Ricocheting pellets 
struck Trent everywhere, from his ankles to the top of his 
skull—one pellet struck him just below the brow over his right 
eye, missing the eye but tearing the skin above it badly. His ears 
popped as the wind shrieked by him; death pressure was almost 
instantaneous. Trent turned, aware of the bizarre pain in his 
eyes and ears, in time to see the emergency airlock doors slam 
themselves shut and locked. Not even Vance would be able to 

388  Tales 
open them while the huge pressure differential existed between 
the changing room and the interior of the airlock. 
Incredible amounts of blood fogged his vision. His eyes stung. 
Trent found the scalesuit by touch, pulled it on quickly. The suit 
sealed itself automatically all the way up to his neck; Trent 
blinked blood away from the surface of his eyes repeatedly, 
found his helmet and pulled it on. The airplant kicked in imme-
diately once the helmet ring had sealed; Trent let go of the 
breath he had been holding in one explosive exhalation. There 
was a sudden flare of amazing pain in his right ear. A burst ear-
drum, probably; the pain did not subside, did not lessen, but af-
ter several seconds had passed and it got no worse Trent knew 
that he would be able to stand it. 
There was barely space to squeeze by the shattered remains 
of the outer airlock door. For a moment Trent thought he was 
stuck, and then he popped free, out into the bright sunshine. 
The catapult at Jules Verne was in a small crater nestled in-
side the larger Verne crater, two kilometers from the base’s 
north airlock. 
Trent pushed himself into a fast walk, then into a trot. 
He thought about the fact that there were other airlocks ser-
vicing the base, and that Vance was probably suiting up at one 
right now. 
He ran. 
HE HAD COVERED, by his best guess, perhaps a kilometer. His 
breath came short; for the first time in his life that Trent could 
remember he was seriously out of breath, unable to draw as 
much oxygen into his lungs as his body required. The airplant 
hummed loudly in his ears, but even so it was too hot inside the 
scalesuit and he felt his sweat making the scalesuit slippery 
around him. 
Vance’s voice came to Trent over Channel 8, the PKF emer-
gency band. 
“Trent?” 
Trent loped in long, steady strides. “Yes?” 
“Look behind you.” 

Moran  389 
 
“I know that trick, Vance.” 
“I’m not far behind you, Trent. Wait for me. I’ll be there in a 
bit.” 
The regolith flowed by beneath Trent. He kept his eyes down, 
on the terrain, looking out for rocks, rough spots. It was as much 
as his life was worth to trip. 
Vance’s voice was smooth, deep and even. Trent hated him 
for not breathing heavily. “We’ve locked down the launch 
mechanism, Trent. Physically locked it down and removed the 
capsules from the queue servicing it. There are two Elite guard-
ing the rail; even if you are still controlling the LINK transput-
ers you will never get one of the capsules up onto the rail to 
launch it.” 
Trent did not dare look back. He wondered how close Vance 
actually was. “I know what I’m doing.” 
“And what is that?” 
Trent spared the energy to laugh, made the laugh loud 
enough that Vance was sure to hear it. “Magic.” 
Silence from Vance. 
The edge of the crater came into view, and Trent slowed, 
came to a complete stop five meters from the edge. He looked 
down over a fifty meter drop, into the crater where the catapult 
began. It ran away from him in a series of superconductor rings, 
ran ten kilometers out toward the horizon. 
Vance’s voice came again in Trent’s ears. “There’s no way 
down, Trent.” 
“Really.” There was a trail leading down the side of the cra-
ter, off four hundred meters or more to Trent’s right. He turned 
at last, looked behind him. A single pressure suited figure was 
two hundred and fifty or three hundred meters away from him, 
moving with the improbably long and fast bouncing strides that 
only a PKF Elite could attain. There were other figures behind 
him, only tiny specks in the distance. 
Trent turned back, looked out over the edge of the crater. 
There was no way he could possibly reach the trail before Vance 
caught up with him, and even if he’d been able to do that it 
would have been impossible to reach the mass driver. 

390  Tales 
He walked a few meters along the edge of the crater, over the 
fifty meter drop. He walked without hurry, trying to see if there 
was any place where an enterprising young man might try to 
climb down. 
There was not. 
Trent turned again to face Mohammed Vance. Sixty meters 
away. “I used this one on Emile, Vance. It was magic last time—
want to see it?” Vance was not thirty meters away, slowing now 
so that he would not overshoot and run out over the lip of the 
crater, out over the long drop. He slowed still more, moving to-
ward Trent with an autoshot clutched in the right hand of his 
scalesuit. 
Twenty meters now. 
Trent turned back to the crater, to the edge. 
The thought threw itself through the back of his mind in a 
bright quick flicker: 
Fifty meters. Half the length of a football field. In one sixth 
gee, though, only a little over eight meters on Earth. 
By Harry. Not even three stories. 
He took a step forward and jumped. 
The ground took a very long time to come up and touch him. 
 
30. 
HE COULD NOT have been unconscious for any great length of 
time. 
In the darkness Vance’s voice was the gentle caress of a 
lover. “I’m coming to kill you, Trent.” 
Trent screamed at the sound of Vance’s voice. 
He opened his eyes. 
He was lying flat on his back at the bottom of the cliff. There 
was the familiar bright, sharp pain in his right knee, and he was 
having more difficulty seeing. For a moment he wondered if he’d 
given himself a concussion; then he blinked again and a film of 
blood came away from the surface of his eyes. 

Moran  391 
 
He rolled slowly to his hands and knees, pushed his way to 
his feet using a small boulder at the side of the crater wall for 
support. He sagged back and sat on the boulder for a while, look-
ing at the world around him. 
Half a kilometer away, Mohammed Vance was an ant moving 
down the trail that led down into the crater. The sight of him 
brought a last desperate rush of adrenaline out of nowhere. 
Trent lurched to his feet. His legs shook and he could not feel 
anything below his knees. He tried to run but could not, could 
not even trot. He walked, staggering at times, depending more 
on the scalesuit’s servos than on his own muscles to keep the 
heavy metal suit moving across the regolith. Once he fell and got 
up again, walking like a drunken SpaceFarer toward the first 
ring of the mass driver. The scene was dreamy and unreal. He 
looked off to his right, and saw that Vance had reached the foot 
of the crater wall and was bounding toward him with an auto-
shot in one hand. Vance tripped and fell, a long slow-motion fall, 
tumbling across the crater floor. It was very funny and Trent 
laughed and laughed. He stood motionless, laughing hysterically 
at the sight of Commissionaire Mohammed Vance of the PKF 
Elite, scrabbling in the dirt for the autoshot he planned to kill 
Trent with. 
“Stop that!” Trent shouted at himself. “That’s not funny.” He 
wanted to slap himself in the face, like Curly in an old Three 
Stooges movie, but the helmet prevented it. 
He lurched on toward the mass driver. 
Put one foot forward. Very good. Now the other. Faster. Yes, 
that’s it. Faster. What was the old Speedfreak slogan—yes. 
Faster, faster, faster, until the thrill of speed overcomes the fear 
of death. 
A two hundred meter stretch separated the two PKF Elite 
guarding the swatter from the first of the mass driver’s rings. 
The two Elite could see Trent clearly, must have been able to, 
but they made no motion toward him. They were Elite; they had 
been assigned to prevent Trent from reaching the launch 
mechanism, and that they would do. 

392  Tales 
There was a low platform, only two meters high, that the 
rings of the mass driver were set up on. Trent found himself 
staring at the side of the platform, and looked up to see the 
huge, twenty-five meter ring staring down at him. He reached 
up over his head and grasped the edge of the platform. 
He stood without moving, simply breathing, trying to catch 
his breath. He considered surrendering; for the first time it 
seemed like a truly good idea. They’d shoot him, put him before 
a Peaceforcer firing squad, and then he wouldn’t be tired any 
longer, wouldn’t be feeling the impossible pain ... 
Trent heaved, pulled himself up onto the platform in a single 
desperate spasm. He lay flat on his back on the platform, look-
ing up at the bright stars, struggling to hang onto his aware-
ness, to remain conscious. After what seemed an eternity he 
struggled to his knees, held himself on his hands and knees for a 
moment, and then pushed his way up to his feet. He wavered 
back and forth, swaying, and turned slowly in a 360 degree cir-
cle, looking at the world. Vance was on the platform with him, 
but at the far end, with the two Elite who had watched Trent 
stagger across the crater floor. 
Vance started toward Trent, walking down the length of the 
long platform with the autoshot clutched in his right hand. He 
did not hurry, merely walked, slowly, carefully. “Trent?” 
“Yes.” 
“Are you ready to surrender yet?” 
“No.” 
“Ah.” A football field’s length separated them. Vance shifted 
the autoshot up to the shoulder of his pressure suit. The image 
that struck Trent was straight out of a Western sensable, the 
marshal striding down Main Street, trusty Winchester in hand, 
to kick some serious Bad Guy butt. 
Trent took two steps backward. If he turned his head back-
ward, to the left, he could see the first of the superconductor-
wrapped catapult rings. 
Vance was simply walking, autoshot pointed at interstellar 
space, watching Trent. “The other Elite will be here shortly, 
Trent.” 

Moran  393 
 
Trent stepped backward again, until he was just about five 
meters in front of the overarching loop of the first magnet. 
“There are no capsules ready for launch. Any SpaceFarer 
craft foolish enough to attempt a landing will be destroyed by 
Space Force. Surrender yourself now; if you wait until my Elite 
have surrounded you I cannot guarantee you will survive your 
capture.” Vance paused, stood motionless twenty meters away 
from Trent. “They are—understandably unnerved by the events 
of the last half hour.” 
“I’m not surrendering, Vance.” 
Vance’s voice was weary, sounded as tired as Trent felt. 
“Very well. I’ll kill you then.” 
“No, you won’t. You’re missing the point, Vance. I’m smart.” 
Through the softsuit Vance wore Trent saw Vance’s posture 
change, saw Vance get it; suddenly the man stood very straight, 
quiveringly alert, the autoshot dropping slowly toward Trent. 
Trent could almost see the thoughts clicking away inside the 
man, not twenty meters away in the bright Lunar sunlight. 
Vance finally spoke, in the thickest French accent Trent had 
ever heard from him. “You must be out of your mind.” 
“I did the math, Vance. It works.” Fifteen, twenty—more 
Elite than Trent could count were pouring over the edge of the 
crater wall, bounding down in huge leaps toward the launch 
platform. 
Vance leveled the autoshot. The muzzle did not waver. The 
huge cyborg’s voice echoed in Trent’s ears. “This is a mistake, 
Trent. If I do not kill you you’ll kill yourself.” 
Standing in front of the mass driver, all by himself in his 
mostly-metal scalesuit, Trent whispered, “Let’s find out.” 
For his life and his freedom, with the last energy he had in 
him, he leapt straight up. 
Into the space before the open catapult ring. 
Through his inskin he said, Launch. 
The barrel of the autoshot erupted into light, hammered 
round after round into the armored chest of Trent’s rising scale-
suit— 

394  Tales 
—and then God’s Own Sledgehammer struck him at ten gees 
over every square centimeter of his body. 
 
31. 
THE CALM, DISTANT voice said, “He’s actually alive?” 
The nearer voice, female, irritated, did not let the comment 
interrupt her diagnosis. “—fractured tibia, two cracked ribs, 
badly dislocated knee, punctured lung, death pressure damage 
to both lungs, both ears, both eyes—” 
With an amazing effort, Trent pried his eyes open. 
He was certain that he was alive; death could not possibly be 
this painful. He was in some small craft—not the Vatsayama, 
the ship was not nearly large enough. 
A red-haired woman was bent over him, doing things to him 
that merged into the general wash of the pain. 
The distant voice came again. “That was the craziest thing I 
ever saw.” 
Trent tried to focus on the person who had made the com-
ment. The croak of his voice was barely audible even to himself. 
“You too? You really never saw one of those guys who ties up 
balloons into the shapes of animals?” 
The darkness claimed him again. 
HE AWOKE to numbness. 
He was strapped into an acceleration couch, under high and 
varying thrust; three and a half gee, something like that. His 
couch was immediately behind the pilot’s chair. The pilot was 
sitting up; Trent could see the back of his head. 
Trent’s voice was slurred. “Who are you?” 
“You’re awake.” 
Rocket scientist, Trent thought vaguely. “Who are you?” 
“Martin Sedlow. Skipper of the Jack of Shadows, crew of two, 
me and my wife Marianne.” 
“Where’s the Vatsayama?” 

Moran  395 
 
“Couldn’t make it. Space Force is swarming over Luna. The 
Jack of Shadows is a stealth ship, painted black, no radar profile 
to speak of. The Fat Sam’s a big ship; when you contracted, no-
body had any idea you were going to kick up such a fuss down-
stairs.” 
Trent considered that. 
“Also,” Sedlow continued, “it was kind of a weird contract. 
Pick up a man from Lunar orbit? Without a spaceship? And then 
when Space Force ended up sitting shiva in high orbit over Far-
side...” His voice drifted back to Trent. “Sid wanted to cancel; 
would’ve if you hadn’t paid K’Hin already.” 
Trent had to gather strength to make himself heard. “You’re 
taking me all the way to Mars?” 
“Assuming Space Force doesn’t get any closer.” 
“We’re being chased?” 
“Yeah. They’re about twenty-two hundred kilometers back, 
and gaining. They’ve been trying to lay a laser on us as well, and 
have twice; that’s why thrust is so erratic.” 
Trent’s throat was horribly dry. “This was supposed to be a 
fast ship. I paid for a fast ship.” 
Sedlow was silent for a moment. “The Jack of Shadows is a 
torch. It’s pretty fast.” Another pause. “I do have something up 
my sleeve if they don’t give up the chase pretty damn quick.” 
Trent sighed. “Good.” 
“No, not really.” Sedlow’s spoke absent-mindedly. “If I use it I 
have to replace the rear quarter of the ship when we reach 
Mars. Radiation damage. Ever hear of the Orion maneuver?” 
“Oh, no.” 
“You have heard of it.” 
The maneuver is simple. Take a small thermonuclear explo-
sive. The operative word is small. The larger the ship is, the bet-
ter Orion works. On any ship below the size of a Space Force 
troop carrier, you kill the torch and load the thermonuclear ex-
plosive into the fusion chamber. 
Then you detonate it. The explosion will give the vessel a 
kick in the pants that cannot be achieved by any other means. 
Usually the ship survives. 

396  Tales 
Martin Sedlow said finally, “Damn.” 
“What is it?” 
“I don’t think they’re going to break off.” 
“They’re kind of pissed at me.” 
“No.” Sedlow called back. “Marianne!” 
Her voice came from somewhere behind Trent. “Ready!” 
The ship’s impact field came on, and suddenly Trent found it 
very difficult to breath. 
Sedlow said, “Trent?” 
Trent gasped, “Yes?” 
“Take a deep breath.” 
THE NEXT TIME Trent awoke they were under high but smooth 
acceleration. 
Marianne had come forward to check on Trent. For the first 
time Trent really noticed her. She was plain featured, red hair 
drawn back into a long ponytail, but with a quality of kindness 
so clearly marked on her features that under other circum-
stances Trent would have found her attractive. She sat in a 
floating chair with supports for her arms and head. 
“Hello,” said Trent. 
Her voice was low, gentle. “How do you feel?” 
He surprised himself by how very, very bad he sounded. 
“Tired. I’m so tired.” 
Marianne nodded sympathetically, carefully. “I’m not sur-
prised.” 
Trent barely heard her. “This keeps happening to me, I don’t 
know why. Getting hurt like this.” He was silent for a moment, 
his vision drifting cheerfully, insanely in and out of focus. 
“Vance was there, and Melissa was there again. And I had a 
dream that Ralf was alive. But that’s silly you know, he can’t 
be.” 
The woman said awkwardly, “You’ll get better. The damage 
isn’t critical; and there are very good medbots at Phobos CityS-
tate, as good as any on Earth. We’ll be there in less than a 
week.” 

Moran  397 
 
Trent closed his eyes again. “Good. That’s good.” How long he 
lay that way, eyes closed beneath the stiff acceleration, he never 
knew. His senses faded away when he did not concentrate on 
maintaining the link with Realtime. The Crystal Wind beckoned 
distantly; there was the ship’s computer to explore, including a 
library of SpaceFarer literature. Two wide-beam masers were 
wavering in and out of focus on the Jack of Shadows, one of 
them broadcasting, over and over again, a message from Mo-
hammed Vance; the other line was strangely silent. 
The message was in Mohammed Vance’s immeasurably grim 
voice. 
It said simply, I am going to catch you and I am going to 
break you. 
catch you and I am going to break you. 
going to break you. 
break you. 
Trent let go of the world and embraced the darkness. 
THE MUSIC brought him back. 
A man singing about pain. 
 
In dark and vision strong 
This night becomes our day 
This chill becomes our warmth 
This stillness is our say 
  
“What a horrible noise,” Trent said clearly. 
The SpaceFarer twisted back to look at him. “Say again?” 
“That terrible music. What is it?” 
“From an old movie. A comedy,” Martin explained. “It’s very 
funny.” 
A woman sang the next chorus, her voice sad and plaintive, 
hurting. 
 
They asked if he would heal them 
And he answered that he dreamed of rainbows 
Refracted from the tears 

398  Tales 
that lingered in their eyes 
They asked then if he could 
He said that even ravens die 
 
Trent said softly, “This is going to be one of those long, long 
trips, isn’t it?” 
The SpaceFarer looked at him curiously. “Tell me something. 
I’ve been auditing the news Boards, and some of them—look, did 
you really walk through a wall?” 
Trent did not answer the man; he was not certain whether 
the voice he heard was imagined, or spoken aloud, or perhaps 
something he heard through his inskin; the voice, the very soft 
voice, almost overridden by the sound of the music, whispered, 
“Good luck, Boss.” 
Trent looked at Martin Sedlow; Sedlow seemed somewhat 
lost in his own thoughts, simply observing Trent as though he 
suspected Trent were some sort of wild animal, probably a 
Peaceforcer. 
Trent stared around at the small, empty ship. Ralf? 
Aloud, Trent said softly, “Ralf? Is that you?” 
Sedlow studied Trent, scrutinizing him as though he found 
Trent’s sanity distinctly in question. 
Trent said, “Did you hear that?” 

    
 
Epilog 
SIXTY-TWO THOUSAND years before the birth of Yeshua ha Notzri, 
whom later humans knew as Jesus the Christ, the Time Wars 
ended, for reasons which no sentient being now knows. With 
that ending, the Continuing Time began. 
In the Continuing Time of which I write, nearly a thousand 
years after the birth of the man named Trent, mankind had 
spread to the stars, and attained a position of pre-eminence 
among the known sentient species of the Continuing Time. 
In that time, four humans had come to be legend, legend so 
great that even non-human sentients knew of them, of the 
dreams and myths that had accumulated about their names. 
Those four were Trent; Daniel, who was the first November; 
Ola who was Lady Blue; and Camber Tremodian. It was said of 
Trent that he could walk through walls, and they called him the 
Uncatchable; it was said of November that he was insane even 
by human standards; and of Camber Tremodian that he was not 
human at all. 
Of Ola Blue they knew only that she had once lived, and 
died; that she was death itself, and sorrow. 
—The Name Historian, Looking Backwards From the Year 
3000, published 3018 Asimov. 

