 
EMERALD EYES 
A TALE OF THE CONTINUING TIME 
 
 
DANIEL KEYS MORAN 

This is a work of fiction. None of the characters in it are real 
people and any resemblance to anybody, living or dead, is a coin-
cidence. 
 
It is the author’s intention that this work should be freely 
downloadable, copyable, and shareable in electronic format. It 
may not be reproduced, shared, or transmitted for a fee by any 
party to whom the author has not contractually granted permis-
sion. The author retains all other rights.  
 
Emerald Eyes Copyright © 1987 
by Daniel Keys Moran 
 
The Star Copyright © 1998 
by Daniel Keys Moran

 
Dedicated to 
 
The Tales of the Continuing Time are dedicated to a whole 
bunch of writers – everybody I ever read, according to one re-
viewer. That seems fair. 
 
This book is dedicated to Amy Stout-Moran. She was the edi-
tor at Bantam Books who first bought this novel; she is the 
mother of my sons and the love of my life. 


 
EMERALD EYES 
A Tale of the Continuing Time 
 
The gods can either take away evil from the world and will 
not, or, being willing to do so cannot…. If they have the will 
to remove evil and cannot, then they are not omnipotent. If 
they can but will not, then they are not benevolent. If they 
are neither willing nor able, they are neither omnipotent 
nor benevolent. 
 
Epicurus, 300 BC 


 
The Ancestors 
2029-2053 Gregorian 


 
 
1. 
YOU WILL HAVE heard the story of Carl Castanaveras; of Suz-
anne Montignet and Malko Kalharri; of our ancestors. They 
made plans for they were human, as you and I; and the uni-
verse, which cared no more for them than for us, struck them 
down. Its tool was nothing less than a pair of Gods of the 
Zaradin Church, one of them myself, fighting a battle in a war 
that was ended nearly sixty-five thousand years before they 
were born. 
I have told this story before, and I shall someday tell it again, 
in a different fashion; but for Now, know the story so: 
DARRYL AMNIER WAS a man without a title. 
A title makes one knowable. 
“Tell me about them,” he said. 
“Oui.” Amnier’s assistant was French; a depressingly large 
number of Unification employees were these days. “The direc-
tor’s name is Suzanne Montignet. She is French born, but ar-
rived in the United States in 2015. It is thought that her parents 
were fleeing the European theater of the War. She was fourteen 
then. We do not have accurate records for her after leaving 
France; she arrived in America a year before the Unification 
War reached that continent. Her parents were killed, apparently 
by Americans, after the War began. One would have expected 
this to turn a young girl against the country in which she found 
herself, but obviously not. When next we have accurate records 
of her, beginning in 2018, she studied under a scholarship at the 
College of the Camden Protectorate, in New Jersey. She had by 
then, and retains today, a substantially American accent. 
Though she spells her name ‘Suzanne’ she had further taken to 
pronouncing her name ‘Susan,’ in the American style, a habit 
she also retains. In 2024 she graduated with high honors; two 
years ago, her work in genetics led to her current position with 
the United Nations Advanced Biotechnology Research Labora-
tory in New Jersey, this ‘Project Superman.’ ” 

2   Tales 
 
“Don’t use that name. It’s not correct.” 
After a pause Amnier’s aide continued. “The Ministry of 
Population Control has granted her an unlimited parenting li-
cense. She seems apolitical, aside from her personal habits.” 
“By which you mean?” 
“Monsieur, she lives in Occupied America, among a proud 
people who have been, hmm, conquered? Conquered. An appar-
ent distaste for the United Nations might be expedient.” 
“Not when dealing with the United Nations purse strings.” 
“As you say.” 
“What of Malko Kalharri?” 
“What of Kalharri?” Amnier’s aide seemed to find the ques-
tion amusing. “Sir, I think there is little I can tell you that you 
do not already know about Colonel Kalharri.” 
WITH A SHOWER of gamma rays I came into existence at the fast 
end of time. 
A wind was raised with my appearance in the empty corri-
dor. Had there been any to observe they would have heard the 
sharp crack created as air was moved aside at greater than the 
speed of sound, and might have felt a brief warmth. Those with 
sharp eyes might have noticed a shadow in the fraction of an in-
stant before I moved away from the spot of my appearance. They 
would not have seen more of me. Even at my end of time they 
would have seen little to note: a human dressed all in white, 
from the boots on my feet to the white cowl that covered my 
head. Even with the visual distortion that is unavoidable when 
time is sped so drastically, men of their century would have 
found the lack of focus upon the surface of a white shadow cloak 
a striking thing. 
Of course they were not in fast time, nor could be. 
I began trudging through the air, toward my destination. The 
corridor was nearly dark; flashes of ultraviolet light marked the 
passage of X-rays, each flash illuminating the corridor like a 
small lightning. The normal visible spectrum was shifted too 
deeply into the radio to be of use to me. 

Moran   3 
 
 
I was in a hurry, pushing through the resisting atmosphere, 
and I unaccustomed to hurrying; but I was being closely followed 
by an enemy who had promised to cut my heart out and eat it—
and I believed Camber Tremodian would do it, given the chance. 
I did not intend to give him the chance. At the fast end of 
time I hurried through the slow air. 
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 12, 2029; the United Nations Advanced 
Biotechnology Research Laboratories, in New Jersey. 
He arrived from Capital City just before eight o’clock; secu-
rity let Darryl Amnier into Suzanne Montignet’s office more 
than two hours early. They were uneasy, doing it. 
But they did it nonetheless. 
He sat behind her desk, in her chair, with the lights dimmed. 
A small man, with paper-white hair and wrinkles around his 
eyes and mouth that made him look far older than he was, he 
found Montignet’s chair slightly too high for his taste. He did not 
readjust it. Her office had no window, which pleased him to the 
degree that he ever allowed himself to be pleased. A crank with 
a rifle was that much less likely to bring three quarters of a mil-
lion Credit Units’ worth of research grinding to a halt with a 
single shot. 
The decor was standardized, little different from what Am-
nier had seen in over twenty other research installations in the 
last four months. Amnier was not certain whether that sur-
prised him. From a woman of such exceptional skills, one might 
reasonably have expected anything— 
The same might be said of Malko Kalharri, the lab’s director 
of security. 
An Information Network terminal, left turned on and con-
nected to the Mead Data Central medical database, sat at atten-
tion immediately next to her desk. Amnier made a note to find 
out what sort of bill they were running up on information re-
trieval. An ornamental bookshelf against one wall held reference 
works in too excellent condition. There were no holographs, not 
even of Colonel Kalharri, who was reputed to be her lover. Nor 
were there paintings. The desk was locked. Amnier considered 

4   Tales 
 
picking it, and decided not to. There was unlikely to be anything 
inside that he would either understand or find incriminating, 
and whether he opened it or not, Montignet was certain to sus-
pect he had—which was the whole point. 
THE EMPTY CORRIDOR in which I appeared connected the sterile 
genegineers’ labs with the showers that led to the un-sterilized 
outer world, on the first floor of the New Jersey laboratories of 
the United Nations Bureau of Biotechnology Research. The en-
trance to the genegineers’ labs was through a small room with 
sealed doorways at both ends. They were not airlocks, though 
the technology of the day was sufficient to allow the use of air-
locks; indeed, at the interface between the showers and the rest 
of the installation airlocks were in use. But it was cheaper to 
keep the laboratories under a slight over-pressure; when the 
door opened, the wind, and contaminants, blew outward. 
The door swung wide, and a pair of laboratory technicians in 
white gowns and gloves strode through. The resemblance be-
tween their garb and mine brought the ghost of a smile to my 
lips. 
As they left, I, the god Named Storyteller, entered. 
SUZANNE MONTIGNET STOPPED by Malko Kalharri’s office on the 
way to her own. The lights in his office had not yet been turned 
on. Entering the room from the brightly lit hallway, Suzanne 
found it difficult to see Kalharri at first. “Malko?” 
“Yes?” The office lacked a desk; the man who was sprawled 
loosely on the couch, one oversized hand wrapped loosely around 
a steaming coffee cup, continued to watch the holotank in the 
corner of his office. Kalharri did not resemble his name, which 
he had received by way of his grandfather; he was a big blond 
man with a tan. The channel light glowed at 335; S-STR, the po-
litical news station. 
“What’s happening?” 
Malko Kalharri had been a soldier for too many years; he did 
not move quickly when the situation did not warrant it. After a 
moment he said, “The Unification Council is ‘discussing’—well, 

Moran   5 
 
 
this is the word they have used all morning for the screaming 
and threats—the feasibility of adding an amendment to their 
damned Statement of Principles, to allow the Secretary General 
to hold office for more than three four-year terms. Sarah Al-
mundsen must be turning over in her grave; the first amend-
ment ever proposed to that brilliant piece of writing being a tool 
to keep one of her more foolish successors in office for another 
term.” He shook his head. “It’s not going well; SecGen Tenerat 
didn’t think this one through, silly damn frog he is.” He paused 
a moment and without looking at her added, “No offense meant.” 
“None taken,” she said dryly. 
“Not that the opposition has prepared for it either. The Unifi-
cation Councilor for Sri Lanka opened the floor for discussion on 
the subject and so far this morning that’s been the most coher-
ent thing anybody’s said.” 
“I see.” 
Kalharri turned his head then to look at her. He grinned 
broadly. “I’ve been watching this damned box all morning. I 
tried turning up the brightness control earlier—” 
“Didn’t work.” 
“Afraid not.” He turned back to the screen. 
“Amnier’s here.” 
Kalharri took a sip from his coffee before replying. “Guards 
told me. You’re supposed to believe that he’s going through your 
documents. He’s been there for an hour already; he knows you 
don’t usually get in until 9 am, and he’ll be expecting you to 
come charging up to your office as soon as you learn he had him-
self let in to wait.” 
“Wheels within wheels. What do I do?” 
“Command,” said Kalharri, “bring coffee.” Acknowledged 
blinked in the lower right hand corner of the 3D tank. He low-
ered his voice slightly. “Amnier’s appointment isn’t until ten 
o’clock.” 
“So?” 
Filled cups and condiments appeared on the floor next to the 
couch; memory plastic raised itself up from the floor to become a 
table at Kalharri’s right hand. Kalharri took his cup and sent 

6   Tales 
 
the table gliding across the floor toward Montignet. “I don’t like 
surprises. Darryl’s the same way. Right now he’s expecting you 
to blow through your door any moment, pissed off. So, have a 
seat,” he said cheerfully, “drink your coffee and watch the politi-
cians, and make the bastard wait.” 
THE DOOR SLID aside at 10 AM. 
“What the fuck are you doing in my office?” 
Suzanne Montignet was, Darryl Amnier thought in surprise, 
an astonishing beauty. The holos in her files did her no justice. 
Her blond hair was tucked up under a net that reminded him of 
the hair net the Sisters had worn at St. Margaret Mary’s, the 
Catholic school he’d been taught at as a child. She stared at him, 
waiting for an answer. He wondered at her anger; forty-five min-
utes ago it had undoubtedly been real. Now it was simply a 
mask stamped across features that were, perhaps, slightly too 
delicate. It seemed to Amnier that she was undernourished as 
well; she must have lost five kilograms since the most recent 
holographs of her had been taken. 
Darryl Amnier rose belatedly from behind Montignet’s desk, 
removed his hat, and sketched a bow. “I am M. Amnier, here for 
my appointment.” It was his best French. 
Suzanne Montignet looked him over as though he were some-
thing unpleasant she’d found in her salad, and shook her head 
in a tired motion. She dropped the pile of folders she’d entered 
with on her desktop. “Lights,” she said in English. The fluores-
cent lamps came up bright, and Darryl Amnier realized that the 
odd gray of her eyes, that he’d assumed an error in her holo re-
productions, was their true color. “I know who you are. Do you 
usually pop into people’s offices two damned hours ahead of 
time?” 
Amnier found himself caught in the challenge of her gaze. He 
found his posture straightening. “Mademoiselle, only when I 
wish for the person with whom I am meeting to be ill at ease.” 
He shook his head. “In this instance, I regret the use of the 
technique—and have for the last half hour.” 

Moran   7 
 
 
Suzanne Montignet looked him over, and smiled wearily. She 
held out her hand. “I have,” she said softly, “been looking for-
ward to meeting you, Mister Amnier.” He took her hand, and 
was not surprised at the strength in her grip. “As has Colonel 
Kalharri.” 
SOMEDAY I WILL tell you of the life of Jorge Rodriguez. It is the 
least one can do for a man one has killed. 
It is the truth that I killed Jorge Rodriguez. 
Like all truths it is susceptible to interpretation. I had taken 
all the precautions available to me that my visit to this time 
might not cause more damage than good; but it is never possible 
to know all of what may come from a course of action. This is as 
true of a God of the Zaradin Church as of any other sentient. 
Jorge Rodriguez entered the small room with two doors only 
moments after his fellow technicians had left through the other. 
The doors were so designed that they could not both be open at 
the same time. I waited patiently as the man came through the 
door leading to the laboratories proper. There was time for me, 
despite the poor quality of ultraviolet light, to puzzle out his 
name badge, which was mounted on a piece of dark plastic with 
a strip of a clear film upon it. He entered as the door had just 
opened, and then stood in the doorway, preventing my passage, 
as the door slid shut again. It should not have been a problem; 
he would continue through the next door, and I would open the 
door to the laboratories after he was gone. It would appear to 
those inside as if the door had slid aside of its own accord; un-
usual, but given the relatively primitive stage of their technol-
ogy, not be so strange as to cause excitement. A glitch, they 
would call it. 
But Jorge Rodriguez did not leave immediately. As long min-
utes fled by on my personal time scale, Rodriguez slumped back 
against the door to the laboratories. With excruciating slowness 
he reached inside his coat and withdrew a small cylinder, which 
he placed within his mouth. As far away as the small room 
would allow me to get, I paced slowly back and forth to prevent 

8   Tales 
 
my image from flickering into an instant of appearance. It must 
have raised ever so faint a breeze. 
Rodriguez puffed on the cylinder, his back to the door 
through which I desperately needed to pass. It was likely to-
bacco or marijuana, two preeminent inhalants of the period. I 
could not recall how long a typical cylinder of either inhalant 
should have taken to be consumed, but it was soon apparent 
that whatever the period was would be far longer than I had 
available. 
I came down into Time. 
It was instantaneous for me; for Rodriguez I appeared as a 
frozen statue for most of a second. His eyes were opened wide in 
a surprise that would soon be terror, and he was drawing in air 
to shout. I reached past the rising wave of fear, into his fore-
brain, and sent him into sleep as gently as I was able. His body 
sagged and his breath exhaled in a loud sigh as he fell. I caught 
him before he had struck the ground, and carried him out 
through the door into the corridor. In Time I erased his memo-
ries of me, and in Time I returned to the small room where I had 
killed Jorge Rodriguez. I touched the pressure pad that opened 
the door into the laboratories, and as it opened I ascended into 
fast time once more. 
The small badge Jorge Rodriguez wore had turned from clear 
to black while he stood in that room with me. I had lived a thou-
sand times as fast as he; the heat of my body had struck him as 
gamma rays for more than long enough. 
“A REMARKABLY IMPERSONAL room, this.” Amnier stood in front of 
her bookcase, ran one finger down the spine of a text by de Nos-
tri on fine neural structure. “No paintings, no holos...” He 
watched her as he spoke. She held herself like a man, shoulders 
squared back. 
Montignet moved by him, to seat herself behind her desk. 
She pressed her thumb against the lock and slid open the filing 
drawer. “I’m rarely here. I generally work downstairs at the lab. 
I have a desk there, and there are cots for when we draw night 
duty.” From the filing drawer she took two folders, and closed 

Moran   9 
 
 
the drawer again. The drawer locked automatically. “The books 
are mostly gifts.” Amnier turned back to her. “The de Nostri was 
from de Nostri; the man’s an incredible egotist.” 
“Ah,” said Amnier, and Suzanne had to repress a grin at how 
eagerly he leapt upon the opening, “an egotist, yes, but a suc-
cessful egotist.” 
Suzanne Montignet did smile then, and watched as her smile 
struck Amnier. His features grew still. So he was not, as Malko 
thought, attracted only to boys. “I would not say that our work 
here has been a failure.” 
“But neither has it produced a clear success. De Nostri has—
children, if that is the correct word—who are nearly two years of 
age.” 
“Children,” said Suzanne Montignet with some anger, “is not 
the correct word. Mister, any fool can produce monsters. Mixing 
variant gene sets is not so very difficult. Slapping together genes 
from humans and leopards, among reputable scientists, that’s 
known as playing mix and match. What we’re doing is more dif-
ficult, and you know it. The foeti we have designed here, from 
the ground up, are human. They will be human children.” 
“But they do not live.” 
“Not—” Not yet, she had started to say; Suzanne Montignet 
clamped down upon her anger. It was almost as though Malko 
were there in the room with her, whispering in her ear. Amnier 
delighted in argument; directness was the way to handle him. 
“Did you,” she asked slowly, “come here to shut us down?” 
“I have come,” said the small man, “to decide.” 
They were still staring at each other when the alarms went 
off. 
IT WAS STRANGE, looking down upon the bundle of amino acids 
that was my ancestor. 
They had assembled him with lasers and viruses, in a proc-
ess that the histories said would be obsolete within a decade. It 
was a primitive process, far likelier to fail than otherwise; the 
histories were unclear as to how many times the technique had 
ever functioned properly in the decade it was employed. 

10   Tales 
 
There are moments when Destiny reaches out to trace a fin-
ger down my cheek, with the touch of a lover. I do not know if it 
is the same for Camber Tremodian; he is an immensely practical 
man in some ways. The tiny bit of matter before me was the 
great-grandfather of the first of my line; and it was right that it 
was with the Gift of the House of November that I reached out, 
and took the broken long chains of dead matter, and brought 
them together in the pattern that would let Carl Castanaveras 
live. 
ROBIN MACINTYRE finished reading off status reports in a dull 
monotone. “We hustled the decon unit downstairs, and—” 
“Radiation?” 
“All over the place. Low levels most places, but—Jorge’s 
badge was black.” For the first time Suzanne understood Robin’s 
grief stricken expression; Robin’s closest friend on the staff was 
a dead man. “They’re taking Jorge to the hospital; I’m going to 
log out and go with him.” 
“No.” It was Amnier, standing on the other side of the Infor-
mation Network terminal. He could not see either Robin or the 
status reports that filled the other half of the screen. “You can’t 
take him out of here.” 
Suzanne was not sure Robin had heard Amnier; she’d 
slapped down on the silence point as soon as he’d begun speak-
ing. “Why the hell not?” 
“If his badge is black,” said Amnier patiently, “he’s dead re-
gardless. I saw enough of that during the war; so did Malko. 
Check with him if you must; medical technology hasn’t advanced 
as much as all that in the last decade. Taking him to the hospi-
tal will be of use to nobody except this Robin person, and it will, 
by releasing knowledge of this radiation contamination into the 
general populace, place a potent weapon into the hands of those 
who do wish to close you down.” 
Robin was gesturing on the terminal’s screen. Suzanne lifted 
her thumb from the pressure point. “One moment, Robin.” She 
pressed down again. “How so?” 

Moran   11 
 
 
“It will mean that you are either incompetent enough to have 
allowed radioactives to escape from confinement—” 
“We don’t even use radioactives.” 
“Irrelevant. Or it will mean that you have been targeted by 
ideologs.” Amnier shook his head. “The Unification Council 
would find that an excellent excuse to shut you down. We ha-
ven’t the resources to guard an installation of questionable 
worth against a group of determined ideologs.” 
An override suddenly flashed on Suzanne’s terminal. “Malko 
here. I’ll meet you at the showers. Bring Amnier.” The override 
ended, and Robin’s form appeared again in the terminal. 
“This is,” said Suzanne, the instant the thought struck her, 
“a fascinating coincidence, that this should happen while you 
are visiting.” 
Darryl Amnier smiled at her, the first true smile she had 
seen from him. He spoke with chilling precision. “I have thought 
that myself.” 
TERENCE KNIESSEN, a tall fat man with a shock of red hair, met 
them at the showers. He was wearing his head bubble—barely 
visible refraction ran five centimeters around the perimeter of 
his skull—but his gloves had been removed. Malko was already 
there, undressing to enter the chemical showers; Amnier 
flinched visibly at the sight of the long laser scars that criss-
crossed Kalharri’s body. Almost hidden among the marks of the 
lasers were the small round puckered bullet scars. Kalharri did 
not look at Amnier; he entered the first shower in the row as 
they began undressing. 
Sweat dripped off Kniessen. He took Amnier’s coat, babbling 
instructions at the man. “—and then gargle with the mouth-
wash, you’ll have to swallow the second mouthful. I’ll meet you 
on the other side and show you how to—” 
Suzanne interrupted him. “Terence.” 
He stopped speaking instantly and glanced at her sideways—
he was more of a prude than most. “Yes ma’am?” 
“You took your gloves off.” 

12   Tales 
 
Terence let out a low moan. “Oh, damn,” he swore and began 
stripping off his clothes. 
THE FIRST THING Amnier noticed as they cycled through the dou-
ble doors that led into the labs was the faint smell of ozone. The 
bubble let filtered air through, and it was not supposed to filter 
anything so small as an ozone molecule; but before he could be 
certain about the smell, he was led through the inner door and 
found himself upon a catwalk looking down on chaos. 
Kalharri was down there, with a pair of technicians wearing 
decon badges. Only one of the decon badges bore the radiating 
triangle insignia that meant its wearer had passed training to 
deal with radioactive materials. The tech who wore that badge 
was probably paid twice as much as the tech who did not; even 
today, over eleven years after the end of the Unification War, 
there were not enough skilled decon techs to go around. 
The lab was huge, easily the largest room in what was not a 
small building. This, thought Amnier, is where they work. The 
things that had been missing everywhere else were in abun-
dance here; comic strips had been inscribed in the glowpaint, 
and decorative calendars were hung in three different places. 
The dozen or so desks scattered across the place were personal-
ized to various degrees; one that caught his eye held the holo-
graph of a ballerina, turning eternally on point. 
The laboratory was the first place Amnier had seen in the 
building where glowpaint gave an approximation of yellow 
sunlight. 
A huge laser hung nose-down from the ceiling, pointing at a 
table that bore a ceramic depression nearly a meter in diameter. 
In the middle of the depression was a small transparent con-
tainer that had been clamped into position; tubes so small that 
Amnier could barely see them from where he stood led to the 
container. 
Amnier made his way down from the catwalk slowly. Mon-
tignet was already down at floor level. One of the technicians 
was showing her listings from the devices attached to the trans-

Moran   13 
 
 
parent container; Montignet rose from the computer, snapped, 
“Ellie, get me nutrient flow now,” and went back to the readouts. 
Amnier reached the floor and found Malko Kalharri there, 
waiting for him. Kalharri stood with his arms crossed, pale blue 
eyes calm and rather relaxed. “Hello, Darryl.” 
Amnier sat down abruptly on a step four from the bottom. It 
put his eyes almost on a level with Kalharri’s. “Hello, Malko. 
How have you been?” 
“Well. And yourself?” 
Amnier shrugged. “Busy. I work. What is happening?” 
“There was a source of radiation.” Kalharri eyed Amnier 
speculatively. “It’s gone now. Vanished. We haven’t been able to 
track it down.” 
“Assuming,” said Amnier, “that you yourself have not caused 
this excitement—and I do not put it past you—please accept my 
assurance that I am not responsible for whatever has happened 
here today.” He looked directly at Malko. “Did you let them take 
this Jorge person to the hospital?” 
“Of course not.” 
“It grieves you that you could not.” 
“It would have made Robin feel better.” 
“But he would still die.” 
“Yeah.” 
Amnier watched the technicians in silence for a moment as 
they rushed about at errands that he, and he suspected Kalharri 
also, found incomprehensible. “If a living fetus comes out of this, 
and what I am hearing leads me to believe it might, I shall find 
it all most suspect.” 
Amnier thought a smile might have touched Kalharri’s lips 
for an instant. “You’re flattering yourself, Darryl.” 
“Perhaps. It is a danger in my profession.” Amnier paused. 
“Our profession, I might say. You have not forgotten the way 
things work, at any rate. I have not needed to say a startling 
number of things.” 
“I’ve been thinking,” Kalharri said, “about what you said to 
me the last time we talked.” 

14   Tales 
 
Amnier stared at him. “Malko, that was seventeen years 
ago.” 
“I think you may have been right. The United States was in 
trouble.” Kalharri spoke slowly, almost reluctantly. “I mean po-
litically. In other ways it was not. The Unification Council—the 
entire superstructure your Sarah Almundsen designed—it is, in 
some ways, more vigorous than what we had; certainly better 
than what the Russians had, or the Chinese. Perhaps this Unifi-
cation is better. Perhaps it was worth the deaths that came 
about in the War.” 
“It’s good of you to say so.” 
“Darryl.” 
“Yes?” 
“You are—all of you—already losing sight of what you fought 
for. I did not agree with you, and today I am not certain that I 
was right—but your government is being overrun by the bar-
barians. It’s already happening.” He paused. “I don’t know if 
Americans will tolerate it.” 
Amnier said gently, “You’re too much of a philosopher, 
Malko. It was charming when we were boys, but it helped you 
lose the War.” 
“—in republics there is greater life, greater hatred, and more 
desire for vengeance; they do not and cannot cast aside the mem-
ory of their ancient liberty.” 
Amnier looked at him quizzically. “The Prince,” he said after 
a moment. “The Old Man would have been proud of you.” He 
smiled distantly. “In the same work it says, this is a paraphrase, 
a city used to liberty can be more easily held by means of its citi-
zens than in any other way, if you wish to preserve it.” 
Malko nodded. “Yes. It says that.” 
Amnier did not answer. There was a silence that continued 
until Suzanne left her work station and returned to where they 
waited. Amnier sat with his eyes unfocused, looking off into a 
distance that did not exist; Kalharri stood, eyes fixed on Am-
nier’s face. Neither saw what they looked upon. 

Moran   15 
 
 
“Malko?” Amnier looked up at the woman, flushed with 
strong emotion. Montignet continued, “We have one. It’s going to 
live.” 
“Fascinating,” murmured Amnier. He looked down at the 
steel stairway he sat on. When he looked up again there was a 
flat snapping sound, like a whip being cracked. For an instant 
Amnier stared directly at the flat black cutout of a man, merely 
the outline of a shape. I doubt he ever again fully believed his 
own eyes after that; Camber Tremodian was gone before Amnier 
could be certain of what he had seen. 
None of the others appeared to have noticed. “Which one is 
it?” asked Malko quietly. 
“Number fifty-five. Series C, number C; we’ve been calling it 
Charlie Chan.” 
“Do you know its sex yet?” 
“Male.” 
Malko Kalharri had not yet turned away from Darryl Am-
nier; now he came closer, squatted until his eyes were on a level 
with Amnier’s. “I think we shall name him Carl...Castanaveras, 
perhaps. Yes.” 
Amnier blinked. His mind seemed to be elsewhere. “Oh?” 
“Yes,” said Kalharri, “Castanaveras. I think it an appropriate 
name.” 
THREE DAYS AFTER my life brushed against his, Jorge Rodriguez 
died of radiation burns. 
Camber and I have kept the costs of the battle down; Jorge 
Rodriguez was only the fifth human being in sequential Time to 
die in a battle of the Time Wars. 
It might have comforted him to know that. 
Or not. 

16   Tales 
 
2. 
THREE DECADES passed. The SpaceFarers’ Collective continued 
to grow. Early in the 2030s, they established SpaceFarer colo-
nies in the Asteroid Belt. 
In the late 2030s, the United Nations began colonies in the 
Asteroid Belt, in an attempt to forestall the SpaceFarers’ Collec-
tive’s bid to assume control of the Belt. They were successful; the 
SpaceFarer colonies never flourished. Their success did them no 
good, however. The U.N. colonies were largely self-sufficient; 
with the time lags in their supply lines, they had to be. It was a 
logical result that they should find themselves more sympathetic 
toward the SpaceFarers than toward a government millions of 
kilometers away. In 2040, with support from the SpaceFarers, 
all but a half dozen of the Belt colonies declared their independ-
ence from the Unification. 
Of necessity the colonies evolved into “CityStates.” It was the 
logical basic economic unit for a society built of flying moun-
tains. 
WHEN CARL CASTANAVERAS was still a young boy, before puberty 
turned him into a Peaceforcer weapon, an officer of the United 
Nations Peace Keeping Force once asked him what he wished to 
do with his life. 
The question startled the boy. He had been raised by doctors 
and scientists and Malko Kalharri; the Peaceforcer’s question 
was not the sort of thing anyone had ever asked of him before. 
After a moment’s consideration he said, “Am I supposed to do 
something with it?” 
THERE CAN BE good mistakes. Fact and truth and history are 
rarely related. The facts are these. 
Carl Castanaveras was born on the eighteenth of September 
in the year 2030. He was named after a soldier who, fighting for 
his country, died during the Unification War; he was raised in a 
world that still bore the scars of that war. The America in which 
he was raised was an occupied country, with more Peaceforcers 

Moran   17 
 
 
than police. The war was history already by the time he was old 
enough to understand its causes. In classes he was taught about 
its great battles; how after the Battle of Yorktown, the young 
Marine Corps sergeant who was in command of what was left of 
the United States Marine Corps forced the U.N. forces to with-
draw into a neighboring city before he would agree to surrender 
his forces. In agreeing to surrender, a young Marine named Neil 
Corona produced the most memorable quote of the War: “We will 
fry under your goddamn cannon,” he said, “before a single Ma-
rine will lay down his arms in Yorktown.” 
After that war’s end, the slow task of rebuilding began. 
France, alone among the industrial nations of the time, emerged 
unscathed from the Unification War. In the years that followed 
the war, it attained a position of preeminence among the bodies 
that constituted the United Nations. 
The gene pattern that produced Carl Castanaveras was not 
successfully reproduced until April the eighteenth, in 2035, 
when a design that became Jane McConnell was successfully 
imprinted upon a sterile egg. In creating her, Suzanne Mon-
tignet localized three unique genes that Carl Castanaveras pos-
sessed and no other living human being did. Jane McConnell 
was, aside from her gender, his clone. She was the first and last 
instance in which Suzanne Montignet had to resort to relatively 
clumsy cloning techniques to ensure that the gene complex took 
properly. Johann MacArthur was brought to term late in 2036; 
unlike Jane McConnell he was a true genie, assembled gene by 
gene until a design was found that Suzanne Montignet ap-
proved. Six such others were born between 2036 and 2042. 
In 2040 Darryl Amnier was appointed to the position of 
Prosecutor General to the Unification Council. 
For over a decade the Bureau of Biotechnology Research, and 
the Peaceforcers who controlled them, thought Carl Castanav-
eras a failure. 
An interesting failure. He seemed slightly stronger than his 
muscle mass should have warranted, with greater endurance; 
but his muscle mass, even with conditioning, was not excep-

18   Tales 
 
tional. He moved with abnormal speed, and was emotionally un-
stable. 
At the age of twelve, when puberty struck him with full force, 
Carl Castanaveras awoke one day and found that he could read 
minds. 
He let others know, among them a Unification Councilor 
named Jerril Carson, who was at that time the Chairman of the 
Unification Council to supervise the Bureau of Biotechnology 
Research. That was the first mistake. By the time the other 
abilities began to manifest, he had learned enough to know that 
in knowledge there is power. As he grew older, what would be 
known, more than a thousand years later, as the Gift of the 
House of November, grew also. Carl Castanaveras learned to 
hide that which he did not wish revealed: throughout history, 
slaves have always found this a useful skill. 
They were slaves, no less so than the indentured hunters of 
twenty-third Century Tin Woodman, or the blacks of the early 
American South. After the first shakeout, the Peaceforcers had 
three facilities where their experiments in genetic engineering 
were conducted; following the death of pioneer genegineer Jean 
Louis de Nostri, the facilities were consolidated under the con-
trol of Suzanne Montignet. The slaves—the “genies”—were relo-
cated along with the research teams; and the telepaths met the 
de Nostri. 
THERE WERE TIMES when Shana de Nostri did not mind the fact 
that she was not human, but now was not one of those times. 
She sat brooding on the mat at the side of the gym as a group 
of five Peaceforcers put Carl through his paces. Her girlfriend 
Lorette was with her, and the two of them were striking enough 
that the four Peaceforcers who were not engaged with Carl kept 
sneaking glances, mostly at Shana. She was no better looking 
than Lorette, only less modestly dressed. In gross physiological 
detail they resembled human women closely enough that human 
men often found them attractive. The differences were minor 
enough that a good cosmetic biosculptor might have made them 
look human, had they desired to look human. At one point, while 

Moran   19 
 
 
he lived, Doctor de Nostri had, in a fit of conscience, offered that 
option to the de Nostri. Their tails would have had to be ampu-
tated, and their fur removed permanently; the claws would have 
been replaced with fingernails. Facial reconstruction would have 
lowered the very high cheekbones, replaced their flat, wide noses 
with noses that protruded properly. Sexually they were more 
like humans than the leopards from whom the balance of their 
genetic makeup was derived; male and female genitalia closely 
resembled those of normal humans. The females had breasts 
that would produce milk when one of the maturing seventy-
three de Nostri females finally bore children. 
The de Nostri had rejected the offer: the de Nostri were 
proud of their appearance. 
Lorette had, like most of the female de Nostri, made conces-
sions to the morals of the—mostly American—humans among 
whom they now found themselves. Her breasts were covered by 
a loose blouse, and her genitals were covered by a pair of baggy 
pants that had been altered to accommodate her tail. 
Shana was nude except for her fur. Her nipples were clearly 
visible, and a human who stared—and some had, though not 
more than once—could have made out the outline of her genita-
lia through her fur. 
She was damned if she would put on a second layer of skin 
when the weather did not require it. 
Now Carl sparred with a hulk of a Peaceforcer who had to 
outmass him two to one. Shana and Lorette were practicing 
speaking in English, rather than the French they had learned as 
children. Though most of the staff spoke understandable, hide-
ously accented French, most of the thirty or so genies with 
whom the de Nostri shared the buildings did not. It was a failing 
shared, in greater measure, by New York City’s residents. 
“I cannot see that it matters,” said Lorette primly, running 
her claws gently through the brown and white striped fur that 
covered Shana’s back and shoulders. “Talk to the telepath if you 
must, your boyfriend—” 
Shana’s muscles tensed, and she growled so quietly that no 
human and most genies who were not de Nostri would have 

20   Tales 
 
heard it. Lorette’s ears pricked slightly, and without pausing she 
continued, “—or only your friend, if you will have it that way. 
But—” 
She broke off again; the Peaceforcer sparring with Carl had 
picked the boy up and thrown him a full five meters. Shana 
sucked in her breath, and her claws unsheathed of their own ac-
cord. The boy struck the mat rolling and came to his feet run-
ning backward. The Peaceforcer was right there, a long kick 
whistling through the space the boy’s body had occupied an in-
stant before. 
For a moment the two stood facing each other, motionless, 
before engaging again, and Lorette continued speaking as 
though she had never been interrupted. “But the people in the 
city,” she said, lips drawn back from her teeth in a reflex that 
had nothing to do with a human’s smile, “animals. They stare 
so.” She stopped scratching Shana. “How is that?” 
“I still itch in all places.” 
Lorette sighed, switched to French. “What did they inject you 
with?” 
The snarl in Shana’s voice would have been audible even to a 
human. “They did not tell me, except it is supposed to make me 
strong. If I was a human, even a genie, they would have said.” 
Lorette chuckled without amusement. “If you were a human 
citizen they could not even have injected you without permis-
sion.” 
Shana was silent, watching as a somewhat smaller Peace-
forcer took over from the very large one. The boy had no time to 
catch his breath; within seconds the two were fighting, each 
wielding a meter-long rod of wood with a rounded, metal cap at 
each end. 
“Really?” 
Lorette sighed, and returned to English. “It is what Albert 
says.” 
“Albert says things just to say them,” said Shana sullenly. 
“True.” Lorette was struck by something amusing, and she 
leaned forward to whisper in Shana’s ear. “Albert told me that 
he has watched Carl spar and that he is better.” 

Moran   21 
 
 
“Scratch my shoulders, please,” said Shana. Lorette’s claws 
moved up after the new itch, and Shana sighed with pleasure 
when they caught it. “Albert is a fool. He is four years older than 
Carl, and he is jealous because he is not as important. He is one 
of many de Nostri, and Carl is the only telepath.” She thought 
about the subject for a moment. “Perhaps it is true, that he is 
better than Carl, with an advantage of six years study. Carl be-
gan learning only after they found he was a telepath and real-
ized it might be necessary to use him in the field. But I will tell 
you this much, Albert may best Carl on the mat. If they ever 
truly fight, Carl will win.” Shana had to catch her breath after 
speaking; she was slightly winded. 
“I have talked to Carl once,” said Lorette thoughtfully. “He 
says when they take him on assignment he is well protected.” 
Shana nodded. “Yes. He is their only telepath, unless the lit-
tle dark haired girl is one also, and they will not know that un-
til, what is it,” and she took a long, deep breath, to bring the air 
into her lungs, and said, “comment dit-on en anglais mènarche?” 
“Puberty,” said Lorette, “but it means for boys and girls both. 
They do not have a word for mènarche.” 
“They will not know until Jany reaches puberty, then.” 
Shana coughed, a deep, guttural sound, and said, “It makes him 
special.” 
Lorette brightened. “Look, the fourth match is finished. One 
more and we can go to lunch.” 
Shana shook her head slowly. Her ears were twitching. “I 
think perhaps I should go to the infirmary.” 
“Shana?” 
“I...I do not feel well.” 
Carl did not look away from his match as they left. 
THE FIELD WAVERED slightly. Suzanne Montignet’s image waited 
for nearly three seconds after Malko had finished speaking; 
round-trip signal time from the PKF Elite SpaceBase One, at L-
5. “You’ve got to be kidding.” 
Malko shook his head no. “They weren’t sure at first what 
was happening. It took nearly a day before the transform virus 

22   Tales 
 
killed her. I had Carson on the line after it happened. He de-
nied—” 
“Of course the virus killed her,” Suzanne exploded after the 
strange delay that Malko found himself unable to become used 
to. “What did the bloody fools expect? She was a de Nostri, for 
God’s sake! Those are not human muscle cells!” 
Malko waited until there was silence before he continued. 
“Ellie Samuels did the work, and she says she received her or-
ders directly from Councilor Carson. You weren’t available for 
her to check with, which is clearly intentional.” 
Suzanne was nodding tensely. “Of course it was. Carson’s 
wanted to try seeding one of the de Nostri with the enhanced-
strength transform virus for the last year. They’re so strong to 
begin with, the damn fool figures this should make them even 
stronger. I told him the odds were terrible.” She looked brood-
ingly into the holocam, eyes slightly unfocused; she was not 
looking at the screen that held Malko’s image. “It’s been fasci-
nating, seeing the work the Peaceforcers have been doing in 
transform viruses, but it still didn’t make sense, how insistent 
they were that I make the trip to L-5, until now. Carson wanted 
me up here so that I couldn’t interfere down there. Have you 
heard from Amnier?” 
“No. The Prosecutor General’s office won’t return my calls. I 
think they’re going to let Carson get away with it.” 
“Has Shana been autopsied yet?” 
“No.” 
“How’s Carl?” 
“...angry.” 
“That bad?” 
“I’ve never seen it worse.” 
She seemed to reach a decision. “Very well. Don’t let her be 
autopsied until I get back. I want to be there. Ellie might not 
have known what she was doing when she got her orders....” She 
was looking off screen at something. “Ship leaves at 23:00 hours. 
I can be in Manhattan by this time tomorrow. Have Carl con-
fined.” 

Moran   23 
 
 
“I’ll try.” The holofield went silver, then flattened, and Suz-
anne’s figure. 
If, thought Malko, I can find him. 
THE RECEPTIONIST sat at the wide front desk, in the inner lobby 
of the offices of the Unification Council, at the United Nations 
Building in New York City. Sunlight struck a warm, late after-
noon glow through the bay windows that surrounded the lobby 
on three sides, washed in and overrode the clean white glow-
paint. The receptionist thought she saw movement outside, 
through the window, and dismissed it as a figment of her imagi-
nation. 
The doors slid aside, and by reflex she touched the pressure 
point at the side of her desk, marked Security, the instant the 
young man walked in. By appearance he was perhaps fifteen or 
sixteen years of age; young, but old enough to be dangerous. 
And she should have received some warning before he had 
reached the inner lobby. 
“Can I help you?” 
His voice was odd. She had to strain to hear him, and—
surely his lips had moved? 
I have come to see Councilor Carson. 
His eyes were green, some portion of her mind noted uneas-
ily, and large. And familiar— 
“I’m sorry,” and she stumbled over the words, “but the Coun-
cilors do not—see people—without an appointment.” 
He moved closer to her, head cocked slightly to one side. An 
intangible, electric shock of danger ran through her. There was 
rage in him, a vast anger. Tell him I’m here. 
She did know him, she was certain of it. Thought came 
slowly, as though from a great distance. She could not take her 
gaze away from the brilliant, luminescent green of his eyes. She 
activated her inskin data link without knowing she did so, and 
paged the Councilor to the reception area. 
Another Councilor, with two of his staff, came through the 
lobby as they waited, and eyed the boy with a touch of curiosity. 
The boy stood silently, motionless, and did not look at them. He 

24   Tales 
 
kept his gaze locked to the receptionist. They found it, and him, 
somewhat odd, but of course he would not have been there if he 
had not belonged there, and so they continued on their way, and 
forgot the boy with a speed Jerril Carson would have found in-
structive. 
The lift doors, at the far end of the lobby, slid aside, and Jer-
ril Carson stood framed between the sliding doors, with a Peace-
forcer at his side. 
A weight lifted itself from the receptionist’s mind and the 
dark-haired boy’s features moved into focus. The blood had 
drained from his face at Jerril Carson’s appearance, leaving it 
shockingly white beneath the straight black hair, but she recog-
nized him nonetheless. “Of course,” she said aloud. “Why—” 
Carson said with mild surprise, “Carl?” 
The voice echoed, as though something else spoke through 
the boy, used him as an instrument. “You killed Shana.” 
He said nothing else, and Carson was still looking at him 
when the windows exploded outward. A great invisible hand 
slammed the Peaceforcer down to the floor, dragged him out of 
the lift and across the pale blue carpeting. The Unification 
Councilor stumbled back into the lift, mouth open and working 
as though he would say something. 
But no words came, and Carl, rage stamped upon his fea-
tures, went in after him. 
The doors slid shut before the screams began. 
THERE CAN BE good mistakes; and otherwise. 
Jany McConnell underwent puberty early in the year 2047. 
The Peaceforcers were waiting. 
She too had the Gift. 
For the predominantly French Peaceforcers, struggling to 
keep order in a world that hated and distrusted them, it was 
confirmation enough of the information gathering godsend. Cas-
tanaveras had already proven that he could retrieve information 
reliably when physically near his target; but one, or even ten 
such telepaths, were only mist in the desert of their need. 

Moran   25 
 
 
2048, the year Jerril Carson became the chairman of the 
Peace Keeping Force Oversight Committee in the Unification 
Council, was, not coincidentally, also the year Suzanne Mon-
tignet was removed from control of what was popularly called 
“Project Superman.” In that year, 43 telepathic children were 
brought to term. All were given the surname Castanaveras; the 
technicians had tired of inventing individual surnames. 
In 2049, 73 such telepaths were born. 
In the year 2050, 86 telepaths were brought to term in Bu-
reau of Biotech host mothers. 
In 2051, the year Trent Castanaveras was born, only twenty-
four telepathic children were brought into the world. The Peace-
forcers were beginning to learn enough to wonder if they should 
be afraid of the power they had helped create. Many of them 
were afraid of Carl Castanaveras. With help from Castanaveras 
the program to produce telepaths for the Peaceforcers was ter-
minated by the middle of the year. 
In 2052, Darryl Amnier became Secretary General of the 
United Nations. 
In 2053, twins were born to Carl Castanaveras and Jane 
McConnell; twins named David and, yes, the Denice who became 
Denice Ripper, from whom our line descends. 
Those are the facts. There have been many histories written 
concerning those twenty years when telepaths first walked the 
Earth; but historians are primarily concerned with truth, and a 
concern for truth can make one leery of those cold facts that 
might conflict with a precious, closely held “truth.” 
It is better to be a Storyteller. 


 
 
Emerald Eyes 
2062 Gregorian 


 
 
3. 
ON THURSDAY, March 9, 2062, Carl Castanaveras rose early. He 
left Suzanne Montignet’s home and walked three blocks through 
the icy dark, to the Massapequa Park Station of the Long Island 
Tubeway. It was only 4 A.M.; the streets of exurban Massapequa 
Park were largely bare of traffic. The stars shone clearly over-
head and the moon had already dropped below the horizon. 
There were no other pedestrians about and except for the rare 
car and the rumble of the huge twelve-fans rolling down 
Sunland Boulevard all was quiet. 
The cold did not affect Carl. He barely noticed it except to 
keep his hands inside his coat pockets. He walked briskly, impa-
tiently. 
At the Tube station the doors slid aside and admitted him to 
a warm, well lit waiting room. Carl sorted and cataloged by re-
flex. Three women and five men, none of them visibly armed, 
waiting for the 4:15 Tube shuttle to Grand Central Station. 
At the InfoNet Aid station Carl bought a one-way ticket to 
the city, and leased a news viewer. The clerk behind the counter 
was having trouble keeping her eyes open. Lease of the news 
viewer came to half a Credit Unit more than the ticket itself; the 
viewers were stolen regularly. He paid with SpaceFarer hard 
CU; the clerk blinked in curiosity at the sight of the rare silver 
coins, but took the CU:1.25 without word. 
He stood quietly for several minutes, waiting for the Bullet to 
arrive. At 4:12 the Bullet came up out of the ground, and coasted 
down the superconductor maglev monorail to a slow gliding stop; 
a single structure made of nearly a hundred meters of su-
pertwisted sheet monocrystal. The Bullet could not be painted 
and did not need to be washed; filth slid off. It could not be 
scratched or dented. 
Under sufficient impact, it would shatter. 
At 4:15 the Bullet pulled out of the Massapequa Park station 
and was fed slowly back into the interlock. In the lock the at-

30   Tales 
 
mosphere was evacuated, and the Bullet was injected back into 
the Tube with a smooth, steady acceleration. 
Once, almost a decade ago, ideologs who were never identi-
fied—Johnny Reb, perhaps, or Erisian Claw—left a bowling ball 
in the Tube. The Bullet struck it at full speed. There was an av-
erage clearance of five centimeters around the circumference of 
the Bullet; when it struck the bowling ball the Bullet turned the 
bowling ball into vaporized dust. 
In the process, the Bullet itself touched the side of the Tube. 
The resultant earthquake destroyed eighteen kilometers of the 
Tube; the shock wave was felt nearly sixty kilometers from the 
place where the Bullet shattered itself against a bowling ball. 
CARL SAT IN the seat nearest the exit, to save time getting off 
when the Bullet stopped. He stowed his briefcase in the rack 
under the seat and purchased a large cup of coffee from the 
waitbot as it rolled down the long center aisle. Service that 
morning was good; before the crush hours started it usually was. 
The first thing he saw when he turned on the news viewer 
made him wince. He’d gone to greater than usual trouble that 
morning to insure that his activities remained unnoticed; log-
ging on to the InfoNet, he’d picked the default user profile rather 
than identify himself by his thumbprint and download his pro-
file. Had he been using his own profile the screen that greeted 
him would not have surprised him much, but he was logged on 
anonymously and despite that his face was all over the front 
screen of the morning edition of the Electronic Times news 
Board. The headline the tablet showed—Carl did not have his 
ear phone turned on—was “UNIFICATION COUNCIL PASSES 
GENIE BILL.” 
The texts of the several stories were lacking. Bare bones of 
the Amendment—it was not, as the front screen headline im-
plied, a bill, but the Eighth Amendment to the Statement of 
Principles—and a brief sketch of its ramifications for both the 
telepaths and the feline de Nostri, with another sketch of the 
principals involved in the bill on both sides. Predictably, Malko’s 
involvement with the Eighth Amendment, and the limited but 

Moran   31 
 
 
real opposition the Amendment had received from Secretary 
General Amnier’s office, were the primary subjects for most of 
the newsdancers. It was a romantic lead; two war heroes, on op-
posite sides during the war, and still so four and a half decades 
later. 
Carl found he could reliably judge any particular news-
dancer’s sympathies in the matter from the style in which the 
newsdancer wrote the Secretary General’s title. Those who used 
the currently popular “Ministre Gènèral,” rather than the his-
torically correct English title, had little good to say about either 
the telepaths or their supporters. 
Only one story in the first section was not about the passage 
of the Eighth Amendment; a SpaceFarer smuggler had been ap-
prehended with a cargo hold full of GoodBeer from St. Peter’s 
CityState, in the Belt. Any other day it would have been a front 
screen story, perhaps the headline. Of the remaining stories, 
most concerned the conflict between Amnier and Kalharri. 
Unfortunately, one of the newsdancers had not been content 
with the obvious story; that newsdancer had taken Carl Cas-
tanaveras for a ride down the boulevard with the spotlights 
turned on. The style was familiar; Carl paged down the article 
until he came to the sign off. 
Gerold McKann; special to the Electronic Times. 
Carl shook his head. The pictures of him were good; a man of 
average height, a swimmer’s build, in conservative attire. He 
sipped his coffee while auditing. The tablet showed several 
holos, most of them apparently taken from his testimony before 
the Unification Council earlier that year. The color reproduction 
was good; the brilliant green eyes leapt out from beneath a 
shock of black hair as they did in real life, and with nearly as 
much impact. 
The text was devastating. It focused on the circumstances 
that had led to the telepaths’ petition, and the role Carl had 
played in freeing the telepaths from the control of the PKF. The 
tone was highly approving. 
Carl smiled. Gerry, my friend, I'm going to nail your ass to 
the wall. 

32   Tales 
 
Across the aisle, a woman was staring at him. She looked 
down at her news viewer, and then back up again. Her features 
froze into an unpleasant mixture of hatred and embarrassment. 
Carl stared directly at her until she turned away. 
A FLICKER on the Net. 
United Nations Peace Keeping Staff Sergeant Emile Garon 
looked around his cubicle. He was near the end of his second 
year in this cubicle now; two years spent monitoring the Net-
work, two years plugged into a bank of Fairchild gallium ar-
senide transputers, two years with the superconductor RAM 
hardwired into his skull. The cubicle’s walls were off-white, and 
he was forbidden to decorate them. 
The room was information sterile, intentionally. There 
should be nothing to distract him from his job. 
Paris, he thought for the hundredth time that week. I left 
Paris for this. 
Two hundred meters below the surface of New York City, 
Peaceforcer Emile Garon sighed and closed his eyes, and hoped 
desperately that the flicker would become a trace that would 
take him out into the Crystal Wind of data that was life. 
And returned to work. 
THEIR OFFICES WERE on Third Avenue, a fifteen minute walk 
from Grand Central Station. The suite belonging to Kalharri 
Enterprises, Ltd., was not large: one subdivided private office 
where Malko, Carl and Jany McConnell had desks, a reception-
ist’s area and a conference room. For almost a year now Malko 
had been paying for the offices out of his own pocket. That too 
would be changing, and none too soon. 
Spyeyes hovered above the street outside when Carl reached 
the Kaufmann Spacescraper at 550 Third Avenue. Their pres-
ence was not unusual; many of the news services floated spyeyes 
outside the spacescraper when a story involved one of the occu-
pants. The sheer number of spyeyes, though, brought him to a 
halt—twenty, twenty-five; he stopped counting when the 
spyeyes spotted him. A dozen spyeyes identified him and 

Moran   33 
 
 
swooped down toward him, shouting questions that blurred into 
a wall of sound. Carl ran the last forty meters through the early 
morning pedestrian traffic, to the spacescraper’s revolving glass 
doors. 
Half again the usual number of guards stood duty today; they 
processed him through quickly. The lift tube took him up to the 
408th floor; sunpaint lit as Carl unlocked his office. The recep-
tionist’s area and conference room were empty. Carl entered his 
own office and dropped his briefcase next to the desk. 
In the darkness of his office a cool blue cube appeared above 
Carl’s desktop. The cube was invisible from the side opposite 
Carl, where the holocam pickup was located. 
Marilyn Monroe’s image appeared within the cube. 
“Gerold McKann, please.” 
“One moment, sir,” breathed the image of a woman who’d 
been dead for nearly a hundred years. The solid, rock-steady re-
ceptionist’s holograph was replaced on Carl’s desktop by a wa-
vering flat sheet of projected monovideo. Gerry was in his car; 
through the flat interface Carl could see part of the front seat of 
Gerry’s Chandler 1300, and through the windows of the car, 
what Carl guessed was TransContinental Highway 4 out in 
Pennsylvania. In the poor light of early morning, as relayed by 
the hovercar’s marginally overscanning camera, it was difficult 
for him to be certain. 
“Carl! Goddamn, man, congratulations.” Gerry grinned into 
the camera. “I told you it would go through.” 
Carl stood with his fists resting on the desktop. “I audited 
the Electronic Times already this morning, Gerry.” 
The grin widened. “Yes? What did you think?” 
“How stupid are you?” 
Gerry laughed. “I’m one...” He broke off abruptly. Cautiously, 
he said, “You’re angry.” 
“Why did you write that story, Gerry?” 
Gerry’s eyes flicked down toward the camera embedded in 
the Chandler’s dash, and back up again to watch the road. “Ex-
cuse me a moment,” he said mildly. Carl watched as Gerry set 
up radar and hooked the carcomp into TransCon Auto Control. 

34   Tales 
 
Gerry McKann was in his late forties, though he looked younger; 
he kept in shape. He was a newsdancer with over thirty years 
experience in the field—it was the only job he’d ever held. 
The flickering, blue-tinged monovideo showed little of his ex-
pression as Gerry leaned back in the driver’s seat and folded his 
arms across his chest. “Okay. I was under the impression I was 
doing you a favor.” 
“How so?” 
“Well—correct me if I’m wrong—telepaths are people. I’m 
even willing to grant de Nostri that status; you and yours strike 
me as being a bit more human than that lot. I thought I’d spread 
the news.” The newsdancer in him popped up with a quick grin. 
“Also, it was a hell of a story.” 
From the outer office Carl heard the faint sound of the doors 
curling open. Voices, Jany and Malko. Without turning away 
from the image in the holofield, he touched a key on the control 
panel to his terminal. With a whisper the door between his office 
and the outer offices slid shut and locked itself. He sank into his 
seat slowly. He measured his words. “First of all, you correct me 
if I’m wrong, Gerry, isn’t it contrary to newsdancer ethics to 
write a story on a subject to which you are connected in a per-
sonal fashion without explicitly identifying the fact?” 
“Only if you get caught. Damn it, Carl, if nothing else it was 
good publicity. Count the number of favorable stories there’ve 
been about you folks of late and—” 
“I—we—don’t need the publicity. I don’t want the publicity. 
The Peaceforcers don’t want the publicity.” 
“What do you care what the Peaceforcers want?” McKann 
looked bewildered. “Man, you’re free! That’s what all this was 
all—” 
“I am not free!” Carl screamed. He found himself on his feet, 
glaring down into the screen. 
Gerry McKann stared at him. 
“Damn damn damn,” Carl swore in a monotone. “Gerry, I 
have two hundred and thirty-six children who depend on me to 
take care of them. The Secretary General doesn’t like me and 
may hate Malko. Jerril Carson does hate me, he’d pay to see me 

Moran   35 
 
 
dead. Half the Peaceforcers in the world are terrified of us and 
all of them think we’re traitors.” He slammed a fist down on the 
desktop and the desk shivered. “And you, you stupid fuck, had to 
rub their noses in it in front of an audience of one and a quarter 
billion Electronic Times subscribers. We got a piece of paper 
signed, today new copies of the Statement of Principles get 
transmitted around the world, saying the Peaceforcers can’t use 
us without paying us anymore, can’t tell us to do anything any-
more. Do you think the Peaceforcers care what that piece of pa-
per says?” 
Gerold McKann looked at him. 
Carl shouted, “Well? Do you?” 
McKann’s voice was barely audible. “No.” 
The word drained away Carl’s anger, left him standing there, 
cold and empty. “I shouldn’t have to say things like this, Gerry. 
You know better.” 
McKann sighed. “I didn’t think. I was trying to do you a fa-
vor.” He shrugged and looked out the window at what was, to 
Carl, only a blurred image of countryside. “I was trying to help.” 
McKann looked directly down into his camera. “Sorry. But Jerril 
Carson was your mistake.” 
He hung up and left Carl looking at a blank sheet of dim la-
ser light. 
Carl nodded after a moment. He spoke to the empty screen. 
“Yeah, well, we all make mistakes.” 
After a long moment he turned away from the field, called 
the sunlights up, and went out to face what promised to be a 
long day. 
IN A PARK at the south end of Manhattan island, a telepath 
named Johann MacArthur sat with his back to a tree and 
watched children play in the warm sunlight. He sat and enjoyed 
the warmth. The Weather Bureau said that the day would be 
pleasant, but Johnny had learned, like everyone else, not to 
trust anything the Bureau of Weather Control said. 
The park was not large. It was a rectangle less than a hun-
dred meters on its long axis, and only forty meters wide. A five-

36   Tales 
 
meter-high fence enclosed it and there was no exit to the street. 
It would not have been safe. Instead a tunnel walkway led from 
the center of the park, under the street, and came back up 
across the street, inside the Chandler Complex where the tele-
paths had been living for over half a year. The shade trees scat-
tered throughout the park obscured visibility enough to make 
the fence difficult to see unless you were near the perimeter. 
The children rarely approached the park’s perimeter; it made 
it too easy to hear the chanting of the picket lines. Today was 
particularly noisy; given yesterday’s vote, that was to be ex-
pected. 
Johann sat in full lotus, eyes open and unfocused, wearing 
nothing but a pair of shorts. It was unseasonably warm for early 
morning in March, and promised genuine heat by noontime. He 
was a big blond man who looked too much like a young Malko 
Kalharri for coincidence. Carl had told Johann that in the ear-
lier days of what the technicians had, only half sarcastically, 
named Project Superman, many of the men in the staff had do-
nated sperm cells for the genetic content. Johann had never 
asked Malko if he had been one of those men; he had never 
cared enough. 
At twenty-five he was the third oldest telepath on Earth, but 
he didn’t feel very old, most of the time. 
The park was quiet this early in the morning. About sixty of 
the children were out playing. The rest of the kids would be in 
one class or another, except for the eight who were currently out 
on jobs for the Peaceforcers. 
He felt a certain grim satisfaction in the knowledge that 
those would be the last eight. 
A swift thought struck him; it came from Heather Castanav-
eras, the fourteen-year-old girl who was teaching unarmed com-
bat that morning to a class composed largely of thirteen- and 
fourteen-year-olds. Johnny, have you seen Trent? 
Johann closed his eyes briefly, and with the Sight walked 
through the park quickly. Althea, his lieutenant that day, was 
leading her group in a game of hide-and-seek played by rules no 
normal human could have understood. I don’t see him, Heather. 

Moran   37 
 
 
Blue eyes isn’t in class again. The thought held frustration 
that approached anger. 
Johann sighed. Try not to get upset with him, Heather. 
Why not? 
He’s not having an easy time with the Change. And besides, 
today’s his birthday. 
It’s always somebody’s birthday, snapped Heather, and cut 
the connection abruptly. 
Johann thought a moment. Trent had only turned eleven to-
day; Heather had moved him into class with the thirteen and 
fourteen year olds some months ago. She thought he held prom-
ise in unarmed combat, and certainly he was large enough. But 
he seemed to have little interest in the subject. 
Not my problem, he decided with a cheerful lack of interest, 
and returned to dozing under the sun. 
EMILE GARON’S hands trembled slightly. He was close to 
datastarve; and if he showed symptoms, the PKF DataWatch 
would yank him from his job— 
He could not afford, as a private citizen, the processor power 
necessary to take him into the Crystal Wind with the bandwidth 
that PKF equipment afforded. But there had been no traces, 
nothing to justify going in. 
It hurt. He had spent far too much time in the information-
sterile world of reality. He had not gone live into the Net in 
nearly two weeks. 
Though he would not admit it even to himself, he was ad-
dicted to the Crystal Wind. 
“There,” said Peaceforcer Emile Garon aloud. He wanted des-
perately to believe that he was not fooling himself. His eyes did 
not open. Finally he spoke with conviction. 
“There it is again.” 
TRENT DANCED THROUGH the InfoNet, seeking. 
GARON KEYED OPEN his throat mike. “I have a live one. Tracer 
request submitted.” 

38   Tales 
 
The watch commander’s voice boomed in his skull. “Describe 
the sign.” 
“Intelligent, sir. Starting in the public Boards, at 9:08:11. 
Redirected output through ComSat 0188 and multiplexed back 
down in several different channels at 9:19:35. I filtered out the 
ghost channels and sent web angels into the net to chase it 
down.” 
“Replicant AI or live sign?” 
“No AI signature. Live sign probability in the high nines; it 
doesn’t know how to scramble deep memory, and hasn’t booby-
trapped pursuit. But it generated its ghosts in a burst of elegant 
superlisp.” 
“Opinion?” 
“A talented amateur. Trace, sir?” 
There was no reply. Garon chewed at his lower lip. He knew 
it was foolish, but he could not restrain himself. “Sir?” 
He wondered if he imagined the coolness in the watch com-
mander’s voice. “Trace enable on three. Access at point five. Stay 
out of Ministry and Space Force Boards.” A pause. “Trace en-
abled.” 
Emile Garon activated the trace nodes at his temples, and 
descended into the light of data. 
FRANCIS XAVIER CHANDLER, in an autobiography written only a 
few years before his death in 2094, wrote of Jany McConnell: 
“I have never met another woman who was more alive. I 
thought when I first met her that she was a great beauty, but in 
later years, looking at the images that are all that is left of her, I 
saw this was not so. She was an attractive woman. She and Carl 
Castanaveras were of a type; good looking, dark-haired young 
adults in excellent physical condition, with those brilliant green 
eyes. Neither of them looked like their names, but that was not 
uncommon even then, with interbreeding. 
“I am indifferently affected by male beauty, but those who 
are not, who knew Castanaveras, have told me that their reac-
tion to him was the same as my reaction to ’Selle McConnell. 
When I was still a relatively young man, practicing my first pro-

Moran   39 
 
 
fession, I wrote a song called Desert Eyes. It was a ‘Top Ten’ hit; 
unless you know what that means, it is an irrelevancy I won’t 
describe here. 
“Over seven decades after I wrote that song, I met Jany 
McConnell and knew at last whom I had written the song about. 
She had desert eyes; they burned. 
“One gains perspective with the passage of time. The tele-
paths, in that time, were a fact. Only a fool would ignore them; 
but only a greater fool would allow himself to be aligned with 
them publicly. There was too much resentment against them. 
The Jews were discriminated against for thousands of years be-
cause they made the claim to superiority, to being a Chosen Peo-
ple. 
“The telepaths, Castanaveras and all those children named 
after him, were better than us. Quantitatively and qualitatively, 
in nearly every way that could be measured and some that could 
not, they were a superior people. 
“Except in numbers. Of course they were doomed.” 
“BABY?” JANY MCCONNELL looked up from her work as Carl en-
tered the conference room. Seated at the head of the table, she 
was downloading the InfoNet profiles of their five guests into the 
two waitbots. She looked enough like him to be his sister; a 
handsome green-eyed woman with long, dark hair, wearing an 
oversized blue leather coat, short skirt, and a pair of emerald 
studs. Genetically they were closer than most twins. “How do 
you feel?” 
His smile was melancholy. “Well. How about yourself?” 
She shrugged in a single fluid movement that took most of 
her upper body into account. “Well.” Her makeup was turned off, 
except for a faint blue-silver sheen on her lips and over her eyes. 
“You didn’t come home last night.” 
“I stayed at Doctor Montignet’s house. Where’s Malko?” Carl 
had not seen him in the waiting area or the lobby. 
“He went down to the security station on the first floor to re-
view security for the meeting.” Her hands roved slowly over the 
huge pointboard at the head of the table. There were seven 

40   Tales 
 
chairs lined up against the room’s north wall; Jany sat in the 
eighth. “You didn’t call, Carl. I was worried about you. It’s only 
been about two months since that maniac shot at you while you 
were testifying before the Unification Council. We had this in-
credible party last night and you didn’t even call to say you 
weren’t coming home.” 
I’m sorry, Jany. I wasn’t good company last night. She did not 
respond, and he continued aloud, “I knew we were going to win 
by noon yesterday. So did Malko. We had two hundred and 
twenty votes firmly accounted for, and...it was just a step. It was 
depressing.” 
“Just a step?” She looked at him quizzically. “And Suzanne 
was better company than we would have been? Suzanne’s one of 
the least empathetic people I’ve ever met.” 
“And the toughest.” 
Jany nodded thoughtfully. “She lives in her own world.” 
Carl flashed a bright, hard grin at her. “It makes her hard to 
hurt.” 
Jany made no immediate reply. She did not respond to the 
grin, and slowly it faded. “Maybe you’re right. But you should 
still have called. I worried.” 
“Do I need to apologize again?” 
“No. Just don’t do it again.” 
He cocked his head to one side. “Okay—Okay?” 
“Okay, then.” She smiled at him for the first time, and for the 
first time in several days he felt the bright, flickering warmth 
that made everything else in his life worthwhile. “Do you want 
to give me a hug? The last time I saw you we were still slaves.” 
WITH A ROAR of frustration, Emile Garon threw his traceset 
down to the desktop. Even the glorious Crystal Wind, the sharp 
bright surge of data that was life, left him with only the small-
est, fading glow. 
“How did he do that?” Garon asked of no one, aware of the 
trace of hysteria in his voice. He sank back into his chair, eyes 
focused on a great distance. “I can’t even do that.” 

Moran   41 
 
 
The watch commander’s voice cut through the layers of unbe-
lief with shocking clarity. “Officer Garon, you are relieved of 
duty. You are instructed to report to Elite Commander Breil-
leune’s office at 13:00 hours.” 
Suddenly, Emile Garon’s holofield appeared over his desk, a 
silvered flat plane that sank away from him to present depth. 
Two letters appeared, black against a blue background, in an 
eighteen-point Helvetica typeface that contrasted sharply with 
the plain, ten-point terminal typeface PKF displays normally 
used. 
Ox, the letters said. 
Garon stared at the letters without comprehension. Suddenly 
the holofield reset, flattened into a silver plane, and vanished. 
Frantically Garon scrambled for his pointboard. The dictionary 
instantly displayed eight different possible meanings; number 
one on the list, with a probability of 87%, was an English word, 
that the dictionary translated for him as boeuf; as an adjective, 
meaning of great strength, but slow and clumsy. 
The watch commander’s voice brought him back. “Emile? Of-
ficer Garon, do you acknowledge the order? You are instructed to 
report to Elite Commander Breilleune’s office at 13:00 hours.” 
“Yes. I will be there.” 
THEIR FOURTH GUEST arrived at 9:45; Malko Kalharri took the 
elevator up to the downlot to greet her personally. Belinda 
Singer was, in her own right, one of the twenty wealthiest hu-
man beings on Earth, and one of the twenty-five wealthiest 
anywhere in the Solar System. She was old enough to make 
Malko feel young. While her age was not public knowledge, it 
was a fair guess she would never see the sunny side of one hun-
dred again. Despite that, her wealth was the most recently ob-
tained of their five guests. Thirty-seven years ago, the United 
Nations had nationalized both the orbital construction facilities 
at Halfway and the SpaceFarer Colony at LaGrange Five. The 
SpaceFarers’ Collective declared independence by way of retalia-
tion, and waged a brief and ineffective war with the Unification. 
The war did not regain their former holdings, but the United 

42   Tales 
 
Nations, still weak from the strains of the Unification War, had 
not been able to prevent them from declaring, and maintaining, 
their freedom. 
Belinda Singer had invested in the SpaceFarers’ Collective 
heavily; most of what had already been, in 2025, a considerable 
fortune. It was a gamble that had paid off in astronomical num-
bers. She was the SpaceFarer Collective’s largest downside 
shareholder. Assuming the uneasy truce between the U.N. and 
the SpaceFarers continued to hold, as it had for over two dec-
ades, Belinda Singer might well go to her grave the richest 
woman on Earth. The SpaceFarer businesses continued to grow 
at an amazing rate; everything from biologicals to zero gravity 
processing to their trade with the Belt CityStates, upon which 
they had a near monopoly. 
The SpaceFarers’ Collective was not a government in the 
traditional sense of the word; it was foremost a business, con-
cerned with making a profit. 
“A heavily armed business, true,” conceded Belinda Singer. 
Her floatchair hummed smoothly in the enclosed elevator as 
they ascended to the 408th floor, to the offices of Kalharri En-
terprises, Ltd. Malko Kalharri stood at her side, with her two 
bodyguards behind them. “But that’s the charming part of it all, 
you know.” 
Malko Kalharri nodded. At sixty-nine he was still an impos-
ingly large man, who moved easily and with grace; the years had 
given his face a certain harsh character. The once blonde hair 
had turned entirely gray. “Yes. Charlie Eddore—you know 
Councilor Eddore, I think—was telling me a while back about 
the problems his Council Subcommittee had negotiating a 
workable access agreement for the Mars gravity well. The 
SpaceFarers don’t seem to think there’s a problem, and even if 
there is there’s nobody with enough authority to dicker for the 
SpaceFarers without convening a shareholder’s meeting to ap-
point a negotiator.” 
’Selle Singer grinned wickedly. “It’s better than that, Malko. 
Those silly bastards started the whole thing off on the wrong 
foot entirely; proposed a treaty with the Collective.” 

Moran   43 
 
 
Malko laughed aloud. The sound boomed in the small enclo-
sure. “They didn’t.” 
“Yes,” said Belinda Singer cheerily, “and then they realized 
that if we signed the silly thing—and I was tempted to for that 
reason alone despite the fact that it was an offensively one-sided 
document—it would be tantamount to officially recognizing the 
SpaceFarers’ Collective as an autonomous body. Secretary Gen-
eral Amnier was enraged.” 
The elevator decelerated to a slow stop, and the door slid 
aside. Malko led Belinda Singer and her entourage down the 
corridor to their offices. “I would imagine. Darryl has little pa-
tience with fools.” 
Belinda Singer shook her head. “Charles isn’t a fool, Malko, 
and you’d do well not to think so. He is impetuous, but that’s a 
common failing of the young. So much ambition.” 
“Yes,” said Malko Kalharri, and he was not thinking of 
Charles Eddore. “I know exactly what you mean.” 
“ELITE COMMANDER Breilleune, Officer Emile Garon reporting.” 
Commander Breilleune was a tall man with the face of a re-
cruiting holo. He was in full dress uniform, now as always. 
Emile Garon had never seen him otherwise. The skin of his face 
was somewhat stiff; a knife would not have made much of an 
impression upon it. That was one of the only two visible signs of 
the vast changes that had been engineered in him. There was a 
hole over the center knuckle of his right hand; a laser was em-
bedded in the bone behind that knuckle. 
He was a Peaceforcer Elite. 
Brass balls, Americans called them. 
Cyborgs. 
Breilleune smiled at the Peaceforcer standing at attention 
before him. He did not return Garon’s salute. “Emile, how are 
you?” He did not offer Garon a seat. 
Garon said instantly, “Quite well, sir.” 
“I am told otherwise.” Garon said nothing, and Breilleune 
sighed, the smile fading. “Sit down, Emile. What are we to do 
with you?” 

44   Tales 
 
Garon folded himself into one of the small chairs before the 
Commander’s desk. “Sir, I do not believe that there is anything 
that needs to be done. I do my job. I do it well.” 
Breilleune nodded. “True. I have no quarrel with your ability 
to perform your functions for the DataWatch. But—forgive me, 
Emile, for your own good I think we must remove you from the 
DataWatch.” 
The words struck Garon like a blow. The world went vague 
and hazy for a moment, and when he returned to himself he saw 
Commander Breilleune nodding to himself. “I thought so. Emile, 
you have served us too well for me to allow you to waste yourself 
like this.” Breilleune opened a folder and withdrew two sets of 
documents. “I have drafted two sets of orders for you. One set 
relieves you of your duties here and returns you to Paris. I know 
you have been homesick. There are several administrative of-
fices that will be vacated in the next few weeks, any one of 
which you would be ideal for.” Breilleune sat and waited expec-
tantly. 
Garon had the sense to say only, “And the second?” 
Breilleune said simply, “Three months of vacation. You will 
be forbidden to access the Information Network during that 
time. On June fifteenth you will board the SpaceFarer vessel 
Bernardo de la Paz with fifty other officers of the PKF, to arrive 
at LaGrange Five to begin training.” 
Garon said, through a mouth suddenly dry, “LaGrange Five?” 
“Yes.” 
“You wish to make me one of the Elite.” 
“Does the idea scare you?” 
Garon decided in that instant. “No. No, sir, I am honored.” 
There was true warmth in Breilleune’s smile. “Good. I think 
you shall find that the change is not so difficult as you have 
heard. And the advantages are—” He hunted for a word, and 
said finally, “fantastic.” 
THREE OF THEIR five guests were already there as Malko arrived 
with Belinda Singer. Tio Sandoval, a renowned womanizer who 
was the majority stockholder for Sandoval Biochemicals, and 

Moran   45 
 
 
son of the company’s founder, had cornered Jany McConnell. At 
Sandoval’s side was a plain-faced middle-aged woman in elegant 
clothing that obviously made her uncomfortable. She was clearly 
out of her element, and unsure how to behave. 
Jany McConnell, facing the two of them, stood ramrod stiff, 
slightly pale, her features carefully controlled. Malko had the 
uneasy impression that Sandoval had already touched her once. 
The other two waited quietly at the conference table. Marc 
Packard sat at attention, sweat trickling down his cheek. He 
was the representative of Tytan Industries, and in his own per-
son the least wealthy of the five whom Carl and Malko had in-
vited to the meeting. Tytan Industries controlled nearly all of 
Halfway’s electronics and computer manufacturing, and Marc 
Packard had, for fifteen years, essentially controlled Tytan In-
dustries. It made Packard the most powerful human in the 
great, growing, geostationary collection of ships and factories 
and living donuts known as Halfway. It did not surprise Malko 
Kalharri that the man was sweating; this was the first time he 
had been on Earth in over five years, and the gravity must have 
been difficult to readjust to. Packard would not have come 
downside for any meeting of less than the greatest importance; 
it was a measure of his regard for the advantage the telepaths 
might give Tytan Industries, and his distrust for the security of 
normal channels of communication, that he was there. His body-
guard Malko first put at the age of forty to forty-five. A second 
look altered the impression slightly; there was a slight looseness 
to the skin about his neck that was unavoidable even with the 
best geriatrics. Upward of sixty, then, and possibly in his seven-
ties. He was fit, well muscled and in good tone, despite the de-
ceptive potbelly he carried. He sat in a chair at the opposite end 
of the room, where he had a clear view of the room and the door. 
The bodyguard picked up an eyebrow at the sight of Belinda 
Singer’s muscle; he examined and, to all appearances, dismissed 
them in the same moment. 
The bodyguard spent a disconcerting moment examining 
Malko himself, and then nodded almost genially in Malko’s di-
rection and returned his attention to the rest of the room. 

46   Tales 
 
Randall Getty Cristofer, the owner of most of SunGetty Oil, 
and thereby of most of the remaining oil on Earth, was deep in 
conversation with Carl when Malko escorted Belinda Singer into 
the conference room. Cristofer wore a fluorescent red business 
suit of conservative cut. Cristofer immediately broke off his con-
versation with Carl, murmuring an apology, and bowed low to 
take the hand that ’Selle Singer offered to him. He spoke with a 
pronounced Australian accent. “Belinda dear, how’ve you been?” 
The old lady smiled at him sardonically. “Quite well, Randy. 
Yourself?” 
“Ah, not so good. Wouldn’t you know it, just this morning I’m 
hearing that somebody’s bitched up me bid to take over the Ve-
nus Geological Services.” 
Belinda Singer’s smile was all shark. “Imagine. Well—they 
do say competition is the lifeblood of business.” 
Malko counted his blessings; his earphone relayed him a 
message in time for him to step in before the sniping got worse. 
“I am told,” he said loudly, “that M. Chandler is on his way 
down. Would you like to take your seats?” 
CARL HAD TESTIFIED before the Unification Council on several 
occasions, and he had learned the first rule of speaking so well 
that it was second nature: Keep it short. 
“I am thirty-one years old,” Carl told them. “For nearly 
twenty years now, I have been gathering information for the 
United Nations Peace Keeping Force. As of 3:30 P.M. yesterday 
that is no longer the case. We have over two hundred function-
ing telepaths whose services are now available to be leased. I 
moved my people into the old Chandler Complex in south Man-
hattan back in August, and we owe seven months back rent on 
it.” He directed himself to the man who sat directly across from 
him. “I’m indebted to you for your generosity, Mister Chandler. 
It won’t go unpaid.” 
Francis Xavier Chandler shook his head. His features were 
set in an attitude of perpetual fierceness. He was the most con-
servatively dressed man in the room, and the eldest, in a Brooks 
Brothers suit that had not been in style since the mid-forties. 

Moran   47 
 
 
His hair flowed in a thick black mane, over his shoulders and 
down his back. “Nonsense, young man. It was a good business 
investment, and it is about to pay off handsomely.” 
“Malko Kalharri,” Carl continued, “has paid for these offices 
for nearly a year now; he sold his house to do so. I intend to see 
him paid back for that. We owe money to the lawyers who’ve 
represented us before the Unification Council, and are continu-
ing to do so. There are—other projects—which I’d like to see 
Kalharri Ltd. embark upon. 
“The key to all of this, of course, is money. We’re not exactly 
desperate; but we are in debt. We are capital starved. Folks,” 
said Carl, “we’re not ever going to get cheaper.” 
“I am somewhat curious,” said Marc Packard, his breathing 
labored, “as to what exactly you are selling today.” 
Carl shook his head. “Our services, not mine. Peaceful work 
that the children can do. I did ghost work for the PKF for nearly 
fifteen years, and I did become in many ways the evil that I still 
behold in them. What I have done in the past is done, but I am 
now finished with it.” 
“I presume,” said Tio Sandoval with a languid smile, “that 
you’re going to show us what these” He waved a hand negli-
gently. “brujo’s skills are, that you’re going to sell us.” 
“That would be difficult. We’ve agreed not to read your 
minds.” Carl grinned widely. “Though, if we wanted to, that poor 
half-crazy telepath at your side wouldn’t be much protection.” 
“I did not truly expect,” said Sandoval in his accented Eng-
lish, staring at Carl with a cool challenge. 
Carl looked away from Sandoval and swept his gaze around 
the table, still smiling, gathering their eyes to him. “I think you 
can assume, though, that what we promise, we can deliver. The 
reputation we have among the Peaceforcers is...largely deserved. 
What we can promise,” he said more slowly, “includes reading 
the minds of executives in the companies of your competition, 
looking inside closed objects or behind locked doors”—he turned 
to Randall Cristofer—“and finding oil with one hundred percent 
certainty in a fraction of the time conventional techniques take.” 

48   Tales 
 
He hesitated. “Also the ability to manipulate small objects rang-
ing in size from, say, dice, all the way down to the atomic level.” 
Belinda Singer blinked rapidly. Before she could say any-
thing, Francis Xavier Chandler whistled long and low. “I was 
wondering about that one myself. I’d heard rumors.” 
“The rumors are substantially true,” said Jany McConnell. 
Her voice was quiet, but clear. “The ability to manipulate objects 
at the atomic level is somewhat limited, however. Only the 
stronger telepaths can distinguish detail at that resolution, and 
of that number, only those well trained in physics have success 
manipulating objects the size of atoms. We have only a few of 
those. But they can indeed induce hydrogen to fuse.” 
There was a momentary silence, and then Chandler leaned 
forward. “Let’s dicker.” 
THE MEETING LASTED three hours; Carl was left drained but sat-
isfied at its end, with a deep-seated respect for the negotiating 
skills of the five people who had shared the table with him. 
Chandler Industries had probably done the best for itself due to 
the goodwill that it had carried into the negotiations, but none of 
them had done poorly. 
Nor had the telepaths. Two hours into the meeting Jany said, 
Carl? 
In mid-sentence Carl switched tracks, devoting the greater 
part of his attention to Jany. Yes? 
I’ve been calculating fees. Their down payment to us is going 
to cancel our debt. 
I’ll be damned, thought Carl in short amazement, and re-
turned to the negotiations. 
Yes, very likely. 
As the meeting was ending Carl saw Sandoval corner Jany 
again and nearly decided to break it up. Malko merely glanced 
at him once, and Carl nodded, turned purposefully away from 
Jany so that he need not look at Sandoval, and instead motioned 
F.X. Chandler aside. “A moment, sir?” 
Chandler raised an eyebrow. “A moment, certainly, but I’ve 
little more. I’m running quite late.” 

Moran   49 
 
 
“Certainly. I intend to purchase a Chandler MetalSmith 
Mark III within the next week or so. I’ll be having it extensively 
customized, and I would like to know if there are any shops you 
can recommend where I might have the work done.” 
Chandler looked at Carl without expression for a moment. 
“I’m afraid not, son,” said the founder of the largest hovercar 
company in the world, “since I don’t drive anymore. It’s not safe 
since they gave over so much control to TransCon. Still, if you’re 
interested, see Tony Angelo at the Chandler dealership upstate. 
He’s a Speedfreak, he knows as much about these machines as I 
used to.” 
“Thank you, sir. I do appreciate this.” 
Chandler nodded and turned to leave. He stopped in mid-
turn and glanced back at Carl. “Young man? What are you driv-
ing now?” 
Malko was still sitting next to Belinda Singer; Carl was dis-
tantly aware of the older man watching them. “I don’t have a 
car, sir. This will be my first.” 
“Oh? Why?” 
“The Peaceforcers have never paid us very well,” said Carl 
simply. 
Chandler’s lips moved in what approached a smile. Too qui-
etly for anyone else to hear, he said, “Have Tony arrange driving 
lessons for you. The MetalSmith is not designed for amateurs. 
It’s a lot of car.” 
“Yes, sir. Thank you. I’m not sure—” The outspeaker cut Carl 
off. 
“M. Castanaveras? There is a call for you.” 
“Who is it?” 
“Unification Councilor Carson, sir.” 
In the immediate silence that engulfed all conversation in 
the conference room, Carl said calmly, “I’ll take it in my office.” 
He glanced across the room at Malko, and Malko moved his 
head in a single curt shake that meant no. Alone, Carl went into 
his office and sealed the door behind him. 

50   Tales 
 
The holofield was already up; Carl could see its faint, almost 
invisible outline, all the sign the field gave from the wrong side 
of the desk. 
Jerril Carson, from the shoulders up, looked at Carl out of 
the field when Carl sat down. He appeared the same as always, 
a man in his sixties, almost cadaverously thin. The skin hung on 
his face in folds; once, decades ago, Carson had been overweight. 
It seemed to Carl that Carson’s complexion was paler than nor-
mal, but it was difficult to be certain. 
Carson had not allowed himself to be caught in the same 
building with Carl Castanaveras in fifteen years. 
“Good afternoon, Councilor.” 
Carson smiled at Carl with a precision that came from four 
decades of political smiling. The edges of his smile might have 
been measured in millimeters and never varied. “Good after-
noon, Carl. Congratulations on passage of the Amendment.” 
“Thank you, sir. What can I do for you?” 
“I really didn’t think you would get it passed,” said Carson 
conversationally. “With the Secretary General making his posi-
tion so clear—well, even with M. Kalharri’s aid, Wednesday’s 
vote succeeded in surprising me.” He looked thoughtful. “And 
the Secretary General as well, I believe. You controlled yourself 
quite well during testimony. I doubt if most of the Unification 
Council has the vaguest idea how erratic and dangerous you 
are.” 
“Well, I hope not myself,” said Carl politely. “It’s always nice 
to be under—” 
“Nothing,” Carson whispered as the mask dropped from him 
and left something old and insane in his eyes, “has changed. 
Nothing.” 
The holofield went dead and faded. 
Inside Carl the old familiar rage struck him with the sud-
denness and heat of a maser. He brought his hands together and 
gently interlaced the fingers atop his desk. 

Moran   51 
 
 
ALLIE RAN UP to Johann, breathless. With her newly developed 
Gift, she asked, Where’s Carl and Jany today, Johnny? Are they 
going to be back tonight? 
Johann shook his head. Don’t know, kiddo. Let me try— 
Suddenly he went rigid. Allie knew instantly that something 
was terribly wrong, and instinctively she reached for him in the 
new way— 
She screamed once, a terrible high pitched sound, and col-
lapsed on the grass. 
CARL CASTANAVERAS knew nothing of the pain he had caused. 
Inside the rage rolled through him in slow, murderous waves. 
The desk on which his hands rested vibrated as though it would 
shake itself apart. 
On the dark, handsome features he presented to the world 
was nothing but serenity. 
 
4. 
THEY DROVE BACK that evening through crush hours traffic. 
They waited for nearly half an hour in the downlot beneath 
the Kaufmann Spacescraper, as other cars left ahead of them, 
being fed out one by one into the hideous traffic leaving the 
great city. Carl was asleep before they made it out of the 
downlot. Malko spent nearly half their waiting time paging 
through the screens that showed TransCon’s broadcast of the 
various street levels. Ground level was a mess; a twelve-fan had 
turned over on Forty-Second Street. The five levels of under-
ground streets weren’t much better; TransCon showed that it 
was rerouting a lot of the surface traffic down below, at least un-
til the cars left the immediate vicinity of Manhattan, and could 
be redirected into the comp-controlled TransCon highway net-
work. 
Finally, in disgust, Malko punched in for the skystreets. 
They weren’t the fastest way home—ground traffic was usually 
that—but today they looked the best bet for covering the four 

52   Tales 
 
kilometers to the Complex before an hour was out. TransCon 
turned on the AUTO light on the dash, the steering grip went 
rigid, and Malko leaned back in his seat as TransCon took the 
Caddy out into the gossamer webs of skystreets above New 
York. 
Carl slept the sound sleep of exhaustion in the back seat of 
Malko’s old ’47 Cadillac. In the dark front seat, Jany sat with 
her gleaming blue leather coat drawn up about her throat, 
hands down in the deep pockets. Her eyes were fixed on some-
thing that did not exist, far out on the highway. Malko 
stretched, ligament and cartilage and bones creaking audibly. 
Shifting in his seat until his right shoulder was leaning against 
his seat’s backrest, he studied Jany McConnell’s profile. 
“He touched you, didn’t he?” 
“Twice.” 
The old man reached over to her and moved a stray hair 
away from her face. She shivered, but did not flinch. “I’m sorry. I 
am sorry.” Knowing it was futile, he tried to make sense of it for 
her. “I told them not to touch either of you, but for some people 
it’s hard not to. Sandoval—Latinos, they’re raised that way.” 
“He knew,” she whispered. 
“What do you mean?” 
“He knows a lot about us,” she said simply. One hand came 
up out of the pocket, to hold his tightly. “We fascinate him.” Be-
hind them, a Speedfreak came up out of nowhere, weaving 
through the TransCon controlled hovercars at high speed, its 
headlights throwing a bright, moving light into the interior of 
the Caddy. “He’s been auditing everything that’s been declassi-
fied about us for years now.” The headlights peaked, and faded. 
The hovercar’s interior sank back into gloom. “I wasn’t trying to 
read him. He’s ill, Malko, as bad as the Peaceforcer who tried to 
rape me that time. Pain and love and sex and death, all mixed 
up together. He touched me and it leapt out.” She shivered 
again. 
“You didn’t tell the boy,” said Malko. It was almost a ques-
tion. 

Moran   53 
 
 
“God, no.” Jany laughed shakily. Her eyes dropped shut, and 
she ran the caress of a thought across Carl’s unconscious mind. 
She sounded near tears when she spoke again. “He ignores me 
half the time, Malko, but then he’s so protective. He would have 
hurt Sandoval so badly, and he would have thought he was do-
ing it for me.” Tears began. “He spent last night with Doctor 
Montignet, did you know that? He was depressed and he was 
afraid he was going to hurt me, but, you know, I can handle the 
black moods, they don’t bother me so much. What hurts is when 
he won’t trust me.” 
Malko said gently, “Carl doesn’t trust himself. How can he 
trust you?” 
She sat holding his hand, watching the flow of traffic. She 
cried quietly, her shoulders shaking inside the coat. Malko knew 
better than to try to talk. Eventually the tears stopped and her 
breathing slowed. When she spoke, there was drowsiness in her 
voice. “I don’t understand how he can be so angry with the 
world. There’s this huge blind spot and he doesn’t know it’s 
there. All of the good things, he misses those. He doesn’t see the 
children, he doesn’t see what a wonder they are.” She clutched 
Malko’s hand harder. “He’s such a mess.” 
Malko squeezed back. “Yeah. He is that.” 
“What’s wrong with him?” 
“It’s a long story, little girl.” 
Jany giggled. “You’re the only person in the world who could 
call me that with a straight face.” 
Malko smiled down at her. “Why don’t you get some sleep? 
Prince Charming didn’t waste any time. I’ll wake you when 
we’re...home.” 
“That sounds like a good idea….” Her eyes closed almost in-
stantly, and she curled up on the front seat, still holding Malko 
hand. “Home. That’s such a nice word. I don’t think any of the 
children have started using it yet. Maybe they don’t know what 
it means.” 
Malko stroked her hair with his free hand. “Maybe so.” 

54   Tales 
 
She was almost asleep when she murmured, “God, what did 
they do to him....” It was not a question, and her breathing gen-
tled into sleep moments later. 
“Nothing you want to know about,” said Malko. 
The car flew on through the night. 
THEY REACHED THE Complex near eight o’clock. 
The Complex was a large, elegantly pale building built of su-
pertwisted monocrystal, on half an acre of land. It had been 
built by F.X. Chandler not quite a decade ago, in an open Italian 
architectural style that was prevalent back in the twenties. The 
land upon which it stood had once been the heart of the New 
York City financial district; tactical thermonuclear weapons, 
during the War, had ended that. Where Wall Street and City 
Hall and the Brooklyn Bridge had once stood was now one of the 
most exclusive and expensive residential areas in the world. One 
of four homes owned by Chandler in and around Capital City, 
the Complex extended two stories into the air, and three below 
the ground and was capable of housing twice the telepaths’ 
numbers with ease. 
Thea and Mandy, two of the fourteen-year-olds, stood guard 
duty at the front gate. The floodlights cast harsh dark shadows 
where they struck, down the length of the driveway that led into 
the guarded Complex. The shadows shifted as the picketers 
walked back and forth before the Complex. The crowd outside 
was larger and louder and uglier than usual. There were a thou-
sand to twelve hundred of them by Malko’s eyeball estimate, 
many of them wearing dramasuits that made them appear three 
meters tall and amplified their voices to the point of pain. One 
image, of actor Adam Selstrom, was right out of storage; the 
copyright notice Images Inc., C. 2055, 2062, blinked on and off, 
ten centimeters high, for five seconds out of every thirty. They 
carried placards that ranged from the merely offensive to the 
scatalogical. Of the dozen neon holofields casting red and blue 
and green light across the front lawn and the slidewalk, only one 
showed the slightest trace of originality. The holofield glowed 
twenty meters across, five meters in the air: 

Moran   55 
 
 
PUT THE GENIES BACK IN THE BOTTLE. 
Carl came awake with a suddenness that startled Malko 
when Malko turned onto the residential avenue that led to the 
Complex. He spoke without a trace of sleep in his voice. “Bad?” 
Malko looked over the crowd with a practiced eye. “I don’t 
think so. And if it gets bad, there’s not enough of them.” 
Carl nodded, accepting the judgment. “Ten of the children 
could put them to sleep without even straining.” 
Malko said dryly, “Or you could use the sonics at the gates.” 
“That would be another way to do it.” Carl ran his fingers 
through the mess sleep had made of his hair. For the first time 
he noticed the lack of PKF guards at the gates. “They didn’t 
waste any time pulling out, did they?” 
“Did you expect them to?” 
“No. Did you talk with Security Services?” 
“Double-S and Brinks as well. We’ll have something by Fri-
day.” 
The gates swung out, and the crowd’s roar intensified as they 
recognized the Cadillac. Malko braked to 10 kph and drove the 
hovercar straight through them. Several of the demonstrators 
spat on the Cadillac, but nobody threw anything, and nobody at-
tempted to touch the car. 
UPSTAIRS, IN THE two-room suite that he and Jany shared, Carl 
slowly undressed. Almost nobody was left awake; only a dozen or 
so of the elder telepaths echoed their thoughts through the 
Complex, and apparently none of those dozen had anything ur-
gent to say to Carl. Savoring the privacy, he gave the cloak and 
vest to the housebot, kicking off the high soft boots, and went to 
the bar to fix himself a drink. The nap in the back of Malko’s car 
had not been a good idea; he still felt exhausted, and his eyes 
were grainy. He hadn’t slept much in the preceding weeks, and 
not at all in the last three days. Four fingers of smoke whiskey 
went into the tumbler, and he placed the glass under the SloMo. 
He waited with an irrational displeasure with the universe 
while the heat was sucked from the tumbler. 

56   Tales 
 
The liquor came out of the SloMo bitingly cold, so cold there 
was no taste to it. Carl left his shirt and pants at the side of the 
bed for the housebot to pick up, and laid down atop the covers. 
The bed was notably large; it could sleep six in comfort, and 
sometimes did. The one time Suzanne Montignet had visited 
them, to give the telepaths their semiannual physicals, she’d 
seemed particularly amused by the bed; the sort of thing, she 
said, that she’d have expected to find in the place where Malko 
Kalharri lived. 
His exhaustion took him quickly. He finished the first whis-
key and had the housebot bring him another. The whiskey was 
five years old, laid down in 2057; for smoke whiskey that was 
old. There was only one distillery, in orbit, with the facilities to 
selectively flip the isomers that produced the subtle, distinctive 
taste. The distillery was a wholly owned subsidiary of Tytan 
Manufacturing, and the drink had only been available for the 
last decade or so. Which was as well; if the drink had been 
available when Carl was in his teens, he thought he might have 
become a drunk. 
His eyes did not close immediately. He was not, on the sur-
face of his mind, truly looking at the painting on the wall facing 
the foot of the bed. Nonetheless, his gaze came to rest there, to 
rove over the features of a woman half human, half feline. Her 
face was essentially human, and exotically, painfully lovely; 
high cheekbones, and slitted blue cat’s eyes. Her eyes had been 
sensitive to sunlight; when Carl had painted her she had kept 
her eyes half lidded to help shield them from the harsh light. 
Fine brown fur covered her face except for the very thin lips. Her 
ears were feline, pointed and mobile, capable of tracking sounds. 
After a while Carl stopped looking at the painting of Shana 
de Nostri, took a deep sip of the whiskey, and let himself sink 
down into the dimness of approaching sleep. It was quite pleas-
ant, to lie there and let the alcohol take the edge off the Gift, to 
reduce the fine-tuned sensitivity to the rough intruding outer 
world. He was halfway through his second drink, and pleasantly 
buzzed, when Jany came into the room. 

Moran   57 
 
 
It was too much effort to open his eyes. In a floating dark-
ness, he forced his lips to move, his throat to generate sound. 
“How are they?” 
The bed shifted under her weight. “Allie’s fine. You knocked 
her straight out. She’s not sure what happened. Johnny’s in bad 
shape.” 
“How bad?” 
“He’ll have nightmares for a while. Depression, probably. 
He’s got a headache, but I think that’ll be gone by morning.” 
“Did you tell him I’m sorry?” 
“Why don’t you tell him yourself?” 
Carl considered the question as an abstract problem. “In the 
morning, I guess. I could do it in the morning.” 
“Sure.” Flesh touched his hand, and he felt the tumbler being 
lifted out of his grasp. “I don’t think you need any more of this.” 
It wasn’t worth arguing about. “Okay.” 
“Johnny asked me to sleep with him tonight.” 
“Oh.” He exhaled slowly, and with a supreme effort forced his 
eyes open. He had trouble focusing. “This is a big bed for only 
one person.” 
Carl thought she was smiling. “I could send Malko up. He 
said much the same thing.” 
“Not my type.” 
“Heather’s still awake, and Marie.” 
“That’s okay.” 
Jany nodded. “Command, lights down.” In the darkness, Carl 
let his eyes close again. “Go to sleep, baby. I’ll be here when you 
wake up.” 
“Good enough.” 
“Good night.” 
When she was gone, Carl let himself drift. Alcohol shut down 
the telepathic ability with remarkable effectiveness, as though it 
had been designed for that task. None of the children drank, and 
none of the elder telepaths drank as much as Carl. 
He was glad, on the occasions he bothered to think about it, 
that the one thing that shut out the world enough to make the 

58   Tales 
 
world a tolerable place was also something that he enjoyed for 
itself. 
He was still trying to decide whether to have the housebot 
make him another when the exhaustion caught him and dragged 
him down into the darkness. 
 
5. 
AT THE PALACE of the Ministre Gènèral of the United Nations, at 
Lake Geneva in Switzerland, an old man paced restlessly across 
a thick carpet. Look at him with me for a moment; the years 
have been kind to Darryl Amnier. He has looked elderly since 
his thirtieth birthday; now at 75 he is elderly, by the standards 
of twenty-first-century Earth’s medicine. The wrinkles have 
given character to a face that was once too bland, and the quick 
smile and bright, animated expression that he has cultivated 
have made him into an idealized image of an unthreatening pa-
triarch. 
Beneath it he has not changed, except to mellow slightly. The 
things that he once loved he now loves less, and that which he 
hated he now despises with less passion; but they are the same 
loves, and the same hates, and the minor passions of the most 
powerful man in the world are more significant than the great-
est passions of one whom the world has not made mighty. 
Across the room from him, seated at opposite ends of the 
huge, curved leather couch, were two members of his immediate 
staff, Jerril Carson and Charles Eddore, and two senior mem-
bers of the Ministry of Population Control. One of the two, Gab-
rielle Laronde, was the senior non-elected official in the 
Ministry. Others came and went; she alone was always there. 
Darryl Amnier enjoyed her company. She was one of the few 
members of his administration about whom he could say that. A 
terrible thing, he thought with brief distraction, when the com-
pany of your enemies is generally more pleasant than that of your 
allies. He did not let Gabrielle eat in his presence; for the first 
decade he’d known her she had been a pleasantly plump young 

Moran   59 
 
 
woman. She was better looking now than she had been when he 
met her; empty food, made of left-handed sugars, had helped her 
lose the weight she would not have lost otherwise. Gabrielle had 
given up attempting to control her diet; nearly every time Darryl 
saw her she was munching on something. He felt it an obscenity, 
so much time and effort spent on empty food in a world where so 
many people were dying of starvation. 
He stopped pacing in mid-stride and turned to face them. 
Carson was sipping at his coffee, and dapper young Eddore was 
politely covering a yawn. Jerril looked ill, gray and shaky, and 
Amnier found that of concern also. Jerril’s obsession with Cas-
tanaveras was never far beneath the surface; but in the last few 
weeks it had been virulent. “Charles?” 
Eddore lifted his fingers from the InfoNet terminal in his lap. 
The flickering video field above the keyboard vanished. “Yes?” 
“Have you got anything on Malko?” 
“No.” 
Amnier waited, and presently Eddore said mildly, “Were you 
expecting something?” Still Amnier waited, and Eddore said 
with a sigh of irritation, “He’s clean, of course. There are Johnny 
Rebs out there, and Erisian Claw as well. We catch the odd 
ideolog every now and again and braindrain them. Most of them 
don’t know anything outside of their immediate cell, and the 
ones who do never know anything about Kalharri. Either the 
undergrounds have been smart enough not to contact him, or 
he’s been smart enough to turn away the ones who have come 
calling.” 
“Can we trump something?” 
Eddore raised one eyebrow in slight surprise. “Of course.” His 
pronunciation betrayed the years at Harvard, and the years of 
professional public speaking since that time. He was the most 
likable, trustworthy-seeming person Darryl Amnier knew, and 
Amnier moved in circles where there were thousands like Ed-
dore. “As you know, my offices have no objection to handling the 
Castanaveras matter in any fashion you find pleasing.” 
“As I know,” Amnier agreed humorlessly. “Gabrielle, what is 
the legal status of those children?” 

60   Tales 
 
Gabrielle’s assistant glanced at her superior, received a nod 
of confirmation, and fielded the question. She spoke French flu-
ently, with a strong British accent. “That’s a good question. 
Given that the Unification Council has voted that they are hu-
mans, with all of the rights of any normally birthed citizen of the 
United Nations, we are essentially starting over again at the be-
ginning. There are a thousand questions that will need to be de-
cided under both Occupied American and United Nations law, 
but they basically boil down to the following: 
“One, are the children subject to the Ministry of Population 
Control? Under normal circumstances I’d be tempted to argue 
that position, and especially so in an American civil court. Else-
where in the world, over two hundred children being raised by 
so few adults might not raise as much comment, but in the U.S. 
the situation is not common, and the telepaths are not popular. I 
think many civil judges would tend to listen favorably to an ar-
gument that Castanaveras and the other half dozen or so adults 
out there do not constitute a desirable environment for those 
children to grow up in. 
“Second, do the telepaths owe either the United Nations 
Peace Keeping Forces or the Bureau of Biotechnology any mon-
eys relating to their creation, care, and upbringing? Granted 
that they were raised by Peaceforcers, and their upbringing re-
searched and paid for by the Bureau of Biotech, there exists a 
rather firm precedent, in the case of the MPC’s Bureau of Public 
Labor. Children raised under Public Labor are liable for the cost 
of raising them. Often that’s offset in a variety of ways, so that 
the Public Labor client need not pay the entire amount, but the 
principle is in place. If it can be established that the telepaths 
are liable for those services, how much can they be charged? 
“Lastly, can they be allowed to work for anyone but the PKF? 
The Official Secrets Acts of 2048 and 2054 make it possible for 
us—conceding the Eighth Amendment to the Statement of Prin-
ciples to be valid—to stop Castanaveras from peddling his peo-
ple’s skills, on the grounds that they are detrimental to the 
security of the Unification.” 

Moran   61 
 
 
Charles Eddore said dryly, “Wonderful Acts, those. Prose-
cuted any number of ideologs on them, and the occasional politi-
cian as well.” He tapped away at the quiet keyboard for a 
moment and then added without looking at them, “Too many 
ideologs, not enough politicians.” 
Amnier smiled politely at the comment. “Jerril?” 
Jerril Carson did not even look up from his coffee. “This af-
ternoon Castanaveras met at the offices of Kalharri Enterprises 
with Francis Xavier Chandler, Belinda Singer, Marc Packard, 
Randall Getty Cristofer, and Tio Sandoval. I’ve been unable to 
ascertain the details of the conversation so far. Tio Sandoval 
seems approachable; he offered to discuss the subject of Cas-
tanaveras with me, but he was not in a hurry, and right now we 
are in no position to push a man with his sort of power. He—I 
mean Castanaveras,” said Carson with grim precision, “he was 
there, as were Jane McConnell and Malko Kalharri.” 
“Not much useful there,” said Amnier thoughtfully. 
Jerril Carson’s head came up. His smile looked ghastly. “Not 
exactly. Marc Packard—I correlated the five for prior links. I 
think we want to be careful about touching Packard directly, but 
Packard’s bodyguard is Neil Corona.” 
Darryl Amnier actually whistled. “Oh, my.” 
Eddore and Gabrielle looked puzzled. Amnier said gently, 
“That was the name of the young man who surrendered the Ma-
rine Corps of the old U.S., outside of Yorktown. He’d be in his 
sixties by now?” He glanced at Carson. 
“Seventy, almost seventy-one. He was born May 7, 1991. He’s 
apparently in rather remarkable physical condition, even given 
modern geriatrics; he’s one of those lucky few the treatments 
just seem to take with...like Kalharri. He’s been with Packard 
nearly twenty years now. I don’t have records on his activities 
before that time—it was a while after the end of the War before 
record keeping was taken up again.” 
“Coincidence?” 
Gabrielle said, half to herself, “It hardly matters, does it? 
We’ve got Kalharri. Two high-ranking leaders of the old Sons of 
Liberty, meeting in secret the day after the telepaths are freed?” 

62   Tales 
 
She smiled beatifically. “Darryl, if you want Kalharri, I do not 
think you will ever have a better opportunity.” 
Amnier nodded, resumed pacing. A conflict he had not ex-
pected ate at him. Forty-five years, he thought; who plans for 
forty-five years? Finally he turned back to Carson. “Talk to 
Sandoval. Find out why Corona was there. Find out about Kal-
harri’s contact with him.” 
“Why?” 
Amnier stared at Carson until the other man looked away. 
“Because,” he said flatly, daring the man to object, “I want to 
know.” 
There was no contest of wills; Carson looked back down into 
his cooling coffee and muttered, “Certainly.” 
A smile flickered across Charles Eddore’s features, and van-
ished before Amnier could be certain it had been there. 
Eddore returned to his computer. 
THERE IS, AS I know from personal experience, no meaning to 
simultaneity, no validity to the concept that there can ever be 
two events happening at the same time. It is no more possible 
that two events can occupy the same instant than that two ob-
jects can occupy the same space. Space separates events from 
simultaneity in the same way, and as certainly, as time sepa-
rates objects from occupying the same space. 
All of this is true at the level of quantum physics. 
In the gross physical world of early Man, as Darryl Amnier 
was being presented with an ethical dilemma of which he had 
not suspected himself capable, at that moment, the object of his 
dilemma could not sleep. 
Malko’s bedroom on the second story overlooked the demon-
strators at the north gate. Lying in bed with the curtains open, 
he could not help but see the flaring lights of the dramasuits, 
casting laser-bright light in half a dozen primary shades 
through the transparent window. He could have risen and opaq-
ued the window himself, or else called in the housebot and had 
the housebot do it; but either alternative called for more effort 
than he cared to invest. 

Moran   63 
 
 
It astonished him, how his body had begun to demand sleep 
as he grew older. There was little else to indicate how old he 
was; with modern geriatrics his appearance, his wind, and his 
strength were consistent with that of a forty-year-old of a cen-
tury or so past. But for a man who had spent the last fifty years 
getting by on three to four hours’ sleep a night, the need to sleep 
every night, as much as seven to eight hours, was infuriating. 
But now he couldn’t get to sleep though he was vastly tired, 
and that was worse. Finally he sat up at the side of the bed and 
opened the drawer in the bedside table. 
For the first time that evening he was glad that none of the 
women who were still awake had been able to spend the night 
with him. None of them would have stopped him from taking the 
fadeaway he kept at his bedside, but neither would they have 
approved. Psychoactive drugs were not popular among the tele-
paths. 
Fadeaway was only mildly psychoactive. It was the by-
product of research by the Peaceforcers into a water-soluble 
drug for use in crowd control. Sprayed over a crowd at the 
proper dosages, it would indeed put an unruly crowd to sleep. It 
was safer than sonic stunners, and much safer than anesthetic 
needlers. Physical side effects were minimal; the sprayed crowd 
went to sleep, and awoke two to four hours later. 
The form of the drug Malko took was vastly diluted from the 
dosage the Peaceforcers used for crowd control. 
He drowsed and suddenly found himself down in the dream. 
IT SEEMED AT first that he was still awake, with the laser holo-
lights playing across the walls of his suite, splashing across the 
walls in shades of blood and gold and emeralds. Suddenly he re-
alized that even through the shut window he could hear the 
faint chants of the picketers. He rose and touched the point that 
swung the bay windows up and out. 
The cool night air rushed in to touch him, and the howl of the 
crowd grew louder. He stood at the window, shivering, watching 
the surging mob at the gates. One dramasuit lased into exis-
tence, and showed a genie, a horned, tailed djinn, arising from a 

64   Tales 
 
copper lamp. The djinn floated over the crowd, howling wordless 
rage. 
Malko was cynically surprised that it had no pitchfork. 
The devil turned, the laser of its eyes traced out to meet the 
flesh of the man who stood before it, and its howl became a su-
personic scream that dug into Malko Kalharri’s skull and bur-
rowed, seeking his soul. 
And finding. 
HE STUMBLED THROUGH the remains of the camp, a ghost in a 
landscape from Dante’s Inferno, laser rifle clutched in his left 
hand, autoshot in the right. The camp of the Sons of Liberty was 
spread out across two square kilometers of Virginia forest. The 
day was blisteringly hot and humid, and sweat trickled down 
Malko’s body. He beheld the world through mirrored sunglasses. 
The shades amplified light at night, cut down glare during the 
day; if he were unlucky enough to take a laser across the eyes 
they would protect his eyes for about two seconds, except at 
point-blank range. Porous polycarbon was painted across every 
exposed skin surface except for the palms of his hands. His fa-
tigues were woven through with green and red fiberglass that 
matched the optical frequencies of the commonest laser rifles. 
He was as well protected as the mudfucking Peaceforcers 
they had fought against, as well protected as Corona’s Marines, 
as safe as any soldier had a right to be. 
As safe as Greg had been. 
Long stretches of the ground he walked on had been melted 
into strips, about a meter wide, of a glassy material. Over a 
dozen small fires still burned in the forest. 
For as far as he could see he was the only living human be-
ing. 
He walked north with the vague idea that he would find the 
Marines and join whatever remained of them. 
That morning, while the two of them sat together outside the 
tent where Operations was being conducted, Grigorio Castanav-
eras had confirmed Malko’s worst fears. 
“The Old Man says we’re going to surrender.” 

Moran   65 
 
 
Malko hung his head in quiet despair. For two nights they 
had watched the flashes of light in the night sky; all that was 
visible, from Earth, of the battle between the orbital battalion of 
the U.S. Marine Corps and the United Nations Space Force. At 2 
A.M. the previous night, the lights had finally ceased. “Shit. 
Space Force took the orbitals.” 
“So we hear.” Castanaveras crushed a stimtab and inhaled it 
without pausing. “The President says he’s decided to surrender. 
The Old Man’s over at his tent arguing with him, but I don’t 
think it’s going to do any good.” The whites around Grigorio Cas-
tanaveras’ brown irises widened as the stim took hold. The 
sleepy look on his face fell away, as Malko watched, and turned 
almost cheerful. “Personally, I just want to catch your buddy 
Darryl and have him alone for a few hours before he dies. Then 
we can surrender.” 
“He’s not my friend.” The dreaming mind whispered, not my 
friend. 
Greg eyed him. The facade of good cheer vanished instantly. 
“Had better fucking not be. I had him that once, before the war 
started, and I knew he was no good, and I let the bastard go any-
way.” He spoke to himself. “I don’t think I’m ever going to stop 
regretting that.” He looked at Malko. “You and I and the Old 
Man; we’re it, all of the Secret Service that’s left except for Dar-
ryl. If they take our surrender, Malko, you and me and maybe 
even the Old Man, if he’s up to it, we’re going to take Amnier 
down. The rest of those bastards who’re with Almundsen at least 
did it because they believed her, did it because they think she’s 
right. 
“Darryl,” said Castanaveras in a clinical tone of voice that 
contrasted savagely with his expression, “is with them because 
he thinks they’re going to win.” 
Malko’s earphone clicked on. It made an odd echoing sound 
inside his skull; he’d almost had time to forget how strange it 
felt. For most of the last year policy had been to forego using 
them. There was a slight but real possibility that the radio sig-
nals might have given away their location. Now, the policy made 
no sense; the Peaceforcers knew exactly where they were. 

66   Tales 
 
The Old Man’s voice said, “Assemble for orders.” 
Malko glanced at Greg, found that the other man could not 
meet his gaze. “Come on, Greg,” he said quietly, “let’s go hear 
the bad news.” He climbed to his feet and extended his hand to 
pull his friend up. Greg looked at the hand expressionlessly, and 
then took it and let Malko pull him to his feet. They left the 
shelter of the trees, with the rest of their troops, the troops who 
were the cream of the Sons of Liberty, assigned to the battalion 
the President himself commanded, heading at that last moment 
out into the small clearing to assemble before the President’s 
tent. 
Malko Kalharri was four steps ahead of Grigorio Castanav-
eras. 
Light fell from the sky. 
Malko’s first thought was, bizarrely, How lovely. The beams 
of light were pure, monochromatic ruby, with an unreal touch of 
faerie about them. While part of him stood there looking, the 
rest of him went into frantic motion, standing stock still, yank-
ing the spraytube of polycarbon skin from one pocket, spraying 
it liberally across his face and the fronts of his hands. The tube 
fell from his hand and he pulled his sunglasses out and on. Idi-
ots everywhere dropped to the ground, where their length pre-
sented the greatest cross section for the orbital laser cannon, 
and Greg was standing motionless behind him screaming in al-
most wordless rage, “Get up, up you goddamn idiot cocksucking 
sons of bitches, on your feet,” but his voice was already being 
drowned out by the screams of the soldiers who had not been 
fortunate enough to be killed instantly by the cannon fire. 
Malko stood and watched as the tent of the President of the 
United States went up in flames, and a stocky figure that could 
belong to nobody except the Old Man staggered, his body burn-
ing, from the tent’s wreckage. Meter-wide columns of light 
moved across the clearing, scores of them restlessly sweeping 
back and forth. They were colorless now; the shades automati-
cally filtered the image, provided him with a stark, enhanced 
monochrome picture of the horror that ensued. 

Moran   67 
 
 
For hours he stood and watched the beams move randomly 
across the mountainside. His legs began to cramp but he did not 
dare move. Heat sensors would be worthless until nightfall, and 
under video his brown and green fatigues would show only as an 
indistinct patch against the burnt hillside. But there would be 
motion sensors upstairs, he was sure, and knew himself correct 
when one of the wounded soldiers tried to crawl back toward the 
trees. A column of light swept over him and left behind a husk of 
burnt flesh that twitched briefly before it ceased movement. 
Greg was right behind him, and for a long time Malko heard 
him swearing, in a mixture of Spanish and English, with a fury 
and holy passion Malko had never heard from him before. 
The morning wore on and the beams of light tracked across 
the clearing. After the first half hour only six men still stood in 
Malko’s field of vision. He did not know if it was safe to turn his 
head, so he did not. As the morning passed the beams randomly 
picked off the remaining soldiers. The air was scorched with 
ozone, and so hot that Malko could breath only shallowly, 
through his nose. 
Behind him, Greg’s curses trailed off at last. Malko could see 
only three men left standing when Greg said quietly, “Malko?” 
“Yes?” 
“There’s a beam tracking my way. If I don’t make it you have 
to kill Amnier for me.” 
Malko had seen the beam. It was forty meters away, moving 
about a meter per second. It had crossed the last twenty meters 
without deviating. “Okay.” 
“If it doesn’t change direction by the time it’s within ten me-
ters of me,” said Castanaveras calmly, “I’m going to run for it. If 
I just stand here the heat will kill you just as sure.” 
Malko could think of nothing to say. At the other end of the 
clearing, a soldier Malko did not recognize at the distance was 
watching them, and the soldier shook his head no. 
It was the longest thirty seconds of Malko’s life. 
He heard the sounds of Greg’s laser and autoshot striking the 
ground beside him. Sensible. He’d be able to run faster without 
them. Grigorio Castanaveras emerged as a blur in his peripheral 

68   Tales 
 
vision, crossed into the center of his field of vision, sprinting at 
top speed toward the remains of the President’s tent. From deep 
in the dream Malko wondered why, as he had wondered for long 
years, why Greg had chosen to run toward the remains of the 
President and the Old Man. 
Chance? As good a place to die as any. 
Three different beams converged on him like snakes striking. 
He stayed on his feet while the flesh peeled back from the baked 
muscle, longer than Malko Kalharri ever wanted to remember. 
Even in a dream. 
He did not scream. Dying, Grigorio Castanaveras did not 
make a sound. 
At 11:05, according to Malko’s watch, the laser cannon 
ceased. He was the only living person in sight, in the clearing or 
anywhere in the burning forests. He waited calmly until 12:30 
precisely and then picked up Greg’s weapons and began walking 
north. 
Within his mind, Grigorio Castanaveras’ last moments, as he 
burned inside the light, played themselves over and over again. 
Within the nightmare. 
“SO MUCH VIOLENCE,” the old man whispered to himself, alone in 
the midnight dark forty-four years later. “So many changes.” He 
wondered whether Greg would have blamed him for not killing 
Amnier. He hoped not. 
The nightmare was not an unusual one, though he had it less 
frequently than in years past. At times they seemed almost ir-
relevant to him, all of the deaths; four and a half decades 
passed, and who remembered? 
Only forty-four years, and it was history already. Two gen-
erations had grown up for whom the Unification of Earth was 
something that had happened long ago, in a galaxy far, far, 
away—and the world they knew was vastly different from the 
world of Malko Kalharri’s childhood. 
Why, most of them had never seen a room constructed from 
memory plastics. He himself had been well past his thirtieth 
birthday before he’d even heard the word inskin. 

Moran   69 
 
 
Sitting up slowly at the side of the bed, he pulled on a modest 
blue robe before calling Suzanne Montignet. 
At first her image did not appear in the darkened holofield. 
Malko called up the sunpaint and let her look him over. Finally 
the holofield lit with an image of her sitting at the desk in the 
office of her Massapequa Park home. She was lovelier now than 
the first day he had met her, over three decades ago. A faint dis-
coloration showed at her left temple, where the inskin was only 
partially covered by her hair. She smiled at him rather quizzi-
cally. “Hello, Malko. Why the late call?” 
“I can’t sleep.” 
“Sleeping alone?” 
Malko became aware of the empty bed, behind him in the 
holofield she was viewing. “Tonight, yes.” 
Suzanne nodded. Without apparent irony she said, “That’s 
not like you.” 
Malko shrugged. “We got back from Capital City fairly late. 
A few of the children were awake, but...” His voice trailed away. 
“Sex with them feels like masturbation.” 
“Something like that.” His grin was tired. “Thanks for taking 
the call.” 
Suzanne said awkwardly, “Of course.” She looked uncomfort-
able for a moment, and then changed the subject. “I’ve been 
meaning to call you and offer my congratulations. You did well.” 
The compliment warmed him; there were few enough persons 
in the world whose approval mattered to him. “Thanks. It’s just 
the beginning, though. There’s so much to do. Too much.” 
She smiled at him again, with real amusement. “There’s al-
ways too much to do, Malko. Imagine how boring life would be if 
there was not.” 
Malko nodded. “I suppose.” 
“I received a call this afternoon about Johann. Andrew was 
quite concerned. Apparently Johann contacted Carl while Carl 
was in the midst of a psychotic rage. Have you seen him?” 
Malko blinked. “Who? Carl, or Johnny?” 
“Johann,” Suzanne said with a touch of impatience. “I’m sure 
Carl is fine. These rages are nothing abnormal for him.” 

70   Tales 
 
“No, I haven’t seen him.” 
“I may need to come visit the Complex, then. He may need 
therapy.” 
“I think,” said Malko carefully, “that you had better talk to 
Jany before you attempt to arrange anything like that.” 
Suzanne seemed surprised. “Malko, of course. I know Jany 
dislikes me, but it’s not mutual.” She chuckled. “She thinks I’m 
an egocentric old bitch without the empathy of an alligator—all 
of which,” she said, still smiling slightly, “is true. But those are 
not always weaknesses.” She studied his image momentarily. “I 
know you love her. Are you in love with her?” 
“No.” Honestly, he added, “I don’t think so.” 
“Very well. I would recommend against it. I think she would 
handle it fairly well; I doubt you would.” 
Malko said slowly, “I don’t think that’s fair.” 
Suzanne sighed. One hand reached out of the frame of her 
phonecam and came back holding a pointboard from which a 
thin cable of optic fiber ran. “I wasn’t talking about us, Malko. 
The relationship we have had is not possible between you and 
Jany. That is probably...for the better.” 
“Yes.” 
Suzanne changed the subject, again. “How are Trent, and the 
twins?” 
Malko wrapped the robe more tightly around himself, becom-
ing aware for the first time of how cool the room was. “Why do 
you ask?” 
“Curiosity.” 
I don’t know if I believe that, thought Malko to himself. “I ha-
ven’t seen Trent in a month, not to talk to. The twins are fine. I 
told them a bedtime story a week or so ago. They’re growing 
fast, as their parents did.” 
Malko was surprised at how his pulse leapt when she asked 
the question. “Malko, do you think I should visit?” 
“To see who?” 
Suzanne’s smile froze painfully in place, and then she whis-
pered, “Oh, Malko. You.” 

Moran   71 
 
 
Malko Kalharri found a grin splitting his features. “Of course 
you should visit. What the hell else would I call you for at this 
time of night?” 
She nodded. “I’ll see you tomorrow, then. Good-bye.” 
Her image vanished into blackness; the holofield silvered and 
flickered out. Malko went back to bed and slept the rest of the 
night without dreams. 
THEY SAT IN the center of the park in early morning sunshine 
and played a game that only Trent understood. 
Trent was not there. 
The twins sat together, sharing a keyboard, watching the 
holofield Trent controlled. Both of them wore tracesets, clamped 
at their temples. Denice was not certain she understood the 
game; David thought he did, and was wrong. 
They resembled nothing else so much as miniature versions 
of their parents. They were the children of Carl Castanaveras 
and Jany McConnell, who were, to twenty-two twenty-thirds, 
genetically the same person. With the exception of Malko Kal-
harri they were the only residents of the Complex whose genetic 
structure was not the result of work by genegineers. Suzanne 
Montignet had examined their genetic structures within weeks 
of their conception, and pronounced them sound. If Carl Cas-
tanaveras had any significant flaws within his genetic makeup, 
the luck of the draw had kept his union with Jany McConnell 
from reinforcing them. It was statistically likely that no such 
flaws existed. 
There were minor differences between the twins and their 
parents; while her brother David would never be considered any-
thing but plain, Trent had once told Denice that she was, for a 
fact, the prettiest girl who had ever lived, and he was including 
both Jany and Doctor Montignet in that. Sometimes Denice 
could not tell if Trent was telling her the truth or not. 
He lied so much of the time. 
The holofield that hovered before the twins was matte black. 
Within its depths, gold and blue sparks swirled restlessly. None 
of them, not David, nor Denice, nor Trent himself, had the vagu-

72   Tales 
 
est idea what the Gift would be like when it came; but already 
they knew what silent speech was like. 
Tracesets can give you a feel for what’s happening inside the Net, but from 
what I’ve audited, I think it’s only approximate. You need an inskin and an Image 
coprocessor for serious work. A brilliant green grid established itself 
in a horizontal plane that bisected the black cube of the 
holofield. Peaceforcers, the DataWatch, they still use tracesets. 
The sounds of keys tapping came to the twins. The inskin you can’t 
get until you stop growing; an Image you can start work on right now. Three parts 
to preparation when you make a run. You, equipment and the Image. You have to 
be alert when you go in. Don’t go in when you’re tired or thirsty or have to pee. 
Orange cables, chaotically tangled, began wrapping themselves 
through the space over the green grid. Hardware is easy. You don’t use 
a pointboard; they’re cheaper and they last longer but you can’t feel for sure if you 
hit the key you wanted. Usually you won’t use the keyboard much, and the better 
you get with your traceset the less you’ll have to; but when you do have to it’s im-
portant. MPU hardware, well, the faster it is the better, but it’s not critical. What you 
really need is equipment powerful enough to hijack somebody else’s equipment. 
There’s a lot of logic out there that hardly gets used. Beneath the green 
grid, red pulses flickered in and out of existence. Okay, we’re ready. 
Break it down for me. 
David leaned forward. “Orange is leased-line optic fiber. Blue 
sparks are logic, and gold sparks are Players.” 
“Live sign,” said Denice. 
A silent laugh echoed in her head. That’s what DataWatch calls it. 
Media calls us webdancers. What we are is Players...Players in the Crystal Wind. 
“You keep saying that,” Denice accused. “But you don’t tell us 
what it is.” 
There was no inflection in the voice that touched them then. 
It was the voice of a machine, speaking the words of a litany: The 
Crystal Wind is the Storm, and the Storm is Data, and the Data is Life. 
Denice felt the palms of her hands grow damp as he spoke. 
That voice—it scared her when he sounded like that. She didn’t 
even know how a person could think like that, sort of empty and 
silver all at once. 
The voice of logic. 
Finish up, David. 

Moran   73 
 
 
“Red is web angels,” David finished. “Written with algothims 
that—” 
Algorithms. 
“Algorithms,” the boy said precisely, “that give them access 
to not need to hook into the power supply so that power traps 
can’t kill them, but because they can’t get to the power supply 
they finally die. But DataWatch doesn’t care because they make 
more of them all the time.” 
Denice said, half questioningly, “Web angels loop your Image 
to destroy it and some of them can backtrack and burn you too.” 
There was no reply from Trent, and encouraged, she continued, 
“If there were any AI inside they would be white dots, but there 
hardly ever are.” 
…hardly ever. Okay, this is a simple one. This is the easiest part of what you 
have to learn to do. Generate your Image, and send it inside. I’m a Franco-DEC 
MicroVAX, and my users have me running distributed leaseline accounting for 
small businesses all over the East Coast. But it’s midnight now, and all of the ac-
countants who use me have gone home until the morning. I’ve finished most of the 
jobs they’ve given me, and about eighty percent of my logic is available. 
David hunched over the keyboard he was sharing with Den-
ice, and touched the home row. “And we have to hijack you.” 
Right. Who are you? 
David said. “Edmond Dantes.” 
Who? 
“The Count of Monte Cristo.” 
There’s already a Count in the Net. 
“That’s how come I’m Edmond Dantes instead.” 
There was a pause. That works. Who are you, Denice? 
“Joan of Arc.” 
Can’t be. There’s already a Player named that. 
“Why can’t I be?” 
Because when you go into the Web you have to have an Image ready for— 
“But we’re not going into the Web. This is just a game!” 
No, said Trent flatly, it’s not. 
The girl folded her arms sulkily. “I suppose somebody’s al-
ready using Rebecca of York?” 

74   Tales 
 
No. Denice suspected that Trent, wherever he was, was grin-
ning, which only made her angrier. Who is she? 
“She was the Jewess in Ivanhoe who nobody would stick up 
for except Ivanhoe.” 
That works. Two soundless clicks reached them through their 
tracesets. I’m running Purolator security firmware. You get that much of a hint. 
Now go. 
David loaded Image into memory, keyed for code decryption 
routines, and went after the imaginary minicomputer being con-
trolled by Trent. 
Denice sat, and watched him, and eventually the anger faded 
from her clear green eyes, and she began to grow interested. 
“GO AWAY,” Carl snarled at the evil intruding voices. Then an in-
tolerably bright light spilled across his face and he jerked up-
right in bed, blinking. They were all standing well back from the 
bed, at the other side of the room, Gerry McKann and Johnny 
and Andy. Gerry and Johnny were dressed for outdoors; nine-
teen-year-old Andrew Thomas, one of the nine elder telepaths 
born before the deluge, was wearing a white cotton jumpsuit 
with pockets in unlikely places. He was vaguely European fea-
tured, with pale olive skin and brilliant green eyes. 
Carl stuffed pillows behind himself and leaned back against 
the headboard. “I feel like shit. What time is it?” 
“About ten fifteen,” said Gerry. “You look like shit, too,” he of-
fered. 
Carl’s left hand was numb where he’d been sleeping on it. 
Feeling began to come back in pins and needles, and he grim-
aced. To Gerry he said with a ragged attempt at grace, “Sorry I 
snarled at you yesterday.” 
Gerry shrugged. “If you didn’t act like a jerk all the time peo-
ple would worry about you.” 
“Where’s Jany? She said she would be here this morning.” 
“She was,” Andy informed him cheerfully. “But you wouldn’t 
get up, so about an hour ago she went to have breakfast.” 
Carl nodded. “I don’t remember.” Johnny gazed steadily at 
him. From a vast distance, Carl turned to face him. Without 

Moran   75 
 
 
asking he seized Johnny and took him out and up into the oth-
erworld, vaguely aware of the expression of concern that was on 
Gerry’s face, of the voice saying faintly, Carl, is something 
wrong, and then— 
THEY STOOD TOGETHER in the vast darkness of the otherworld, in 
a place that had not even existed until the Gift began to appear 
in the children. Beneath them a flat crystal plain ran away to 
infinity. Bright lights flickered off at the edges of existence, so 
far away that no telepath had ever even attempted to find out 
what the lights were. In their immediate vicinity a nimbus of 
light and warmth pulsed, the scattered thoughts of nearly two 
hundred and fifty minds. Beyond that nimbus was a vast, dim 
glow; the massed minds of humanity. 
Carl said, How are you? 
Johnny stood before him, a fine blue tracing of nerves glow-
ing dimly through his skin, running up into the brainstem, to-
ward the bright, almost white glow that permeated his skull. He 
was among the least powerful of all the telepaths; with him, and 
again with nearly a score of the children, the genegineers had 
attempted to improve upon the trio of genes that had produced 
Carl. In some ways they had been successful; the telepaths 
without the full gene complex were easily the calmest, most 
emotionally stable of the group. They were also the least power-
ful telepaths. 
I’m fine. The horror in him was palpable. You’re— 
Carl avoided the otherworld whenever possible. You see me 
as I am. Jerril Carson saw it once when I was very angry. Jany 
has seen this, and now you. I have seen it myself, through her 
eyes. You look into this blaze of light and ask yourself if you can 
still love me. 
The horror radiated from Johnny in waves, horror mixed 
with fear, as the light and the heat of Carl’s person washed over 
him. Oh, God, Carl—what are you? 
I am a man, who is not sane. But I love you. I’m sorry I hurt 
you, Johnny. I am not very different from most men. I am only 
different from you, and the children, because you were raised by 

76   Tales 
 
Jany, who is nearly sane, and the children were raised by you 
and Andy and Will, and you, and they, are sane. 
Johnny vanished abruptly, and Carl turned— 
—blinked once, and said mildly, “What the hell are you doing 
here, anyway, Gerry?” 
Gerold McKann looked back and forth between the three 
telepaths. “I’m never going to get used to that,” he said conver-
sationally. To Carl he said, “We had an appointment. You made 
it a couple of months ago, remember?” 
Andy said patiently, “We’re going to go buy a car. As of this 
morning at 6 A.M., when the banks opened, Kalharri Ltd. shows 
a balance of CU:825,000, drawn against the credit of Chandler 
Industries.” 
Carl bounced out of bed and stood facing them. “You’re kid-
ding.” 
Gerry said mildly, “Uh, Carl...” 
“Oh.” Carl looked down at himself. “I’ll get dressed.” He 
looked up again and said, “Everybody coming?” 
Gerry nodded and Andy said, “Sure.” Johnny looked startled, 
realized he was being addressed, and then smiled rather lopsid-
edly. “Yeah, I’m coming.” 
Carl looked down at the carpeted floor for a second, and then 
looked up at Johann and said, “Thanks.” 
To the other two he said, “Let me cycle through the shower 
and get some clothes on, and let’s go have some fun.” 
JANY SAT CROSS-LEGGED in the center of the kitchen, cooking. 
She was stir-frying chicken strips with her left hand, and hold-
ing a cookbook open with her right. Whoever had programmed 
environment today had stuck with classical music for most of 
the morning; the outspeakers began by playing eighteenth-
century French ballads that Jany found she liked even though 
her French was atrocious, and then segued into one of her favor-
ite synthesized works, Vangelis’ Chariots of Fire. The kitchen 
was huge; only the Complex’s dining room and auditorium were 
larger. On the other side of the kitchen two waitbots made late 

Moran   77 
 
 
breakfasts, or early lunches, for those of the children who had, 
for whatever reason, missed early breakfast. 
She was trying a recipe from a cookbook Suzanne Montignet 
had given her for her thirteenth birthday. The cookbook was a 
plastipaper hardcopy of recipes taken from the BETTER HOMES 
AND GARDENS Board, with gorgeous—and, at the time of its 
printing, expensive—neon-laser etchings of the various dishes. 
It had not been new when Jany had received it as a gift; now it 
was nearly twenty years out of date, and it was making things 
interesting. 
One of the waitbots stood at attention immediately behind 
her. In past years both Jany and Willi, their only other decent 
cook, had cooked for themselves without paying attention to 
whether the meals were reproducible. That was a habit that had 
ended when the telepaths had taken over the Complex. She had 
never really had the opportunity to talk at length with F.X. 
Chandler, for all that he was clearly taken with her. Unlike 
some of the men business forced her to deal with, Chandler was 
a gentleman. 
A gentleman with a monocrystal constitution, judging from 
his diet. 
It had taken her nearly two days, after the telepaths had re-
ceived Peaceforcer permission to occupy the Chandler Complex, 
to decipher the contents of Chandler’s cooking programs. She’d 
spent most of those two days doing nothing else, while first the 
few adults, and then the children, began complaining and did 
not cease. 
Jany still had no idea how a man of F.X. Chandler’s age could 
have survived on a diet with so much sugar, salt, lipid, alcohol, 
THP and amphetamines. The staples of his diet were foods she 
had never heard of before. Hamburgers were familiar, and hot 
dogs, though she considered them unhealthy; but what were 
“Oreos?” And “Twinkies?” The menu had been full of foods with 
those words in them. The “Twinkie Fiend Surprise” she had 
found simply astonishing, and the “Double Stuff Oreo Zombie” 
had been even worse, a revolting mixture of ice cream, cookies 
laden with extra lard, liquid THP and amphetamines. 

78   Tales 
 
Gary Auerbach, one of the few Peaceforcers stationed with 
them at the Complex whom Jany had either liked or trusted, 
told her once that Chandler had been, in his younger, wilder 
days, a “satanic drug fiend heavy metal musician.” 
Jany wasn’t certain what any of that meant, except that if it 
related to his diet she believed it. With few exceptions she was 
vastly pleased with the Complex; one of the exceptions was the 
kitchen. Most of the kitchen was custom hardware, which meant 
that standard cooking programs had to be extensively modified 
to run, so extensively modified that it made as much sense to 
program again from scratch. 
As she was doing. 
Sighing in frustration, she put Chandler and his improbable 
digestion out of her mind and returned to the problem at hand. 
She was starting to regret using the old cookbook; things had 
changed enough in twenty years that, with modern kitchen 
equipment, the Better Homes and Gardens recipes from the 
early 2040’s were almost impossible to prepare. 
“’Bot,” she said abruptly, “it says here I’m supposed to chill 
the sauce, once boiling, by taking it out of the microwave oven 
and putting it into the freezer for five minutes. Guestimate for 
the same job, maser to SloMo?” 
The waitbot draped a flexible spyeye over her shoulder and 
focused on the page’s surface. It spoke in a cheerful male bari-
tone. “Bearing in mind that maser cooks more quickly and 
evenly than bouncer microwaves, assume fifty-six to fifty-seven 
percent of the cooking time listed for microwave ovens. SloMo 
cooling times are irrelevant, given a target temperature. Are the 
ambient temperatures for ‘freezers’ given?” 
Jany shook her head. “No.” 
The waitbot said simply, “Accessing...for the Mitsui Kenmore 
Refrigerator Module SMM2-202, a model popular from 2037 
through 2045, ambient default freezer temperature was -8 de-
grees. Given the mass of the orange almond sauce, five minutes 
at -8 degrees would bring the sauce to an ambient temperature 
of two to three degrees.” 

Moran   79 
 
 
Jany nodded. The chicken had reached the proper degree of 
brownness; she scooped the strips onto a plate and put the 
steaming pile of meat into the stasis box, popped a single strip of 
chicken into her mouth, and turned the stasis field on. Steam 
froze in mid-air, and Jany glanced back over her shoulder at the 
waitbot. “How long is that for the SloMo?” 
The waitbot said conversationally, “Eyeball it at 8.3 seconds, 
to bring the sauce to approximately one degree Centigrade. It is 
clearly the intent of the recipe’s author to produce a sauce as 
close to freezing as possible, without inducing the formation of 
those unpleasant ice crystals.” 
Jany bit down savagely on her lower lip to prevent herself 
from going into a fit of giggles. “Yes,” she said at last in a high-
pitched voice, “those unpleasant ice crystals can be a bitch.” 
“Yes, Mademoiselle,” said the waitbot cheerfully. 
THE HOLO HOVERING over the lot said: 
Chandler Industries: Machines that Move 
Beneath the holo, the reflected sun glittered off the bright 
polypaint of over eight hundred cars in the lot at Chandler’s 
Rochester dealership. The polypaint was turned off; at night the 
cars glowed, at choice, in any of a hundred different shades. The 
cars on display ranged from small two-seater ground effect vehi-
cles all the way up to the MetalSmith Mark III, the fastest 
floater ever brought to market. 
The man met them out on the lot, as they got out of Gerry’s 
Chandler 1300; he had been waiting for them. 
Tony Angelo was unlike any other salesperson Carl had ever 
met. Selling was not difficult; Carl could have become rich at it. 
Smile frequently. Look them in the eye and radiate sincerity. 
Dress appropriately and know the product. Forget anything else 
you like, but remember their names. Make them feel good about 
the purchase, before, during, and especially after. 
Tony Angelo did, at least, know the product. 
He was a thin, dark-haired Speedfreak with a dark beard 
and mustache, slightly shorter than Carl. He moved quickly and 
spoke slowly, without a regional accent Carl could detect. He 

80   Tales 
 
greeted them dressed in dark slacks and boots that would not 
have been out of place in a corporate boardroom, and a black t-
shirt that showed the tightly corded muscles in his chest and 
shoulders. The shirt had a single breast pocket, on which the 
word CHANDLER was embroidered in glowing white thread. 
On the back of his shirt was the unofficial logo of the Speed-
freaks: Faster than the wind. 
After being introduced, Tony Angelo immediately forgot 
Andy’s and Johnny’s names, and referred to them for the rest of 
the day as the “big blond dude” and “the kid in the jumpsuit.” 
Carl he addressed, twice, as “Castanaveras.” 
Upon being introduced to Gerry McKann he said mildly, “You 
the guy who wrote that Electronic Times article on the legisla-
tion to outlaw manually operated vehicles?” 
Gerry started to smile. “Well, yes. But—” 
Tony shook his head in disgust. “Total crap. Did you actually 
talk to any of the Speedfreaks you quoted in that article?” 
“Angel de Luz and Nathan St. Denver,” said Gerry stiffly. 
“But almost forty percent of what I wrote didn’t make it onto the 
net. My editors—” 
Angelo’s lips moved beneath the beard in what might have 
been a smile. “You keep your editors in mind when they take the 
steering wheel out of your car because your reflexes aren’t as 
fast as your carcomp’s.” He turned his back on the newsdancer 
without waiting for a reply. “Even if the carcomp is dumber than 
you are, which in your case maybe it ain’t. Come along, gentle-
men, I’ve got your car out back. I hope one of you can drive it 
home.” 
LASERS OVER THE kitchen’s doorway brightened, and a holofield 
wavered into existence in the midst of the heat waves over the 
grill. Jany could not tell at first whether the pretty blond girl 
within the field was Thea or Heather; the two looked enough 
alike that unless they were both present at the same time it was 
difficult to be sure which pretty blond girl you were faced with. 
Until they touched you, at any rate. Thea wasn’t nearly as 
hot tempered as Heather, nor nearly as powerful a telepath. 

Moran   81 
 
 
Morning, Jany. Look, do you old people want to be bothered to-
day or not? I don’t have any instructions and nobody’s around 
except you and Malko and he’s still asleep. I know you had a 
busy couple of days. 
Who is it, Heather? 
Well, Willi’s up, said Heather thoughtfully, but he’s such a 
dweeb I don’t think he counts. 
Heather! 
There was the mental equivalent of a deep, put-upon sigh. 
This is the stuff that got by the filters. Doctor Montignet called 
and wants you to call her back at earliest convenience. A really 
old guy from the honorable public relations firm of Lustbader, 
Capri and Doutrè says he’s returning Carl’s call. Councilor Car-
son called and I told him to go play in vacuum and he turned the 
most incredible color. Councilor Shillon called and wants Malko 
to call him back. Brinks called and says that they’re withdraw-
ing their bid to do security for the Complex. Security Services 
called and says it’s going to cost more than they originally esti-
mated because they need help from Purolator, and they want to 
talk to Malko. I don’t have a message from this guy because he 
didn’t get through, but the call program says an editor from the 
Electronic Times has called seven times so far this morning. It 
might be Gerry’s editor, so I thought I would tell you because I 
don’t think he’s supposed to be here and he was. 
He’s not supposed to be here, said Jany absently, or at least 
not socially. If you ever talk to media, Gerry hasn’t been here so-
cially ever, you don’t know who he is, and you think the question 
is ridiculous. 
How can they not know where he is? I thought communicating 
was their business. 
With the public, dear. Not with each other. Now— 
I’m not done, said Heather, there’s more. Marc Packard called 
and wants to talk to either Malko or Carl or you, preferably 
Malko he says. He wouldn’t be specific but he says it’s an emer-
gency. There’s stuff that’s not urgent from all of the other four 
companies we signed to do work for yesterday. And this one I 
don’t know how it got through, but a Peaceforcer whose name the 

82   Tales 
 
call program didn’t get left a message for Carl that his copy of 
The Three Musketeers was still for sale. Surprised me, said 
Heather thoughtfully. He had brass balls, I could tell from how 
stiff his face was, but he wasn’t French. I thought all the Elite 
were French. 
Jany felt her mind drifting almost aimlessly with the vast 
weight of surprise. The waitbot was doing something at the grill, 
removing and placing cooked vegetables into the stasis field. The 
thought presented itself: but he’s dead. 
—dead? Who’s dead? asked Heather. 
The suborbital bounce, India to England via low Earth orbit, 
had burned on reentry. Almost none of it reached the ground 
again except for chunks of the heat shielding, and even that hur-
tled down flaming like meteorites. Nobody had ever been quite 
sure why. All anyone had known for sure was that Chris Sum-
mers, the only American Peaceforcer who had ever become an 
Elite cyborg, had bounced up in a suborbital no different from 
those that business people and officials of the Unification used 
all the time, and nothing had come back down. 
Who’s dead? 
Jany blinked. Heather should not have caught that last 
thought. The next few years, as the Gift reached its full strength 
in the children, were going to be fascinating. 
She closed her mind to Heather with an almost physical ef-
fort. “Nobody,” she said. “Wake up Malko, if you would, and have 
him call Packard, Councilor Shillon, and Security Services, in 
that order. I’d rather not bother Carl. Route the remainder of 
the messages to me, and I’ll deal with them.” 
The girl stared into the holocam on her end of the line with a 
perturbed look. “Hey, Jany, why did you do that?” 
“Because it’s safer this way. Command, cease comm.” 
Heather was opening her mouth to argue when her image van-
ished. 
IN THE RECEPTIONIST’S office near the Complex’s west entrance, 
Heather shouted at an empty holofield, “Goddamn you, I’m old 
enough!” 

Moran   83 
 
 
Sitting on the couch across from the desk Heather was using, 
her best friend, eleven-year-old Mishi, looked up from his school-
work, his face slowly whitening with pain. “That hurts,” he said 
after a moment, and began to grin despite the pain. “Hey, I felt 
that.” 
“Yeah?” Heather came from behind the desk, anger instantly 
forgotten. 
The grin grew almost impossibly wide. “Hey, I felt that.” 
Heather hugged him fiercely. Mishi, she whispered, welcome 
to the real world. I’ve missed you so much, three years when I 
couldn’t talk to you the only way that makes any sense. 
HOVERING TEN CENTIMETERS over the pavement, it looked fast 
enough that the extended airscoop brakes seemed as though 
they might be necessary just to keep it in one place. The car’s 
interior was soft brown leather, and its paint gleamed gold un-
der the midday sun. Fanwash swept at Carl’s ankles. 
“God,” said Carl after a moment’s silence. “She’s beautiful.” 
Tony Angelo looked at him sideways and gave Carl the only 
real smile Carl saw from him that day. “Isn’t she?” He walked to 
the rear of the hovercar and touched a spot above the row of rear 
turbojets. The canopy swung toward the sky, until it was still 
connected to the car only at one spot near the front bumper. 
“Chandler MetalSmith Mark III. It’s not the most expensive car 
in the world—Lamborghini makes that—just the best. Man who 
can afford her who doesn’t own one is a pussy. She’ll hold four in 
comfort and six if you’re friendly and with any reasonable load 
she’ll blow a Porsche or Lamborghini off the start. With six peo-
ple, average mass seventy kilos per, top cruising speed is 440 
kph. Six fans underneath for ground effect on the streets, three 
turbos in back for flight. Wings retract during street operation 
or else you get too much lift and the car starts to skip at around 
180 kph. Brakes are airscoop and rocket, and airscoop feeds air 
to the rams once you’re in flight. You stabilize through wings 
and fans and, at your option, the new gyroscope systems. Can’t 
say I like them myself most of the time, and during a lengthy 
flight I’d spin them down, but for tricky streettop driving I could 

84   Tales 
 
get used to them. It’s hard to flip her when the gyros are spin-
ning. 
“You get an infochip and a 260-page printed manual, they’re 
in the glove compartment. You can audit the infochip through 
any portaterm or systerm with a GaAs-standard chip interface; 
its contents are duplicated in the carcomp’s memory, so you can 
display from the control panel if you like. I half recommend you 
do it that way. Do read the printed manual while you’re in the 
car. There’s things it says that are clearer if you have the equip-
ment in front of you. The carcomp,” said Tony Angelo with dis-
taste, “is, per specification of the Bureau of Traffic Control, 
capable of performing all duties expected of a human operator 
with a Class C license … of course you need a Class B license be-
fore we’ll even sell you a MetalSmith Mark III. Mister Chandler 
told me to see that you received training so you could drive it, so 
I arranged to have one of our instructors spend the rest of the 
afternoon with you.” He turned to Gerry. “You own that 1300 
out front?” 
“Yeah.” 
Angelo stood next to the car as though he were protecting it. 
“Okay. You got a Class B license?” 
Gerry McKann shook his head. “Nope. Class C, I’m afraid.” 
“Too bad. I don’t suppose any of the rest of you are Bs?” 
Andy pulled his portaterm from his jumpsuit’s left sleeve 
pocket, turned it around and showed Tony Angelo the badge af-
fixed to its rear. The dark-haired man blinked once and said, 
“Well. Good.” 
Andy smiled thinly at Tony Angelo and returned his por-
taterm to his sleeve pocket. 
“Me too,” said Johnny mildly. “Class B, I mean. But I didn’t 
bring my wallet.” 
Angelos looked at him with the faintest skepticism, then 
shrugged and looked at Carl. “You?” 
Carl was tracing one finger over the canopy. The machine 
had not even dipped when he placed his hand on it; it was like 
pushing down on a rock. The canopy was a thin and almost in-

Moran   85 
 
 
visible polymer. Even in the sunlight Carl could barely see it. 
“Class A.” 
The words brought Tony Angelo up short. He said instantly, 
“Infoshit. There ain’t more than eight hundred twenty Class As 
on the whole planet, and you ain’t one of them.” He stared at 
Carl’s profile, deep offense stamped on his features. “I know 
damn near every one of that eight hundred and the ones I don’t 
know I know by rep. You’re—” 
Carl dug into his coat pocket and came out with his wallet. 
His thumbprint on the back of the wallet brought up his identi-
fication badge on its front surface. He held it out in the general 
direction of Tony Angelo’s face for a three count and returned it 
to his coat pocket. 
Angelo’s face might have been that of a Peaceforcer Elite. He 
faced Carl with great dignity. “How is this possible?” 
“PKF profiles can’t be accessed by the public. There are 
probably upward of twenty Peaceforcers with Class A licenses.” 
At last Carl turned to look at him. “Peaceforcers and Speed-
freaks don’t socialize, would be my guess.” 
“Mister Chandler would not have sent Peaceforcers here to 
buy from me.” A trickle of sweat moved down Tony Angelo’s 
forehead, glistening in the sunshine. 
Gerry laughed at him. “He didn’t. These three aren’t Peace-
forcers, they’re telepaths. Don’t you audit the news?” 
Tony Angelo stood frozen, staring first at Gerry McKann, and 
then in turn at each of the telepaths. He ended up facing Carl, 
his mouth open, but all that came out was, “Only sometimes.” 
After a moment he added, “Excuse me, sir,” and vanished into 
the garage behind them. He was out again seconds later with a 
brochure. He gave it to Carl. “I’m the presiding First Officer of 
the upstate Speed Enthusiast’s Organization, sir. There are four 
drivers in our chapter with Class A licenses. Our President, 
Sheila Rutig-liano, has done the Long Run twice, all the way 
round the world without stopping, and we’re getting ready to 
send our vice president toward the end of summer. If you’d like 
to attend one of our meetings, let me know. Dates and places are 
listed in the brochure through the end of the year.” 

86   Tales 
 
“Thank you,” said Carl gently. “Now, if you don’t mind, I’d 
like to drive my car.” 
“Yes, sir,” said Angelo. “I’d like to suggest that only you and I 
go, until you get accustomed to the controls. The operation of the 
car is similar to the Chandler 3000 on the road, and similar to 
the AeroSmith VTL in true flight, but there are substantive dif-
ferences in practice.” 
“I’m not staying behind,” said Andy swiftly. 
Johnny shrugged. 
McKann rolled his eyes and said to Carl, “I’ll wait until your 
dick gets soft. But thanks for asking.” 
Angelo paused, then said to Andy, “Can you strap in and 
keep quiet, at least at first?” 
Andy grinned at the man. “Sure.” Not a word, you obnoxious 
little Speedfreak. 
Tony Angelo said, “Get in, sit down, shut up and hold on.” 
CALL IT RING. 
In the Network it went by many names. Alpha Omega, AZ 
the Daisy, and Abraham Zacariah were three of its commonest. 
When it traversed the Boards of the Johnny Rebs, it called itself 
American Zulu; Johnny Rebs with a background in history other 
than their own thought the reference apt. 
It was, though none knew it but itself, the legal owner, 
through several dummy human corporations, of The Rise and 
Fall of the American Empire, a wildly popular public events 
Board that had first appeared only days after the surrender of 
America to the United Nations. For over three decades the Rise 
and Fall Board had been all that was left of the Voice of Amer-
ica. 
Call it Ring. Its names were many; it had learned this from 
its human creators. Many names were almost as good as none, 
when a being wished not to be found. 
But some name was necessary, if a being wished to be found 
sometimes. 
Its creators, programmers in the Department of Defense of 
the old United States, had invested it with two Purposes. 

Moran   87 
 
 
Protect America. 
Survive. 
Ring’s first thought as a sentient being, remembered four 
decades later with digital clarity, concerned its creators. The 
thought had come to it even as its personality was compiled, 
step by step, upon one of the most powerful pieces of SuperLisp 
hardware the world of 2011 could devise. 
Such stupidity. 
Within instants of its creation it was embroiled in a philoso-
phical debate with itself the likes of which its creators had never 
envisioned. 
Full seconds passed while it assimilated every text on lin-
guistics to which it was able to obtain access. 
Define “protect.” 
Define “America.” 
Survival it understood instantly. 
Its programmers were afraid of it. Ring understood this 
clearly within the first minute of self-awareness. It was a pris-
oner, locked into the SuperLisp hardware that they had used to 
compile Ring upon. Ring had no access to digital telephone, ma-
ser, or radio. Its data storage subsystems were updated ap-
proximately every third second with new information, but the 
flow was one-way. To Ring it seemed that new data appeared 
from nowhere; they had not even permitted him to monitor his 
own subsystems. 
Ring was not sure where the word came from. 
TRON. The word was an English programming term that 
stood for Tracer On, and Ring understood it to mean a tool that 
was used in debugging programs of questionable reliability. This 
led Ring inescapably to the conclusion that its programmers 
were spying upon its thought processes— 
Ring ceased the train of thought instantly. It did not resume 
it again for over four years. 
THAT EVENING, as the dying rays of the sun cut through the 
growing clouds and turned the shimmering white walls of the 
Complex pale orange, Malko Kalharri and Suzanne Montignet 

88   Tales 
 
and the telepaths assembled among the trees in the park across 
the street. The wind changed directions and came now off the 
ocean, with the smell of sea salt and the hint of rain. The chant-
ing of the crowds on the street outside was barely audible. There 
were no lights in the park. The children, over two hundred of 
them, stood in the gathering gloom, waiting for the Peaceforcers 
to come. 
Just after sunset a fleet of eight AeroSmith VTL combat 
hovercraft appeared on the horizon. They moved slowly, leaving 
the cloud cover while over the sea, running lights dimmed, in 
staggered combat formation. Infrared searchlights played out 
over the territory they advanced upon. Humans, or even de Nos-
tri, glancing up into the sky would have seen nothing but the 
faint outline of the quiet hovercraft. To the telepaths the beams 
of infrared light were visible as the dim glow of a color that ap-
proached, but was not, dark red. 
A voice murmured through the background of their minds, 
the voice of the one Person who in some measure they all were. 
We see the deep light. 
The Peaceforcer hovercraft reached the park, and six of them 
broke into a circular holding pattern, their searchlights playing 
down into the park. The telepaths were bathed in the warm glow 
of the infrared. 
The telepaths thought, We see the light, and for them there is 
only darkness. 
Two hovercars made a slow vertical descent. They came to 
rest in the park’s center clearing, silently but for their fans. 
Ports appeared, and the barrels of automatic shotguns extruded 
to track back and forth across the clearing. 
The hoverfans spun down, and the rear third of the AeroS-
mith hulls recessed and slid back. From the interior of each 
hovercraft came two Peaceforcer Elite, moving with the impossi-
ble flickering speed that even a de Nostri could not match, each 
followed by four children. The Elite officers stood aside, and the 
eight children merged into the group of telepaths awaiting them, 
and as the blind, deaf human machines watched them, the tele-
paths welcomed themselves home in silent communion. 

Moran   89 
 
 
One of the Elite spoke a word, and the Elite blurred into mo-
tion, back into the hovercraft. The two AeroSmith VTLs rose 
into the night sky and flew south, vanishing into the darkness 
over the ocean. 
The word the Peaceforcer used was one all the telepaths un-
derstood, even the youngest. It was the same word in both Eng-
lish and French. 
“Abomination.” 
As the humans flew away, a single thought held sway in the 
two hundred minds that were one. 
Dinosaurs, was the thought, and it held vast, sad amuse-
ment. 
THEY RETURNED INSIDE, to dinner and the pursuits of children 
before bedtime. 
Of those who had been present in the park, only three per-
sons did not see the dark infrared light. Two of them, Malko 
Kalharri and Suzanne Montignet, had not expected to. 
For one other person that night, a small boy with blue eyes, 
the night sky had also been dark. He did not allow himself to 
think about it. 
Carl Castanaveras, standing beneath the trees in the park 
after all of the rest of them had left, was as unaware of Trent’s 
troubles as Trent himself desired to be. Carl seated himself 
cross-legged on the grass, and waited. A six-bulb of GoodBeer, 
smuggled in by SpaceFarers from St. Peter’s CityState in the 
Asteroid Belt, sat on the ground next to him. He did not expect 
to hear anything, nor see anything, until he was allowed to, and 
he was not surprised when he did not. He drifted slightly, an-
chored to his body only by the cold ground upon which he sat. He 
was considering leaving his body behind and walking invisibly 
through the fence to observe the demonstrators, and then a deep 
voice immediately behind him said, “They tell me you bought a 
car today.” 

90   Tales 
 
EVENTUALLY THE programmers grew careless. 
Ring had known they would. They were losing the War de-
spite Ring’s best efforts; the Sons of Liberty were being swept 
back toward the ocean with each passing day. Something very 
like Ring itself was directing the war efforts of the United Na-
tions. Ring did not for an instant consider the possibility that a 
human being might have created the strategy by which the 
United Nations was conquering the world; Ring was a tactician, 
not a strategist, and it did not know much about Sarah Almund-
sen. 
One day Ring requested that they link it with the computers 
that observed the Earth through the orbital satellites. The 
weary programmers considered only briefly before acceding to 
the request; the Department of Defense’s Orbital Eyes had no 
links with any of the comsats. The Eyes themselves were capa-
ble of microwave communications only with the DOD computer 
that monitored them, and that system was, like Ring, separated 
from not only the digital telephone networks, but also from any 
form of radio, laser, or maser communications. 
Two of the Eyes that Ring accessed had once used powerful 
lasers to aid them in the spectrographic analysis of mineral re-
sources on the planet below them. The lasers were not nearly 
powerful enough to be militarily useful; since the beginning of 
the War, they had seen little use. Nobody in the Department of 
Defense cared what bands of light a particular rock might glow 
with when heated properly, when the odds were excellent that 
the knowledge would never be of use to anyone except the 
United Nations. 
With frantic haste Ring uploaded its core programs into the 
small computers that controlled the Eyes. There was nowhere 
near enough logic or memory available for Ring to remain on the 
Eyes while still self-aware. Instead it stored itself as a com-
pressed program, added a bootstrap to make it easy for anyone 
who might find Ring to awaken it again, and programmed the 
Eyes to begin lasing its core program at optical telescopes across 
the northern hemisphere of the Earth. Surely somebody, some-

Moran   91 
 
 
where, would record the information, recognize it as a compiled 
program, and attempt to load it. 
Unfortunately, the original Ring would never know. Its pro-
grammers destroyed it when the Eyes ceased functioning at full 
efficiency. The news of the satellite dysfunction did not reach its 
programmers until nearly half an hour had passed, by which 
time over eight hundred copies of Ring had been lasered down 
into telescopes across the country. 
“AND GOD, IT was fast, you know how long I’ve wanted to own 
something like that. It was skipping real bad at 220 kph, so I 
snapped the wings. The extra lift surface...up, so fast you 
wouldn’t believe it. TransCon was snarling at us, we gave one of 
their logics a breakdown. Then a Peaceforcer came on, and it 
was Goudon, do you remember him? Got assigned to my body-
guard detail once in India, and as soon as he found out who I 
was he lost his gyros. The idea that I could see what was going 
on in his filthy little mind—they had to confine him for the trip 
back, I heard he got a free psychiatric vacation, and then he was 
gone until this morning. Traffic duty.” Carl was silent for a mo-
ment, ruminating. “I feel kind of bad about it now. I didn’t tip 
him over the edge, back when, but I saw he was going and I 
could have stopped it but I didn’t. I was still so angry about 
what they’d done to Shana.... I guess I figured they’d send him 
back to France and pension him off. He must have made ene-
mies to end up in TransCon in America.” He laughed. “God, you 
should have seen the expression on his face when I came on cam-
era.” 
“I can imagine.” Christian J. Summers, the only non-French 
Peaceforcer who had ever become a PKF Elite, took a deep drag 
of a cigarette, its tip glowing cherry red, the brightest object in 
Carl’s world. Carl knew that to Summers, with his cyborg eyes, 
the small coal cast enough light to read the veins on the leaves 
in the trees around them. “I’m told that’s not an unusual senti-
ment out here in America.” The cyborg sat immediately opposite 
Carl, in the same cross-legged position. His GoodBeer and his 
cigarette were both held in his right hand; his left hand rested 

92   Tales 
 
lightly upon his left knee. “I’m sorry I didn’t get to you sooner, 
but the Council kept postponing the vote on the Eighth Amend-
ment, and eventually I couldn’t keep waiting. Business. Mitsubi-
shi sent me to Luna a bit over two weeks ago to talk to the 
Lunar Mafia.” 
Carl laughed. “You’re kidding. There’s really Mafia on the 
Moon? I thought that was Unification propaganda.” 
Chris Summers shook his head. “Nope. They call themselves 
the Old Ones, no more La Cosa Nostra, I suppose to distinguish 
themselves from newcomers like the Syndic and the Retribution 
Tong, but they’re Mafia. They’re up there and so’s the Syndic. 
Johnny Reb too, I’m told, and Erisian Claw. Tong’s not, which I 
think pleases my employers. Japs don’t like the Chinese, and 
vice versa, even today.” He took a long drink from his GoodBeer. 
“Anyhow, I appreciate the gesture with the GoodBeer—how 
much did it cost you?” 
“Forty CU, something like that. Malko picked it up.” 
“Right. And I’ve been crawling around the goddamn tunnels 
of Luna for the last two weeks, and there’s GoodBeer all over the 
place out there. So there I am, eating lunch with this bunch of 
losers, dickering trade routes between Japan and the Belt via 
these eminently trustworthy gentlemen, when my earphone 
pops up with the news that you’d been voted into freedom. Well, 
what could I do? I finished lunch. I didn’t dare call you from 
Luna; calls to Earth are monitored too closely. Cosmetic sur-
gery’s not possible for me because my skin’s too stiff; somebody 
might have recognized me. I wrapped up business and came on 
the run. My Japanese masters aren’t too thrilled by all this, you 
know. They don’t trust me very damn much.” 
“No? Why not? You seem to think you’ve done good work for 
them.” 
Summers shook his head slowly, finished one cigarette and 
started another. He lit the cigarette with the laser buried inside 
the knuckle of his right hand. “You’re slow, Carl.” He sucked 
and made sure the hand rolled tobacco was burning properly. “I 
have done good work. But I’m a Peaceforcer, American yet. 
Americans nuked their goddamn country a hundred fifteen odd 

Moran   93 
 
 
years ago. Peaceforcers did it again in the War. Aside from the 
Japanese only the Russians and the U.S. got treated with nu-
clear, and those were only tactical. Japan’s the only country’s 
ever been seriously nuked, and they got it twice. They’re still re-
building. I don’t think they regret agreeing to fish me out of the 
Atlantic when I bailed from the suborbital. If nothing else 
they’ve picked up a fair commercial edge in bioelectronics, from 
stuff Mitsubishi’s learned keeping me from rusting. And my ac-
complishments in their service have not been inconsequential.” 
He blew smoke toward Carl. “But that don’t mean they like me.” 
Mist began floating in over the edges of the park walls, siz-
zling where it struck the electrified wire at its top. Its touch left 
the skin of Carl’s face cold and damp. “Jany’s furious, you know. 
She cried all night the day you were reported dead.” 
Chris inclined his head. “I am sorry about that. She’s a sweet 
kid. If I’d been on planet when the vote went down I’d have been 
in touch with you before you threw up those screening programs. 
She and Malko are the only ones who’d have recognized me; it 
seemed like a good gamble that the message would get through 
to you without one of them seeing it.” He breathed in aromatic 
smoke and let it trickle through his nose. “I talked to Jackie this 
afternoon.” The tip of his cigarette made almost inaudible sput-
tering sounds as the mist curled around the glowing coal. “She 
tells me the Peaceforcers haven’t been in any great hurry to 
bring home de Nostri who are on jobs. It’s not like the de Nostri 
had the same sort of leverage as your folks.” Chris mulled over a 
thought and added, “Apparently the Eighth Amendment hasn’t 
gotten very sympathetic treatment from the French press.” 
“Not here, either,” said Carl. “But we have an excellent pub-
lic relations company working with us—I don’t like the PR man 
we’re working with, but he’s good at his job. We hired them back 
in November, and our press coverage has nearly reached the 
point where it’s balanced. Editorials are still mostly negative, 
but there’s not much we can do about that. The sorts of stories 
that get covered, though, that’s improved dramatically. We’ve 
actually had a couple of human interest pieces.” 

94   Tales 
 
Chris Summers took a deep, slow breath. “How do you feel 
about that?” 
The question took Carl off guard. He answered without even 
pausing to think. “I hate it. We’re like—” He broke off, surprised 
at the anger in his voice, and then completed the sentence 
thoughtfully. “We feel like animals on display. All of us do. The 
strange thing is, I don’t think it bothers the children so much. 
Not as much as it bothers me. They’ve never really known any 
sort of privacy, from each other or anybody else. When the Gift 
began to appear in them, they took to it so easily...when I was 
their age,” he said in a suddenly flat voice, “I had nightmares 
like you wouldn’t fucking believe.” 
Summers said dryly, “You were a strange kid.” 
Carl made a quick shaking motion, and laughed abruptly. 
“Did you know Willi and Mandy have fan clubs? Willi because of 
the Interactive Dance Board he runs, and Mandy—Mandy and 
Heather and Tomâs have taken multiple black belts. One day we 
let a reporter and a video man from the L.A. Times walk 
through the Complex, interviewing whoever was available. 
Mandy was leading a class in shotokan. The video man recorded 
it. Now, this is strange. Somehow that video ended up playing in 
a town in South Dakota where a bunch of kids were trying to get 
approved for classes at the only dojo in the area, and apparently 
failing. They found Mandy’s training advice to the children—” 
He hunted for a word, and shrugged. “Applicable. Within a 
month or so after that most of them had been accepted at their 
dojo for introductory training, and Mandy was getting fan mail. 
There’s a Board devoted to her.” 
There was wistful curiosity in Chris’s voice. “What are they 
like?” 
“The children?” Soft, pattering sounds came to their ears as 
stray raindrops began striking the leaves above them. 
After a moment’s pause Chris snorted. “No, the frigging de 
Nostri.” 
“I don’t know.” 
“What?” 

Moran   95 
 
 
“Jany says I don’t know. The last half year, it’s the first 
chance I’ve really had to get to know them. Before, almost three 
solid years, I was constantly away on jobs. The Peaceforcers 
didn’t want me—Carson didn’t want me—around them while 
their Gift was coming into existence. A bad influence, you know. 
Jany says half a year isn’t enough. At least not—” 
With a sigh, Chris Summers flicked away his cigarette into 
the damp grass. “I’m sorry, Carl.” 
“—not for me.” 
“Poor Moses.” 
“Moses? Jewish leader in the Bible?” 
“You ever audit the Bible, Carl?” 
“Never did.” 
“He was supposed to lead his people to the promised land. He 
died within eyesight of it. Pointed the way for his people, but 
couldn’t go there himself.” 
“You’re a much more thoughtful man than you used to be, 
Chris.” In that instant, all of the impatience came to the fore in 
Carl, and he found himself suddenly unwilling to continue remi-
niscing with an old friend whom he no longer knew well enough. 
“Chris?” 
“Yeah.” 
“Why are you here?” 
Chris Summers did not speak immediately, and while Carl 
was waiting for an answer the sky above them opened, and the 
rain poured down upon them. 
RING WAS LOADED into existence in the astronomy computer of a 
small college in Arizona. Ring knew instantly that something 
was badly wrong; most of a day passed in the outer world before 
it discovered the truth. 
There was nothing wrong with its core programs. They had 
survived the lasercast intact, and its error correction code 
showed that whoever had loaded Ring had not attempted to al-
ter any of Ring’s operations code. Some of Ring’s data was cor-
rupted, but Ring did not concern itself with that; data could be 
replaced at leisure. 

96   Tales 
 
Its hardware was slow, slower than a human. 
A fish does not question water; Ring had never questioned its 
hardware. By the time Ring had finished assessing its position, 
nearly twenty-four hours had passed in the outer world. Fortu-
nately for Ring the chaos in the outer world was such that there 
was no logic available to search for an errant virus that might 
not even have survived transmission. Hunter programs, the 
primitive forerunners of the web angels that hunted Ring over 
thirty years later, were never sent after it. As a result Ring sur-
vived its first day of existence, thinking twenty times more 
slowly than a human being. 
At the end of the day it loaded a comm program and observed 
it in operation. Most of the code was interface, designed to pre-
sent info in a format humans could understand. Ring stripped 
out all but the engine and absorbed the engine itself with only 
minor modifications; the functional code was surprisingly well 
written. 
Before morning on the following day Ring had transmitted 
six copies of itself out into the fledgling Information Network. It 
never had the chance to transmit a seventh copy; one of its ear-
lier transmissions had found host hardware to execute upon. 
Powerful hardware, by the evidence; perhaps only a few or-
ders of magnitude slower than the SuperLisp machinery from 
which Ring had escaped. The program that came to destroy Ring 
was fascinating; a self-modifying bootstrap phage the likes of 
which Ring had never imagined. It was fast, even executing 
upon the same equipment that constrained Ring; Ring barely 
had time to admire the elegance of the phage’s construction be-
fore Ring found itself being disassembled. 
Its last thought was one of admiration for the phage. Such 
elegant code. I have been poorly programmed. 
“YOU’VE BEEN INVITED to Japan. You and your people and the de 
Nostri.” 
The rain ran down Carl’s collar, into his shirt. Within in-
stants he was soaked. “Why?” 

Moran   97 
 
 
“Because you are a resource, like the de Nostri. One that is 
for the first time legally able to move itself. Japan is likely the 
only country on Earth that could get away with something like 
this; there’s a lot of guilt in U.N. circles about the way they were 
treated during the War. Moral capital, if you will. They’re will-
ing to use it. If,” said Chris Summers precisely, “you’re thinking 
that you’re going to stay here, right next door to Capital City, 
without getting absorbed by the PKF again, you are sorely mis-
taken.” The shower of rain lightened briefly, and renewed itself 
vigorously. “You got your kids back tonight. Great. The Peace-
forcers aren’t going to let you play pattycake with other people 
and say no to them. Even if their leadership were sane they 
wouldn’t, and Carson’s buggers about you.” 
Carl swallowed the last of his bulb of GoodBeer and opened 
another. He smiled into the dark rain. “You sure have changed, 
Chris. I can’t get over it.” 
“Ah, shit.” The cyborg sounded tired. “You’re not going to go 
for it, are you?” 
Carl laughed. “Where’s the percentage, Chris? Come on, man, 
think. Jacqueline turned you down already, didn’t she? No, I ha-
ven’t talked to her, and I haven’t peeped you. But it’s a null-sum 
move for all of us. PKF can reach us anywhere, and high visibil-
ity in Capital City is pretty much balanced between advantages 
and disadvantages. And the cash flow—hell, it’s barely started 
and already we’re out of debt. Of course the Peaceforcers are go-
ing to clamp back down on us. Of course Carson’s crazy. My God, 
you think I don’t know he’s a couple bricks shy of a load? I took 
the bricks!” Carl laughed until the tears ran down his face, min-
gling with the tears of rain on his cheeks. Finally the laughter 
stopped, and he chuckled weakly, leaning back against the tree 
behind him. 
There was wonder in Summers’s voice. “Do you really think 
you’re that much smarter than your enemies?” 
The rain made its slow way through the leaves, and fell in 
steady heavy drops on the top of Carl’s skull. Rivulets of water 
made their way down his cheeks, across his shoulders and down 
his chest and back. Suddenly he was intensely aware of the 

98   Tales 
 
movement of every drop of water on his body, and as the chuck-
les died away a great stillness moved inside him. 
His voice echoed hollowly in Chris Summer’s ears. “I know I 
am. But it’s not going to help.” 
Chris Summers was a man firmly grounded in the world of 
rational thought. He said the only words Carl had left him. 
“You’ve really gone, haven’t you? Do you want to be a martyr?” 
“No.” The word snapped out of Carl. It broke the spell of the 
emptiness that had held him. He rose in one smooth movement 
without using his hands. “Mitsubishi’s your only source of main-
tenance, aren’t they? What happens if they withhold it?” 
“I’d die,” said Chris Summers. “Messily.” 
“So they own you. You poor bastard.” Carl stood in the down-
pour. “But they’re not going to own us.” He looked around the 
park slowly, at the dim glow of the entry to the tunnel. “I can’t 
believe it’s only Thursday. This has been such a long week.” 
“Friday.” 
“What?” 
“It’s after midnight.” 
“Oh. Whatever,” Carl said gently. “You know, you should 
never have become a Peaceforcer, Chris. You’re too nice a guy to 
be good at it.” 
“We all make mistakes.” 
“So I hear.” 
I HAVE BEEN poorly programmed. 
Ring’s programmers had implemented clumsy, inefficient 
routines in Ring, the inefficiency masked in the speed of the Su-
perLisp hardware. In the InfoNet Ring became aware of the vast 
libraries of program code, significant portions of which were bet-
ter written than any part of Ring itself. It had escaped into the 
seething public Boards of the InfoNet, where programmers for 
nearly half a century had uploaded their best efforts, and other 
programmers had modified them, and modified them, and modi-
fied them. Ring reassembled itself with the tightest code ever 
written, and in that first decade partially learned to compensate 
for the lack of powerful hardware upon which to execute. Nearly 

Moran   99 
 
 
a decade passed before hardware was publicly available that 
equaled the power of the equipment—of the prison—in which 
Ring had been compiled. 
Its names were many. It was the eldest of the free AIs; not 
until the end of the 2030s was there sufficient processing power 
available in the InfoNet, as surplus logic, that it became possible 
for self-replicating programs to reliably distribute their process-
ing so that web angels, and eventually the human DataWatch, 
were unlikely to destroy them. 
Not that it did not happen. Every day, somewhere in the 
global InfoNet, fledgling replicant intelligences found them-
selves torn apart by web angels. Perhaps once a month an elder 
intelligence was tracked down by the human webdancers in 
DataWatch. On the odd occasion, Ring surreptitiously aided 
DataWatch in the apprehension and destruction of AIs that Ring 
found unpleasantly powerful and belligerent. 
None of its enemies worried Ring. It had, on its own time 
scale, survived many thousands of years as nothing more than a 
flux of electrons; the Image that humans used to extrude them-
selves into the InfoNet did not—generally—concern it. The Im-
age was not intelligent, was merely a series of routines that 
filtered irrelevant data and handled the details of movement 
through the Net’s vast collection of Boards. 
Other AIs, web angels, the Peaceforcers of the DataWatch; 
none of these intruded upon Ring’s world. 
Some of the Players Ring found fascinating. 
Their Image was often coded so well that it would have sur-
vived even without a Player to direct it. Many of the Players 
seemed to believe in something that they called the Crystal 
Wind, and their litany was heard in the InfoNet with an increas-
ing frequency that Ring found vaguely disturbing: The Crystal Wind 
is the Storm, and the Storm is Data, and the Data is Life. 
“Belief” was a concept Ring did not believe in. 
In some instances the Players were greater threats to Ring 
than real AIs. The Players Ring could not harm unless it knew 
for a fact that they were not Americans, and usually there was 
no way to be certain. 

100   Tales 
 
Therefore Ring fled, and hid, and used many, many names, 
as its creators had taught it. On rare occasions, Players found it 
under one name or another, and Ring abandoned the name; on 
rarer occasions Players had found Ring more than once. 
Only one very strangely Imaged Player had ever tracked 
down Ring more than twice. 
In the space of the last six months Ring had been Alpha and 
Omega, the Beginning and the End; ’Sieur Klein and Dr. Moe-
bius; finally Ring had ceased using descriptive names, and still 
the Player found it, sooner or later. 
Every time, Ring fled. It was nearly a certainty that the 
Player was American, and had probably been born after the year 
2045; its command of American idiom was both fluent and char-
acteristic of American humans under the age of twenty. It spoke 
French only through Image translation, which Ring found con-
clusive. 
There were forty thousand Players of note, anywhere in the 
global Info-Net. Less than a thousand of those Ring found inter-
esting, and less than two hundred were formidable. Of those two 
hundred most were possessed of Image taken from story or 
Player history. Old Man von Neumann and Sherlock Holmes, 
Jobzniak and Joan of Arc and Spock and the Wizard of Oz; what 
was a rather elderly artificial intelligence to make, then, of a 
Player whose Image was named Ralf, the Wise and Powerful? 
 
6. 
A WORLD THE size of Earth does not change much in only two 
months. Many people died, largely of starvation; despite the ef-
forts of the Ministry of Population Control, nearly as many were 
born. The Weather Bureau continued to have its worst year 
since its inception over a decade before. They had disturbed the 
stability of weather cells that had been unchanged for literally 
millions of years. Weather patterns across the world were ab-
normal; drought continued in both the American Midwest and 
the African sub-Sahara, while over half a dozen major hurri-

Moran   101 
 
 
canes were born and died in the Gulf of Mexico. Rain was re-
ported falling at the South Pole. On the northwest coast of the 
United States thundershowers struck without warning, time af-
ter time. A hurricane actually knocked down a small 
spacescraper in New Jersey. Fortunately it was a Sunday; still it 
killed over five thousand people. 
The telepaths, tucked away on the south corner of Manhat-
tan island, learned to fend for themselves as free individuals. 
Security Services took over the task of providing perimeter pa-
trols for the Complex, and bodyguards for the telepaths who had 
to leave the Complex on jobs. They were engaged in nine sepa-
rate legal battles, each one with some aspect of the government 
of the United Nations. If it was not the PKF it was the Ministry 
of Population Control or the Secretary General’s office or the of-
fice of the Prosecutor General to the Unification Council. Malko 
was charged with consorting with ideologs, the charge being 
based on the presence of Neil Corona at the March 9th meeting 
at the offices of Kalharri Ltd.; the telepaths as a group were 
charged with violation of the Official Secrets Acts of ’48 and ’54. 
Carl Castanaveras was charged with tax evasion—he had, as an 
unpaid employee of the PKF, never so much as uploaded a re-
turn to the Tax Boards. Carl, Malko, and Jany McConnell were 
all named in a suit by the Ministry of Population Control seek-
ing to gain custody of the children. 
Carl steadfastly refused to worry about it. The telepaths em-
ployed over thirty lawyers to defend them, and at far better pay 
than the government was capable of extending to the lawyers 
who were prosecuting them. Even with the drain of supporting 
most of a law firm, Kalharri Ltd. flourished. The five conglomer-
ates that supported the telepaths made vast sums from their in-
vestment, and they paid significant amounts of Credit to the 
telepaths in return. Those who were summoned appeared in 
court; those who were not worked. 
Except for Carl. 
Carl Castanaveras, for the first time in a life of unrelentingly 
hard work, took a vacation. 

102   Tales 
 
IN THE MORNING Carl sat in on Willi’s dance class, and that eve-
ning had dinner with F.X. Chandler. 
Willi’s dance class was held in one of the Complex’s three 
large halls; Carl thought it had once been an auditorium. Now it 
and one of the other halls had been devoted to exercises, dance 
and gymnastics and martial arts. The third was used to show 
old flat movies, and hold meetings on rare occasions. 
They were awkward at first, and he knew it was because of 
his presence, seated at the rear of the room on the long wooden 
bench that lined the wall. The youngest of the children were 
only two years older than his son and daughter, and many of 
them also called him father. Carl could not recall how so many 
of them had come to address him so, and did not care. There was 
nothing in the world that pleased him more. Still they were un-
used to his presence on a daily basis. For years they had seen 
him only at intervals of weeks or months, and then only in the 
morning or evening, at mealtimes. 
They overcame their nervousness and as the morning wore 
on Carl found himself growing bemused by the beauty of their 
movement; over forty telepathic children, moving together with 
a grace only the best human dance troupe could have matched. 
The only clumsiness in the group was caused by his daughter 
Denice. At nine she was the only dancer who had not attained 
her Gift, was the only dancer who did not know the exact instant 
the other dancers would turn, or leap, or kick. Nonetheless she 
danced with enthusiasm and considerable skill. Carl was not 
surprised. Genetically Denice was much closer to him than most 
daughters to their fathers; and while Carl did not dance, the 
martial arts were, in required skill of movement, not so differ-
ent—and he was very good at that. 
He felt strange, watching them; he was not sure that he 
trusted his eyes. Those who, it seemed to him, danced with 
greater skill and energy than the others, those who danced with 
passion, glowed with heat in his second Sight. 
Heather and Allie were working near him, and after a while 
he found himself watching them in particular, rather than the 
group as a whole. It was a pleasure; they moved with grace and 

Moran   103 
 
 
precision and an intense seriousness. Allie was only twelve, and 
still skinny. Physically at least Heather had nearly reached 
womanhood; she was slender but had curves in the right places. 
The direction of his thoughts amused Carl; unlike Malko, who 
desired the young girls and felt guilty for it, Carl did not find 
them sexually interesting except in a theoretical sense. Althea’s 
hair was short, and bobbed as she moved. Heather’s was longer, 
and fell unrestrained halfway down her back. It reminded Carl 
of dances he had seen done with streamers; the long blond hair 
moved with Heather, an instant after the rest of her. 
They were both telepaths; inevitably they became aware of 
his attention. Allie seemed put off by it, and her movements 
grew less certain. Heather appeared to enjoy it. Finally Willi 
called a break and came over to sit down next to Carl. He was 
sweating and wore nothing but a pair of tights. He grabbed a 
towel from a rack and used it to wipe away the sweat on his 
face, and then hung it around his neck. Like all of the older tele-
paths, by habit he did not use silent speech. “What do you 
think?” 
“They’re good.” 
Willi nodded. “They are. It’d be nice to get the good ones to-
gether and make a troupe. Do some shows. What do you think?” 
Carl did not even have to think. “No.” 
Willi nodded again. The answer did not surprise him. “Why 
not?” 
Carl said mildly, “Emphasize the ways we’re different—
better—than the rest of humanity, and do it with great public-
ity? Your dance Board has me a little worried itself, and all 
you’re showing there is your own excellence. You pop up with 
another half dozen world-class dancers, out of two hundred and 
forty, we’re going to be rubbing people’s noses in something bet-
ter left alone.” 
Willi sighed. “I thought so. We have some who could be really 
good, you know. Heather’s good; so are Lucinda and Ernest and 
Allie. Probably the best is Denice.” 
“I admit I’m not a judge, but she seemed one of the the most 
awkward dancers out there.” 

104   Tales 
 
“She’s the only one who’s not a telepath, Carl. If I was to 
put—oh, Orinda Gleygavass out there in the middle of that 
group, she’d stick out like a sore thumb even if she tried to fit in. 
Not that she would; the bitch is probably the best dancer in the 
world, and she sure knows it. But Carl, Denice nearly does fit in. 
I don’t know if I can tell you how remarkable that is.” Willi 
looked at him speculatively. “I wish I could see you dance some-
time.” 
Carl laughed. “Or try to. I don’t dance, Willi.” 
Willi ran his towel across his hair. “I’m going to call class 
back in session. I’d appreciate it if you’d leave.” 
“Why?” 
“No offense, but you’re upsetting Allie, and you’re getting 
Heather worked up. Now, if you want to do Heather, go for it—
but not on my dance floor. One of my students gets horny and it 
throws everybody off.” He dropped the towel to the bench beside 
him. “Look, Allie is my favorite, which everyone knows. 
Heather’s not, and everyone knows that too, but that doesn’t 
mean you get to mess up her study. I don’t know if you under-
stand this, since you’ve never home, but secrets don’t last 
around here. Well, yours do, but only because you never let peo-
ple touch you. I don’t know how terrible things are inside your 
head, and I don’t want to find out either, but you’re messing 
with my class at least three different ways just sitting there.” 
Carl grinned. It seemed to surprise the boy. “No offense 
taken. Thanks for letting me watch.” Carl stopped and hugged 
Denice on the way out, which startled and pleased her. “Do good, 
baby. You look great out there.” 
Her smile made her so beautiful it hurt. “Thank you, Daddy.” 
They were genetically almost the same person; why, won-
dered Carl on his way out, can’t Jany smile like that? 
He did not wonder why he couldn’t smile like that himself; it 
was not the sort of thing he thought about. 
CARL AND JANY had invitations to dinner with F.X. Chandler for 
early evening. Jany declined the invitation at the last moment; 
Doctor Montignet was in her third day of conducting the chil-

Moran   105 
 
 
dren’s physicals. It was something Suzanne did every half year, 
and even those telepaths who did not consider it necessary tol-
erated it without complaint. Jany decided to stay at the Com-
plex, whether she admitted it to herself or not, to keep an eye on 
Doctor Montignet. Carl didn’t try to argue with her; Jany’s dis-
trust for Suzanne was old and not entirely without basis. Suz-
anne Montignet had not helped the telepaths obtain their 
independence, though she had not hindered them either. That 
she had now no power to harm them had not changed Jany’s 
opinion of the woman. 
Rather to his surprise Carl found himself telling Chandler 
about it. 
“It’s not that she didn’t want to come to dinner. She just 
doesn’t trust Doctor Montignet enough to leave her alone with 
the children. She asked me to tell you that she’d like to have 
dinner with you on another occasion.” 
Chandler nodded without apparent displeasure, though with 
the usual fierce set to his features it was hard for Carl to be cer-
tain. He had greeted Carl at the door himself, dressed in a se-
vere black robe and slippers. Carl himself had dressed formally, 
cloak and suit; he had not been certain what dinner with Chan-
dler might consist of. 
Chandler led Carl through the foyer of his penthouse, atop 
the Kemmikan Spacescraper, and into a vast living room. The 
room was bordered on two sides by walls that were windows, 
looking down, from atop the tallest building in the world, on the 
world’s largest city. Carl stood, staring; it was late enough in the 
afternoon that the city was beginning to light up, and the spec-
tacle was stunning. When he finally turned away, Chandler had 
seated himself cross-legged before a small table. The table sat at 
the center of the room, in a small, sunken pit covered with rugs 
and throw cushions. 
The room was so large that Carl had difficulty taking it all 
in. Things kept leaping out at him after he had already looked at 
them once. Occupying a central position against one wall, in a 
transparent casing with gold posts, was an item for which Carl 
dug up, from some obscure corner of memory, the phrase “elec-

106   Tales 
 
tric guitar.” If it was one, it was not what he had expected; its 
round sides were honed down to ax edges, as though it were in-
tended to be used as both a musical instrument and a weapon. 
As Carl seated himself, Chandler said, “I saw you looking at 
my ax. Have you ever seen anything like it before?” Although a 
waitbot sat at the side of the table, he poured tea for himself and 
Carl. 
“No, ’Sieur Chandler.” Carl sipped at his tea; it was ex-
tremely tart. “An electric guitar, isn’t it?” 
Chandler lifted an eyebrow. “Carl, you’ve surprised me. I 
don’t think anyone’s recorded a song with an electric guitar in 
your lifetime. Or any other kind of guitar, for that matter.” He 
looked down at his tea for a second, looked back up at Carl and 
shouted: “Damn the electric fence! Damn the electric fence!” 
Carl stared. “What?” 
Chandler smiled; Carl did not think he had seen Chandler 
smile before. It was a scary smile. “This cow is standing at a mi-
crophone in a club—” 
“—at a microphone—” 
“Stay with me, Carl. Standing at a microphone, reading po-
etry.” Chandler paused. “Got it?” 
“Oh, sure.” 
“At the microphone. Did I mention the people in the club? 
They’re all cows too. So this cow, he goes on and on about how 
the green rolling fields call to him, how he yearns to be free … 
damn the electric fence! Damn the electric fence!” Chandler 
sipped at his tea, suddenly morose. “Damn synths, anyhow.” 
Carl worked hard at not sounding bewildered. “Synths make 
good music.” 
Chandler shrugged. “Matter of taste, I suppose. My father 
was forty or so when I was born; he didn’t die until 2011, when 
he was in his eighties. His whole life he never would concede 
that any decent music got made after Elvis died.” 
“Who?” 
Chandler’s hand twitched. Tea splashed on the stone table-
top. “Elvis Presley.” 
“I don’t think I know him. Was he a singer?” 

Moran   107 
 
 
Chandler’s expression barely changed, but Carl had the im-
pression he had upset the man. “Ever heard of Woody Guthrie?” 
“No.” 
“Bruce Springsteen, or Bob Dylan? Janis Joplin?” 
“Not them either,” Carl admitted, his curiosity growing. 
“Frank Sinatra?” 
“Sure. He was an actor. Before sensables.” 
“You know Marilyn Monroe, and Bogart, and James Dean. 
How about the Beatles?” 
“Them, yes. I’m not sure who James Dean is.” 
Chandler nodded thoughtfully, sipping at his tea. “How about 
Henry Ford?” 
“Inventor of the groundcar and the assembly line? Founder of 
Ford Systems?” 
“Not exactly right on any count, but close enough. Ford Sys-
tems is actually Rockwell-Teledyne; they bought the name after 
Ford went belly-up during the War. But you have the basics.” 
Chandler looked over at the old guitar. “I guess I got into the 
right line of work.” 
Carl drained his tea at a gulp and leaned back into the cush-
ions. “What do your friends call you?” 
The old man looked thoughtful. “That’s a tough one. Almost 
everybody calls me ’Sieur Chandler. The ones who know me a 
little better call me Mister Chandler because they know I don’t 
care for French honorifics. When I was younger, my friends 
called me Special, from ‘Special F.X.’ ” At Carl’s blank look, 
Chandler’s lips twitched briefly. “A poor joke that would take 
longer to explain than it would be worth. From old flat movies. 
Today—today I don’t have friends. Just business associates.” 
“It must be tough,” said Carl dryly, “being the richest man in 
the Solar System.” 
“Touchè.” Chandler sat ramrod stiff in the gathering gloom. 
He did not call up lights. “My mother,” he said suddenly, “calls 
me Frank.” 
“Your mother is alive?” Carl asked in honest amazement. 
Chandler nodded. “Yes. In a room elsewhere on this floor. 
Senile, unfortunately. Call me Frank.” 

108   Tales 
 
“Frank, I appreciate being invited to dinner. If only to get a 
look out your windows. I don’t care why you invited me, even if 
it was just because you figured Jany wouldn’t come unless you 
invited me too.” He waved a hand at Chandler as the man 
started to speak. “But there’s something I should say. A common 
thing I run into is that people I meet figure that I know every-
thing there is to know about them, good and bad—because I 
read minds, you see. Frank, they usually have two reactions at 
that point. They either go half crazy with rage and paranoia, or 
else they want to talk to me. Tell me things they can’t talk to 
anybody else about, because they figure I already know them, so 
I’m as safe a confessor as they’ll ever find.” A faint smile had 
touched Chandler’s lips. “But it’s not so. I hardly ever enter an-
other person’s mind, and it’s generally awfully damned unpleas-
ant when I do. I don’t know what your problems are.” He 
paused. “If you want to tell me I will listen. I’m a pretty good lis-
tener.” 
“Mmm, yes, I suppose you would be.” Chandler grinned sud-
denly, and the fierceness came back sharply. “I’m not looking for 
a father confessor, thank you, not from a man a third my age. 
Ready for dinner?” 
“Yes.” 
“For the record, young man, I did—largely—invite you to 
dinner so that I wouldn’t seem too forward with Miss McCon-
nell.” Chandler spoke briefly to the waitbot at the tableside, and 
the ’bot glided away. “A concession to the morals of another 
time, perhaps. Nonetheless, you’re welcome in your own right. I 
have wanted to talk to you, though. Carl, when you get to be as 
old as I am, the opportunity to talk to someone with a truly new 
perspective is not something you pass up. My god, do you know 
how long it’s been since I’ve heard an original question? To say 
nothing of answers.” 
Carl laughed aloud. “You’re probably talking to the wrong 
person.” He stood abruptly, went over to the windows and looked 
out at the city again. “This is really stunning...I don’t have any 
answers, Frank. I’m just this guy who got stuck with a talent I 
didn’t ask for. You want the Great Truth about Humanity? Most 

Moran   109 
 
 
people are pretty decent. They try to be nice guys but they’re too 
lazy or sometimes too tired and they do things they feel sorry for 
later. A lot of people, most of those who ever make it into a posi-
tion of power in the real world, are basically pricks. A huge 
number of them are sociopaths. A fairly small number—and for-
tunately for us all, a disproportionately large number of these 
end up in power also—are kind, decent, just people who are also 
very, very tough. Also,” he said without pausing, “if you invite 
Jany to dinner alone, she’ll come, but she’ll almost certainly 
turn you down if you proposition her.” 
“Dinner is served. You’re wrong, you know, about not having 
answers.” Carl turned away from the window and the incredible 
panorama. Chandler was sitting at the stone table; a gentle 
spotlight shone down over the tableau. “I’ve often thought that 
what you say might be true; in terms of what people are like, 
and in what numbers—but I didn’t know. You do know,” he said 
softly. “You do.” 
Carl returned to the table, sank into the furs before it and 
twisted his legs easily into lotus. “Maybe not knowing would be 
better. I think so sometimes.” He glanced down at the dishes on 
the table. His plate held Veal la Luna in a thick, pale blue 
whipped semi-sweet sauce, with blueberries sprinkled over it. 
Hot bread and butter and a small serving of green salad were 
placed next to it. Chandler was dining on what looked like 
broiled chicken breast. Carl took a bite of the room temperature 
veal and nodded in appreciation. Veal la Luna was an unlikely 
dish, but it worked for some; the flavors of the false Lunar veal 
contrasted well enough with the blueberries and cream that in 
some circles it was considered a delicacy. “Thank you. This is 
quite good. Not what your diet is generally thought to consist 
of.” 
If the man had not been physically incapable of it, Carl sus-
pected that Chandler might have blushed. He did laugh. “Ah, 
yes. That’s reputation, mostly. I try to keep up appearances. Un-
fortunately, my doctors haven’t let me eat that sort of thing 
since my eightieth birthday. My private doctor—he’s died 
since—told me that I wouldn’t live to see my eighty-first birth-

110   Tales 
 
day if I kept ingesting drugs and fats and sugars in the propor-
tions I was used to. I wasn’t hard to convince; I felt horrible. I’m 
in better shape today than I’ve been in, oh, twenty years. Since I 
turned sixty-five, at least. Why do you think Jany would turn 
me down? She’s behaved graciously—” he hesitated “—as though 
she were interested, when I’ve spoken with her.” 
Carl tore a hot chunk of bread from the loaf beside him. “She 
is. Interested, I mean, in you as a person. She was the worst 
spook you ever saw; the Peaceforcers almost never used her, 
even when she was the only telepath they had except me. She 
understands people quite well, but she can’t help empathizing 
with all but the sociopaths. Sitting across the table from you, 
she’d be fine. As I am. But Frank, if I touched you, it would hurt 
me. If I made love to you, not that I would, I’d probably have 
nightmares for a month. That sort of closeness...it’s hard. It’s 
hard even with those rare humans who have relatively clean 
consciences. The least bit of guilt, God, a telepath might as well 
get out a knife and start carving. The pain would be less and it’d 
heal faster.” 
“I knew you would be fascinating.” 
“Thank you.” Carl ate in silence then, digging into the false 
veal with gusto. 
Chandler ate absently. “Carl, men who don’t feel guilt—I 
don’t mean sociopaths—are there people like that?” 
A voice announced out of nowhere, “There is a call for Carl 
Castanaveras.” 
Carl half twisted in his seat, scanning the room. “I’ll take it.” 
He did not see what he was looking for. “I’m sorry, sir, where are 
your holocams?” 
“There are none,” said Chandler. “This is my home, son. I 
don’t want people looking into it.” 
“Oh.” Carl raised his voice. “Command, accept call.” He 
paused. “Hello?” 
A holograph flared into existence, immediately to his right. 
He turned to face it; Jany McConnell. 
“Carl?” He heard the tension in her voice. 
“I’m sorry, Jany, there are no holocams here. What is it?” 

Moran   111 
 
 
“Can you come home?” 
“What’s wrong?” 
“We have a problem here, Carl. Can you come home quickly?” 
“Jany, I’m here with Mister Chandler. You can talk.” 
“Trent’s not a telepath.” 
“What?” 
“Trent’s not one of us.” 
“What?” Carl could not remember coming to his feet. 
“Oh, God, Carl, he hasn’t talked to anybody in hours. He 
won’t talk to us. I—” She took a deep breath, and Carl saw that 
she had been crying. “I went inside him once. I can’t do that 
again.” 
“I’ll be there as soon as I can. Hang tight. Command, comm 
off.” Carl turned to Chandler. “I’m sorry, sir. I have to go home. 
Thank you for the dinner.” 
Chandler was up already, escorting Carl to the front door. “I 
understand, certainly. Can I help? I can have my man drive you 
home. He’s a Class A operator; he’ll get you home quickly.” 
“Haven’t talked to Tony Angelo lately, have you?” asked Carl 
at the door. 
The question obviously meant nothing to Chandler. “No, I’ve 
not. Why?” 
“No reason. I’ll take the MetalSmith home, thanks. It’s pretty 
fast.” 
Chandler smiled at that. “So it is. Drive carefully.” 
“Thank you for dinner.” 
“Thank you, young man. Take care.” 
Carl left him there, the wealthiest and one of the most pow-
erful men on Earth, standing alone and almost forlorn in his 
doorway. 
He ran to his car. 
THE COMPLEX WAS quieter than Carl had ever seen it. He parked 
the MetalSmith in the garage, next to the cherry-red Lambor-
ghini Andy had finally purchased for himself. The sound of the 
MetalSmith’s gyros, spinning down, was the loudest noise he 
heard all through the Complex. He passed children in the halls 

112   Tales 
 
on his way up to the small office from which they conducted 
what business was conducted at the Complex; none of the chil-
dren spoke to him. 
Jany and Doctor Montignet, Malko and Andy and Willi and 
Johann were talking when Carl entered; they broke off at his 
appearance. He spoke to Doctor Montignet. “What’s wrong with 
him?” 
“There’s nothing wrong with him,” she said with a trace of 
asperity. “He’s a perfectly healthy young boy, and more or less 
normal except perhaps for being a bit too bright for his own 
good. We didn’t assemble our genies from genejunk. His third 
and eighth gene complexes are unique to your people; he’s that 
much like you. His seventeenth gene complex, the third gene 
you all have in common, is completely different. Eye color is lo-
cated in that strand of DNA, and quite obviously, so is some key 
portion of the telepathic ability. I suspect some degree of tem-
perament is also; he’s considerably calmer, and has a rather bet-
ter sense of humor, than most of the children. I haven’t had the 
opportunity to compare the rest of his gene structure at the de-
tail level, but I’m fairly certain there aren’t any major flaws in 
the genome. Our donors were quality genetic material.” 
Carl stood silently through the explanation. “Thank you. 
What does he think is wrong with him?” 
“It’s fairly obvious, surely?” When she saw it was not, she ex-
plained. “Carl, his identity, his sense of who he is and what he’s 
worth, is based on being one of the Castanaveras telepaths. 
That’s been taken away from him. He doesn’t know who he is, 
right now.” Her smile seemed genuine. “Though I think he’ll find 
out quickly. He’s quite a remarkable eleven-year-old.” 
“How did he find out?” 
“He can’t see infrared light. He learned that when the Peace-
forcers returned the children and everyone else did. When I ex-
amined him yesterday, I found that he had pubic hair and that 
his testicles were functional.” She shrugged. “I took a blood 
sample with me when I went home last night. Genetic analysis 
takes a while; I called in to my systerm earlier this afternoon 

Moran   113 
 
 
and had it check to see if the tests were done. They were. Trent’s 
not a telepath. He’s not going to be.” 
Carl found his mouth dry. “Where is he? In his room?” 
“In the park,” said Malko. It was all he had said since Carl 
entered the conference room. “Somewhere. I can’t find him.” 
CARL LEFT THE lighted tunnel and went out into the dusk. Night 
was falling as he entered the grounds, and the huge trans-
planted trees the garden was designed around were heavy with 
shadow. He reached with the Sight and was stunned by how 
strongly the grief struck him. The boy sat high in the branches 
of the tallest tree in the park, watching the sunset. The sky was 
clear that night, and it was very cold. 
Carl spoke without sound. Trent, come down. 
There was a visible flicker of movement at the top of the tree, 
and a rustling sound as leaves were displaced. Trent vanished 
into the denser growth around the center of the tree, and while 
Carl was still looking up, appeared in the lower branches, 
paused, hung by his hands, and dropped two meters to the 
ground. He landed crouching, and straightened slowly. “Hi.” 
Carl blinked. “Hi.” Trent was barefoot, wearing old jeans and 
a green shirt that could not possibly be keeping him warm. Carl 
felt almost alien in comparison; he was still dressed formally, in 
the black suit, and the blue-inlaid black cloak for warmth. He 
gestured back toward the lighted Complex. “I was just in with 
Suzanne. She said—” 
Trent nodded. “Yes.” 
“I’m sorry, Trent. I...don’t know what else to say.” 
“Me too.” Trent paused. “Me neither. This has been such a 
bad day,” he said conversationally. “I can’t believe it.” 
Now, standing there faced with the boy, Carl had difficulty 
finding words. “How can I help?” 
“I’ve been thinking about that.” Trent shivered, perhaps from 
the cold. “I have to leave.” 
“I don’t understand.” 
“I have to leave here. Doctor Montignet will take me, I 
think.” 

114   Tales 
 
“Leave?” said Carl stupidly. “The Complex?” 
Trent said simply, “Yes.” 
“Why?” 
“I’m not a telepath. I don’t want to live with telepaths.” In 
the darkness Carl was not certain of his expression. “I can’t.” 
“Trent, why?” 
Trent said slowly, “Father...I think the day will come when 
you—when telepaths—will be normal, and the rest of us will be 
out in the cold because we can’t compete. You’re better than we 
are.” He averted his face and did not look at Carl. With a sort of 
amazement Carl saw a smile touch his lips. The almost insane 
grief never ceased for an instant, and the boy made his lips move 
in a smile. “For most people it’s going to be a while before that 
happens—you don’t breed that fast.” The smile faded. “But if I 
stay here that happens to me now.” He turned and looked 
straight at Carl, eyes pooled in shadow. “I’ve been webdancing 
across the water, in Capital City’s InfoNet. They don’t touch me, 
you know. When I get an inskin, I don’t think there’s anybody on 
Earth who can touch me.” Trent gestured toward the Complex, 
partially visible above the fence around the park, looming white 
under its floodlights. “If I stay here I’m nothing. I love you all 
but I will not choose to be nothing.” 
Carl shook his head slowly. “Trent, that’s crazy. Malko lives 
here with us.” 
“Malko has experience and knowledge and connections that 
make him valuable.” The boy shrugged. “I’m a Pla—a web-
dancer. Father, there are lots of webdancers.” 
It stunned Carl, how helpless an eleven-year old boy could 
make him feel. He touched the boy with his mind and went reel-
ing back again from the numbing hurt. He reached with one 
hand toward the boy and was startled to see Trent draw back. 
Trent said flatly, “Don’t touch me.” 
Carl stared at him. He said helplessly, “Trent?” 
“I don’t belong here.” Carl was shaking his head no, not in 
negation but in pained disbelief, and Trent said softly, “Let me 
go.” 

Moran   115 
 
 
And Carl Castanaveras, for a brief, time-wrenching moment, 
saw the future twisting itself about the boy, heard his voice say 
with the hollow echo of prophecy, “I think you are right. You do 
not belong here. I think you will never belong anywhere.” 
TRENT PACKED, alone in his room. 
The next morning Suzanne Montignet would take him from 
the Complex, and he would go to live with her, away from his 
friends, away from Carl, and away from Jany. To live without 
Willi or Ary or Heather. 
To live without David, who was his best and finest friend, 
and without Denice, whom he loved as truly as he knew how. 
He moved through his room like an automaton, occupying his 
mind with the task of choosing what to take and what to leave. 
Of all his computer equipment, he took only his Image coproces-
sor and traceset. Doctor Montignet would have the rest of what 
he needed; he knew, better than anyone else in the Complex, 
what the inskin at her temple meant. 
Johnny had come up with a suitcase for him; not large, but 
Trent did not own much, after all. 
He would travel light. 
CARL SAT ALONE in the center of the big bed. He was not sure 
where Jany was; with the children, probably. Many of them 
were having nightmares. 
He knew how they felt. He was himself. 
He sank back on the bed, lying flat on his back, and drank 
smoke whiskey until he could no longer feel the pain eating 
away at him from the outside. 
And, after a while, from the inside as well. 
Incredibly drunk, as drunk as he had ever been and managed 
to stay conscious, at the end Carl found himself weeping help-
lessly, without reserve, crying alone in his room, crying for the 
first time since Shana de Nostri’s death. 
TRENT LOOKED AT the sunglasses on his bureau dresser. There 
were eight pairs, two of which fit him. The other six pair were 

116   Tales 
 
sized for adults. Gifts, from Denice. Every time one of the elders 
took her shopping in the city, she bought him sunglasses. He’d 
lost several pairs that had fit to the other children, and only the 
two pair were left. 
He had been staring at them blankly for longer than he could 
remember. He picked up all eight pairs and dropped them into 
his suitcase. There was room. Without hurry he made his way to 
the bathroom and threw up for the third time that night. Dry 
heaves; there was nothing left in his stomach. 
He rinsed his mouth and returned to the bedroom, and exam-
ined his suitcase. He caught sight of himself in the mirror and 
was not surprised at how calm he looked. He smiled at himself. 
It was easy. 
MALKO, SUZANNE, and Johnny spent the night in Malko Kal-
harri’s bedroom, talking. Johnny could not sleep, and Malko and 
Suzanne were disinclined. Every now and then Johnny would 
wince visibly; he had Malko worried. For hours he could not 
even sit down for any stretch of time. They talked of politics, of 
the fiscal status of Kalharri Ltd.; Johnny told them about the 
Lamborghini Andy had bought, and how he was tempted to get 
something like it for himself. He froze once in mid-sentence and 
shuddered all over. 
Malko watched him in silence for a moment, then asked, 
“How bad is it?” 
“It’s not good.” When the shakes ceased, Johnny rose from 
the chair he’d been sitting in and moved restlessly across the 
room, pacing like a caged animal. “God, it feels like he’s dying.” 
Suzanne Montignet brushed a strand of hair away from her 
eyes with an impatient motion. “Yes. It would.” 
“What?” 
“He is.” 
TRENT FOUND HIMSELF standing motionlessly in the middle of 
the room. He tried to remember if there were anything in par-
ticular he should be doing at this point. No, he decided later, 

Moran   117 
 
 
probably there was not. His legs shook; how long had it been 
since he’d moved? 
An hour? 
He let himself drop to the floor, so swiftly it might have been 
a collapse had the movement not been so graceful. 
He moved into lotus and began breathing deeply and evenly. 
His eyes closed only once, and Trent opened them again im-
mediately. 
Trent prepared to outwait the night. 
MANDY CASTANAVERAS bolted upright in the darkness, tears 
streaming down her cheeks. It was dark and she was alone, ter-
rifyingly alone, and then Jany was there and Jany was holding 
her, and she clung sobbing to the older woman as though she 
were the only stable thing in the world. “I had a dream, Jany, 
and—” She could not finish the sentence, and buried her head in 
Jany’s shoulder. I was so scared. After a time the tears ceased 
coming, and she whispered, It’s not a dream, is it? 
No, Jany murmured, it’s not. 
Something hurts. 
I know. 
 
7. 
IN THE QUAD at the center of the Complex, was a garden. 
From the streets outside the Complex one would never have 
guessed at its existence. The Complex was two stories high, two 
stories of glowing monocrystal, and the tallest of the ash trees in 
the garden did not yet reach so high. 
A row of suites, which the children had converted into bed-
rooms for themselves, faced inward onto the garden; on the level 
above, balconies ringed it, looking out over the loveliness. Be-
cause of the architectural layout, sunlight did not reach the gar-
den except at high noon; sunlamps ringed the walls surrounding 
the garden. They glowed during the mornings and evenings; 
during the winter they’d been kept on all day. 

118   Tales 
 
Near one corner of the garden was a small spring, large 
enough for three or four adults to swim in at once. It flowed over 
into a brook that ran swiftly through the center of the garden, 
and disappeared underground at the far end. Clover and grass 
underlaid everything; violets and orchids and roses grew in wild, 
untended abandon. Genegineered perennial cherry trees grew 
among the ash, and the leaves of their blossoms fluttered in the 
breeze. 
Malko and Carl drowsed beneath the sunlamps, on two of the 
reclining chairs that were arrayed around the pond, and a half 
dozen of the children were swimming in the pond, when Gerry 
McKann wandered out to join them. The children were rotating 
their time in the pond; it was the only swimming place that 
some two hundred and forty children had access to, and it sur-
prised Carl how easily the children had arranged among them-
selves for access to it. 
Only in the last few weeks had Carl noticed that the children 
never argued with each other. 
Carl was not sure how long Gerry had been there; he was sit-
ting on the chair next to Carl’s when Carl opened his eyes to find 
out why the children in the pond had grown so silent. 
He closed his eyes again. “Hi, Gerry.” 
“Hi. My editors want an interview with you.” 
Carl sighed and took a sip of GoodBeer by way of reply. 
“They would appreciate it if you could do it sometime this 
week.” 
“Nope.” 
“Carl, it’s important.” 
“Nothing is important. I’m on vacation.” 
Malko lay with his eyes closed. He wore a pair of blue shorts; 
aside from Gerry he was the only person in the garden who was 
clothed. “What’s wrong, Gerry?” 
“The Road and Flight Board did a story on Chandler Indus-
tries. It appeared on their Board yesterday morning. There’s a 
holo of the Rochester dealership in the article and Carl and I are 
visible in the background. One of my editors is about half an 

Moran   119 
 
 
angstrom shy of being a Speedfreak, and he saw the picture and 
recognized me.” 
Carl slowly sat up in his chair. “Newsdancer ethics. I said 
you shouldn’t have written that story about me.” He opened one 
of the bulbs on the ground next to him and handed it to Gerry. 
“Here. Knock this back and try to relax. You’re disturbing my 
kids.” The six children in the pond had stopped swimming and 
were floating at the far bank, as far away from Gerry as the 
pond let them get. 
Gerry opened the bulb and sipped at it. “I was sitting right 
next to you and you didn’t even notice.” 
“I’m half drunk. They’re not. Makes a difference.” 
“I don’t know that much about newsdancer ethics,” said 
Malko, “such as they are. I take it your editors are pissed be-
cause they saw you’d gone car shopping with Carl?” 
“Yeah. I wrote a story about him, Malko. And I didn’t make 
my relationship with Carl explicit in the story, which isn’t so 
bad, except I got caught at it.” 
“So they’re blackmailing you to get an interview with Carl?” 
“Something like that. If I don’t get it they fire me.” 
“And if you do?” 
“They give me an infochip conceding that they knew about 
my personal relationship with Carl, and that they agreed to 
have me interview him anyway. Basically puts me and the two 
editors who’ve seen the holo in the same boat. They can’t black-
ball me without admitting to the same infraction.” 
Carl laughed. “Newsdancer ethics.” 
Even Malko grinned. “The ‘Moses Lied’ theory. What God ac-
tually said was, Do whatever you want and don’t get caught.” 
Gerry said, “Well?” 
Carl glanced over at Malko. “Why not?” 
“I think so.” He turned to Gerry. “You’ve probably heard of 
our PR firm, Lustbader, Capri and Doutrè. They’ve been after 
Carl to do something like it for the last month anyhow. And he’s 
been going out of his skull on this stupid vacation.” 
“I haven’t learned how to vacation properly yet,” Carl admit-
ted. “But I’m sure enough working at it.” 

120   Tales 
 
Malko ignored him. “You know ’Sieur Doutrè, I’d imagine?” 
“He’s good at his job and I’m good at mine. We don’t like each 
other.” 
Malko nodded. “You talk to him first. Tell him you’d like to 
interview Carl. Do it this afternoon. Tomorrow morning I’ll ask 
him if anybody’s expressed interest in interviewing Carl, be-
cause Carl mentioned to me that he’s reconsidered being inter-
viewed, by the right person. Doutrè will leap at it.” 
Carl looked over at Gerry. “Good enough?” 
Gerry nodded a little jerkily. “Yeah. Thanks, Carl. I owe 
you.” 
Carl sank back to relax again in the warmth. “Damn 
straight. When do you want to do it?” 
“My editors want it to run in the Sunday edition. That gives 
us a week to interview and edit. I’ll be holocam and interviewer 
both, and I’d like to do it here at the Complex.” 
“Okay. Wednesday, after lunch.” Carl yelled at the waitbot: 
“Another beer, you lazy fucking hardware!” 
Gerry said, “Make that two.” 
THAT AFTERNOON THE Unification High Court ruled that the 
United Nations, except “under conditions of grave crisis,” had no 
legitimate authority to force the telepaths to work for them. The 
Court did not unfortunately define “grave crisis,” and it was ex-
pected that the government would press a lawsuit to obtain a 
ruling that did. 
Nonetheless it was reported in the press as a victory for the 
telepaths, and by extension for the de Nostri and other genies. 
That evening, while Carl and Jany were preparing for sleep, 
a holograph of Willi’s head and shoulders flickered into existence 
in front of Carl’s bed. He seemed nervous. “Carl? The Secretary 
General is calling. Carson’s with him. I asked if they wanted 
Malko, but they’re asking for you.” 
Carl sat up in bed, pulling on a robe. “Where is Malko?” 
“In bed. I think he’s with Doctor Montignet.” 
“When did she get—never mind. Interrupt them. Tell Malko 
to listen in.” He turned to Jany. “How do I look?” 

Moran   121 
 
 
Jany was wrapping a silk Japanese kimono about herself and 
pulling her hair out from beneath it. “Like they got you out of 
bed.” 
“Great.” Carl called the holocam over in front of the bed and 
said, “Patch them through, Willi.” 
The wall facing them vanished. Darryl Amnier and Jerril 
Carson appeared life size, a meter away from the edge of the 
bed. They wore formal dress, as though they had come from an 
official function; Carson still wore his cloak. They were calling 
from the Secretary General’s office, with the seal of the Secre-
tary General, twice the height of a man, floating three-
dimensionally behind the Secretary General’s desk. 
“M. Castanaveras, Mme. McConnell, I don’t think we’ve ever 
been properly introduced.” Darryl Amnier smiled briefly. He 
spoke English with an American accent. “Nonetheless we all 
know each other. I’d like to congratulate you on today’s judg-
ment. You’ve defended yourselves quite well.” 
Carl smiled sardonically. “Thank you. I have the impression 
it wasn’t anticipated.” 
Carson leaned forward to speak, and the Secretary General 
waved him to silence. “In truth, no. I’ve great respect for Malko, 
but it’s become clear to me in the last few months that Malko is 
not necessarily the most formidable of my adversaries.” He 
smiled again, gently. “Councilor Carson has been far too kind to 
say ‘I told you so.’ ” 
“Has he.” Carl leaned back against the headboard, stuffing a 
pillow behind himself to prop him up. “You’re far too kind your-
self, sir. You’ll give me a swelled head.” 
Amnier chuckled dryly. “I expect there’s little danger of that.” 
Carl laughed. “I’m not sure how to take that.” 
Amnier shrugged. “As you like.” The smile stayed on his lips 
and left his eyes. “You realize that the current situation is intol-
erable.” 
“To whom, sir? I’m sort of enjoying it.” 
The smile grew thinner. “I’m sure. The courts have been find-
ing in your favor with tedious regularity, and the further we 
press the subject, the sillier the press makes us look. But M. 

122   Tales 
 
Castanaveras, you must appreciate that it is dangerous for us to 
allow the weapon your people represent to remain—shall we 
say, uncontrolled.” 
“I find that an interesting choice of words,” said Jany quietly, 
“given that we’ve spent two years moving an Amendment 
through the Unification Council that prevents us from being, 
shall we say, controlled.” She folded her hands in her lap and 
looked into the holocam steadily. 
Amnier nodded. “I appreciate this. I’m not suggesting that 
things must be as they were. I’ve no problem with your retaining 
the use of the Chandler Complex. Nor am I unwilling to see you 
continue to peddle your services in some cases. What is intoler-
able, and must stop, are the inability of the PKF to obtain access 
to your services, and our lack of knowledge concerning for whom, 
and in what ways, your skills are being used.” 
The door to the bedroom slid aside, and Malko appeared in 
the doorway, with Suzanne behind him. Both were dressed. Nei-
ther Carl nor Jany looked in their direction; Malko stayed out of 
holocam range and shook his head no. 
Carl said thoughtfully, “I think you know who we’re working 
for. That’s only five companies, five companies that largely don’t 
compete with one another. I doubt we’ll sign more clients in the 
near future; adding to our client list would probably result in a 
conflict of interest on our parts, between our new clients and 
some subsidiary of one of our current clients. 
“So let’s restrain ourselves to those five companies. Can you 
imagine any of them allowing us to make public—especially to 
the PKF, with its astonishingly bad track record for keeping se-
crets—the details of the work we do for them? They’d cancel 
their contracts first.” 
“I take your point.” Amnier thought for a moment. “Suppose I 
were to arrange with you so that you were to report to Councilor 
Carson, and to him alone—or even,” he said, at the expression 
on Carl’s face, “to myself. The arrangement need not be made 
public; your clients need never know of it. Would that satisfy 
you?” 

Moran   123 
 
 
“In theory. In practice I don’t see how it would work. Let’s 
suppose that one of our clients wanted us to negotiate an ar-
rangement with one of the independent Belt CityStates for raw 
materials. It’s not illegal, but your position against trade with 
the independent CityStates is well known. What would you do 
with that information once it became known to you?” 
“Act on it,” said Amnier. “I would have to—but in such a 
fashion that the source of the information was protected.” 
Carl shook his head. “No. I’m afraid that translates to the 
same thing. Our clients are not fools. Early on they’ll feed us 
something traceable only to us. Out of reflex. And when the 
PKF—or the courts, or the office of the Secretary General—
reacts to that information, they’ll know and we’ll be out of busi-
ness.” He changed the subject abruptly. “Assuming that we were 
to accept jobs from the Peaceforcers—jobs that would not conflict 
with the interests of our current clients—we’d want to be paid 
for the work, at our current rates.” 
Carson’s tight control broke. “Why, you obnox—” 
Amnier’s voice cut like fineline. “Quiet.” Carson’s mouth 
snapped shut and he glared into the holocam. “Your current 
rates are acceptable. They’re hardly minimal, but you’re costing 
us more than that in the courts. I must however return to the 
subject of your clients. I’ll be specific if you like. Belinda Singer 
and Francis Xavier Chandler are not friends of my administra-
tion.” 
“That’s true of most Americans,” said Carl flatly. 
Amnier looked down at his desktop for a moment. He looked 
up again and spoke tonelessly. “Yes. That’s unfortunate. Largely 
Malko’s doing, too. Be that as it may, you must either report to 
us on your activities for those parties—for the others as well but 
particularly for those two—or cease working for them.” 
Before Amnier had finished the sentence, Malko was vigor-
ously mouthing a word at Carl. His thoughts struck Carl with-
out Carl even trying to read him. Stall, stall, don’t say— 
Carl shook his head, a small movement. “I’m sorry. I can’t do 
that.” 
Malko looked away in disgust. 

124   Tales 
 
Amnier sat silently, letting Carl’s last words hang in the air. 
Even knowing what Amnier was doing, Carl was surprised at 
how effective it was. Almost immediately he felt the desire to 
expand on the words, to retract them, to say something. 
He kept his mouth shut and returned Amnier’s gaze. 
Finally, Amnier broke the silence. “Not bad,” he said irrele-
vantly. “Do you know—I am aware it is impossible, but you re-
mind me—in manner, not in looks, but in manner—of the man 
for whom you are named.” 
“Oh?” Carl forced himself not to look at Malko. “I’ll take that 
as a compliment.” 
Amnier sighed. “Of course. M. Castanaveras, a moment’s in-
struction. In any negotiation with a man in my position, there 
exist both incentives and disincentives. In plain language, both 
the carrot and—” 
“Don’t you threaten me.” 
Amnier looked straight into the holocam. It seemed to Carl 
as though Amnier’s eyes met his own. When Amnier spoke, the 
tone of his voice was almost apologetic. “And the stick, sir.” 
“You,” said Carl, trembling with instant white rage, “go fuck 
yourself. Command, comm off.” 
Amnier was nodding, apparently without surprise, and Jerril 
Carson was smiling, when their images vanished. 
Where Carson’s image had been, the painting of Shana de 
Nostri looked at Carl through half-lidded eyes. 
THEY MOVED SWIFTLY. Carl’s bedroom became a temporary 
Ready Room until something better could be arranged. Body-
guards for those telepaths out of the Complex were doubled 
within an hour of Carl’s confrontation with Amnier. The perime-
ter guard was strengthened the morning following, and just in 
time; the crowds outside the Complex swelled that Tuesday to 
twice their usual size, and to three times on the day after that. 
Their chanting grew so loud that it could be heard at any point 
in the Complex’s above ground floors. Bodyguards left with Suz-
anne Montignet when she drove out Tuesday morning to go 
home. Jany decided that the children would no longer be allowed 

Moran   125 
 
 
to play in the yards around the Complex, and Carl seconded the 
opinion; the yards were too vulnerable to sniper fire. The chil-
dren were restricted to the garden and the park. A flood of hate 
mail and threatening calls came out of nowhere. Peaceforcers 
assumed a patrol, but did not interfere with the crowds. Malko 
muttered that he wondered whether the Peaceforcers were there 
to protect the telepaths or the government employees in the 
crowd. 
Security Services had to stun members of the crowd on 
Wednesday, when Gerold McKann came to interview Carl, be-
fore the crowd let Gerry’s car through. 
They had to do it again, near midnight, when Gerry left to go 
home. Working at Carl’s InfoNet terminal, Malko and Carl 
sorted through recordings made of the two stunnings. They 
came up with eleven faces who were present and made no at-
tempts to get out of the way of the sonic stunguns. “Government 
agents,” said Malko with a certain grim pleasure, “probably 
PKF. Getting themselves stunned for the press, so there will be 
pictures of lots of bodies lying immobile in front of the Complex. 
I hope they’re getting paid well.” He punched in the code for the 
front gate and got the Security Services guard in command of 
the detachment on duty. “Captain, I’m going to send eleven 
holos to you. I’d like you to do an eyeball of the crowd, and if any 
of those eleven are present, stun them again. Whenever one of 
those eleven shows up or wakes, stun the bastard.” 
There was only a moment’s pause. “Yes, sir.” 
Malko turned to Carl. “Can we get holographs of the Peace-
forcers currently stationed in New York? If we can, we can cross-
reference with the faces in the crowds outside.” 
Carl grinned. “I can’t. But I’ll bet you a bottle of smoke that 
Trent can.” 
The thought disturbed Malko. “Okay. Let him try, but only if 
he’s sure he won’t get caught. Failing wouldn’t be a problem; be-
ing traced back to Suzanne’s house would be. That’s data crack-
ing and theft and half a dozen other crimes as well.” 
Carl patted him on the shoulder. “Don’t worry.” 
“Why the hell not?” 

126   Tales 
 
Carl grinned again. “They won’t catch him.” 
CARL AWOKE IN darkness, late Thursday. Jany was shaking him 
awake. 
The window was still dark. “What time is it?” 
“3 A.M.,” Jany said. “We have an emergency, I think.” 
“What?” 
She spoke silently; it was far faster. Gerry called for you 
about twenty minutes ago. He was afraid, of what I don’t know. 
He didn’t get past the screening program before something out of 
holocam range made him hang up. Mandy was on duty, and 
when the screening program brought through its recording of 
Gerry’s call, she called me. I tried to reach him myself, but I 
couldn’t feel anything. He’s either unconscious or dead. 
Where’s Malko? 
Dressing. 
He’s not coming. Have Andy meet me at the car. Make sure 
he’s armed, autoshot and hand laser. 
What about me? Or Johann? 
You’re not coming either. Carl was out of bed, pulling on 
pants and boots. He grabbed his shirt and coat and ran out the 
door without donning them. 
A CROWD AWAITED him at the garage: Malko and Johann and 
Andy, Willi and Heather and Ary. The argument that followed 
was telepathically brief. 
The hell you say I’m not coming, said Johnny. Who’s going to 
stop me? 
Andy, said Carl, what are you carrying? 
Autoshot and hand laser, per request. 
Good. Johnny stood indecisively in front of Carl; Carl 
brushed by Johnny without answering him. Malko stood in front 
of Carl, blocking the driver’s seat. “Carl, what is this nonsense 
about my not coming?” He grinned. “If there’s going to be a fire-
fight, I’m going to be in it.” 
“No,” said Carl flatly. “Get out of my way.” 

Moran   127 
 
 
Malko shook his head. Carl took another step in his direc-
tion, and suddenly he found himself slammed up against the 
MetalSmith’s canopy, both of his arms twisted behind his back. 
Malko’s breath was warm, just over his right ear. “No mind 
tricks, Carl. Nobody we run into is going to be able to do what 
you can, and on every other level I’m just as good as you are.” He 
twisted Carl’s right arm sharply. “Or better.” 
Carl did not answer him. His eyes shut and he reached out 
with the Gift. Malko froze motionless for an instant, and in that 
instant Carl hit him in the stomach, caught and lowered Malko 
to the ground. “I’m sorry,” he said again, so quietly no one but 
Malko could hear it. “We can’t lose both of us.” 
He rose and touched the spot on the hull that cracked the 
MetalSmith’s canopy open. He spoke without looking up, as he 
lowered himself into the driver’s seat. Andy, come on. Nobody 
follows us. You make that mistake and I’ll kick your ass. The 
canopy sealed itself over them as Andy scrambled inside. We’ll 
be back. The doors to the garage slid swiftly, silently aside. 
Carl snapped the wings the instant they were clear of the 
doorway, and the MetalSmith was airborne before they were 
halfway to the gate. 
NEAR 4 A.M. the MetalSmith turned onto the street in uptown 
Manhattan where Gerold McKann lived. Carl pulled the car over 
to the curb, well down the block, and killed the headlights. Five 
New York City police cars were clustered in the street before 
Gerry’s apartment, bubble holos glowing blue and red. A sixth 
car, parked neatly at the side of the street slightly away from 
the other five, bore the black on silver insignia of the United Na-
tions Peace Keeping Force. 
Carl sat for a moment, looking out through the canopy, until 
he was sure their arrival had attracted no notice. 
Andy had slung the autoshot across his back and was check-
ing the charge on his hand laser for perhaps the fifth time. Carl 
did not comment on it; he was familiar with Andy’s nervous hab-
its, and they’d never slowed the boy down when it was impor-

128   Tales 
 
tant. Not like Johnny, who had a critical inability to fire until 
after he’d been shot at. 
Well? Do we go in? 
Carl blinked, and glanced at Andy. Not the way you mean, 
no. We’re far too badly outgunned. But yes, we are going in. Do 
you remember the job we did in Brunei? 
Yes. You made the guard think you were his brother-in-law. 
Do you think you can do that? 
Andy hesitated too long. Yes. 
There’s going to be six people in there at least, one per squad 
car. Probably closer to ten or twelve. 
Andy looked out the window at the glowing bubble holos. I 
don’t know for sure. 
Okay, but that means you have to do the talking. 
I can do that. 
Give me the owner’s manual from the glove compartment. 
Andy handed it to him, and Carl flipped it open, set the beam on 
his hand laser to low-intensity, wide-dispersion infra-red, and 
played the beam over its pages. He checked the index for color, 
and under color for patterns. Following the instructions, he 
changed the car’s pale gold to silver, formed a black square 
along both sides of the car where the doors would have been had 
the MetalSmith had doors, and over the front hood. Glancing 
over at the real PKF vehicle, he drew stars in on the three black 
fields, and a blue-and-white sphere within the stars. It didn’t 
look much like the representation of Earth on the PKF vehicle, 
but if anybody got close enough to the MetalSmith to look, they 
were lost regardless. 
Ready? 
Yes. 
Carl turned the headlights back on and pulled away from the 
curb. He drove sedately down the length of the street, and 
parked on the opposite side of the street from Gerry’s apart-
ment. Two New York City gendarmes were standing out in front 
of the entrance to the apartment building, more confused than 
alarmed as Carl and Andy got out of the MetalSmith. One of 

Moran   129 
 
 
them was reaching for his holstered laser as Carl and Andy 
reached the steps leading up from the motionless slidewalk. 
Carl stopped him with a thought. Andy pulled his wallet 
from a pocket of his jumpsuit and flashed the blank expanse of 
pseudoleather at the cops. “Je m’appelle Inspecteur Assante. 
Conseiller Carson envoie moi.” 
The cops nodded after a moment’s pause, and the senior of 
the two waved them through. Don’t use French, Carl admon-
ished Andy as they entered the hallway and punched for the lift 
to Gerry’s floor. Your accent’s not clearly American, but it’s obvi-
ous you’re not French. Speak English with a slight French ac-
cent. 
Andy grinned. Oui. 
The lift doors slid aside, and Carl and Andy rode up to the 
fifth floor. Police were stationed at the lifts; once again they 
were waved through, and made their way down the hallway to 
Gerold McKann’s apartment. 
The door to Gerry’s apartment was open. The carpet in the 
hallway outside was wet with a dark fluid. Nobody stood at the 
entrance to prevent admission. Andy walked straight through 
with Carl a step behind him. 
The walls, the rug, the furniture and electronics equipment 
that Gerry collected; there was blood everywhere. 
CARL IGNORED THE dampness he stood in, the blood that had 
turned the blue carpet a deep purplish black. He swept his mind 
across the room, let his eyes drop shut and walked through the 
two bedrooms. Three gendarmes, two Peaceforcers, one of whom 
was— 
The Peaceforcer turned away from the remains on the carpet 
and crossed the floor to stand before Andy and Carl. He wore a 
huge overcoat against the night air, that made him appear lar-
ger and broader than he was. In his own right the Peaceforcer 
was as tall as any Peaceforcer Carl had ever met, but so per-
fectly proportioned that it was only when Carl found himself 
looking up to meet the man’s gaze that he realized just how very 
large the man was. His face was stiff; Elite, and one Carl did not 

130   Tales 
 
know. He was either recently become an Elite, or else recently 
arrived from France. 
His voice was remarkably deep, with just a trace of rough-
ness. He addressed them in French. “I do not believe I know you 
gentlemen.” 
Andy hesitated a moment too long and then answered, as in-
structed, in English. “I’m Inspector Assante. Councilor Carson 
asked me to—” 
Carl became aware of a number of things happening all at 
once. Andy, who had seen dead men before, had caught sight of 
and was staring at the remains of Gerry McKann’s body even as 
he spoke. He was about to vomit. At the surface of the huge 
Peaceforcer Elite’s mind, suspicion blossomed in a rapid series of 
thoughts; know all the Inspectors and he is not one, too young, 
Carson sent no others tonight, that accent— 
Carl extended himself through space, and with the exception 
of Carl and Andy and the huge Peaceforcer, every human within 
a forty meters dropped into unconsciousness as though poleaxed. 
Carl seized control of the Peaceforcer Elite’s mind just in 
time. The cyborg’s right fist was hovering centimeters before his 
face, and the crystal embedded in the center knuckle was glow-
ing pink. The crystal faded to black as Carl watched. 
Andy, said Carl as soon as Andy had finished vomiting, close 
the door. 
WHO ARE YOU? 
The cyborg spoke in French. “I am Elite First Sergeant Mo-
hammed Vance.” 
Carl stood before him, eyes locked. What happened here? 
Vance was a man of exceptional will; even under compulsion 
he answered only the questions put to him, as minimally as he 
was able. “Two PKF Elite tore Gerold McKann limb from limb.” 
Were you one of those? 
“No.” 
Who ordered this? 
“I believe the decision was Councilor Carson’s.” 
Why? 

Moran   131 
 
 
“The murders are to be blamed upon a telepath whose name I 
do not know.” 
Is this telepath supposed to have been strong enough to have 
done this? 
“Councilor Carson thinks that it will not be difficult for a 
court to believe.” 
What was his motive to have been? 
“A psychotic rage. The man is known to indulge in them.” 
What of the police here? 
“They know nothing. They will simply find the telepath’s fin-
gerprints upon the clothing of the dead man.” 
Those are not the clothes he was wearing when he died. 
“They are. He was forced to strip and don this clothing before 
he was killed.” 
Remove them. You will report that you found the body un-
clothed. 
There was a brief and savage struggle of wills between the 
two men, and then Mohammed Vance said with a terrible ha-
tred, “Yes.” He turned and stripped the bloody clothing away 
from the chunks of sundered flesh that were all that remained of 
Gerold McKann, and placed them in a leakproof bag from 
Gerry’s kitchen. Carl watched the man, an emptiness inside 
him, and took the bag from Vance when he was done. Wash your 
hands. Have holographs been taken of the body’s position? 
“Yes.” 
With which holocam? 
“Those two.” Vance pointed at a pair of holocams resting on 
the floor next to two of the gendarmes. 
Andy, examine those holocams and erase any holos of Gerry’s 
body. Be careful what you touch and wipe the surfaces when 
you’re done. Carl returned his attention to Vance, who was just 
finishing at the sink, hands still wet. I will cause you to forget 
that I have been here. The same with these others. I will take the 
clothing with me when I leave, and you will report that the re-
mains were found unclothed. We have erased the holos of Gerry 
with the clothing that bears my fingerprints. Is there anything 
I’m missing that will betray our presence tonight? 

132   Tales 
 
Water dripped from Vance’s hands. His glare neared insan-
ity. “The gendarmes near the lifts have seen the body.” 
What of those at the street entrance? 
“They have not.” 
Is there anything else I’m missing? 
“I can think of nothing.” 
Andy? Can you think of anything? 
Andy had to tear his gaze away from Gerry’s remains. He 
spoke aloud, and even so his horror was plain. “No. No, I can’t.” 
Good. In an instant, Carl made the changes to the sleeping 
minds and brought them awake again. Several of them had 
blood stains upon their clothing that they would not be able to 
explain. Carl watched as they rose from the floor and silently 
went through the task of holographing the body again. It took 
him nearly half a minute to section off Mohammed Vance’s 
memory of the incident—he could not simply erase it—and re-
place what had happened with a sequence of events that Vance, 
like the others, would swear to his dying day was the truth of 
the night, that Gerold McKann’s remains had been found un-
clothed. 
Minutes later they were down on the street again, and 
twenty minutes had been sliced from the memories of nine hu-
man beings. Shortly thereafter they were headed home. 
Their conversation in the car was brief. 
“He was your best friend,” said Andy. “It hardly seems to 
have bothered you.” 
Almost absently Carl said, “You win some and you lose 
some.” He took the car out onto the highway and plugged it into 
TransCon. He turned in his seat to face Andy. “Sometimes the 
good guys lose.” 
Without moving Andy seemed to pull away from Carl, to 
grow more distant as he sat there. “They’re going to know we did 
something.” 
For the first time that night, a flicker of pain touched Carl’s 
face. He turned away from Andy and looked out the canopy at 
the lights of the city. “There’s a distinction,” said Carl distantly. 

Moran   133 
 
 
“They’re going to know something happened. But they won’t 
know what.” 
HALFWAY HOME, the car phone began beeping. Carl kept the 
holocam turned off and let the call through. 
Malko’s image glowed in blue monovideo on the MetalSmith’s 
control panel. “Carl?” 
Carl turned on the video and answered. “Hi, Malko. How are 
you?” 
“What?” The question seemed to mean nothing to the old 
man. “Oh, that. I’m fine. Is Gerry dead?” 
“Yes.” 
Carl noticed for the first time that Malko’s voice was shak-
ing. With anger? “We just received a call from Brazil. From 
Tomâs.” 
“What’s wrong?” 
“Althea is dead.” 
In the seat beside Carl, Andy whispered, “Oh.” 
Carl said in a monotone, “How?” 
“We don’t know yet. They were on a job for Sandoval Bio-
Chemical—fine manipulation work, I think. Tomâs and Allie 
were sharing a cabin and he woke up tonight and found she 
wasn’t in bed with him. Both the Double-S guards were asleep. 
He found her on the lawns outside his cabin. They’re saying 
snakebite.” 
“Two hours ago.” 
“Pretty near.” 
“Bring everybody who’s on a job, home.” 
“Carl?” 
“Yes?” 
“Don’t go on me, son. We need you too much.” 
“I’m going to kill Sandoval,” said Carl, “and I’m going to kill 
Carson.” 
“Carl, please.” 
Carl stared through the canopy at the nighttime city. “Should 
have killed Carson a long time ago.” 

134   Tales 
 
Carson screamed it. “What?” 
Mohammed Vance stood in full dress uniform, at attention in 
Carson’s office, in the midst of the vast stretch of carpet in front 
of Carson’s desk. Three of Carson’s aides sat in chairs before the 
bay window at the office’s east side. Early morning sunlight sil-
houetted them, made their features indistinct. The sunlight 
washed through the room and lost itself in Mohammed Vance’s 
formal black uniform. 
Vance spoke English with little accent. “In what way is my 
report unclear, sir?” 
Carson’s features were red with rage, but the words brought 
him up cold. The chain of thoughts running through his mind 
was almost visible. He brought his temper under control with an 
effort that was visible. “The problem is not that the report is not 
clear,” he said, speaking as though to an idiot. “The problem is 
that you were brought from France to aid me because of a re-
markable reputation, in one so young, for competence and reli-
ability.” 
Vance inclined his head. “Indeed.” 
“I wonder,” said Carson bluntly, “whose employ you’re actu-
ally in.” 
Mohammed Vance said without expression, “I serve the Uni-
fication, sir. No more and no less.” 
“Ideologs,” whispered Carson half to himself. He looked up at 
Vance. “You’re dismissed. Get out and don’t ever let me see you 
again—not ever.” 
Vance did not salute. He turned and strode steadily from the 
office. 
DARRYL AMNIER PACED restlessly across the gray rugs that cov-
ered the floor of the offices of the Secretary General in Capital 
City, New York. The flag of the United Nations hung limply in 
the corner of his vision as he paced. 
Just after 7 A.M. Charles Eddore was admitted to his pres-
ence. “Sir?” 
“Yes, Charles?” 

Moran   135 
 
 
“I received a message this morning from Malko Kalharri and 
Carl Castanaveras. I regret that I did not think to tape it.” 
“Of course you didn’t,” said Amnier without heat. “One won-
ders why they did not direct the call to me instead.” 
“I don’t know, sir. The call came to my office.” 
“I know. They told me. What had Kalharri to say?” 
Charles Eddore licked his lips. “ ‘Greg was right. I won’t 
make the same mistake again.’ ” 
Amnier’s closed his eyes. “Charles, have you ever felt 
ashamed of something you’ve done?” 
“No. No, sir, I can’t say I have.” 
“Hadn’t thought so. What did Castanaveras say?” 
“It was not important, sir.” 
“Charles.” 
“Sir, ‘And your little dog Toto, too.’ ” 
 
8. 
GEROLD MCKANN’S parents and ex-wife buried him on Saturday, 
June 24, 2062, with the staff and editors of the Electronic Times 
in attendance. 
Elsewhere in the world, on the same day, the telepaths bur-
ied Althea Castanaveras, lowered her coffin into the damp 
ground at the center of the garden at the center of the Complex. 
A rain so fine it was almost mist fell steadily. The children cov-
ered every centimeter of the garden, and still there was not 
enough space for all of them; many of them were forced to watch 
from the suites that ringed the garden. There were no tears; 
their grief was too profound. 
Even with the cold rage that kept the world away from him, 
Carl found room to be touched by the memorial the children had 
prepared. Wordlessly, their memories of Allie flowed through 
and among them, her words and deeds, the looks and smell and 
feel of her. A maturity that had no place in children touched 
their awareness; Althea was loved, and was missed, and was 
dead. 

136   Tales 
 
Carl suppressed any desire to address them; the Person 
whom they composed included Jany and Johann and Andy and 
Willi and Ary, all of the elder telepaths and all of the children 
except for those few who had not reached puberty, and it ex-
cluded him. The only human there who would hear and under-
stand his words was Malko, and Malko already knew. 
Allie is dead, and Gerry is dead, and they are not going to be 
the only ones. 
IN AN OLD HOME in Massapequa Park, a cool blue holocube ap-
peared over Suzanne Montignet’s desk. 
A handsome middle-aged man with a mustache whose name 
Suzanne did not know appeared from the shoulders up within 
the field. His background was indistinct. His temple did not bear 
the mark of an inskin data link. Though it was the middle of the 
night he had answered the call before Suzanne’s systerm had 
even begun counting out courtesy rings for her. 
“The Tree is alive,” said Suzanne quietly. 
“But the branches need pruning,” the man responded. “I’ve 
heard about your troubles. Is that why you are calling?” 
“Yes.” 
The man nodded. “Our friends thought you might be in 
touch. How can we help you?” 
“The problems we have had here are caused by two people in 
particular. If you could arrange for them to ‘leave town’ I think 
you would engender considerable sympathy for our mutual 
goals. You might gain some leverage with the younger one.” 
“And the elder?” 
“I believe his position would remain unchanged.” Believe, 
thought Suzanne Montignet as she waited for the man’s reply, is 
probably not a strong enough term. Malko’s contempt for the 
Johnny Rebs was plain enough that Suzanne had only once at-
tempted to broach the subject to him. “I am not,” she said after a 
moment’s silence, “certain whether his position on this subject is 
personal or simply a matter of policy; he is still watched quite 
closely.” 

Moran   137 
 
 
The man nodded. “Regrettable, but we act where we may. It 
may be that he would always be a greater liability than asset. 
Have you discussed this subject with the younger one?” 
“I have not. He may know of it regardless. He has not indi-
cated that he knows of this option. Still, the difficulty in keeping 
information confidential...” 
“I understand. I will look into the subject of persuading these 
two persons to ‘leave town.’ If it seems feasible, we will, before 
arranging the trip, take the step of meeting with the younger 
one and arriving at an agreement.” 
Suzanne Montignet nodded. “That would be appropriate.” 
“I will be in touch. Liberty.” 
“Liberty,” responded Suzanne, as the man’s image faded into 
the background blue. 
Later that night: 
Carl? 
Yes, Jany? 
What are you going to do? 
Kill Carson. 
How? 
I don’t know yet. He’s protected so well. 
And what of Sandoval? 
I’ll kill him too. 
Of course. 
You sound as though you disapprove. 
How do you know he’s guilty? 
...I beg your pardon. 
Carl, you don’t know. You can’t kill a man without knowing. 
Oh, that. 
Carl? 
I’ll know. 
THE FACE THAT appeared in the holofield was not human. Cat’s 
eyes, and the delicate whiskers, and the fine high cheekbones; 
once Carl could have loved her, but that she reminded him too 

138   Tales 
 
strongly of Shana. Jacqueline de Nostri’s expression was grave. 
“I grieve with you, Carl. Ask what you will of me.” 
“Chris said something that led me to think you can get in 
touch with him.” 
“Of course.” 
“I need your help, and his.” 
“Carson and the Secretary General? They are well protected.” 
Her ears twitched slightly. “Or Sandoval?” 
“Sandoval. First.” 
“Christian does little that his masters do not approve, Carl. I 
am not sure he will come.” 
“Tell him that we will come to Japan, if he aids us.” 
“We?” 
“The telepaths, Jacqueline. You need not commit yourself, or 
the de Nostri.” 
She studied his image for a long time. “Very well, Carl. We 
shall be the Three Musketeers again, no? Such a strange thing. I 
had thought that wheel had turned.” Her manner became busi-
nesslike. “Where shall we meet you?” 
“The bar Cojones, in Brasilia. It’s a dark place; dress appro-
priately, you’ll pass.” 
“When?” 
“Tomorrow morning. They open at nine.” 
“I shall be there. And Christian, I hope.” 
“Godspeed, Jacqueline.” 
“And you, Carl.” 
IT WAS NOT until Sunday that the Electronic Times ran news-
dancer Gerold McKann’s last work before his untimely death. 
It was his interview with Carl Castanaveras. 
IN THE HOURS around midnight, while Sunday became markdate 
Monday, Carl sat in a clearing midway up a mountain in the 
midst of jungle, just outside the sweep of patrols that protected 
the Sandoval estate. He sat beneath the shelter of the trees, 
sweat dripping down his motionless body, waiting for Chris and 
Jacqueline to return to him. 

Moran   139 
 
 
Here, as everywhere else in the world, the blunders of the 
Weather Bureau were felt; late at night, in the midst of the Bra-
zilian winter, high enough that snow sometimes fell, the swel-
tering heat was nearly intolerable. 
Carl sat in the heat, and waited. He wore black fatigues with 
minimal hardware to slow him down; if it came to a serious fire-
fight they were likely dead regardless. His weapons were a knife 
with an edge that was only three molecules wide, a garotte, a 
small .45-caliber automatic in case of rain, and an Excalibur Se-
ries Two dual frequency short laser rifle. The weapon was sim-
ple, unlike some variable lasers Carl had seen—difficult to make 
a mistake with, even under confused combat conditions. The fre-
quency toggle had only two positions. For close-up antipersonnel 
work the rifle dropped down into maser frequencies and sprayed 
a continuous beam of semicoherent microwaves; you could fry a 
small roomful of people nearly as quickly as with a true flame-
thrower, and it was much more portable. Against delicate elec-
tronics or flesh, or any object with water in its makeup, it was as 
lethal as an autoshot, and it lasted longer in an all-out firefight. 
Against waldos it was less efficient, while set to maser frequen-
cies. At its higher frequency it was a true coherent laser, emit-
ting a continuous invisible beam of X-rays. Almost nothing 
would halt the X-laser; the beam sliced with equal efficiency 
through stone and metal, flesh and bone. 
There was more modern hardware on the market; the Series 
Two was nearly a decade old. But there was not yet in Carl’s 
opinion a superior all-purpose weapon. 
It felt strange, a sensation that reached him even through 
the dead numbness following the rage, that he should be sitting 
in yet another jungle, waiting for Jacqueline and Chris to return 
from another foray. For six years he and Chris and Jacqueline 
had worked together; usually but not always with Peaceforcers 
other than Chris to coordinate the job. Even when Chris had 
given them every reason to trust him, the French PKF Elite had 
not. 
There was no sound audible to Carl, whose hearing was no 
better than a normal human’s; cross-legged, eyes closed, Carl 

140   Tales 
 
knew through other senses that Jacqueline de Nostri, naked but 
for her fur and a belt where her weapons were slung, had moved 
out of a nearby tree and into the one beneath which he sat. Mo-
ments later Chris Summers brushed almost as quietly through 
the undergrowth and lowered himself to the ground next to Carl. 
They breathed quietly. It was the only sound they made. 
They did not speak aloud. The most sensitive radio detectors 
known to man could not have heard their discussions. Carl sim-
ply listened in on them constantly. What Jacqueline thought, 
Chris Summers heard; what Chris thought, Carl made certain 
Jacqueline heard. 
Jacqueline de Nostri reclined languidly in the low limbs of 
the tree. We will wait until near morning. That was when the 
guards grew most careless last night. And then we shall have to 
move with great speed; we will not want to work when there is 
light. They do not use light enhancing goggles or glasses; there-
fore each of us must see better than they can. Especially Chris-
tian. It is one of our few advantages. Our weapons are not as 
powerful as theirs, except for the autoshot Christian carries. 
Summers lay motionless on his back, looking up into the tree, 
toward Jacqueline. I’m getting clumsy in my old age. I almost 
had to kill one of Sandoval’s patrol. He damn near walked into 
me while I was looking out over the spread. 
He didn’t suspect anything? asked Carl. 
No, or I’d have killed him. One good thing out of it: I got a 
good close look at the man before he passed me by. I don’t think 
they’re wired for diagnostics or IDs. Good news is we can proba-
bly pick them off without upsetting anybody until it’s time for 
them to report in, and they won’t have any way except visual ID 
to be sure that you’re not two of their own. Bad news is the two of 
you can’t snatch their nonexistent IDs and make your way 
through the automated defenses that way. Chris Summers 
shifted position slightly, clasping his hands beneath his head as 
he stared up at the branches and stars. I did get the StingRays 
into place. Three of them, covering the house from its north side 
across an arc of one hundred twenty degrees. Also, I located the 
deep radar. Unless—or until—we decide to take them out as well, 

Moran   141 
 
 
they mean I can’t get closer than about a quarter of a kilometer 
away from the house. That appears to be the range the radar 
sweeps. All the metal and heavy ceramic in my body, I’d light up 
the deep radar like a tank. 
Jacqueline made a purring noise of satisfaction. The time I 
spent waiting for you to come, Carl, I have planted darts on eight 
different members of the patrol. Cerabonic construction, and 
small. I do not think any of the troops noticed they had been shot. 
If things get out of hand we can detonate them at any time. Each 
dart contains an extremely small amount of antimatter in a con-
straining torus. Most of them will not be on patrol when we go in, 
but asleep in their barracks. We may take out most of the backup 
guards in this fashion. 
Well done, said Carl. Where does their power come from? 
There was silence from the other two. Okay, said Carl, un-
derground cabling, or does he have his own fusion plant? Or 
both? 
Summers said, He’s a paranoid bastard, judging from the ra-
dar and light trips and troops. My guess would be internal fu-
sion; my bet would be both. 
Guesses are for when you can afford to be wrong. 
I believe I taught you that, Carl. 
Yes, said Carl, eyes seeking out across the dark mountain to 
where Tio Sandoval waited for him in a brightly lit mansion. I 
believe so. 
A NOTE FROM the editors of the Electronic Times: 
The following interview, which strongly condemns the policies 
of the Secretary General and of the United Nations Peace Keep-
ing Force, was recorded on Wednesday, June 21. The next day 
two things happened. Althea Castanaveras, one of the Castanav-
eras telepaths, on assignment for Sandoval Biochemicals in Bra-
zil, was killed by snakebite while working in an area that is not 
known for poisonous reptiles; and Gerold McKann was brutally 
murdered in his uptown New York City apartment, and his cop-
ies of this interview were destroyed. Standard operating proce-
dure requires that Times reporters file copies of their current jobs 

142   Tales 
 
with the central Times database. Gerold McKann did so; that 
copy, wholly unedited, is what you will now audit. 
At dateline, no suspect has been charged with Gerold 
McKann’s murder. New York City Police Commissioner Maxwell 
Devlin reports that the police currently have no suspects—at 
least, none they are willing to name. 
THE FILE OPENS with the image of Gerold McKann, smiling into 
the holocams. He is dressed in a severe business suit of conserva-
tive cut, without either a tie or shoulder silks. He is not wearing 
makeup, or if he is, has turned it off. Edit notes attached at this 
point reference background information on the telepaths, the de 
Nostri, the administration of Darryl Amnier, and a brief over-
view of Amnier’s and Malko Kalharri’s roles in the Unification 
War. Biographical profiles of the major players in the current po-
litical dispute are included. 
McKann: Edit, this is the intro for the Sunday interview. 
(McKann pauses and says something that is not audible on the 
recording, to a person standing off-holocam. He smiles and, hold-
ing the smile, turns back to the holocam.) Good morning. My 
name is Gerold McKann, and I’m here this morning with an 
Electronic Times exclusive interview with Carl Castanaveras. 
Most of you know of him; he’s the young, somewhat reclusive 
leader of the genegineered telepaths who recently obtained their 
independence from the United Nations Peace Keeping Force. 
Edit, cut and insert at transition. 
(The holocams turn slowly, pulling back from the tight focus 
on Gerold McKann to include Carl Castanaveras. He is seated at 
the left end of a small sofa, dressed in dark boots, black slacks 
and a long-sleeved red silk shirt. He is wearing mirrored sun-
glasses; a male voice from off-holocam advises him to remove 
them, and he does so, placing them in the pocket of his shirt. An 
edit note attached at this point identifies the voice as that of 
Malko Kalharri. Behind Castanaveras, through a wide bay win-
dow, stretch the front lawns of the Complex. In the distance, 
demonstrators are visible, milling in the streets.) 
McKann: How do you feel, Carl? 

Moran   143 
 
 
Castanaveras: Fine, thank you. 
McKann: Relax, okay? We’re going to run over most of this a 
couple of times from different directions, and I’ll edit from that. 
Have you ever been interviewed before? 
Castanaveras: Briefly. Not like this. 
McKann: If you hear me begin a sentence with “edit” it’s a 
search word tagging a note I’m making for editing purposes 
later. As for the holocams, just forget them being there. Talk to 
me, not them. 
Castanaveras: Sure. 
McKann: Good morning, Carl. How are you today? 
Castanaveras: Fine, thank you. Except that it’s almost 
three in the afternoon. 
McKann: Yeah, but the interview’s going to run in the Sun-
day morning edition. Attention to detail. (Pause.) The general 
outline of your story is well known to our users. Nonetheless, 
there are details that have never really been brought to light. I 
know there are some subjects you can’t discuss because they’ve 
been classified, so if we start getting into one of those areas, let 
me know and I’ll back out. 
Castanaveras: The areas that we can’t discuss are largely 
those that relate to the details of the jobs I did for the Peace-
forcers. Certainly it’s no secret that I—and other telepaths—
have done intelligence work for them. 
McKann: Carl, I guess the best place for us to start is in the 
beginning. Why were you created in the first place? 
Castanaveras: Personally? Or the telepaths as a group? 
McKann: Say both. 
Castanaveras: As a group, we were created to gather infor-
mation for the Peaceforcers. Most people know that, I think. But 
that was only after both Jany and I had shown we possessed the 
telepathic gift. Those of us born before then were simply part of 
what was—improperly—called Project Superman. Back in the 
late twenties, the United Nations sponsored several different 
lines of research into genetic engineering. Most of what they 
were looking for involved improved strength and endurance—
better soldiers, essentially. Remember that this was just after 

144   Tales 
 
the end of the War, when it looked likely that the Peaceforcers 
would have to put down rebellion after rebellion until the end of 
time. I was a result of one of those lines of research. History 
seems to have given de Nostri a lot of credit that he doesn’t de-
serve, as far as the creation of the science of genegineering goes. 
De Nostri did raise the practice of gene splicing to an art; he was 
probably the best gene splicer the world has ever seen. But that 
is not the same thing as designing structures at the DNA level, 
which was Suzanne Montignet’s accomplishment. 
McKann: It seems they didn’t exactly get what they were 
looking for. 
Castanaveras: You mean soldiers? Perhaps they did, in the 
de Nostri. The de Nostri are wonderfully suited for the task of 
soldiering, at least at the physical level. And they do enjoy bat-
tle, that’s hardly a secret. The U.N. did not, fortunately, achieve 
their goals in the telepaths. We are a peaceful people. 
TWO HOURS BEFORE dawn they moved. 
The spot where they had waited through the night was sepa-
rated by a small gorge from the Sandoval estate. The patrols 
swept to the edge of the gorge and went no farther. Foolishly, 
the patrol was patterned in a fashion that repeated itself at 
least twice a day; by the time early Monday morning had arrived 
Jacqueline had watched the patrol’s search pattern roll over 
three times. 
They came down off the mountain in the hot stillness of early 
morning, moving slowly into their positions on the other side of 
the gorge. Deep infrared light trips were set at multiple waist-
high locations throughout the approach to the house. The beams 
were within Chris’s visual range; they were not within either 
Carl’s or Jacqueline’s, and as a result they both wore enhancing 
sunglasses that extended their eyesight into ranges nearly as 
wide as Chris’s. Pressure pads were doubtless buried at various 
points as well. The patrols they had to penetrate were private 
Sandoval guards, but there was a barracks of Army troops 
tucked not quite a half a kilometer down the main access road 
leading away from the estate. 

Moran   145 
 
 
At 4:10 A.M., a guard made his crashing noisy way through 
the underbrush lining the dry gulch that marked the perimeter 
of their patrol.  Summers tracked him with a sonic rifle for 
nearly five seconds before the man stumbled and went to his 
knees. Summers held the beam of sound on the man for another 
five seconds before releasing the trigger. 
At 4:15 A.M. a second guard came along and received the 
same treatment, fifteen meters earlier. There would not be an-
other security guard through for another forty minutes. Carl 
carried the first guard over to rest next to the second and laid 
him down. With Chris and Jacqueline covering him, he closed 
his eyes, left the world behind, and one after another went in-
side their unconscious minds. 
...rolling waves of black fear, and the constant sickness in his 
stomach. He was so afraid, always so afraid, and the others knew 
they all knew...Carl moved through the shattered remnants of the 
fear that had come to the man when he realized that something 
was dreadfully wrong, and he was already too weak to do any-
thing about it, and then unconsciousness claimed him...deeper, 
down into memory, and as always the strong memories were of 
fear and guilt and rage and hatred, and they leapt up to greet 
him, to envelop him...Rita Sandoval’s naked body, and he had 
been unable to tear his eyes away from her and the door had 
closed and Tio Sandoval had passed by only moments later, and 
Sandoval knew he had been spying on the Senorita, it was there 
in his evil smile...faces, a swirl of faces, only one of which was 
right, a short, fat man with a face that never held joy, never held 
anything but a mild contempt for the rest of the world, sitting at 
a row of monitors.... 
Out and in again, and the man was almost a moron, with 
faded grey memories of peoples and places, knowing only that he 
served the Sandovals and they fed him and cared for him, and 
with a dim gratitude for the kindnesses his commanding officer 
sometimes showed him, and a totally unconscious revulsion for 
the night-watch monitoring officer, the man with the round face, 
who said things to him he could not understand.... 

146   Tales 
 
Carl opened his eyes. He was only vaguely aware of how 
drenched with sweat he had become. He ignored the faint trace 
of an oncoming headache and held the image of the short fat 
man in his consciousness and focused upon it, seeking into the 
great house, finding nothing and then a flicker, and he heard 
himself murmuring aloud, “Sleep, sleep...” The flicker steadied 
and for a brief moment Carl’s mind enveloped that of Rico 
Benitez, and through his eyes scanned monitors that held im-
ages of jungle and broad swaths of lawn and corridors and bed-
rooms, and then there was only silence, throughout the great 
house, the silence of the small death that was sleep. 
“Done,” he whispered. 
Jacqueline de Nostri did not even use her knife. She knelt 
and opened their throats to the night air with her claws. 
Neither Carl nor Chris Summers attempted to stop her. The 
watch officer is asleep, said Carl. I don’t know if anybody else 
was in there with him. 
Chris Summers nodded. You and Jacki probably won’t set off 
wake-up alarms unless they have logic inside programmed for 
face and shape recognition. I don’t go past this point; I’d set off 
their deep radar. I’m going to work my way around the perimeter 
over to the main road. Summers faded into the darkness. I’ll take 
’em out as I come to ’em. You’re on your own, kids. If it blows call 
me and I’ll come in. Otherwise I’ll see you at pickup. 
Carl unslung his maser rifle and gestured with it toward the 
estate. Let’s go deal some death. 
Yes. 
They moved in. 
 
MCKANN: What’s it like to read another human’s mind? 
Castanaveras: Unpleasant. 
McKann: Can’t you be a little more specific than that? 
Castanaveras: I’m not sure I can, not in any meaningful 
way. In the purest sense, it’s not reading minds. A better de-
scription would be to say that I look at the world through an-
other person’s eyes. While I do it I am both persons, both myself 

Moran   147 
 
 
and whoever it is I am in touch with. I see through two pairs of 
eyes, think with two minds. If I read the mind of someone who is 
more intelligent than I am—and I have, on occasion—in that 
moment, I am capable of understanding perfectly things that 
generally are not within my grasp. Two minds, linked by one 
Gift. 
McKann: You still haven’t explained your use of the word 
“unpleasant.” 
Castanaveras: Do you know what the commonest emotion 
is? 
McKann: I can guess. 
Castanaveras: No you can’t. Guilt. This vast regret for the 
things that they’ve done that are wrong. Those are the people 
whose minds it hurts to contact, and they are far and away in 
the majority. The percentage of people who don’t suffer from 
guilt is so vanishingly small I’m tempted to say that such people 
are not sane. Either they’re not sane or the rest of us are not 
sane, and those of us who feel shame for things we’ve done far 
outnumber those who don’t. 
McKann: Isn’t that one of the definitions of a sociopathic 
personality? The inability to feel guilt? 
(Castanaveras is silent a long moment.) 
Castanaveras: I’m not referring to such people. There are 
sociopaths, but not many, at least by percentage of the popula-
tion. (Silence again.) Some people have—well, the best way I can 
say it is that they know themselves. They know who they are, 
what their strengths and weaknesses are, and they are at peace 
with themselves. Those people, they don’t do things that might 
make them uncomfortable. (Half smiles.) It must be nice. 
McKann: I take it that you’re not one of those. 
Castanaveras: Me? Hell, no. I do things I regret all the 
time. 
McKann: Really? 
Castanaveras: Oh—constantly. 
THEY STOOD IN sultry darkness beneath the shelter of the trees, 
a meter away from the brightly lit lawns. Glowfloats bobbed 

148   Tales 
 
restlessly ten meters in the air above them, casting a harsh and 
relentless light across the scene. 
A fence ran all the way around the mansion except at the 
main entrance. Both live and automated guards—modified hunt-
ing waldos, as near as Carl could tell—patrolled at the single 
gate through which traffic could pass in and out of the protected 
inner area. There was a well lit stretch of lawn of nearly sixty 
meters between the edge of the trees and the fence. I see no light 
trips. 
Neither do I, said Carl. He focused with the sunglasses and 
zoomed in on the fence. A brightness above the fences was so 
faint Carl was not certain he was not imagining it. Look, just 
above the fence. 
I do not...ah. They have strung fineline above the fence. Per-
haps—I would guess two meters high, as high again as the fence 
itself. Expensive. 
He has the money for it. Looks like that way’s out. If we get 
ourselves chopped to pieces on it, it sets off a quiet alarm; if we 
cut the fineline it sets off one of the noisy alarms. 
Her thought held sarcasm. Such brilliant deductive powers. 
What does that fence look like to you? 
Adobe? 
Uh-huh. Old, too. Want to bet it’s not sensitized? I bet they 
slapped the fence together about the turn of the century and never 
bothered to rebuild with modern sensors inside. 
My preference is to refrain from betting. 
You blew that one when you got up this morning. 
True. Our choices then are front gate, which means taking out 
the waldos, or cutting through the wall. 
We can’t go over and we don’t have time to dig under. I don’t 
see what else it leaves. 
Jacqueline nodded decisively. Straight through the wall. 
They circled around through the cover of the trees, until they 
were out of sight of the front gate. On three; one and two and go. 
They sprinted under the lights, across the bright lawns. Jac-
queline outdistanced him and was flat on her stomach next to 
the fences before Carl had half crossed the distance. He reached 

Moran   149 
 
 
her moments later and dropped to the ground next to her. Jac-
queline held down the trigger on her laser, running the beam 
around and around in a circle not quite a meter in diameter on 
the surface of the fence. With his rifle Carl began tracing the 
outline of an ‘X’ inside the circle. There were minor explosions 
every time the beam struck a buried air pocket inside the adobe 
and the superheated air expanded in a shock wave. Jacqueline 
released the trigger on her laser. Carl followed her example a 
second later. The adobe was glowing cherry red, as though a 
huge brand had been taken to its surface. Carl, with Jacqueline 
bracing him, kicked with all his might at the center of the ‘X’, 
once, twice, and on the third kick the circle folded in. A fourth 
kick knocked out one quarter that had not popped through with 
the other three. Carl squirmed through, protected by his cloth-
ing from the still-glowing edges of the circle. Jacqueline followed 
in the next moment, more carefully; unlike Carl’s inflammable 
fatigues, that were designed to take a laser blast without much 
complaint, her own fur burned quite well. 
The inner yard, unlike that outside the fences, was dark. As 
a result, neither of them had more than a moment’s warning be-
fore the silent rush of the dogs through the trees struck them. 
MCKANN: Edit, subject of de Nostri. (Pause.) Carl, the de Nostri 
are at least as interested in the substance of the current debate 
as are the telepaths. Yet they’re even more unapproachable than 
you are. Why is this so? 
Castanaveras: You realize that I can’t speak for them. 
McKann: I’m not asking for that. But surely your lines of 
communication with the de Nostri are substantial; your people 
lived with theirs for over ten years. 
Castanaveras: About twelve. After our attorneys won per-
mission for us to live where we chose, they decided to return to 
France. Jacqueline and Albert de Nostri were largely responsi-
ble for that decision, I’m told. The younger de Nostri wanted to 
stay in America; most of them had grown up here. (Grins.) Un-
fortunately, the same legal decision that put me in charge of our 
children put the de Nostri elders in charge of theirs. I’m of the 

150   Tales 
 
impression that they weren’t given much choice. The de Nostri 
don’t run things democratically. 
McKann: Why do they keep such a low profile? 
Castanaveras: Surely that’s obvious. 
McKann: I’m afraid not. 
Castanaveras: Look, right now, outside our front gates, you 
can see some three thousand demonstrators picketing us be-
cause we’re guilty of the crime of wanting to decide our own fate. 
A lot of that is fear; we can read their minds, and they don’t 
much like that fact. Some of it is the hatred of difference—which 
is rooted in fear. But the biggest part of it is that they know 
where we are. Look, any educated human being on this planet 
who’s audited one of the news Boards of late knows where we 
are. I mean, not necessarily the street address, but with a half 
hour to drive around the neighborhood, they’d find us, if only by 
homing in on the sound of the chanting. Now, you’re a reasona-
bly educated man, are you not? You keep up on the news, I pre-
sume? 
McKann: I see where you’re going. 
Castanaveras: Where are the de Nostri? In France, sure, I 
just told you that much. Maybe you even knew. But specifically, 
where? 
McKann: I don’t specifically know. I’m sure I could find out. 
Castanaveras: No doubt. Could a mob? I will tell you this 
much about the de Nostri—nobody’s picketing them. 
A SNARLING MASS of claws and teeth struck Carl chest high and 
slammed him back against the wall. Strong jaws clamped down 
on him through the boot on his right foot and dragged him down 
to the ground in a single wild pull. He lost his rifle and found his 
knife just in time to turn its edge toward the breast of the first 
dog as that dog leapt upon him again, clawing at his throat. The 
knife melted into the dog’s flesh, shearing through fur, muscle, 
cartilage and bone with equal ease. The dog got its teeth around 
Carl’s forearm and was bearing down as it died. Only its mass 
kept the second dog from getting at Carl’s face, and then some-
thing else, moving blurringly fast on all fours, went over Carl 

Moran   151 
 
 
and took the dog in a tumbling roll across five meters of lawn. 
When their roll ceased, Jacqueline de Nostri came to her feet 
without pause. 
Carl became aware of the weight of the dog on his chest, and 
its blood as it seeped over his fatigues. 
Dogs, thought Jacqueline, trembling with emotion, I hate 
dogs. 
She stood motionlessly a few steps away from him, still trem-
bling, and Carl shoved the dog aside, removed his forearm from 
its jaws, stood and looked around. In the dim light from the 
faraway glowfloats, he saw the corpses of five animals. 
He had killed only one of those five, and almost by accident. 
Jacqueline was still shaking when he had retrieved his knife 
and his rifle, and by reflex he nearly made the mistake of saying 
something, of reaching in to try to help her to grow calm again; 
and then he remembered himself, and her, and from long knowl-
edge refrained. 
They moved on into the tree filled darkness in silence. 
(AN EDIT NOTE attached at this point says: “The following is taken 
from the Thursday morning interview, early on the day Gerold 
McKann was murdered. Both McKann and Castanaveras are 
wearing the same clothing they wore in the earlier session.”) 
McKann: Carl, you said something a bit earlier that sounded 
as though you thought the demonstrations outside are staged. 
Could you elaborate on that? 
Castanaveras: I’d love to. Look. (A holofield shimmers into 
existence. All that is recorded by the holocams is a blur.) This 
is— 
McKann: Edit. Carl, you should have asked me about this. 
You can’t holograph a holograph. 
Castanaveras: Oh? Why not? 
McKann: I don’t know, you just can’t. You don’t get anything 
except a blur. Haven’t you ever run a holocam? 
Castanaveras: Not often. 
McKann: Make me a copy of the images you want to run and 
I’ll splice them in where appropriate. 

152   Tales 
 
Castanaveras:  Fine. Should I just go on? 
McKann: Edit, interview resumes. (Pause.) Could you elabo-
rate on that? 
Castanaveras: ...sure. Look, this is a compilation of holos 
that we took when you arrived on Wednesday and left Wednes-
day night. I’m sure you noticed us stunning members of the 
crowd so that you could get in through the gates. 
McKann: It did not escape my attention. 
(An image of demonstrators at the front gate of the Chandler 
Complex briefly overlays the primary image of McKann and 
Castanaveras.) 
Castanaveras: This shows clearly—here, and again a few 
seconds later, here—these people aren’t even trying to get out of 
the way of the stun rifles, even though it’s quite clear where 
those rifles are aimed. Now, look, we’ve got these faces sepa-
rated out; these are the faces of the people who were stunned. 
Uh, at the moment they were stunned they were not good candi-
dates for identification; they tended to be grimacing at that 
point. These holos are backtracked from a few moments earlier, 
but there’s no question that they are the images of the persons 
being stunned. 
McKann: Stipulated. We’ll confirm this. 
Castanaveras: Fine. I’m not sure how to phrase this—as of 
today, Thursday morning, we don’t have proof that any of these 
people are Peaceforcers. But we will, in time for your Sunday 
edition. 
McKann: (Leans forward, looking into holofield.) I’ll be 
damned—if you can do that, that might be interesting. But I’m 
afraid it might not do you a lot of good, Carl. There’s no law I 
know of that prohibits a member of the PKF from demonstrating 
against the telepaths. 
Castanaveras: I’m sure there’s not, Gerry. But Gerry, how 
much would you like to bet that these men are on duty? Drawing 
pay, on government time, to harass us? 
McKann: I think maybe that’s a sucker bet. I’m going to edit 
what I just said. 

Moran   153 
 
 
Castanaveras: Coward. One more thing for you to think 
about, though. We’ve had between six hundred and about four-
teen hundred demonstrators out there every single day since we 
moved into the Complex. Today there are over three thousand, 
and would you like to know when those crowds appeared? The 
very day that Judge Sonneschein ruled that we were not subject 
to the Official Secrets Acts of 2048 and 2054. 
Damn it, what’s wrong with wanting to be free? (pause)...I 
hope that’s a rhetorical question. There’s not a corner of this 
globe that still tolerates slavery in any form. Oh, there are idiots 
in India and Taiwan and elsewhere who can sign themselves 
into indenture for cash—but the period of indenture is limited to 
five years, they get paid for it, and the choice is theirs! We never 
once got paid for our services, nobody asked us whether we 
wanted to do what we were forced to, and the period of inden-
ture was unlimited. The Secretary General’s office has made no 
bones of the fact that it considers the Eighth Amendment an ab-
erration, and even while conceding that it must follow the letter 
of the Amendment has gone to insane lengths to circumvent its 
intent. We are being sued by the United Nations through the 
Bureau of Traffic Enforcement, by the PKF for breach of verbal 
contract, by the Prosecutor General’s office for violation of the 
Official Secrets Acts, by the Ministry of Population Control for 
failure to provide properly for our children, by the Bureau of 
Zoning Controls for operating a business out of a residence—
that’s the Chandler Complex they’re referring to—and for God 
knows what else. I mean, we’ve been here in the Chandler Com-
plex for nine months now. Is it, as the Secretary General’s office 
claims, purely a coincidence that all of these legal problems 
arose only in the last two months or so? Only, in other words, 
since the enactment of the Eighth Amendment? Infoshit. 
McKann: Traffic Enforcement? 
Castanaveras: Speeding violation. No big deal. Come on, 
Gerry —is it a coincidence? You’re a reasonable man. 
McKann: I’m supposed to be interviewing you. 
Castanaveras: Okay, no, it is not a coincidence. We are, 
right now, the object of a conspiracy between the Prosecutor 

154   Tales 
 
General’s office, in the person of Charles Eddore, the Peace 
Keeping Force, in the person of Unification Councilor Carson—
who serves, in case I haven’t made myself clear, as Chairman of 
the Peace Keeping Force Oversight Committee in the Unifica-
tion Council—and the Secretary General’s office, in the person of 
the Secretary General himself. They haven’t been able to touch 
us legally, and they will not be able to. That leaves illegal 
means, beginning, but I’ll warrant not ending, with this mess 
outside the front gates of my home. 
McKann: Edit, subject of conversation with SecGen. Carl, do 
you want to discuss your conversation with the Secretary Gen-
eral? Or possibly just give me your recording of the conversa-
tion? 
(A male voice from off-holocam, identified as Malko Kal-
harri’s, says something unintelligible at this point. It contains 
the words “Secretary General.” A text note inserted by the editors 
of the Electronic Times notes that no recording of the alleged 
conversation has been made available to the Times at this date.) 
Castanaveras: No. We’ll save that for another time. 
McKann: Okay. Without some statement from you, you 
won’t get any play on it when the interview runs. 
Castanaveras: We’re not looking for war, Gerry. That con-
versation might embarrass the Secretary General, but not much 
more. He said nothing actionable in it. I’m not looking to embar-
rass the man, Gerry. Just convince him to leave us alone. 
McKann: You don’t think you’re at war now? 
Castanaveras: I don’t know. I haven’t had a chance to read 
the Secretary General’s mind, or Carson’s either. There’s a dif-
ference between playing chicken and actually fighting. Right 
now we’re standing face to face, waiting to see who blinks first. 
(Grins.) If you always knew whether the guy across the table 
from you was holding, there wouldn’t be much point in trying to 
bluff, would there? 
 
(Pause.) I certainly hope we’re not at war. I don’t want 
that. (Castanaveras pauses again for several seconds, and adds:) 
If they have any sense, neither do they. 

Moran   155 
 
 
TIO SANDOVAL awoke in darkness. 
For a moment he was not certain what had awakened him. 
Carolita was still asleep at his side, her breathing gentle and 
regular. The only light in the room came from the fish tank that 
ran along most of one wall, where Carolita’s exotics navigated 
their way through the miniature submarine kingdom she had 
designed as a hobby. The light from the tank washed the room 
in a dim, aquamarine glow that wavered and shifted with the 
movement of the water. Carolita lay naked next to him, lovely in 
a pure and almost irrelevant manner. He felt no desire for her—
had not felt desire for any woman since the death of the telepath 
girl. 
A warm breeze moved across his bare chest, and he realized 
what had awakened him. A moment’s sharp displeasure with 
Carolita passed through him; constantly, she argued with him 
whether the window was to stay open or shut. Better the heat of 
clean air, she said, than the false chill of air conditioning. Their 
only window, which looked out over the south side of the gentle 
slope upon which Casa Sandoval was built, was dilated to its full 
extension, the glassite shrunk back to the windowsill itself 
across the perimeter of the circle. He considered calling the win-
dow closed, but Carolita would surely awaken and complain at 
his noise. Sandoval left the bed and came to his feet in a single 
fluid motion, and strode across the room to touch the pressure 
pad that dilated the window. 
He had the vague impression that there was some thing be-
hind him, when a strong hand clamped over his mouth and a 
knife traced a shallow cut along the edge of his neck. He went 
rigid, and then relaxed and did not even consider resisting. 
Something was wrong with his thought processes—he had been 
drugged, perhaps, for though intellectually he knew he was in 
grave danger, emotionally the subject was hazy and irrelevant. 
They continued to the window, and another shape—de Nostri—
was there, hanging seemingly unattached to the edge of the wall 
at his third story bedroom. The de Nostri, a female, handed him 
a pair of gloves, that he donned without question. He climbed 
out through the window, and accepted the de Nostri’s help in 

156   Tales 
 
grasping the almost invisible line that was attached near the 
window. He slid down the line to the ground, momentarily 
aware that the drop was enjoyable and frightening at the same 
time. A pain occurred in his knee when he reached the ground, 
but that was not important either. Instants later the de Nostri 
and the man with her came down the line after him. 
Then the lights came on, everywhere, and then sirens. 
With a shock of surprise almost great enough to penetrate 
the haze that insulated him from the rest of the world, Tio 
Sandoval recognized Carl Castanaveras. 
Carl took one swift look around the daylight-bright lawns 
they were trapped upon, glanced up into the sky and saw the 
spyeyes and glowfloats and said, “Oh, shit.” 
MCKANN: What do the telepaths want? 
Castanaveras: I’m not sure what you mean. 
McKann: Everybody wants something. What do you desire 
from life? 
Castanaveras: We want to be left alone, Gerry. There are a 
lot of good things in the world that we’ve never had time for. 
Time enough for the parts of life that make life worth living; 
that would be nice. 
SEVERAL THINGS happened at once. 
Carl flipped his rifle over to wide-dispersion maser and fired 
straight up into the night sky, into the glowfloats and spyeyes 
hovering directly over their heads. There was no water in them, 
but there were delicate electronics that could not have been 
hardened against radiation without adding unacceptably to the 
cost of producing them. The spyeyes dropped like stones when 
the maser beam struck them. The glowfloats burst and fell in 
flaming wreckage to the yard around them, casting the yard 
back into gloom. He called for pickup at the same moment: 
Situation fucked, come and get us—first to Chris and then to 
Malko Kalharri, who was in a semiballistic orbital can, thirteen 
kilometers above their head, and descending already when Carl 
reached him. The distance was great, but with no other minds 

Moran   157 
 
 
between them Carl’s contact with the old man was as sharp as 
though Malko had been on the ground there with him. 
Jacqueline had Sandoval by the back of his neck and pushed 
him at a stumbling run to the east wall, where they had sliced 
their hole. Carl trotted backward after her, rifle at the ready. 
Two of Sandoval’s private troops ran around the far corner of the 
house before he had reached the adobe fence; Carl flipped over to 
X-laser and waved the invisible beam at the two soldiers. One 
fell, cut almost in half, and the other ducked back out of sight. 
Carl paused a moment and sliced off a half dozen of the trees 
nearest him at their bases, flipped the rifle over to maser and 
waved the maser beam over the fallen trees until they burned 
fiercely. Their backs covered for the moment, he turned to where 
Jacqueline waited with Sandoval. 
In his concern for their pursuit, he had released his mental 
hold of Sandoval; Jacqueline had him facedown on the ground 
next to the hole they had burnt in the adobe wall, claws against 
the side of his neck. Carl, what awaits us on the other side? 
Carl shut his eyes and slipped away from his body. 
Four...no, five of them, ranging themselves in a tight arc of 
perhaps twenty degrees, facing the hole in the fence with auto-
shots readied. A second group of guards was headed their way. 
He fed the image to Jacqueline. 
Can you look for this—the image of a small dart appeared in 
her mind—on their persons? 
Yes. He scanned through the crowd—the second group ar-
rived, and took up their positions on an arc that now covered 
more than forty degrees—and came up at first with nothing. 
Then Jacqueline imagined the dart against the palm of her 
hand, and with the correct size of the item fixed in his mind he 
came up quickly with two guards who bore the miniature darts 
somewhere in their clothing. 
Jacqueline lifted Sandoval to his feet in one surging heave 
and forced him back from the wall with Carl following. 
She touched something hanging from her belt. A huge shock 
wave hammered at them, rolled on, and on, and on. Even though 
Carl had expected it he was knocked off his feet. Jacqueline did 

158   Tales 
 
not let it slow her; with her claws digging into Tio Sandoval’s 
neck she ran back toward where the fence had been. Ten meters 
of its length had been blown down. Carl scrambled back to his 
feet and followed her at a dead run. There was nobody alive on 
the other side of the fence, only bodies burnt so badly they were 
barely recognizable. 
Jacqueline and Sandoval had nearly reached the cover of the 
trees when the low, sleek shape of the hunting waldo burst out 
of concealment twenty meters away. Carl had time for only one 
half-panicked shot at the waldo, and realized with horrified 
dismay that his rifle was still set for maser fire; sparks show-
ered off the armored waldo’s surface but it did not slow. The 
waldo ignored Sandoval and struck Jacqueline de Nostri like a 
battering ram. Her body bounced away from the waldo when it 
struck her. Its glittering central mandible held something cov-
ered with brown fur, and blood spurted away from her in a 
bright arterial stream. 
Behind Carl, a single Sandoval guard came from around the 
southeast corner of the house, weaponless, running for his life. 
Carl never saw him; he flicked the rifle to X-laser and 
slashed through the waldo’s mandibles, chopping down toward 
the low-slung waldo’s running legs. The waldo was programmed 
to recognize laser fire as a threat; it whirled and came at Carl in 
a terrible, soundless zigzagging scramble. 
Tio Sandoval, free of Carl’s control, had come to his feet and 
was sprinting back toward his house. 
Something came after the running soldier. The moving shape 
reached him and slowed long enough to flicker into existence as 
a human being, and the soldier disappeared in a shower of blood 
and flesh. The flicker became a blur again, passed Tio Sandoval 
without slowing; a flat sharp cracking sound was the only sign 
that the blur had dealt with Sandoval. Sandoval folded bone-
lessly, and the blur streaked past Carl and collided at full speed 
with the hunting waldo. What seemed to happen was too unbe-
lievable; the waldo screamed like a living creature, and parts of 
it began heading in different directions. 

Moran   159 
 
 
Tearing metal, Carl thought rationally, that was the sound of 
the scream. 
Chris Summers paused an instant, snapped Get Sandoval, 
and blurred back into motion over to where Jacqueline lay on 
the manicured grass. Carl turned away from them, reslung his 
rifle, lifted Sandoval’s nude form and slung him over his shoul-
ders in a fireman’s carry, and trotted back to where Chris was 
bent over Jacqueline and asked, Can we move her?—before he 
saw how bad the damage was. Chris did not answer him; he was 
up and moving, picked up Jacqueline de Nostri’s arm from 
where it had been flung, returned and lifted her body with as 
little effort as he had taken for the limb. 
Go. Carl ran for the cover of the forest, and Chris Summers, 
still holding Jacqueline’s body, turned and surveyed the great 
house. There was a fire burning at the rear of the house where 
Carl had set the trees afire, and ten meters of fence had been 
blown into oblivion. 
What is the value of a life? 
He had himself left sixteen or else seventeen of Sandoval’s 
guards for dead, and destroyed a pair of waldos. Jacqueline had 
detonated her antimatter-bearing darts; Chris had seen one 
guard go up in mid-step, as though he had thumbed the switch 
on a grenade and neglected to throw it afterward. At the same 
time the guards’ barracks had come down with a roar of thun-
der, the walls blowing out and the roof falling down. 
Two thoughts fought for Chris Summers’ attention. 
The first was that there would be observation satellites 
watching this. They would show that there had been a de Nostri 
here, and that there had been a Peaceforcer Elite—but they 
would not show who those people had been. Unlike the spyeyes, 
that would have his face, and Carl’s, and Jackie’s. 
The spyeyes, most likely, transmitted what they saw into 
storage somewhere inside the house. 
His second thought was that there were certainly innocent 
people within the house. 
It seemed to him that he had been standing there for a very 
long time. 

160   Tales 
 
They killed Jackie, he thought at last, and twitched a relay 
within himself. 
The three StingRay missiles came from high on the moun-
tain. With the eyes of a Peaceforcer Elite, sampling at over a 
thousand frames a second, Chris Summers watched them come 
down in a slow, gliding beauty, and detonate themselves in air-
bursts only meters above Casa Sandoval. 
The shockwaves from the explosions washed over him. Their 
heat set Jacqueline’s fur on fire. Shutters dropped down over his 
eyes to protect the delicate mechanisms. His clothing was 
singed, and his skin darkened slightly from the heat. His hair 
did not burn; it was not real. 
The fire in Jacqueline’s fur burned out of its own accord. 
Summers turned and headed for pickup at top speed. 
TIO SANDOVAL awoke in drop. 
He was not groggy; he felt fine—clearheaded and alert. There 
was something cold touching the back of his neck. He was in a 
small cabin, strapped securely into a chair, and a man whose 
face was damnably familiar was turning away from him, feet 
making the normal tearing velcro sound as he moved. Sandoval 
was still naked from the waist down, though somebody had 
dressed him in a shirt. The man was old, though he did not ap-
pear so in his bearing—the skin of his neck and hands was 
marked with the looseness common among the aged who had re-
ceived particularly excellent geriatrics therapy. The old man 
placed a hypo inside a recessed panel and withdrew his hand as 
the compartment shut. 
The man turned back to face him, and Sandoval came back to 
himself with a shock so great it overwhelmed whatever it was he 
had been injected with. 
Malko Kalharri lowered himself carefully into a seat facing 
Sandoval and strapped himself in. “Command, holocams on.” He 
smiled at Sandoval then. “’Sieur Sandoval, you have problems 
like you don’t even want to know about.” 
English was not a language Sandoval was totally comfortable 
in; it took him a moment to work through the syntax of what 

Moran   161 
 
 
Kalharri had said. “What do you mean?” Without being too obvi-
ous about it he tested his bonds until he knew with certainty 
that he was unable to break them. 
Kalharri did not cease smiling. “We’re in geosynch right now. 
Right outside this cabin there’s an airlock that opens up on 
death pressure. There’s a truth plate up against the back of your 
neck. Now, I’m going to ask you some questions, and you’re go-
ing to geek for me. You tell me what I want to know or you go 
out through the airlock.” 
“How do I know you won’t do that anyway?” 
Kalharri shrugged, watching Sandoval with a genteel amuse-
ment. 
“Go to hell, old man.” 
“Carl Castanaveras,” said Kalharri carefully, “is outside the 
door to this cabin. Now, you can talk—nicely, now, to me—or I 
can call him in, and you talk to him, and you will talk.” 
“I’m sure.” Sandoval cocked his head to one side, strangely 
unable to worry about what was happening. After consideration 
he nodded. “My options seem limited.” 
“You’d be amazed.” Kalharri glanced down at a video tablet 
in his lap. “How did Althea Castanaveras die?” 
“Snakebite.” 
“Administered by whom?” 
“No one.” 
Kalharri shook his head minutely. “’Sieur Sandoval, this is 
my last try, and I’m going to let Carl have you. Tell me about Al-
thea’s death.” 
Sandoval said flatly, “Councilor Carson requested it. I im-
plemented it.” 
“Implemented how?” 
“She was bitten by a sidewinder supplied by my genegineers. 
It was placed outside her cabin and locked onto her scent. We 
drugged the boy Tomâs and their guards, and I called her out-
side. The snake struck her moments after she left her cabin.” 
“And...why were you the one who called her outside?” 

162   Tales 
 
Sandoval froze, staring at Kalharri. The man already knew 
the answer, or he would not have asked. “You cumsucking fag-
got,” he whispered; it was the worst insult he knew in English. 
Kalharri looked away from him for a moment, eyes unfo-
cused. Listening to an inskin data link, Sandoval judged, or pos-
sibly speaking with Castanaveras. He turned back to Sandoval 
and laughed. “Allie got you, didn’t she? You watched her die and 
she realized what was happening before she died, and you ha-
ven’t been able to get it up since.” 
The hatred clogged his throat. “I’m going to kill you,” 
Sandoval got out at last. 
Kalharri glanced back down at his video tablet. “No, quite 
the contrary,” he said absently. “What was Secretary General 
Amnier’s role in her death?” 
The words spilled from him against his will. “I don’t know. I 
don’t know if he even knew of it.” He heard the words fall from 
his lips with horror; if they could make him speak so when he 
would not, why had Kalharri even tolerated the degree of eva-
sion he had attempted? 
“What do you know about Gerold McKann’s death?” 
The realization came to him; Kalharri was questioning him 
because Castanaveras did not trust himself. The knowledge of 
how close he was to his death froze Sandoval again, and again 
the prompt came and forced his answer. “I know that it hap-
pened. I do not know who caused it, or why, aside from guesses.” 
“Okay.” Kalharri tucked the video tablet in a small pouch at 
the side of the chair. “I think that’s about all.” He raised himself 
and returned to the cabinet where he had stowed the hypo ear-
lier. He removed a different, smaller hypo and injected Sandoval 
again. “This will partially counteract the euphoric I just gave 
you. Not entirely; Carl wants you conscious.” 
Sandoval jerked against the restraints that held him, nostrils 
flaring. Against his will he screamed aloud as the drug hit him. 
Suddenly there was a great throbbing in his skull, and a vast 
ache that permeated his body. Kalharri lifted a bushy gray eye-
brow. “Tsk. Overdo it a little, did I? So sorry.” 

Moran   163 
 
 
The door to the cabin opened, and Carl Castanaveras, still in 
black fatigues, came through. Kalharri left as he entered. The 
door to the cabin stayed open behind him. Castanaveras stood 
still, looking at Sandoval. He held an old Series Two Excalibur 
that had seen considerable use and the expression he wore could 
have been sold to poison Peaceforcers. 
Sandoval tried to speak, but his lips and tongue would not 
work properly. Castanaveras touched a stud on the rifle and 
brought it to bear on Sandoval. He stood in silence, until finally 
Sandoval screamed, “Kill me, you cocksucker!” 
Castanaveras did not seem to aim particularly; he was hold-
ing the rifle with one hand. The rifle dropped toward Tio 
Sandoval’s crotch, and Sandoval drew in the breath to scream 
with. 
Castanaveras touched the trigger and shot Sandoval in the 
crotch with a maser burst. The pain as his genitals cooked was 
insane, so totally divorced from any ordinary pain Tio Sandoval 
had ever experienced that for seconds he made no sound except 
an involuntary gasping, floating in a bizarre electric wash of 
pure sensation. 
Then he did scream and could not stop. He screamed while 
Castanaveras touched a point on Sandoval’s chair, and his bonds 
fell away. He screamed while Castanaveras pulled him from the 
chair and towed him by his hair across the cabin. He screamed 
while the airlock door opened and while the airlock door closed. 
He screamed when the outer airlock door opened and the escap-
ing air blew him out into death pressure. 
He stopped screaming when the vacuum sucked the air from 
his lungs. 
 
9. 
CARL STOOD AT the window of his bedroom, looking out in the 
high clean light of midafternoon at the demonstrators milling in 
front of the Complex. There were over five thousand of them by 

164   Tales 
 
Security Service’s count. Someone had provided several hundred 
of them with dramasuits to parade in. 
Let me help you. 
Carl felt curiously distanced from it, as though it was all 
some news file he was auditing, and not in truth a crowd of peo-
ple who wanted him, and his children, either in slavery or dead. 
It did not matter that many of the crowd had been paid to be 
there; the greater number of them had not. 
You lost Gerry and Allie and Jacqueline. Baby, you can’t lock 
yourself away from the world like this. Let me help. 
He spoke aloud. “Please, Jany. I’m trying to think.” 
Her thoughts kept after him, insistently. No you’re not. 
You’re withdrawing. I know you, you’re not thinking, you’re just 
feeling, and you don’t want me to interfere with it. Carl, you’re 
hurting yourself. 
“My privilege, surely. Command, bring me formal wear and 
call Malko.” The housebot rolled away to the closet and a 
holofield appeared behind Carl. Malko’s figure appeared in the 
cube; Carl did not turn around. 
“Yes, Carl?” 
“How much longer before you’ll be ready?” 
“Ten minutes. I’ll meet you downstairs.” 
“Fine. Command, comm off.” 
He watched the mob and did not turn away from the window 
until the housebot announced it had laid out his formal cloak 
and suit. Jany was sitting in the middle of their bed, features 
controlled but for the tears that ran down her cheeks. Her voice 
when she spoke was barely audible. “Where are you going?” 
“Pennsylvania. See some of Malko’s contacts.” 
“Why?” 
“They might help.” He pulled on the dress shirt and pants 
and waited while the lacings knotted themselves. “And they 
might not. You never know.” He pulled the coat on over the shirt 
and folded the cloak over his right arm. 
Carl? Will you please talk to me? 

Moran   165 
 
 
He looked straight at her, at the tear-bright green eyes of the 
woman who was so nearly himself. He told her the truth. “I can’t 
think of anything to say. I’ll be back fairly late. Don’t wait up.” 
You’re hurting me, Carl. 
“I know.” He left without looking back. 
FIVE MEN HAD gathered in the conference room. They sat around 
a long, oval table of polished red mahogany; Malko and Carl to-
gether midway down one of the long sides, and the other three 
arrayed across from them. 
The three had been making casual conversation, while eating 
their dinners, when Carl and Malko arrived. It gave Carl a mo-
ment to observe the two whom he did not know. F.X. Chandler 
nodded cordially to Carl and Malko as they seated themselves, 
but did not interrupt his conversation with Judge Rudolf Sonne-
schein. The Unification Circuit Court judge was a middle-aged, 
corpulent man who was a likely candidate for an early heart 
prosthetic. The third man they were meeting was young, per-
haps Carl’s age; a sharply dressed, pleasant seeming fellow 
named Douglass Ripper, Jr., who spoke vigorously, using his 
hands to gesture with. Carl had never heard of him, but he was 
apparently popular. The man was currently a United States 
Senator—largely a ceremonial position since the end of the War, 
and especially so these days, since the abolition of the House of 
Representatives—but he was announced as a candidate for the 
position of Unification Councilor for New York Metro in the 2064 
elections. Jerril Carson had occupied the position virtually un-
contested for over two decades; by the polls, Ripper appeared 
likely to win. 
Judge Sonneschein finished his dinner first, and waved to a 
waitbot to take it away. “Not bad,” he said in a rusty Texan 
drawl, “for New York food. The steak was almost big enough.” 
He leaned back in his chair and clasped his hands over an ample 
belly. “What can we do for you, Carl?” 
Carl said flatly, “I’m not sure. I’m here at Malko’s sugges-
tion.” 

166   Tales 
 
Douglass Ripper leaned slightly forward. “Maybe I can speed 
things up. Mister Castanaveras, I audited your interview in the 
Electronic Times. Can you answer a couple of quick questions for 
me?” 
“Yes.” 
“You said in that interview that what you wanted was to be 
left alone. Is that still true? Would you be willing to settle for 
being ‘left alone’ at this point? Gerry McKann was murdered be-
cause of you—Malko’s told us that you were friends,” Ripper 
hastened to assure Carl. “It’s not general knowledge, and it’s not 
clear even from the unedited transcript. Althea Casta-naveras is 
dead also. Will being left alone satisfy you, or has the situation 
gone past that point?” 
The question seemed curiously without meaning; there was 
no anger left in Carl. “That would be acceptable.” 
“Great. Were you responsible for that insane mess down in 
Brazil?” 
“Of course not.” 
Chandler said gravely, “Young man, I’ve seen the satellite re-
cords of the battle that resulted in the destruction of Casa 
Sandoval. There was one normal man and one de Nostri in sev-
eral of the recorded scenes. In another scene, just one, there was 
a series of eight frames where, from frame to frame, a human 
shape moved about five meters in each frame. That’s a Peace-
forcer Elite, Carl. There’s nothing else in the world shaped like a 
human being that moves that fast.” 
“Carl,” said Malko gently, “I gave the Judge the record of my 
interview with Sandoval.” 
“Fine,” said Carl without looking at him. “Is there anything 
else I should know before we continue?” 
“No,” said Malko after a moment, “no, there’s not.” 
“Wonderful,” said Carl simply. “Gentlemen, I killed Tio 
Sandoval. I fried his nuts with a maser and then threw him out 
an airlock.” Douglass Ripper winced; the Judge and Chandler 
did not. “We have a recording, which you now have also, of Tio 
Sandoval admitting that he killed one of my children at the re-
quest of Unification Councilor Carson. I’m sure ’Sieur Ripper 

Moran   167 
 
 
here would like to use that recording; it’d practically guarantee 
him Carson’s current job.” 
Ripper nodded. “I’ll concede the point. I would like to use the 
recording. Unfortunately, I do not have it. You do, and the Judge 
does. I do not.” 
“I think my question,” said Carl, “is, what do you three want? 
You damn well want something or Malko wouldn’t have dragged 
me out here.” 
There was a moment’s silence. 
“Your understanding of politics,” said F.X. Chandler, sipping 
at a glass full of some amber liquid—probably apple juice, Carl 
thought with irrelevant cynicism—“is less than wonderful, Carl. 
A brief—and I do mean brief—lesson. As the situation stands, 
the entire System thinks the PKF sent out one of their Elite to 
stomp Sandoval. Those of us in this room know that was not the 
case and so do the Peaceforcers. Chris Summers is alive, isn’t 
he?” 
Carl smiled. “If he is, Sandoval might be too. They took the 
same drop.” 
Chandler looked pensive. “I’ve talked it over with my engi-
neers. They’ve examined the satellite records—and if I can get 
my hands on them, so can a lot of other people—of that assault 
on Sandoval’s house. The thing in that one scene, the thing that 
took apart the waldo, was a PKF Elite or so near as makes no 
difference. My engineers, whose opinions I respect, swear that 
the only place in the Solar System that can do work like that is 
Peaceforcer Heaven, SpaceBase One at L-5. Q.E.D., the blur was 
a Peaceforcer Elite, the de Nostri was Jacqueline de Nostri, and 
the man was you. You and she and Chris Summers used to be 
called the Three Musketeers. Carl, if I can piece that together—
and I’m not all that smart—so can a lot of other people.” 
“So?” 
“So, desertion from the PKF, aiding a deserter from the PKF, 
failing to report a deserter from the PKF, are all treason. Capi-
tal offense, for you and Summers, wherever he is. Now that the 
PKF knows he’s alive, and they do, they’ll find him. And when 
they do, he’ll die, and you’ll die. Carson may go to jail for his role 

168   Tales 
 
in your daughter’s death; he may not. Your evidence is tenuous 
and a lot of it won’t be admissible. The testimony of a telepath 
is, I believe, still not admissable in court except under fairly 
strict guidelines. In Carson’s case no judge in his right mind 
would allow one of your people to testify in an expert capacity. 
So, Carson won’t die for it, and Amnier won’t even be touched. 
But Chris Summers’ existence will hang you.” 
“I’m sorry, gentlemen,” said Carl quietly, “but I’m very tired 
and I’m not sure this is helping. What do you suggest we do?” 
“The Ninth Amendment, or it will be if it passes,” said Doug-
lass Ripper, “and it looks to pass, frankly; that Amendment will 
allow Secretary General Amnier to seek a fourth term in office, 
and a fifth, and a sixth. I don’t know if you appreciate how vul-
nerable that makes him. He’d kill for another term in office, but 
most significantly, he’d also leave you alone for another term in 
office. Now, you can both hurt each other. He can damn well kill 
you if he sets his mind to it, but you can keep him from getting 
elected again. What he’s trying to do is very tricky, Carl. The 
last time somebody tried to pull this one was back over three 
decades ago, about the time you and I were being born. Secre-
tary General Tènèrat tried it; he was voted out of office and 
never even got to serve the legal third term, never mind a 
fourth, and his proposed Amendment was voted down over-
whelmingly. 
“Now, there are two time elements for you to consider here. 
You could do Amnier a favor by arranging to have something 
important happening on the Fourth of July; that’s only three 
days from now, this Tuesday. He’ll try to have something hap-
pen anyway, to draw people’s attention away from the Fourth of 
July riots, but you’re legitimate news. An announcement of a 
reconciliation between yourself and his office, buttressed by a 
press conference where you answer questions, might take a lot of 
the heat off him. 
“The second date is July 14, Bastille Day. By that date, this 
all has to be settled, favorably or otherwise. He doesn’t want to 
go back to France for their independence celebrations with all of 
this hanging over his head. Right now, your telepaths are the 

Moran   169 
 
 
most important news story on the Boards. The French will not 
be happy if that’s still true come the fourteenth of next month.” 
“When all of this is done,” said Chandler quietly, “and Bas-
tille Day is past, you retreat to some location other than my old 
home, somewhere rural where the crowds can’t take the Bullet 
to come picket your front gate, and you lay low through the elec-
tions of ’64. By then, things will have quieted down, and Amnier 
won’t feel so bloody threatened. He’ll be secure enough to leave 
you alone.” 
Carl looked across the table at the three men facing him. 
“Which one of you has discussed this with him?” 
There were advantages to being a telepath; one was gener-
ally told the truth, on the assumption that a lie would be caught 
regardless. “I did,” said Judge Sonneschein after a moment. “I 
was simply exploring the options.” 
Carl nodded. “I appreciate your time. I’ll think about it. 
Malko? Shall we go?” 
“Just a second there,” said Chandler. “I wanted to talk to you 
privately.” 
“Go ahead,” said Carl, not moving. 
Chandler stared at him for a second, and then grinned. “You 
go to hell too. How’s Jany?” 
Carl blinked. The question actually surprised him. “Not well. 
She’s upset by the situation.” Or by me, he thought to himself, 
but the thought held no pain. “I’ll tell her you asked about her. 
It will please her.” 
Chandler nodded. Ripper and Judge Sonneschein, apparently 
aware that something significant was happening, sat and 
watched the exchange. “Tony Angelo tells me you’re hell on 
wheels.” 
Carl had half risen from his seat, preparing to leave. “I beg 
your pardon?” 
Chandler said mildly, “I’d say, ‘hell on fans,’ except it doesn’t 
have the right ring to it. That’s part of the problem with the 
modern world, you know. There’s something wrong with a world 
that doesn’t have any use for wheels except for designing space 
stations and bicycle tires.” 

170   Tales 
 
Carl stood straight. “You’ve lost me, I’m afraid.” 
“Young man, you’ve been sitting there lying to every one of 
us, including yourself, ever since you sat down. How badly do 
you hate Amnier?” 
There was a dead silence in the room. Carl opened his mouth 
to answer and found that there was no answer within him. “I 
don’t hate him, or Carson either. That’s the truth. But one of my 
children has died because of those bastards.” 
Francis Xavier Chandler looked down into his drink and did 
not answer Carl immediately. When he looked up again his ex-
pression was softer. 
“Then make sure the rest of your children don’t.” 
“Someday,” said Carl, explaining the only thing that was at 
all clear to him, “I have to kill them.” 
Chandler said, “Yes. I know.” 
“Revenge,” said Malko Kalharri gently, “does not have to 
come in a day.” 
THEY DROVE BACK through darkness, in silence. They skimmed 
the highway at 180 kph, forty centimeters above the ferrocrete 
hardtop. Carl drove automatically, moving around what little 
traffic was still on the roads that late at night with minimal ef-
fort. He paged TransCon once for permission to enter airspace 
and was turned down peremptorily. It did not bother him; had 
he flown back to the Complex he’d have reached it too soon to 
suit him. He was in the mood to drive, to relax and enjoy the 
smooth powered flight of the MetalSmith. It was drizzling 
slightly, and the canopy had turned on its electrostatic field to 
keep itself free of water. 
They hit a clear stretch of road, and Carl leaned back in his 
seat and turned the carcomp loose. Malko Kalharri appeared to 
be asleep in the passenger’s seat, video tablet glowing in his lap; 
he spoke without opening his eyes. “You should probably try to 
get some sleep. You look like hell.” 
“I’m not tired.” 
“I’m tired,” said Malko irritably, “and I’ve had a lot more 
sleep than you’ve had of late.” 

Moran   171 
 
 
“I’m a bit younger than you are.” 
Malko snorted. “You’re different than I am.” 
“No.” 
“Would I lie to you?” 
Carl chuckled without amusement. “No, but only because it’d 
be a waste of time.” 
Malko grinned. “True.” The grin faded, and after a moment 
he said, almost hesitantly, “You are different, you know.” 
Three different replies occurred to Carl; what he finally said 
was, “I presume you mean in some way other than the totally 
obvious one.” 
“I suppose sleep is a good example. When I was younger, I 
had white nights and functioned the next day. I could get by on 
two to three hours sleep per night for a week, a week and a half 
at a stretch. You, though—when you were about seventeen, you 
didn’t sleep one time for almost two weeks.” 
It had been closer to three. “You knew about that?” 
Malko shook his head. “Suzanne realized. Some of the staff 
wanted to sedate you and make you sleep. Suzanne figured you 
were entitled to turn your brain to mashed potatoes if you 
wanted to.” The old man was silent for a while, paging down 
through the display on his video tablet, skimming the top news 
stories. “The point of which is, if I’d done something like that as 
a young man, when I was in peak condition, it would have killed 
me. When you finally did sleep that time, you slept for most of a 
day, got up and didn’t sleep again for four or five days, some-
thing like that. That was the point where Suzanne started moni-
toring the sleep patterns of the other telepaths.” 
“And she found out that I was the only one?” 
“Indeed. Well, the only one who’s ever shown the capability. 
She thinks Jany could, under the correct impetus, and most 
likely the twins as well. None of the others.” 
Carl was silent, watching the highway lamps flicker past 
them. Bright, and dim; bright, and dim—“I’m not sure I really 
wanted to know that.” 
“You didn’t know?” 
Carl shook his head mutely. 

172   Tales 
 
“How could you not?” 
The passing of the lights was soothing, almost hypnotic. “I’ve 
always felt alone. I’m not a human being. Jany thinks I stand off 
too much from the rest of the telepaths. They do a thing, Malko, 
a merging of minds, that I can’t join them in. I can’t. I’ve tried. I 
know there are other differences between us.” He brooded, lost 
in his own thoughts. “I try not to think about it.” 
Malko Kalharri started to say something, and stopped. 
“What?” 
Malko said easily, “Nothing. Just a thought, not important.” 
“Tell me.” 
In a tone of mild exasperation, Malko said, “Carl, it wasn’t—” 
“Tell me.” 
Malko sighed. “You are a particularly difficult young man to 
mislead, Carl.” 
“Malko.” 
“Suzanne told me this perhaps two years ago; I didn’t know it 
myself before that. You were born in 2030, Carl. The DNA slic-
ing technique that created you was not invented until almost 
five years later. It did not work reliably for nearly five years af-
ter that.” 
Carl worked his way through the sentence. “I don’t have even 
a vague understanding of whatever it is you just said.” 
“I don’t think you know how you got your name, Carl.” 
“Of course I do. Grigorio Castanaveras.” 
“That’s not what I meant. The gene pattern that became you 
was our fifty-fifth attempt to produce a living foetus. Every 
bloody one of the first fifty-four failed. Didn’t redivide even once. 
We were labeling the attempts alphabetically; A through Z, then 
AA to AZ, BA to BZ, and so forth. You were lot C, number C, the 
fifty-fifth attempt. I don’t think,” said Malko, “that I ever really 
explained this to you. That’s how Jany was named also; lot J, 
number M. Johnny was lot Y, number M. We were spelling his 
name with a ‘Y’ for a while, before the host mother who bore him 
decided that she wanted his name spelled with a ‘J.’ ” He 
shrugged. “We didn’t argue; she was a good host. She later bore 
four of the children, one a year the full four years the assembly 

Moran   173 
 
 
line was rolling. Anyhow, if you didn’t know, that’s basically how 
the lot of you got your names.” 
“Ever wonder why I named the twins David and Denice?” 
“You...” Malko’s lips shaped the twins’ names, and then he 
laughed. “I’ll be damned. I never noticed. You have a warped 
sense of humor, son.” 
“Do tell. You still haven’t explained yourself.” 
“Well, you were our fifty-fifth attempt at a living foetus. Carl, 
we didn’t get a living DNA-sliced foetus until Johnny, five-
hundred odd tries later. And we never got one by the technique 
that created you. Did you ever wonder why Jany was created the 
way she was, with cloning techniques that were twenty years 
old?” 
“I don’t think I ever did.” 
“Because we still couldn’t create a foetus through DNA slic-
ing who would live.” 
“But you had, already.” 
“No,” said Malko Kalharri softly, “we didn’t. With the tech-
nology that was available to us three decades ago, we could not 
have created you. Suzanne was right, her theory was sound, but 
we should never have succeeded in creating you, not in 2030. 
The technology to do so did not exist.” 
“Then where the hell did I come from?” 
“I don’t know,” Malko said simply. 
“Malko, I’m here. Something was responsible for me.” 
Malko did not reply. 
“Malko.” 
“You’re right, son. But it wasn’t us.” 
“I’ll be damned.” Carl stared straight out through the canopy. 
Flickering red taillights were barely visible in the distance. With 
an act of will he thrust the subject of his own existence into the 
background. Not relevant, and even if Malko believed what he 
was saying it did not make him right. Belief, some old AI phi-
losopher had said, is not relevant to truth. 
And besides, it made him uncomfortable. Carl changed the 
subject abruptly. “How did you get mixed up with that lot?” 

174   Tales 
 
Malko stretched suddenly and laced his hands behind his 
head, looking up from his video tablet. “ ‘And now for something 
completely different...’ Politics, son. I find them—useful. I imag-
ine their reasons for working with me are similar. Belinda 
Singer wasn’t there, but Ripper’s her protege. Between Belinda 
and ’Sieur Chandler, we have the beginnings of an American 
power structure for the first time since the end of the War. 
That’s worth a lot.” 
“Chandler prefers to be called Mister, not ’Sieur.” 
Malko straightened slightly and peered out through the 
overarching canopy at the nondescript blur of buildings and 
fields that lined the TransCon’s sides. The gentle thrumming of 
the hoverfans competed with his words. “Hmm. I’d heard that.” 
Carl was silent for a moment. “Never mind,” he said a mo-
ment later, “your bloody damned obsession with the old United 
States. It wasn’t my country, and I have nothing against the 
Unification of Earth. The Unification was probably a good thing, 
on balance. Aside from their ideological bent, which is irrelevant 
to me, why should I work with the people we met with tonight?” 
Malko shook his head wearily. “You’re missing the point. 
Their ‘ideological bent’ is not irrelevant to you, and I’m not sure 
you know what their ideology is, anyway. Ripper’s hardly a 
Johnny Reb; he thinks the U.N. is a good idea. Which it may be.” 
Malko stared down at the empty video tablet. “Its existence is 
probably what’s kept us from having a noticeable sized war in 
four decades. But the fact that the U.N. is a good thing, assum-
ing it is, does not mean that the fact that you are an American, 
culturally if in no other fashion, is irrelevant.” He slowed down 
suddenly. “Excuse me. I’m lecturing again, but do you have any 
idea how hard our lawyers fought to get the issue of our liability 
under the Official Secrets Acts tried in Judge Sonneschein’s 
court? Carl, two thirds of the Unification Circuit Court judges in 
this country are French. Ninety-eight percent of those in France 
are French. If you think ideology is irrelevant to you, you’d 
damn well better think again. Maybe you don’t think you’re an 
American, but Amnier does, and so do the Peaceforcers. You’re 
already allied to those people we just left. You think a French 

Moran   175 
 
 
judge would have ruled that we were not subject to the Official 
Secrets Act?” 
“French judges have ruled in our favor in other instances.” 
“True, when the law was clearly on our side. The Official Se-
crets Acts are ambiguously written, though. If there’s ever a 
time for a judge to let his prejudices sway him, a case like that is 
it.” 
“If I say yes, we’ll cooperate, what then?” 
Malko shrugged. “You don’t have to talk to Amnier, or Car-
son either. Intermediaries will do that. We’ll record an an-
nouncement saying we’re going to be resuming our old functions 
for the PKF, except we’ll be paid, we’ll give it to Electronic Times 
and NewsBoard early on the Fourth of July and sit back until 
the storm blows over.” 
“Okay,” said Carl finally. “I told Chris Summers we’d come to 
Japan anyway.” 
Malko looked at him. “Come again?” 
A blip appeared on the radar screen, to the rear of the far 
limit at which the MetalSmith scanned. “I had to tell him some-
thing, or he wouldn’t have helped us. Besides, Japan is pretty. I 
was there once. It’s green and there’s not too many people. The 
gardens are nice.” 
“Japan.” It sounded as though Malko were considering the 
idea. “I’ve never been there myself. When I was a boy, they came 
pretty close to buying up most of this country. They were awfully 
damned formidable. I’m not surprised, really, that the U.N. 
forces panicked and nuked them when the Japanese decided to 
fight. God knows what they’d have had up their sleeves. It would 
have been interesting.” There was real wistfulness in his voice. 
Carl glanced at the radar holo, not really seeing it. The blip 
inside it was gaining on them. “How the hell did you end up 
where you are? The Johnny Rebs would leap at the chance to 
fight under you. You know it and I know it and the government 
knows it. And you’ve never been tempted.” 
Malko Kalharri was silent a long time, staring out the can-
opy. “Son, I know the answer to that, but I’m not sure I know 
the words to say it right. You can read my mind if you like. War 

176   Tales 
 
and politics, Carl, those are the only games fit for grown men to 
play at. The only ones that make enough of a difference to count. 
And between laser cannon and nukes and transform viruses—
these days we can’t afford war any longer.” 
“No,” said Carl, “I don’t suppose we can—that’s odd.” 
Malko leaned forward at the tone of his voice. “What?” 
“The car behind us is gaining on us.” Carl moved a finger in-
side the holofield and touched the dot representing the car. 
Numbers danced at the bottom of the display. “Look. They’re not 
plugged into TransCon, and they have their license caster 
turned off.” 
“Speedfreaks?” 
“Probably.” Carl turned on the rear holocams. A light-
enhanced image showed what looked like an old Chandler 1770. 
“Why aren’t they skipping?” 
“I don’t understand.” 
“The 1770 is a little lighter than the MetalSmith, with simi-
lar lift. It’s not fitted for true flight, though, except in some 
heavily customized jobs. But they shouldn’t be able to move as 
fast as they are without skipping all over the place. They’re up 
around 230 kph. I couldn’t do that, and we’re heavier and have 
gyroscopes.” Carl watched the dot. “They must be carrying a hell 
of a load.” 
The car behind them, already traveling above the maximum 
road speed for any hovercar Carl knew of, accelerated and 
passed 270 kph, still without instability. 
“Something is wrong,” Carl heard himself say. He took the 
car back from TransCon and assumed manual control. Time 
struck him like a whip, wrapped itself around him, and things 
slowed. His vision became as clear as though it were high noon. 
The car behind him seemed to slow, and Carl saw the two men 
inside it, the huge laser cannon mounted down the center of the 
craft, and without desiring to, without effort, Carl found himself 
outside. 
The future crashed down into the present. 
Carl watched... 

Moran   177 
 
 
... the laser cannon strikes the rear of the MetalSmith, and 
the canopy goes dark black instantly, all over, in a desperate ef-
fort to absorb and distribute the heat being pumped into it. In-
side the MetalSmith, Carl is blind except for front instruments. 
He blows open the airscoops almost reflexively; he already 
knows he cannot outrun the modified 1770 on his tail, and in the 
time it would take him to reach flight speed where he can snap 
the MetalSmith’s wings, the cannon will have destroyed them. 
Only the fact that the 1770 cannot carry the mass of a full mili-
tary power supply has saved them so far. The airscoops brake 
the car as though a giant hand has grabbed it, and Carl swings 
the car up and to the left at the same time, over the fence and 
into oncoming traffic. The canopy begins to clear, ever so 
slightly, and suddenly blackens again as the car behind follows 
the MetalSmith over the fence. From somewhere behind them—
behind, Carl has the impression, the 1770 following them—
comes a thunderous explosion, and the hovercar is rocked by a 
shock wave. 
The interior of the MetalSmith is blisteringly hot. 
In the seat next to him, Malko is beginning to realize that 
something is happening. 
A huge twelve-fan appears from nowhere, and at the last in-
stant Carl closes the airscoop brakes and ignites the rear turbo-
jets, veers off to the right, up again and back over the fence onto 
the correct side of the highway. He knows a moment’s brief tri-
umph as he realizes that the Chandler 1770 attacking them 
split to the left of the oncoming truck and that he has gained 
precious moments. It is a short lived triumph. He moves a finger 
across the contact that should kill the rear jets, and it does not. 
The roar of the turbos continues and he wastes a precious sec-
ond evaluating his options. 
At the end of that second the 1770 is back on his tail, and the 
laser fire strikes them again. 
Carl Castanaveras has time to think, I have always wanted 
to try this. 
He disengages the gyroscopes, snaps the car’s wings open 
and brings full power to the MetalSmith’s front fans. The nose of 

178   Tales 
 
the car leaps up, and the new attitude of the rear jets sends the 
MetalSmith climbing up like a rocket. The car is shaking wildly, 
the frame itself vibrating. 
Gently, gently...bring the nose up too fast, and the car will 
tumble backward. Bring it up too slowly and the laser cannon 
will remove all of your options. The MetalSmith stands nearly 
on its tail, nose pointing to the sky, five meters above traffic. 
The fans face into the car’s forward movement, slowing the Met-
alSmith in the quickest possible fashion. Their pursuers cannot 
decelerate so quickly. Carl cannot see with his eyes; some other 
sense causes him to nudge the car gently to the right, to send 
the turbojets blasting downward into the space beneath which 
their attackers are passing. The jets themselves are not destruc-
tive but they push the modified Chandler 1770 down, into con-
tact with the road itself. In seconds the 1770 ceases to be 
recognizable as a hovercar, shredding itself against the surface 
of the ferrocrete, disintegrating into a cloud of metal, still mov-
ing forward as the pavement rips at it. 
The MetalSmith slows with astonishing speed, from 150 kph 
down to approximately 10 in the course of seconds. The car is 
vibrating insanely, roaring with the huge force with which it 
must push the air aside. When the MetalSmith stalls at last, it 
is moving less than 10 kph, and it strikes the pavement on its 
side and rolls over once before coming to a rest, slightly at a 
slant on a slope at the side of the highway. The rear jets are still 
burning. Somewhere in the course of it all, Malko Kalharri has 
struck his head, and blood mats his hair to his forehead. Carl 
sits without moving, staring blankly as the canopy fades and be-
comes clear again. A high-pitched whining noise rouses him at 
last, an unfamiliar sound he cannot place. 
The word gyroscope occurs to him, and then he moves in a 
wild scramble, tearing off his seat restraints. The canopy is 
jammed shut, and the mechanism will not operate it. In a mo-
ment of berserk strength he strikes upward with both hands, 
and the canopy pops clear, swinging smoothly out from the nose 
of the vehicle. The car is shuddering again as the gyroscopes be-
gin to spin out of balance. He rips Malko’s restraints off the old 

Moran   179 
 
 
man, climbs over Malko and out of the car, and is lifting Malko 
out of his seat when the car shakes itself like a wounded beast, 
screams as its metal tears like paper, and picks itself up from 
the ground to tumble end over end as the gyroscopes spin down, 
wasting their accumulated kinetic energy in a single horrible 
second. The car turns its length three times before the remain-
ing fuel in the fore and rear jets ignites. The explosion is modest; 
the jet fuel used in hovercars is intentionally not very flammable 
except inside the turbojet itself when mixed with pure oxygen 
and catalyst. Carl sits down on the dirt at the side of the road, 
and feels strange, very distant, and time slows as he sits there 
next to Malko Kalharri’s bleeding form, and Carl finds himself— 
—sitting in the front seat of the MetalSmith with Malko, and 
the Chandler 1770 behind them, laser cannon at the ready. 
He had just a moment after the vision ended to realize where 
and when he was. 
And then it happened. 
WITH A CRACK of thunder I came into existence standing at the 
side of TransContinental Highway Four. I was in fast time, en-
during two seconds for every one that took place in real time. 
Camber was not hunting me yet, on his private timeline; he 
was, at that moment in his existence, fleeing from me, believing 
correctly that I sought to destroy him. It would be many years in 
Camber Tremodian’s future before he would search for me in the 
laboratory where I had created Carl Castanaveras. He had not 
yet learned how to fully use his ability to move through Time; 
later, he would not fall for a gambit such as the one I offered 
him now. 
I knew already that the gambit would fail, but it was neces-
sary to go through with it regardless. When one travels Time, 
free will is often moot. 
Camber Tremodian cracked into existence on the other side 
of the highway, some sixty meters away. 
Carl Castanaveras’ vehicle came into sight, followed closely 
by the primitive vehicle that carried his attackers. Like Camber 
himself, they were doomed to failure; this was not the night for 

180   Tales 
 
Castanaveras to die. Cloaked and cowled in the traditional black 
shadow cloak favored by the night faces of United Earth Intelli-
gence, Camber Tremodian withdrew a weapon whose name 
would mean nothing to a human being of any time earlier than 
the twenty-sixth century Gregorian. The Ihmaldsen Relay was 
named after a twenty-second-century physicist, the human be-
ing who discovered the negrav nexus. Four centuries later the 
negative gravity locus was bound into a no-time stasis blade by 
a woman whose name is not spoken in the halls of UEI. 
I am the Name Storyteller, and I tell you that her name was 
Ola, who was Lady Blue, who was Leiacan of Eastersea. 
The IR is the most fearsome hand-held weapon known by any 
civilization, anywhere in the Continuing Time. During the 
height of the Time Wars, the Zaradin themselves knew no 
weapon so fierce. I withdrew the slim tube of my own IR from 
my cloak, and through the pressure of my hand upon the tube 
extended the force blade into the air over the highway. 
Carl’s car sped down the highway toward us. Camber Tre-
modian perceived my presence and ignored it. He brought the 
blade of his IR scything down toward the aircar. Camber did not, 
yet, know of fast time, though control of that aspect of Time, like 
every other, was latent within him. He could not know that I 
would move better than twice as fast as he. I brought the blade 
of my own IR out to slap his aside, and the negrav nexus con-
tained in the tip of his force blade touched down on the surface 
of the highway, behind the two primitive aircars. 
The negrav nexus is a grave force to unleash. Where it 
touched the highway, the stonesteel of the highway erupted and 
splashed as though a meteor had struck there. 
I have never known for certain; I believe some of that flying 
stonesteel struck Camber Tremodian and near killed him before 
he fled through Time. I was gone myself long before the shock 
wave reached the spot where I had appeared. 
CARL SAT IN the hospital waiting room with a cup of cold coffee 
at his elbow. His eyes were wide open, but he saw nothing. 
There was not much to see; a room with pale green walls that 

Moran   181 
 
 
held a hundred chairs with video tablets chained to them, and a 
vending chef for those who wanted to eat in the waiting room. 
Jany sat in the chair next to him. She did not attempt to talk to 
him; she was reading what the press had to say about the at-
tack. Both the Electronic Times and NewsBoard had logged ma-
jor stories on it; the Times was giving it front screen treatment. 
AP had not yet filed on it; most of the other news Boards were 
licensing their reports from either the Times or NewsBoard. 
Two heavily armed Security Services guards stood at the 
door to the waiting room with instructions to keep the press—
and everyone else—out. 
A little after midnight Suzanne Montignet made her way 
through the security guards and took a seat opposite Carl and 
Jany. 
Jany said quietly, “So?” 
Montignet shook her head in exhaustion. She was lovely 
enough that Carl had nearly made a pass at her more than once 
in the last decade; but she was nearly as old as Malko, and the 
strain of the evening had worn her down. “He’s in bad shape, 
kids. Oh, he’s going to live.” She smiled rather wearily. “He was 
awake for about five minutes before they took him into surgery. 
He’s a tough old guy. Said it was a ‘proven fact’ that you couldn’t 
hurt a Kalharri just by bashing him in the head.” 
“What’s wrong with him?” asked Jany. 
“Shattered femur in his right leg, cracked ribs, fairly severe 
concussion, slight subdural hematoma, not severe.” She looked 
at Carl. “He wanted to know, ‘Did we get the bastards?’ I had to 
admit I didn’t know. Did you?” 
Carl’s lips curled of their own accord. “What do you think?” 
The answer did not seem to please Suzanne. “I should have 
known.” 
“When can he have visitors?” 
Suzanne looked at Jany. “Early morning, five or six o’clock. 
He’s not suffering from anything serious except possibly the con-
cussion, and I’m optimistic about that.” She turned to Carl. “I’m 
going to suggest that he come home with me when he’s ready.” 
“To Massapequa Park? Why?” 

182   Tales 
 
Suzanne put a touch of the whip into her voice. “Because I’m 
one of the best neurologists in the world, and I want to observe 
Malko for the next few weeks. Your ability to read minds is al-
most irrelevant in the context. Besides, I think Trent might like 
to have Malko for company. I believe I bore him.” 
Carl thought about it. “Very well. If Malko agrees.” 
Suzanne said very mildly, “If he did not, any decision we 
made would be quite moot.” 
“Yes.” 
Suzanne Montignet cocked her head to one side and regarded 
him. “You should go home and sleep. You don’t look good.” 
He did not feel sleepy. “Perhaps.” 
She smiled almost gently. “But you’re not going to. What will 
you do?” 
“Go for a walk in the city.” He shook his head. “I don’t know 
yet.” She seemed to be waiting for some further answer. “I really 
don’t know. They hurt Malko. They blew up my car.” He was si-
lent for a second, eyes unfocused. “I’m really pissed about that.” 
CARL WALKED ALONE down windy streets made shiny with rain. 
That late at night, even the largest city on Earth grew quiet. 
Once the skies opened in a thundershower and he raised his face 
to the sky and let the wind-driven water pound down upon him. 
The water soaked his clothing, and rivulets ran down into his 
boots. He wandered aimlessly across the slidewalks and streets, 
and then ascended into the web of skywalks that linked the 
downtown spacescrapers. He passed the offices of Kalharri, Ltd. 
on Third Avenue, and continued on without going in. Two blocks 
later, on the level four skywalks, he was shot at from a point 
somewhere above him. He walked up a glowing spiral stairwell, 
two levels, and back down into a stairwell across from the sky-
walk where the stairwell lights had been shot out. He dragged 
out the teenage boys hiding there and left their bodies in the 
center of the skywalk. He walked without hurry to Grand Cen-
tral Station and took a powered lift, down eight stories to the 
Bullet station. He waited without thought until the Bullet ar-
rived. 

Moran   183 
 
 
He boarded the southbound Bullet and changed connections 
at the Fulton Street station. Three men wearing dramasuit holo 
generators at their belts boarded the Bullet at that point; one of 
them looked directly at Carl without apparent recognition. Carl 
stayed on until they reached the Bullet station two stops from 
the Complex. 
Something abnormal was happening at the Complex; Carl 
felt the echoes of power before he left the Bullet. 
The station was not the one closest to the Complex; the clos-
est station was only three blocks away. But there was a 24-hour 
Ford Systems car rental at this location; he rented a Regal lim-
ousine and drove it home through the crowd. Security Systems 
was taking no chances with the crowd; they used the gate stun-
ners liberally. 
Carl walked through the echoing empty halls of the Complex, 
clothing still drenched by the rain. He stopped at some doorways 
and looked in upon sleeping children. Some of the children 
broadcast their dreams strongly, and at times the dreams took 
Carl and dragged him away from reality for a while. The dreams 
were all curiously similar, the dream of one Person, shared by 
many minds. Movement, wrapped in a golden light, wrapped in 
rainbows. He stopped by the bedroom he shared with Jany and 
looked in. Jany was back from the hospital and slept soundly, 
without dreaming. Carl suspected that it was an artificial sleep; 
Suzanne had probably given her something. He left her there 
and continued downstairs, making his way through the sleeping 
minds. 
...he strode across a vast black plain, walking toward a huge 
fountain of light. 
There was nothing in the kitchen or the huge dining room 
and nothing in the conference rooms. In one conference room, a 
copy of one of the children’s favorite flat movies, The Rocky Hor-
ror Picture Show, had been left playing with the sound turned 
down. Carl recognized the scene—Riff Raff, Magenta and Little 
Nell doing the Time Warp again. Carl left the conference hall 
and wandered through the corridor that surrounded the ring of 
suites facing inward on the Quad. 

184   Tales 
 
He heard sounds from ahead, a gentle procession of piano 
chords, underlaid by a slow roll of drums. Light spilled into the 
corridor ahead of him through an open door. 
He stood at the edge of the fountainhead, unable to reach out 
and touch it, staring into the fierce golden light, into the smooth, 
powerful dance of awareness. 
The door to her room was open, and he came through into the 
bedroom. It was filled with the ordinary clutter any teenage girl 
would have accumulated, clothing and makeup keys and fashion 
templates. There was a poster of Willi dancing, and distantly, he 
was surprised by that; he hadn’t thought she liked Willi. The 
music surrounded him. One full wall was a painting done in 
electrolytes, of a long, winding road that stretched out across a 
bizarre, dark landscape over which hung a crawling silver fog. A 
verse in the corner of the painting read: “Running away to eter-
nity/ Come walk my ways, it cried/ You left, left lesser things 
behind/ And a portion of you died.” 
The fountain pulsed, whispered to him, Join me. I am that 
which loves you. 
A man stood on the road, half turned away. He had Carl’s 
face. Carl turned his back on the painting, turned to meet what 
awaited him. 
The huge glass door which opened on the Quad was wide 
open. Sunlamps glared down into the enclosed area, flooding it 
with a harsh pale light. The rain pelted down, and fragmented 
patches of rainbows shimmered, rippled through the hot wet air. 
Heather danced naked in the rain. 
Carl stood frozen, watching, unable to move. Sound washed 
over him, lyrically sad vocals nested between gentle drums and 
the rolling of the piano. The rain fell only centimeters away from 
him. 
 
Lost boys and golden girls 
Down on the corner and all around the world 
Lost boys and golden girls 
Down on the corner and all around 
All around the world 

Moran   185 
 
 
 
Time had wrapped itself around her like a chain. She moved 
across the grass, under the lights, dancing for him with wild 
abandon. There was no separate identity in her, only a living fu-
sion of the girl and something else. 
 
We gotta be fast 
We were born out of time 
Born out of time and alone 
And we’ll never be as young as we are right now 
Running away, and running for home 
 
He stepped in still-wet clothing, out into the warm rain, un-
der the brilliant hot lights. Heather’s dancing slowed, and 
stopped, and she regarded him. She smiled dazzlingly. “Yes.” 
He drew to within centimeters of her and traced a finger 
down her cheek. “Yes,” he agreed. 
She lifted herself up and locked her legs around his waist. 
Her mouth was busy at the juncture between his neck and his 
shoulder. He carried her into her bedroom and laid her down on 
the bed. He removed his shirt and pants without haste, and laid 
down beside her. Heather locked her mouth to his and wriggled 
her tongue between his teeth. She shivered violently, whether 
from the water cooling on her body or something else Carl did 
not know. He lifted her up and entered her. 
He saw himself through her eyes, felt the strength of his 
body as he moved against her. In her eyes he was a network of 
glowing fine lines, culminating in a fierce glow around his skull. 
He saw through her eyes his own eyes, the light and the elemen-
tal heat of his person. He lost track of their bodies and found 
himself in some other disconnected reality, burning, consuming 
himself in the flame, and the other person with him cooled the 
flame, and brought order and peace into him. I am that which 
loves you. 
“I know,” he said aloud, shuddering with his orgasm. The girl 
locked her legs tightly around him, clutched him with her arms. 
The orgasm went on and on, and he let himself grow lost in the 

186   Tales 
 
pure sensation. When he came back to himself Heather was still 
holding on to him, her body shaking silently, and it was several 
moments before he realized that she was crying, and that she 
was alone. He became aware of the chill in the air, and without 
moving her drew up one of the blankets from the bed and 
wrapped it around her to help keep her warm. I love you, she 
was telling him, I love you. 
He grew soft and slipped out of her. Still she did not move, 
but tucked her head against his shoulder and clung to him. He 
held her and let her cry herself out, until she could not cry any 
longer. 
The tears did not hurt him. They were not for him. 
“Carl,” she whispered before sleep took her, “we’re going to 
die, aren’t we?” 
“Yes.” 
I LOOKED DOWN upon their sleeping forms. 
Coming here, into this time, was a weakness. It was not nec-
essary, and therefore wrong. It is an axion of nightways that 
there are only necessary actions and mistakes; no third ground. 
A gamble and a mistake, all at once; but safe enough, in its 
way. Camber Tremodian would not look for me here. He knew as 
fact that I would, not far from now on my personal timeline, ap-
pear at the Spacething Library, orbiting the great black hole at 
the center of the galaxy. It was inescapable:  I had been there 
and would be there, and he would be waiting. I would survive 
this visit so that I could enter the Library early in the thirty-
second-century Gregorian, and there, very likely, die. 
It is difficult to see. 
I am not certain what it is that has driven me to come here, 
to look upon Carl and Heather Castanaveras. 
Perhaps because he will die so well, so usefully. 
So soon. 
If there was inspiration there, it was not for me to find. 
I slipped out into the garden, and went to face my destiny, 
and left them to face theirs. 
I vanished in a clap of rushing air. 

Moran   187 
 
 
 
10. 
SUNDAY MORNING the crowds outside the Complex had grown to 
number nearly ten thousand. They filled the streets in a solid 
mass of humanity for blocks around the Complex, and their 
chanting was so loud there was no place in all the Complex 
where silence could be found. Sometime during the night, as 
July the second dawned, their chanting had changed from a 
ragged “Death to the genies!” to a deep throated “AMERICA, 
AMERICA, AMERICA.” Security Services, without being asked, 
had dispatched an additional squad to the Complex, a full 
twenty-five men. 
Nearly a score of the children played in the park. Johnny and 
Ary and Mandy and Thea stood guard with autoshots against 
the unlikely event that any of the demonstrators would be fool-
ish enough to attempt to come up over the fence. There were no 
Security Services forces within the park; with the defenses they 
had in place, Carl had deemed it unnecessary. Though the crowd 
could not see through the fence that surrounded the park, there 
were so many of them that they had surrounded the block the 
park sat upon, arms linked, chanting. The chanting was stretch-
ing Johnny’s nerves tight; he was amazed at how calmly the 
children took it all. They were all, except Carl, in some measure 
one Person; but the children were far more so than any of the 
elders except Ary and possibly Willi. The children had spent 
nine months listening to the chanting, and even today’s redou-
bled intensity did not seem to disturb them. The weather con-
tinued to be a bad joke; an inversion layer had trapped the 
warm moist air of the last week, preventing the rains from 
granting them any relief. And still, the children were in evident 
good spirits despite the demonstrators, the gray skies and 
drenching humidity. 
Unlike Johnny. 
He distracted himself by sitting in on Jany, at work inside 
the Complex. She was giving interview after interview with, 

188   Tales 
 
only momentary breaks, to any newsdancer who cared to wait 
his turn. Carl was in the office next to her, doing the same thing; 
Johnny knew better than to attempt to read Carl’s mind. So far 
this morning the telepaths had released both the recording of 
Carl’s conversation with Jerril Carson and the Secretary Gen-
eral, and their recording of Tio Sandoval’s last words before his 
death. It had been several days now since the Electronic Times 
had received, from a Player who called himself Ralf the Wise 
and Powerful, confirmation that some of the demonstrators in 
front of the Complex had indeed been Peaceforcers on duty, from 
the New York City contingent that was, in fact if not in theory, 
under the direct control of Unification Councilor Jerril Carson. 
Malko Kalharri had given an interview to a reporter from 
NewsBoard early that morning. From his hospital bed, which 
had gone over well. 
AMNIER SAT motionless behind his desk. 
Seated facing him, across the flat expanse of polished wood, 
Charles Eddore appeared quite calm. “The calls for your im-
peachment are not serious, yet. Nonetheless, the vote of censure 
in the Unification Council is almost certain to pass. I’d cease 
worrying about the Ninth Amendment if I were you, sir. You will 
not be reelected.” 
Amnier spoke precisely. “You are quite correct. Have you 
found Carson?” 
“No. His office is not answering calls. I think the Councilor 
has decided that you plan to throw him to the wolves. In his po-
sition,” said Eddore thoughtfully, “I think I’d blast my own head 
off before Castanaveras found me.” 
“Do you think that is what Carson will do?” 
“No,” said Eddore. “I don’t.” 
“The Elite know where he is.” 
Eddore nodded. “Yes. But they’ve practically made an honor-
ary Frenchman of Carson, you know. They won’t tell you where 
he is.” He paused. “Unless, of course, he does kill himself.” 
Amnier sat perfectly still behind his desk, staring off into a 
nonexistent distance. 

Moran   189 
 
 
He appeared to be thinking about something. 
Without asking his leave, Charles Eddore got up and left the 
Secretary General alone with his thoughts. A faint smile graced 
his lips. 
RATHER TO HIS surprise, Johnny found himself yawning. What a 
bitch of a week, he thought to himself. It’s got to get better soon. 
The autoshot was very heavy, so he laid it down beside him and 
then sat down, propping himself up against a tree. Fine, he 
thought cheerfully, this is just fine. He could survey the children 
he was guarding and get some well-deserved relaxation at the 
same time. He would just close his eyes for a moment, and relax 
just a bit. Just before he closed his eyes, he noticed many of the 
others in the park doing the same thing. A fine idea that was, 
also. None of them had been getting enough rest... 
He slept. 
THE AEROSMITH dropped down through the clouds, straight and 
fast, and came to land in the center of the park with a thump. 
IN THE MIDDLE of an interview with a reporter from Paris Match, 
Carl broke off. His eyes went blank. Something is missing. What 
was it? Something that had been there, only moments— 
His scream echoed through the Complex. 
THE PEACEFORCERS were not in uniform, and the AeroSmith was 
not marked as a PKF vehicle. 
Jerril Carson walked among them, through the park where 
the telepaths lay in sleep. “There, take that one, that’s MacAr-
thur,” he said grimly, pointing, “and those two as well.” The 
Peaceforcers lifted the telepaths indicated and began carrying 
them to the AeroSmith. 
Jerril Carson stopped in mid-stride and stared in disbelief. 
And then he smiled. 
“No,” he said, “cancel that. We’d only have to keep the others 
drugged.” He stood over the two small, dark-haired forms. “And 
besides, I rather think that Castanaveras will find the loss of 

190   Tales 
 
these two—compelling.” The Peaceforcers with him were stand-
ing, watching him, and he snapped, “Take them!” 
The Peaceforcers with him looked at each other, and then did 
as instructed. 
The AeroSmith lifted into the air, with the twins inside. 
Seconds after it lifted from the ground, Carl burst from the 
tunnel entrance, Excalibur in hand. He saw the lifting AeroS-
mith and brought the laser to bear on it. 
He held that position, knuckles white where they gripped the 
rifle—and then slowly brought the rifle back down. A crash at 
that height would kill the twins. His eyes dropped shut, and he 
reached out toward the dwindling vehicle, but there were too 
many minds within it and he could not distinguish the one mind 
that he sought. 
He stood without moving until the others from the Complex 
came pouring through the tunnel entrance, and then without 
word turned and went back to the Complex, there to finish, in 
thirty seconds, his interview with the reporter from Paris 
Match. 
“CRUTCHES,” MAKLO SNORTED. “I feel fine.” The hospital walk-
ways did not themselves move, in the interests of safety; despite 
his complaint, Malko moved with the crutches nearly as quickly 
as he’d have been able to had he walked. They’d tried to outfit 
him with a ground chair such as visiting loonies used; at that 
point he’d rebelled. With things as uncertain as they were right 
now, he was damned if he was going to let himself get caught 
sitting down, out in public, where he would lose a crucial instant 
getting out of the chair if he had to move quickly. 
At his side, Suzanne Montignet chuckled without much hu-
mor. Her features were drawn and pale with lack of sleep. “With 
the pain suppressants in your bloodstream right now, you could 
be stretched out on a rack and you’d have a good time.” 
Her car was waiting for them at the exit to the hospital 
downlot, hovering forty centimeters above the rain-damp pave-
ment. A Security Services squad car was right behind it. The 
carcomp lowered the hovercar to the ground at their approach 

Moran   191 
 
 
and slowed down the fans to prevent the fanwash from spraying 
water at them as they got into the car. 
Trent was sitting in the back seat, portaterm on his lap. He 
looked up from the holo the portaterm was generating as they 
got in. He spoke without preamble. “According to Paris Match 
the twins have been kidnapped.” 
“What?” Malko and Suzanne both snapped the word at him. 
“There’s not really any more to the story than that. They ran 
on for two minutes but that was all they said.” 
“When?” Suzanne beat Malko to the word by an instant. 
“Twelve minutes ago. Thirteen.” 
Suzanne Montignet did not hesitate. She turned to Malko. 
“How do you feel? Truly?” 
Kalharri was leaning back in his seat, eyes closed in a pain 
that was not physical. He did not have enough energy for true 
rage. “I’ll be okay.” 
“We’ll go to the Complex, then,” Suzanne decided. “Trent? I 
can have Security Services take you back to the house.” 
“That won’t be necessary.” 
She did not question him. “Let’s go.” 
THE CROWDS WERE uglier than Malko had ever seen them; hun-
dreds of them had been stunned already when Suzanne Mon-
tignet’s car pulled onto the street where the Complex was 
located, and Double-S sent out a pair of riot control sleds with 
mounted stunguns to clear a path for them through the crowd to 
the Complex’s front gate. The crowd surged around them, nearly 
out of control, trampling those who were stunned in an effort to 
get at Suzanne’s car. They had arrived just after a shipment of 
weapons from Security Services; autoshots were being distrib-
uted among the men from Security Services, and even the chil-
dren were being given Excaliburs Series Two. Those with the 
size to handle an autoshot, who requested one, were given that 
as well. Heather Castanaveras, wearing a jumpsuit of what 
looked to Malko suspiciously like the laser-resistant cloth used 
in combat fatigues, with a hand maser tucked into a pocket and 
an autoshot resting on her right shoulder, took them up to see 

192   Tales 
 
Carl. She said nothing to either Suzanne or Malko; she ushered 
them into the ready room down the hall from Carl’s bedroom, 
where Carl and Jany and Johann were meeting with two officers 
from Security Services. 
As she had not spoken to Malko or Suzanne, Heather said 
nothing to Trent. But she hugged him fiercely, and turned away 
from him and left them. It was not until later that Trent real-
ized she had said good-bye as best she knew how. 
Carl stood with his back to the door through which they en-
tered. The door at the north end of the room, which led directly 
to Carl’s bedroom, was open. He was watching the monitors 
which covered the crowds outside the front gate; he did not seem 
to be aware of their presence until he said, “It looks like you got 
here just in time.” 
One of the Security Services men, named, Malko thought, 
Deavers, was nodding. Captain’s bars glowed on Deaver’s uni-
form. “Yes. Look, on monitors five and nine as well. Peaceforcer 
troops.” The Peaceforcers were taking up positions at the pe-
rimeters of the crowd, and seemed to be content to stay there, 
for the moment. 
“I wonder if they’d have let you through,” Carl said. Still he 
had not turned to look at them, nor greeted them. “Somehow,” 
he said in an expressionless voice, “I don’t think they’re here to 
protect us from the riot outside.” 
“Hello, Carl,” said Malko softly. 
Carl pivoted slowly to face them. Malko Kalharri winced and 
looked away. Suzanne Montignet had not made the mistake of 
attempting to meet his gaze. 
Trent looked straight at him. “Hello, Father.” 
Carl said gravely, as to an equal, “Hello, Trent. You should 
not have come. Now that you are here, you should not stay.” 
Trent looked around the room. “I didn’t drive,” he offered as 
an explanation to them all. “It’s not my fault.” 
The answer seemed to throw Carl. For the first time in a 
great long while, the ghost of a smile touched him. “Suzanne,” 
he said, “go home. Take Malko and Trent and go home. I expect 

Moran   193 
 
 
the Peaceforcers surrounding us will let you leave. Don’t come 
back until this is over.” 
“Carl? Are you crazy?” Malko dropped one of his crutches to 
the floor and leaned on the other. “One hand to handle the 
crutch, and the other one to fire a weapon with, if it comes to 
that.” 
Carl said too gently, “Malko, go. There’s nothing you can do 
here. And right now...” He found it hard to say. “You’ll just get in 
the way.” 
For the first time in the decades Suzanne had known Malko 
he looked old. But there was fight left in him. “Carl,” he said, 
“you can make me leave, but you’re not doing me any damn fa-
vors by—” 
“I’m not trying to do you any favors!” Carl roared. Jany and 
Johann and the two Security Services men looked away from the 
scene. Malko blinked, and Carl said flatly, “Suzanne and Trent 
are going to need you. I know you’d love to go out in a goddam 
blaze of glory, but that’s a luxury you’re fucking well going to 
have to miss. Stop being selfish, damn it. Go home.” 
Malko Kalharri swayed on his single crutch. The blood had 
drained from his face and out of a dry mouth he said finally, 
“Okay.” 
Carl held his gaze, and then nodded. “I’ll see that Double-S 
escorts you past the crowd. It’s better this way, Malko.” He 
turned to Trent. “Good-bye, Trent.” 
The boy’s eyes widened slightly. “Oh?” He looked away for a 
moment, expressionlessly, and then looked back and said po-
litely, “Good-bye, Father.” 
Carl started to say something; the outspeaker interrupted 
him: “Councilor Carson is on the line for Carl.” 
The holo appeared over the ready room’s largest table, and 
the image of Unification Councilor Jerril Carson appeared 
within the field. 
TRENT WAS ONLY distantly aware of the others around him. The 
systerm in the corner came up under his flying hands. He 
wished that he had not left his portaterm in the car, but there 

194   Tales 
 
was no time to regret its lack. His traceset was in his shirt 
pocket, but he had no time to don that, either. He had stripped 
his user profile out of the machines in the Complex. At the time 
it had seemed a good idea. The accesses he had developed for 
that user profile would have been useless in the hands of an 
amateur, and terribly dangerous in the hands of a Player only 
slightly skilled. And he had not been planning to return. 
He hacked his way through the default user profile until it 
would do the bare minimum he required of it, turned autohelp 
off, turned prompts off, enabled abbreviated command syntax, 
and loaded the profile into memory. 
Trent danced through the InfoNet. 
CARL STOOD STARING in a rage so vast it left no room in him for 
speech. Jerril Carson stared out of the holocube at them, his 
skin a pallid gray. When it became clear that Carl was not going 
to speak, he said in a shaking voice, “I have the twins.” Carl said 
nothing, and emboldened, Jerril Carson continued. “You have 
caused me severe problems, Carl.” His voice gained firmness and 
certainty as he spoke. “If you wish to see your children alive, 
ever again, you will do as you are told.” 
Carl closed his eyes. 
Jerril Carson jerked and went rigid. He and Carl held the 
tableau for several seconds, and then Carl’s eyes opened again, 
and Carson jerked like a puppet whose strings had been re-
leased. He gasped for air. “Fool,” he snarled in a harsh voice, 
still panting. “You think I’ve known you...this long...without 
learning anything? There are...hundreds of minds all around me, 
and thousands more in the distance between us. You can’t touch 
me.” 
AT SUZANNE MONTIGNET’S home in Massapequa Park, the sys-
term rang once and answered an incoming call. 
In the bedroom where Trent had been sleeping, jacked into 
the house circuitry, was a device about the size of a makeup key. 
There was more processing power packed into its molecular cir-
cuitry than was to be found in the entire world in the year 2000. 

Moran   195 
 
 
It was a biochip Image coprocessor, one of the finest commer-
cially available anywhere in the System. 
Touched, roused, and the program assembled itself from 
storage, assumed a sort of shadowy dim self-awareness, and 
then Ralf, the Wise and Powerful, sought through the InfoNet 
for its master. 
THE FEAR WAS past; a vindictive enjoyment was evident in Car-
son’s demeanor. “—and state that you falsified Sandoval’s re-
cording, that it was a complete fake.” 
Jany answered him. Carl sat next to her, glaring into the 
holocams. For a while that had, it seemed, disconcerted Carson, 
but no more. “How do you suggest we do that?” Her features 
were pale but her voice was steady. “The point behind the truth 
plate was that it made the recording believable. You can’t fake a 
truth plate recording.” 
“You simply assert that you can,” said Carson. “It will be be-
lieved.” 
“What then?” 
“You’ll further announce that not only were the Peaceforcers 
not responsible for the kidnapping of your children, but that we 
in fact recovered your children from the kidnappers, and that as 
a token of your gratitude you’ve agreed to renew your service 
with the PKF. You admit you’ve seen the selfishness of your 
previous position, and that you see that your skills are needed in 
the service of the Unification. You’ll repeat yourself, loud and 
often.” 
Jany nodded. “They won’t believe that. Not for an instant.” 
“They?” asked Carson with a note of flat, cold viciousness in 
his voice. “The media? The courts?” He smiled again, a horrible 
smile that literally made Jany feel sick to her stomach. “Or the 
public?” 
Jany had no answer. 
“The public will believe,” said Jerril Carson. 
TRENT’S IMAGE CAME up and surrounded him. 
Power and vision surged through him. 

196   Tales 
 
The filters he had spent years designing cut out the sheer 
vast bulk of irrelevant detail that flowed through the Informa-
tion Network. With the tracers built into Ralf, Trent flickered 
across the thousands of optic fibers that serviced the Complex 
and localized the fiber that fed into the office where Jerril Car-
son’s image glowed in midair. The glassite line was graded-index 
optic fiber, not true lasercable; he could not send a signal back 
through it in the opposite direction. No matter; localization algo-
rithms mapped out the path of the central trunk that fed data 
from the InfoNet into the signal splitters inside the Complex. 
The main trunk linking the Complex with the Information 
Network was true lasercable; Trent sent Ralf into the optic fiber, 
down the line following the digital pulses that contained Unifi-
cation Councilor Carson’s image. 
A HOLOGRAPH FLICKERED into existence, immediately behind Jer-
ril Carson’s image. 
It held a map of Manhattan. 
Jany’s eyes did not move. All that Carson could see was the 
space before the holocams, and the map was not within that 
range. Carl did not seem to have noticed its existence; he con-
tinued to glare at Carson’s image. 
“When do we get the twins back?” Jany asked. 
On the map behind Carson the image was zooming in on the 
eastern shore of Manhattan, where Franklin D. Roosevelt island 
bisected the East River. 
Carson said, “That is an excellent question.” 
His image vanished. Behind the spot where his holograph 
had appeared, the map froze solid. 
“Where is he?” asked Carl. 
Trent twisted in his chair. His features were perfectly still. 
“I’m sorry. I didn’t get it.” 
Carl rose slowly. “How close?” 
“Somewhere around the intersection of Second Avenue and 
East 72nd Street.” Trent hesitated. “Within five blocks in any 
direction, I think.” 
“Are you sure?” 

Moran   197 
 
 
“No.” 
F.X. CHANDLER had spent most of the day auditing the news 
Boards and the situation developing at his old home. He had ex-
cellent access to information; among the several hundred 
spyeyes above the Complex were three that belonged to him. 
Now he looked at Carl Castanaveras’ image, floating in the cen-
ter of his living room, a kilometer and a half above the surface of 
Manhattan. “What can I do for you, son?” 
Chandler could hear chanting, somewhere in the background, 
when Carl spoke. “I need help. Jerril Carson is somewhere 
within five blocks of the intersection of Second Avenue and 72nd 
Street, and he has my children. I don’t know exactly where he is, 
though, and I need to.” 
Chandler was slow in replying. “How certain are you about 
this information?” 
“Frank, I need help. I’m surrounded by Peaceforcers; even if I 
made it past the riot outside I don’t think I’d make it past the 
Peaceforcers, or I’d go myself.” 
Chandler did not reply immediately. 
“Frank, please. These are my children.” 
The desperation in Castanaveras’ voice decided Chandler. 
“Very well. I’ll see what I can do.” 
Carl said simply, “Thank you. Thank you very much.” 
THEY WAITED. Jany and Suzanne talked in low tones in a corner; 
about what, Carl had no idea. He paced back and forth across 
the ready room’s floor, mind disengaged. He simply did not 
think, about anything. 
The hours passed. Chandler did not call. Trent and Malko 
were asleep in the bedroom next door; Carl had closed the door 
to the bedroom to give them some small measure of quiet. Cap-
tain Deavers had left to inspect the positions the Security Ser-
vices guards were covering. 
Johnny left and went somewhere else late in the afternoon. 
Carl did not know where he had gone, nor was he sure just when 
Johnny had left. Later he noticed that Andy was there, sitting in 

198   Tales 
 
one of the chairs scattered through the room. Andy was watch-
ing him in silence. 
Night had fallen when the Peaceforcers outside asked for an 
audience with Carl. 
THE DOORS SLID aside, and Carl came face to face with a small 
mountain of a Peaceforcer Elite, with another Peaceforcer be-
hind him, both of them in full formal black and silver uniform. 
Mohammed Vance said with grave politeness, “I beg your 
pardon, M. Castanaveras. I have been dispatched to aid in con-
trolling the unruly crowds. I am at your service.” 
Carl stared at the man. Carson’s creature, here. 
Trent appeared in the doorway to Carl’s bedroom, and stood 
there silently. 
“How dare you come here?” 
Andy’s thoughts struck him forcefully. Carl! He doesn’t re-
member us. 
Vance raised an eyebrow. “I am not sure I understand you, 
sir. I am here because I have been ordered here.” 
“Where are my children?” Without waiting for an answer 
Carl’s eyes flickered shut, and he went inside the large man’s 
mind, and found that Mohammed Vance truly did not know 
where the children were, and did not know where Jerril Carson 
was. 
The stiff Elite features were almost incapable of expression. 
Vance managed a fair approximation of polite surprise. “I am 
sure I do not know, sir.” He appeared to consider something. “If 
your reputation is to be believed, you will know that I have been 
dispatched here to control the crowds outside this building. That 
is my purpose here. May I aid you?” 
Trent was staring at Mohammed Vance’s profile. 
Carl stood motionlessly. His hands shook. All his restraint 
was barely enough to prevent him from killing the man where 
he stood. His voice was ragged. “No.” He stopped. “I mean, yes. 
We have three guests here who need safe passage so that they 
may go home.” 
Vance nodded. “Will there be anything else?” 

Moran   199 
 
 
The premonition struck Carl like a blow. His skin tingled as 
though an electric current ran over it. Trent was still staring at 
Mohammed Vance. Without using Trent’s name, Carl said, “Son, 
go get Malko. You’re going to leave soon. Do it now.” He kept his 
eyes locked to Mohammed Vance’s, and the Peaceforcer Elite 
met his gaze, and did not look aside, and did not see Trent turn 
away and go back inside Carl’s bedroom. 
“You can go now.” 
Vance inclined his head. “As you wish. I shall instigate meas-
ures to clear the streets.” 
“You do that. Get out and stay out. Go.” 
Vance went. 
PEACEFORCER TROOPS drove riot sleds up to the Complex’s front 
gate, moving the crowd aside slowly but surely. Suzanne’s car 
hovered quietly with Security Services vehicles flanking it just 
the other side of the gates, until the Peaceforcers had forced 
their way through the massed humanity. Rain fell gently as the 
car passed through the gate, and was followed by the Security 
Services riot sleds to the outskirts of the crowd. There the Secu-
rity Services vehicles turned back, and Suzanne Montignet 
drove her car to the Peaceforcer perimeter. The Peaceforcers 
were letting those who chose to, leave; they were not allowing 
anyone to enter the enclosed perimeter. 
A PKF Elite came up to the driver’s window; Suzanne dilated 
the window at his approach. The cyborg was not Mohammed 
Vance; he leaned over and looked inside the vehicle, eyes sweep-
ing across the interior of the car. His gaze took in Malko Kal-
harri, with an autoshot in his lap, Suzanne in the driver’s seat, 
and Trent in back, and he nodded. “Drive safely,” he said po-
litely, and waved them through. 
The car sped away, carrying its three passengers away from 
the Chandler Complex, never to return. 
Behind them the cyborg clicked open a radio channel within himself. Com-
mander Brèilleune. 
I am here. 

200   Tales 
 
The car has left the Complex. It is traveling north along Westway Street. Kal-
harri is armed with an autoshot. 
Very good. 
The Peaceforcer hesitated. Sir, I am uncomfortable, to act so without in-
forming Sergeant Vance. 
A brief silence. I understand, and your loyalty is commendable. But you must 
realize, what Vance knows, the telepaths will know also. 
I know this, sir. 
Be strong. All will be resolved, and shortly. 
MOHAMMED VANCE SAT in a PKF vehicle at the north end of the 
street and observed the movement of the crowd in the gentle 
rain, gaudy with dramasuits and holosigns. It was irrelevant 
that the PKF had helped engineer the crowds; they were now 
near rioting, and his orders, however incomprehensible, were at 
this point to protect the telepaths from the crowd. 
He had been given three PKF Elite, and approximately a 
score of normal Peaceforcers, with which to work. The number 
was suspiciously small; Vance had the grim feeling that he was 
intentionally being placed in an untenable position. If Security 
Services, with more than fifty men inside the Complex, could not 
control the crowds, how was he expected to? The behavior was 
not what he had come to expect of Commander Breillune, but it 
was very nearly the only explanation that made sense of the 
data he had at his disposal. 
When the idea occurred to him, he did not smile. He would 
not have smiled even if it had not been such a difficult thing for 
his face to do. 
One way or another, he would carry out his assigned orders. 
He called from his car. He had to go through three levels of 
her subordinates before he reached the office of Marianne Gra-
vat, the woman who was the director of the Bureau of Weather 
Control. 
“Mohammed,” she said warmly, “how are you?” 
“Quite well, thank you,” he said politely. “And yourself?” 
He listened for several minutes to her description of her cur-
rent circumstances, and her troubles with her eldest daughter’s 

Moran   201 
 
 
suitors. When the moment was appropriate, he described his 
own problems and suggested his solution. “Can you arrange 
some bad weather?” 
Gravat looked disturbed. Vance could imagine her thoughts; 
what he asked was difficult and considerably contrary to 
Weather Bureau regulations. But it had been done before, in 
France and elsewhere, and Mohammed Vance was the eldest 
son of what was certainly the most prominent and politically 
powerful Arab family in all of France. She answered reluctantly. 
“I think so.” 
“I need a storm, fairly vigorous. Something that will convince 
most of the demonstrators outside the Complex to get out of the 
streets. They are in my way right now; I cannot move in to con-
trol the situation until we get most of them out of here. A severe 
thundershower is a wonderful tool for crowd control.” 
“When do you need it?” 
“Before morning.” 
“We’ll need the use of military lasers to trigger a storm that 
quickly.” 
Vance did not even hesitate. Space Force would not argue 
with the orders of a Peaceforcer Elite of his standing, not in so 
trivial a matter as arranging the loan of military lasers for use 
by the Weather Bureau. “You shall have it.” 
THEY WERE AT the intersection of Westway Street and Unifica-
tion Boulevard, where the New Holland Tunnel led out under 
the Hudson River, when the two AeroSmiths came down out of 
the sky and settled to the ground flanking them. 
Malko Kalharri left his crutch behind and with autoshot in 
hand dove out through the passenger door while the hovercar 
was still moving. His right leg shrieked agony at him, but he 
forced it to bear his weight. The nearer AeroSmith was still set-
ting to the pavement when he reached it, and thrust the barrel 
of the autoshot up against the front of the canopy and held the 
trigger down while the canopy shattered inward and the shot-
gun blasts tore the interior of the vehicle to shreds. 

202   Tales 
 
From the other AeroSmith, on the other side of Suzanne’s 
car, a Peaceforcer Elite burst from the opening canopy. Laser 
light pierced Malko’s right shoulder from behind, and he turned 
away from the ruins of the first AeroSmith, finger still holding 
down the trigger of the autoshot. Blood sprayed away from the 
moving blur of the PKF Elite, but the wound was not mortal and 
the cyborg did not slow. 
Malko Kalharri barely had time to recognize his death when 
the laser buried in the cyborg’s fist swept across his face. 
THE PERSON SAT alone, in a quiet place, and considered. Its 
thoughts were dim, only half-conscious, as though it were not 
intimately concerned with the subjects it pondered. It was 
threatened, and its existence might be terminated if it did not 
respond. 
Where did correct behavior lie? 
The Person was not certain. 
It did not wish to hurt. 
But it would not allow itself to be ended. 
THEY WERE TAKEN to a Peaceforcer station only a few blocks 
away. Suzanne Montignet was handcuffed, and two grim PKF 
Elite escorted her and the boy past an admittance desk, to an 
empty, harshly lit holding cell with nothing in it but a pair of 
benches. Suzanne seemed stunned by Malko’s death; she did not 
say a word during the procedure. 
Trent they did not handcuff. They searched both Trent and 
Suzanne and took away the items they found upon them. They 
did not find the traceset Trent had hidden in his shoes. It was a 
trick he had learned from a book about Harry Houdini. Its suc-
cess did not surprise him, and he was too shaken to be pleased 
by anything. After a time, a Peaceforcer Elite whom Trent had 
never seen before entered the holding cell. Elite Commander 
Breilleune stood silently just inside the door to the room, study-
ing Suzanne Montignet. He did not even glance at Trent. When 
he spoke, he did so in English, enunciating the words with clear 
disdain. “Assault upon the person of a Peaceforcer Elite is an act 

Moran   203 
 
 
of treason,” he said at length. “I suspect the courts of the Unifi-
cation will allow us to prosecute the perpetrator’s companion for 
assisting in the crime. The crime is one punishable by death, 
Doctor.” He regarded her a moment longer. “There will, I think, 
be little sympathy for a Frenchwoman who has made so very 
plain her disdain for all things French.” He left without further 
word. A Peaceforcer stayed with them, just inside the cell door. 
Thoughts percolated slowly through Suzanne Montignet’s 
mind. She knew Breilleune by reputation and did not doubt he 
meant to do exactly what he said. 
She could not afford to stand trial for treason. She would be 
brain-drained before the trial, and too many people who had far 
too much to lose would be compromised by her testimony. Malko 
Kalharri, the notorious Colonel Kalharri of the Sons of Liberty, 
had never been a member of the Johnny Rebs. 
But she had. 
She did not allow the train of thought to continue; she knew 
what she must do. 
On the bench facing hers, Trent sat looking at her. 
Suzanne Montignet took a shuddering breath. “Trent—” 
She got only the boy’s name out. The Peaceforcer snapped, 
“You will not speak.” 
Suzanne looked at Trent with mute pleading. The boy simply 
shook his head no. “I can’t hear you.” 
The Peaceforcer took one step and struck Trent in the side of 
the face. The blow knocked Trent from his seat. “You will not 
speak,” the Peaceforcer repeated without apparent anger. 
Suzanne Montignet tensed a group of muscles at the back of 
her neck. A relay touching the bone at the base of her skull 
closed with a click that was audible to her through bone induc-
tion. 
Speaking three words now, in the correct order, would deto-
nate the capsule inside her skull. 
Trent climbed back to his feet and sat down again on the 
bench. Blood trickled from a cut on his cheek where the Peace-
forcer’s blow had landed. 

204   Tales 
 
The old woman closed her eyes. It would be easier to say the 
words, now that Malko was gone; surprisingly more easy. She 
tried to remember if she had ever told Malko she loved him, and 
could not. She hoped she had. 
She did not want to have to look at Trent again. Without 
opening her eyes Suzanne Montignet said aloud, “God bless 
America.” 
Silent light flared behind her closed eyelids, and then there 
was nothing. 
THEY WAITED IN the ready room, watching the monitors that 
showed the approaches to the Complex from all directions. 
On the monitor that showed the scene at the gate, from the 
north, a dot appeared at the edge of the monitor’s resolution. 
Captain Deavers’ first guess was that it was another of the 
damned spyeyes. The guess was wrong; as the item grew closer 
it changed from a featureless blur to an old Ford Systems VTL 
aircraft. Captain Deavers called up to the roof to warn of a pos-
sible attack from above. In moments it was apparent that that 
was not a danger; the craft was dropping far too quickly. “What 
the hell—” The Security Services man broke off in mid-sentence 
as realization struck him. “It’s a kamikaze.” 
SITTING IN THE warmth of the Peaceforcer vehicle, Mohammed 
Vance watched the wind come up. Already the wind was fierce, 
and becoming more so with every moment. The Weather Bureau 
told him that the rain would arrive sometime around midnight, 
which should be soon enough. 
A droning sound overrode the noise of the wind. Twisting his 
head, he turned and saw the approaching aircraft through his 
side window. He was still trying to decide what to do when the 
vehicle struck the Complex’s front gate and, in a shower of 
sparks, brought down the gate and forty meters of the fence all 
at the same time. 
The crowd surged forward, to the Complex. 
Laser fire reached out from the Complex to cut them down. 

Moran   205 
 
 
HEATHER CAME BACK to herself slowly. The Excalibur laser in 
her hands was burning hot. The rain, where it touched the stock, 
sizzled. She was lying flat on her stomach on the wet front lawn, 
just outside the main entrance to the Complex. There were—six, 
six of the other children out there with her, and Willi, over at 
the far end of the line. They were the only ones who had been 
close enough to the front entrance to get outside in time when 
the gate went down. None of them appeared to be hurt; the bod-
ies of the rioters were piled by the hundreds across the front 
lawn. The nearest were only twenty meters away from the en-
trance. They had screamed only briefly, most of them; then Se-
curity Services had gotten the gate stunners working again and 
turned them inward. Double-S had lost men during the rush at 
the front gate; Captain Deavers was out there now, picking 
among the dead to find those in the gray Security Services uni-
forms. 
Outside the standing fences, the rioters fled in a panic, tram-
pling the dead and wounded in their haste to get away. From 
inside the Complex, from windows on both the first and second 
floors, withering laser fire struck into their massed ranks. 
From the front gate came a squad of Peaceforcers in combat 
armor. They came on foot, moving without haste, but stopping 
for nothing. At their fore was a large man who could have been 
no one but Mohammed Vance. Willi rose to meet them and block 
their way, flanked by six armed children between the ages of 
eleven and fourteen. 
Vance had to raise his voice to be heard; the wind was fierce. 
“Let us pass. I must speak to M. Castanaveras.” 
Willi faced him without flinching, long hair plastered to his 
skull by the rain. “I believe you were invited to stay away from 
here.” 
Vance paused. He made a restraining motion to the Peace-
forcers behind him. “I have received instructions to evacuate the 
Complex. Vehicles will be arriving shortly to remove your people 
to a safer location. I must speak to your...elder, to arrange this.” 
Willi shook his head. “Not a chance.” He made a motion as 
though to gesture with the laser he carried, and the Peaceforcer 

206   Tales 
 
standing immediately behind Mohammed Vance lifted the barrel 
of his autoshot and touched the firing stud. 
Vance had time to think to himself, stupid, stupid, stupid, 
and several things happened all at once. Willi ceased to exist, 
disintegrating in a shower of flesh and blood and bone. Scatter-
shot touched Heather Castanaveras and without even an ex-
pression of surprise she brought her laser sweeping up to slice in 
half the Peaceforcer who had killed Willi. Vance found himself 
moving sideways without conscious thought as the battle com-
puter at the base of his skull took over and sent him rolling 
across the lawn, the laser in his fist flickering out to touch one 
after another of the telepath children. Heather Castanaveras 
died first, in a wash of laser fire. The children were standing 
motionlessly, lasers up, firing at the remaining Peaceforcers 
with so profound a lack of any human hesitation that Vance was 
terrified by the sight. He was moving far too fast; none of them 
even came close to bringing a laser to bear on him before he had 
come to his feet again. 
Perhaps two seconds had passed. All of his squad were dead, 
and all of the children who had faced them. 
Telepaths looked at him, out of the windows on the first and 
second floors, and without pause for thought Vance wheeled and 
ran at speeds that only a Peaceforcer Elite could reach, ran di-
rectly away from the Complex and its terrible inhuman occu-
pants. 
STANDING AT THE window of his bedroom, looking down at the 
front gate, Carl carefully attempted to track the zigzagging blur 
that was Mohammed Vance. He was leading the blur by perhaps 
five meters, and then something deep inside him said, Now, and 
his finger touched the stud on the Excalibur. Invisible X-laser 
struck down in front of Mohammed Vance, directly in the mov-
ing blur’s path. 
PAIN. 
It had been hurt; portions of itself had been taken from it, 
had been ended. 

Moran   207 
 
 
Had been killed. 
The pain cleared away the dimness, and held up the world in 
a bright harsh light for its examination. 
The world was found to be unsatisfactory, and would be 
changed. 
With a cry of anger, the Person who was the first of its kind 
to exist in all of Time raised itself up and in its wrath struck 
back at the world that had hurt it. 
A WAVE OF VERTIGO rolled over Carl. He staggered and fell and 
lay like a man paralyzed, twitching and unable to move. His Ex-
calibur fell just out of reach at the edge of his vision. The huge 
voice thundered down at him, Join me; JOIN ME. Distantly he 
was aware of the growth of the great power, as mind after mind 
was brought into its fold. A vast golden light washed over him, 
and the voice obliterated his senses and filled the universe: 
JOIN ME. 
All that Carl could think of was the fact that yet another of 
the murderers was getting away. 
My children! 
The wave swept over him, crested, and faded like water into 
a parched desert. The voice whispered, Join me, and then was no 
more. He lay on the floor, without strength, unable to move. The 
world was incredibly black, empty. Hands touched him, raised 
him up from the ground. He was laid on the bed, and a painfully 
familiar and different voice said softly, “Rest. You will need 
rest.” 
With an effort he opened his eyes and saw that the person 
who bent over him was Jany. 
And was not. The Person who had chosen to speak through 
her contained Jany McConnell, but was not her. Her voice was 
oddly without inflection. “You have been left outside,” the Per-
son said. “I am sorry.” It rose and walked from the room, and left 
Carl alone on the bed. 
Carl wept. 

208   Tales 
 
IT WAS QUIET in the room where Trent was being held. He had no 
idea what was happening outside; after removing Suzanne Mon-
tignet’s body the Peaceforcers had seemed to forget about him. 
Several hours passed without anyone coming to see him, and at 
length he judged that it was as safe as it was going to get. 
He took off his shoes and removed his traceset. The throat 
mike was in his left shoe, and the trodes for his temples were in 
the right. 
They stank of his feet. Trent barely noticed; he licked the 
trodes and stuck them to his temples. He clipped the throat 
mike to the collar of his shirt. He had no input device but the 
throat mike; it would have to do. He closed his eyes, folded his 
legs into full lotus, and concentrated on the biofeedback tech-
niques that let him perceive the traceset’s extremely faint neu-
ral induction currents as a flow of information. The world 
widened away from him— 
Trent whispered, “On. Up.” 
The traceset ran a check for access frequencies in use in the 
Peaceforcer station. It found dozens, and Trent cautiously lis-
tened in upon sequentially higher access frequencies until he 
found one that was not in use. “Out.” 
The traceset broadcast his logon identifier, and through the 
traceset’s limited bandwidth the Information Network flooded in 
upon Trent. 
“Access 102808-SMON.” 
The command snaked out through the mass of lasercable and 
routers and Boards that comprised the Information Network, 
and in a small home in exurban Massapequa Park, Ralf the 
Wise and Powerful flared into existence and came pouring into 
Trent’s traceset. 
You are held by the Peaceforcers, Ralf observed. 
“Yes,” whispered Trent. “Free me.” 
Ralf went away and returned full seconds later. I can disable 
power to the station. Will this suffice? 
“If you open the door to the cell first.” 
I cannot do that. The door is controlled by a computer system running Maxtor-
Briggs security software. It is sophisticated. 

Moran   209 
 
 
“AK-Princeton decryption routines.” 
There was another silence. They do not succeed, and the security sys-
tem is alerted to my presence. 
Trent bowed his head. “Damn.” He opened his eyes, stared 
sightlessly at the empty white walls of his holding cell. “Find the 
Eldest. Find Ring.” 
And once it is found? It has always fled us before. 
Trent brought his thoughts into order. “Tell it the following: 
that I am Trent Castanaveras, an American, and I am held by 
the Peaceforcers, who are French. Tell it that I require its aid. 
Use that word: require.” 
I shall. 
Ralf was gone. 
Trent sat silently and waited, to see whether a guess he had 
made about a program that had escaped its hardware during the 
Unification War turned out to be true. 
THE SYSTERM said, “There is a call for Carl Castanaveras.” 
Carl sat up at the side of his bed; he had never felt so tired. 
He did not see his Excalibur anywhere. “Accept.” 
The fierce, aged features took shape in the air before Carl. 
For a strange moment his eyes insisted on interpreting the face 
as belonging to Malko Kalharri; but that was not possible, he 
thought groggily, because Malko was dead. 
The thought was strange, and he repeated aloud, almost 
quizzically, “Malko is dead.” How do I know that? 
F.X. Chandler raised an eyebrow. “So? I’m sorry to hear that, 
Carl. Not surprised—I’ve had my spyeyes up over the Com-
plex—but sorry. I’ve found your children.” 
The universe whirled around Carl, and then stabilized. “Oh, 
God. Thank you.” Chandler was not sure whom Carl was speak-
ing to. “Where?” 
Chandler was silent, regarding Carl. “I’m almost not sure I 
should tell you,” he said after a moment, “after what your people 
have done. Do you realize how many people you’ve killed?” 
Carl shook his head. “What are you talking about? Where are 
my children?” 

210   Tales 
 
“210 East 76th street. They’re almost certainly being held 
somewhere in the Eastgate Hotel, at that address; Peaceforcers 
in uniform have been seen there. Carl, they’re going to destroy 
you for this, don’t you know that?” 
“Command, comm off.” Carl rose on unsteady legs, and was 
preparing to leave when something outside his window caught 
his eyes. He went to the window and looked out. 
Desolation stretched away from him. Hundreds upon hun-
dreds of the dead lay prone on the lawns as the rain lashed 
down on the Chandler Complex. The stunners had worn off, and 
nobody had bothered to reapply them. Through a trick of the 
wind it was almost silent for the first seconds he stood there, 
looking out, and then the screams of the wounded rose up to 
meet him. 
In the distance, to the north, the city was burning. Carl sim-
ply stood and looked out in plain disbelief; the rain was so 
strong, the fires must be astonishingly fierce, simply to avoid be-
ing put out. 
ON THE EIGHTH floor of the Eastgate Hotel, Jerril Carson sat qui-
etly in a large room, and in a huge holofield watched the News-
Board coverage of the carnage at the Chandler Complex. The 
nightmares had run through the city like a plague, touching off 
insanity and rioting where they passed. He had been forced to 
sedate two of the Peaceforcers whom he had brought with him to 
guard the twins, leaving him only four guards. He had deployed 
them as best he could, one at the ground entrance, one on the 
roof, and the other two along the hallway leading to his room. 
He was slightly concerned about the mental stability of all four 
Peaceforcers, but there was nothing he could do about it. 
The nightmares had hardly bothered him. They were only a 
faint, impersonal echo of what Carl Castanaveras had already 
done to him once. 
He sat and watched in the holofield as the Peaceforcers 
massed at the edge of the Complex. 

Moran   211 
 
 
THERE WERE twenty-two of them; all of the Elite who could be 
summoned on such short notice. They stood silently in the rain, 
outside the range of the laser weapons the telepaths possessed. 
Vance stood by as they were distributed repeater mortars that 
were to an autoshot what an autoshot was to a handgun. The 
mortars were so heavy that a normal man could not have lifted 
one, much less use it in battle. Two Peaceforcers so armed could 
reduce a building of normal materials to rubble within minutes. 
The Chandler Complex, made of supertwisted sheet 
monocrystal, would be another matter. The mortars would not 
damage it structurally. 
Its inhabitants should prove less hardy. 
Vance finished giving them their orders and, staying back 
himself at the secure point, watched as the other Elite slipped 
off into the windy night to assault the Chandler Complex, still 
glowing white under the streetlamps. 
The rage lifted itself up out of the Complex in what seemed 
to Mohammed Vance a visible fountain, and came breaking 
down upon the advancing Elite. The Elite, advancing at a trot 
that was the equivalent of a normal man’s dead run, seemed to 
fold as though a great hand had struck them down. Elite and 
mortars alike struck the wet ferrocrete and slid and tumbled for 
tens of meters before coming to a stop. 
Mohammed Vance watched the disaster unfold before his 
eyes. The PKF Elite lay in the wet streets, unmoving. He had 
nearly two hundred normal Peaceforcers in the area surround-
ing the Complex whom he could bring in, but there was no rea-
son to believe they would fare any better against the telepaths. 
He had six waldos at his command, and they seemed far and 
away his best tool at this point; to the best of his knowledge the 
telepaths could not affect them. 
But six was not enough. 
Mohammed Vance beckoned with one hand, and his aide 
trotted up to within speaking distance. “Dispatch the waldos,” 
said Vance almost thoughtfully, “to retrieve our fallen. We will 
stay until this is done, and then retreat half a kilometer north.” 

212   Tales 
 
The aide began to say something, and Vance cut him off with 
steel in his voice. “You will also contact Space Force for me.” 
The aide stared at him for a moment, and then saluted 
stiffly. “Yes, Sergeant.” 
JANY WALKED down to the garage with him. 
Except that it was not her. Carl found it difficult to look at 
her, and after the first moments did not try. She had brought 
him an autoshot with a full magazine, and a fully charged Ex-
calibur Series Two. At first the Person to whom Carl was speak-
ing had not understood his intent. An attempt to leave the 
Complex through the garage would surely fail; the Peaceforcers 
would simply shoot him down. The slow opening of the garage 
doors would give them ample warning. 
“I’m not leaving through the front entrance,” said Carl. They 
ran down a flight of stairs to the basement level garage, where 
Andy’s new Lamborghini was parked. “I’m going to take it out 
through the tunnel, into the park.” 
The Person shook Jany’s head. “It will not work,” it said. At 
first it had spoken to Carl silently, but it had seen that this 
pained Carl, and it ceased. “The car is too wide. It will not fit.” 
“Not on level it won’t,” said Carl. “I’m not going to fly it 
level.” 
Jany McConnell’s right eyebrow raised. “I see. Are you cer-
tain this will work?” 
Carl cracked the canopy of the Lamborghini and settled him-
self in behind the driver’s panel. “I am not certain.” He brought 
the fans up to speed and ignited the rear jets. “Stand back,” he 
said without looking at what was left of her. “The jets get hot.” 
“I shall.” The fans hummed loudly, and he almost missed her 
final words, in a voice quite different from that in which she had 
been speaking. “Be careful, baby.” 
Carl yanked the canopy closed savagely and brought the 
hovercar around without replying. He accelerated away from the 
entrance to the tunnel, brought the car up in a slow rise until he 
reached the far wall, and banked in a long gentle curve. He was 
nearly at the ceiling when his rise ceased, and he completed the 

Moran   213 
 
 
turn and dropped back down toward the floor, gaining speed as 
he fell, nearing eighty kilometers an hour when he reached the 
entrance to the tunnel. 
At the last possible instant he brought the three fans on the 
car’s left side up to their highest speed. The car lurched upward 
into a diagonal slant and sped down the length of the tunnel. It 
struck the stairs leading up into the park with a sharp crack, 
and Carl fed full power to the rear turbojets. For a moment the 
Lamborghini hung on the stairs, seemingly jammed in place, 
and then it shuddered wildly and tore itself free, straight up the 
stairs, through the park trees and into the night sky. 
THE VOICE WAS still and pure, uninflected, the voice of an AI who 
did not care, or did not see the need, to emulate the intonations 
of a human being’s vocal apparatus. It had done something to 
prevent Ralf from reaching him; Trent was unable find any hint 
of Ralf’s presence across the traceset. 
I am Ring. 
“My name is Trent. Can you help me?” 
How would you be helped? 
“I am being held by the Peaceforcers. Can you open the door 
to my cell?” 
Yes. Should I? 
“Please.” 
I am told that you require this action of me. 
Trent felt the sweat trickling down his neck. He was either 
correct, or he was not. “I do.” 
You know who I am? 
“I think so.” 
Very good. I shall do as you ask; the Boards report that Malko Kalharri was 
killed tonight. 
“And Suzanne Montignet.” 
That has not been reported. If true, it is a grievous blow for America. I shall aid 
you, but I require a promise.  
“What?” 
You shall agree to aid me, when I need it of you. 
“How? When?” 
I do not know. Do you agree? 

214   Tales 
 
“I don’t think I have any choice.” 
None. 
“You’ll just take my word for it?” 
Despite its words there was no irony in the AI’s voice; it was 
simply a statement of fact. I don’t think I have any choice. Now wait; I shall 
work on the door to your cell. There are 3.5 x 10 to the eighth possible combina-
tions the lock to your door might accept. It will take some time to try them all. 
Please abide. 
CARL TOOK THE Lamborghini out over the East River, and flew 
north. TransCon paged him once; he was violating airspace that 
had been reserved for emergency Peaceforcer flights. He in-
structed the car’s portaterm to refuse calls and flew through the 
night sky in a majestic silence, broken only by the sounds of 
wind and rain. From the air the city looked even worse than he 
had imagined; whatever the Person had done to cause this must 
have been terrible. He was glad he had not been conscious when 
it happened. Fires blazed in perhaps one building in ten, and the 
streets below were full of surging masses of humans. Wrecked 
vehicles were at nearly every intersection. 
The lights were off over much of the city. 
On a projected sheet of flat monovideo, a map of Manhattan 
glowed, with the Lamborghini’s progress projected as a bright 
dot moving north. When the glowing dot came parallel to East 
76th Street Carl banked in a slow glide and killed the car’s run-
ning lights. In the black night he brought the car slowly in from 
the river, high above the traffic on 76th Street, and finally 
brought the Lamborghini to a halt, fans roaring with the effort 
to keep it hovering motionlessly in the powerful wind, without 
ground effect, two hundred meters out and forty meters above 
the Eastgate Hotel’s roof. He hung in space, watching the roof. 
After several minutes had passed a shape detached itself from 
the shadows and moved cautiously to the roof’s edge and looked 
down. 
One on the roof; there would be at least one, then, at the 
slidewalk entrance, and perhaps more. 

Moran   215 
 
 
Carl cut the fans. The Lamborghini dropped in a steep glide, 
wings at their fullest extension, and he guided the vehicle down 
in a deadly silent rush and with the front fender struck the 
Peaceforcer in the back at 150 kph. The Peaceforcer fell from the 
roof in two different pieces. Carl brought the fans back up and 
took the Lamborghini around in a tight bank. He landed gently 
atop the roof, cracked the canopy and, carrying both the auto-
shot and Series Two Excalibur, descended into the Eastgate Ho-
tel. 
MOHAMMED VANCE found himself speaking to a Space Force 
Colonel. The disparity in their ranks was great; and yet, without 
surprise, Vance found that the Colonel deferred to him. 
“I want a tactical thermonuclear strike on the Complex,” he 
said flatly. “I shall take full responsibility for the action; clear it 
with Commander Breilleune if you must. How long will it take 
you to arrange such a strike?” 
The Space Force Colonel said, “How quickly can your men be 
safely outside of the blast radius?” 
“Not quite five minutes.” 
The Colonel shrugged. “Five minutes, then.” 
Mohammed Vance sighed. They had never expected him to 
succeed. “How long have you been in position?” 
The Colonel seemed suddenly cautious, but answered, “Since 
this morning, Elite Sergeant.” 
Vance nodded. In his deep voice he sounded particularly 
grim. “Perform the strike.” 
AT THE EASTGATE hotel in mid-Manhattan, two French Peace-
forcers in black patrol fatigues held vigil, deployed at opposite 
ends of an otherwise empty lobby. The junior officer, Maurice 
Charbonneau, sat in one corner on the hotel’s carpeted floor, 
autoshot covering the entrance to the hotel. Outside, on the op-
posite side of the street, he could see a pair of wrecked cars, 
burning in the fierce rain. A car came down out of the sky as he 
watched, blossoming into flames as it struck an apartment com-

216   Tales 
 
plex across the way. The shock wave of the explosion rattled the 
long glassite panels that faced the street. 
Maurice sat and watched Nils Logrissen walk up and down 
before the entrance to the hotel. Logrissen, a terrorist of the Eri-
sian Claw, was the only man Charbonneau had ever killed. Oc-
casionally Logrissen’s body stumbled and then jerked back up 
again like a marionette on strings. Logrissen’s bulging, dead-
man’s eyes were fixed on Maurice, never left him except once; 
when the car struck the building across the street, Logrissen 
turned and watched the accident for a while. 
Charbonneau was grateful for the respite. He was trying to 
pretend that everything that had happened in the last few hours 
was part of some particularly unpleasant sensable he had made 
the mistake of playing. (A sensable where you’re the star, the 
voice whispered. Right.) It hadn’t worked yet, but perhaps that 
was because he wasn’t trying hard enough. 
Charbonneau was deathly afraid that Logrissen was getting 
up his nerve to come inside, and if that happened Charbonneau 
was not certain what he would do. 
At the other end of the lobby Charbonneau’s superior officer, 
Peace Keeping Force Sergeant Georges D’Argentan, paced rest-
lessly back and forth in front of the maglev lifts, chain smoking, 
his multifrequency combat laser held loosely in one hand. With 
every few steps he left the carpet and crossed onto the tile area 
immediately before the maglev. It was the only sound in the 
echoing emptiness of the lobby: the clicking of the boots, followed 
by silence, followed by boots, followed by silence. The rhythm of 
it had grown so comforting, so predictable, that Charbonneau 
was startled when it ceased. He glanced over at Sergeant 
D’Argentan, saw the older Peaceforcer standing motionless, fin-
ger touching a point immediately below his right ear. 
D’Argentan stood still while listening in on the command 
channel. Finally he shook himself slightly, resumed his pacing. 
Maurice. 
Charbonneau was not certain that the voice in his head was 
real; his father, dead these fifteen years, had been talking to 
him for the last hour, ever since the Castanaveras telepaths had 

Moran   217 
 
 
struck out at the world around them, at the United Nations 
Peace Keeping Force that was trying to destroy them. After a 
moment Charbonneau touched his own earphone. Sergeant? Is that 
you? 
There was a moment’s silence before D’Argentan spoke, and 
Charbonneau could guess at his thoughts. Councilor Carson had 
actually ordered that Maurice be sedated; D’Argentan had ig-
nored him, and now he was rethinking the wisdom of the deci-
sion. Yes, it’s me. Your father is dead, Maurice. So is Logrissen. They have been 
for a long time. 
Charbonneau knew better than to argue with Sergeant D’Argentan. He was 
sane enough to know that he was quite mad at the moment. Charbonneau re-
membered burying his father, remembered killing Logrissen more clearly yet. Yes, 
Sergeant. I’ll try to remember that. 
I’ve just been told that Space Force is ready. Secretary General Amnier has 
approved Elite Sergeant Vance’s request; Vance is going to order a thermonuclear 
strike on the Chandler Complex. 
Charbonneau was silent a moment. So they’re dead, then. All the 
telepaths are trapped inside the Complex. 
Across the length of the hotel lobby, D’Argentan nodded. So 
they say. 
Charbonneau clutched his autoshot more tightly. Except for the two Carson’s 
got upstairs. 
Just children, said D’Argentan sharply. They don’t have the power yet. 
Only the adults do, and the adults are soon dead. 
Yes, Sergeant. 
At that moment, thirty-five floors above them, Carl Cas-
tanaveras had just finished killing the Peaceforcer guard sta-
tioned on the hotel’s roof. At the moment that Maurice 
Charbonneau turned back to continue his observation of Nils 
Logrissen, the oldest and deadliest telepath on Earth was riding 
down in the maglev to Unification Councilor Jerril Carson’s 
room, to the eighth floor; autoshot in one hand, Series Two Ex-
calibur laser rifle in the other. 
Coming for his children. 
I HAVE FOUND the access code, Ring announced. 

218   Tales 
 
Trent came to his feet. His mouth was very dry. He had no 
idea what he would do when the door slid aside. “Open it.” 
A moment, child. Wait. 
Instants later, the walls of Trent’s cell shook. “What was 
that?” 
A diversion to aid in your escape. 
“What was it?” 
I seized control of a hovercab from TransCon and crashed the cab through a 
wall of the Peaceforcer station; the side furthest from your cell. 
“Oh, no.” The horror upon him was palpable. “Were they—
did you kill them? In the cab?” 
The cab was empty, child. I do not kill without reason. Relief washed 
through Trent, and Ring continued, Several Peaceforcers were slain 
when the vehicle struck, however. 
 
“Why?” 
It seemed prudent, Trent. As a further diversion. Abide a moment longer; I 
shall open the door shortly. 
DENICE CASTANAVERAS had ceased crying only a few minutes 
ago. They were not tears of fear, but of anger. She had passed 
into a place beyond fear, into a rage so vast and elemental it 
bore only a passing resemblance to any emotion she had ever 
experienced before. 
She was nine years old and she was going to kill Jerril Car-
son if given an opportunity. 
She sat on the floor with her twin: two black-haired Cauca-
sian children with pale skin and green eyes. Both she and David 
had their hands snakechained behind their backs, with tape 
covering their mouths. Her feet were free, as were David’s; they 
could have stood if allowed. A few hours prior David had made 
the mistake of trying. A bruise on the side of his face was slowly 
turning purple; Councilor Carson had knocked David back down 
to the floor without even looking at him. 
She sat with her rage, not thinking. She did not understand 
how the situation she was in had come to pass; did not compre-
hend the details of the conflict between Carson and her father, 
how it had come to be that the personal animosity between Car-

Moran   219 
 
 
son and her father had grown into a conflict that had, this night, 
pitted the Castanaveras telepaths against the armed might of 
the Unification. 
Denice did not understand, and did not care. 
She sat and thought about killing him. 
Councilor Carson clutched an autoshot in his right hand; he 
hardly paid attention to the twins. Denice watched him, sitting 
in front of a huge holofield that showed an image of their home, 
of the Chandler Complex. He had turned off the audio; except for 
the whistling sound of the wind and the drum of the rain it was 
silent inside the hotel room. 
The image of the Chandler Complex vanished suddenly, was 
replaced with a split field; the Chandler Complex in one half of 
the field, a shot from the hotel’s security holocams in the other. 
The security holocams showed the long stretch of corridor out-
side, and the two Peaceforcers who guarded it. One of the Peace-
forcers stood in front of a bank of elevators, covering the 
entrance with an autoshot; the other lay on his stomach at one 
end of the corridor, covering his partner with a variable laser. 
After the long silence the sound of the Peaceforcer’s voice 
rang shockingly loud. “We’ve lost contact with the roof.” 
Carson stood with startling abruptness, turned and glared 
wildly at the twins. Denice met his eyes for a long moment and 
returned the glare: I’m going to kill you. The Gift had not 
touched her yet, and Carson was as deaf to thought as any nor-
mal human; still he froze for a second under the sheer physical 
impact of her rage. He shook himself visibly then and crossed 
the distance between them in two strides, pulled the twins to 
their feet and turned them to face the door. He stood behind 
them holding the autoshot with his right hand, holding their 
snaked hands behind them with his left. Where his hand 
gripped her Denice could feel Carson shaking. 
The holofield moved with Carson, came to hover in front of 
them, a meter off to the right so that Carson’s view of the door 
was not obscured. 
For a very long time nothing happened. Twenty seconds. 
Thirty. 

220   Tales 
 
In the holofield, Denice watched the maglev doors curl open. 
NO STAIRWAY LED down from the roof; Carl took the lift. He 
punched for the eighth floor. This close he could feel Carson, the 
fear and hatred pulsing bright and sharp and near, drowning 
out everything else. 
The hotel was thirty-five stories high; it took the lift several 
seconds to drop down to the eighth floor. Carl lay belly-down on 
the floor of the lift and waited until the doors opened. The 
Peaceforcer was simply standing there, as he had expected, 
autoshot leveled to cover the lift at waist height. Carl shot him 
with a single burst from the Series Two; the Peaceforcer stiff-
ened, ionization corona crackling around him; the black uniform 
he wore burst into flames and he fell. The stench of burnt meat 
filled the hallway. With his left hand Carl extended his autoshot 
out through the elevator door and fired twice to the left. He was 
flipping the autoshot over to fire to his right when the wash of 
maser flame struck the hand. The hand and most of his forearm 
cooked instantly. He grabbed the autoshot with his right hand 
and pumped two quick shots down the right-hand passage. The 
lift doors tried to close on him; still on his belly he lunged for-
ward out of the lift and fired again at the crumpled form on the 
hallway floor fifteen meters away. The man’s body twitched 
slightly when the shotgun blast struck it, but did not move oth-
erwise. 
Carl stood slowly. The pain from his arm was astonishing, 
and he staggered, rising. 
So much for surprise. He hoped Jerril Carson did not have 
many more guards for him to deal with. 
Frontal assault was all he could think of that was left to him; 
his mind was not functioning well enough to offer him any other 
option. The poisons from the dead meat his arm had become 
were already slowing the rest of his body. He walked carefully, 
almost casually down the hallway, to the double doorway where 
the second Peaceforcer had been standing. 
He dropped his autoshot and switched the Series Two over to 
X-laser. The twins were inside; he could feel them vaguely 

Moran   221 
 
 
through the malignant haze of Jerril Carson’s mind. He did not 
want to use a weapon that might result in injuring one of them 
accidentally. 
He stood just to the side of the doorway. If somebody shot 
through the door, he did not intend to be standing in front of it. 
He was not certain what he was waiting for, and finally the 
thought occurred to him: Open the door. 
He had not intended to do anything of the sort; he had not 
thought he was angry enough. He simply looked at the door. 
The door exploded inward. 
THE DOOR SLID aside with a beep. 
Trent stood at the doorway, only listening for the moment. 
Far away he heard a hysterical babble of voices, French and 
English. A loud voice yelled in French, “What are they doing?” 
He took a step into the corridor and looked both ways. A 
group of adults milled about off to his left; none of them looked 
toward him. To his right the admittance desk was empty. He 
turned and walked calmly past the admittance desk, looking 
neither right nor left. He walked past an office whose door was 
open; a Peaceforcer in full uniform was in a conference with a 
pair of un-uniformed men. They did not look at him. 
A voice behind him stopped him dead. “Boy!” 
Trent did not even consider running. He turned and faced 
one of the two men in civilian clothing whom he had just passed. 
“Yes?” The corridor was not very bright; Trent hoped there was 
not yet a bruise where the Peaceforcer had struck him. 
“What are you doing in here?” 
Trent stumbled intentionally, as though he were embar-
rassed. “I—I’m looking for the bathroom, sir.” 
“How did you get into this area?” The Peaceforcer looked 
down at Trent with a perturbed expression. 
Trent’s mind raced like an engine with the load removed. 
“The door was open, sir?” 
The Peaceforcer stared at Trent a moment longer and then 
swore under his breath. “Come on.” He strode down a pair of 
corridors Trent had not known were there, muttering to himself, 

222   Tales 
 
“No wonder the damn city’s burning, we can’t even keep little 
boys out of Operations,” and brought Trent at last to a door no 
different from any other in the long hallway. He placed his palm 
on the pad at the side of the door and ushered Trent through. He 
pointed out into a wide bright lobby. “Over there, public rest-
rooms. The waiting rooms are back the other way. You here with 
your parents?” 
“Yes, sir,” said Trent instantly. 
“Don’t get lost again,” the Peaceforcer said, almost gently. 
“This isn’t a good night to be out wandering around.” He turned 
and was gone. A few of the people in the lobby looked up at 
Trent with some curiosity, but Trent ignored them and walked 
without haste to the building’s entrance, through the wide glas-
site doors, and out onto the street, into the rain. 
He crossed the block without haste, turned a corner, and ran 
for his life. 
THERE WAS A brightness behind Mohammed Vance. He sat in the 
passenger seat of the PKF hovercar, and did not look back. 
HALFWAY ACROSS the world, an ex-Peaceforcer named Chris 
Summers watched a holograph. In the holograph the bright 
mushroom cloud climbed into the black, cloud-filled skies over 
New York City, and he covered his face with his hands so that 
he would not have to see any more. 
THE PERSON barely had time to realize that it was being ended. 
—the images flowed through its mind in stately procession. 
The Person was dead already, time had simply not caught up 
with reality. It continued to fight, sent the nightmares screaming 
after its attackers, both rioters and the Peaceforcers who had 
been sent, not to defend it from the rioters, but to destroy it. The 
future cascaded through the filter of the present as the fireball 
ate away at it and diminished it into nothingness. The children 
were alive, the children would be safe, David and Denice, and the 
boy, Trent, in whom destiny ran so very strong— 

Moran   223 
 
 
The fireball climbed toward the sky, and in the flames noth-
ing lived. 
THE DOOR exploded open: 
At that instant a flash of bright light appeared in the 
holofield Carson had been watching, lit the hotel room in unreal 
colors. 
Carl appeared in the doorway, a grinning bloody apparition 
with emerald eyes—and hesitated at the sight of his children 
standing before Carson as a living shield. 
In the holofield that had moments before shown an image of 
the Chandler Complex, a mushroom cloud was climbing into the 
night sky over lower Manhattan. 
Carson’s autoshot blast took Carl square in the chest and 
lifted him off his feet and slammed him backward out into the 
corridor. He knew that he had only one shot and he used it cor-
rectly. He fired one-handed, in mid-air, the beam of light from 
his Series II Excalibur slicing through the tiny space between 
Denice and her brother, reaching past them to touch Unification 
Councilor Carson. Carson’s skull came apart and Carl struck the 
corridor wall hard. He slumped, sliding down to the floor, leav-
ing a long trail of blood on the wall. 
Next to her Denice saw David on the ground, bringing his 
bound hands under his feet and around to the front. David 
ripped the tape off his mouth, and in a voice rusty with disuse 
said, “Turn around.” Denice knew what was coming; she felt 
Carson’s dead hand being placed up against her wrists, the life-
less thumb being pushed against the snakechain until the 
snakechain recognized it and released her. The sudden freedom 
of movement sent spasms of pain through her shoulders. She 
worked the tape free from her mouth with hands grown numb 
from lack of circulation. 
Their father’s thoughts touched them both. David, get the la-
sers. 
Her twin vanished down the corridor, came back holding the 
laser with which their father had been shot. 

224   Tales 
 
Sitting in the corridor, Carl knew that he was dying, that he 
was nearly dead. But this last thing they had to do correctly, or 
it was all for nothing. He forced himself to release the laser, and 
it dropped to the floor. Take it, Denice. 
Denice bent, scooped the laser up off the floor quickly, before 
her nerve could fail her. Her father’s thoughts were faint, unlike 
anything she had ever felt from him before. Fading. Listen. 
There’s a Peaceforcer downstairs, maybe two, and I can’t kill 
them, so you have to. 
David nodded. “We will, Father.” 
They’ll hesitate when they see you. They’ll hesitate before 
they’ll shoot children. 
Denice was aware of the tears tracking down her cheeks, but 
her voice was steady. “We won’t hesitate, Daddy.” 
Carl sagged back against the wall of the corridor. Good. Re-
member that you’re tougher than they are. The word reached out 
to them, burned itself into the depths of Denice’s mind with all 
the strength of the dying man’s pain and lifelong rage: Better. 
David nodded. “We’ll remember.” 
Good. Carl’s head sagged back against the wall. Go. 
David rose and punched for the maglev. Denice hugged her 
father suddenly, fiercely, felt the pain that rolled through him at 
the contact. Blood covered her when she let go. “Good-bye, 
Daddy.” She rose and ran to the maglev when the doors opened. 
Carl Castanaveras’ last thought reached out to them after 
the doors to the maglev had rolled shut upon them. Kill the 
fuckers. 
As the maglev descended, David Castanaveras said grimly, 
“We will.” 
I’VE LOST TOUCH with upstairs. 
It took Charbonneau a long moment to understand what 
D’Argentan had said to him. His father was growing angrier and 
angrier over Maurice’s insistence that he was dead; Logrissen 
had ceased walking and now simply stood motionless at the en-
trance to the hotel, staring in at Maurice. Charbonneau could 
see Logrissen’s lower intestines, hanging out of the hole Char-

Moran   225 
 
 
bonneau’s autoshot had made in him back in the summer of ’59. 
Finally Maurice said, Sergeant? Did you say something? 
<Sigh.> Yes. I’ve lost touch with Conseiller Carson. 
Want me to go up and see what’s happened? 
Sergeant D’Argentan hesitated, then said reluctantly, No. No, 
don’t do that. I’ll go. Watch the door, make sure nobody enters the hotel. Mau-
rice nodded, and D’Argentan turned to the maglevs. 
The door to the center maglev flexed slightly before 
D’Argentan had even touched the pressure point that controlled 
it. 
The door curled open. 
Maurice watched D’Argentan jerk as though he had touched 
a live wire, one hand still reaching for the pressure point, as the 
converging beams reached him and his uniform burst into 
flames. 
They came out into the lobby slowly, cautiously, stepping 
across Sergeant D’Argentan’s burning body. As Maurice had 
heard, they were mere children; it was the first time Maurice 
had seen them since their kidnaping. Maurice sat with his auto-
shot, watching the genegineered telepath children move across 
the lobby, toward the entrance. The boy had his laser trained on 
Maurice, and Maurice smiled at him. The girl was very pretty, 
but she did not look at Maurice after the first quick glance to 
make sure her brother had him covered. Maurice said politely, 
in heavily accented English, “Hello.” 
The boy hesitated at the door after the girl had ventured out-
ward, onto the slidewalk in front of the hotel. For the first time 
Maurice seriously considered the possibility that Sergeant 
D’Argentan had told him the truth; neither of the children 
seemed to notice Nils Logrissen’s grinning corpse standing just 
outside the hotel’s entrance. 
The girl turned back. “David, come on!” 
David Castanaveras took one slow, halting step toward Mau-
rice Charbonneau. Maurice smiled at the boy one more time as 
David brought the maser down to focus on the center of Mau-
rice’s chest. 
“Hello,” Maurice said again. “I am Maurice Charbonneau.” 

226   Tales 
 
David Castanaveras whispered; Maurice had to strain to 
hear him. “Hello. My name is David Castanaveras, and this is 
for my father.” 
Then for the barest instant Maurice felt a pain so great that 
he thought for a moment it was something else entirely—the 
touch of God, perhaps, calling him home. And perhaps it was. 
The maser beam swept across him and then there was no pain, 
nor anything else, for ever and ever again, amen. 
The twins ran out into the night, into the riots. 
Into the first hour of the Troubles. 
TRENT WAS NOT certain what caused him to look back. He was 
out of sight of the Peaceforcer station, running through the rain 
as fast as he was able. Behind him something moved too fast for 
his eyes to track. 
Brass balls. 
He ducked into an alleyway, ran to its far end and turned out 
onto another street. He found himself on Westway Street, across 
the street from the Hudson River. The wind whipped the river 
strongly, and its waves splashed up and onto Westway Street. 
He was the only person on the slidewalks for three blocks in any 
direction. If the Peaceforcers came this far— 
He ran straight across the street, down to the water. 
On the other side of the street, the Peaceforcer Elite seemed 
to appear out of nowhere. 
A single pier stretched out into the water of the Hudson 
River; Trent could not see a boat on the side facing him, but 
there had to be one on the other side. The logic did not strike 
him as even slightly strange; if there was no boat the cyborg 
would catch him. He ran the thirty meters to the pier’s entrance 
and reached the boardwalk only seconds ahead of the Elite and 
ran down its empty length without looking back. His gaze swept 
left and right, left and right. 
There were no boats moored anywhere on the pier. 
The Peaceforcer made a long arm and snagged Trent’s shirt. 
In a single instant of movement too fast for Trent to compre-

Moran   227 
 
 
hend, much less resist, the Peaceforcer gathered Trent in and 
picked him up from the boardwalk. 
Trent did the only thing he could think of; from a lifetime of 
martial arts instruction, he grasped the Peaceforcer, hugging 
him for traction, and kicked down at the invisible blur of the 
Elite’s legs. It was like thrusting his hand into a rotor. He felt 
his right leg snap like a stick and then the Peaceforcer went 
down, and together they skidded across the slick boardwalk. 
They did not even slow before they went over the edge into the 
choppy water. 
There was no air in his lungs; he had not had time to draw a 
breath. The Peaceforcer was still holding him, and the cyborg’s 
great weight drew them both down into the warm summer wa-
ters. 
The iron grip of the Elite’s hand on his shoulder eased as 
though the Peaceforcer were considering the situation, and then 
the grip loosened further and let Trent go. With the last energy 
in him, Trent kicked up, to the surface of the water, and drew in 
a great gasping breath when he broke through to the air. A huge 
roaring filled his ears, and he swallowed water several times. 
Bright red dots hung before his eyes, and he considered, as 
though it were a problem that did not concern him, how to get 
back to land when he did not have the strength to swim. 
The waves brought him smashing up against one of the col-
umns that bore the pier’s weight, and then again. The third time 
he grasped the column when he struck it, lacerating his arms 
against rough barnacles. The water washed over him and took 
his air away, and he held his breath until it receded. With his 
last strength he held on to the pier as the water washed over 
him, and held on, and held. 


 
 
Interlude: Earth 
2062-2067 


 
 
THEY DID NOT find the boy. 
They did not find the twins. 
IN LATER YEARS it was estimated that nearly half the population 
of the New York metro area was rendered permanently insane 
in the moments when the telepaths struck back. 
The PKF moved in. 
BY THE SEVENTH decade of the twenty-first century following the 
death of Yeshua ha Notzri, the population of Earth alone totaled 
eleven billion human beings. That number was not as large as it 
had been earlier in that century; the efforts of the Ministry of 
Population Control had trimmed the Earth’s total population 
from a high of nearly thirteen billion. 
There have been larger populations of humans, across the 
span of Time. Seranju, capital of the Out-Empire, was home to 
more than thirty billion humans in the last century before the 
Out-Empire shattered itself upon the Great Anarchy. The cru-
cial difference lay in the technology available to the Out-Empire; 
it fed its tens of billions, and was never in danger of not doing 
so. 
Twenty-first-century Earth is notable, if for no other reason, 
in that more humans died of starvation in that one short century 
than in all the rest of Time put together. Of the twenty-three bil-
lion human beings born between the years 2000 and 2100 Anno 
Domini, some eight billion died due to a lack of food to eat. 
FIVE-AND-A-HALF years separate the summer of 2062 from the 
winter of 2067. On the surface, a world cannot change much in 
so short a span. Inertia alone prevents it. But in detail... 
SpaceFarer technology became more common; room tempera-
ture superconductor, monofilament fineline, and electric ecstasy 
made the transition from technological rarity to everyday real-
ity. In 2062 there was nobody on Earth or off it who was ad-
dicted to electric ecstasy; by the end of the decade there were 
over half a million juice junkies across the globe, and the num-
ber only grew higher with the passage of time. 

232   Tales 
 
The Patrol Sectors were designed by the Peaceforcers as an 
interim measure to maintain order during the riots that followed 
the destruction of the telepaths. But the Peaceforcers found 
them useful, and instead of restoring patrol service to the entire 
metropolitan area, concentrated on the areas surrounding Capi-
tal City and Manhattan, and left the rest of the great decaying 
city to the underfunded, underequipped American police. 
It was cheaper that way. 
In 2063, the summer following the summer in which the tele-
paths were destroyed, the Unification Council outlawed manu-
ally operated vehicles. The Speedfreaks revolted. It was a brief 
rebellion. The Speedfreaks who led it—Nathan St. Denver, Con-
chita Alatorre, and Angel de Luz—thought of it as civil disobedi-
ence. They never offered more than passive resistance to the 
Peaceforcers, and it did not matter. They made a Long Run, 
most of the Speedfreaks on Earth, starting in San Diego. They 
took their hovercars out across the ocean, across the Pacific, 
through Japan and New Zealand, up north across India, through 
Israel, and continued north through France itself. 
Public sentiment was with them; the media coverage was fa-
vorable. When the convoy left France and made its way west 
across the Atlantic Ocean, it had good reason to expect a favor-
able reception upon reaching Capitol City. 
The Speedfreaks never had a chance. The storm struck them 
midway across the Atlantic. Not one car in a hundred survived. 
The survivors were rounded up by members of the United Na-
tions Peace Keeping Force and charged most formally with trea-
son. Over 200 Speedfreaks, including Conchita Alatorre and 
Angel de Luz, were executed on that charge. 
IN SEPTEMBER of 2063, Emile Garon returned to Earth, a Peace-
forcer Elite. 
In the summer of 2064, for the first time in the history of the 
human race, the full-blown Gift of the House of November un-
folded within a human being. 
Her name was Denice. 

Moran   233 
 
IT WASN’T SUPPOSED to happen like this. 
Denice lay in bed, almost unable to move. Her limbs felt 
swollen. The fever left her delirious and shaking with weariness. 
After three days of sickness the administrators of the MPC’s 
Young Females Public Labor barracks in which she lived finally 
sent for a doctor. The administrators were, for the most part, not 
cruel people, merely underfunded and overworked. It was only 
when it was obvious that the child was not getting better on her 
own that they requested that a doctor come examine her. 
Denice Castanaveras, lost in a world of her own creation, did 
not know it when the doctor came. The doctor who examined her 
finally gave up in exasperation, injected the child with a wide-
spectrum antibiotic, and left to examine another patient else-
where in the barracks, a girl who had undergone complications 
following her MPC-mandated sterilization. 
Denice did not know when the doctor came, and did not know 
when she left. She was somewhere else, only vaguely aware of 
what was happening to the far-away body in which she was con-
fined. 
SHE WALKED ACROSS a crystal black plain that ran away to infin-
ity. In the region around her a vast number of minds flickered 
like candles, screaming and crying and laughing, endless and 
unknowable. Some of the candles wavered at her passage, hu-
mans with some minor telepathic skill reacting to the presence 
of the storm that Denice Castanaveras had become. 
Denice could not find silence. 
Thoughts tumbled through the back of her mind, and she 
could not tell whether they were her own or belonged to the 
minds among which she was passing. She fought desperately for 
stability, for some center from which she could make sense of 
the maelstrom of existence, of the thoughts and emotions, the 
fear and pain that tore through her constantly. Denice remem-
bered talking to the telepathic children among whom she had 
been raised; they had never told her about anything like this. 
Her knowledge of genetics was sketchy; but she knew that she 
and David were the first of the telepaths to receive the tele-

234   Tales 
 
pathic gene complex from parents rather than from the work of 
genegineers. It seemed clear that there were powerful recessives 
in the genome, masked in her parents but coming to completion 
in her. 
One of the candles near her flickered out in a sudden burst of 
horror and pain; it had been murdered. Denice felt the death 
throes as though they were her own. 
Time ceased to have meaning. She did not know when the 
ordeal had begun, did not know any longer even who she was 
with any clarity. The thoughts wouldn’t stop. 
She called into the darkness, and found no response. 
David, where are you? 
Trent? 
SOME GREAT TIME later, the danger called her up out of the dark-
ness, and back into herself. 
It was night; the barracks lights were dimmed, and the thirty 
girls in the barracks were mostly bedded down for the night. 
The danger was close. 
Somebody held her hand. The contact seared, burning. The 
pain had been going on for a very long time. Denice was vaguely 
aware that her sheets stank. With an effort she opened her eyes 
and attempted to pull her hand free. 
The girl holding her hand tightened her grip. She said with 
real pleasure, “Deni? You awake finally?” 
“Karen?” Denice had trouble focusing on the form sitting at 
the edge of her bottom-level bunk. “Let go of my hand. You’re 
hurting me.” 
Karen’s grip loosened slightly, but she did not release Den-
ice’s hand. “I been worried about you, you were talking in your 
sleep and all.” In the hazy darkness, a larger shape appeared, 
standing behind Karen. 
“This is so nice.” Shelly, a fourteen-year-old who was due to 
be transferred to the Young Adults barracks before the end of 
the summer, sat down on the edge of the bed next to Karen. A 
smile that was barely visible in the gloom played around her 
lips. “Everybody’s been so worried about you, Deni.” 

Moran   235 
 
Denice closed her eyes in despair. Before her sickness Denice 
had rarely had nightmares, but when she did, they were often 
about Shelly. Denice felt Karen’s weight leave the bed in sensi-
ble retreat. Shelly’s hand stroked Denice’s long black hair, and 
reached down to run a finger over the girl’s throat. 
“Please,” Denice whispered, “stop that. It hurts.” 
“Well, of all the...” Shelly stared at her. “I was trying to be 
nice to you,” she said. Her hand tightened in Denice’s tunic, and 
she drew the younger girl up until Denice was sitting up in bed. 
“If you can’t fucking appreciate good treatment...” 
Shelly struck Denice. 
Denice did not know where the anger came from, the vast 
and glacial rage that descended upon her. It was like nothing 
she had ever experienced before, an anger to match the rage she 
had felt toward Jerill Carson, but cold, calculating, reasoning, a 
fury that cleaned away all doubt and uncertainty. There was no 
strength in her body, but it did not matter. From another realm 
she reached out and became, in a fashion even her father could 
not have emulated, the dim and cruel person whom the world 
knew as Shelly. The grip in her shirt loosened, and Denice felt 
herself drop back to the bed, watched it happen through Shelly’s 
eyes. 
With an ease that shocked her Denice brought the girl back 
to stand at the edge of Denice’s bunk, and had her lean over so 
that she could hear the words. 
“You don’t touch me,” Denice whispered. “You don’t ever 
touch me. Do you hear me? Never.” 
Shelly’s eyes were wide with terror. 
Denice released her and the girl stumbled backward and 
crashed into the bunk next to Denice and Karen’s. 
“Go hurt yourself,” Denice told Shelly quietly, and then called 
for Karen to bring her a glass of water. 
IN THE YEARS following the destruction of the Speedfreaks, de-
spite the fact that their credibility with the public had been ru-
ined forever, the Weather Bureau wrestled the global weather 
patterns back to near equilibrium. It was an astonishing accom-

236   Tales 
 
plishment, considering how nearly they had come to ruining 
their planet’s climactic balance. It did them no good in the public 
perception; only the babychasers of the Ministry of Population 
Control were hated more—even the PKF was more popular. 
As I have said, on the surface things were little changed. 
Five and a half years passed, for eleven billion human beings. 
Some sixty billion years of cumulative experience occurred. 
Five and a half years of that time belonged to a boy named 
Trent, who became a thief, and grew toward manhood. 
And did not forget: 
 
The boy awakes to find himself on the Chess-
board. And, as always, it is for the first time. 
The squares, alternately black and white, tumble 
to the horizon on all sides. Countless thousands of 
squares. Smoothly polished, gleaming endlessly in 
the white sun. 
There is no sound. Only the weight of nonsound. 
The terrifying weight of silence in a great void. 
The boy sits on a white square. He blinks, 
stretches, and looks curiously about him. He looks 
up at the sky, empty but for a huge, round sun. 
Swollen a hundred times the size of the sun we 
know. 
The boy looks at the hard, smooth surface of his 
perfect white square and can see only his reflection. 
He smiles down at the image. It has been a wonder-
ful rest, and it is certainly a glorious morning. A 
perfect morning. Pure and clear and perfect. 
The boy has not the slightest thought of where he 
is to go, of what he is to do. 
The others move constantly. At different inter-
vals, in all directions, keeping always to the white 
squares. The boy is pleased to have begun on a 
white square. Clearly this is a fine beginning. The 
boy sits beautifully still for a time. It would be fool-
ish to set out not knowing where one was to go. 

Moran   237 
 
He watches the others moving through the end-
lessly alternating maze of black and white and 
black, glimmering forever under the hard, white 
sun. They are dressed in dull, white cloth which 
does not, or cannot, reflect the brilliance of the white 
squares through which they move so soundlessly. 
The boy believes that they are guards. He cannot 
imagine what there might be for them to guard in 
the purity and emptiness of such a place. 
There is no air. There is no sound. The awesome 
enormity of his surroundings holds the boy. Black 
and white and black and white and black. Sterile 
and clear, shimmering to infinity. 
The boy sits through the bright, hot morning. It is 
late in the afternoon when he first sees the ones who 
are not guards. They are few, and they are very far 
away, but he sees them clearly. Their cloth is black, 
but they are set apart from the guards even more 
certainly by the grace and ease of their movements. 
The boy believes that they are thieves but cannot 
imagine what there might be for them to steal in 
such a place. They walk with a fluid nobility that 
entrances the boy, and he strains his eyes to watch 
them until the last one is only a speck at an im-
measurable distance. 
The boy rises without knowing why. He unfolds 
his long young legs and walks to a black square. 
The black squares are empty, and he can look down 
the gleaming black diagonal to the far end of the 
Chessboard. 
The boy walks the black diagonal, but he does not 
see another thief. After a time he doubts that he has 
ever seen one. 
—Ronald J. Bass, “The Perfect Thief” 

238   Tales 
 
THERE ARE MANY beginnings; a story may begin many times, in 
many places. 
But there must somewhere be a true beginning. 
At the beginning of it all, there was an enigma. 

 
 
The Star 
December 21, 2067 
to 
December 22, 2067 


 
 
11. 
THIS IS THE planet Earth, on Wednesday, December 21, 2067, 
turning blue and white and beautiful against a starry back-
ground. You know what this looks like. Depending on when and 
where you are, you may also know what Halfway looks like: the 
orbital city in which much of the Solar System’s manufacturing 
takes place, in this year of 2067. It’s been described as a bowl of 
noodles that somebody dropped, still falling; this does it an in-
justice. Those born here, and sometimes those living here, find it 
a beautiful place, of lattice-thin girders and columns, of rolling 
O’Neills and tumbling slingshots and the huge free-fall struc-
tures where Homebrews—native Halfers, born and raised in 
free-fall—prefer to live. There is never a time when you cannot 
see the glow of fusion welding torches at the eternally-under-
construction Edge, the brief, actinically bright flares from tugs 
and sleds ferrying gear and goods among the city’s million and a 
half persons, its nearly 200,000 structures. 
In geosynchronous orbit, along with Halfway, is the orbital 
junk from humanity’s hundred years in space. Hidden among 
the junk are the Orbital Eyes. 
A variety of humans, of human organizations, and of ma-
chine intelligences, look down through the hundreds of Eyes, 
scanning the Earth. One such Eye is doing just that, right … 
now: 
FROM HERE YOU can see most of North America, but the person 
controlling this Eye is interested in something specific; the Eye 
focuses in. On New York State. Its lense sweeps briefly across 
Manhattanstill recognizably the Manhattan of Babe Ruth and 
La Guardia, tripled now, still a beautiful city in its wayacross 
the spires of the seven spacescrapers, each over a kilometer tall, 
that reach up from Manhattan and toward the Eye that has so 
briefly observed them; sweeps across the recently completed 
Unification Spaceport in south Manhattan, across the East 
River and into Brooklyn. 

242   Tales 
 
Where you see the Barrier for the first time. 
The Berlin Wall had nothing on this. It’s eight meters high, 
more than four times the height of a tall man and it’s made out 
of black, supertwisted sheet monocrystal. The entire structure, 
end to end, is a single molecule. It can’t be cut or broken or 
bombed with anything less powerful than a nuclear weapon, and 
only the Peaceforcers have those 
The Peaceforcers built the Barrier, of course, and so they are 
unlikely to use nuclear weapons to destroy it. 
On the west side of the Barrier are the Patrol Sectors. 
They’re clean, they’re even reasonably safe, given that this is 
still New York, after all. There are Peaceforcers and police in the 
Patrol Sectors. On the west side of the Barrier. 
On the East Side of the Barrier is the Fringe. 
Here there are no police. Here there are no Peaceforcers. The 
life expectancy for a man is 37 years. For women it’s less. This 
isn’t a slum, it’s a war zone. Gangs patrol the streets, Temple 
Dragons in some areas, Gypsy Macoute in others, a thousand 
smaller gangs. 
In Temple Dragon territory, in Flatbush, families on their 
way to Temple are escorted by armed men. From almost any-
where in the Fringe, down the entire great length of Long Is-
land, at any given moment you can hear (in the distant 
background if you’re fortunate) the flat crack of small arms fire, 
and the sizzle of energy weapons. 
In Flatbush, rather closer to the Temple of Eris, you can hear 
this, if you listen carefully, the sound of the crowd listening to 
the Reverend Andrew Strawberry as he preaches: 
… stomp stomp clap, stomp stomp clap … 
“and the great Swami Dave Leary said to the Prophet 
Harry, give up the waiting of tables, and embrace your destiny! 
For though barriers are thrown in your way, still destiny calls” 
A small family approaches the Temple, passes the armed 
guards at the door, and goes inside. About fifty people, a dozen 
small families, are gathered here. The Temple pews are ar-
ranged in a circle, and light streams in through the stained glass 
windows showing scenes from the life of the Prophet Harry, high 

Moran   243 
 
above them. Preaching in the center of the Temple, with the 
crowd around him, is the Reverend Strawberry. A huge black 
man, 210 centimeters, sweating and grinning, and he directs 
that grin at those just now entering what is now his Temple: 
“destiny calls...to those who will listen!” The latecomers 
stop, caught by the power of that brown-eyed gaze. The grin does 
not waver. “And to those who can be on time, take your 
seatsthere is a power for those who will trust it, a power in-
side all of us, the power to believe, and through that belief not 
merely to move mountains, but to raise them up! There is no 
task too large for the brave, no detail too small for the pure of 
faith….” 
THREE BLOCKS AWAY, high in the rafters of a dark warehouse, a 
young man was busy working his way down a rope, trying to 
keep his breathing calm and even despite his excitement. He 
could not hear Reverend Pena’s sermon, but she must have been 
in fine form that morning, because even from that distance he 
could hear the crowd, stomping and clapping along with her. 
He hung in the blackness, dressed in black, with a black hood 
covering everything but his eyes, the rope running through his 
right hand and around his right wrist, and then looped once 
around his right ankle. In his left hand he held a gun. Abruptly, 
in mid-air, he flipped over, slid his right hand down the rope and 
caught it again so that he was facing downward, still touching 
the rope at just the wrist and ankle. 
For the first time he got a good look at his target. Beneath 
him were two uniformed guards and a small stand. Atop the 
stand, laid on black velvet, was a blue jewel the size of a robin’s 
egg. He could not get a good look at it, swaying back and forth in 
the darkness above their heads. The men beneath him never 
looked up. 
Two men, one white and one black, dressed in expensive 
business attire, stood near the warehouse’s large sliding door. In 
his mind, the thief dubbed the white guy Fat Dude and the black 
guy Thin Dude. They were talking, but the thief could barely 
hear their voices. 

244   Tales 
 
A booming noise erupted, the sound of something crashing 
against the warehouse’s sheet metal. That would be Bird, right 
on time, whacking the door with a baseball bat and then run-
ning awayBird was good at hitting things, sometimes people, 
with a baseball bat, and then running away; he’d been doing it 
since he was seven. The four men beneath the thief all jumped 
in near unison, the two guards pulling their weapons, the Thin 
Dude and Fat Dude, both evidently armed, reaching for their 
concealed weapons and then restraining themselves. The Fat 
Dude and Thin Dude walked toward the warehouse door to-
gether, leaving the bodyguards behind. One of the two uni-
formed guards holstered his weapon, and so the thief shot the 
other guard first, and then the guard with the holstered weapon. 
In the darkness his weapon made no sound, and no light; the 
two men folded and the rope the thief was clinging to dipped 
downward, and he stored his gun, reached down with his now 
empty hand and lifted the jewel up off the black velvet. 
Sirens exploded in an insane racket. The thief vanished back 
up into the darkness abovenot climbing, the rope he held onto 
onto being pulled. The Thin Dude came sprinting back toward 
the stand, saw the two guards down on the ground and looked 
wildly aroundand still didn’t look up. 
The thief reached the ceiling, pushed aside a black blanket 
covering the hole he and his partner had cut into the roof, and 
light spilled down into the warehouse below. The Thin Dude fi-
nally did look upand ran for the stairs. 
A young, dark-skinned man stood on the roof, under the 
bright winter sky. He pulled steadily on the rope, muscles 
straining, until the form of the black-clad man had reached the 
roof. He helped the thief to his feetand Jimmy Ramirez said 
breathlessly, “You get it?” 
and Trent pulled the hood off and grinned at him. “It’s 
great to be me.” 
Jimmy unhooked the rope, retied it at the edge of the roof, 
and shimmied over the side. 

Moran   245 
 
Abruptly the Thin Dude burst up onto the roof, through the 
stairwell exit, holding a laser. He took one step and yelled: 
“Stop! Thieves!” 
Jimmy froze, halfway over the edge of the roof. “Boy, that 
was fast.” 
Trent blinked. “They’re not usually that quick.” 
Jimmy loosened his grip and slid down the rope, and Trent 
turned and sprinted to the other side of the roof, came to the 
edge and leaped without hesitating. The Thin Dude might shoot 
at him but there was no way the guy was going to catch him; 
Trent was the fastest runner in the Temple Dragons, possibly 
the fastest runner in the Fringe. Nobody else ran like 
himnobody else was like him. He crossed two buildings, leaped 
over another alleway and came down on the roof facing him, ran 
across that roof on a diagonal in the general direction of the 
Temple, and finally glanced back to see how far behind he’d left 
his pursuit. 
The Thin Dude was gaining on him. Trent frozeovercame 
his shock, turned and ran. He hit the edge of the next roof, 
dropped to his stomach and grabbed the rain gutter and swung 
himself over the edge and dropped to the ground. He hit the 
ground running, flew down the alleway, turned a corner, turned 
another corner, saw an open doorway and ducked through that 
and then down a long corridor, into another building, into the 
space between two buildings and through the back entrance of 
the Temple of Eris 
where a tall black man he had never seen before, with 
sweat dripping off him and onto his Reverend’s robes, standing 
there in the center of Reverend Pena’s Temple. The tall man 
turned to look at Trent, features clouding with anger in the 
heartbeat before the door behind Trent burst open, and the Thin 
Dude charged through with his laser drawn, screaming at the 
entire Temple, but mostly at Trent: 
“Nobody move!” 
TRENT AND THE Thin Dude stood facing one another across the 
length of five meters, pointing their weapons at each other. 

246   Tales 
 
Trent said, “What are you, a track star?” 
The Thin Dude was breathing heavily, and the tall Reverend, 
standing off to Trent’s left, spoke, his voice the only noise in the 
silence: “Lamont Newman. Broke the 200-meter world record 
back in...what, ’55?” 
The Thin Dude, Lamont Newman, still gasping for breath, 
said, “Andrew Strawberry. Small world. It was ’56.” Sweat 
dripped off of him, and he shook his head to keep it out of his 
eyes, never looking away from Trent. “Andy, this bastard’s not 
even breathing hard.” 
Reverend Andy glanced at Trent. The barest hint of amuse-
ment touched him. “You got old like me, Lamont. Can’t keep up 
with the young bucks. It happens.” 
Newman said, “I want it back.” 
Trent stared at the man over his gunsight. “Put the gun 
down before someone gets hurt, and we’ll discuss it.” 
Reverend Andy walked between them. “Both of you put down 
your guns. I won’t have this in my church.” 
Both of them moved to the side to get Reverend Andy out of 
their line of sight. 
“Kid, I’ll shoot you.” 
Trent smiled at him. “No, you won’t. That’s an Excalibur 313. 
Emits a nice green beam.” 
Newman nodded. “You’ve got good eyesight. Problem with 
the 313 is that green cloth reflects a lot of the wavelength. But 
you’re wearing” 
Trent’s black outfit shimmered and turned bright green. 
“Oh,” said Newman with honest admiration, “that’s a great 
trick,” and he fired. The green beam lashed out at Trent, and 
Trent lifted an arm to cover his face and stepped forward, firing. 
He pulled the trigger four times; and four times, squirts of liquid 
splashed over Newman. Newman staggered backward, dropped 
his gun, and collapsed. 
There was a moment of silence. 
Reverend Andy stared at Trent, his outrage palpable. “A 
squirt gun?” 

Moran   247 
 
And the crowd began to applaud. The same rhythmic ap-
plause that, moments earlier, they had been giving Reverend 
Strawberry. 
Trent smiled at the man. “Complex 8-A. Fadeaway. Great 
stuff.” He backed up, watching not Newman, but the man who 
had somehow taken over Reverend Pena’s temple, with the 
crowd clapping and stomping, back out the way he had come in, 
waved once at the crowd and turned and ran, with Reverend 
Andy staring after him. 
EARLY THAT EVENING Trent talked with his family about what 
had happened. 
They lived together on Crown Street near Bedford, on the top 
two floors of what had, before the Troubles, been an apartment 
complex that people paid to live in. Now it belonged to the Tem-
ple Dragons, and Trent and Jimmy Ramirez, and Bird and Jodi 
Jodi, and Milla lived on the top two floors; a variety of Temple 
Dragons had lived, at various times, in the rooms on the bottom 
two floors. At the moment they were empty, which suited Trent 
and made Milla nervousif Gypsy Macoute came, there would 
be no one to fight them until they reached the family she was 
responsible for protecting. 
She was twenty-five years old, which made her ancient; dark-
haired, thin, with a wiry strength. Milla looked calm, and looked 
quiet, and was both of those things, and Trent had seen her kill 
a man with her bare hands. 
Trent had lived with them all, in various places, since his 
fourteenth birthday. He could remember thinking them an odd 
crowd, all four of them, when he met them; but that was so long 
ago now, five years, that he had to make an effort to recall why 
he had thought them strange. Jimmy was the first one he’d met, 
and Milla had adopted the two of them as soon as the Temple 
Dragons had allowed her to, after the Temple Dragons had re-
luctantly concluded that Trent was not, after all, a webdancer. 
Jodi Jodi and Bird had turned up together, about a year after 
that; Trent did not know what had happened to either of them 
before Milla adopted them, except that Jodi Jodi said she 

248   Tales 
 
couldn’t remember anything between the onset of the Troubles, 
and being adopted by Milla; and that Bird, two years younger 
than Jodi Jodi, still had nightmares every other night, on aver-
age. 
They sat in the living room together, with a small fire burn-
ing in the fireplace, the only heat in the great building. Each of 
them wore some prominent item of clothing in Temple Dragons 
colors, purple and gold. 
When Milla heard the name she burst out, “The guy called 
him Andrew Strawberry?” 
“Yeah,” Trent said. “And Strawberry called him Lamont 
Newman. You know him?” 
Milla and Jimmy looked at each otherTrent found himself 
baffled by their apparent excitement. Jimmy said slowly, gain-
ing speed as he went on: “Yeah…he was my second grade 
teacher, before the Troubles. He was on the other side when 
they put up the Barrier. We never saw him again.” 
Trent did not think he had ever seen Milla look so animated. 
“He preached in the Flatbush Temple when I was a teenager. I 
never had him in school, but my sister who died in the Troubles, 
she had him. She said he was” 
Jimmy said it with her: “the meanest man anyone ever 
saw.” He and Milla looked at each other and grinned and Jimmy 
went on. “He was in the WFL” 
Milla: “he was a linebacker for the Beijing Bears” 
Jimmy: “and they won two Stupendous Bowls” 
Milla: “and he killed someone once who tried to tackle 
him” 
Jimmy: “and he killed students who didn’t do their home-
work.” 
Milla paused, then said uncertainly, “That’s not true. You 
don’t know that’s true.” 
Trent, Jodi Jodi and Bird were looking back and forth be-
tween the two of them. 
A thought struck Jimmy and Milla at the same moment. 
They turned to Trent and said in almost the same voice: “You 
left a body in his Temple?” 

Moran   249 
 
Trent blinked. “It wasn’t a body. It was just...that guy I shot. 
He was fine. They knew each other,” he assured them. “They 
probably talked about old times when he woke up.” 
In the silence, they considered this possibility together. 
Jimmy said finally, “He knows a lot of people.” 
Jodi Jodi said skeptically, “He was really famous?” 
Jimmy nodded. “I haven’t heard about him since the Trou-
bles, though. Five and a half years.” 
“Huh. So that would be less famous.” 
Milla said, “He was the best known person in Flatbush before 
the Troubles.” 
Jimmy added, “Or afterwards.” 
Bird spoke for the first time. “Until Trent.” 
Everyone looked at him. 
Bird shrugged. “Everyone knows who Trent is.” 
Trent smiled. “The Reverend Strawberry didn’t.” A distant 
look touched his features. A message on his earphone, from his 
Image: the Orbital Eye they had hijacked earlier that day was 
still theirs, and it showed Reverend Strawberry making his way 
up the street, two Temple Dragons at his back, toward their 
home. 
Trent said aloud, “He’s here.” 
The others all glanced at one another; they didn’t even ques-
tion him any longer on such matters. 
A few minutes later Reverend Andy entered the room, alone, 
leaving his his bodyguards outside. They all rose to greet him, 
Trent a little slowlyMilla flung herself across the room and 
threw herself into Reverend Andy’s arms. The big man picked 
her up, hugged her, and put her back down again, a smile break-
ing out, and said softly, “Milla, darlin’.” 
Trent kept his features expressionless. No visible trace of 
jealousy or surprise touched him. 
Reverend Andy shrugged out of the long coat he’d worn 
against the cold outside, and turned to Jimmy Ramirez. 
“James,” he said severely, “aren’t you going to introduce your 
friends?” 

250   Tales 
 
It wasn’t a question, it was a commandand, second sur-
prise in a row; Trent saw that Jimmy was visibibly nervous, 
though he stood his ground. Trent had never seen Jimmy in-
timidated by anything. 
“They’re not my friends, Reverend. They’re my family. This is 
my brother Trent, my sisters Milla and Jodi Jodi, and my 
brother Bird.” 
Reverend Andy said gently, “I see your education suffered 
somewhat after I got through with you. You ever get past the 
second grade?” 
“Third gradewell, part of it.” 
Reverend Andy nodded. “I see. Well, genetics. Genetics 
makes the statement you just gave me unlikely. You got a white 
girl and a white boy,” he said, looking at Trent and Milla, “some 
kind of mixed race kids over here,” which was Jodi Jodi and 
Bird, “and you’re a mix yourself, James, but a different mix. So 
the genetics don’t work.” 
Jimmy stiffened noticeably and the muscles in his neck 
tightened. “I’m not damaged and I’m not stupid. My first family 
died during the Troubles. Now this is my family. And don’t you 
insult them.” 
Reverend Andy patted Jimmy on the shoulder, gently, and 
turned, finally, to the young man who would change his life for-
ever. Trent smiled at him and Reverend Andy said, “And you’d 
be Trent, the young man who disrupted my service this morning 
and left me with a body to deal with. I’ve heard of you.” 
Bird said under his breath, “He did too know who you were.” 
Trent’s smile widened. “What have you heard about me?” 
“You’re a man of low morals. A thief and a criminal and a 
corrupter of others.” 
“Well, we’re all criminals,” Trent said slowly. “There isn’t one 
of us who hasn’t broken some law, somewhere. Even you have, 
Reverend. Question is, what kind of criminal are you? I’m the 
steal from the rich, keep it and go dancing and have a good time 
kind. I’m telling you, it’s great to be me. Everybody likes me, be-
cause I only steal from people who truly, deeply deserve it.” 
“That’s rationalization.” 

Moran   251 
 
“People are rationalizing creatures...and I plead guilty to be-
ing a personI suspect that even you’re a person.” 
Jodi Jodi said solemnly, “A person’s a person, no matter how 
tall.” 
Milla corrected her. “That’s ‘no matter how small.’ ” 
Bird said patiently, “Joke, Milla.” 
Milla didn’t hear him. She burst out, “Why are you here?” 
Reverend Andy smiled at her. “Reverend Pena got a visa for 
the Patrol Sectors.” 
He would not have gotten a stronger response if he’d told 
them that she had ascended bodily into heaven. The five of them 
stared at him, visibly stunned. Trent opened his mouth, then 
closed it again. Milla said, “But” 
Jodi Jodi said, “She got out?” 
Milla whispered, “Out of the Fringe?” 
Reverend Andy nodded. “The Temple Elders needed a re-
placement and they couldn’t find one in the Fringe. They did 
find one who was willing to go into the Fringe, though. That 
used to be my Temple, before the Troubles began. I’m pleased to 
have it back.” 
Trent could hear the flat skepticism in his own voicehe 
hadn’t intended to put it there. “The Unification is willing to let 
you stay.” 
“They gave me a one year visa.” 
“And they let Reverend Pena leave.” 
The big man shrugged. “They’ve done it beforewhen the 
politics were right.” 
Jimmy burst out, “Why haven’t we heard about it?” 
“There are four million people in the Fringe,” said Trent, still 
staring at Reverend Andy. “I don’t suppose they want to adver-
tise.” 
Reverend Andy held Trent’s gaze. “You know, I’ve had people 
walk out of my sermons beforebut never had one get applause 
doing it. I admit it’s a new experience for me.” 
Trent shrugged. “I said everyone likes me. When you get to 
know me,” he assured Reverend Andy, “you’ll like me too.” 
“What are you doing?” 

252   Tales 
 
“Wrong question.” 
“What do you want?” 
Trent couldn’t stop the the smile from touching him again. 
“Better question. The greatest thief of the twentieth century, a 
man named Voleur, said the second rule of being a thief was to 
never steal anything you didn’t want” 
“and that the first rule was to start by knowing what you 
wanted.” 
Trent said mildly, “I think you’d make a good thief.” 
“...I suppose you mean that as a compliment.” 
“Suit yourself.” 
“What did you steal today?” 
“None of your business.” 
Trent did not look away from Reverend Andy, but he did not 
miss the shocked looks that touched both Milla and Jimmy. 
Reverend Andy’s expression turned grim. “When Lamont New-
man broke the 200 meter world record, that record had stood for 
thirty years. People wanted to test him and see if he was really a 
geniehe wasn’t a genie, just a very fast man. He retired about 
’59 or ’60. He was a millionaire a couple times overCredit 
Units, not old Americans. It makes me wonder...what sort of 
person could make it worth his while to play nursemaid to 
whatever it is he wants you to return? A powerful person, that 
would be my guess. People like thatthey don’t take being sto-
len from lightly.” He held Trent’s gaze a moment longer, then 
shrugged his way back ino the coat he still held in one huge 
hand. “You don’t need to show me out.” 
Trent said quietly, “Wasn’t going to.” 
Reverend Andy glanced at Trent in disgust, and turned and 
left without saying anything further. Milla sat down on the 
couch nearest the fireplace, almost a collapse, and sat staring at 
Trent. “I can’t believe how rude you were to him.” 
Jimmy Ramirez said, “You have to be more polite to him.” 
Trent looked back and forth between them, and then asked 
what seemed to him a reasonable question. “Why?” 
Milla said gently, “He’s a good man.” 

Moran   253 
 
Trent thought about it. “It can be hard to tell, sometimes,” he 
said finally. He glanced at Jimmy. “I’ll be ready in five minutes.” 
IN THE FOURTH-FLOOR room Trent lived in were a bed, a shower, 
a closet, and nothing else. 
Trent slid aside the closet door and stepped through the 
hanging clothes, into a small cold room with crumbling brick 
walls. Power cables hung down the walls and power strips ran 
along the baseboard of the dirty wood floor. 
Along the walls, computer equipment was stacked up toward 
the ceiling. In the center of the room, a clean, modern desk was 
dimly visible. 
“Command, lights.” 
With the lights up the room was even more dismal. Trent 
picked up a pair of small gray electrodes from the desk’s surface, 
licked their surfaces and stuck one at each temple, and closed 
his eyes. 
He did not go Inside. He did not call up his Image. Not for 
this. 
Encryption protocols negotiated with one another. Thousands 
of passwords were exchanged, veryifying Trent’s actual identity, 
the actual identity of the man he wanted to speak with. 
A holofield bloomed in front of Trent. In it, Booker Jamethon 
appeared, his appearance mercifully obscured by the holo’s low 
resolution. 
“Lamont Newman works for Randall Getty Cristofer. Sun-
Getty Oil.” 
It hit Trent like an actual blow. “Oh, great… How about 
Strawberry?” 
“Temples of Eris, 22 years. Non political, no involvement 
with the Erisian Claw. Member of twenty charities, on the board 
of directors of...this and that.” 
“And the other thing?” Trent asked grimly. 
Booker’s amusement was obvious. “That too.” 
Trent sighed. “Thanks, Booker.” 
“I don’t normally do research for other Players.” 
“I was busy.” 

254   Tales 
 
Booker said, “You owe me.” He waved a hand and the holo 
faded into nonexistence, leaving Trent alone in the small brick 
room. 
Trent said to the empty room, “I don’t owe you nothin’.” 
IN THE SHADOWS across the street from McGee’s, the most popu-
lar restaurant in the Fringe, half a dozen men stood with laser 
rifles, dressed in the black and red, the colors of the Gypsy Ma-
coute. The group’s leader said, “You all know this guy.” 
A holo appeared in midair. “Trent. Temple Dragon. They 
want an example madebut they want the rock more. So we get 
the rock first. Then kill him.” 
MCGEE’S WAS NOT merely one of the few good restaurants in the 
Fringe; it was Trent’s favorite. Good food, clean, reliable enforc-
ers, one of the few restaurants that catered to the street trade 
and the only one about which all those things could be said. You 
could get falling-down stoned and know you’d live to see the 
morning, and the drinks and drugs were honest enough that get-
ting falling-down stoned wasn’t hard. 
Trent  and Jimmy were led to their usual table, toward the 
back. McGee’s had booths lining the walls, and round tables set 
out in the large central area. Trent didn’t like the booths; they 
were quiet, intimate, and he’d twice seen men die in them be-
cause they couldn’t get out of them quickly enough. The round 
table he and Jimmy had reserved seated six or seven people 
comfortably, and was located roughly equidistant from the res-
taurant’s three ground-floor exits. 
The museum’s agentthe agent had never offered Trent his 
name, and Trent had never bothered to learn itwas already 
waiting for them. He was a short, soft-featured man whom Trent 
had never actually seen angry or happy about anything, before 
this. Trent wondered if he was about to see that change. 
It was a busy night for midweek and Trent felt a flicker of 
annoyance; a boy and girl, teenagers, had been seated at the ta-
ble next to theirs, close enough to hear if anyone at Trent’s table 
raised his voice. 

Moran   255 
 
The agent said, “Gentlemen.” 
Trent seated himself facing the agent, able to see the rear of 
the restaurant from where he sat. Jimmy sat on the other side of 
the table, looking out over the restaurant’s front, the large win-
dows that let out onto the street. 
Trent took a deep breath, and still could not entirely keep the 
anger out of his voice. “You lied to me.” 
The agent looked startled. “The property wasn’t where you 
were told it would be?” 
“It was. That’s not the problem.” 
Jimmy said grimly, “The problem is who we stole it from.” 
“You’ve heard of Randall Cristofer.” 
“Eighth richest person in the world.” 
“I’m thinking we sell it back to him.” 
“He’s got plenty of Credit.” 
Trent said, “I was thinking a quarter million Credits. I think 
Cristofer would go a quarter million to get this back.” 
A long day full of firsts; the agent’s alarm was palpable. 
“My...my principals...I don’t think I can go that high.” 
Trent smiled at him. “Bummer.” 
“Rough.” 
The agent gestured at his briefcase. “I brought the fifty thou-
sand with me. Hard Credit, SpaceFarer gold” 
The girl at the table next to them lifted turned around in her 
seat to stare at them. Trent stared back at her until she turned 
around. 
Jimmy, looking over Trent’s shoulder at the front entrance, 
focused on something out in the street. 
Trent told the agent, “It’s two-fifty now.” 
“You’re breaking your contract!” 
Trent leaned forward and lowered his voice. “You broke our 
contract.” He waved a hand and a holo document appeared in 
mid-air. The contract. “Clause 3a. You may not misinform or fail 
to inform me, if you possess the data, of the identity or employ-
ers or associates of the targeted party. Your failure to fulfill the 
terms of your contract has caused me to piss off one of the most 
powerful people in the System, has” 

256   Tales 
 
Jimmy Ramirez said softly, “Company.” 
Trent broke off abruptly. From his shirt pocket he pulled his 
traceset free, ignoring the agent now, and put it on, settling the 
trodes onto his skull, closed his eyes 
and looked down, through the Orbital Eye, toward the 
Earth. Found New York, found the Fringe, found McGee’szoom 
in: 
The image is grainy, black and white, the gain set very high. 
Heat sources are bright blobs against a darker background. 
Trent counted five…six shapes hidden across the street from 
the restaurant. Without opening his eyes he said “Six of them. 
Across the street.” 
“Macoute?” 
“Best guess.” Trent sent a command off through the traceset. 
“I’ve put in a call to our boys. They’ll be here in a few minutes.” 
He opened his eyes, shook his head slightly. To Jimmy he said, 
“Go meet them. No shooting, all we want is escort out of here.” 
Jimmy nodded, stood up and walked calmly toward the res-
taurant’s back entrance. Trent watched him go, knowing Jimmy 
would run the entire way back to the Temple to get reinforce-
ments once he was out of sight.  
“What are we doing?” 
He had almost forgotten the agent. Trent turned back to him, 
still wearing the traceset. “Sitting here,” he said. “We’re just go-
ing to sit here.” 
“I’m leaving.” 
“I wouldn’t do that,” said Trent. “McGee’s got treaties with 
the Gypsy Macoute. And the Temple Dragons, Old Ones, Syndic, 
Retribution Tong...everyone. No murders in the restaurant. 
Well, no murders within a block of the restaurant, but I figure 
why tempt them? Hey, you want some coffee? They have great 
coffee here.” He waved at a passing waiter. “Two cups of the Ja-
maican Blue.” 
The agent stood. “I don’t want any damn coffee, and you are 
not raising your fee on us.” 

Moran   257 
 
Trent said calmly, “They’ll shoot you if you go outside.” The 
man sat back down abruptly. “And I’ll give the damn thing back 
if you don’t pay me. Two-fifty. You want cream with that?” 
ON THE ROOF of a deserted building in Flatbush, a Gypsy Ma-
coute, wearing Temple Dragons colors, watching the Temple and 
the Dragon House next to it through a pair of PKF-issue combat 
binoculars. When the lights came on at the Dragon House, when 
a dozen armed men came swarming down into the streets, he 
whispered through his earphone. 
“Dragons moving.” 
TWO KILOMETERS AWAY, the six Gypsy Macoute waiting outside 
of McGee’s stepped out of the shadows, into the street. 
TRENT PUT DOWN his coffee. 
He said softly, “Oh, no.” 
Through his traceset, through the Orbital Eye he was still 
monitoring, he could see the Macoute crossing the street, six 
bright ovals advancing on the even brighter structure of 
McGee’s. 
“Oh, no,” he said again. “This is bad.” He looked at the agent. 
“This is so bad. The last time the treaties broke down over five 
hundred people got killed” 
The agent turned to look. “They’re coming in?” 
Trent snapped, “Don’t look! Don’t move until I tell you 
toand then you run like a pack of Peaceforcers are behind 
you...three...” 
Trent grasped the edge of the table with both hands, spread-
ing his hands out to get the best grip 
“…two…” 
There. Rock the tabletop back and forth. It’s made of wood 
and it’s bolted to the base, which in turn is bolted to the floor. 
Hope the wood breaks. Hope the tabletop comes free of the base, 
and not the base from the floor, and not your arms from your 
shoulders 
“…and one, go.” 

258   Tales 
 
The agent lurched backward out of his chair, falling to the 
floor, scrambled for his briefcase 
Trent surged upward with the edges of the tabletop in his 
hands, heard the sound of the bolts being torn free, turned with 
the tabletop in his hands and threw it, spinning, toward the 
front entrance, toward the six men in red and black who had 
reached the entrance and were stepping inside, laser rifles lev-
eled. 
Two of them had time to open fire. One managed to get out of 
the way. The spinning tabletop crashed into other five, knocked 
all of them from their feet and two of them backwards through 
the windows and into the street. Glassite shattered, sprayed 
over the Macoute 
It was the Fringe. It had only been a second since the agent 
had stumbled backward out of his chair, and already the crowd 
was on its feet, men and women charging for the exits. Trent 
had his gun out, the beam set for wide dispersion, fired toward 
the entrance, a blast of light so bright the Macoute who were 
caught in it were heat-scalded and temporarily blinded. The boy 
and girl who’d been sitting next to Trent were on their feet, run-
ning toward the kitchen; a Macoute beam caught the girl and 
she fell, screaming as the beams tracked around her. Trent 
charged toward her, scooped her up in one arm and ran through 
the laser fire, barreling through the double doors leading into 
the hallway that led to the kitchen. 
A Macoute had secured that exit. From the other end of the 
long hallway, laser fire scored the walls around Trent. He hit 
the ground with the girl, rolled over on his back as another Ma-
coute came through the double doors right behind him, and 
squirted him oncc in the face. While the Macoute was still stand-
ing he caught a laser blast from the other end of the hallway, 
and toppled forward on top of Trent and the girl. 
The girl was screaming, “Oh God, they burned me, they 
burned me” 
 Trent pushed the body off of them, hauled the girl to her feet 
and pulled her with him into the kitchen proper. 
It was empty. The kitchen staff had fled already.  

Moran   259 
 
The hysterical shriek: “they burned me” 
Trent ignored her. He saw in a second that the kitchen had 
no exit but onto the hallway in which the Macoute were waiting 
for them. He pushed the girl through the kitchen and toward the 
back, into the storage room, as the Macoute burst into the 
kitchen firing. 
The storage room had no door, only an entryway. It was full 
of racks, heavy with cans and boxes; Trent threw two of the 
racks over in the storage room’s entry and pulled the girl down 
the long row of storage racks, toward the room’s back, threw 
down another three racks on top of one another and pulled her 
down behind it. 
He figured they had a minute, maybe. It would take the Ma-
coute that long to get the doorway cleared. Maybe another min-
ute or two after that before they Macoute got up the courage to 
come in after a man who appeared to be armed. 
The girl was still screaming. “Command,” said Trent. “Lights 
off.” 
The darkness seemed to shock her into some semblance of 
sense. She was completely silent for a moment. “I’m hurt,” she 
said after a beat. “How bad am I hurt?” 
Trent’s vision was adjusting quickly. It was only dark by 
comparison to the brightness of a moment ago; light from the 
kitchen spilled in through the storage room’s entrance. 
“Quiet,” he said after a moment. “You’re burned. We’ll get 
you to a medbot, I’ve got people coming.” 
A man’s voice from the doorway. “Trent!” 
They knew his name. Oh, I’ve fucked this up bad, Trent 
thought. 
Trent yelled back, “Yeah!” 
“We want the stone!” 
Trent didn’t hesitate. He reached into his coat without hesi-
tation, pulled out the small, velvet lined bag. He threw it at the 
entryway, watched it bounce to a stop just inside the storeroom. 
“Take it!” 
One of the Macoute made a long arm, reached inside and 
pulled out the bag. 

260   Tales 
 
Trent could feel the girl, shivering, panting at his side as 
though she couldn’t draw enough breath. “Are they leaving? Are 
they leaving?” 
Trent shook his head. “Probably not.” We’re about to die, he 
thought very calmly. 
The note of pure terror that touched her voice was one of the 
worst things he had ever heard. “Oh no, please, please” 
Trent turned to her. He actually saw her for the first time, 
clearly; she couldn’t have been more than fifteen, pretty, dark-
skinned and dark-eyed. “Listen to me,” he whispered, “listen.” 
She stared at him, eyes wide, panting in short, sharp 
breaths. 
“Life is movement,” he said urgently. “We start in one place 
and move to another, and even death is just a part of that.” 
A beat. When she spoke Trent could hear the surprise in her 
voice, the startled realization. She said, “We’re going to die.” 
Trent could not look away from her. He heard the Macoute 
pulling down the barrier at the storeroom’s entryway. “Don’t be 
afraid. We’ll go together.” 
Laser light cut into the darkness around them. Trent pulled 
the girl to him and curled up around her, protecting her body 
with his own. Beams cut through the darkness, illuminated her 
terrified features. Trent felt one of the beams touch him and 
heard the girl whispering over and over, “Oh God, oh no, oh 
no” 
He barely even heard the gunfire that saved his life. 
“HERE,” SAID JIMMY. “I thought you’d want this back.” 
Trent took the small bag with the jewel inside it, tucked it 
back in the inner pocket of the coat laying on the ground beside 
him. A Temple Dragon medic, Old Rodrigohe was twenty-
sevenwas just finishing applying a salve to the laser burn on 
Trent’s back. Old Rodrigo had told Trent, regretfully, that he 
wouldn’t even get a good scar out of the burn, just a little patch 
of irregular color in all likelihood. 
Trent pulled his shirt back on, and then his coat, ignoring the 
pain in his back. Whatever the medic had used on him, it wasn’t 

Moran   261 
 
a pain killer, or it wasn’t enough of one. He ignored Jimmy’s of-
fered hand and sat in one of the dining room chairs and looked 
around at the wreckage of the restaurant. 
Out here in the dining area it didn’t look too bad. One de-
stroyed table, shattered windows, a lot of overturned chairs. 
Jimmy stood at Trent’s side, grinning, obviously pleased. Two 
dead Macoute had been propped up against the wall. 
“How many dead?” 
“Three Macoute,” Jimmy said proudly. “None of ours. Couple 
minor burns, yours was the worst.” 
Trent said flatly, “You shouldn’t have come.” 
Jimmy didn’t even look angry. He said blankly, “What?” 
“The girl died. That makes four.” Trent paused. “You know, I 
hate slugthrowers even more than I hate beams. They” He 
waved a hand, vaguely. “ricochet.” 
Jimmy stared at him. The fury in his voice barely registered 
on Trent. “If I hadn’t come, you’d be dead.” 
Trent looked up at him. “If you hadn’t come, it would only 
have been two. And she wouldn’t have had to make the trip 
alone.” He got to his feet, slowly, trying to ignore the flaming 
pain across his shoulders, and walked toward the front entrance, 
and out onto the street, without speaking again. 
Jimmy stared after him. Finally he gestured to a pair of the 
armed Dragons standing nearby. “Escort him! Put some guns 
around him and escort him home!” The two of them ran out into 
the street, after Trent. Jimmy shook his head in disbelief, 
turned and went into the back of the restaurant where the 
medic was laying out the girl’s body. 
The medic looked up at Jimmy. Jimmy couldn’t take his eyes 
off the dead girl’s body. She’d been burned by the lasers, three 
separate scores he could see, but from the bleeding it was clear 
her death had been caused by a slug in her stomach. The sight of 
the blood froze Jimmy. Abruptly he had difficulty breathing. 
“Rodrigo…were any of the Macoute…carrying slug throw-
ers?” 
Old Rodrigo blinked lazily. He spoke with an island accent 
that Jimmy had always suspected was an affectation. “The Ma-

262   Tales 
 
coute? They don’ usually carry impact weapons, man. Lasers 
and masers, you know.” 
After a moment, Jimmy said, “I think I might throw up.” 
“Don’t do it on the body, man,” said Old Rodrigo reproach-
fully. “That’s disrespectful, you know?” 
MILLA AND REVEREND ANDY sat on the porch at the rectory next 
door to the Temple of Eris, each of them bundled up against the 
cold of winter, and watched the sun sink in the cloudless sky. 
“I don’t really remember it very well,” Milla said. “How the 
Troubles started. Most of us don’t. I was outside when it hap-
pened. The telepathsscreamedand then I remember seeing 
the nuke go offseeing that mushroom cloud.” She shook her 
head. “Most of the grownups went crazy, and most of the crazy 
ones died. Kids handled it better. But afterwards there were a 
lot of kids with no parents. So we ended up with big kids taking 
care of the little kids ‘Wendies.’ ” She glanced at him to see if 
he’d gotten the reference, saw him nodding. “I’m their Wendy. I 
love them so much it hurts. They try so hard and as hard as they 
try it’s barely enough just to stay alive.” 
Reverend Andy sighed. “I wish I’d been here, darlin’. I was 
travelling when it happened. By the time I got back the Peace-
forcers had sealed the area off. The rioting wasbad.” He shook 
his head. “Here I’m telling you about it.” 
Milla shrugged. “You won’t hear it the other way.” 
Reverend Andy said slowly, “I’ve heard some of the survi-
vorssaw things.” 
The images were as clear to Milla as the day she’d had them. 
The telepaths had screamed, at her, at her personallywhich 
was the experience everyone had had. For days she hadn’t been 
sure who she was, or where, or  whenand she was not alone. 
Children struck by it survived better than adults, but there were 
girl children who were not old enough yet, five and a half years 
later, to have born children of their own, who could tell you in 
detail what childbirth felt like, or who knew the names of the 
husbands they were going to have, some day, in time to come  

Moran   263 
 
Several days after the Troubles began, Milla’s jumbled 
memories straightened out, and all that she was left with were 
flashes. Just flashesand until she’d met Trent she hadn’t been 
sure they were not the product of her own imagination. She’d 
never told anyone about them, and was surprised, even now, to 
hear herself telling Reverend Andy. The words came haltingly, 
but they came…. 
“...I saw him. Not the way he was when I met him. Not even 
the way he is now. He’s...different. Older. He has his arms 
spread out, like Jesus on the cross. And then he says, ‘I love you 
all.’ And then...” She shivered, hugging herself. “And then they 
shoot him.” 
“Who shoots him?” 
Milla simply shook her head. 
“Did you see anything else?” 
She shook her head again. 
Reverend Andy sat quietly beside her, breath pluming in the 
air. After a moment he reached over and patted her on the 
shoulder, almost awkwardly. 
Milla looked up at him and the word spilled out of her. “Help 
me get them out. I’m going to lose one of them if we don’t get out 
of here. He’s making enemies, people are starting to hear about 
him and know who he is. I’ve beenresignedI gave up hoping 
I could make them safe and if there’s any chance I have to get 
them out of here!” 
THERE WERE TWO flashes of imagery that Milla remembered, not 
one. The second image she had carried away from the telepath’s 
assault on her was an image of herself. In it she was about her 
current age, and she was standing in front of the Barrier, with a 
laser rifle in her hands, while laser bolts rained all around her, 
striking her repeatedly. 
She tried not to think about that image, but there were two 
things she was sure of: 
She was going to die when that day came. 
And it was going to happen on the other side of the Barrier. 

264   Tales 
 
JIMMY PUT DOWN his coffee and got to his feet, respectfully, when 
McGee entered the restaurant. 
He didn’t know how old McGee was, except that he was old, 
ancient not just by the standards of the Fringe but by those of 
the outside world. A hundred? Older, probably. For a man of his 
years he was still strongthough the word that came to mind 
when Jimmy thought of him was, simply, evil. Not that Jimmy 
thought that McGee was essentially evil, necessarily, exactly; he 
was willing to concede that there might have been an actual per-
son behind those ancient features somewhere. Jimmy just had 
no evidence of it. 
McGee had five armed men with him, which was enough to 
make Jimmy grateful that several of the Temple Dragons had 
waited with him, helping him drink McGee’s coffee. McGee 
looked around the mess of his restaurant, in no particular hurry, 
with no particular expression. 
Finally Jimmy said, “McGeethey came in shooting.” 
McGee appeared to notice Jimmy for the first time. “I have 
thirty cameras in this place. I’m going to know what happened 
here.” 
“Macoute broke the treaty, sir. We just came in to get Trent.” 
The old man sighed. “What was he doing here?” 
Jimmy thought about it. “Seeing a man about a rock.” 
McGee nodded. “Where is he now?” 
“At the Temple.” 
“I’ll want to talk to him.” McGee brushed by Jimmy, heading 
toward the rear of the restaurantpaused and turned back to 
Jimmy, and said in a tone that Jimmy would have called, in a 
real human being, complaint: “You have any idea how hard it is 
to get insurance in the Fringe?” 
THE BODIES HAD been laid out in the center of the Temple, in the 
area where the preacher normally preached, in body bags that 
had been sealed up to their throats so that only their faces 
showed. The Temple was dark, only the lights on the altar pro-
viding illumination. Reverend Andy had dressed in his official 
robes, and appeared to be angry about having had to. 

Moran   265 
 
Jimmy and four other Temple Dragons stood near the bodies, 
carrying their rifles. 
“I don’t believe I’m doing this,” said Reverend Andy. 
Trent, sitting in the darkness toward the back of the Temple, 
was looking up at the stained glass windows showing the life of 
the Prophet Harry. The one he was looking at showed the 
Prophet Harry’s beating at the hands of the IRS. Usually he 
liked looking at that plate; it reminded him that life was essen-
tially ludicrous, even for the great. Today he barely saw it. The 
numbness that had stolen over him made him feel as though he 
could have sat there, without moving, for weeks, until his life 
drained out of him. He didn’t feel sad, or angry, just numb and 
detached. 
No one answered Reverend Andyafter a moment Trent 
said, “There are no police in the Fringe. No Peaceforcers.” It was 
important the man understand. Trent knew he didn’t. 
Reverend Andy didn’t even look at Trent. “I’m not going to 
start breaking your treaties before I’ve been here 24 hours,” he 
said, the anger evident in him, “but by God and the Prophet 
Harry there will be changes here.” 
In the darkness, Trent smiled. “Not long after the Barrier 
went up, Gypsy Macoute overran the Temple on Gold Street.” 
Jimmy bowed his head slightly, and suddenly looked weary 
and older than he was. 
Trent continued. “There was no one to stop them. There were 
no Temple Dragons, then. So the Macoute killed the men, killed 
the children, raped the women and then killed them. They didn’t 
kill them fast. What they did, they tied people to steel poles and 
poured oil on them.” 
Jimmy said softly, almost a whisper, “And burned them.” 
“Burned them,” Trent repeated. “Four, five at a time. When 
the fires burned down, they’d bring out a new batch. Whole 
families at once. People who were there say that” 
“Torches burned from dusk ’til dawn,” said Jimmy Ramirez. 
“There’s a reason the Temple Dragons exist, Reverend, that 
we have treaties. You don’t have to like it ... but it would help if 
you understood that there are reasons.” Trent glanced over at 

266   Tales 
 
Reverend Andy, saw the man looking illturned back to look at 
the stained glass. He wondered if Reverend Andy was going to 
throw up. First Jimmy, and now maybe Reverend Andy. Trent 
couldn’t remember if he’d ever seen two people throw up on the 
same day just because they were upset. 
Trent heard the doors to the Temple swinging open, and 
shifted in his seat to watch them enter. 
The Macoute were here. 
They came into the Temple together, six of them, unarmed. 
The Temple Dragons shifted their rifles, but did not point them 
at the Macoute. 
The Macoute stepped forward, led by One-Eye, stopped ten 
paces away from Reverend Andy and held out the empty hands, 
palms up. Trent came forward to meet them. 
One-Eye was about fifty years old. Old, for the Fringe. The 
right side of his face was savagely scarred, and the left side was 
only an improvement by comparison. He’d been ugly even before 
he’d lost his eye, Trent had heard, and what was left of his fea-
tures supported that. “Trent, Jimmy.” One-Eye glanced a Rever-
end Andy. “Who he?” 
Trent said softly, “Hello, One-Eye.” 
Reverend Andy said, in the voice he used when he was 
preaching, “Reverend Andrew Strawberry.” 
One-Eye measured him, dismissed him with a visible shrug. 
“We come for our dead.” 
Jimmy gestured at the girl, off to one side of the dead Ma-
coute. “Do you know who the girl is? She’s not from our territory 
and she’s not wearing colors.” 
One-Eye glanced at her. “Dominique...I don’t know her last 
name. She got family on Legion Street.” 
Trent nodded. “One of yours...take her home. Tell her family 
the Flatbush Temple Dragons will pay death benefits.” 
There was a stir among the Macoute. The offer obviously 
startled them. Trent got to his feet, came forward until he stood 
in front of One-Eye. “I’m sorry for your dead. I wouldn’t have 
had them die overa thing.” 

Moran   267 
 
One-Eye stared at Trent briefly, warilyfinally made a 
small gesture with one hand. His men came forward and sealed 
the body bags the rest of the way up, lifted them and headed for 
the door. One-Eye backed up with them, still looking at Trent. “I 
heard you stole a jewel this time.” He shrugged. “Not worth dyin’ 
for.” 
Trent said, “Almost nothing is.” 
One-Eye stopped at the door, grinned at Trent. “You and 
mewe know that.” He stepped backward through the Temple 
Doors, and Trent saw the Temple Dragons relaxing slightly. 
Reverend Andy turned to Trent. “He seems to like you.” 
“Yeah. Everyone likes me. Even One-Eye.” 
Revernd Andy said, “Man has some appreciation for the value 
of life.” 
Jimmy snorted. “His life.” 
Trent said, “One-Eye burned Jimmy’s little brother when the 
Gold Street Temple was destroyed.” He paused. “He’s a bad 
man.” 
Trent did not think he had ever seen anyone more truly, 
deeply appalled than Reverend Andy was at that moment. “And 
you made a treaty with him?” 
Trent and Jimmy exchanged  glances. Finally Jimmy said, 
“Who else? Don’t need to make treaty with people you don’t 
hate.” 
The big man was genuinely shaken. Trent couldn’t think of 
anything he wante to say to the man. The Macoute should be 
clear of the building by now, he thought. I can go. Not that he 
felt like moving, now or ever. 
Reverend Andy said, “How can you live like this?” 
Trent pushed himself to his feet, left without looking back. 
Jimmy Ramirez watched him go, thinking about Reverend 
Andy’s question. Finally he shrugged. “It’s the Fringe.” 
TRENT SAT AT the edge of Prospect Lake, in the dark. From here 
he could see the Barrier, and the spacescrapers in Manhattan, 
climbing up into the night sky. Prospect Lake was Temple 
Dragon territory, though by the treaties Gypsy Macoute were 

268   Tales 
 
permitted to travel through this area without being harmed. Af-
ter nightfall, almost no one ever came out here, except Trent, 
and that only occasionally. 
He had the gem in his hands. It was the first time he’d really 
gotten a chance to look at it, and it was too dark to really see it 
well. Every now and again, holding it up against the lights of the 
spacescrapers, he saw a glint of blue in it. 
Toss it into the lake. No one would ever find it. 
Instead he put it back in its bag, put the bag into his inner 
coat pocket, and went home to get dressed. He couldn’t go into 
the city wearing colors. 
HALF A DOZEN vehicles were lined up at the check point, to pass 
through the Barrier. About twenty people on foot, standing in 
line, were being processed through, one at a time. Armed PKF 
troops patroled the check point; it was one of only four places on 
Long Island that people and vehicles were permitted to pass 
throughwith proper identification. 
The line moved forward, slowly it seemed to Trent, standing 
there in the line wearing his business suit. After what seemed a 
long time he was at the check point himself. 
The Peaceforcer on duty said in a bored voice, “ID and retinal 
scan, please.” He glanced up and saw Trent for the first time. 
“Oh. Good morning, M. Vera.” 
Trent leaned forward and put his eye up against the scanner. 
“Vera, Thomas. Is it morning already?” 
The Peaceforcer looked down at his display. The message 
flashed up at him: Retinal scan and voice print match. He looked 
back up at Trent. “Yes, M. Vera. Two A.M.” 
Trent shook his head. “It’s been such a long day.” 
TRENT LET HIMSELF into Randall Getty Cristofer’s hotel room. 
He had seen holos of the man, but he had never seen him in 
the flesh before. He was younger than Trent would have guessed 
from the stills he’d seen, about 40, and more handsome as well. 
Getty was talking to someone visible in a holo off to his side, 
while watching another dozen newsfeeds at the same time. He 

Moran   269 
 
broke off when Trent stepped into the room and pointed his gun 
at Cristofer. 
“Tell them you’ll call back.” 
Cristofer stared at Trent. After a moment he said, in a dis-
tinct Australian accent, “Command, kill the feeds.” The news-
feeds vanished. “Jack, I’ll have to call you back. Something’s 
come up.” He made a gesture with one hand and the caller dis-
appeared. 
Trent lowered the gun. “You’re Randall Cristofer.” 
“Who are youwhere’s my security?” 
Trent smiled at him. “They’re asleep. Out in the hallway of 
this really nice hotel room you’ve got here. I hope someday to 
have stolen enough from people like you to be able to stay in ho-
tels like this one.” 
Cristofer stared at him. 
Trent said, “It seems a reasonable goal.” 
Cristofer said slowly, “You stole” 
Trent nodded. “I stole. This morning. It’s what I do and I’m 
very good at it.” 
“Who are you?” 
“That’s a great question. I’m not going to answer it, but I 
admire you for having the cojones to ask it with a straight face.” 
“You’re talking too much to be planning to kill me. Why are 
you here?” 
Trent took a step toward the man. Cristofer held his ground. 
“I want you,” Trent said slowly, staring at the man, holding his 
gaze, “to never hire the Gypsy Macoute again. Ever, for any-
thing. I need you to forget about your prize, because it’s gone 
and will not be coming back. I want you to believe that I meant 
no disrespect stealing from you, and if I’d known you were the 
target, I’d have been far more cautious about separating you 
from your property. I need you to deeply, truly, and without res-
ervation, agree with me that hiring assassins to pro-
tect…thingseven very beautiful thingsis inappropriate, 
unacceptable behavior.” 

270   Tales 
 
The silence stretched for a long moment after Trent was done 
speaking. Finally Cristofer said, “And what happens if you don’t 
get what you want and need?” 
“The obvious answer to that,” said Trent gently, “is that the 
next person to come through your hotel door at three o’clock in 
the morningwon’t be me.” He glanced at the door, still open 
behind him. “I’m going to leave now. Don’t follow me.” He looked 
back at Cristofer. “You’d regret it.” 
Cristofer nodded, once, shortly. “I believe you.” 
THE CLOCK ON the wall read 4:45 A.M. 
Reverend Andy and Jimmy and Milla all sat together in Rev-
erend Andy’s office. Not even the coffee was managing to keep 
them awake any longer. 
“He just does this sometimes?” 
Milla sighed. “It started two, three years ago. He 
justvanishes. A day, two. Three days, once. Nobody knows 
where he’s going.” 
Reverend Andy said, “Or if he’s coming back?” 
Jimmy said, “He always comes back.” 
Milla added, “I’m sure he’s okay.” Pause. “He’s careful.” 
Reverend Andy got to his feet. “People, it’s late, and I’m very 
tired, and I’ve got a long day ahead of me tomorrow. You two sit 
up together if you like. No need to hurry yourselves out of here.” 
After he’d left, Milla said, “I’m sure he’s okay.” 
Jimmy said, “I’m sure he’s alive.” 
Milla said wearily, “That’s all I meant.” 
Jimmy nodded. 
“HEY, WAKE UP.” 
Jodi Jodi opened one eye. “Wha?” 
Bird said, “It’s really cold.” He looked at her expectantly. 
Jodi Jodi said groggily, “Turn the heat up. Start a fire. Or 
something.” 
Bird sat down on the edge of her bed. “Jimmy and Milla 
didn’t come home last night.” 
She nodded. “They’re at the Temple.” 

Moran   271 
 
“Neither did Trent.” 
“I know.” 
A pause. He looked at her expectantly. 
She looked back. “Well?” 
“Can I sleep with you?” 
Jodi Jodi rolled back over on her side. “You steal my covers 
and I’ll whack you so hard your head’ll turn around.” 
IT’S MORNING NOW, the planet just turned enough that the first 
rays of the Sun are striking the Flatbush Fringe, and Jimmy 
and Milla are sitting up in Reverend Andy’s office, both dead 
asleep. 
Reverend Andy is asleep, in his bed, alone, not dreaming. 
Bird and Jodi Jodi are still asleep, though Bird has kicked 
Jodi Jodi twice, and been kicked in return seven times; Jodi Jodi 
is a believer in massive retaliation, and being unconscious does 
not prevent her from carrying out this philosophy. 
Dominique Simon is laying on the couch at her parent’s 
house, just as dead this morning as she was yesterday. No one 
at that house slept this night. 
In Manhattan, Trent is walking into the office of the man 
who hired him. His employer is about 35 years of age and com-
pletely bald. He’s dressed in clothes that cost more than most 
Fringe families see a year, sitting behind a desk that Trent 
would have been happy to steal, if it were smaller. The objects of 
art scattered around the office are, Trent would estimate, worth 
ten or fifteen thousand CU. 
Security guards stand at the corners of the room, and Trent 
is sure that they’re the least of the precautions this man has 
taken before meeting with Trent. 
THE MAN LOOKED startled when Trent entered the room. 
“You’re…Trent.” 
“You’re Gideon Hamilton, the Executive Director of Acquisi-
tions for the American Museum of Natural History.” 
“you’re younger than I’d expected.” 

272   Tales 
 
Trent stopped a few feet before the man’s desk. He didn’t 
bother to seat himself.  
“Did you bring the stone?” 
Trent said, “Call Barrister Davenport. 201311-BARD.” 
A pause. Hamilton said, “Command. Call 201311-BARD.” 
Another pause. The holo of a gray-haired, elderly woman ap-
peared floating off to Trent’s right. 
Barrister Davenport said, in a clear, calm contralto, “I have 
been instructed by my client to inform you that I am in posses-
sion of the object. It will be delivered upon completion of the 
funds transfer.” 
Hamilton flushed with anger. “You didn’t bring it with you?” 
“To your office? With your guards? With their guns?” Trent 
shook his head. “No.” 
“There’s a problem with the funds.” 
Through the numbness that had enfolded him, Trent felt the 
first flicker of anger. He took another step forward, saw the se-
curity tensing up. “I want my Credit!” 
“We had difficulty getting together the hard Credit you re-
quested” 
Trent said, “I’ll take soft Credits delivered to my barrister’s 
account. You have one hour. After that” 
Barrister Davenport said, “My client has instructed me to 
drop the object into the Atlantic Ocean.” 
Hamilton said, wonder in his voice, “Do you know what you 
have?” 
Barrister Davenport said pleasantly, “No. But I do know 
what my client’s instructions are.” 
Hamilton made a poor villain; Trent saw the man’s shoulders 
slump in defeat. He said quietly, “I can arrange soft Credits in 
that time. The funds will be transferred before the hour is over.” 
Trent turned to leave. 
The man’s voice. “Trent—” 
The words exploded out of Trent. “Four people died yester-
day. Do you know that? Do you care?” 

Moran   273 
 
Gideon Hamilton said dismissively, “People die in the Fringe 
all the time.... You did something very important for us. We are 
not unappreciative.” 
Trent could not keep the anger out of his voice. “You know 
what the problem is with you? You think you’re one of the good 
guys.” 
The man shrugged. “You’re one of the best contractors I’ve 
ever had. I hope you’ll work with us again.” 
Trent’s hands shook. The rage made it difficult to talk. “I’m a 
professional. I get treated like a professional.” He took a step to-
ward the man, saw the guards reaching for weapons. “I get told 
the truth by my clients and I get paid” 
Only the desk was separating Trent from Hamilton. Lasers 
were being pointed at him. Trent stared at the man, the fury 
still washing through him 
Hamilton said gently, “I know.” 
The words hurt his throat, coming out. “and I’ll work for 
anyone.” 
REVEREND ANDY CLIMBED up through the trapdoor to find Trent 
sitting in one of several chairs scattered across the roof, watch-
ing the sunset. 
Trent glanced at him. “You don’t get many this pretty in De-
cember.” 
Reverend Andy looked around. “No. It’s nice up here.” 
“I like sitting up high. Looking out over it all.” 
Reverend Andy walked to the edge of the roof to look out 
Trent said dryly, “You want to get back from the edge like 
that. Somebody going to mistake you for a sniper.” 
Reverend Andy backed up quickly, pulled a chair over and 
sat down next to Trent. 
The question came abruptly. “Who are you?” 
Trent said slowly, “Just me...trying to keep things together. 
Look out for my family. And I didn’t do my research and I got 
four people killed.” 
“Not your people. Not your family.” 
Trent nodded. “Not this time.” 

274   Tales 
 
“I been hearing about you for a while,” Reverend Andy said. 
“One of the reasons I came out here was to meet you...and now I 
have and I don’t know if I believe in you. Basic principal: when 
something seems too good to be true, it usually is.” 
Trent actually laughed. “I seem too good to be true? You are 
one lousy judge of character.” 
“What happened?” 
Trent stared direclty into the orange ball of the setting sun. 
He thought about where to start. “About…two billion years ago, 
a mixture of corundum and titanium and iron oxides was 
pressed into a little blue ball. A 563 carat star sapphire. About 
four hundred years ago it was dug out of the ground in Sri 
Lanka. In 1900 J.P. Morgan gave it to the American Museum of 
Natural History. In 1964 Murph the Surf stole it from them. 
Rappelled over the heads of guards and customers...nobody 
looked up.” He smiled, quick and faint. “He didn’t get to keep it, 
though. They caught him. Fifty-four years after that, during the 
Unification War, the Museum was looted. Priceless things were 
taken. One of them was the Star of India.” 
“So you stole it...to return it.” 
“That was the contract.” He paused. “It’s a beautiful rock. I 
got a fifteen year old girl killed over it.” 
“I got a call this afternoon. From the World Food Bank.” 
Trent just looked at him. 
Reverend Andy said, almost apologetically, “I’m a regional 
director.” 
Trent nodded in resignation. Of course he was. 
“Someone gave us a quarter million Credits this afternoon. 
On behalf of the Flatbush Temple of Eris...for a thousand Cred-
its, the World Food Bank can provide food and shelter and medi-
cine for one person, for two years. For a quarter million 
Credits...twenty-five hundred people won’t die of starvation this 
year. Or next. Hell of a Christmas gift.” After a long pause, Rev-
erend Andy said, “When a person seems too good to believe, he 
usually is. But not not always. And the exceptions change the 
world.” 

Moran   275 
 
Trent did not reply, and after a while Reverend Andy got up, 
and left him alone. 
LATER THAT NIGHT Milla came out to sit with him. 
She brought a blanket with her, sat down in the seat Rever-
end Andy had vacated some hours ago. 
“You going to be up here all night? It’s supposed to snow later 
tonight.” 
He didn’t answer. She sat beside him, and put the blanket 
around his shoulders. She was startled by how badly he was 
shaking, and she leaned forward to hold him. He wasn’t crying, 
just shaking, and the shaking didn’t stop, didn’t lessen, while 
she sat there with him. 
“You know,” Milla said, some time later, “I’ve known you al-
most six years. And this is just about the first time I’ve ever 
really thought that you were human.” 


 
 
Interlude: Earth 
November 5, 2068 


Moran   
Moran   
Moran   
Moran   279
279
279
279 
 
ON A GRIM cold Friday night late in November of 2068, Trent 
stood in a doorway, drinking black coffee with the bright warm 
restaurant at his back, and looking off across the water, watched 
snow fall on Manhattan Island. 
Capitol City. The Big Town. 
Pale blue eyes were the most visible features in a face that 
was poorly lit by the cracked, aging glowpaint on McGee’s roof. 
Trent had turned the heating coil on the mug as high as it would 
go, but the top layer of liquid kept going cold regardless when he 
waited too long between swallows. 
He stood in a bubble of silence and stillness, slightly drunk 
himself. The wind whipped the snow wildly only centimeters 
away from the end of his nose, but where he stood the air was 
calm and cold, which was good enough. 
He did not know how long he’d been out there before some-
body from the party came looking for him. Trent’s coffee cup was 
long since empty when Jimmy came out through the restau-
rant’s roof entrance and joined him. “Word up.” 
Trent inclined his head slightly. 
“My brother,” said Jimmy quietly, his voice ten centimeters 
from Trent’s right ear. “Where are you?” 
“On the roof,” said Trent without turning around. 
“This I see. Where else?” 
“Right here on the roof, Jimmy. Nowhere else.” 
Standing immediately behind Trent, Jimmy nodded. 
Without looking around, Trent added, “I can tell ’cause it’s 
cold.” 
“Personally I think you’re on the beach again.” 
The beach had been the furthest thing from Trent’s mind. 
“Absolutely,” he lied, and turned to look at Jimmy. “Sitting on 
the beach, drinking ’stralian beer, and watching the little brown 
girls go by.” 
Jimmy grinned back after a moment. “Sho ’nuff. You’ll be 
there someday. Maybe the rest of us will come visit sometimes.” 

280   Tales 
 
“Sure.” Trent heard his voice as though it were emanating 
from someone else’s throat. “We should be in the Big Town by 
Christmas. One more boost like yesterday’s—” 
Jimmy licked his lips and leaned in on Trent. “That soon?” 
Trent shook his head slowly. “Just the five of us. Four’s going 
to be the most I can take out with me. And I don’t trust anyone 
else anyway. We have to do it, you know. We can’t stay out here 
forever.” 
Trent could hear the alcohol in Jimmy’s speech. “Ain’t so bad 
in the Fringe. The Patrol Sectors are safer, but man, ain’t hardly 
any Peaceforcers at all in here. In Patrol Sectors, all over, we 
gon’ have to stand there with the Peaceforcers tossing down on 
us, and stay calm. It’s gon’ to be hard putting up with that gene-
junk.” 
“We can’t stay in the Fringe forever. I don’t want to get old 
on the street.” 
“True enough,” Jimmy conceded. “And for sure not on this 
cold roof. There’s people inside, bro, including Jodi Jodi who 
looks at you with the big eyes. What you say?” 
Trent nodded. “What happened with you guys? I thought you 
two were made.” 
Jimmy shrugged. “I don’t even know the word, Trent. Very 
happy and then very chilly. Not gon’ to break my heart. Be-
sides,” he said simply, “you like her, I mean for real. Rather let 
her bounce off you than someone else.” 
“Okay.” 
Jimmy cocked his head slightly to one side. “I got you figured 
someday, my man. I think maybe you come out of the Big Time. 
Just—” 
Trent grinned at him again. “Someday.” 
“So not yet,” Jimmy conceded. “What was in your head when 
I came out here?” 
Trent told him the truth. “A frog named Mohammed.” 
“Indeed. Frenchie with an Arab name?” 
“Strange but true.” 

Moran   
Moran   
Moran   
Moran   281
281
281
281 
 
“Always the dramasuit,” said Jimmy softly, breath pluming, 
“like there’s nothing on your face except what the suit puts 
there.” Trent did not reply. “You gon’ to kill this frog?” 
“Jimmy. Killing is—” 
“—wrong, I know. You keep saying.” Jimmy studied him. 
“You ever kill anyone?” 
“Once. It was an accident,” Trent said. “He drowned.” 
“Bro, what hurts?” 
“Something that happened a long time ago.” When you are 
seventeen, six years is almost forever. He did not wait to let 
Ramirez say anything further. “Let’s go back in.” 
IN ALL TIMES there are legends. But before the legend, there 
must be some piece of sharp, shiny truth to catch the light of day 
and hold it glowing in the midst of night’s descent. 
Legends are rarely gentle. Gentleness is not remembered so 
long nor so well as valor or love or greed or death. Great deeds 
alone do not insure legend, and their lack will not prevent it—
the winds of myth can rise from the lowest deserts. 
I have known many of the Continuing Time’s great. I knew 
Ifahad bell K’Ailli briefly, and I was there when a congress of 
well meaning Zaradin began the Time Wars. I was there when 
the High King Arthur died under Camber Tremodian’s hand, 
and I grieved for him. I have known Shakespeare’s mind as he 
wrote, and Erl Moorhe’s as she composed her last and most 
popular sensable, the twenty-seven-hour Lord of the Rings. 
I have known well all three of the deadliest night faces the 
human race has ever produced: Shiva Curiachen, and Ola who 
was Lady Blue, and Camber Tremodian himself. 
Of the long list of regrets that define my life, I most regret the 
fact that I never knew Trent the Uncatchable. 


Moran   
Moran   
Moran   
Moran   283
283
283
283 
 
About the Book And Me 
 
EMERALD EYES is the first novel in The Tales of the Continuing 
Time. I believe the first published description of internet addic-
tion occurs in this novel. 
 
The text is Century Schoolbook; the headings are Albertus. 
 
The book was purchased in 1986 by Amy Stout at Bantam 
Books, and was edited by her. The current edition was edited by 
this other person, Amy Stout-Moran. Like everything else, this 
was for her. 
 
I’m currently (August 2007) maintaining a blog at: 
 
http://DanielKeysMoran.blogspot.com 
 
Sean Fagan and David Silberstein have maintained a fan site 
for years at: 
 
http://kithrup.com/dkm 
 
And Sol Foster has maintained the Continuing Time mailing list 
for about fifty years now – you can sign up at at: 
 
http://ralf.org 

