
 
 
DARK PSYCHOLOGY AND
MANIPULATION
3 IN 1
 
Take Full Control of Your Life.
How to Read Body Language Instantly
and Make Your Mind Inaccessible From
Any Form of Covert Manipulation and
NLP Techniques
 
 
 
Jonathan Mind
Alejandro Mendoza

Text Copyright © Jonathan Mind, Alejandro Mendoza
All rights reserved. No part of this guide may be reproduced in any form
without permission in writing from the publisher except in the case of brief
quotations embodied in critical articles or reviews.
 
Legal & Disclaimer
The information contained in this book and its contents is not designed to
replace or take the place of any form of medical or professional advice; and
is not meant to replace the need for independent medical, financial, legal or
other professional advice or services, as may be required. The content and
information in this book have been provided for educational and
entertainment purposes only.
The content and information contained in this book have been compiled
from sources deemed reliable, and it is accurate to the best of the Author's
knowledge, information and belief. However, the Author cannot guarantee
its accuracy and validity and cannot be held liable for any errors and/or
omissions. Further, changes are periodically made to this book as and when
needed. Where appropriate and/or necessary, you must consult a
professional (including but not limited to your doctor, attorney, financial
advisor or such other professional advisor) before using any of the
suggested remedies, techniques, or information in this book.
Upon using the contents and information contained in this book, you agree
to hold harmless the Author from and against any damages, costs, and
expenses, including any legal fees potentially resulting from the application
of any of the information provided by this book. This disclaimer applies to
any loss, damages or injury caused by the use and application, whether
directly or indirectly, of any advice or information presented, whether for
breach of contract, tort, negligence, personal injury, criminal intent, or
under any other cause of action.
You agree to accept all risks of using the information presented inside this
book.
You agree that by continuing to read this book, where appropriate and/or
necessary, you shall consult a professional (including but not limited to
your doctor, attorney, or financial advisor or such other advisor as needed)

before using any of the suggested remedies, techniques, or information in
this book.

Download the Audio Book Version of This Book for FREE
If you love listening to audio books on-the-go, I have great news for you.
You can download the audio book version of this book for FREE just by
signing up for a FREE 30-day audible trial! See below for more details!
 
 
Audible Trial Benefits
As an audible customer, you will receive the below benefits with your 30-
day free trial:
FREE audible book copy of this book
After the trial, you will get 1 credit each month to use on any
audiobook
Your credits automatically roll over to the next month if you don’t use
them
Choose from Audible’s 200,000 + titles
Listen anywhere with the Audible app across multiple devices
Make easy, no-hassle exchanges of any audiobook you don’t love
Keep your audiobooks forever, even if you cancel your membership
And much more
 
 
 
Click the links below to get started!
 

               For Audible US                         For Audible UK
 
               For Audible FR                         For Audible DE

Table of Contents
 
BOOK 1: MANIPULATION AND DARK PSYCHOLOGY
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER ONE
What is Dark Psychology?
CHAPTER TWO
The 4 Dark Psychology Traits
Narcissism
Machiavellianism
Psychopathy
Sadism
CHAPTER THREE
Psychological Manipulation Techniques
Gaslighting
Projection
Isolation
Positive Reinforcement
Negative Reinforcement
Punishment
Nagging
Yelling
Silent treatment
Intimidation
Traumatic one-trial learning
Manipulation of facts
Mind control and mind games
CHAPTER FOUR
Behavioral and Character Traits of the Manipulators
Lying by the commission and lying by omission
Denial
Rationalization
Minimization

Diversion and Evasion
Covert intimidation and guilt tripping
Shaming
Vilifying the victim
Playing the victim role, and playing the servant role
Seduction
Projecting the blame
Brandishing anger
CHAPTER FIVE
What is Covert Emotional Manipulation?
Emotional manipulation in relationships
Emotional manipulations in friendships
Emotional manipulation at work
CHAPTER SIX
What are the Manipulators Trying to do?
Cancellation of willpower
Destroy self-esteem
Passive-aggressive revenge
Confuse reality
CHAPTER SEVEN
Behavioral Traits of Favorite Victims of Manipulators
Emotional insecurity and fragility
Sensitive people
Emphatic people
Fear of loneliness
Fear of disappointing others
Personality Dependent disorders and emotional dependency
CHAPTER EIGHT
Pathos, Ethos, Logos the Three Emissaries of Public Opinion
Modern Day Aristotle
CHAPTER NINE
Difference between Persuasion and Manipulation
CHAPTER TEN

CHAPTER ELEVEN
Why is Hypnosis Done?
What are the Risks of Hypnosis?
Preparing for Hypnosis
Three Stages of Hypnosis
Applications for Hypnosis
Types of Hypnotherapy
CHAPTER TWELVE
Dark NLP
What is Neuro Linguistic Programming?
How NLP Works
Importance of NLP
NLP Techniques
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
How to Persuade People
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
What is Deception?
Types of Deception
Reasons for Deception
Detecting Deception
Primary Components of Deception
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
The Role of Defense
Acceptance
Increase awareness
Detach with love
Build self-esteem
Change reactions
Be assertive
Feed yourself
Become autonomous and take control
CONCLUSION
 

BOOK 2: MANIPULATION AND NLP TECHNIQUES
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER ONE
Understanding Dark Psychology
Explore your dark side to regain control
The archetype of the shadow: the dark side of our psyche
CHAPTER TWO
What Is NLP
The principal of Neuro-linguistic programming
NLP Techniques
Benefits derived from the use of NLP
Manipulating the Mind Through NLP
Strategies to Increase Self-Esteem Through NLP
Methods for rescuing self-esteem recommended by psychologists.
CHAPTER THREE
Psychological Manipulation Techniques
Psychological Manipulation In Communication
Emotional Blackmail and Manipulation
How to Avoid Emotional Manipulation and Cope with Manipulation?
How Do You Understand and Stop Your Partner's Emotional
Manipulation?
Behavioral and Character Traits of the Manipulators
CHAPTER FOUR
Covert Emotional Manipulation
Signs of Emotional Manipulation
How to deal with an emotional manipulator?
Emotional blackmail and manipulation in relationships
Emotional Manipulation in The Workplace
CHAPTER FIVE
Understanding Body Language
What Is Body Language
Body Language of Each Personality Type
The types of body language

Body language of self-confidence
CHAPTER SIX
The Five C's of Body Language
How to identify the subtle inputs sent by the body
Mastering the Secrets of Non-Verbal Communication
Master your non-verbal communication
CHAPTER SEVEN
Verbal Communication and Nonverbal Communication
Rapid Cynological Or Nonverbal Language Decryption.
Body language in the workplace
CHAPTER EIGHT
How To Analyze People
How to Influence People
How to Analyze Your Relationship?
CHAPTER NINE
Brainwashing
Mind Control Brainwashing - 3 Common Ways it is Used to Manipulate
Others
Brainwashing: Coercive Persuasion Techniques
Brainwash Yourself to Higher Self-Esteem
CHAPTER TEN
Understanding Persuasion
Key elements of persuasion
Principles of Persuasion
Persuasion Techniques
Psychological Tricks to Increase Your Persuasive Power
CHAPTER ELEVEN
How to Differentiate Between Persuasion and Manipulation
Gestures to Increase Your Power of Persuasion
Persuasion Tactics to Influence Anyone in The Most Effective Way
Persuasive Communication and Interpersonal Relationships. How Does It
Help Us?

Discover When You Are The Target
How to increase our capacity for persuasion
CHAPTER TWELVE
What Is Deception
Main Components of Deception
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
The Role of Defence in 9 Steps
1. How to Spot Lies with Deception Detection Techniques
2.Techniques for defending against manipulation
3.Acceptance
4.Increase awareness
5.How to increase self-esteem and gain confidence?
6.Change reactions
7.Be assertive
8.Feed yourself
9.Become autonomous and take control
Deal with toxic people
CONCLUSION
 
BOOK 3: MANIPULATION AND BODY LANGUAGE
INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER ONE
What’s Dark Psychology?
Dark Psychology to Influence People
CHAPTER TWO
The Dark Psychology Traits
Narcissistic
Machiavellian
Psychopaths and Sociopaths
Sadism
CHAPTER THREE
What Are the Psychological Manipulation Techniques?
Behavioural and Character Traits of the Manipulators

CHAPTER FOUR
Signs That You're Being Manipulated
How to Defend Yourself from a Manipulative Person
Practical Tips for Dealing with Predators
CHAPTER FIVE
Deciphering Personality Types
Five Subtypes of Paranoid Personality
What is Covert Emotional Manipulation?
Signs of Emotional Manipulation
How to deal with an emotional manipulator?
CHAPTER SIX
Understanding Body Language
Make Body Language Your Superpower
Detecting Deception, Proceed with Caution
How do to know if a person is lying?
CHAPTER SEVEN
The Secrets of Body
Body language of self-confidence
Reading Body Language
Keys to Reading Body Language
Tips for Reading Body Language
CHAPTER EIGHT
The Five C's of Body Language
How to identify the subtle inputs sent by the body
Mastering the Secrets of Non-Verbal Communication
Master your non-verbal communication
Body Language: Keys to Improve Your Safety and Convince Others
CHAPTER NINE
How to Interpret the Verbal Communication?
What is non-verbal communication?
Rapid Cytological or Nonverbal Language Decryption
CHAPTER TEN

What Is Neurolinguistic Programming?
The Origins Of NLP
Principles of NLP (Neurolinguistic Programming)
CHAPTER ELEVEN
Is NLP Effective?
NLP and Belief in "Failing"
Guide to Your Success
Explore and Design Your Goals With NLP!
NLP Exercise to Break the Rapport
CHAPTER TWELVE
The Pillars Of NLP
How to Apply NLP in Your Life
Manipulating the Mind Through NLP
NLP Communication - NLP and Communication
Body language:
what we communicate and how we do it
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
The Art of Persuasion
The History of Persuasion
Persuasion 101
Discover When You Are the Target
How to increase our capacity for persuasion
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
The Secrets To Read People
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Strategies to Increase Self-Esteem Through NLP
Methods for rescuing self-esteem recommended by psychologists
CONCLUSION
5 Clues to Reveal True Intentions


BOOK 1:

Manipulation and Dark Psychology
 

INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
Congratulations on downloading Manipulation and Dark Psychology: 2nd
Edition: How to Learn Speed Reading People, Spot Covert Emotional
Manipulation, Detect Deception, and Defend Yourself from Persuasion
Techniques and Toxic People, and thanks for doing so.
 
The following chapters will discuss the traits of malicious and manipulative
people and teach you how to identify the techniques they use to take
advantage of others. We will look at the concept of dark psychology and
discuss dark psychological traits such as narcissism, psychopathy, sadism,
and Machiavellianism so that you understand the driving forces behind
manipulative people.
 
The book will also list and dissect all the manipulation techniques while
using simple anecdotes to help you understand how those techniques work,
and how someone might use them against you. The book also covers the
behavioral tendencies and character traits of manipulators so that you can
identify malicious people when they cross your path. It also covers covert
and subtle methods that people in your life might use to influence you
without your knowledge.
 
The book takes a dive into the psyche of the manipulators to help you
understand exactly why they do what they do, and what end goals they have

in mind when they target you. It also discusses the vulnerabilities that
manipulative people look for in the people they choose to victimize.
 
Towards the end, the book teaches tried and tested methods that people can
use to defend against manipulation and exploitation. You will discover why
your self-esteem is your best defense when dealing with psychological
manipulators, and what you can do to raise your self-esteem and regain
control over your life.
 
There are lots of books on dark psychology and manipulation in the market
right now, so thank you very much for choosing this one! Every effort was
made to ensure that this book is filled with useful insights and practical
information that can help protect you against manipulators, so please enjoy!

CHAPTER ONE
What is Dark Psychology?
 
 
There are many different ways to define dark psychology, but in this book,
we will go with the simplest one. Dark Psychology is the art and science of
manipulation and mind control. Psychology, in general, seeks to study and
understand human behavior. It is focused on our thoughts, actions, and the
way we interact with each other. Dark psychology, however, just focuses on
the kinds of thoughts and actions that are predatory in nature. Dark
psychology examines the tactics used by malicious people to motivate,
persuade, manipulate, or coerce others into acting in ways that are
beneficial to themselves, and potentially detrimental to the other person.
 
Dark psychology can be seen as the study of the human condition, in
relation to the psychological nature of the different kinds of people who
prey on others. The fact is that every single human being has the potential

to victimize other people or other living creatures. However, due to social
norms, the human conscience, and other factors, most humans tend to
restrain their dark urges and to keep themselves from acting on every
impulse that they have. However, there is a small percentage of the
population that is unable to keep their dark urges in check, and they harm
others in seemingly unimaginable ways.
 
The point of dark psychology, as a subject, is to try to understand those
thoughts, feelings, and perceptions that cause people to behave in predatory
ways towards each other. Experts in dark psychology work under the
assumption that the vast majority of human predatory actions are
purposeful. In other words, most of the people who prey on others (99.99%)
do it for specific reasons, while the remaining people (0.01%) do it for no
reason at all.
 
The assumption is that when people do evil things, they have specific
motivations, some of which may even be completely rational from their
point of view. People do bad things with specific goals in mind and specific
rationales for their actions, and only a tiny fraction of the population
brutally victimizes others without a purpose that can be reasonably
explained by either evolutionary science or some form of religious dogma.
 
You have heard many times that everyone has a dark side. All cultures and
belief systems acknowledge this dark side to some extent. Our society
refers to it as “evil” while some cultures and religions have gone so far as to
create mythical beings to whom they attribute that evil (the devil, Satan,
demons, etc.). Experts in dark psychology posit that there as some among
us who commit the worst kinds of evil, for purposes that are unknown.

While most people may do evil things to gain power, money, retribution, or
for sexual purposes, there are those who do evil things because that’s just
who they are. They commit acts of horror for absolutely no reason. In other
words, their ends don’t justify their means; they cause harm for its own
sake.
 
Dark psychology is rooted in 4 dark personality traits. These traits are;
narcissism, Machiavellianism, psychopathy, and sadism. People with such
traits tend to act in ways that are pointlessly harmful to others.
 
Let’s look at examples of how dark psychological aspects are manifested in
the real world:
 
“I-Predators” are people or groups of people who use modern technology to
prey on others, either directly or indirectly. As we have mentioned,
everyone has a dark side, and the anonymity that the internet offers has a
way of bringing out that dark side in many of us. The result is that there is
an ever-increasing number of people who are looking to exploit, coerce,
stalk, and victimize others online, and through the use of other
technological tools.
 
These predators seem to be driven by deviant fantasies, which they feel free
to play out because the internet makes it possible for them to lurk in the
shadows. In other words, they are not restricted by the usual social norms
that keep people from revealing their dark side because no one online
knows their real identities. These people tend to have all sort of prejudices
and preconceptions, which they go to great lengths to impose on others.
 

I-Predators come in different shapes and sizes; there are stalkers, harassers,
criminals, perverts, terrorist, bullies, conmen, and even trolls. No matter
what kind of predators they are, they all tend to have a self-awareness of the
fact that they are harming others. They also tend to go out of their way to
cover their tracks, which means they don’t want the people who know them
in real life to discover that they have a dark side.
 
Arson is also a different manifestation of dark psychology. Arsonists are
people who tend to be obsessively preoccupied with setting fires. Some of
them become serial arsonists; they set fires regularly and in a manner that is
highly ritualistic.
 
Necrophiliacs are people who are sexually interested in the dead, while
serial killers are people who murder three or more people over a prolonged
period of time. These are some of the most extreme manifestations of dark
psychology, and although they are rare (as a function of the overall
population), they are still worth discussing if you want to understand dark
psychology. Experts in the field of criminal psychology believe that serial
killers and other evildoers are motivated by the pursuit of psychological
gratification, which they can only achieve by performing those brutal acts.
 
To the people who perform the worst kinds of evil acts, those acts are like
drugs to them; they are addictive in a way. For instance, when a serial killer
gets some form of gratification from murdering someone, he may feel the
urge to do it again in order to experience the same gratification.
 
For the purposes of this book, we won’t be discussing the darkest aspects of
dark psychology; instead, we will be looking at those aspects that you are

more likely to experience in your day to day life. We will be looking at how
you can deal with people who are narcissistic, sadistic, Machiavellian, and
psychopathic. We will look at why and how they do what they do, and what
you can do to keep yourself from falling victim to their machinations.
 
 

CHAPTER TWO
The 4 Dark Psychology Traits
 
 
For a long time, psychologists have referred to the dark human traits as "the
dark triad," which consists of three negative personality traits; narcissism,
Machiavellianism, and psychopathy. However, in recent years, many
experts in the field have been insisting that garden-variety sadism should
also be added to the list of major dark psychological traits. As a result, we
are now moving away from the dark triad and toward the "4 dark
psychology traits". 
 
In this chapter, we will take a look at each of the four traits and discuss
them in detail. Before we look at those traits, it’s important to note that
understanding them is very crucial if you want to have functional
knowledge of how to avoid being manipulated. In fact, research into these

traits has many applications in different fields, including; clinical
psychology, law enforcement, and even business management. Studies
show that people who score high when tested for the four traits are more
likely to commit crimes, to cause problems within organizations, to cause
distress to the people in their lives, and to society in general. In business
situations, it may be important to keep people with such traits away from
positions of power.
 
We encounter instances of narcissism, Machiavellianism, sadism, and non-
clinical psychopathy on a regular basis, and if we are keen, we might be
able to notice them. Statistically, we all have these traits in us to some
extent. In fact, when psychologists test people for these traits, they use
testing methods that assume that these traits exist in a spectrum. To take
sadism as an example, such tests imply that instead of having people who
are sadistic and those who are not sadistic, we have people who have high
levels of sadism and those who have low levels of sadism.
 
Another important thing to note is that some of the characteristics that are
displayed by people with each of the four traits can overlap, and this can be
confusing, even for people who have professional training in psychology.
For example, narcissists may behave in ways that are similar to
Machiavellians or sadists. Because of this, it may be hard to tell what kind
of dark trait a person has just by observing them for a short period of time.
 
If someone does something that’s detrimental to others, you could be able to
tell which dark trait the person has by examining the motivation, or the
extent of the evil action. Don’t jump to conclusions; take some time to
examine the person's behavior closely before you make any judgment. If the

person’s actions are detrimental to you, it may be hard to stay objective
when you are analyzing his dark personality trait, but it’s important to
remember that you can only appropriately deal with people if you have a
good understanding of their traits and motivations. You can try to remove
yourself from the situation and analyze the person as an objective third-
party observer.
 
Narcissism
Narcissism is the dark trait that is displayed by individuals who are
narcissists. Narcissists display high levels of grandiosity, superiority,
dominance, and entitlement. Narcissists tend to be charming people who
have a positive outlook, which is why they are good at fooling other people.
According to psychologists, narcissists are usually on the lookout for people
to feed into their “narcissistic supply” because they want to use those
people to build their own egos. They also lack empathy for others.
 
One main characteristic that you see in narcissists is that they are quite good
at building and cultivating relationships, and they can initially blind people
to the fact that they are acting out of self-interest. We all tend to have
narcissistic traits to varying extents, but there are few among us who have
Narcissistic Personality Disorder.
 
The terms Narcissist and Narcissism come from Narcissus, a character in
Greek mythology. Narcissus was a hunter and a very attractive young man.
He was so attractive that everyone seemed to fall in love with him.
However, he only treated people with contempt and disdain, and he never
returned the love that others showed him. Because of this, he was cursed by

Nemesis (the goddess of revenge) to fall in love with his reflection in a pool
of water.
 
Just like Narcissus, modern-day narcissists are in love with themselves.
However, psychologists have come to discover that narcissist don’t love the
real versions of themselves; they are in love with perfect versions of
themselves, which only exist in their imaginations. It’s easy to assume that
narcissists have high self-esteem, but that is not actually the case; they have
a perverse kind of self-esteem that is not predicated on accepting or loving
who they are but loving a fictitious grandiose version of themselves. When
a narcissist acts out of self-interest to someone’s detriment, it’s usually in
pursuit of that grand vision of himself, even though he knows for a fact that
it’s not real.
 
Narcissists have an exaggerated sense of self-importance. They think they
deserve to be treated better than everyone else around them. They have an
exaggerated sense of entitlement, and they truly believe that when they
receive favorable treatment in certain situations, it is for the common good.
A narcissist thinks that when he is taking advantage of you, he is actually
doing you a favor. This way, he can rationalize a lot of selfish and evil acts.
In a relationship, a narcissist will think of himself as more important and
more deserving than the other person. In the workplace, a narcissist will
think that he has more natural talent than his colleagues, and he, therefore,
deserves to be put in charge of projects or to be promoted ahead of
everyone else.
 
The interesting thing about narcissism is that in some cases, it can make
someone successful. Narcissism can be a self-fulfilling prophesy. When a

narcissistic person believes that he is smarter than everyone else, he may
work hard to prove it, and in the end, he may be more accomplished in his
career. When a narcissist believes that he should be in a leadership position,
he may exude confidence and acquire leadership traits, and the people
around him will become truly convinced that he deserves to be their leader. 
 
Because of this fact, some have argued that narcissism could be a positive
trait in a person who is ethical. The problem, however, is that most
narcissists seem to believe that their needs come before everyone else's, so
sooner or later, they are likely to do something unethical, and to betray the
trust of those who hold them in high esteem. Narcissists who seem
confident at the beginning will often turn out to be arrogant. A narcissist
who seems ethical at the beginning will throw ethics out of the window as
soon as he feels that his dominance is being threatened.
 
Narcissists believe that they are special, and to reinforce this belief, they
surround themselves with people who tend to be agreeable. They want to be
around people who will validate their inflated sense of self-worth. Now,
even the most agreeable people have the ability to spot flaws in others, and
after spending some time with narcissists, they will stop affirming the
negative actions of the narcissist. To prevent this, narcissists try to control
the thoughts and actions of the people around them.
 
Narcissists are very controlling. They control people in both covert and
overt ways. They try to manipulate others so that they keep feeding their
“narcissistic supply,” and when people try to break from their control, they
can react with anger or rage. In relationships, narcissists are more likely to
practice domestic abuse because they are trying to keep the other person

under their thumb. At work, narcissists are more likely to act vindictively
because they want to punish others for challenging their dominance. Later
in the book, we will discuss ways to deal with narcissistic people. 
 
Machiavellianism
Machiavellianism is a dark trait that involves deceitfulness and
manipulation. Machiavellians tend to be very cynical people (not that they
are skeptical or they have doubtful curiosity; they just don’t care for the
moral restrictions that the rest of society adheres to). They tend to be
amoral and self-interested. They don't have a sense of right and wrong;
they'll take any course of action, as long as it serves their interests.
 
Machiavellians are cold, unprincipled, and they are naturally adept at
interpersonal manipulation. They believe that life is a zero-sum game and
that the key to success is manipulating others. They approach all kinds of
relationships with a cold, calculating attitude, and to them, when they desire
a certain outcome in a given situation, the end invariably justifies the
means.
 
Machiavellianism is named after Niccolò Machiavelli, the Italian political
philosopher who is best known for writing The Prince. The book offers
advice on how one can control the masses and manipulate people in order to
gain power over them. The book teaches people to be cunning,
manipulative, and deceitful, as long as they get what they want. It argues
that in pursuit of one's interests, it’s morally justifiable to harm others. In
this sense, Machiavellianism is similar to narcissism because, in both traits,
there is an underlying belief that one’s own interests serve the common
good, even if people are hurt in the process.

 
People with these traits are likely to cheat, lie, and harm others in order to
achieve their goals. They are emotionally detached from the people around
them, so if you are in a relationship with them, you may notice that all your
experiences are shallow. They won’t hesitate to harm others if it’s expedient
for them. Where narcissist, sadists, and psychopaths may harm others for
their own enjoyment, because they lack empathy, or to fulfill certain
emotional needs, Machiavellians will do it for a rational and arguably
pragmatic purpose. They have little consideration for the emotional
collateral damage that they leave behind; in fact, they only care about
others’ emotions if they know it will come back to haunt them.
 
Machiavellians seem to have "cold empathy" as opposed to "hot empathy."
Cold empathy is an understanding of how people may think or act in certain
situations, or how certain events may unfold. On the other hand, hot
empathy refers to be being aware of and caring about people's emotions in a
given situation. Normal people have hot empathy, which means that they
understand how others feel, and they take care not to negatively impact the
sensibilities of those around them. Machiavellians tend to understand the
moves that others are likely to make in specific situations, but they don’t
resonate with other people’s emotions. As a result, they tend to come across
as unfriendly, emotionally distant, and harsh.
 
Some psychologists and anthropologists have argued that Machiavellianism
could be an evolutionary advantage and that it’s, therefore, a desirable trait.
Machiavellians understand people’s emotional reactions, which helps them
deal with real and perceived threats, but they can technically bypass
empathy when reacting to threats, which means that their actions are more

effective. If the rule of the jungle (survival of the fittest) applies, then
Machiavellians are more likely to thrive. The problem with this argument is
that we are not in the jungle anymore, and society only functions if we all
care about the welfare of others.
 
Machiavellians are master manipulators, and they are highly likely to be
involved in white collar crimes. People with this trait are more likely to be
involved in embezzlement schemes, pyramid schemes, stock swindling
schemes, overpricing schemes, and political crimes. They work their way to
the top by manipulating people, and when they get to positions of power
(whether in business or in politics), they use the same techniques to
manipulate the masses.
 
Psychopathy
Of all the dark traits, psychopathy is the most malevolent. Psychopaths have
very low levels of empathy, so they don't care for others. On the other hand,
they have extremely high levels of impulsiveness, and they are thrill-
seeking individuals. They are very callous, very manipulative, and they
have a heightened sense of grandiosity. They seek thrills without caring
about the harm that they inflict on others in the process.
 
Psychopaths are more difficult to spot than you might think. They tend to
keep normal outward appearances; even though they lack empathy and a
conscience, they learn to act normally by observing others' emotional
reactions. They can even come across as charming when they are trying to
manipulate you. They are volatile, and they have criminal tendencies,
although this isn’t always the case.
 

There is a lot of interest and fascination with psychopaths, which is why
you see so many depictions of them in pop culture. However, with
fascination comes misconceptions. We tend to think of psychopaths as
serial killers, bomber, super villains, and people who are certifiably insane,
and the danger here is that we forget that most psychopaths are just normal
(at least by all appearances), and they can harm us in other ways. People
who like starting fights, who disregard your emotions and those who
consistently lie to you may turn out to be psychopaths.
 
Adult psychopathy cannot be treated. However, when psychopathic
tendencies are observed in children and young people, they can be put
through certain programs that teach them to be less callous and more
considerate of others.
 
A key thing you need to understand is the difference between a psychopath
and a sociopath. In colloquial conversations, these two terms are often used
interchangeably, but in psychology, they have different meanings. A
sociopath is a person who has antisocial tendencies. Now, these antisocial
tendencies are usually a result of social and environmental factors; for
example, a person who has a bad childhood may turn out to be a sociopath
because he doesn’t trust society in general, or he has developed certain
psychological issues as a result of the unfavorable upbringing.
 
On the other hand, psychopathic traits are innate. People don't become
psychopaths; they are born psychopaths. However, social and
environmental factors may contribute to a person's particular brand of
psychopathy. For example, people who are born with psychopathic traits
and are brought up in an environment that is chaotic and violent, are more

likely to have more pronounced manifestations of their psychopathy.
Experts agree that there are three main factors that contribute towards
psychopathy; genetics, brain anatomy, and environmental factors. 
 
Like the other dark traits, psychopathy exists on a spectrum. Clinicians use
a scale assessment system to measure the level of psychopathy; everyone
falls somewhere on that scale, but people with a score of 30 and above as
considered to have psychopathy that rises to the level of clinical
significance. The Hare Psychopathy Checklist is used by mental health
professionals to check for psychopathy, mostly in clinical patients and in
criminals, but if you suspect that someone you are dealing with is a
psychopath, you can find it online and use it for free as a guide if you want
to know for sure that you are indeed dealing with a psychopath.
 
Sadism
Like the other three dark traits, sadism is characterized by callousness.
Sadists tend to have normal levels of impulsiveness and manipulation,
which explains why this trait wasn’t originally included in what is now
known as the "dark triad." The defining characteristic of sadists is that they
enjoy cruelty. 
 
Everyday sadists tend to be normal and functional by all indications, but
they enjoy harming others. Sadists are referred to as “everyday sadists”
because it’s important to make a distinction between them and the
narcissists, Machiavellians, and psychopaths who may manifest sadism as
part of their other dark traits. Sadists are intrinsically motivated to cause
others harm, even if they are completely innocent. Sometimes, sadists can
prioritize the infliction of emotional pain on others even if it comes at a

personal cost to them. They find cruelty to be pleasurable and exciting, and
some even find it sexually stimulating.
 
Some psychologists have noted that sadists are often drawn towards career
paths where they are allowed to harm other people under the guise of
legitimate work. That means that many of them flock towards law
enforcement, the military, etc. Psychologists have observed that when the
levels of sadism in police forces are compared to the levels of sadism in the
general population, the levels within police departments are always
invariably higher. This could explain why police forces often have problems
with some of their members taking the law into their own hands. 
 
Sadists tend to inflict pain on people around them for no reason, and they
are likely to escalate, especially when they discover that the person in
question is less likely to push back. That explains why bullies keep picking
on people who don't stand up to them.
 
Sadists are the kind of people who would tell your secrets to other people
even after promising to keep them private because they enjoy it when you
experience discomfort. They are also more likely to portray others in false
or unflattering terms, with the intention of damaging the other person’s
reputation; while Machiavellians may do this to advance their personal
agenda, sadists would do this because it’s fun for them. Sadists may also
work actively to get you fired from your job or to jeopardize your success,
not because they want to get ahead of you, but just because they want you
to be unhappy. They may also try to ruin your personal relationships; they’ll
cause turmoil in your relationship, then sit back and enjoy the drama and
misery. They are more likely to steal other people's property, not because

they need it, but because they don't want what the other person to have it.
They are more likely to bully you either in real life or online.
 
You can always spot a sadist by the comments and remarks he makes
online. Most internet trolls tend to be everyday sadists. They will make
negative comments about pretty much anything, not because they strongly
believe in the opinion that they have, but because they want to annoy you or
get a rise out of you. They’ll always find something negative to say about
even the most unifying things online. With trolls, the more you engage with
them, the more energized they become, and the more they’ll bother you
online.
 
 

CHAPTER THREE
Psychological Manipulation Techniques
 
 
 
Psychological manipulation is defined as a form of social influence which
seeks to alter the behavior and the perceptions of others, by the use of
tactics that are indirect, deceptive, and underhanded. In other words, it’s
about using certain tricks to get people to act in a certain way or to think
certain things, usually to the advantage of whoever is perpetrating the
manipulation.
 
This way, the interests of the manipulator are advanced, usually at the
expense of the other person in that equation. Psychological manipulation
employs methods that are both devious and exploitative, and they are often
used by people who have one or more of the dark personality traits that we
discussed in the previous chapter.
 
Now, from the very start, we need to make sure you understand that not all
psychological manipulation and social influence is negative. It’s possible to
manipulate someone for their own good. For instance, parents may
manipulate their children into eating vegetables. In as much as that is
manipulation, it ends up benefiting the child because his or her health is
improved. Similarly, friends, family members, and healthcare professionals
may try to influence you using certain manipulation technique with the aim
of getting you to make the right choices in certain situations.
 

Social influence is a normal and important part of social discourse. In
healthy social influence, there is no aspect of coercion. In other words,
when a well-meaning person tries to influence you, and you resist that
influence, they are not going to strong-arm you into doing what they want.
However, in unhealthy psychological manipulation, the manipulator often
resorts to coercive techniques if they sense that you are resistant to the
softer techniques that they have been trying to use on you. 
 
When malicious people deploy psychological manipulation techniques
against you, they usually try to conceal the aggressive nature of their
intentions, so you have to understand that most of their techniques are
designed to be subtle. Most of them will also take some time to get to know
you and understand your psychological vulnerabilities before they can
decide which manipulation techniques will work on you. This means that
just because you have known someone for a while, and you haven’t seen
them try to harm you in any way, it doesn’t guarantee the fact that their
intentions are pure, which means that you shouldn’t start disregarding your
instincts about them. The best manipulators are those who reveal their
intentions long after you have decided to trust them.
 
Remember that manipulators generally have a tendency toward
ruthlessness, so even if they are treating you well at the beginning of your
association with them, pay close attention to the way they act towards
others. If you see them using manipulation techniques against other people,
you should know that it’s just a matter of time before they get around to
using the same techniques against you.
 

In this chapter, we discuss the most common psychological manipulation
techniques that are used by people who mean to harm you or to take
advantage or you. It’s important to understand these techniques and how
they work so that you can be able to spot them when they are being used
against you or someone close to you, and so that you can know how to
defend against them.
 
Gaslighting
Gaslighting is one of the most lethal psychological manipulation techniques
out there. It’s where a manipulator tries to get their target to start
questioning their own reality. It involves getting someone to doubt their
own memories and perceptions, and instead, to start believing what the
manipulator wants them to believe.
 
The manipulator will sow seeds of doubt in the person so that they start
thinking that either they remember things wrong, or they are losing their
sanity. Gaslighting involves the persistent denial of things that obvious
facts. It also involves a lot of misdirection, contradictions, and blatant lying.
When a person is subjected to gaslighting for a long time, they start to
become unstable, and they start feeling as though their own beliefs are
illegitimate.
 
One common example of gaslighting is where an abuser convinces the
victim that the abusive incident she recalls did not even occur. This
phenomenon is more common than you might imagine, and it happens in all
sorts of relationships. An abusive spouse might deny ever abusing you
when confronted later, by either blatantly denying that they abuse occurred,

or claiming that it didn’t happen as you remember and that your version of
the events is greatly exaggerated.
 
A manipulative boss or colleague might prey on a subordinate and later
deny that it happened that way. Someone who groped you might later claim
that they "accidentally brushed against you," and they may insist on it so
much, to the point that you start thinking that maybe you were mistaken.
 
You may wonder; “How does it even work? I mean, I have a firm grasp of
my own reality, and I doubt someone could be able to convince me that my
perceptions are wrong!”
 
It’s easy to assume that gaslighting won’t work on you because you are
smart or because you are strong-willed, but the truth is that when a
manipulator is good at what he is doing, you might not even see it coming.
The way it works is that it often starts with small lies on the manipulator's
part and small concessions on your part. 
 
Say, for example, your boyfriend shows up a few minutes late to an
appointment when you had agreed to meet at a specific time, and he insists
that he is on time and that it’s you who came in a bit earlier and is mistaken
about the timing that you agreed upon. At that moment, you might think,
"Well, a 10-minute difference isn't such a big deal, and maybe we just got
our lines crossed". You could dismiss this small discrepancy because it
seems inconsequently, but that will just be the beginning. The next time, the
lie will get a little bigger, and you will feel obligated to excuse it as well,
because you already let something else slide, so it would seem inconsistent
if you made a big fuss at this point. 

 
After that initial seed is sown, the lies will start to escalate, and you will
continue making concessions and agreeing with things that you know are
lies, until one day, you realize that you are so far gone. You might not even
notice when the small lies graduate into bigger lies. In every step of the
way, you will be letting go of your reality and accepting the other person's
version of things, and you will find yourself trusting their judgment over
your own. 
 
In a nutshell, gaslighting involves desensitizing you to your own reality,
until the truth becomes what the other person says it is.
 
Gaslighting is more likely to work in situations where there is a power
dynamic between two people, or between a person and a group of people. In
a relationship where the victim is financially or emotionally dependent on
the manipulator, the victim may accept to let go of her reality because its
more comfortable to do so than to stand up to the manipulator, only to end
up losing the relationship. In the workplace, a subordinate may go along
with the boss’s lies because he is afraid of losing his job. In a situation
where a leader gaslight his followers, it often works because deep within,
the followers want to believe whatever lies the leader is telling them.
 
There are several techniques that gas lighters use to get a stranglehold on
their victims. One such technique is withholding. This is where the
manipulator refuses to listen to what the victim says or pretends not to
understand what they are saying. You might bring up something important,
but the response you get is, "I don't even remember this thing you keep
talking about."

 
Another gaslighting technique is called countering. This is where the
manipulator questions the victim’s memory of the events in questions. They
say things like “Were you even sober? Because that is not how that
happened." The manipulator would then go on to offer an entirely different
version of the story, where he casts himself as the hero or even the "real
victim." 
 
Gas lighters also use blocking and diverting as a manipulation technique.
This is where they change the story or question the way the victim is
thinking in order to avoid addressing whatever issue the victim is raising.
 
Trivializing is also a common gaslighting technique. This is where the
manipulator makes the victim feel that her feelings or needs aren't that
important, or that she is just being unnecessarily dramatic. Manipulators in
such cases may say things like "don't blow things out of proportion." 
 
You may be able to tell if someone is gaslighting you if you find that you
are frequently second-guessing yourself, or that your convictions fade away
when you interact with a certain person. If a person makes you ruminate
about certain character flaws, they are most likely gaslighting you.
Someone who tells you that you are too emotional might really be trying to
get you to stop trusting your emotions. If you feel confused about the nature
of your relationship, or you feel like the person is driving you crazy, or that
you are losing control when you are with them, they might be gaslighting
you.
 

If you walk into a room with the intention of having a discussion about
something specific, but a few moments later, you find yourself arguing with
your partner about a whole other topic, it means that the person is
deliberately frustrating your genuine efforts to communicate, and it could
be a sign of gaslighting.
 
If you feel fuzzy about your own beliefs, thoughts, and feelings whenever
you are with someone that is a clear red flag. When you are being
gaslighted, you might also find that you are constantly apologizing for
“being mistaken” or that you are frequently making excuses to yourself and
to others for your partner’s behavior.
 
Projection
Projection is a psychological manipulation technique where someone
transfers their emotions and mistakes onto you. Projection is a defense
mechanism that almost everyone uses to some extent. We all have a natural
tendency to project our negative emotions and undesirable feelings onto the
people around us, and this often happens when we feel like we have been
put on the spot. However, in as much as we all do it, narcissists and people
with other dark personality traits tend to do it excessively and to absurd
extents. 
 
Toxic people find it very difficult to admit even to themselves that the nasty
things around them could be a result of their own doing, and they always
find people to blame for every little thing that happens. Such people often
go out of their way to avoid taking responsibility for their own actions. As a
result, they may assign their negative behavior and traits to you. For

example, if you have a boss who is always late to work, you might be
surprised to find him accusing you of tardiness even if you are consistently
punctual.  A kleptomaniac is more likely to accuse you of stealing his/her
personal items. 
 
In relationships, a manipulator who cheats on your is more likely to accuse
you of cheating in him/her or to act in a way that suggests that he/she
suspects you of cheating. When a person is cheating on you, he may choose
to spy on you by checking your messages, phone calls, and emails, and he is
more likely to barrage you with questions every time you are a few minutes
late. Now, a good partner may get a little suspicious or insecure if you
suddenly become more secretive or absent, but if your partner starts treating
you with suspicion even if you acting completely normal, chances are they
are the ones who are cheating, and they are just projecting it onto you. 
 
Manipulators tend to project partly because they want to destruct you and to
keep you on the defensive, and this gives them more control over your life.
When they accuse you of certain things, and you feel like you owe them an
explanation, it allows them to dominate you; in other words, it becomes as
though they are the “boss or you” and you now have to answer to them. As
you frantically try to defend yourself from the accusations that they have
made against you, they get to do whatever they want, and you never get the
time to call them out on their mistakes. They are also counting on the fact
that it would feel weird and childish if you accused them of the exact thing,
they have already accused you of, so it takes away the possibility that you
might confront them based on suspicions that you might have.
 

As we have mentioned, projection is something that everyone does, and that
can complicate things for you if a manipulative person project onto you.
When someone projects negative emotions onto you, you might have a
natural inclination to project your sense of empathy and compassion back
onto them. This explains why projection works so well as a manipulation
technique. Even when someone is accusing you of doing something bad,
you will still feel compassion for them, and you will go out of your way to
reassure them that they are mistaken; but when you do this, they win, albeit
with your help. When you feel like someone is projecting onto you, the best
thing you can do is leave your own emotions out of the equation and try to
respond as rationally as possible.
 
Isolation
We all have social support systems that help us cope with difficult situations
and keep us from making decisions that are bad for us. We have friends and
family members who take notice when our behavior changes, or when we
start hanging out with "bad people," and they always watch our backs.
Manipulators understand this, and one of the first things that they'll do
when trying to gain control over your life is to isolate you. 
 
Isolation facilitates abuse because it takes away any recourse that you might
have when someone starts getting abusive. It closes a victim's avenues of
escape, and it increases their sense of helplessness. It ensures that when
things go south, there's no one there to rescue you. It increases the power
that the abuser or manipulator has over the victim because it makes the
victim more dependent on the abuser.
 

Isolating the victim from the outside world is widely used by all sort of
manipulators. When a cult leader tries to indoctrinate young recruits, he will
make sure that they are locked away so that he can have complete control
over the information that they receive. The same happens in abusive
relationships, workplace bullying, and many other areas.
 
When an abuser sets out to isolate you, he will start by driving a wedge
between you and the people that you depend on. He will learn everything
about the dynamics between you and your family and friends, and he will
use the weaknesses in your bonds to sow distrust and conflict. For example,
if a guy knows that you are close with your sister, but you have some
unresolved childhood conflicts with her, he may try to reignite those
conflicts so that you start drifting apart.
 
In the workplace, a manipulator may create animosity between you and
your colleagues so that they get mad at you and stop siding with you or
watching your back. If you join a cult or any sort of group and the leader is
a manipulator, he may insist that you cut ties with your family and friends,
and only depend on other people within that group.
 
Rivals in business, at work, or even in your personal life can isolate you by
smearing your name and discrediting you with other members of the
community. “Divide and conquer” is also a form of isolation that is used
especially by people with the Machiavellianism trait. In this instance, the
manipulator is using isolation as a double-edged sword to gain control over
both parties that are being pulled apart from each other.
 

Once an abuser has managed to isolate you, he will take his abuse to the
next level because he knows you have no one to turn to. In fact, other
manipulation techniques such as gaslighting work even more effectively
when a person is isolated.
 
They say that love is blind, and sometimes, at the beginning or
relationships, we are blind to the dark traits of the people we are dating.
Some manipulators may try to isolate you from the very first time you meet
them. If you start dating someone and you notice that he never wants to
hang out at your place, or he never wants you to bring your friends along on
casual dates, chances are he is trying to isolate you so that you cannot get
your friends to give you an objective assessment of his character.
 
In the workplace, isolation can take many different forms. A person may
isolate you by denying you access to certain opportunities, withholding
important information from you, or keeping you out of the loop on matters
that are crucial to your job performance.
 
Isolation can also be used by a manipulative person as a form of
punishment if you are not doing what he wants. For example, an abusive
person might invite all your friends and acquaintances to a gathering, but
fail to invite you, so that you feel left out, and you are forced to do what he
wants just to score an invite to the next gathering.
 
Positive Reinforcement
We always think of positive reinforcement as a good thing, but malicious
people can also use it to manipulate their victims. The fact is that we all use
positive reinforcement in one form or another. Parents use it to get their

kids to behave properly, teachers use it to make their students more
interested in school, bosses use it to encourage productivity, and partners
use it to modify each other’s behavior in relationships. It is an integral part
of our social interactions, but it only becomes a problem when it’s
detrimental of the person it’s being used on.
 
Positive reinforcement happens when a good or desirable stimulus is
presented in such a way that it appears to be a consequence of certain
behavior. For example, a child who eats his vegetables gets a scoop of ice-
cream at the end of the meal, and it registers in his mind that those two
things are intricately linked. An employee who works hard and becomes
more productive gets a bonus at the end of the month, and her brain makes
the connection between the hard work and the extra disposable income. The
next time the person has to perform the same activity, he/she will recall the
positive feeling or the reward from earlier and will take a course of action
that ensures he/she gets a similar outcome. 
 
When manipulators use positive reinforcements, they are always trying to
get you to do things that benefit them. For example, an abusive person in a
relationship may buy you a gift after a major abusive incident in order to
keep you from leaving or reporting him. You may have heard of people who
hit their spouses and then buy them flowers the next day. In such cases, the
abuser is trying to get you to accept the abuse as a norm that comes with a
reward. The message here is that "if you shut up, you get something nice."
 
Positive reinforcement is also used by manipulators who want you to be
their accomplice when they are taking advantage of a third party.

Machiavellians are particularly good at using this technique. For example, a
boss who embezzles from work may offer you a payoff to keep his secret.
 
Manipulators often use positive reinforcement on an incremental basis
when they want you to do something against your will. The objective here
is to lull you into complacency. They know that once you have accepted a
basic level of positive reinforcement, they can escalate things and push you
outside of your comfort zone.
 
The simplest and most commonly used form of positive reinforcement is a
commendation. When someone goes out of their way to compliment you in
public, they could be using positive reinforcement to manipulate you. For
instance, when you are with a group of friends and one of them starts saying
what a nice guy you are, how much they know they can rely on you, the
chances are that he is buttering you up to ask you for a favor. 
 
Negative Reinforcement
Negative reinforcement is a form of psychological manipulation which is
used to make people feel obligated to act in certain ways in order to avoid
certain levels of mental or physical pain or discomfort. In positive
reinforcement, you get a reward for acting the way the manipulator wants
you to act, and the desire for that reward is what modifies your behavior in
the future. Negative reinforcement is, however, a bit more complicated than
that. 
 
To understand the concept of negative reinforcement, you first have to
understand how it’s different from punishment. Both of them are popular
manipulation techniques, but there is a subtle difference between them.

Many people assume that they are the same thing, but they are not. In
punishment, the manipulator adds something negative when you don't act a
certain way. In negative reinforcement, the manipulator subtracts something
negative when you act the way they want you to act.
 
Reinforcement is meant to strengthen voluntary responses, while
punishment is meant to weaken voluntary responses; the manipulator will
choose one method or the other based on the kind of outcome that they
desire in that particular situation.
 
While punishment is meant to stop a certain behavior from occurring again,
reinforcement is meant to encourage the behavior to occur again. A
manipulator would use punishment to stop you from doing something he
doesn’t want you to do. However, he will use negative reinforcement to
force you to do (or to keep doing) something he wants. For example,
nagging is more of a negative reinforcement technique than a punishment.
When someone wants you to do something, they keep nagging you to do it,
and the nagging (which is the negative stimulus) stops when you comply.
So, negative reinforcement works on you because you want to put a stop to
a negative stimulus that already exists, while punishment works because
you want to keep something negative from happening. 
 
Every time someone does something negative to twist your arm to get you
to take a certain course of action; that is negative reinforcement. When you
are trying to break up with someone, and he/she cries very loudly about it in
a public place, until you change your mind, they are using negative
reinforcement to manipulate you (at that moment, you feel that the

uncomfortable stares from strangers will only stop if you take the person
back). 
 
Sanctions are also a very common form of negative reinforcement. They are
used by powerful nations to get other nations to bend to their will, but they
can also be used in interpersonal relationships or at work in one form or
another. A sanction is basically a threat of a future consequence if you fail
to do something. Sanctions may be used in relationships for the common
good or for malicious intentions; you have to assess the individual situation
to tell if the use of sanctioning (or any other negative reinforcement
technique) is malicious.
 
Punishment
In psychological manipulation, punishment is a negative action that is taken
by the manipulator to weaken the victim’s voluntary responses. Punishment
works because it makes the victim fear the consequences of going against
the will of the manipulator. We have already looked at how punishment
differs from negative reinforcement, but we should point out that in some
instances, those two can overlap. In this segment, we will take a look at
some of the most common types of punishment that people with dark
personality traits use to manipulate their victims.
 
Nagging
Nagging, also known as pestering or hectoring, is a form of manipulation
where one person continuously urges another to do something, despite the
other person previously refusing to do it or to agree to do it at a later time.
One author famously described nagging as an interaction where one person

makes a repeated request while the other person repeatedly ignores that
request, and both people become annoyed as the battle of wills escalates.
 
Although it has negative connotations, nagging is actually an integral part
of interpersonal communication in many social dynamics. Parents nag their
kids to get them to do certain things. In fact, nagging is necessary when
training children to take up certain constructive habits. Nagging may also
be used by well-meaning people; friends or partners may nag you to do
things that benefit you. In fact, some amount of nagging is necessary even
in healthy relationships. However, people with dark personality traits may
nag you to do things that benefit them and impact you negatively.
 
To tell if the person nagging you has malicious intentions, you have to
examine the individual situation. Are they asking you to do something that
only benefits them? Does the nagging seem forceful? Do you detect anger
or threats in their body language and in the words they choose to use? Are
they trying to guilt you into doing something you don’t want to do?
 
If your girlfriend repeatedly asks you to take out the trash, that might
indicate that she has some control issues, but that’s not the same thing as
having malicious intentions. When malicious people nag you, there is
usually an “or else” to what they are asking you to do, and if you look at the
subtext, you will realize that it’s more of a demand than a request. 
 
Yelling
Yelling works as a manipulation technique for one simple reason; it makes
you feel uncomfortable or afraid to the point that you comply with whatever
the manipulator wants you to do. There are two main ways in which

manipulators use yelling to manipulate others. People either yell to
dominate over you, or to play the victim and to gain your sympathy.
 
Yelling can be used to intimidate someone. When a manipulative person
yells at you, he may be trying to intimidate you because you are more likely
to do what he wants if you are afraid of them. Manipulative people resort to
yelling partly because at that moment; they know that they are unable to
make a logical argument to get you to do what they want. They know that if
you stick to the facts of the matter, you might come out on top, so they yell
because they want to disorient you and make you lose the argument by
default.
 
When a person raises their voice during an argument, it’s a clear sign of
rising hostility, but it could also be a sign that they are passionate about the
topic of discussion. You have to assess yelling in context to understand if
it’s being used to manipulate you. Just like with the other manipulation
techniques; you have to look at the person's intent. 
 
When manipulators use yelling to play the victim during an interaction,
they often (but not always) choose to do it in front of an audience. When a
person (particularly one who is perceived to be weaker) yells at you in a
public place, by-passers who don’t have the full story of what’s going on
will automatically assume that you are on the wrong, and that puts you on
the spot. You may be forced to agree with the person’s request just to avoid
the judgmental eyes of strangers.
 
Silent treatment

The silent treatment works as a manipulation technique because it's a form
of love withdrawal. When a person gives you the silent treatment, they are
essentially saying, "I’m taking away the love unless you do what I want." It
is a form of punishment that is designed to control people, and it's a very
popular type of emotional abuse. 
 
The silent treatment only works in cases where there is some level of
emotional dependency between the two parties (you don't really care if a
total stranger gave you the silent treatment). In certain dynamics, the silent
treatment can be used to make you feel powerless and invisible; as if you
don’t even exist. 
 
As social beings, we need the approval and the affection of others to thrive.
Even people who are introverted need to have some sort of back and forth
with the people in their lives to feel whole. When someone gives you the
silent treatment, they deny you that affection, and it can mess with you
psychologically, and force you to make certain concessions that you aren't
ready to make.
 
So, a manipulator will ask you to do something, and when you say no,
he/she will start ignoring you. They won’t respond when you talk to them,
and they won’t answer your calls or texts. Some of them may even suddenly
vanish from your life or go out of their way to avoid being in the same
room with you. The more emotionally involved you are, the higher the
chances you will decide that the animosity isn’t worth you standing your
ground, and you will find yourself doing what they want.
 

The silent treatment is one of those bad habits that tend to escalate with
time in a relationship. If someone uses this technique against you once and
it works, they’ll start using it at every turn.
 
Intimidation
Intimidation can either be covert or overt, but in either case, it’s used by
manipulators to get you to bend to their will out of fear. 
 
Overt intimidation is also known as bullying. This is where manipulators
make open threats to get you to do what they want. They’ll use fear to
threaten you into submission. It may be a threat of physical violence.
They’ll brandish anger and rage to prove to you that they have violent
tendencies. If you stand your ground, they may even resort to actual
physical violence. They are usually angry people who have problems with
authority.
 
Covert intimidation involves the use of veiled or vague threats to
manipulate people. People who use covert intimidation has violent
tendencies, but they try to control themselves because society frowns at
overt displays of violence. Such people are very dangerous because they are
good at hiding their true nature from the rest of the world. These are the
kinds of people who abuse their spouses indoors but then present a
charismatic character to the rest of the world.
 
People who use convert intimidation tend to be very calculated, and they
are good at coming up with diabolical ways of punishing you if you don’t
do what they want. 
 

Traumatic one-trial learning
One-trial learning refers to singular experiences that we encounter, which
end up shaping our behavior in the future. This sort of experience is usually
traumatizing and powerful enough to serve as a deterrent from acting in a
certain way for the rest of our lives.
 
In many cases, one-trial learning may occur without anyone inducing it or
imposing it on us. For example, if you try a certain kind of food for the first
time, and then you get a serious bout of food poisoning, you may be
traumatized to the point that you avoid eating that food again in the future.
One-trial learning is important for humans and all animals because it’s
crucial for survival. When we were still hunters and foragers, one-trial
learning would help us avoid foods that were poisonous or situations that
were dangerous. 
 
Malicious people use one-trial learning as a manipulation technique to get
us to tow certain lines. The way it works is they induce the traumatic
experience in such a way as to ensure that our brains associate certain
actions with the trauma.
 
One such example is corporal punishment. Corporal punishment is less
common in Western societies than it was a few decades back, but it is one
of the easiest forms of traumatic one-trial learning to understand. It used to
be that when a child did something wrong, the parents (or teachers) would
hit him while making it very clear to the child why he was being punished.
In future, when the child considered making the same mistake again, he
would remember the pain that he experienced earlier, and he would decide
that the action was not worth a repetition of the painful experience. Of

course, corporal punishment is now either frowned upon or illegal in most
jurisdictions because it causes serious psychological wounds and self-
esteem issues.
 
Manipulators use traumatic one-trial learning in many different ways. They
use verbal abuse, intimidation, and explosive anger to traumatize people
and keep them from acting in certain ways in the future. For instance, let’s
say that you are in a team with a colleague who isn’t pulling his/her weight
on the project you are working on. One day, you decide to confront him
about it in a calm and rational way. However, he reacts in a very explosive
way. He calls you names, throws a tantrum, causes a scene, and he makes
you extremely uncomfortable and traumatized. In the future, when a similar
issue arises, you will be afraid to confront him, so he gets away with it. In
this case, he has manipulated you by conditioning you to avoid confronting
or upsetting him in the future. 
 
There are many variations in the way traumatic one-trial learning works,
and it’s commonly used to manipulate people in interpersonal relationships.
The next time you want to do something, but you decide against it because
you had a bad experience in the past, you should know that you are dealing
with traumatic one-trial learning; if the situation is tied to a specific person,
that should indicate to you that the person is a manipulator.
 
Manipulation of facts
Manipulation of facts is one of the most effective psychological
manipulation techniques because it is based on facts that are subject to
interpretation. When a person manipulates facts, he is technically not lying;

he is just using the facts in his favor. It could involve cherry picking facts,
omitting certain facts, or taking facts out of context.
 
Even the most indisputable facts are subject to interpretation, and people
with dark personality traits are very good at coming up with interpretations
that portray them in the best possible light. Machiavellians are especially
skilled at using factual information to turn bad things into seemingly good
things.
 
One way to manipulate facts in interpersonal relationships is by making
excuses. People can excuse all sorts of bad behavior by creating narratives
that warp the context of the objectionable actions that they have taken.
 
Another way to manipulate facts is by blaming the victim for causing
his/her victimization. There are many documented cases where abusers in
relationships were able to convince their victims that they did certain things
to deserve the abuse. There are many wife beaters who defend themselves
by saying, "you made me do it."  This manipulation technique often works
more effectively after the victim has been isolated from her support system.
Victims who are in love or are dependent on the abuser are more likely to
accept warped interpretations of abusive events because their own judgment
is impaired by their affection for the abuser.
 
Withholding of key information, or strategic disclosure of facts, is another
common technique that involves manipulation of facts. Someone might be
telling you the truth with the intention of manipulation you. Manipulators
know that your reaction to certain information depends on the mood you are
in when you receive the information, or whether or not you will consider

that information a priority at the moment you receive it. Manipulators also
know that hiding certain key details can affect the way you digest and react
to information.
 
Strategic disclosures and withholding of key details are used every day in
interpersonal relationships, in business, and even in political discourse.
Politicians use this all the time. When they have information that could
damage their standing with the public, but they have a legal obligation to
release it, they often do it at the close of business on Friday, when most
people are looking forward to the weekend, and they aren’t paying attention
to the news. This way, they ensure the damaging information doesn’t get a
lot of media coverage.
 
Other ways to manipulate facts include; exaggeration of the facts,
sensationalizing or the facts, understating facts, or presenting facts with
one-sided biases. Everyone uses all of these techniques to some extent; you
have to examine each person’s intent to determine whether or not they are
malicious.
 
Mind control and mind games
The term mind control has many definitions and interpretations, but the
crucial thing to note is that it doesn't involve any sort of magic or
supernatural ability; it just requires a rudimentary understanding of human
emotions and behavior. Mind control can involve brainwashing a person,
reeducating them, reforming their thoughts, using coercive techniques to
persuade them of certain things, or brain-sweeping.
 

There are many forms of mind control, and we could fill an entire book
discussing all those forms, but for our purposes, we will look at the concept
in general terms. Mind control means a person is trying to get others to feel,
think, or behave in a certain way, or to react and make decisions following a
certain pattern. It could vary from a girl trying to get her boyfriend to
develop certain habits, to a cult leader trying to convince his followers that
he is God.
 
Mind control is based on one thing: information. We have the thoughts and
beliefs that we do because we learned them. When we are subjected to new
information on a deliberate and consistent basis, it’s possible to alter our
beliefs, thoughts, or even memories.
 
The brain is hardwired to survive, and towards that end, it’s very good at
learning information that is crucial for our survival. When you receive
certain information consistently, your brain will start to believe it even if
you know it’s not true. For example, even if you are the most rational
person out there, if you go online and watch 100 videos about a certain
conspiracy theory, you will start to believe it to some extent. That explains
why people who seem smart can end up getting indoctrinated into cults or
even terrorist groups.
 
Mind control also works more effectively when one is dependent on the
person who is trying to control his/her mind. Even in relationships that are
involuntary, the victim can start buying the perpetrator’s world view if they
have been dependent on the perpetrator for a long time. That explains
phenomena such as Stockholm syndrome (where people who are kidnapped

or held hostage start being affectionate towards their captors and
empathizing with their causes).
 
The worst thing you can do is assume that you are too smart for mind
control to work on you. Under the right circumstances, anyone can be
persuaded to abandon their world view and adopt someone else's. 
 
Mind games are covert tricks that are deliberately crafted in order to
manipulate someone. Think of them as "handcrafted" psychological
manipulation techniques. While other techniques are applied broadly, mind
games are created to target very specific people. They work best when the
victim trusts the perpetrator, and the perpetrator understands the victim’s
personality and behavior.
 
Most of the psychological manipulation techniques we have discussed thus
far can be used when crafting mind games. A person who understands you
will tell you certain things or behave in certain ways around you because
they are deliberately trying to get you to react in a certain way. It almost
always involves feigning certain emotions.
 
People who play mind games use innocent sounding communication to
elicit calculated reactions from you. Psychologists refer to such mind games
as “conscious one-upmanship," and they have observed that they occur in
all areas of life. Mind games occur in office politics, personal relationships,
and even in international diplomacy. 
 
At work, someone could try to make you feel like you are not up to the task
so that they can steal an opportunity from you. In a marriage, your partner

could make certain seemingly innocent slights against you so that you feel
like you have something to prove, and you take a certain course of action as
a result. In dating, there are “pickup artists” who use different kinds of
tricks to get you to lower your guard and let them in.

CHAPTER FOUR
Behavioral and Character Traits of the
Manipulators
 
 
Being able to tell if someone is taking advantage of you or manipulating
you is one of the most important survival skills that you need today.
Everyone around you has their own interests and agendas, but it’s crucial to
be able to tell when those agendas are malicious or likely to cause you
unintended harm.
 
Manipulators have many identifiable behavioral and character traits, some
of which we will discuss in this chapter. With the information you learn
here, you will be able to tell whether or not a person is a manipulator,
whether or not his/her brand of manipulation is meant to cause you harm,
and what kind of manipulator he/she is. 
 

Here are the character and behavioral traits that you ought to look out for if
you suspect that someone is a manipulator. 
 
Lying by the commission and lying by omission
A lie of commission is what's called a "classic lie." When someone says
something that they know is not factual, then that is a lie of commission. In
other words, a lie of commission is something that is simply untrue. It
involves purposefully telling someone something with the intention of
deceiving them. It is extremely deliberate, and its main purpose is to gain a
personal advantage in a given situation. 
 
Lying by the commission isn’t always done with malicious intent, but
people who are more comfortable telling outright lies are more likely to be
manipulators. Everyone lies. Even seemingly innocent young children will
tell a lie of commission to get out of trouble; a child with jam on his face
will deny touching it because he is trying to evade the consequences of
telling the truth, not because he is malicious.
 
When you spend time with a manipulator, you will notice that he lies all the
time out of habit, even when the situation doesn’t necessitate it. Narcissists
will lie because they want you to think highly of them, while sadists will lie
to cause you pain. Lies of the commission may seem pointless to you in
specific situations, but they always have a certain value for the manipulator,
even if you aren’t able to see it.
 
Lying by omission is also known as "exclusionary detailing." It involves
telling the truth but leaving out certain specific details. It may also involve
failing to correct certain misconceptions that one is aware of. Lies of

omission are more sophisticated than lies of commission because they give
the person a loophole in case they are caught on the lie. Even in legal
situations, it’s possible to get away with lies of omission, because you can
always argue that the person asking the questions wasn’t specific enough
about what details they wanted you to give.
 
The first and most common instance of lying by omission is the kind that
involves leaving out details. The best example of such a lie is when a
salesperson talks about the positive aspects of a product but fails to mention
its negative aspects. Manipulators can use lies of omission to control the
way people react in certain situations.
 
For example, when a malicious person reports to you what a mutual friend
said about you in an earlier conversation, they may choose to mention the
details that are likely to breed animosity between you and your friend but
leave out the redeeming details. If someone said three things about you; two
compliments and one critical comment, the malicious person will report the
critical comment to you and deliberately fail to mention the two positive
comments.
 
Failing to correct misconceptions is a less common kind of lie of omission,
and it’s mostly used by diabolical Machiavellians and psychopaths. This is
where a person lets you believe a certain thing even when they know it’s
not true. For example, if you blame yourself for a situation that the other
person knows isn’t your fault, they’ll let you keep believe it because it
benefits them. Experienced manipulators may say things or act in ways that
lead you to arrive at a certain false conclusion, and when you get there, they
let you keep believing it.

 
Lying by omission can be used to trick or confuse people into making
assumptions that benefit manipulators. Manipulators understand that the
human mind tends to jump to conclusions, so they often use cues that lead
you to those conclusions. Conmen use this technique all the time to gain the
trust of unsuspecting victims. For example, if you are sitting in the hospital
waiting room and someone walks up to you wearing a lab coat, you will
assume that the person is a doctor even before he starts talking to you. In
that case, you would have come to a reasonable conclusion based on the
context. Manipulators know that you have the inclination to do that so
they'll create the right context to make you jump to the conclusion that they
want. Once you are at that conclusion, they'll let you keep believing it, and
they’ll exploit you. 
 
Denial
When you say that someone is in denial, it often means that they are having
a difficult time accepting reality. However, denial takes on a whole deferent
meaning where manipulators are concerned. Manipulators use denial to
feign innocence when they know full well that they have done something
wrong.
 
Manipulators use denial to control other people’s impressions of who they
are and interpretations of the things they did. Some manipulators are so
good when it comes to using denial that they are able to get people to start
second-guessing themselves. Denial is a crucial behavioral trait in
predicting whether or not a person is likely to gaslight you. If in the early
stages of a relationship, your partner blatantly denies something you both

know to be true, you can rest assured that he is the kind of person who will
be gaslighting you for years to come.
 
When manipulators are confronted and put on a spot, they might use denial
to save face. This is fairly easy to conceive; the person doesn't want to
admit the truth, so they deny it. But with some people with dark personality
traits (especial the psychopaths), denial goes beyond that. When ordinary
people use denial, do it to deceive you. However, when some disturbed
individuals use denial, they do it to deceive both you and themselves. This
is a particularly dangerous trait because it could mean the person
completely lacks a conscious. For instance, if a person causes you harm,
and he denies doing it to get you off his back, that's one thing. But if he
denies it because he truly believes there is nothing wrong with what he did,
then you are dealing with a dangerous psychopath.
 
Denial also indicates that the person you are dealing with is unwilling to
change his behavior. In as much as he is manipulating you as he would
using other techniques, denial implies that the person feels justified, and he
won’t hesitate to do the exact same thing again in the future.
 
They say that accepting a mistake is the first step towards correcting it. If a
person can’t accept a mistake he has made, it means he is nowhere near the
path to fixing it. If you meet a person (whether at work or in your personal
life), and you notice that he habitually denies things about him that are
objective facts, it means that you are dealing with a rigid person who would
go out of his way to make sure things go his way even if it means refusing
to accept the truth. 
 

Denial can be a defense mechanism, a manipulation tactic, or a way to
avoid taking responsibility. In any case, people who use it can cause serious
damage to your psyche, so watch out for them. 
 
Rationalization
Rationalization is similar to making excuses. Manipulative people are very
skilled when it comes to concocting narratives that justify the way they treat
other people. When you confront a manipulator, even with the most
damning accusation, he will come up with a well-thought-out and rather
convincing explanation for his actions. When ordinary people rationalize or
make excuses for their actions, you get the sense that even though they are
trying to assuage their conscience, they feel guilty and they are even
apologetic about what they have done. However, when manipulators
rationalize their actions, they are trying to manage the way you perceive
them, and they feel justified in their actions. 
 
Most people use rationalization as a defense mechanism, or to make the
actions they have done or are about to do seems morally tolerable.
Whenever rationalization is used, there is a certain “leap” that is taken by
the person who is using it. The larger the leap, the higher the person is
likely to score when tested for dark psychological traits.
 
For example, a person who rationalizes taking $20 from the office petty
cash box for personal use may be a bit narcissistic, but a person who
rationalizes embezzling $20 million from the company retirement accounts
may have extremely high levels of narcissism, Machiavellianism or even
psychopathy. Like with all other traits that are common in the entire

population, the motivation behind the rationalization has a bearing on
whether or not the person doing it has malicious intentions.
 
When you encounter someone who rationalizes things that are clearly
wrong, you have to examine what it is they are rationalizing to tell how they
feel about certain principles. Even if you are having a hypothetical
conversation with someone, you can learn a lot about their attitudes towards
certain things by the way they rationalize them.
 
For example, if you confront someone you’ve just met who behaves in a
belligerent way, and he consistently comes up with ways to excuse that
behavior, it could mean that he is the kind of person who believes in the
principle that bullying is acceptable. It means that it’s just a matter of time
before he turns around and starts bullying you.
 
If you are in a new relationship, you should take a keen interest in the
things your partner is willing to justify. One thing many people fail to
understand is that if you hear someone close to you justify something and
you don’t object to it on principle, it registers in his mind that you are okay
with it, and it becomes part of your social contract with him. That means
that a person who rationalizes small things won’t hesitate to rationalize
bigger things if the same basic principle applies.
 
Minimization
Minimization involves trivializing a person’s emotions or actions for the
purposes of manipulation. It often combines elements of denial and
rationalization; it’s somewhere in between those two characteristics. When

a manipulative person can’t completely deny something, and he can’t
completely rationalize it either, he will settle for minimizing it.
 
Manipulators downplay the significance of certain events or emotions all
the time. The emotions or actions that they downplay could either be yours,
theirs, or those of a third party, as long as it serves their purposes.
 
If you have accomplished something significant, a manipulative person may
try to belittle or to discount that achievement. A narcissistic person may try
to make your contribution to a team effort seem like its "no big deal," even
if it was pivotal to the success of a project you are working on together.
 
In a relationship, your partner may trivialize your emotions and make them
seem insignificant. If you react emotionally to something they have done or
said, they may say that you are too sensitive, and you are making a big deal
out of nothing, or that you are immature. Both male and female
manipulators can have this character trait. A man could say that a woman is
a "drama queen" for "overreacting" and a woman could accuse a man of
being "unmanly" for expressing strong emotions. 
 
Minimization often works on people because it makes them feel self-
conscious. If someone accuses you of blowing things out of proportion, you
are likely to take a step back to see if you are overreacting.
 
Abusers also use minimization to make it seem as though their actions
aren’t as harmful as the victim claims. A physically abusive spouse could
say that he "didn't hit you that hard" and an emotionally abusive one could
get a rise out of you and then say that you are "just being a big baby." In

both cases, the person minimizes the harm they have caused by arguing that
it could have been much worse. In their minds, they think they deserve
credit for holding back. 
 
Another common aspect of minimization is called "cognitive distortion."
This is where a person minimizes certain actions or emotions by making it
seem as though they are not that important, or by trying to reduce the
perception of the impact of those emotions and actions.
 
For example, a person may insult or taunt you, but when you confront him
about it, he may try to say that it was just a joke and that you should get a
sense of humor. Cognitive distortion also happens at institutional levels. For
example, institutions that have systemic problems always claim that they
have “a few bad apples” instead of acknowledging that there is a big-picture
problem that needs to be addressed.
 
You should be very careful with people who use minimization in
manipulation because this behavior has a tendency of escalating.
 
Diversion and Evasion
Evasion and diversion are used by manipulators to keep the spotlight away
from their manipulative behavior. These tactics also help them to avoid
being exposed for who they are, and they keep them from having to take
responsibility for what they are doing.
 
Evasion involves providing rambling or irrelevant feedback in a situation
that demands direct responses. When manipulative people are asked direct

questions, they start talking about vaguely related things that aren’t even
relevant to the conversation.
 
A person who uses evasion will try to avoid giving a straight answer to a
question that you have asked them. On the other hand, a person who uses
diversion will change the topic or steer the conversation in a whole other
direction. Diversion involves avoiding a topic by bringing up a different
topic, especially one that is likely to spark outrage.
 
For example, if you are in a relationship and you ask your partner a
question about why they have come home late, the evasive ones will start
talking in detail about random topics such as things that happened at work,
which have nothing to do with what you want to know. The person who
uses diversion, on the other hand, will bring up an unresolved issue, and
they may even try to turn things around on you. Instead of telling your
where he was, he will reignite an argument you had put on hold, and a few
minutes later, you will find yourself arguing about your mother, with no
idea how the conversation got there.
 
Politicians use diversion and evasion all the time when they don’t want to
address certain issues, and they would rather have the public outraged about
something else. Politicians are very masterful when it comes to turning any
line of questioning into a discussion about a talking point that they have.
There are also other professions where evasion and diversion are considered
useful techniques. Lawyers and PR managers use it to keep their clients
from being closely scrutinized in public.
 

Evasion and diversion mostly work on victims who have problems being
assertive. When a manipulator finds that you keep insisting on getting a
straight answer despite his best efforts to avoid providing it, he may resort
to other techniques.
 
Evasion and diversion are clear signs of deception. They often mean that
the person is hiding something, and he doesn’t want to go on record, so he
goes out of his way to avoid giving a real answer to your question.
 
Covert intimidation and guilt tripping
Covert intimidation and guilt tripping use the same underlying principle;
they prey on a person’s emotions. Covert intimidation preys on fear, while
guilt tripping preys on compassion. People who use these techniques have
what psychologists refer to as covert-aggressive personalities. They are
"wolves in sheep's clothing." They present one face to the world, while
deep within, they are very malicious people. 
 
Covert intimidation involves threatening victims in subtle ways. It can be
used by people who are close to you if they understand your fears or
desires. Your boss could use covert intimidation to get you to do his bidding
at work. If he knows that you are working towards a promotion, he could
ask you to do him certain favors, and then imply that your promotion is
dependent on that favor. He may not say it directly, but it’s all going to be in
the subtext.
 
If you are afraid of ending up alone, an abusive partner may play on that
fear to manipulate you. For example, if you want to break up with someone

who is emotionally selfish, he could keep implying that you will never meet
someone else and that he is your only chance of not being lonely. 
 
Guilt tripping is used by manipulators to get people to doubt themselves, to
be anxious, to revere the manipulators, or to do certain favors for the
manipulators. People can guilt trip you by making themselves appear like
victims, or by making you appear to be selfish. When you are accused of
being selfish, you are likely to go out of your way to prove that you are not,
and manipulative people can take advantage of this.
 
For example, if you are dating someone and she wants you to buy her
something expensive, or to do her a favor that is going to cost you, you'll
try to explain as plainly as possible that you are unable to do it. She may
then say something like, "you just don't care about me enough." When she
says this, even the most rational argument you make won’t matter. There is
a bottom-line in place here; that you value keeping your money more than
you value her happiness. Guilt trips work because they are not based on
objective reasoning; they are based on emotions (which are more primal
and rank higher in the hierarchy of brain functions).
 
When you care about someone, and you feel a sense of obligation towards
them, then they have the power to take you on a guilt trip. That means that
for a manipulator to guilt-trip you, they are going to make sure that you
have some emotional connection with them. If you are in a new
relationship, you should watch out to see if your partner likes to take his/her
friends and family members on guilt trips, because it could mean that you
will be subjected to the same treatment once you are emotionally involved.
 

Shaming
Shame refers to the uncomfortable feeling of distress or humiliation, which
results when we are conscious of certain behavior that we consider to be
wrong or foolish. The thing to understand about shame is that it’s a social
construct, and it’s highly subjective.
 
You’d feel shame if the wind blew up your skirt in a public place, but there
are remote tribes of people and even communes in Western societies where
people walk around naked. The point is that most shameful things are only
shameful because we perceive them as such. Manipulators can use shame
against you by either convincing you to be ashamed of something that you
weren’t, or by revealing (or threatening to reveal) your secrets to people
who revere you.
 
Traditionally, shaming is used as a deterrent to make people adhere to social
contracts or to teach children the proper way to behave.  Malicious people
shame people in many different ways, often to their own benefit. They
shame people by calling them names, expressing disgust in response to
others' ideas, emotions, and behavior, using sarcasm, rolling their eyes, or
exposing their secrets.
 
A malicious person shames others to bring them down and to elevate
themselves. They can do this because they want to distract people from
their own inadequacies. A sadist may shame you because he enjoys it when
you are uncomfortable. A narcissist may shame you just to show others that
he is smarter than you. A Machiavellian may shame you because he wants
to modify your behavior to his advantage.
 

Shaming is somewhat similar to guilt-tripping, but shaming tends to play
out in the public arena. Shaming works more effectively when there are
people whose opinion you value who are involved. Malicious people know
that there are certain things you don't want people to find out about you,
even if you are comfortable with them in principle. "Slut shaming" is one
example. "Revenge porn" is an even more extreme example. When you are
in a relationship with a malicious person, and you try to get out of it, they
may use these techniques to either get you to stay or to punish you for
leaving them.
 
Vilifying the victim
Manipulators, especially Machiavellians, tend to be smart and devious, so
they can easily find ways to vilify their victims. There are two ways that
this can happen; they can either convince other people that the victim is the
real aggressor, or they can convince the victim that he/she is the one who
did something wrong. Vilifying the victim involves using several tactics,
including rationalizing, and gaslighting.
 
People who vilify victims try to justify their actions by making it seem as
though the victims are the "bad guys." For example, someone who cheats
on his spouse may explain his behavior away by telling people that his
spouse is a "bitch," or she is "frigid" and "controlling." The manipulator is
trying to rationalize his actions here by creating the impression that
whatever he may have done, the person he did it too, had it coming, and she
probably deserved worse.
 
You can tell if a person you have started seeing has a tendency to blame the
victim by assessing the way he/she talks about his/her past relationships. If

he blames everything that went wrong on his ex and takes no responsibility
whatsoever for his role in what happened, you can be certain that he’ll
approach your relationship the same way. 
 
Manipulative people know deep within that they are responsible for the
things that go wrong, but to them, vilifying the victim is just another way to
be deceptive and to control the way people perceive them. If they are
vilifying you, they want you to take responsibility for their actions so that
they can dominate you.
 
Narcissists tend to believe that they are superior to other people, and when
they vilify the victim, they may truly believe that its within their right to
take advantage of you however they can; it’s not that they don’t know they
are taking advantage of you, they just think that you are subservient to them
and that’s just the natural order of things.
 
Playing the victim role, and playing the servant
role
When manipulators play the role of the victim, in actual sense, they never
really see themselves as victims. It’s just a game for them, and the point is
to avoid responsibility while getting the benefits that come with sympathy.
They want to be perceived as weak people who are suffering, emotionally
wounded, or even physically injured for the purposes of eliciting sympathy
or managing impressions. 
 
Manipulators try to convince their victims that they are the ones who are
suffering in one way or another. If the victim is invested in the

manipulator’s welfare, he/she may decide to offer help, often at a high
personal cost.
 
You should be extremely cautious if you realize that you are dealing with a
person who likes to play the victim because you never know how far they
may go. If someone plays the victim in any dynamic, someone else has to
be cast as a victimizer, and if the manipulator is good at it, he/she could
come up with a very well-constructed narrative that could irreversibly ruin
your reputation or even put you in legal jeopardy.
 
If someone you are dating plays the victim when the two of you are
together, it might be possible to deal with the issue by seeking counseling.
However, if you notice that he/she is selling that narrative to other people,
you should try to get out of that relationship as fast as possible before the lie
escalates and everyone turns against you.
 
Playing the servant role refers to a manipulative trait where a person
pretends to be doing something for a noble cause or to serve someone else
when they are actually cloaking a self-serving agenda. This is common in
Machiavellians and psychopaths, but not so much in narcissists.
 
A Machiavellian may pretend to be on your side, and he may offer to do
your bidding. He may even give you plenty of reasons to trust him, and you
may let him in and give him access to your resources. Sooner or later, he
will reveal his true intentions; often time, it could be that he has a desire for
power or control, and to him, you are just in the way. Machiavellians are
good at hiding their ambitions, but when the opportunity arises, they'll
strike, and they'll exert their dominance over you.

 
There are manipulators who get into leadership positions by playing the
servant role. They then go on to use those leadership positions for personal
enrichment, or for their own agendas. You may have heard of people who
start charities and prey on conscientious and well-meaning people to collect
donations, which they proceed to embezzle.
 
Seduction
Seduction is an integral part of romance and courtship, but it can also be a
very effective manipulation tactic if a person has malicious intentions. We
all want to be liked and to be valued, so when someone says flattering
things about us, we are likely to believe them. Seduction is one of the first
manipulation techniques that most manipulators will deploy when they
meet you for the first time. As we have mentioned several times already,
manipulation techniques tend to be more effective when the manipulator
and the victim have some sort of emotional connection; seduction is the
first step towards establishing that connection.
 
Seduction and flattery are insidious ways of managing impressions when
manipulators want to conceal their true intentions. When someone gives
you attention, you feel special and flattered, and you let your guard down,
allowing him to come in and take advantage of you. We all have some level
of narcissism inside of us, so when someone flatters us, we rarely stop to
think that maybe they have an ulterior motive and that the flattery has
nothing to do with us. 
 
Even when people are aware that they are being buttered up, they often let it
happen, and they don’t put a stop to it. They start off by assuming that they

are immune to the manipulator’s charms, and they tell themselves that they
are indulging the person just for fun, but before they realize it, the end up
actually falling for the trick and becoming emotionally invested in the
manipulator.
 
Manipulators don't pull any stops when they are seducing their victims.
They present themselves very well, and they use every trick in the book to
win over their victims. Depending on the manipulator's dominant dark trait,
after getting what they want, they may either reveal their true nature, or
they may continue to make efforts to conceal it. By the time the victim
knows what’s going on, it would probably be too late.
 
Projecting the blame
Playing the blame game is one of the most defining characteristics of
manipulators. They like to project blame on others because it keeps others
from blaming them, and as a result, they are able to avoid taking
responsibility for their actions. Projecting blame on a person forces him to
go on the defensive, and this serves as a distraction.
 
Such people always claim that it was another person or a circumstance that
caused them to do something wrong. Psychologists call this tactic
"projection." In ordinary people, projection is an automatic mental behavior
that is well documented in research concerning psychodynamic psychology.
People can unconsciously project their intentions, motivations, or actions on
others if they are feeling guilty or unnerved under the prevailing
circumstances. However, after that initial subconscious reaction, most
people will do the logical thing and admit to themselves that the projection
is mistaken.

 
People with dark personality traits, on the other hand, will stick with the
projection even if they know that they are the ones who are truly
responsible for a negative outcome. Sadists will not only project their
mistakes onto you, but they will also go out of their way to make you feel
bad about it. 
 
Narcissists, Machiavellians, and psychopaths are especially good at
projecting blame on others because they don't feel guilt and shame the way
most people do. When an ordinary person projects blame on someone else,
he will have to deal with a high level of cognitive dissonance, which means
that he would be torn up inside. Manipulators, on the other hand, will
rationalize their projections; for example, Machiavellians will just see it as
a means to an end.
 
The more tactful manipulators can pass blame in a more subtle way by
spreading it around rather than just projecting it onto one entity. For
example, when they do something wrong, and you call them out on it, they
will bring to your attention a whole list of "contributing circumstances"
with the intention of obscuring or minimizing their role in creating the
problem under discussion.
 
Brandishing anger
Malicious people use anger to manipulate people all the time. When
someone brandishes anger at you, they may yell, or use threatening
gestures, spit out harsh words, or react in totally unpredictable ways.
People’s emotions have an effect on how we act and react in specific
situations, so manipulative people can strategically deploy anger to control

the way you react. It could be that they want you to be afraid of them so
that you refrain from asking prying questions. No one wants to be yelled at,
so if someone is angry at you, it incentivizes you to drop the issue you are
raising.
 
Manipulative people also brandish anger to convey fake moral outrage in
order to portray themselves as innocent in the face of damning accusations.
For example, if you suspect your partner of cheating on you and confront
him about it, if he is manipulative, he may react very angrily to show you
that he is outraged that you would even ask him about such a thing.
 
Brandishing anger also makes manipulative people feel superior to those
around them. A boss who yells at his subordinates may be doing it to show
that he is in control, that he knows more than everyone else, and that he
wants people to do things his way out of fear. Abusive partners do the same
thing when they want to put their spouses or girlfriends under their thumbs. 
 

CHAPTER FIVE
What is Covert Emotional Manipulation?
 
 
 
Covert emotional manipulation is used by people who want to gain power
or control over you by deploying tactics that are both deceptive and
underhanded. Such people want to change the way you think and behave
without you ever realizing what it is they are doing. In other words, they
use techniques that can alter your perceptions in such a way that you think
that you are doing it out of your own free will. Covert emotional
manipulation is “covert” because it works without you being consciously
aware of that fact. People who are good at deploying such techniques can
get you to do their bidding without your knowledge; they can hold you
“psychologically captive."
 
When skilled manipulators set their sights on you, they can get you to grant
them power over your own emotional well-being and even your self-worth.
They will put you under their spell without you ever realizing it. They will
win your trust, and you will start attaching value to what they think of you.
Once you have let them into your life, they will then start chipping away at
your very identity in a methodical way, and as time goes by you will lose
your self-esteem and turn into whatever they want you to be.
 
Covert emotional manipulation is actually more common than you might
think. Since it's subtle, people are rarely aware that it’s happening to them,

and in some cases, they may never even notice. Only keen outside
observers may be able to tell when this form of manipulation is going on.
 
You might know someone who used to be fun and jovial, then she got into a
relationship with someone else, and a few years down the line, she seems to
have a completely different personality. If it’s an old friend, you might not
even recognize the person she has become. That is how powerful covert
emotional manipulation can be. It can completely overhaul someone’s
personality without them even realizing it. The manipulator will chip away
at you little by little, and you will accept minute changes that fly under the
radar, until the old you are replaced by a different version of you, build to
be subservient to the manipulator.
 
Covert emotional manipulation works like a slow-moving coup. It requires
you to make small progressive concessions to the person that is trying to
manipulate you. In other words, you let go of tiny aspects of your identity
to accommodate the manipulative person, so it never registers in your mind
that there is something bigger at play.
 
When the manipulative person pushes you to change in small ways, you
will comply because you don't want to "sweat the small stuff." However,
there is a domino effect that occurs as you start conceding to the
manipulative person. You will be more comfortable making subsequent
concessions, and your personality will be erased and replaced in a
cumulative progression.
 
Covert emotional manipulation occurs to some extent in all social
dynamics. Let’s look at how it plays out in romantic relationships, in

friendships, and at work.
 
Emotional manipulation in relationships
There is a lot of emotional manipulation that takes place in romantic
relationships, and it’s not always malicious. For example, women try to
modify men’s behavior to make them more “housebroken"; that is just
normal. However, there are certain instances of manipulation where the
person's intention is clearly malicious, and he/she is motivated by a need to
control or dominate over the other person.
 
Positive reinforcement is perhaps the most used covert manipulation
technique in romantic relationships. Your partner can get you to do what he
wants by praising your, flattering you, giving you attention, offering your
gifts, and acting in an affectionate way.
 
Even the seemingly nice things in relationships can turn out to be covert
manipulation tools and props. For instance, your girlfriend could use
intense sex as a weapon to reinforce a certain kind of behavior in you.
Similarly, men can use charm, appreciation, or gifts to reinforce certain
behaviors in the women they are dating. 
 
Some sophisticated manipulators use what psychologists call “intermittent
positive reinforcement” to gain control over their partners. The way it
works is that the perpetrator will shower the victim with intense positive
reinforcement for a certain period of time, then switch to just giving her
normal levels of attention and appreciations. After a random interval of
time, he will again go back to the intense positive reinforcement. When the
victim gets used to the special treatment, it’s taken away, and when she gets

used to normal treatment, the special treatment is brought back, and it all
seems arbitrary. Now, the victim will get to a place where she becomes sort
of “addicted” to the special treatment, but she has no idea how to get it, so
she starts doing whatever the perpetrator wants in the hope that one of the
things she does will bring back the intense positive reinforcement. In other
words, she effectively becomes subservient to the perpetrator.
 
Negative reinforcement techniques are also used in relationships to
manipulate others covertly. For example, partners can withhold sex as a
way of compelling the other person to modify their behavior in a specific
way. People also use techniques such as the silent treatment, and
withholding of love and affection.
Some malicious people can create a false sense of intimacy by pretending to
open up to you. They could share personal stories and talk about their hopes
and fears. When they do this, they create the impression that they trust you,
but their intention may be to get you to feel a sense of obligation towards
them.
Manipulators also use well-calculated insinuations to get you to react in a
certain way at the moment, with the aim of modifying your behavior in the
long run. Such insinuations can be made through words or even actions. In
colloquial terms, we call this "dropping a hint." People in relationships are
always trying to figure out what the other person wants out of that
relationship, so a manipulative person can drop hints to get you to do what
they want without ever having to take responsibility for the actions that you
take because they can always argue that you misinterpreted what they
meant. 
 

Dropping hints isn’t always malicious (for example, if your girlfriend wants
you to propose, she may leave bridal magazines out on the table). 
However, malicious insinuations can be very hurtful, and they can chip
away at your self-esteem. Your partner can insinuations to suggest you are
gaining weight, you aren’t making enough money, or even to suggest that
your cooking skills aren’t any good. People use insinuations to get away
with "saying without saying," any number of hurtful things that could affect
your self-esteem.
 
 
Emotional manipulations in friendships
Covert emotional manipulation is quite common in friendships and casual
relationships. Friendships tend to progress slower than romantic
relationships, but that just means that it can take a lot more time for you to
figure out if your friends are manipulative. Manipulation in friendships can
be confusing because even well-meaning friends can come across as

malicious. That's because there is a certain social rivalry that exists between
even the closest of friends, which explain the concept of "frenemies." 
 
Manipulative friends tend to be passive-aggressive. This is where they
manipulate you into doing what they want by involving mutual friends
rather than by coming to you directly. Passive aggression works as a
manipulation technique because it denies you a chance of directly
addressing whatever issue your friend is raising, and so in a manner of
speaking, you lose by default.
 
For example, if a friend wants you to do her a favor, instead of coming out
and asking you, she goes to a mutual friend and suggests that she asks you
on her behalf. Now, when the mutual friend approaches you, it becomes
very difficult for you to turn down the request because there is added social
pressure. When you say no, your whole social circle now perceives you as
selfish.
 
Passive aggression can also involve the use of silent treatment to get you to
comply with a request. Imagine a situation where one of your friends talks
to everyone else but you. It’s going to be incredibly awkward for you, and
everyone will start prying, wondering what the issue is between the two of
you, and taking sides on the matter.
 
Friends can also covertly manipulate you by using subtle insults. They can
give you back-handed compliments which have hidden meanings. When
you take the time to really think about what they meant by the compliment,
you will realize that it’s an insult in disguise, and that will bruise your self-
esteem, and possibly modify your behavior.

 
Some friends can manipulate you by going on a “power trip” and trying to
control your social interactions. For example, there are those friends who
are going to insist that every time you hang out, it should be in their
apartment, or at a social venue of their choosing. Such friends often have
the intention of dominating your friendship, so they are keen to always have
the “home ground advantage” over you. They’ll try to push you out of your
comfort zone, just so that you can reveal your weaknesses and you can then
become more emotionally reliant on them.
 
Manipulative friends tend to excessively capitalize on your friendship, and
to a disproportionate degree. They will ask you for lots of favors with no
regard for your time or your effort. They are the kinds of friends who will
leverage your friendship every time they need something, but then make
excuses when it’s their turn to reciprocate.
 
Emotional manipulation at work
There are many reasons why your colleague may want to manipulate you. It
could be you are on the same career path, and so he wants to make you look
bad. It could be that he is lazy and he wants to stick you with his
responsibilities. It could also be that he is a sadist and he just wants to see
you suffer.
 
One-way people at work exert their dominance over others is by stressing
them out and then, almost immediately, relieving the stress. Say, for
example, you make a minor error on a report, and your boss calls you into
his office. He makes a big fuss and threatens to fire you, but then towards
the end, he switches gears and reassures you that your job is secure as long

as you do what he wants. That kind of manipulation works on people
because it makes them afraid and gives them a sense of obligation at the
same time.
 
Some colleagues can manipulate you by doing you small favors, and then
reminding you of those favors every time they want something from you.
For instance, if you made an error at work and a colleague covered for you,
he may hold it over your head for months or even years to come, and he is
going to guilt you into feeling indebted to him.
 
Colleagues can also manipulate you by leaving you out of the loop when
they are passing across important information. The intention here is to get
you to mess up so that they can have a better standing with the boss or with
other colleagues. When you discover that someone is leaving you out of the
loop at work and you confront them, they could feign innocence and
pretend that it was a genuine mistake on their part, or they could find a way
to turn it around and blame you.
 
People with dark personality traits tend to be hyper-competitive at work,
and they won’t hesitate to use underhanded means to pull one over you.
Most colleagues turn out to be good friends, but you should be careful with
colleagues that are overly eager to befriend you. It could be that they want
to learn more about you so that they can figure out your strengths and
weaknesses, and find ways to use them against you. Narcissist,
Machiavellians, and psychopaths are very good at scheming at work, so
don’t let them catch you off guard.
 
 

CHAPTER SIX
What are the Manipulators Trying to do?
 
 
 
You may wonder; what are manipulators trying to do? Why do they put so
much work into manipulating others, instead of just focusing on improving
themselves?
 
The fact is that manipulators have a deep-seated psychological need to
control others, so they seek to "weaken" their victims in order to gain
dominance over them. When they manipulate others, they are trying to
cancel their willpower, to destroy their self-esteem, to seek passive-
aggressive revenge against them, or to confuse their reality so that they
become more malleable. Let’s look at how and why manipulators do those
four things.
 
Cancellation of willpower
It’s because of our willpower that we are able to retain control over our
lives and to resist people’s attempts to dominate us and force us to do their
bidding. That is why one of the primary intentions of manipulative people is
to obliterate our willpower.
 
So, how can someone take away your willpower? Well, first, you have to
understand that willpower isn’t unlimited. We can lose our will power
through a process that psychologists refer to as "ego depletion." To

understand this, you have to think of willpower as a resource that may be
renewable, but it can only be renewed at a slow pace. So, if we spend that
resource on one thing, we have less of it to spend on another thing that
demands it. So, ego depletion is the outcome that occurs when we spend all
the willpower that we have, and we are left without adequate willpower in
the face of subsequent challenges.
 
Manipulative people know that willpower doesn’t come from a bottomless
pit, so they tend to overload us with scenarios where we are forced to use
our willpower until that willpower gets depleted. For example, a malicious
person may keep trying to agitate you, while you keep trying to stay calm
and keep your cool. However, if he keeps doing it for a prolonged period of
time, chances are you will get to a point where you snap and react with
anger.
 
Psychologists believe that willpower is sort of like a muscle; it gets stronger
when you exercise it, but during the moment of exertion, it can fail if it’s
pushed past a certain point. Malicious people can cancel your willpower by
forcing you to overexert it.
 
Willpower is what’s makes it possible for us to make the right decisions in
the face of serious temptation or pressure. It’s what makes us spend time
studying for an exam instead of watching videos online. Without willpower,
we become highly suggestible, and people can get us to do their bidding
with little resistance.
 
Ego depletion is sometimes also referred to as "decision fatigue." The idea
behind this concept is that the more decisions we make, the more fatigued

we become, and as a result, we are unable to make good decisions. When
manipulative people put us in situations where we have to keep making
decisions, they eventually are able to wear us out. 
 
There are several other factors that have been known to destroy willpower.
The first one is scarcity. When something is scarce, we are tempted to act in
a more impulsive way to acquire it, abandoning our principles in the
process. For instance, when you are hungry, you might be forced to
abandon the “thou shalt not steal” principle just to feed yourself.
 
People who are adept at emotional manipulation can chip away at your
willpower by introducing the element of scarcity. For example, when a
person gives you the silent treatment, she is essentially withholding human
interaction and affection, thus making it a scarcity for you. This increases
the likelihood that you will abandon your stand and comply with her
request.
 
Another way to cancel someone’s willpower is by threatening their
wellbeing or their livelihood. Malicious people can compromise your
willpower by doing things that jeopardize your job, your relationships, or
your happiness. When a colleague does something that puts your job
security in jeopardy, or if your partner does something that makes your life
a living hell, you will become somewhat desperate, and at that moment,
your willpower is more likely to be compromised leading you to either
surrender or do something that is detrimental to you.
 
Stress is another factor that can cause the depletion of one's willpower.
When we are constantly stressed, our minds are filled with worries that

cloud our judgment, and we end up making bad decisions. Malicious people
will work both overtly and covertly to introduce stressors into our lives in
the hope that the resultant stress will take up all our energy, and we will be
left more susceptible to their manipulation.
 
When manipulators succeed in canceling our willpower, then they gain the
power to control us and tell us what to do. We will start deferring our
judgment to them, and we will lose our identities.  
 
Destroy self-esteem
Apart from depleting your willpower, malicious people also want to destroy
your self-esteem. Unfortunately, there have dozens of different ways that
they can do this. In as much as we try to draw our self-esteem from within,
the fact remains that as social beings, we put a lot of stock in what other
people say about us, and that is where manipulative people draw their
strength.
 
Manipulators can chip away at your self-esteem by using carefully worded
phrases that are aimed at attacking and belittling you. Their words are
usually carefully calculated to either upset you or to confuse you so that you
spend a lot of time thinking about what they mean. We have already looked
at the kinds of manipulative techniques that can cause you to start
questioning yourself or thinking that your own emotions aren’t valid.
 
Manipulators also chip away at your self-esteem by constantly blaming you
for all sorts of problems. When someone keeps telling you that certain
things are your fault, a seed of self-doubt will start growing in you, and as

this idea is reinforced, you will get to a point where you start actually
internalizing the person’s criticism, and this ruins your self-esteem.
 
Sometimes, manipulative people can pass the blame onto you without even
saying a word. When something bad happens, they’ll give you a look that
says everything you need to know about how they feel, and even in the
absence of an accusation, you will start questioning yourself.
 
Another way manipulative people destroy your self-esteem is by flooding
you with negative information. We all know that self-esteem can be affected
by the company we keep. If we surround ourselves with negative people,
and they keep saying bad things, we start internalizing those things.
Manipulative people, especially Machiavellians, can dupe us by feeding us
negative information.
 
For example, a colleague at work could keep pouring cold water on all your
ideas until you get to a point where you start believing that you can’t get
things done.  In relationships, manipulators can destroy your self-esteem by
neglecting you emotionally, until you start thinking that you don’t deserve
love and affection.
 
Manipulative people can also destroy your self-esteem by feeding your
fears. Once they discover that you have certain fears, they’ll start nurturing
those fears in you so that they can use them against you. The more afraid
we are, the more our self-esteem diminishes.
 
Manipulative people like it when their victims have low self-esteem for a
lot of reasons. You have probably heard the saying that if you don't stand

for something, you will fall for anything. That is what manipulators are
counting on here. They know that if you don't have a strong view of
yourself, they can gain the power to control how you view yourself. If you
start doubting who you are, they'll take over and create a version of you that
they can push around. 
 
Manipulators also know that when we have low self-esteem, we become
very agreeable because we want to please other people so as to gain some
positive attention and to win the approval of others. They want their victims
to turn into people-pleasers, and they want to put themselves at the center of
the victims’ lives so that they are the ones benefiting from it.
 
At work, manipulators may want to destroy your self-esteem to make you
feel like you are not up to the job so that they can climb over you on their
way to the top. If they can’t completely convince you that that you are a
loser, they’ll settle for making you so afraid of failure that you are even
unable to gather the strength to try to compete with them.
 
Manipulators may also want to destroy your self-esteem so that you are
unable to maintain your personal boundaries, and they can get in and take
advantage of you. Like we have mentioned, when your self-esteem is
destroyed, you are unable to stand up for what you believe in, so you can’t
enforce your principles. You may feel like you don’t even have the basic
right to assert your preferences, so manipulators will be at liberty to walk
all over you.
 
Passive-aggressive revenge

Some manipulators will go after you because they are seeking passive-
aggressive revenge against you. If you have ever slighted a narcissistic
person, a sadist, or a psychopath in any way, they are probably holding
some sort of grudge against you, and they may manipulate you because they
want to get even.
 
Now, normal people hold grudges or go after each other for clear reasons
that both parties are aware of. However, people with dark personality traits
can target you for pretty much any reason, as long as it makes sense to
them. There is no logical threshold that you have to meet for them to set
their sights on you. They could hold a grudge for years because of a
statement that you made in passing. They could make you their target
because your boss complimented you instead of them. They could even
target you because of deep psychological issues that even they cannot
comprehend.
 
For instance, a psychopath may seek to victimize you and destroy your life
because you look like the girl who rejected him way back when he was a
teenager. The point is you don’t have to do anything specific for a malicious
person to decide to seek passive-aggressive revenge against you. It’s
possible that you just have the misfortune of reminding them of a mean
parent they had growing up, or in the case of Machiavellians, it could just
be that you are on their way and they have to destroy you to get ahead. It
could also be that they think you are weak, and therefore, you are an easy
target for them.
 
When someone is seeking passive-aggressive revenge against you, they'll
want to put you down so that they can feel superior. They think that you

have it good, so they want to cut you down to size by making you feel
insecure. If you outperform them at work, they'll want your performance to
decline because it will make them feel better. Such people will treat you
with a lot of disguised verbal hostility. They will propagate negative gossip
about you when you are away. They will go out of their way to find fault in
the things that you do, and they will be habitually critical of you. They’ll try
their best to invalidate your thoughts, feeling, and contributions because
they just don't want you to be happy. 
 
Some people will seek passive-aggressive revenge against you because they
are miserable, and misery loves company. Most people with dark
personality traits just can’t stand seeing you happy when they are miserable.
The narcissists believe the world revolves around them, so if they are
miserable, they’ll expect everyone else to be miserable, and they’ll try to
punish anyone who isn’t miserable through psychological manipulation.
Sadists will try to make you miserable as a way of cheering themselves up.
Machiavellians, on the other hand, will scheme to steal your happiness. 
 
People seeking passive-aggressive revenge often use disguised hostile
humor to bring others down. They use sarcasm to veil their hostility
towards others. They'll say hurtful things then claim that they are "just
kidding." They'll attack others based on their looks, their social-cultural
background, their gender and sexual orientation, their levels of education,
and anything else that comes to mind. In other words, these manipulators
have deep-seated issues which result in psychological disturbances, and
they'll go out of their way to harm others in order to satisfy their
psychological needs. 
 

Confuse reality
Manipulators also want to confuse your reality so that they can control you.
Altering a person’s perception of reality is the ultimate way to control and
dominate them. That’s because when you can convince a person that what
he sees and hears isn't real, then you gain the power to tell them what they
should think, what you should feel, and what you should value. 
 
Controlling other people's reality is the ultimate dream for any manipulator.
They want you to substitute your judgment for theirs, and the chances of
that happening increase exponentially when you question your own reality.
That is why mind control manipulation techniques, such as brainwashing
and gaslighting, are the most dangerous ones. 
 
There are lots of reasons why a manipulator would want to confuse his
victim's reality. An abusive partner would want you to quit looking for help,
so they would either want you to believe that you are going crazy and the
abuse isn’t really happening, or that no one will offer you the love and
protection that you are hoping for, so you should stop searching for it. 
 
When psychopath’s gaslight others, they tend to do it intentionally. They are
deliberately trying to damage their victim's mental health because they
know when you are mentally weak, they can control you. They don't have a
conscience, so they don't care if they do irreversible damage.
 
Narcissists, on the other hand, tend to gaslight others or confuse their reality
unintentionally. That is because the narcissists are themselves delusional;
they have delusions of grandeur, and they think that they are entitled to
dominate you. They'll confuse your reality because they want to impose

their own perceptions onto you so that their delusions of grandeur can
become your reality.
 
Bullies and sadists will want to confuse your reality because they want it to
be bleak. Their intention is to make you have a pessimistic outlook, just like
them.
 
 

CHAPTER SEVEN
Behavioral Traits of Favorite Victims of
Manipulators
 
 
There are certain characteristics and behavioral traits that make people
more vulnerable to manipulation, and people with dark psychology traits
know this full well. They tend to seek out victims who have those specific
behavioral traits because they are essentially easy targets. Let’s discuss 6 of
the traits of the favorite victims of manipulators.
 
Emotional insecurity and fragility
Manipulators like to target victims who are emotionally insecure or
emotionally fragile. Unfortunately for these victims, such traits are very

easy to identify even in total strangers, so it’s easy for experienced
manipulators to find them.
 
People who are emotionally insecure tend to be very defensive when they
are attacked or when they are under pressure, and that makes them easy to
spot in social situations. Even after just a few interactions, a manipulator
can gauge with a certain degree of accuracy, how insecure a person is.
They’ll try to provoke their potential targets in a subtle way, and then wait
to see how the targets react. If they are overly defensive, manipulators will
take it as a sign of insecurity, and they will intensify their manipulative
attacks.
 
Manipulators can also tell if a target is emotionally insecure if he/she
redirects accusations or negative comments. They will find a way to put you
on the spot, and if you try to throw it back at them, or to make excuses
instead of confronting the situation head-on, the manipulator could
conclude that you are insecure and therefore an easy target.
 
People who have social anxiety also tend to have emotional insecurity, and
manipulators are aware of this fact. In social gatherings, they can easily
spot individuals who have social anxiety, then target them for manipulation.
"Pickup artists" are able to identify the girls who seem uneasy in social
situations by the way they conduct themselves. Social anxiety is difficult to
conceal, especially to manipulators who are experienced at preying on
emotional vulnerability. 
 
Emotional fragility is different from emotional insecurity. Emotionally
insecure people tend to show it all the time, while emotionally fragile

people appear to be normal, but they break down emotionally at the
slightest provocation.  Manipulators like targeting emotionally fragile
people because it’s very easy to elicit a reaction from them. Once a
manipulator finds out that you are emotionally fragile, he is going to jump
at the change to manipulate you because he knows it would be fairly easy.
 
Emotional fragility can be temporary, so people with these traits are often
targeted by opportunistic manipulators. A person may be emotionally stable
most of the time, but he/she may experience emotional fragility when they
are going through a breakup, when they are grieving, or when they are
dealing with a situation that is emotionally draining. The more diabolical
manipulators can earn your trust, bid their time, and wait for you to be
emotionally fragile. Alternatively, they can use underhanded methods to
induce emotional fragility in a person they are targeting.
 
Sensitive people
Highly sensitive people are those individuals who process information at a
deeper level and are more aware of the subtleties in social dynamics. They
have lots of positive attributes because they tend to be very considerate of
others, and they watch their step to avoid causing people any harm, whether
directly or indirectly. Such people tend to dislike any form of violence or
cruelty, and they are easily upset by news reports about disastrous
occurrences, or even depictions of gory scenes in movies.
 
Sensitive people also tend to get emotionally exhausted from taking in other
people’s feelings. When they walk into a room, they have the immediate
ability to detect other people’s moods, because they are naturally skilled at

identifying and interpreting other people’s body language cues, facial
expressions, and tonal variations.
 
Manipulators like to target sensitive people because they are easy to
manipulate. If you are sensitive to certain things, manipulators can use them
against you. They will feign certain emotions to draw sensitive people in so
that they can exploit them.
 
Sensitive people also tend to scare easily. They have a heightened "startle
reflex," which means that they are more likely to show clear signs of fear or
nervousness in potentially threatening situations. For example, sensitive
people are more likely to jump up when someone sneaks up on them, even
before they determine whether they are in any real danger. If you are a
sensitive person, this trait can be very difficult to hide, and malicious people
will be able to see it from a mile away.
 
Sensitive people also tend to be withdrawn. They are mostly introverts, and
they like to keep to themselves because social stimulation can be
emotionally draining for them. Manipulators who are looking to control
others are more likely to target people who are introverted because that trait
makes it easy to isolate potential victims.
 
Manipulators can also identify sensitive people by listening to how they
talk. Sensitive people tend to be very proper; they never use vulgar
language, and they tend to be very politically correct because they are
trying to avoid offending anyone. They also tend to be polite, and they say
please and thank you more often than others. Manipulators go after such
people because they know that they are too polite to dismiss them right

away; sensitive people will indulge anyone because they don't want to be
rude, and that gives maliciously people a way in. 
 
Emphatic people
Emphatic people are generally similar to highly sensitive people, except
that they are more attuned to the feelings of others and the energy of the
world around them. They tend to internalize other people's suffering to the
point that it becomes their own. In fact, for some of them, it can be difficult
to distinguish someone's discomfort from their own. Emphatic people make
the best partners because they feel everything you feel. However, this
makes them particularly easy to manipulate, which is why malicious people
like to target them.
 
Malicious people can feign certain emotions, and convey those emotions to
emphatic people, who will feel them as though they were real. That opens
them up for exploitation. Emphatic people are the favorite targets of
psychopathic conmen because they feel so deeply for others. A conman can
make up stories about financial difficulties and swindle lots of money from
emphatic people.
 
The problem with being emphatic is that because you have such strong
emotions, you easily dismiss your own doubts about people because you
would much rather offer help to a person who turns out to be a lair than
deny help to a person who turns out to be telling the truth. 
 
Emphatic people have a big-hearts, and they tend to be extremely generous,
often to their own detriment. They are highly charitable, and they feel guilty
when others around them suffer, even if it’s not their fault and they can’t do

anything about it. Malicious people have a very easy time taking such
people on guilt trips. They are the kind of people who would willingly fork
over their life savings to help their friends get out of debt, even if it means
they would be ruined financially.
 
Malicious people like to get into relationships with emphatic people
because they are easy to take advantage of. Emphatic people try to avoid
getting into intimate relationships in the first place because they know that
it’s easy for them to get engulfed in such relationships and to lose their
identities in the process. However, manipulators will doggedly pursue them
because they know that once they get it, they can guilt the emphatic person
into doing anything they want. 
 
Fear of loneliness
Many people are afraid of being alone, but this fear is more heightened in a
small percentage of the population. This kind of fear can be truly paralyzing
for those who experience it, and it can open them up to exploitation by
malicious people. For example, there are many people who stay in
dysfunctional relationships because they are afraid, they will never find
someone else to love them if they break up with an abusive partner.
Manipulators can identify this fear in a victim, and they'll often do
everything they can to fuel it further to make sure that the person is crippled
by it. People who are afraid of being alone can tolerate or even rationalize
any kind of abuse.
 
The fear of being alone can be easy to spot in a potential victim. People
with this kind of fear tend to exude some level of desperation at the
beginning of relationships, and they can sometimes come across as clingy.

While ordinary people may think of being clingy as a red flag, manipulative
people will see it as an opportunity to exploit somebody. If you are attached
to them, they’ll use manipulative techniques to make you even more
dependent on them. They can withhold love and affection (e.g., by using the
silent treatment) to make the victim fear that he/she is about to get dumped
so that they act out of desperation and cede more control to the manipulator.
 
The fear of being alone is, for the most part, a social construct, and it
disproportionately affects women more than men. For generations, our
society has taught women that their goal in life is to get married and have
children, so, even the more progressive women who reject this social
construct are still plagued by social pressures to adhere to those old
standards. That being said, the fact is that men also tend to be afraid of
being alone.
 
People with abandonment issues stemming from childhood tend to
experience the fear of loneliness to a higher degree. There are also those
people who may not necessarily fear loneliness in general, but they are
afraid of being separated from the important people in their lives. For
example, lots of people end up staying in abusive or dysfunctional
relationships because they are afraid of being separated from their children.
 
Fear of disappointing others
We all feel a certain sense of obligation towards the people in our lives, but
there are some people who are extremely afraid of disappointing others.
This kind of fear is similar to the fear of embarrassment and the fear of
rejection because it means that the person puts a lot of stock into how others
perceive him or her. The fear of disappointing others can occur naturally,

and it can actually be useful in some situations; parents who are afraid of
disappointing their families will work harder to provide for them, and
children who are afraid of disappointing their parents will study harder at
school. In this case, the fear is actually constructive. However, it becomes
unhealthy when it’s directed at the wrong people, or when it forces you to
compromise your own comfort and happiness.
 
When manipulators find out that you have a fear of disappointing others,
they'll try to put you in a position where you feel like you owe them
something. They’ll do certain favors for you, and then they’ll manipulate
you into believing that you have a sense of obligation towards them. They
will then guilt you into complying with any request whenever they want
something from you.
 
Personality Dependent disorders and emotional
dependency
Dependent personality disorder refers to a real disorder that is characterized
by a person having an excessive and even pervasive need to be taken care
of. This need often leads the person to be submissive towards the people in
their lives and to be clingy and afraid of separation. People with this
disorder act in ways that are meant to elicit caregiving. They tend to
practice what's called "learned helplessness." This is where they act out of a
conviction that they are unable to do certain things for themselves, and they
need the help of others.
 
Such people have a hard time making decisions, even when dealing with
simple things like picking out which clothes to wear. They need constant

reassurance and advice, and they let others take the lead in their own lives.
These are the kinds of people who either move back into their parents'
homes as adults or treat their spouses and partners as though they are their
parents. 
 
Manipulators like to target people with dependent personality disorders
because they are very easy to control and dominate. These people willingly
cede control over their lives to others, so when manipulators come
knocking, they don’t face much resistance. Manipulators start off by giving
them a false sense of security, but once they have won their trust, they
switch gears and start imposing their will on them.
 
Emotional dependency is somewhat similar to dependent personality
disorder, but it doesn't rise to the level of clinical significance. It stems from
having low self-esteem, and it’s often a result of childhood abandonment
issues. People with an emotional dependency will play the submissive role
in relationships for fear of losing their partners. They tend to be very
agreeable because they want to please the people in their lives. Such people
are easy to manipulate, and malicious people can easily dominate them.


CHAPTER EIGHT
What is Persuasion?
 
 
The goal of any type of manipulation is to get the intended person to do
something. This can either be a direct action or a more general sort of
behavioral change. It can also be the deliberate alteration of held beliefs,
opinions, and world views. Getting to change the way a person thinks is
tantamount to changing that person. The breakdown of an intended target’s
belief system is one of the first things that an experienced manipulator goes
after.
In a world fueled by an increasingly divided political base, public opinion
matters. The ability to sway public opinion to have a favorable view of an
organization, political party or candidate is a form of manipulation. But
here we come across the thin line once again between malicious
manipulation and just plain manipulation. It is unclear whether a politician
is malicious when they make promises on their campaign trail only to fall
back on them when they are in office. 
Such promises might get them more votes, and might be to an extent
misleading, but it isn’t clear if they are malicious. Most would say that the
candidate with the best speeches, talking points, and overall rhetorical
strategies is the candidate who is most persuasive to their cause. And while
persuasion sounds harmless at the surface level, persuasion is still a form of
manipulation. To understand why it bears going back in history to find the
beginnings of persuasion when it was being perfected as an art. 
 

Pathos, Ethos, Logos the Three Emissaries of
Public Opinion
The art of persuasion can be traced back to Greek origins. It was used as a
tool by great orators to get their message across to the common folk. For a
country that is said to have created the political frameworks behind
democracy, persuasion was immensity popular. If you have ever taken an
advanced writing class that went over rhetorical analysis, you might
recognize the above three rhetorical modes of pathos, ethos, and logos.
These were billed by Aristotle as the three main appeals that an orator could
make to move their audience.
Its usage implies that the audience is a malleable entity, like putty. The
words of a skilled orator can manipulate the audience like a child might
manipulate a piece of putty. Other times persuasion is simply used to rile up
a cause that was already popular, to begin with, but that had been up to that
point undisclosed. 
The three rhetorical modes are important because they represent three
different attack vectors that a manipulator might use to persuade their
audience. Again, any form of persuasion is a type of mental manipulation,
but it doesn’t become a psychological attack until it becomes malicious. In
other words, there is a difference between plain old persuasive arguments
and using persuasion to carry out dark psychology.
Regular persuasion is the type that might make you vote for a candidate, or
buy some product (though some would argue that modern-day advertising
has dark psychology aspects). Malicious persuasion, on the other hand,
might entice you to go against your set of morals and beliefs. This sort of
persuasion is dangerous, because an attacker’s arguments may seem very
convincing to you when, in reality, they are just cleverly designed to trick

you. At the same time, the persuasion is being used for the benefit of
someone else (most types of persuasion we are familiar with already do
this). 
The dark psychology mindset tells us that there are people out there with
less than kind objectives. They may be after your wealth, your emotional
labor, your body, your mind, or just a few minutes of your attention. And all
of this is theoretically possible through the levying of persuasive
techniques. But first, we should talk about everyday persuasion in the
traditional sense. What is it, who uses it, and how to detect persuasive
arguments.
 
Modern Day Aristotle
No matter what persuasive argument you come across, they will have all of
the semblances of Aristotle’s appeals, mixed in with a modern “secret
sauce” that is unique to the persuader (and indeed the situation). It is still
worth talking about persuasion and persuasive arguments because they are
the cornerstone of all types of manipulation. If a manipulator was a boxer,
persuasion techniques would be like their left jab. Not as powerful as a KO
punch, but still the punch that lands them the most points and slows down
their opponent.
A modern-day Aristotle can be anyone. A politician, a used cars salesman,
even your mother is trying to convince you to move closer to home. All of
these would be Aristotle's have something in common: they want something
from you. And it is your job to decide whether their needs are genuine and
desirable for all parties. They will no doubt stop at anything to convince
you that they are. To do this, you have to separate their argument from the

chaff. For persuasive techniques, the chaff is usually the bubbly language or
the sharp edge in their arguments that really cuts you into you.
But beware. Just because it cuts you, it doesn’t mean that it is deep, or
meaningful to you in any way. Many skillful persuaders will only pander to
already preconceived notions that their audiences may have. They simply
say something that they know their audience will like, and instantly become
that much more credible.
But someone trying to come up with a novel argument will first have to
design a rhetorical strategy using any of the three rhetorical modes
available. This is true whether they are trying to form an essay, a speech, or
simply persuade you into doing something. The world of sales is chock-full
of strategies used designed to get you to buy. A competent salesman may
try to get to know you first (especially if the purchase is large, like a new
house or car). They wish to form a relationship on the first-name basis and
then pose as a close friend.
In the world of sales, the only thing that matters is the purchase. If a
customer decides to buy, then whatever strategies used to make that sale are
fair game. This opens the ground for deploying several different types of
psychological tricks against the unsuspecting customer. For example, a
salesman may introduce them to a high-end item that is purposely out of
their buying range and then redirects them towards an item of similar
functionality that is perceived as being more affordable.
A family looking to buy a new laptop for their college-bound son may be
directed towards the expensive and latest Apple laptop product only to
realize that it is well out of their budget. The savvy salesperson can then
walk them to the Windows computers aisle and show them an alternative
product that is the same color as an Apple computer, but that has a different

operating system and is slightly less performative. Now, that other laptop
may still be a flagship item and have a sizable price tag, but it is perceived
as a good buy by the family because the salesperson showed them an item
they believe to be state of the art. 
Such tricks are less persuasive strategies than they are crude psychological
manipulation. But both of these things can be used for devastating effect.
Persuasion that is more psychological in nature involves more trickery and
subterfuge—the type of things one would expect except dark psychology
techniques. Indeed, the salesman trick of going high and then going low can
pass as a type of emotional manipulation. It is subtle, but there is clear
pandering towards what a customer believes their money can buy them.
First, they are shown what is considered to be the “it” product. But since
they can’t afford it, the salesman is putting them on an emotional roller
coaster of desire.
In a way, it is a projection of what the customer believes they deserve. Sure,
they can’t afford the best, but since they feel like they deserve the best (and
since the salesman believes that they deserve the best) then buying the next
best product is an easy choice. And if they can afford the high-end object
the salesman shows them first, then their job is already finished. In other
words, whether the customer buys the expensive item or the lesser
expensive one, the salesman still wins. It is a perfect example of a
psychological manipulation that is difficult to detect in the heat of the
moment, and that has a high rate of success.
Pathos
Pathos is an appeal to emotion. Traditionally, it has been based on appeals
to sadness or pity (which shouldn’t come as a surprise seeing that the
Greeks were very into plays and tragedies). Nowadays, any appeal that has

a strong emotional response may be considered as pathos. Emotion has
infiltrated the marketing world in recent years, especially when it comes to
social media ad campaigns. Companies and large corporations are waking
up to the new realities of social awareness. Never before has an audience
been so keen on the problems facing the world, many of which are blamed
on the corporations in the first place.
Pathos works best when it is bare and out in the open. When used correctly
it hits the target like a punch to the gut (think about those cancer hospital
commercials or animal cruelty videos) Pathos often strives to make the
audience uncomfortable, but making the audience feel good about
themselves is just as common now.
The anatomy of a good argument from pathos is as follows: establish a
connection with the audience through common understanding, put forth an
argument, and then charge the audience with the emotional payload in
relation to the argument. Take, for example, the following implicit argument
about cancer research.
1. Cancer is a terrible disease. Cancer can hit anyone, at any time, even
innocent children. Sometimes it the reward for simply being “born.”
Because of this, it is in the best interest for humans to find a cure for it.
2. Cancer is a common enemy for humanity to defeat (1). An effective way
to defeat it is to increase government t and public spending on cancer
research.
3. The people who suffer the most from cancer are those who are diagnosed
with it and their families. The financial burden of a cancer diagnosis can be
just as disastrous as the illness itself.
4. Charity organizations can both provide aid to families (3) and increase
spending on cancer research (2)

5. Therefore, by donating to charity organizations (4) you helping fight in
the war against cancer (2)
This entire argument can be implied through a short, 30 second commercial
on TV by using compelling images. It is powerful because it establishes a
moral common ground (cancer is bad, people who get cancer through no
fault of their own don’t deserve it) and then uses that common ground
against the audience (if you don’t donate, then you have no sympathy for
others). Or alternatively, if you don’t donate to help end cancer, then you
are contributing to the deaths of thousands every year)
Note that appeals to emotion are almost always logical fallacies. Obviously,
a person can still be sympathetic towards cancer research but not have the
kind of disposable income to donate. Or they don’t believe that charities are
efficient at getting money to the cause (this happens all the time). 
But pathos is effective because not everyone cares about spotting a
fallacious argument when they are getting hit in the gut by an emotional
attack. Though logically inconsistent, plenty of people do and will fall for
the persuasive power of pathos arguments.
Ethos
Ethos is less easy to classify into argument form. In Ancient Greek, ethos
means “character.” It is sometimes called the appeal to ethics, from the
Nicomachean ethics theorized by Aristotle himself. His ethics, in short,
emphasized personal character and virtue. An Aristotelian appeal to ethics,
then, is an appeal from someone's character (if it is deemed virtuous). For
example, people were more likely to listen to what an esteemed orator had
to say that to pay attention to what the local drunk said. Politicians in
Ancient Greece used the power of ethos to solidify their public image as
men of virtue. Men who, on any given day, acted in the way that the ideal

man should. This demeanor of rightness gave them considerable voting
share.
Now when we use ethos, we use it a little differently (though in many
situations in the same way of old). Instead of making an appeal to the ethics
of the speaker, modern ethos makes an appeal to authority, social standing,
fame, and domain knowledge. We live in a world where experts in their
fields hold more persuasive power than the right to do man. And why
shouldn’t we? The scientific revolution shifted the focus from virtue ethics
to the scientific method. It is now men in lab coats who command the
strongest ethos in a purely logical sense.
People listen to doctors for their health advice. But they might also listen to
what a celebrity says, or believe the political advice given by a five-star
general. They might listen to what their local religious leaders say (both in
established religious sects and in cults). Children listen to what their nearest
authority—their parents—tell them to do. And so guess the argument. Ethos
is convincing because people believe in the person who is endorsing the
argument. They want to show the way, by someone who has the perceived
authority to do so.
These arguments, like with appeals to emotions, tend to be hopelessly
fallacious. Before cigarette companies were demonized for selling cancer-
causing product and before they were required to put health information on
the label, they used depictions of doctors or celebrities smoking. But
doctors or celebrities endorsing a product says nothing about their potential
harm, especially before cigarettes were branded a carcinogen. Prior to the
acceptance that cigarettes caused lung and throat cancers, the major concern
was with dental health. A new line of cigarette filters was created to protect
consumers oral hygiene, rather than to protect them from the real menace. 

A quite famous old-timey cigarette ad by Viceroys featured a man in a
white frock with the caption “As your dentist, I would recommend
Viceroys.” The emphasis was that Viceroy filters prevented tar buildup and
were thus “healthier” for you than other brands. Of course, we know now
that the notion of a healthy cigarette is completely absurd.
Perhaps the most well-known of these arguments is WWJD, or “What
would Jesus do?”. Jesus is a moral character, is given moral weight to any
situation. By posing the question to any potential dilemma, one could
imagine the righteous course of action. 
Logos
The last rhetorical mode is logos or appeals to logic. This is the most
straightforward rhetorical mode available and the most logically consistent.
An appeal to logic will have the necessary scientific and mathematical facts
to back up the argument’s position. An argument for gun control should be
accompanied with a number of violent crimes using handguns, deaths and
so on compared across various different gun control legislation (including
no legislation). The audience is then tasked with deciding for themselves f
the numbers tell the truth, or if they tell lies. 
Logos can be used by itself or in conjunction with ethos and pathos to form
a persuasive argument.
While logos seems logically consistent at first glance, it is still possible to
form fallacious arguments using them. And these are just as convincing as
using arguments from the other two forms.
A drug company is trying to sell a new medication for a serious illness. The
company says that their product saves 20% more lives (or some other
treatment improvement. But what does this really mean? The company
doesn’t provide a full breakdown where their numbers came from. All the

consumer sees is a commercial with uplifting music and people doing
everyday things. 
What the company may not tell you, is that the breakdown is much more
sinister. In other words, if only 20 people normally survive out of 100, then
a 20% increase is only four additional people. That isn’t very much—
especially when you consider the potential side effects of the given
medication.
Sadly, pharmaceutical companies get away with this all the time. They use
purposely misleading health information in the form of relative frequencies
(mostly because they are easier to understand). The net effect is that a
consumer might make a decision based on false pretenses. For the company,
it means higher profits.



 
  

 

CHAPTER NINE
Methods of Persuasion
 
 
 
The basis of persuasion is to direct the other person to the thought you
desire and to make it normal in the basic belief and vision system. To
simplify, it is to make the other person think the way you want. That's
exactly what it means to convince. If the other person thinks the way you
want, you can take the action that you want to take, that is, buying a product
or consuming a product. 
Located below are techniques to persuade and convince some of the most
effective techniques effectively. Persuasion techniques are not limited to
these, but they are important for efficiency. You may encounter many other
techniques of persuasion, such as rewarding, punishing, creating a positive
or negative perception. 
1. Creating Needs 
One of the best methods of persuasion is to create a need or to reassure an
old need. This question of need is related to self-protection and
compatibility with basic emotions such as love. This technique is one of the
biggest trumps of marketers in particular. They try to sell their products or
services using this technique. The kind of approaches that express the
purchase of a product to make one feel safe or loving is part of the need-
building technique. 
2. Touching Social Needs 

The basis of the technique of touching social needs are factors such as being
popular, having prestige, or having the same status as others. The
advertisements on television are the ideal examples. People who buy the
products in these advertisements think they will be like the person in the
advertisement or they will be as prestigious. The main reason why
persuasion techniques such as touching social needs are effective is related
to television advertising. Many people watch television for at least 1-2
hours a day and encounter these advertisements. 
3. Use of Meaningful and Positive Words 
Sometimes it is necessary to use magic words to be convincing. These
magic words are meaningful and positive words. Advertisers know these
positive and meaningful words intimately. It is very important for them to
be able to use them. The words “New,” “Renewed,” “All Natural,” “Most
Effective” are the most appropriate examples of these magic words. Using
these words, advertisers try to promote their products and thus make the
advertisements more convincing for the liking of the products. 
4. Use of Foot Technique 
This technique is frequently used in the context of persuasion techniques.
The processing way is quite simple. You make a person do something very
small first because you think they can't refuse it. Once the other person has
done so, you will try to get him to do more, provided he is consistent within
himself. 
First, you sell a product to a person at a very low price. Then you get him to
buy a product at higher prices. In the first step, you attract him to yourself,
so you convince him to buy it. In the second step, you convince yourself to
buy products at a higher price. Their acceptance of a small thing will help
you to fulfill the next big demand from you. 

After refusing the small request from the other party, you feel a duty to
make a big request from the same person. This is usually the case in human
relations. For example, you agree when your neighbor comes and asks you
if you can keep an eye on the shop for a few hours. If your neighbor comes
to ask you to look at the shop all day, you will feel responsible and probably
accept it. This means that the technique of putting a foot on the door is
successfully applied. 
5. Use of Orientation from Big to Small 
The tendency to ask from big to small is the exact opposite of the technique
of putting a foot on the door. The salesperson makes an unrealistic request
from the other person. Naturally, this demand doesn’t correspond to the real
issue. However, the salesperson then makes a request that is smaller than
the same person. People feel responsible for such approaches, and they will
accept the offer. Since the request is small, by accepting it, people have the
idea that they will help the salespeople and the technique of moving from
big to small requests works. 
6. Use of Reciprocity 
Reciprocity is a term for mutual progress of a business. When a person does
you a kindness, you feel the need to do him a favor. This is one example of
reciprocity. For example, if someone bought you a gift on your birthday,
you would try to pay back that gesture. This is more of a psychological
approach because people don’t forget the person who does something for
them and they try to respond accordingly. 
For marketers, the situation is slightly different from human relations.
Reciprocity takes place here in the form of a marketer offering you an
interim extra discount” or “extra” promotion... You are very close to buying
the product introduced by the marketer you think offers a special offer. 

7. Making Limits for Interviews 
Setting a limit for negotiations is to provide an approach that will affect
future rights. This is particularly effective when negotiating prices. For
example, if you are trying to negotiate a price to sell a service, it might
make more sense to start by opening the price from a higher number.
Opening from a low number is not the right method because you have
weakened your stretching share. 
Even if the limitation for negotiations is not always useful, it’s particularly
useful in terms of price negotiation. Say the first number and get on with
the bargaining advantage. 
8. Limitation Technique 
Restriction technique is one of the most powerful methods to influence
human psychology. You can see this mostly in places selling products. For
example, if a store has a discount on a particular product, it may limit it to
500 products. This limitation can be a true limitation or a part of the
limitation technique. So, you think that you will not find the product at that
price again and you agree to buy that product at the specified price. 
The restriction technique is particularly useful in new products. As soon as
a new product goes on sale, you can convince people to buy it for a limited
time or by selling a limited quantity of products with extra promotions or
discounts. People who think that the product will not be sold again at a
similar price may choose to buy the product you have chosen thanks to the
success of your persuasion technique. 
Persuasion techniques are not limited to these. Different techniques can
provide more successful results in various fields. However, most of the
techniques we may encounter in our daily lives consist of the methods
shown here. If you want to be a marketer, if you are trying to sell a product

or service, you need to have detailed information about these techniques if
you want to make them available.  
 
Difference between Persuasion and Manipulation 
 
There are many similarities between Persuasion and Manipulation as the
two words confuse non-English individuals: Natives too. There are many
comparisons between the two concepts, and because of the overlap, people
think these two can be used interchangeably. There are convincing good
people, and there are good manipulators. Both try to make sense and
encourage others to accept their views. However, although there are
similarities in manipulation to being able to persuade someone, there are
differences that must be emphasized. 
Persuasion: 
Persuasion is a behavior from someone else directed in a specific direction.
You've managed to convince when you try to explain a certain way of
behavior logically and correctly, and others accept your opinion that they
think is of mutual benefit. If you have good marks on your test and you
asked your mother for an expensive gift, you are trying to convince her to
buy you a gift. This persuasion is convincing because it sees the logic
behind your request and she buys the gift.



 
  

 

CHAPTER TEN
Brainwashing
 
 
If you would ask a person at random whether they know what brainwash
means, you get an affirmative answer 90 percent of the time. That's not the
case more often. This concept has been heard by many of us, but we often
tend to confuse our vague realization of what it is for an otherwise accurate
understanding. The question we dare ask ourselves then is what
brainwashing means and why it does. It is perhaps the essential kind of dark
psychology we are going to discuss, which offers much more negative
results than the rest.
This complex brainwashing enigma is essentially the gradual process of
replacing the ideas of a victim with a manipulator about their being and of
replacing them with new ideas that should adapt to one's own needs, and

that can either narrowly take place. For example, a manipulator can control
a person or adopt the same principle but a broad group. The circumstance of
brainwashing is like the one where people believe they can be a call for a
higher purpose to join a terrorist organization. In the majority of other
scenarios, indoctrination appears to be effective. Most believe that
brainwashing is the Hollywood fiction of someone who continually imposes
certain concepts on their victims, and within a short period, the person
becomes the manipulator for every bidding. More realistically, it is a
process that generally changes an individual's perception of reality far from
what they have had a very gradual but voluntary process. The fundamental
trick is to make the victim feel as though they are always in control. There
are several situations that make brainwashing possible, and often they are
motivated differently by it. Let us discover these specific scenarios, starting
with the situation of a cult. A cultic can be said to be an organization of
people who often believe that one individual is considered as their leader in
something larger than themselves. The leader is often characterized by his
exceptionally great influences and a very charismatic behavior on his
followers. The question that we now try to ask ourselves is, why is
brainwashing a culture in those contexts?
The very basic appeal that these cults possess is that actual reality is only
graspable if they decide to cultivate and follow the teachings in the factions.
This is often something that people want to listen to because the truth is that
today's world is a complicated journey often appears confusing, which gives
some relief from a promise of fraternity and an unparalleled opposite.
Brainwash resonates here with the idea of a new normal. It is because of
this idea that cults used by different sect leaders to brainwash the members
to accept their mostly strange doctrines at the same time, making them a
dominant theme in their lives. It sounded incredibly strange to idolize a

mere mortal to the extent that he actually adored it. But that's so' normal' in
a cult that it doesn't seem to be a little bizarre for other members. Probably
the most potent way to ideological brainwashing is through this process of
social strengthening. Cults have the same DNA as drug distributors. Why is
that? Why? Usually, a person finds a particular sect to find something he or
she lacks in life. In the drug world, the same thing happens because a
person often tries not to experiment freely. Cults do not make brain ash
people members, as people have sought some form of fulfillment of a
particular desire. It is this innocent desire to search and to be prepared,
making them easy goals for brainwashing.
The context of ideologies would be another similar one, which must
brainwash on its foreheads like cults. Their principal difference is that not
so much the individual is the focus of ideology, but the whole idea. In
principle, ideological brainwashing is stirred up by persons who have put
absolute and full confidence in a plan. It is regarded as a very dangerous
tactic because it goes beyond one person. Use an example to understand this
better. When you look at the religious extremist groups, they worship their
leaders like tomorrow is no one. Would it be enough to say that your' god'
could be killed? This is a definite no because, as long as they are 6 feet
below the surface of the ground, they will be praised and recognized as
martyrs who died because of their ideologies.
This theme not only resonates in the cultural playground, but it also places
me on a more innocent level. The brainwashing effect on fans is too often
experienced by musicians. If you hear music often, a diehard fan of a
particular musician will mark a reasonably young and impressive person
with his sense of identity and happiness for a specific musician. You are
frequently able to defend your famous superstar as if you knew the person
personally. Some fans will even go to a higher level to harm themselves if

their idols also imply that it is a cool thing to do. Can you imagine the
effects this will have if used in a cult context if ideological washing on the
innocent level is so dangerous? In addition to the general brainwashing
scenarios, it can easily take form in a personal setting.
When you dive into the bowl of personal brainwashing, we find that the
brainwashing process, as it is at the border, is also the slow and gradual
replacement of the existing beliefs of a man with those placed by a
manipulator to serve his benefit more effectively. The main difference
between the two is that unlike a group to implement the new typical
scenario, the manipulators, in this case, aim at establishing a profoundly
personal relationship with the victim. This is considered to be stronger than
the brainwashing group because the brainwashing tape can be continuously
altered to match the psychological structure of the victim.
After you have had an insight into the real occurrence of brainwashing, how
do the manipulators use this kind of dark psychology? Hollywood's one
thing is to lay the groundwork for indoctrination. Each brainwashing movie
typically begins with a focus on the mental state of the individual and the
social circumstances surrounding him — this way of controlling the mind.
Brainwashing is not a technique that every single person can smoothly
perform. These manipulators are often the preferred victim who seems to be
attempting to fill an absolute emptiness, particularly those who are turned
on by certain life events by their current reality. There is no question of
losing a loved one as the best example of this to be illustrated. The
emptiness is often conveyed to people wherever they go. This person, in
search of their being full again, will choose to flee and join religious
extremist groups and become suicide bombers in pursuit of being entire.
The brainwasher gives us assurance as a killing ideology.

Once a handler intensifies his aim from the Internet or in an individual, the
brainwashing method has been launched. Contrary to the image, the actual
representation of these unhappy personalities, which looks strange and
culturally withdrawn from the fellow with a particularly distorted
perversion as an intellectual washer, is north of this because they are only
ordinary individuals with whom we communicate on a regular occasion,
with a calm and pleasant feel. Slowly but certainly, the manipulator will
operate challenging to create an atmosphere in which the person thinks he
can trust him. It is accomplished by generating clever peripheral
associations such as a shared interest in a specific sport and a similar
musical relationship. After that, the manipulator will then move forward to
create even more confidence. He does so by creating some grim
experiences from the background, which are also associated with painful
survivors. For instance, if the victims share in the loss of a wife, the
manipulator will give them a history in which he, too, has lost a friend.
The next phase is recognized as a demonstration of utopias. What does that
imply? What does that imply? The manipulative person regularly provides
alternatives to any of the issues that the people face. It is a brainwashing
method. This is generally performed informally, at first, to prevent any
negative pressure interactions of the person. The perfect introduction is
never any specific item, and it is either character; the manipulator often tries
to transform his target as well as religion or a particular religion. It could be
either terror or his stupid willingness to honor and validate. If procedures
are started correctly, a specific person often seeks to gain perspectives into
greater knowledge of the alternatives. In certain situations, the manipulator
will initially retain this data, emotionally forcing the person to operate to
prevent it. This outcome is what occurs effectively.

Once the person who was subsequently introduced into this new belief
system and appeared to be reacting in such a manner that the manipulator
would like to, his real motives will be revealed very carefully. This concept
is called "gradual disclosure." In essence, this is a method where ideas are
presented that are often simple to comprehend before anything disputed
becomes apparent. When we stare at religious terrorism, this is made
completely clear. Recruits are frequently taken in by persuasive phrases like
God enjoys them. After you're a wholly committed participant, the story
requires a severe turnaround. What those rulers advise the participants is
that the person is now crossing a line of no exchange, and nothing can be
said to modify their minds because of this love.
I can bet that the question you are asking yourself right now is, why does
the person consider it still okay to still communicate with his oppressor
after the aims of manipulation have been disclosed? Usually, this is because
of several factors. First of all, the participants experience a powerful feeling
of pleasure and acceptance at this stage. This is because they took the time
to build this solid base of friendship and helped them out of a challenging
period in their lives. Secondly, the victim has spent a lot of time and money
on the process so far and isn't right to let all of that drain back from
everything. This is also referred to as the price mistake. Finally, because the
manipulator has now collected a box of conflict of the perpetrators of most
mysteries, the person decides to remain. They are cautious that this could be
used at some stage at the moment against them. The problem of blackmail
is not generally grasped to explain, particularly if they are endangered, why
a person would be associated with them. Why is that? Why? The
manipulator is willing to hide the truth often in a non-threatening manner as
a master of deception. The manipulator will tell, "if I can no longer assist
you, you get the greatest person, like a near family-member bug, you can

go," because the manipulator already has a profound feeling of relationship
and confidence in the subject, the blackmail image and power is usually
seen to emanate from it. That is what persuades the viewer externally to
remain ahead of this brainwasher's manipulating route. The events behind it
create the pain and difficulty of moving back so severe that the only way to
stay in this manipulative room is for the survivors. More often than not, this
method puts the person in a situation to believe that whatever the
manipulator says is eventually the reality. The person feels as if he has
selected his opinions as his own and has sought them out of his will. This
turns a human being, who is once usually imagining, away to something
that they have no concept of life into an indoctrinated psychological slave.
Brainwashing affects a person since it is considered as one of the most
potent tactics of mental control. One of these side effects that the victim is
likely to suffer is identity loss. In many cultures and ideologies, one
characteristic is the fact that individuals often obliged to finish their
initiation cycle are often told to give up their earlier identities, and their
oppressors are granted another name. You're going to do what was just out
of your moral radar before. When a manipulator skillfully deploys
brainwashing, he tends to let the person feel like he only wakes up from a
lifetime vision.
The primary risk of brainwashing is not that it influences the manner the
person believes about sand, but also significantly affects the behavior of
manipulators. People are changing drastically from productive employees to
morbid personal outcasts ready to commit abominable crimes like rape and
assassination.
This feels somewhat drastic, but it's right in almost every way. If you have
any doubt, for instance, as to what brainwashing an individual can do, take
these instances. Members of certain spiritual cults happily break up all their

links to their families beforehand, put behind their thriving lives, hand over
all their assets and property, and give full autonomy to the organization that
has brainwashed them — not everything. The person will regard their new
lifestyles as a gift, rather than a disagreement in which they were compelled
to live. 
Another example of the toxic brainwashing consequence is the recurring
tale of mostly youthful people who are brainwashed by spiritual extremes
who travel abroad to a community of persons that they never encountered
and never damaged by a car filled with explosives Such perpetrators are
often educated people who have a long history of lives and have no
disruption or abuse. Does this dramatic death show that the brainwashing
method is overwhelming, conquesting? 
Another characteristic of those who escape or who is rescued from an
intense brainwashing situation is post-traumatic stress disorder. In most
instances, victims of brainwashing show severe symptoms of mental
distress comparable to those of military servicemen. This demonstrates that
brainwashing produces outcomes similar to those submitted in a war-like
context, which is probably the most significant impact of brainwashing,
where the person returns to the communities, they once thought secure after
being expertly drawn out from the bleak angles. Even though the people
have been fished from this psychological grip, some have been harmed only
too much that they wind up with latches in the fingers of their manipulator.
This is because they are so harmed that they do not understand otherwise.



 
  

 

CHAPTER ELEVEN
Hypnosis
 
 
Hypnosis or hypnotherapy is a state that is trance-like where a person’s
focus is heightened as well as their concentration. Hypnosis is done with the
assistance of a therapist that uses verbal repetitions and mental pictures.
When a person is put under hypnosis, they normally feel relaxed, calm and
are open to suggestions.
Therapists have used hypnosis to help individuals gain control over
behaviors that are undesirable. In dealing with anxiety and pain, hypnosis
has also been found to be helpful. Although a person is relaxed and more
open-minded to receive various suggestions, it is important to know that a
person doesn’t lose control over their behavior.
 
Why is Hypnosis Done?

Therapists say that hypnosis is an excellent way to cope with anxiety and
stress. For instance, if someone is supposed to go for a medical procedure
that they are anxious and stressed about, hypnosis can help calm them
before the procedure. There are various conditions where hypnosis is used.
These may include:
Pain control – if a person is suffering from chronic pains from
cancer, childbirth, joints, headaches among others, hypnosis may
help in bearing the pain.
Hot flashes – when a woman is going through menopause, she
will experience hot flashes that are uncomfortable most of the
time. Hypnosis has been known to help with the discomfort of hot
flashes.
Behavior change – some people may find themselves having
behaviors that are undesirable. Such include bed-wetting,
insomnia, eating disorders, among others. The use of hypnosis has
been known to help in transforming these undesirable behaviors.
Side effects of cancer treatment – during cancer treatment, patients
go through chemotherapy and radiation treatment. These forms of
treatments leave the patient with undesirable side effects. The use
of hypnosis helps cancer patients deal with these effects and cope
with the treatment.
Mental health conditions – many people suffer from various
mental health issues such as post-traumatic stress, anxiety,
phobias, among many more. The uses of hypnosis help a person
deal with these conditions and bring relief.
 
What are the Risks of Hypnosis?

When hypnosis is done by a trained therapist or a medical practitioner, it is
considered a safe addition and alternative treatment. However, in people
with serious mental health issues, hypnosis may not be the best method to
use. There are various reactions to hypnosis. However, these reactions are
rare and they include:
The person may feel dizzy after therapy
Experience slight headaches
After therapy, a person may feel drowsy
A person can be distressed or anxious
In rare cases, hypnosis can create false memories
 
Preparing for Hypnosis
There is no need for special preparations before a hypnosis session.
However, it is recommended for a person to be comfortable and relaxed. It
is also important for a person to be well-rested to avoid falling asleep
during therapy.
Before you go for therapy, research and ensure the therapist you have
settled on is certified to perform hypnosis. Look for someone you trust that
has undergone hypnosis and ask for references. You can also opt to
interview the therapist before the session by finding out some of these:
Does your therapist have psychology, social work, medicine
training?
Is your therapist licensed and certified to perform hypnosis?
Where did the therapist get his training from?
How much training does your therapist have in hypnotherapy and
where did they get the training from?

Does your therapist belong to any professional organizations and
if so which ones?
How long has the therapist been in practice?
How much the cost per session and are their sessions covered by
insurance?
Once you have settled on a therapist, he or she will explain the expectations
and the process. The therapist will then embark on talking in a gentle
soothing voice as he describes pictures that create relaxation, well-being,
and security.
When you are relaxed and in a state of reception, the therapist will begin to
suggest ways you can achieve your goals. A therapist may also help you
have a vivid mental picture of yourself accomplishing the goals. Once the
session is over, you can either bring yourself out of it or the therapist will
help get out of your relaxation state.
During hypnosis, one does not lose control of their behavior. A person is
always aware and remembers all that happened during the hypnosis session.
Hypnosis is used to help in coping with pain, anxiety, and stress and is used
in cognitive behavioral therapy to change the behaviors and thoughts that
are undesirable. However, hypnosis is not recommended for every person.
Some people find it hard to get hypnotized while for others it is easy and
they enjoy the benefits.
 
Three Stages of Hypnosis
Hypnosis is a process that involves the deep body and mind relaxation.
Before we get to the various hypnosis stages, it is important to first
understand how hypnosis works or the process of hypnotherapy.

1. Getting ready – every hypnotherapy session with a qualified therapist
must be carried out in a relaxed, safe and calm environment where there
are no interruptions of any kind. There is usually a preliminary
discussion between the therapist and the person to be hypnotized. This is
usually done to establish if the person has had prior hypnotism sessions
and their experiences as well as trying to establish the problem one needs
working on.
Most of the problems usually include a behavior or thoughts a person needs
to balance or completely changed. For instance, a person may be struggling
with bed-wetting; this behavior with the help of hypnosis is addressed and
changed.
A skilled therapist should gather as much information as possible during the
preliminary talk. This is important so that he may work on the best
technique for the particular person and problem. The pattern most therapists
use during the session is loose. It follows:
Preparing and screening a client
Inducting a client to an altered state consciousness state
Deepening the trance state that opens suggestibility
Posthypnotic suggestions. This is where advice is given regarding
the problem the therapist worked on.
2. Induction – in a typical hypnotherapy session, the initial 15 minutes are
for helping the client relax their mind and body. This stage is referred to
as the induction stage. It involves helping a person to enter into a light
state of trance by the use of relaxation techniques that work on the mind
and body.
Gradually, the person is encouraged to relax their muscles and mind. This
technique is aimed at ridding a person of any tension and releasing anxiety.
The therapist focuses on instructing the client to slow and control their

breathing. This is also to help relax and distract the conscious mind so that a
person focuses on the subconscious mind. Because of many methods of
induction, it is important for the therapist to understand their client and
apply a method that works for them.
3. Deepening a trance – this stage is where the subconscious mind is made
ready to be more receptive to suggestions or new behavior. Once the
mind accepts new thought patterns, a change in behavior follows. To
deepen the trance, some therapists may opt to continue reinforcing the
induction method used. The method can be accompanied by
visualization techniques that are very deep to increase the trance. A
qualified therapist knows that it is important for a person to be deeply
altered in consciousness before starting hypnotic suggestions.
Now that you know how hypnosis works, it is important to understand the
three stages to hypnotism.
Stage 1 – Hypnoidal State
This is the stage of light induction. At this stage, the person is encouraged
to relax and have an internal focus. This stage is light and is characterized
by the fluttering of the eyes of the person.
Stage 2 – Cataleptic State 
This is the stage where the therapist moves to deepen the trance state. To
know if a person is in this state, their eyes move from one side to the other.
Stage 3 – Somnambulistic State
This is the deepest stage in a trance. This is evidenced by the rolling up and
down of eyes. This is the stage where suggestions are given and received at
a subconscious level and the person in some cases may not remember
hearing them.

 
Applications for Hypnosis
Hypnosis has been known to have existed for as long as records have been
able to show. According to the American Society for Clinical Hypnosis
(ASCH), the use of modern clinical hypnotherapy goes back to the late
1700s. since 1958, the use of hypnotherapy as a form of reliable therapy
and tremendously increased. Hypnotherapy has found use in the modern
world in different ways.
Hypnosis is used in various ways from mental health conditions to
psychological and physical conditions. It is used on people suffering from
chronic pain, depression, in sudden and acute illnesses, among others. Most
health professionals nowadays recommend the use of hypnosis to treat their
clients facing different conditions. Some of the uses of hypnosis include:
Treatment of phobias and fears
Unreasonable irrational fear or phobia of anything can be treated through
the use of hypnotism. Many people struggle with phobias on a daily basis
causing them not to function normally. Some of the fears that paralyze
people are fear of spiders or arachnophobia, fear of enclosed spaces or
claustrophobic, fear of heights, snakes, flying or agoraphobia; the fear of
leaving home. A hypnotherapist will work with a patient while under
hypnotism to try and identify the reasons for the fears and work on finding
solutions to them.
Stopping smoking
There are people that want to stop their habit of smoking but it becomes
very difficult. Most smokers attempt several times to quit smoking and find
themselves falling back. Regardless of how committed a smoker is to cease

smoking, it is not easy and they may need help to do so. A hypnotherapist
may be able to help them. In a relaxed environment, the therapist works on
understanding the various stress factors in the life of the client that may be
causing fall back to smoking every time they stop.  A therapist will go to
the subconscious mind to find these reasons and make suggestions on how
to stop. Once the subconscious mind has received the suggestions, it is then
possible for the person to change their behavior by addressing the stress
factors.
Weight loss
Many people struggle with weight loss and often feel they have lost the
battle with food. With a qualified hypnotherapist, a person can learn more
about their relationship with food. They also learn why they have no control
over food and how to overcome their cravings. Through hypnosis, a
therapist can suggest ways to overcome the destructive behavior and have a
healthy relationship with food.
Boosting Confidence
There are many people that suffer from low self-esteem issues. To gain their
confidence back, such people may require assistance. Most people lose
confidence because they can seem to embrace their good qualities. A
therapist can help such a person find their confidence by tapping on their
best qualities that are subconsciously hidden.
Anesthesiology during surgery
There are cases where a surgeon may hire a hypnotherapist to supplement
medical anesthesia. In some extremely rare cases, hypnotherapy has been
used solely as an anesthetic during a surgical procedure. Some procedures
that surgeons have used hypnotherapy include the removal of gall bladder,

cesarean, hysterectomy, and amputation. There are patients that have
sensitiveness and allergies of chemicals used in anesthesia. However, they
can still benefit from health-improving and life-saving procedures through
the use of hypnotherapy. 
Hypnosis has been credited with improving the lives of many people. For
cognitive-behavioral therapy, hypnotism has been known to help many
patients transform their thoughts and in effect changing their outward
behaviors for better.
 
Types of Hypnotherapy
There are many types of hypnotherapy techniques used in the world today.
Depending on the need of the client and the therapist, different therapies
can be used to treat a given condition. However, here we are going to
discuss some of the most common hypnotherapies available.
Cognitive hypnotherapy
Cognitive hypnotherapy uses hypnosis to align the subconscious mind with
the conscious one and the way it understands reality.  Cognitive
hypnotherapy is most useful for dealing with anxiety and phobias although
it can also be used for other conditions.
Ericksonian hypnotherapy
Milton Erickson was a family psychiatrist and a medical hypnotist. He
brought a revolution in the use of hypnotherapy to approach many issues.
Ericksonian hypnotherapy uses storytelling to change behavior while the
patient is under hypnosis.
Hypno-psychotherapy

This is an approach where hypnosis is used alongside another type of
psychotherapy like mindfulness, psychodynamic, among others. Therapists
that offer this kind of therapy often have training in psychotherapy as well
as hypnotherapy. Through hypnotherapy, a therapist can be able to analyze
more deep-seated issues and is helpful for individuals that feel they need
more.
Hypnoanalysis
It draws from analytical psychotherapy concepts. Hypnoanalysis looks to
know a trigger or a cause of an event that leads to the problem at hand. By
understanding the root of a problem, the hypnotherapist helps in resolving
negative associations that come from the issue. This process can take
several sessions because it needs the patient and the therapist to build a
trusting relationship.
Neuro-linguistic Programming (NLP)
This is a technique hypnotherapist’s use often in their practice. This
technique is designed to help patients help themselves to reach their best
state of mind and attain happiness.
Past life regression
Therapists that use this technique believe each person has a past and they
use hypnosis to recover past memories. They believe these memories are
able to help understand why a person is struggling with various issues and
understand who they are better. This is a holistic therapy that works the
mind, spirit, body, and emotions. Past life regression is especially useful
where a person feels stuck on certain issues of the past.
Solution-focused hypnotherapy

This kind of hypnotherapy focuses on the present. It looks at your current
situation to determine your future would look like. this kind of therapy is
centered on the client meaning the client takes the lead in the session while
being guided by the hypnotherapist. In this session, a client focuses on
setting goals and questioning techniques that one needs to get solutions. It is
based on the premise that a client has inner strength and resources to draw
upon and help themselves.
Suggestion hypnotherapy
In most types of hypnotherapy, suggestion techniques are employed. The
premise behind the use of hypnotherapy is that when a person is in a
hypnotic state, their subconscious is more open to suggestions or advice.
During hypnotherapy, suggestions are given that are aimed at helping alter
the thought pattern of the patient. If the aim is to transform behaviors, this
technique is ideal and it also helps in dealing with anxiety and stress.
Timeline Therapy
Timeline therapy is based on the understanding that the memories of a
person are stored in a linear pattern. A timeline therapist uses various
techniques to help a person release beliefs that are limiting as well as
negative emotions that are linked to their past. This technique is believed to
be very helpful in dealing with depression, stress and anxiety disorders.



 
  

 

CHAPTER TWELVE
Dark NLP
 
What is Neuro Linguistic Programming?
Neuro-Linguistic Programming has to do with the study of thoughts (neuro)
and language (linguistic) in a systemic way and the scripts that run the life
of an individual (programming).  
It deals with the understanding and the development of the mind and the
entire understanding of the language of the mind in relation to the way it is
designed to function and the ways in which it is molded by the personal
experiences of an individual. It is simply a study of a person's subjective
reality. 
A proper understanding of the language of the mind influences every aspect
of a person’s life from his relationship with others to his communication
skills with friends and clients to the general outcome of a person’s life. It is
a holistic study that puts the spirit, body, past and present of an individual
into consideration. 
As Homo sapiens who are gifted with the ability to think, it is presumed
that our most important function is the thought or the thinking function.
NLP, however, brings one to the understanding of the fact that no thought
process exists in a vacuum, as they are a product of a person's perspective.
It has a presupposition of perception as reality and it holds that the things,
we think are colored by the way we think. 

For different individuals there are different ways of thinking and
interpreting reality. What NLP does is assist in the understanding of these
various representational systems to help each person narrow down his own
system. It helps in the understanding of the three different types of thinking
patterns which are: 
Visual: deals with both pictures and visual metaphors. 
Auditory: sound (hearing). 
Kinesthetic: deals with the five senses, as well as gut feelings. 
In NLP, a person is thought to take absolute control of his mind and
ultimately his life. Unlike what is obtainable in psychoanalysis, which
places its focus on “why,” NLP presents a more practical approach with its
focus on the “how.”  
 
 
How NLP Works 

If you are just coming across this topic for the first time, NLP may appear
or seem like magic or hypnosis. When a person is undergoing therapy, this
topic digs deep into the unconscious mind of the patient and filters through
different layers of beliefs and the person's approach or perception of life to
deduce the early childhood experiences that are responsible for a behavioral
pattern.  
In NLP, it is believed that everyone has the resources that are needed for
positive changes in their own lives. The technique adopted here is meant to
help in facilitating these changes. 
Usually, when NLP is taught, it is done in a pyramidal structure. However,
the most advanced techniques are left for those multi-thousand-dollar
seminars. An attempt to explain this complicated subject is to state that the
NLPer (as those who use NLP will often call themselves) is always paying
keen attention to the person they are working on/with.  
Usually, there is a large majority of NLPers that are therapists and they are
very likely to be well-meaning people. They achieve their aims by paying
attention to those subtle cues like the movement of the eyes, flushing of the
skin, dilation of the pupil and subtle nervous tics. It is easy for an NLP user
to quickly determine the following: 
The side of the brain that the person uses predominantly. 
The sense (smell, sight, etc.) that is more dominant in a person’s
brain. 
The way the person’s brain stores and makes use of information
(the NLPer can deduce all this from the person’s eye movement). 
When they are telling a lie or concocting information. 
When the NLP user has successfully gathered all this information, they
begin to mimic the client in a slow and subtle manner by not only taking on

their body language, but also by imitating their speech and mannerisms, so
that they begin to talk with the language patterns that are aimed at targeting
the primary senses of the client. They will typically fake the social cues that
will easily make someone let their guard down so that they become very
open and suggestible. 
For example, when a person’s sense of sight is their most dominant sense,
the NLPer will use a language that is very laden with visual metaphors to
speak with them. They will say things like: “do you see what I am talking
about?” or “why not look at it this way?” For a person that has a more
dominant sense of hearing, he will be approached with an auditory language
like: “listen to me” or “I can hear where you’re coming from.”  
To create a rapport, the NLPer mirrors the body language and the linguistic
patterns of the other person. This rapport is a mental and physiological state
which a human being gets into when they lose guard of their social senses.
It is done when they begin to feel like the other person who they are
conversing with is just like them.  
Once the NLPer have achieved this rapport, they will take charge of the
interaction by leading it in a mild and subtle manner. Thanks to the fact that
they have already mirrored the other person, they will now begin to make
some subtle changes in order to gain a certain influence on the behavior of
the person. This is also combined with some similar subtle language
patterns which lead to questions and a whole phase of some other
techniques.  
At this point, the NLPer will be able to tweak and twist the person to
whichever direction they so desire. This only happens if the other person
can’t deduce that there is something going on because they assume

everything that is occurring is happening organically or that they have given
consent to everything.  
What this means is that it is quite hard to make use of NLP to get other
people to act out of character, but it can be used to get a person to give
responses within their normal range of character.
At this point, what the NLP user seeks to do may be to either elicit or
anchor. When they are eliciting, they make use of both leading and
language to get the person to an emotional state of say, sadness. Once they
can elicit this state, they can then lead it on with a physical cue by touching
the other person's shoulder for example.  
According to theory, whenever the NLP user touches the person's shoulder
in the same manner, the same emotional state will resurface if they do it
again. However, this is only made possible by the successful conditioning
of the other person. 
When undergoing NLP therapy, it is very possible for the therapist to adopt
a content-free approach, which means the therapist can work effectively
without taking a critical look at the problem or without even knowing about
the problem at all. This means that there is room for privacy for the client as
the therapist does not really need to be told about whichever event took
place or whatever issue happened in the past. 
Also, prior to the commencement of the therapy, there is an agreement
which ensures that the therapist cannot disclose any information, hence the
interaction between the therapist and the client remains confidential. 
In NLP, there is the belief in the need for the perfection of the nature of
human creation, so every client is encouraged to recognize the sensitivity of
the senses and make use of them in responding to specific problems. As a

matter of fact, NLP also holds the belief that it is possible for the mind to
find cures to diseases and sicknesses. 
The techniques employed by NLP have to do with a noninvasive, medicine-
free therapy that enables the client to find out new ways of handling
emotional issues such as low self-esteem, lack of confidence, anxiety and
destructive relationship patterns. It is also a successful tool in effective
bereavement counselling. 
With its roots in the field of behavioral science, which was developed by
Skinner, Pavlov and Thorndike, NLP makes use of the combination
physiology and the unconscious mind to bring about change in the thought
process and ultimately the behavior of a person. 
 
Importance of NLP 
NLP is not only necessary for the understanding of a person's being, but it
also helps in the understanding of the way an individual is. It helps a person
to get deep into the root cause of the problem, as well as the foundation of
their being.  
Here are some other reasons why NLP is important: 
It helps people take responsibility for the things that they feel they may not
be able to control. With the help of NLP, it is possible for a person to
change the way they react to events of the past and have a certain level of
control over their future. 
It is very important for people to be aware of the body language of the
members of their inner circle, as well as those who they seek to do business
with. With NLP, it is possible to make use of language with both control
and purpose, and with this it is possible to have control over your life.  

Remember, you cannot expect to make the same mistakes using the same
mindset and hope to get different results. During an NLP session, the focus
is placed entirely on the client as they are made the subject. This helps a lot
because at the point where a person can deal with his or herself as a person,
they gain more clarity into his or her dealings with other people. 
It helps to improve finance, sales performance, marriage, health issues,
parenting, customer service and every other aspect and phase of life. This is
because it helps in the holistic improvement of an individual and when a
person is whole, his interactions and relationship with himself and other
people become whole as well. 
It assists in targeting your beliefs, thoughts and values and helps with the
targeting of a person’s brain functions, as well as developing certain
behaviors. It also shapes the way these behaviors metamorphoses into
habits and how the habits change to actions which in turn comes as results. 
NLP is applicable in different vocations and professions. This is a tool that
is very important in the mastery of sales, personal development experts and
self-help, teaching, communication, parenting and other facets of life.
 
NLP Techniques 
Here are some of the techniques that are employed in the users of NLP: 
Dissociation
Everyone experiences a bad day when a situation ruins it and gives one a
bad feeling. This may be an experience that drowns your spirit every time
you are faced with it. Also, it may be a certain nervous feeling that comes at
any point that you have to address an audience. It could be a feeling of

shyness that comes whenever you need to approach a certain (special)
person. 
Although it may seem as though this feeling of shyness, sadness or
nervousness is automatic and unstoppable, what the NLP technique of
dissociation offers are ways to get over these feelings.  
Get to know about the emotion that you wish to overcome. Whether it is a
feeling of discomfort, anger or dislike for a certain situation. 
Imagine the possibility of teleportation and looking back at yourself going
through the same situation, but this time from an observer’s point of view. 
Take note of the dramatic change that occurs in the feelings. 
To get an extra boost for your morale, think about floating out of your body
and watching yourself. This means that you will now be looking at yourself
while your other self is also looking at yourself. What this double
dissociation attempts to do is to take away all the negative emotions in all
possible minor situations. 
Content Reframing
This technique is useful for all the times you feel like you are trapped in a
negative or helpless situation. With the help of reframing, you will be able
to get rid of all negative situations by becoming empowered by interpreting
the meaning of the situation into becoming a positive thing.  
Take a situation where your relationship ended for instance. Although it
may seem as if it is an awful situation when one looks at it on the surface,
what about the possibility of those hidden benefits of being single? Think of
the fact that you are now open to meeting and interacting with new people,
which means that it is possible for you to get into a new relationship. This
means that you are now free to do whatever you want to do at whatever

time you want to do it. From the last relationship that ended, you must have
learned some valuable lessons that will eventually be useful to you in your
subsequent relationship(s).  
It is very possible to panic or get thrown into fear in certain situations.
Instead of focusing on fear, you can sway your focus by reframing. This
will contribute to helping you make some even-handed and responsible
decisions. 
Anchoring yourself
This process of creating a neurological connection between the ringing of a
bell and the attitude of salivating is known as a conditioned response. These
responses to stimulus anchors can also be used on humans. 
The result of anchoring oneself is that a person gets to link a desired
positive emotional response with a specific sensation or a phrase. When you
can select a positive emotion or a thought and intentionally link it to a
gesture, you will be able to trigger the anchor at every point you feel low, so
you will be able to change your feelings immediately. Here are some ways
of anchoring yourself: 
Take note of the feelings you want to experience. It could be a feeling of
happiness, confidence, calmness, etc. Decide on the part of your body
where you would love to place the anchor. This could be a certain action
like pulling your earlobe, squeezing your fingernail or touching your
knuckle. With this physical touch, you will be able to trigger the desired
positive feeling whenever you want to. This has nothing to do with the part
of the body that you have chosen, all that needs to be done is create that
connection between the unique touch and the feelings. You do not have to
make this touch for anything else besides the feeling. 

Think about a certain time in the past when you had the same feelings you
are experiencing at a given moment. Reminisce on the time you felt the
same way then float into your body by looking through your eyes so that
you will be able to replay and relive the memory.  
Once this is done, you can make some adjustments to your body language
to match with the memory and the state of mind. When you are reliving the
memory, make sure you can see, hear and feel everything the way you
remember it. If you can do this, the feeling will come back, just as it will
when you tell a funny story from the past to your friend.  
Keep in mind that you will typically begin to laugh over again as you tell
the story because while you get into the story, you will create some mental
association to the story and relive the experience. 
While you are going back to this memory, pull, touch or squeeze that part of
your body that you had earlier chosen. If you do this, you will notice that
the feeling will heighten while you are reliving the memory. Once the
emotional state gets to its peak and begins to wear off, you can then release
the touch. 
This touch will create a certain neurological response that will be a trigger
for the state whenever you touch that spot again. So, in order to feel this
state again, all you need to do is to touch yourself again in the same way. 
To get an even stronger response, you can think of another memory from
the past where you had that same feeling and go back and relive it from
your own perspective. Anchor that same state as you have done before.
Every time you add another memory, this anchor will gain more potency so
that it will trigger an even stronger response. 
Whenever you feel the need to change your mood, you can revisit this
technique.

Hypnotists make use of NLP to get a great selection of methods that they
can make use of during the process of hypnosis. When the process of NLP
is being used, the hypnotist will use thought patterns that are causing
problems for the subject. This will save both parties a lot of time as opposed
to the use of the process of suggestion.  
Let's take the process used in stress relief or in dealing with excessive
appetite for example. This thought pattern will be used to get rid of any
problem that the subject is facing, and when it is used by a certified
hypnotist or a psychologist it will prove to be a very effective technique.



 
  

 

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Body Language
 
 
The power of persuasion means nothing more than using mental abilities to
form words and feelings used to convince other people to do things they
may or may not want to do spontaneously. Some people are more capable to
persuade than others and some people are easier to persuade then others.   
The ease of persuading other people is directly connected to their current
mental or emotional state. Someone who is lonely or tired is easier to
persuade, simply because their defense mechanism is lowered. Someone
who is momentarily needy may be easier to persuade than someone who
has a strong sense of self-worth. People who are at a low point in their lives
are easy prey for others who might try to persuade them to do something
they might not usually do.   
The first step in persuasion involves the idea of reciprocating. If a person
does something nice for someone else, then the receiving usually feels the
need to do something good in return. 
As an example, if someone helps their elderly neighbor carry in groceries
from the car, that neighbor might feel obligated to bake homemade cookies
for that person. A coworker who helps complete a project is more likely to
receive assistance when it is needed. Many people do nice things for others
all the time without expecting anything in return. The person who does nice
things for people and then mentions some little favor that can be done in
return may be someone to watch closely.  He or she lacks in genuine
purpose. 

There are ways to improve the power of persuasion. Just like any other trait,
it can be made stronger by following a few strategies and by regular
practice.   
Did you know that your body speaks more eloquently than words? Body
language is at work constantly whether you are aware of it or not. When
you want to master the art of persuasion, you need not only to understand
(and read accurately) body language, but also learn to use it to drive your
point home.    
Body language is a mix of hand and facial gestures, posture and overall
appearance. You can decide to use these to your advantage and you will
make people to do what you want without them realizing that you are
actually controlling the outcome of the discussion.    
Why people are persuasive   
What makes a person convincing? Why are they persuasive, and you aren’t?
There is no single, short answer to that question.    
Confidence is the absolute most important aspect when it comes to
persuasion. 
There’s no doubt it’s been scientifically proven that it’s easier to persuade
people when you’re confident, when you believe in yourself and trust the
message you are passing to the other person. That’s because through your
attitude, people convince themselves you you’re an authority on the topic
and they’ll listen to you, because they have no knowledge or experience,
but you seem to have both.    
In this framework, it’s also crucial to understand that humans are doubtful
creatures. We’re not very confident and we don’t really believe in our own
abilities or even experience, so when someone comes along and appears to
be confident and to know more, we follow them like a herd of dim sheep.    

Persuasion is just as much about the impression you leave upon people as it
is about your actual skill. Like many other times in life, appearances are
more “real” than actual reality, because that is all other people will ever
know about you. It doesn’t matter if deep inside, you’re insecure or you
don’t really think you know what you’re doing.    
On the outside, you’re this dazzling, confident creature that can persuade
anyone into anything because you’ve mastered all the important
contributing factors: confidence, eye contact, body language, manner of
speaking, tone, facial expressions, as well as your general demeanor.   
Confidence   
How do you think so many scammers make a living? 
Now, I’m not advocating that you try to trick people, but I am simply
suggesting that we have to work on our confidence. You’ll notice that every
single person you find convincing has some sort of authoritative stance. It’s
like their presence demands attention and respect.    
Eye contact   
Eye contact is a classic, natural display of dominance. It’s a technique that’s
even present in the animal kingdom. Be extremely mindful when it comes
to “using your eyes” since they are the first tool you can use during an
encounter and the way you decide to use them can determine the outcome
of such a meeting. Eye contact can intimidate, eye contact can attract and
push your imagination, create desire and interest, use them consciously and
effectively.    
Body language   
Do you know how often people underestimate body language, or just ignore
it outright? Body language is an incredible tool for persuasion. People are

always advised to display open body language, like facing your audience,
making sure not to keep your arms crossed against your chest, keep your
palms open, and all sorts of little tips that we’ll discuss at length.    
What you maybe haven’t heard is that in order to be effectively persuasive,
you also need to take note of and use the body language of the person
you’re talking to.   You need to observe carefully your counterparty and by
detecting his/her body language predict his/her attitude towards you in real
time.
Manner of speaking   
Your choice of words is overwhelmingly important when attempting to
convince someone, because it must be very deliberate. There’s a clear
strategy behind verbal persuasion, and it relies on appealing to the person’s
emotions.    
The way you speak and what you say are both equally important, because
even though your message may be perfect, if the delivery is lacking, it
won’t do much good. We’ve already established that speaking with
authority is half the battle, but you also have to speak the right words, in
order to win it.  If your aim is to persuade, go to the meeting fully prepared
about the topic and try some rehearsal before that, so you will have the
possibility to observe the counterparty attitude and response while you are
talking, in real time, and adjust your speech and body language.
Tone   
Continuing on the idea that the way you say things is vastly important, let’s
talk about tone and why it matters. In fact, I lied when I said tone and
message are equally important: tone weighs much more on a person’s
impression.    

If someone has a very somber voice, a serious, measured tone, and an
equally severe facial expression, it almost doesn’t matter what they’re
saying – you’re going to assume it’s grave and important; the actual words
or what they mean matters less. A joke told with a serious tone is not
perceived as funny at all.    
Facial expressions   
Facial expression goes hand in hand with body language and eye contact
and is similarly important to tonality. Creating the impression that you
mean what you say involves your face, because it will be the very first to
betray you or, on the contrary, help you enforce your message.    
What you can obtain through persuasion   
Persuasion is a very powerful and very valuable skill that everyone should
have and learn how to master and use in a positive constructive way. It
comes in handy throughout your life in virtually any aspect of your
existence, from sweet-talking your way into free movie tickets to
convincing your boss you deserve a raise.    
Your relationship with your spouse   
Far from being unfair or manipulative, having the ability to convince your
significant other can actually improve your relationship because you can
have less discussions about your disagreements and lack of compromise.
Now you can use all that extra time and energy implementing your superior
decisions.   
Your relationship with your kids   
Persuasion skills and indisputable power and authority to convince your
kids to actually listen to you and follow your advice is an essential
educational tool. Master daily affirmation about your parenting abilities,

work on your confidence when talking to them, use eye contact and body
language in the most difficult moments to attract their attention and stop
their negative behavior. You will realize that your mental attitude will lead
and guide your body language. Guide your thinking and master it to obtain
the highest level of positive persuasion with your children.
Your relationship with your friends   
We all have that one friend who always makes terrible life choices and no
one can get through to them and steer them towards the right path…except
you, that is. If you have influence and persuasion skills, don’t keep them for
yourself. Use them for good, not evil.    
Get paid what you deserve   
Negotiating falls under persuasion, absolutely everyone should master this
skill. You need to have the ability to convince your ‘opponent’ that you
deserve an increase and you should have it.   
This advice mostly applies to the workplace, where – let’s be real – no boss
will ever willingly part with their money and hand it over to you. This is the
reason why you must convince them to do it. You’ve earned it, you deserve
it, and it’s rightfully yours. You have to ask for it, but you have to know
how, and persuasive skills help with that.    
Start with your daily affirmations about the concept of abundance and being
enough to prepare your mindset; “you deserve more and are made for
more” and it is just to your counterparty, your boss, to accept it and see it.
Master daily affirmations to prepare your subconscious mind to fully accept
this idea you are more and deserve more. 
Prepare yourself for the meeting and visualize the situation, get emotionally
involved, experience the conversation and feel it, this will help you prepare
to get out of your comfort zone.  

Work carefully on your body language, make straight eye contact at the
beginning of the meeting and use a soft but precise tone, outdistance the
words, the sentence and prepare the speech so that the “opponent” will
perceive and feel your confidence. 
Earn the trust and respect of your boss   
You can accomplish that by becoming their go-to person. Offer your bright
ideas, come up with solutions to problems the company is facing, persuade
them to implement your suggestions and that they’re the contribution the
company needs right now. In time, you will reap the rewards when your
boss comes to consult with you first.    
Be a good leader to your colleagues   
Your persuasive abilities will prove to be invaluable and will bring you to a
position like this if you want people to respect you, your work, and your
ideas. It should be obvious for everyone that your way is the right way and
there will be minimal dissent if you have the necessary influence over
them.   
Get important information   
If you can talk the talk well enough, you can basically convince anyone to
tell you anything. Preferred customer sales dates from sales attendants, and
even gossip from your friends, you get the idea. Sweet talk yourself into
perks and valuable info.   Follow the steps above listed and when it comes
to the meeting with people, remember not to ask direct questions, but let me
talk about the topic and be aligned with the interlocutor without being
assertive or disruptive about the topic otherwise the person will never open
up and a rapport will never form.
 

How to Persuade People   
 
The ability to influence someone during a conversation and make them take
a decision is necessary in order to become one of the most important people
in the world today. 
This ability is useful in business negotiations, and in everyday life.   
In general, the impact on people is not so obvious. The basic idea is that
people’s behavior is often guided by their subconscious simple desires. And
to achieve your goals, you need to understand the simple desires of people,
and then make your interlocutor passionately wish for something.  
It should be noted that in order to influence people you should NOT try to
impose or force them to make a hasty decision, or to go for something they
did not even consider. 
The first step is to try to reach a mutually beneficial cooperation. 
If you are willing to put yourself in the shoes of another person from whom
you want to get something and understand his/her thoughts, then you do not
have to worry about your relationship with the person. 
The secret lies in the ability to help the self-affirmation of the interlocutor. 
What does this mean?
We have to make sure that your companion looks decent in his own eyes.
He needs to feel at ease, you need to be able to establish a rapport whereby
the person feels she/he can trust you. The person needs to feel she/he can
trust you and establish a rapport, that he can open up himself to his
interlocutor without feeling that the latter has a specific expectation on him.
Moreover, in order to have influence and control over another person, you
must know their personality and behavioral traits. Most importantly, learn

how to use this knowledge to master the specific methods and techniques of
influence and control the behavior of the other, on the basis of his outlook,
character, personality type and other important psychological features.   
To help people to look beyond the limits of consciousness, professionals
use a variety of methods and techniques. One of the most effective of these
is hypnosis. 
This method can directly influence the psyche, whose essence consists of
the introduction of human narrowed state of consciousness, makes it is easy
to control someone else's suggestion and management.   
The ability to manage people, primarily, is to combine the knowledge of
human psychology and their personal characteristics. They help to change
their own behavior so that this change will cause the desired reaction in
others. 
Try to be more observant while communicating; it will help you better
understand the individual psychological characteristics of the interlocutor.
Based on this knowledge, try using the following methods and techniques
that will help you manage people correctly and efficiently.



 
  

 

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Deception
 
 
This type of dark psychology shares some similarities to manipulation in
the sense that a lot of deceptions are disseminated to achieve the desirable.
 
What is Deception?  
How can deception be defined? Deception, alongside subterfuge,
mystification, feign, deceit and beguilement, is an art employed by an agent
to spread beliefs in the subject which are untrue, or truths coated with lies.
Deception involves numerous things, example dissimulation, sleight of
mind, suppression, cover-up, propaganda etc. The agents win the favor of
the subjects, they trust him and are unsuspecting of his propensity to be

dubious. He is able to control the subject's mind having won their
confidence and trust. The subjects have no doubts on the agent's words, in
fact the subjects trust the agent completely and possibly plan their affairs
based on the agent's statements.   
The deception practiced by the agent can have grave consequential effects if
discovered by the subjects. How? The subjects will not be disposed to
hearing his words, neither will they accept them anymore, no wonder the
agent must be skilled at the deception technique. He must create an escape
route to cover up if things boomerang and still retain the trust his subjects
have in him. 
Deception breaks the laws that govern relationships and it has been known
to affect negatively the hopes that come with relationships. Deception does
occur every now and then and this could result in feelings of doubt as well
as disloyalty among the two people who are in the relationship. Nearly
everyone desires to have an honest discussion with their partner; if they find
out that their partner has however been dishonest, they, in turn, need to find
out how to make use of confusion and distraction so as to get the
dependable and honest information that they are in need of. Trust, on the
other hand, would be lost in the relationship, making it hard to restore the
relationship to its former glory. 
The individual on the receiving end of both dishonesty and betrayal would
always wonder about the things their partner was telling them, thinking
about whether the story was true or false. As a result of this new doubt,
most relationships will be brought to an end once the agent realizes their
partner's dishonesty. 
 
Types of Deception  

Deception is a type of communication based on omissions and falsehood so
as to convince the subject of the world that best fits the agent. Seeing that
there is a need for communication to take place, there will likewise be
various kinds of deception that could take place. As per the Interpersonal
Deception Theory, there are 5 different sorts of deception. A few of these
have been revealed in other types of mind control, showing there can be
some similarities.  
The 5 major types of deception include:  
1. Lies: This occurs when the agent manufactures information or provides
information that is not similar to the truth. They will give this information
to the unsuspecting individual as the truth and the individual will then see
this lie to be fact indeed. However, this can be unsafe as the person being
given this false information would have no idea about the falsehood; most
likely, if the subject understood that they were being given information that
was not true, they would not be on talking terms with the agent and no
deception would have occurred; 
2. Equivocations: This is the point at which the agent will make statements
that are differing, unclear, or not direct, such that the subject becomes
confused and does not understand what is going on. Also, it can help the
agent to preserve their reputation, saving face if the subject later returns to
blame them for the falsehood;  
3. Concealments: It is the most frequently used form of deception. It refers
to when the agent leaves out information that is related or critical to the
situation on purpose, or they display any such behavior that would cover up
information that is of importance to the subject for that exact situation. The
agent won't have lied straightforwardly to the subject, they will, however,
have ensured that the vital information required never gets to the subject; 

4. Exaggeration: Exaggeration occurs when the agent emphasizes too much
on a fact or stretch the truth just a little so as to twist the story to suit them.
Although the agent may not directly be lying to the subject, they will
manipulate the situation such that it appears as though it is a bigger deal
than it actually is, or they may twist the truth to make the subject do
whatever they need them to do; 
5. Understatements: This is the inverse of the exaggeration tool in the sense
that the agent will present part of the fact as less important, telling the
subject that an event is less of a deal than it actually is when in it really
could be what decides whether the subject gets the opportunity to graduate
or gets a huge promotion. As such, the agent will be able to return to the
subject saying they had no idea how huge a deal their omission was, they
get to keep their reputation leaving the subject to look petty if they protest. 
The above are only some of the forms of deception that there are. To reach
their final goal, the agent of deception will make use of any means that is
available to them, same as what happens in other types of mind control.
These methods mentioned are however not limiting, as the agent would use
any means to get to their goal. 
The agent of deception (who is going to be good at what he does) can be
dangerous since the subject will be unable to know what is the truth or lie.  
 
Reasons for Deception 
It has been confirmed by researchers that there are 3 major reasons for
deceptions found in intimate relationships. These consist of motives
focused on partner, motives focused in self-focused, and motives focused
on a relationship.  

In the case of the partner focused motives, the agent will use deception to
keep their partner from harm. Also, they could make use of falsehood to
save their partner's relationship with an outsider, thereby protecting the
subject from worry, or keep the subject's confidence intact. This reason for
deception is often seen to be of benefit to the relationship and socially
respectful.  
In comparison with some of the other reasons for deception, this one is not
as bad. If the agent finds out about something terrible that the subject's
closest friend said about them, the agent may remain quiet about it.
Although this is a type of deception, it not only saves the subject's
friendship but also keeps the subject from feeling terrible for themselves.
This is the type of deception that is often found in most relationships and
also if found out, might not cause a lot of damage. To protect their partner, a
larger percentage of couples would use this form of deception to protect
their partner. 
The self-focused motive for deception is not thought to be as noble as the
partner focused motive for deception, and as such, is not as acceptable as
the other methods. Rather than stressing over the subject and how they are
doing, the agent is going to simply consider how they are doing, and about
their very own self-image. Here, the agent makes use of deception so as to
protect the agent from criticism, shame or anger. Using this form of
deception in a relationship is typically seen to be a very serious issue and
offense than in the case of partner-focused deception. This is because the
agent chooses to act in a manner that is self-centered instead of working to
protect their relationship or their partner. 
Lastly, the relationship focused motive of deception. The agent makes use
of this form of deception to prevent any harm coming to the relationship
basically by staying away from deception relational disturbance and

quarrel. This type of deception will either help or harm the relationship
depending on the circumstances. This form of deception could be harmful
because it makes thing rather complex. For instance, if you do not reveal
just how you feel about dinner to prevent a quarrel, this might just help the
relationship. Then again, if you keep to yourself the fact that you took part
in an extra-marital relationship the situation is only going to become more
complex. 
No matter the motive of deception in the relationship, deception is not
advised. The agent is holding back details that may be vital to the subject;
when the subject discovers it, distrust in the agent will set in and they are
left to ponder what other details the agent is keeping from them. The
subject would however, not be too worried for the reason behind the
deception, they will simply be vexed that they have not been told some
things, causing a split in the relationship. Usually, it is best to stick with
truthfulness in the relationship and not encircle yourself with individuals
who don't put deception into practice in your social circle. 
 
Detecting Deception  
An individual that has interest in preventing deception to avoid the mind
games that come with it should learn how to detect deception when it is
occurring. It is not usually easy to know when deception is going on as
there are really no pointers to rely on; except the agent makes a mistake and
either tells an obvious lie or says something that the subject knows to be
false. While it might be difficult for the agent to mislead the subject for a
long period of time, it is something that will usually happen regularly
between individuals who know one another.  

Deception can place a heavy weight on the cognitive thinking of the agent
because they will need to find a way to bring to remembrance all the
conversations they have had with the subject on the situation, so the story
stays believable and dependable. Any mistake will bring the subject to the
realization they are being deceived. The stress involved in keeping the story
believable, is much, and as such, the agent is very much likely to spill out
details that will give the subject a clue that they are being deceived either
through nonverbal or verbal signs.  
It is believed by researchers that detecting deception is a process that is
cognitive, fluid, and also complicated and which will regularly differ based
on the message that is being passed across. As indicated by the
Interpersonal Deception Theory, deception is an iterative and dynamic
process of influence between the agent, who attempts to manipulate the
information and how they need it with the goal that it varies from the truth,
and the subject, who will at that point try to know if the message is true or
false. The agent's activities will be in relation to the actions that the subject
makes after they get the information. All through this trade, the agent will
uncover the nonverbal and verbal information that will signal the subject
into the deceit. Eventually, the subject might have the capacity to tell that
the agent has been lying to them.    
It is not all the time that the subject will be able to know the agent is
deceiving them. Aldert Vrij, a notable deception scholar, said that there are
no specific nonverbal behaviors related with deception. There are, however,
some nonverbal behaviors that can be related with the act of deception.
These signs can be displayed also when other behaviors are present, making
it hard to know whether the agent is being deceptive, except they tell a
complete lie. 

Mark Frank, another scholar of deception, suggests another idea of
deception that contains how it very well may be detected at the subject's
cognitive level. When deception takes place, an agent requires a cognizant
behavior that is intentional. Hence, being attentive to words and focusing on
the nonverbal behavior that is going on are both basic when trying to decide
whether or not you are being deceived. If somebody asks a question and the
agent isn't happy to answer it straightforwardly, rather makes use of some
type of disturbance, with a poor logical structure, repeats words, and uses
less time answering that exact question, they are most definitely lying.  
Essentially, there are only a few signs that can be used to try and find out
when deception is taking place. There are a couple of nonverbal signs that
may be when an agent is being deceptive; they may, however, have some
other issue, for example, anxiety or shyness.  
 
Primary Components of Deception  
Most times, the subject won't realize that these components have taken
place except if the agent has told an obvious lie or been caught being
deceptive. These are parts that will be later known if the agent is making
use of the deception process rightly. The 3 primary parts of deception are
camouflage, disguise, and simulation. 
Camouflage  
The major component of deception is camouflage. It is the point at which
the agent is attempting to hide the truth in such a way that the subject is
unaware of the fact they are missing. Usually, this method is used when the
agent gives information that is only partly true. Until these facts are
uncovered one way or the other, the subject will not know that

camouflaging has taken place. The agent will be so talented in hiding facts,
with the goal that it is not easy for the subject to realize the deception has
taken place by chance. 
Disguise  
This is yet is another component which can be found in the process of
deception. In this case, the agent tries to pass across the idea that they are
something or another person. This occurs in such instances when the agent
holds back details about themselves, for example, their genuine name, what
they do for a living, the people they have been with, and what they do when
they go out. This is more than simply changing the clothing that a person
wears in a play or film; when disguise is employed in the process of
deception, the agent is attempting to deceive the agent by changing their
entire personality and appearing as somebody else. 
There are quite a few models that can show the use of disguise in the
deception process. The first is in relation to the agent masking themselves,
often as someone else, with the goal that they are not recognized. The agent
may do this so as to be accepted into a group of individuals that do not like
him, change their persona to make somebody like them, or for the purpose
of achieving their selfish interests. Now and again, the word disguise can
simply be referring to the agent masking the real nature of a proposal with
expectations of hiding an impact that is not agreeable with that proposal.
Most times this type of disguise is found in propaganda or political spin.  
Disguise can be harmful for the reason that it is concealing the genuine
nature of what is happening. When important details are held back from the
subject, it clouds their thinking since they don't have the correct information
to settle on logical decisions. While the subject may imagine that they are

settling on logical decisions all on their own, the agent has, however,
removed important information that may change the subject's decision.  
Simulation  
This is the third component of deception. Simulation involves presenting
false information to the subject. Three methods that can be used in
simulation include; mimicry, fabrication, and distraction. 
In mimicry, otherwise defined as the copying of another model, the agent
will without thinking be giving a picture of something that is like
themselves. They may have a plan that is like another person's and rather
than giving credit to the other person, they will say that the plan is all their
doing. This type of simulation can happen regularly through sound-related,
visual, and other methods.  
Fabrication is yet another means of deception. Here, the agent takes
something found in reality and changes it until it becomes different. They
may tell a tale that did not take place or add to a true story to make it better
or worse. While the heart of the story might be true, agreed they got a poor
score on a test, it will have some additional things put in, for example the
teacher gave them a poor score intentionally. While in reality, the agent got
a poor score because they failed to read. 
Lastly, distraction is another type of simulation in deception. In this case,
the agent makes an effort to get the subject to concentrate on other things,
but not the truth; usually done by offering the subject with something that
may be more tempting than the truth that has been hidden from them. 
For instance, if a cheating spouse thinks the wife is beginning to suspect, he
may bring home a precious stone ring to distract her from the matter even
for a short while. The problem with this method is that it is not usually

long-lasting and as such, the agent has to look for a new way to trick the
subject if they are to keep the process going.



 
  

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
The Role of Defense
 
 
To avoid falling victim to manipulators, you have to build your defenses so
that you are prepared for any manipulative strategies that they may try to
use on you. The best way to build your defenses is by taking steps to
improve your self-esteem and your willpower. However, as a point of
caution, you should be very careful about how you build your defenses
because you don’t want to create restrictions that will keep you from living
a fulfilled life.
 
For example, as you try to guard against manipulation, you can’t act out of
fear. You can’t hide from the world just to avoid scenarios where someone
might want to take advantage of you. Remember that the world is full of

people with dark personality traits who may harbor malicious intentions, so
acting out of fear won’t protect you from anyone. In fact, it will just make
you more of a target. As you build your defenses, make sure that start on
the premise that you are willing to confront manipulators head on, and you
will never run away or recoil. If you act out of fear, you lose by default.
 
The steps to raise self-esteem: To help you build your defenses, we will
discuss the eight steps that you have to take in order to raise your self-
esteem and to increase your willpower by extension. 
 
Acceptance
Acceptance is about assenting to the reality of a given situation. It’s about
recognizing that a certain condition or process is what it is, even if it’s
characterized by high levels of discomfort and negativity. It’s about
consciously submitting to the fact that something cannot be changed, and
that its reality is not subject to interpretation. It’s about making peace with
the situation that you are in.
 
Acceptance is the opposite of denial. Even the most rational among us tend
to be in denial about lots of things in their lives, which are settled facts in
real sense. Denial can be a coping mechanism, one that can keep us from
being overwhelmed by the reality of a given situation. However, denial does
us more harm than good, because unless we can accept something, we can’t
change it, and we will be stuck looking for alternative interpretations and
explanations for our prevailing circumstances.
 
Without acceptance, the door remains wide open for malicious people to
exploit us. Take the example of a patient who is told that he/she is

terminally ill. After seeking the opinions of several medical professionals
and getting the same diagnosis, the patient is still left with the choice of
either accepting or denying the situation. The one who accepts it will make
peace, and try to make the best out of what little time he has. The one who
stays in denial will become susceptible to tricksters who may offer
"alternative cures," and he may end up losing all his savings paying such
people so that in the end, he leaves his family with nothing. That is an
extreme example, but it perfectly illustrates why acceptance is important in
avoiding manipulation, even if the reality may seem too painful to accept.
 
The most crucial form of acceptance is self-acceptance. It refers to the state
of being satisfied with yourself, the way you currently are. Self-acceptance
is a kind of covenant that you make with yourself, to validate, support, and
appreciate who you are instead of constantly criticizing yourself and
wishing you were someone else. Most people have trouble accepting
themselves as they are. We are all in a constant strive for self-improvement.
We want to be more successful, to be wealthier, to be more attractive, or to
be perceived more positively by others. Even the most accomplished among
us have issues with self-acceptance.
 
In many ways, the desire to be a better version of yourself can be seen as a
positive thing; it can help you study harder in school, work harder to earn a
promotion at work or exercise more to get in shape. However, the problem
is there is always room for improvement, so no matter how high you
ascend, the dissatisfaction will always be there, and it will make you
vulnerable to manipulation by people who want to take advantage of your
desires.
 

To defend against manipulation, you have to accept your reality, and you
have to accept yourself. People tend to think that if they accept themselves,
they won’t try to improve – that couldn’t be further from the truth.
Accepting yourself means owning up to your flaws, and that gives you
control over your life. With self-acceptance, attempts at self-improvement
would come from within, so when you decide to change, you will be doing
it for yourself and not for anyone else.
 
Increase awareness
Increasing your awareness means having a higher level of alertness when it
comes to understanding what’s going on in your environment. It means
paying close attention to your surroundings, and to the way, people behave
around you. The higher your level of awareness, the better you will be when
it comes to adapting to your surroundings and understanding the
motivations of the people you interact with.
 
When you become more aware, you will be able to catch on quick when
people try to manipulate you. Many of us tend to be preoccupied with our
own thoughts that we hardly ever notice the cues of the people we interact
with. We tend to live life on autopilot, so when other people try to seize
control over our lives, we only notice it when it’s too late. If you increase
your awareness, you will be equipped with the skills necessary to identify
all the red flags, and you will be able to stop most manipulators on their
tracks before they can do any real harm.
 
The first step towards increasing your awareness is to learn about the
tendencies of manipulative people. Reading this book puts you ahead of the
curve; you now know enough to be able to spot people with ill motives, but

you should understand that the worst kinds of manipulators are very good at
concealing their motives, so you have to keep working on increasing your
awareness.
 
To be truly aware of manipulative people, you have to approach all
interactions with some levels of skepticism. We are not telling you to turn
into a paranoid person who doesn't let anyone in; we are just saying that
you should take a deeper look each person you interact with. Try to study
their body language and their words, and try to see if they are trying to hide
something.
 
Apart from increasing your awareness, you have to increase your self-
awareness as well. Many people confuse those two things, but them entirely
different concepts. Self-awareness is about understanding yourself. It’s
about having a clear concept of your own personality. You have to examine
yourself and figure out what your strengths and weaknesses are, what your
values and motivations are, and what kind of thoughts and emotions you are
likely to have in specific situations. Self-awareness helps you understand
both who you are and how other people perceive you.
 
Self-awareness works as a defense against manipulation because when you
know who you truly are, it becomes more difficult for someone to alter your
thoughts and perceptions. If you have strong and well-articulated values, it
becomes harder for a manipulator to get you to abandon those values.
People who like self-awareness are more likely to be gaslighted or to be
subjected to other forms of mind control.
 

If you end up in a relationship with a manipulative person, self-awareness
can help you keep your identity. Manipulators will try to tell you what to
think and how to behave, but if you are self-aware, you will experience
cognitive dissonance, and your brain will push back against any attempts at
manipulation.
 
Detach with love
Detaching with love is a defense against manipulation that is most
commonly used by people who have loved ones who suffer from substance
abuse problems. Even though it was conceptualized to help people deal
with addicts, it can also work when you are dealing with manipulators.
 
Detaching with love is about showing love and compassion for others
without taking responsibility for their actions. For example, if you have a
family member who is a drug addict, the way it works is that you try to
support them and encourage them to get clean, but you let them make their
own decisions, and you let them suffer the consequences of their actions. If
the addict doesn’t come home, you don’t waste your time looking for them
in the seedy parts of the city, you stay at home, and you do the things that
benefit you and make you happy.
 
The point of detaching with love is to stop trying to control other people's
lives, even if you are doing it for their own good. The idea is that you
accept that people are different from you and that they have their own free
will.
 
Detaching from love can defend you from manipulation in many ways.
There are manipulators who want to exploit you by making you responsible

for them. We have mentioned several times in the book that some malicious
people will take the submissive position in a relationship because they want
your world to revolve around them. They want you to give them all your
attention; that is how they control you.
 
When you detach with love, you will learn to stop fixing everyone’s
problems. So, when the manipulator tries to play the victim in order to gain
your sympathy, you will keep doing whatever is in your best interest, and
you will tell him or her to take responsibility for his or her own actions.
 
Some manipulators may take up self-destructive habits because they want
to dominate you by making you clean up after them. When they do this, you
can detach with love by letting them follow the paths they have taken, no
matter where they lead them. If they are causing you harm, you can get
away from them, but leave your door open. If they find the right path in the
future and regain control over their own lives, you can let them in again.
You have to make it very clear, through your words and actions that you
will let them direct their own lives, and you won’t take any responsibility
for them. 
 
Detaching with love is about accepting others for who they are, and
respecting them enough to let them be in charge of changing their own
lives. When you feel responsible for someone, and he makes a choice that
harms you both, often times, you will react with fear, anger, or anxiety. To
detach with love, you have to learn to let go of those negative emotions. 
 
Manipulators count on the fact that you will react in a predictable way to
their machinations, but when you detach with love, you learn to calm

yourself down and think about your role in the other person's life before you
take any sort of action. This will keep you from falling into the traps that
manipulators will set for you.
 
Detaching with love builds your self-esteem because it allows you to put
your own needs ahead of those of the people that try to manipulate you. 
 
Build self-esteem
You can defend against manipulation by building your self-esteem in the
old school way; using self-help techniques. People tend to discount classic
self-help techniques, but they actually work. They won’t solve all your
problems, but they'll make you feel worthy enough and give you the
strength to resist many forms of manipulation.
 
The oldest self-help technique in the book is to try to be nicer to yourself.
This usually involves being kind to yourself and being your own
cheerleader. It also involved challenging the negative thought and
assumptions that you make every day. It also involved treating yourself as
you would treat a close friend.
 
If your friend had certain fears and doubts and he came to you for advice,
you would try to tell him the truth, but you won’t be harsh with him.
Similarly, you should embrace your reality even if it’s uncomfortable, but
you shouldn’t beat yourself up even if you have made mistakes.  Even when
things are gloomy, you should try to talk yourself up.
 
We all have to draw strength from somewhere. That means that if you don’t
try to build your own self-esteem, you will look for external sources of

strength and motivation, but the problem with that is that people have their
own interests and agendas, and your wellbeing isn’t always their biggest
priority. When you look for strength from external sources, you open
yourself up for manipulation.
 
You can also build your self-esteem by avoiding comparing yourself with
other people. Manipulators are very good at preying on your desires. When
you desire the things that other people have, manipulators see this as an
opportunity to gain control over you. Most people who end up getting
conned are usually pulled in because they are blinded by their desires, and
they want what other people have.
 
To build your self-esteem, you have to do your own thing. You should
pursue your own interests and create your own goals. Never live your life
by measuring it against someone else’s. That is a surefire way of
obliterating your self-esteem, introducing negative emotions into your life,
and opening the door for all sorts of predatory characters.
 
You can also build your self-esteem by being careful about the kind of
company you keep. Surround yourself with positive people who make you
happy, and try to keep away from the kind of people who are constantly
negative, or those who unnerves you.
 
You can also build your self-esteem by exercising more. Studies show that
when we exercise, we are more motivated, more confident, and we feel
more in control of our lives. Working out makes our bodies release feel-
good hormones, which can help boost our self-esteem.
 

Change reactions
To defend against manipulation, there is one important thing that you need
to realize; the only person you can control is you. You have absolutely no
control over what other people might say, or how they might act. Your
reaction is the only thing that is within your control. Even if you are a
victim, and someone limits your choices considerably, at the end of the day,
the power to choose how to act or react is still in your control.
 
Think of all the civil rights icons you learned about in school; all of these
people were victimized in one way or another, but they came out on top
because of the way they chose to react to that victimization. So, to defend
against manipulation, you have to change the way you react to the words
and actions of manipulators.
 
First, when someone does something to set you off, try to approach that
situation with calm rationality. Focus on resolving the conflict instead of
debating whose fault it is. When you react with anger in response to an
accusation, or if you start passing the blame back and forth, you are playing
right into the hand of the manipulator. When you change the way you react,
you will be creating your own rules for the game that the manipulator is
trying to play, and that will keep you from falling into his trap.
 
Never lead with your emotions. Instead, you should practice thinking things
through before you react. In other words, instead of reacting
instantaneously, train yourself to respond in a calculated way. When
someone upsets you, refrain from lashing out angrily, and try to figure out
what their motivations are. You can manage your reactions by using the

same techniques that are used in anger management therapy; take a deep
breath and weight the situation before speaking out. 
 
It may not seem so, but the simple act of taking a deep breath can do a lot to
center you and to help you react better in any stressful situation. When you
take a breath, it puts some distance between your reaction and the trigger
situation, and that small window of time is enough for your brain to
deliberate on things and to create a better response.
 
You also have to understand that things only have the meanings you give
them. When a manipulator calls you names or yells at you angrily, it’s
completely up to you to decide whether you’ll let it roll off you like water,
or whether you will internalize it. It’s true that people only treat you the
way you let them.
 
You can change your reaction by changing the questions that run through
your mind when you are in a negative situation. If someone is attacking
you, the questions running through your mind could be: Why is he doing
this? Who does he think he is? You can try to change those questions so that
you start thinking: How can I quickly resolve this? How can I keep my
dignity here? When you ask yourself the right questions, you have a better
chance of finding a proper way to react.
 
Be assertive
Someone can only successfully manipulate you if you are not willing to
stand your ground and be assertive. Some psychologists have pointed out
that being assertive is the middle ground between being passive and being

aggressive. Aggressive people bully others to get what they want, and
passive people let others walk all over them, so they don't get what they
want. Assertive people, on the other hand, stand strong and ask for what
they want in a firm and diplomatic way. 
 
When you are assertive, you communicate in a way that's respectful
towards the needs, feelings, and opinions of others, but you are unwavering
in advocating for your own needs. You make requests that are reasonable,
and you try to avoid infringing on the rights of others. In case of a dispute,
you seek a compromise that is objectively fair to everyone. You draw clear
boundaries, and you let people know when they are crossing those
boundaries.
 
The most crucial aspect of assertiveness is being a good communicator.
Assertive people have voices that are relaxed but firm. They speak fluently,
and they come across as sincere. When they have to work with others, they
are cooperative, and they contribute in a constructive way. They don't raise
their voices when things get heated; they stay steady, unshaken, and
unfailingly logical.
 
Assertive people are also good at using non-verbal cues to communicate
effectively. They maintain eye contact with the people they are talking too.
They have open body stances and good posture, which helps project
strength and confidence. They smile when they are pleased, and they frown
when they are displeased. 
 
Assertive people are very direct, and they know what they want from the
very beginning. As a result, it’s very difficult for you to manipulate them.

Manipulators like to use mind games and other little tricks to conceal their
ill intentions, but assertive people will cut through all that by enforcing
straight and clear two-way communication. When ordinary people suspect
that they are being manipulated, they may keep those suspicions to
themselves, but assertive people will come out and ask the manipulators
what their intentions are; this throws the manipulators off balance and
forces them to back off or switch gears.
 
Being assertive means having the skills to communicate with both
aggressive people and passive people. They don't let anger or fear keep
them from putting their point across when they are dealing with aggressive
people. However, when they are dealing with passive people, they also don't
let other people's meekness, deter them from demanding what they are
entitled to.
Assertive people are also well attuned with their own emotions. When they
are upset, they don’t let their own negative feelings derail them from
asserting for themselves in a rational manner.
 
Feed yourself
The idea that the food we eat affects our self-esteem has been around for a
very long time. There is a lot of scientific evidence that shows a correlation
between the type of food we eat and our levels of confidence, as well as our
general mental wellbeing. The food you eat has an effect on your mood,
your levels of anxiety, and how you feel about yourself as a person.
 
When we lack the right balance of nutrients in our bodies, it affects the
levels of certain hormones, and as a result, we experience a shift in our
moods. That explains why we tend to be more active and stimulated when

we consume sugar, coffee, or foods with high levels of carbohydrates.
There are also other foods that make us feel lethargic when we eat them.
 
Some researchers have found out that when we fail to take in enough
vitamins, fatty acid, and certain mineral, and omega three oils, we could
experience depression. Because of their ability to keep depression at bay,
these foods are referred to as "mood-boosting foods."
 
Carbohydrates are usually broken into glucose, which is used as energy in
the brain and in the muscles. If we don't eat enough carbohydrates, we will
lack the energy to concentrate and to make good judgments, and that can
affect our self-esteem and make us more susceptible to manipulation. On
the flip side, eating lots of carbohydrates lead us to gain weight, and that
can have a negative effect on our self-esteem. So, if positive self-esteem is
your goal, you need to eat the right amount of carbohydrate; don't kick them
off your diet, but also don't overindulge in them. Try to eat carbohydrate
from whole-food sources instead of refined sources. Unrefined
carbohydrates release energy slowly and give you a mood boost for much
longer while providing you with much-needed fiber.
 
Foods that are rich in omega-3 fatty acids prevent low moods and can help
keep you from getting depressed. Based on that, some scientists have
argued that eating more fish can help improve your self-esteem. As you
plan out your diet, you can make sure that you have at least one portion of
fish a week. As a point of caution, avoid eating too much fish if you are
pregnant or breastfeeding.
 

Foods that are rich in vitamin B, such as spinach, broccoli, meats, eggs, and
dairy, have the ability to boost your energy levels and your mood, so they
can contribute towards you having a more positive outlook. Vitamin D food
sources such as eggs, cereals, and oily fish can increase serotonin levels in
your brain and make you feel good about yourself. Of course, you can also
get vitamin D from the sun, so letting in the light or talking a walk outside
every now and then can be good for your self-esteem as well.
 
Excessive sugar, too much caffeine, and a high amount of alcohol can affect
your self-esteem in a negative way. When you have a sugary snack, it
increases your blood sugar levels and causes a spike in energy, but that is
just momentary. After that, you will experience a "crush." That, combined
with the feeling of guilt that comes from consuming "empty calories" can
dampen your mood and lower your self-esteem.
 
Caffeine also has a similar effect. It will stimulate you, for a moment and
improve your mood, but once it starts wearing off, your mood will go down.
 
Alcohol has the effect of improving your confidence and lowering your
inhibitions, which is why it’s referred to as a "social lubricant." However, it
is also a depressant, which means that it will make you feel anxious and
irritable the following day, and that is bad for your self-esteem. By lowering
your inhibitions, alcohol can also make you more susceptible to
manipulation.
 
Become autonomous and take control

To increase your self-esteem and to become less susceptible to
manipulation, you have to become autonomous and to take control of your
own life.  Researchers have found that autonomy is more highly correlated
with happiness than any other factor out there. People who are autonomous
tend to be more satisfied than those who are wealthy. That is because
autonomy represents the core value that makes us human; the ability to
exercise free will. 
 
In many social sciences, autonomy is defined as the quality of being able to
make decisions according to one’s own free will. Since we are social
beings, it can be argued that we don’t have absolute free will because the
things we do are constrained by the rules of the societies we live in, but the
important thing is that autonomy should be characterized by a feeling of
freedom. In other words, it’s about being able to do things within being
coerced by either internal or external pressures. To put it simply, autonomy
is having your own identity, and being the only one that controls it.
 
It’s very easy to lose your autonomy when you are in a relationship with a
controlling person. Even if you are part of a couple or a family, autonomy
means that you do things because you want to and not because you are
obligated to do them. It means that there should be a clear distinction
between you and your partner and that everyone should have their goals and
ambitions, independent of each other. If you are in a relationship where you
are subservient to the other person, then you lack autonomy.
 
To maintain your autonomy and improve your self-esteem, be very careful
about who you choose to date, and the people you choose to associate with.
Even if you are committed to the person, you have to know at all times

what your values are, what you want out of life, and who you are as a
person. You need to hold onto those foundational values, and you should be
wary of anyone who tries to make you compromise on them.
 
You have to retain control over your life, no matter how much it’s
intertwined with someone else’s. If you can’t define yourself, someone else
is going to do it for you, and then you will become a mere extension of
them. In other words, they will succeed in completely dominating and
controlling you.
 
You can take control of your life by setting aside some “me time” for
yourself. It’s okay to take care of your family, friends, or partner, but if you
let them have all your time, then you lose control over your life, and your
identity will disappear. Set some time aside for yourself, and make sure that
everyone respects it.
 
You also need to draw clear personal boundaries and to learn to say "no" to
people. When someone asks you to do something, make an objective
assessment of the request; if it adds no value to your life, then turn it down.
Manipulative people will want to turn you into their "errand boy," so from
the very first time you meet anyone, make sure that you don't let them use
you.
 

 
 
 


CONCLUSION
 
 
Throughout this book, we have covered many different topics regarding
manipulation and what they are or could look like and how to avoid them.
But the question of why people manipulate others is still being answered
today, with interesting answers. To begin this subject let's look at antiquity.
People have been manipulating each other, according to historical records
and the earliest bibliography, since the dawn of humans. From as far back
as the first Roman emperors, people have been using tricks to play on
simple innate human emotions to get what they want from others. By other
promising false things, or playing on primal human fears, people have
attained a certain great power, via using these simple psychological tricks to
their advantage.
A lot more is going on when two people meet for the first time than most
people pick up on. Many people are so preoccupied with themselves and
other thoughts that they would never notice the subtle cues that people are
continually giving off, broadcasting their feelings and thoughts. When you
know the tricks of the trade when it comes to picking up nonverbal
communication and body language, you will be able to read a great deal
about people before they even open their mouths to introduce themselves.
When you can read the room and size people up, you already have an
advantage over anyone else who might be trying to vie for that person’s
affection, political support, or sales transaction. It’s all about taking the time
it takes to learn and practice in the real world once you’ve decided to
undertake the art of dark psychology. It’s impossible to become comfortable
with these techniques without observation and practice. You will find that

the more confident you are with your strategies, the more comfortable and
more natural they will happen, leaving your targets entirely in the dark
about what’s going on under the surface.  

BOOK 2

Manipulation and NLP Techniques
 

INTRODUCTION
 
 
Dark Psychology attempts to explain certain impulses, emotions, beliefs,
and processes of rational thinking that contribute to antithetical sexual
behavior to contemporary human acts. Dark Psychology postulates there is
a human mind setting where all individuals can act atrociously without
intent. The Dark Singularity invented theory.

Once the man started speaking, mental manipulation and writing have been
of considerable significance. As we have seen in history, there are several
forms of manipulators; those that manipulate other people for economic
reasons, without remorse. Deception, manipulation, terror, seduction, etc.
Many people are exploited. We've developed persuasion skills since our
childhood, and the most obvious is; impulses and deceptions to achieve our
goals.
Our homes show vital signs of abuse. In families, there is usually a more
influential individual who can become a manipulator, either our father or
mother. Masculinity has been more common in past generations than in
present times. It was the man who took control in the social sector, but as
we matured, we were able to repress this scenario that we used to, balancing
these aspects. There are tall, strong women now. And our controlling media
are the greatest manipulators.
A combination of personality traits Machiavellianism, narcissism, and
subclinical psychopathy is called the Black Triad, embodied in, among
other things, self-esteem and careless, deceptive actions. These three
characteristics are conceptualized differently, while similarity exists
empirically. They require an arrogant, aggressive, interpersonal style.
Strong features of these characteristics are essential when hiring and
assessing managers in organizational psychology. In studies, men typically
have higher values for all dark triad characteristics than women.
For years, mind-management intrigued people. Books and movies told tales
of brainwashed or hypnotized people doing things they would never have
done otherwise. There are people on both sides of the issue; some say
there's no such thing as mind control, and it's all made up, while others
believe they can be affected by mind control at any moment.

This guidebook offers a detailed overview of what emotional intelligence
means and how this knowledge can help you identify, prevent and
overcome many of the common traps that keep people from achieving their
goals in areas of their lives.
As you read this guide book, you will find a top-down approach to
understand what emotional manipulation is, how it can affect you, where
you can turn for help, and what you can do to formulate an action plan
personally.
 
 

CHAPTER ONE
Understanding Dark Psychology
 
 
Dark Psychology is the study of human nature concerning people's
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors linked to this innate propensity to prey on
others without clear motives. Because behavior is consciously, consciously,
and conceptually based on modus operandi, dark psychology incorporates
the notion that the closer a person gets to the "black pit" of unclean evil, the
less likely he/she will have a motive. Although the author claims unclean
evil is never achieved because it's infinite, dark psychology claims others
are close.

Given its latent form, Dark Psychology may be misunderstood by its
potential to perceive as aberrant psychopathy. History is full of examples of
this latent tendency to become involved, destructive actions. Modern
psychiatry and psychology define psychopaths as a killer without remorse.
Dark psychology offers a continuum of seriousness from thought and
experiencing aggression to extreme, irrational victimization and assault.
Dark Psychology claims everybody has violent potential. The ability is
inherent to all organisms, and both internal and external factors raise the
likelihood of erratic behavior. These practices are deceptive and frequently
operate without intent. Dark psychology suggests humans misunderstand
the predator-bear model. Dark psychology is also psychological, so no other
human being feels it. Aggression and disaster may occur among other living
organisms, but humankind is the only species capable of doing so without
intent.
Dark Psychology can be characterized as the study of the human condition
as it relates to people's psychological nature to pursue other people without
intent and general perceptions of instinctive instincts and social sciences
driven by criminal urges or deviants.
Dark Psychology recognizes all subjective cognitive thoughts, emotions,
attitudes, and processes that contribute to predatory behavior those conflicts
with contemporary human behavioral values. Dark Psychology claims that
99.99 percent of the time is intentional, deviant, and violent conduct and
has a logical, focused purpose. It is the remaining 0.01%, the amounts of
Adlerian theory and teleology in Dark Psychology. Dark Psychology
assumes that the human psyche has an area that allows some people to
engage in cruel behaviors without a purpose. It's named Dark Singularity in
this theory.

Dark Psychology notes that all humanity has a reservoir of malicious
intentions toward others, ranging from minimally intrusive and transient
thoughts to purely psychopathic deviant behavior without any coherent
reasoning.
What Dark Psychology considers the Dark Factor is the limiting factors that
serve as accelerators or attractors to get closer to the Dark Singularity, and
where somebody's horrible actions fall into the Dark Continuous. Below is
a brief introduction to these definitions. Dark Psychology is a theory battled
by this author for 15 years. It is only recently that the meaning, theory, and
psychology of this dimension of the human condition has finally been
conceptualized.

The Dark Triad
 
The Dark Triad is a relatively new concept in the literature, and the impact
that this concept has had in recent years is noted by the vast amount of
research in this area of ​interest.
The Dark Triad consists of three undesirable personality factors: narcissism,
Machiavellianism, and psychopathy. These traits involve malice,
grandiosity, duplicity, the need for power. Psychopathy is characterized by
impulsivity and antisocial behaviors, Machiavellianism by manipulative
actions towards others, and narcissism by arrogance, vanity, selfishness, and
grandiosity.
 
Characteristics
The dark triad is described as a component of personality consisting of
three distinct subclinical personality traits, the common feature being
aversion.
The term Machiavellianism can be briefly described as a person's
tendency to be manipulative.
Machiavellianism is the concept that refers to interpersonal strategies used
in one's interest using flattery, emotional detachment, and deception to
manipulate social and interpersonal interactions. These people are perceived
as smart and attractive. However, intelligence does not correlate with the
aspirations of Machiavellian life, such as significant material situation or
status. People with Machiavellian traits tend to expose others to achieve
their interests; this aspect was predictably correlating with a low level of
empathy.

Machiavellians easily take the lead in small groups and prefer to negotiate
the formation of an alliance in complicated situations. People with high
scores on Machiavellianism succeed and are excited about it, especially
when circumstances involve face-to-face interactions, a place conducive to
innovation, and situations where the emotional load is substantial.
People with this trait should not be seen as evil bastards, but as people who
force the rules rather than break them. Thus, just as people with high scores
on Machiavellianism should not be considered channels, neither should
those with very low scores on this characteristic be regarded as models of
the perfection of social virtue. We could think that they make art from
manipulation techniques, deliberate lying, and social influence.
Narcissism is characterized by feelings of grandeur (in one's fantasies or
real behavior), the need for admiration, and a lack of empathy for others.
Narcissists have an exaggerated sense of importance, and they are
preoccupied with fantasies of success, beauty, power, or ideal love.
He needs constant admiration, shows arrogant behavior or attitude,
superiority, and tends to take advantage of interpersonal relationships
(exploits other people for gain or personal gain), feeling that he is entitled
to certain favors. They always overestimate their abilities and exaggerate
their achievements, often being perceived as boastful and pretentious.
They take it for granted that others appreciate their efforts just as much and
are surprised if they are not praised as they think they deserve. Being often
preoccupied with overestimating their achievements, they underestimate the
contribution of others.
Narcissism is associated with self-orientation and extreme vanity, a constant
need for attention, admiration, and self-determination, an expectation of

special favors that are simply due to him. For the narcissist, understanding
the workings of others is essential to exploit such favors on their part.
Narcissism is associated with self-orientation and extreme vanity, a constant
need for attention, admiration, and self-determination, an expectation of
special favors that are simply due to him. For the narcissist, understanding
the workings of others is essential to exploit such favors on their part.
Narcissism is associated with self-orientation and extreme vanity, a constant
need for attention, admiration, and self-determination, an expectation of
special favors that are simply due to him. For the narcissist, understanding
the workings of others is essential to exploit such favors on their part.
Narcissists are extremely sensitive to criticism and feel it as a direct threat
to their self-image and vision, which is a somewhat problematic
consequence in certain situations. For example, narcissistic leaders are quite
abrasive with their subordinates. They cannot tolerate dissent on the policy
they impose. However, paradoxically, these leaders manage to be
significant due to the emotional isolation they show.
Psychopathy is marked by the ability to influence and dominate others, to
show a low degree of anxiety, take risks, look for "strong sensations" and
also tend to be indifferent, selfish, aggressive and profitable, act unplanned,
and have a low imaginative capacity. People with this trait are
opportunistic, selfish, and cruel, yet they can be charming, ambitious, and
manipulative. Egocentric impulses, specific to this trait, can lead to
unethical behaviors. Feelings of social responsibility are not pronounced,
and they rarely feel shame, guilt, or remorse over the consequences of their
decisions. Psychopathy is defined not only by antisocial behavior but also
by an emotional "deterioration," such as lack of guilt.

Psychopaths are deceptive, biased, superficial in attitude and in what they
do, dominant over others, manipulative, show very little affection and
somewhat superficial, are unable to create strong emotional connections
with others, and are almost incapable of feeling empathy, remorse, or guilt.
Initially, the triad was individually framed in the areas of the five major
personality traits (extraversion, agreeableness, conscientiousness,
neuroticism, and openness) to analyze similarities and differences
concerning fundamental personality dimensions.
Although these traits seem to manifest as an unstable core of personality,
they can be integrated and recognized as the right qualities of co-leadership.
Machiavellians are characterized by long-term strategic orientation and can
postpone their immediate satisfaction for a long-term reward. At the same
time, psychopathy is characterized by a person's willingness to take certain
risks, and this is not necessarily a negative aspect.
 

Explore your dark side to regain control
 
Do you have feelings you hate? Do you do things you're ashamed to talk
about? Is there a part of you that you want to delete? Do you want things
you hate to admit? We have a dark side that we are afraid to face.
Your dark side does not understand the intentions, the commitments, doing
what is supposed to be done. He remains overwhelmed, but growing,
looking for a way out.
Exploring your dark side will allow you to rethink your control if you
understand and know yourself.
 
What do you feed your dark side?
The dark side of your mind feeds on misery and self-destruction with
everything you refuse, with those desires that cannot materialize.
Your unmet need produces negative emotions that feed you. If you can't get
rid of these needs, these negative emotions will continue to make you worse
and make you believe that this is your true or even your only version.
Not feeding this obscure part of your mind is the only way to control it.
However, there are many things you don't know how to do because I'm bad
for you, and I still do. You know you shouldn't smoke, you shouldn't overdo
your fat intake, you shouldn't yell at your partner or children, you shouldn't
feed unnecessary discussions that lead nowhere ... But, anyway, you do it
all this.
 

For your dark side, good intentions are not enough. Either take action and
turn off the power, or it will take over the best of you.
 
Why do you need your dark side?
In order not to feed your dark side, you need to know what he likes best. It
feeds on negative psychological worries, those foods that make you shake
tightly in a previous state that creates suffering.
These negative blows prevent you from feeling safe, balanced, and healthy.
Express yourself through rejection, humiliation, betrayal, feelings of
worthlessness, and failure. All this negativity feeds the darkest part of the
psyche, which grows with negative emotions, thoughts, and behaviors with
the influence of toxic people that have existed and still exist in your life.
Whenever something negative happens in your life or whenever you
remember something you don't like, your darkest part, which clings to this
negativity as if you were entitled to it, comes out. There was another way
out. To attract more misery, self-destruction, and negativity to feed yourself.
How to deal with the dark side?
 
The solution to face the dark side of the mind is to face it
consciously.
There are things we can't eliminate, but for those that can be addressed, you
need to know them. The biggest challenge is to bury yourself in mind and
illuminate everything that is hidden in it.
Share the dark side hides much more than unfulfilled desires, frustrated
aspirations, or broken dreams, but only you can throw yourself into the

water and exploit it. Whenever you face negativity in your life, every time
you feel something creepy trying to catch yourself, you should try to
understand why this is happening, without feeling ashamed.
You have to accept that there is an obscure part of your mind that is there
and that it will not turn into smoke simply because you want to suppress it
Repression will make you stronger and with more force, explode once you
have the opportunity. Be brave.
 

The archetype of the shadow: the dark side of our
psyche
 
The archetype of the shadow represents, according to Carl Jung's analytical
psychology, the "dark side" of our personality. This is an explosive world in
our psyche with the most primitive, the sharpest selfishness, the most
repressed instincts, and my "mind" has "denied" the conscious mind, and
we reject the deep exile of our being.
We have all heard about this concept, this shadow archetype that continues
to be used to talk about this confrontation in psychology. From that feeling
of struggle that we sometimes have in ourselves when working on our
frustrations, fears, insecurity, or resentment.
However, we cannot forget that the idea brought by Carl Jung through his
work on archetypes was already present in our historical and cultural
society. The concept of the shadow or the dark side is this well-known
duality, which had even served as inspiration for Robert Louis Stevenson to
now create his classic Dr. Jeckyll and Mr. Hyde long before Jung himself
developed his theory of the shadow archetype.
Everything we consider at one time "bad" because of our education and the
moral standards of our society becomes our shadow. However, it is not
advisable to consider all these internal dynamics as condemnable or
dangerous experiences, to the point that we all carry within us Hyde tends
to escape.
Jung himself explained that there are different types of shadows and that
one way to achieve personal well-being, healing, and freedom is to make
them aware by confronting them.

 
The archetype of the shadow: the dark side of the
human being
The archetype of the shadow is closely linked to Freud's concept of the
unconscious. However, it contains unique nuances that distinguish and
significantly enrich it. We must not forget that what began as an intellectual
love story between Freud and Jung was gradually cooled to the point where
he came to say the father of psychoanalysis was "a tragic figure of a great
man, but of someone whom he did not share the therapeutic method.
Jung developed his method, analytical psychology. He left the couch and
the asymmetrical relationship between therapist and patient to establish a
conversation-based therapy where he investigated the structure of the
psyche and unconsciously where the archetypes navigated. Of these, the
one that could have the most significant therapeutic value was, without a
doubt, the archetype of the shadow. Let's see its characteristics:
The shadow, a familiar but repressed presence
"Shadow" is a term that Jung borrowed from Friedrich Nietzsche.
This idea represented the hidden personality of each person. At first
glance, most of us claim to be (and perceive as) good and noble
beings. However, there are inside us some repressed dimensions,
inherited instincts, where violence, anger, hatred sometimes hide…
The archetype of the shadow does not live only on each person. I Not
sometimes present in "groups of people," insects, in certain types of
religions, or even in political parties. These are organizations that, at
any time, can cast their shadow in the light to justify violent actions
against humanity itself.

The shadow is more destructive, insidious, and dangerous when we
"repress" it. Then he "projects," thus revealing, according to Carl
Jung, disorders such as neurosis or psychosis.
Similarly, Jung differentiated two typologies in his shadow archetype.
The first is the personal shadow, which we carry with our small
frustrations, our fears, our selfishness, and the most common negative
dynamics. However, there would also be an impersonal shadow,
which contains the essence of the more archetypal evil, the one that
accompanies criminal genocide, ruthlessness, and so on.
 
 
How to deal with our shadow?
It is possible that the theory of Jung's shadow archetype is interesting to us
on a theoretical level, that it is attractive, that it has a symbolic and mystical
character. We all perceive in this concept the most classical representation
of taboo, evil, and this dark dimension of the human personality, which
always provokes excellent interest. However, can we practically apply it in
our daily lives?
The answer is, "yes." As a father of analytical psychology, he reminds us in
such works as "Archetypes and the Collective Unconscious" our role in life
is to accept and fully integrate "our shadow" with the personality to become
aware of it and work with it., which he directly faces. To neglect her, to let
her continue in her unconscious universe, can undermine our balance and
the possibility of being happy.
We cannot forget what kind of dynamics this concept we call shadow is:
Here, we find our fears, our past traumas, the disappointments that poison

us, the dreams that we did not realize through indecision, and that turn into
frustrated sharks sailing in our personality. If we hide them, these inner
demons become stronger, and if we ignore them, they will eventually
control us, often projecting on others an image of ourselves that they do not
like.
Therefore, we cannot forget that our personal growth and psychological
well-being will always depend on our ability to highlight these shadows.
This act of courage will be the starting point of a delicate but precious
work, which tends to heal us, to find calm and well-being.

CHAPTER TWO
What Is NLP
 
 
Neurolinguistic programming (NLP) is one of many techniques for
modifying behavior and experiencing. Neurolinguistic programming
focuses on the relationship between the functioning of the human neural
network (hence the word "neuro" in the NLP name), linguistic (linguistic)
aspects, and the resulting behavioral, but also influencing the behavior of
other people (collectively understood as programming). Although it
probably sounds quite complicated, in reality, neurolinguistic programming
is not that difficult to understand. What's more - basically anyone willing to
do so can get acquainted with this technique.
NLP Neurolinguistic Programming is the abbreviation for Neuro-Linguistic
Programming. At first glance, the title sounds exceptionally pompous, and
it seems that we are dealing with something overly complicated and
inaccessible. In reality, Neurolinguistic Programming is a clear, precise, and
easily applicable science immediately. NLP is the study of how people
work, understanding the mechanisms, and their practical use in everyday
life. NLP is both simple and "dangerously good," in the sense that, using the
right techniques, you can change your condition, you can change other
people's states, you can convince more easily, you can drive easier, you
increase your efficiency, you increase productivity, eliminate mental and
emotional blockages.
In short, the abbreviation NLP (Neuro-Linguistic Programming) is
explained as follows:

N - Neurology - How the mind works and how we think to become
exponential in the environment in which we live
L - Linguistics - How we use language to build trust and manage our
and those around us
P - Programming - How we order our actions and thoughts to
generate exceptional results
 
History of NLP (neurolinguistic programming)
Neuro-linguistic programming was born in 1976, co-founded by Richard
Bandler and John Grinder. Their approach was slightly different from the
scientific method in general, in that they began to study the best therapists
of the time, to see what they were doing, to systematize what they were
doing, and then to devise strategies that worked. Thus, for a moment, he
was not interested in the scientific basis, but only the final result, namely:
What do they do to have effects? Among them are Fritz Perl’s (gestalt
therapy), Virginia Satir (family therapy), and Milton Erickson
(hypnotherapy).
The NLP was an important step forward at that time and has maintained its
reputation today. On the other hand, there are still opponents today, as to
how neurolinguistic programming works is an empirical rather than a
scientific approach, despite the pretentious title. For example, you can send
a child to a psychologist, when at the same time, the same child can be sent
to the NLP therapist. Assuming that this child refuses to go to school,
through NLP techniques, the child can change his mind about school in 30
minutes (be careful, not always!), Unlike a psychologist where he could go
for years. Days at therapy sessions. This was just an example, but this is
where the controversy comes from. The NLP is interested in solving the

problem immediately in solving it, and as long as it is solved, it goes on.
The alternative of psychologists (at least in the 80s) was to probe the
unconscious and the subconscious of the person (somehow to work on the
cause) until, miraculously, the child had a revelation.
I think that to say that Neuro-linguistic Programming is good or bad, or to
say that psychology or classical therapy is good or not, are statements that
do not help us much. In my view, these sciences complement each other,
just as they complement each other. with other sciences.
 
Where does NLP apply?
Some might say that NLP - neurolinguistic programming applies in too
many areas. So it is, fortunately, or unfortunately. See below the three areas
in which we can use neurolinguistic programming, but before that, I also
offer five definitions, in the vision of those who created and developed it.
Neurolinguistic programming in business - how to apply it?
In business, sometimes unintentionally, sometimes intentionally, we
encounter neurolinguistic programming techniques everywhere. For
example, NLP techniques are for problem solving or creativity. In the
creation of slogans or commercials, we also see NLP. In sales or
negotiation, NLP techniques are often applicable immediately.
Also, in building a business strategy, you can use neurolinguistic
programming techniques to create a skeleton (using modeling), and you can
optimize using the Disney strategy. NLP is also a critical step in
Leadership. It seems to me that the science of neurolinguistic programming
goes beyond the realm of generalist techniques. For example, if we say that
a leader inspires those in the team or those who sympathize with them,

neurolinguistic programming will teach you concretely HOW to do this.
Without making NLP a dogmatic approach, I can say that I am an NLP fan
because it gives me concrete answers to the question HOW IS IT DONE?
Neurolinguistic programming (NLP) in personal development
Here the NLP attacks the most complicated topics such as self-confidence,
achieving goals, or managing emotions. Using NLP, you optimize your
"relationship with yourself" and the relationship with those around you.
NLP techniques not only help you grow, but they also help you get up when
things are not exactly rosy. For example, some of the methods I use to make
it possible for people to do seemingly impossible things to do (such as
going through the fire, bending a steel bar around their neck, breaking a
wooden board) are all collected from NLP. Basically, in a way, we could say
that through NLP techniques, the impossible becomes possible. If you are
wondering to what extent you can integrate NLP techniques alone or with
the help of someone, you will find the answer below.
Neurolinguistic programming (NLP) in therapies
Neurolinguistic programming is also applied in therapies. Some therapists
have chosen to integrate it thoroughly, and others who have integrated only
part of the NLP techniques. I will not insist on this field because it is
already addressed to specialists, and the debates and opinions are very
divided and different.
Coaching with NLP
Lately, Coaching is also in great demand in many countries. Without going
into the details of coaching schools, I want to remind you that there are
quite a few coaches who coach with NLP. Specifically, they use, beyond the
actual coaching technique, tools in neurolinguistic programming to deliver
coaching with results.

 

The principal of Neuro-linguistic programming
 
1. The internal map is unique
One of the concepts of the NLP relates to the orientation people have
around them in the world. The way the person orients himself has to do
with his inner map. The internal map is simple in the early stages of life.
However, as we grow, the map will become more complex, and new routes
will be opened.
The more complete the map, the more successful the person is. The map of
the world is individual, and it is based on our experience. Each person has
his or her map, and no two maps are the same.
2. The best map is one that offers more than one road
As mentioned above, the complete map is also more accurate, offering more
opportunities to reach a goal or solve the problem. This involves flexibility
and the ability to react to an important event in various ways. The map is
not the territory it represents, but if accurate, it will have a territory-like
structure and be more useful.
3. Every behavior has a positive intention
It may be one of NLP's most debated ideas. This argument refers to the fact
that every person and action has an intrinsic positive purpose. For example,
someone doubts a smoker has a good intention to smoke. But according to
this theory, the smoker may smoke or be socially accepted. NLP seeks to
turn this optimistic attitude into a more efficient and appropriate individual
behavioral model.
4. The structure of experience

This principle shows how each interaction consists of a particular structure.
Each thinking, feeling, memory, or experience is a collection of elements.
This implies that if each perception has a structure, its impact can be
modified by changing its composition.
5. All problems have a solution
This theory relates to the idea that there is a solution to any problem. And
because often it may seem ideal, the solutions cannot be enforced. Many
times, issues can occur that do not have a simple solution. This applies to
the person's map. Since then, the fewer paths or options that you have, the
fewer approaches that you can give to the actual situation. Additionally, the
definition of the problem is related to the map material. A richer map
offering more services will experience some fewer alarming circumstances.
6. Everyone has the strength they need
This is one of the principles of the NLP and has to do with the individual's
personal growth because it means that everybody has the power to
accomplish what is being suggested. The question comes up when the
restricting values of individual affect self-esteem.
7. Body and mind are part of the same system
This principle refers to the human being is body and mind. In other words,
every feeling and emotion affects the body. This is also true in reverse. For
example, a disease that affects the body will have psychological
repercussions. Therefore, for NLP, thought changes that modify physical
problems are essential. By the way, have you heard of embodied cognition?
8. The meaning of communication depends on the result
It is necessary to establish clear guidelines for communication, which do
not give rise to misunderstandings, nor an option of distorted personal

interpretations by the recipient of the message.
9. There are no failures but opportunities
When a person is continuously on the move, he has several ways to achieve
the goal. Failures must be seen as opportunities, that is, as measures that
allow you to overcome and move in the desired direction.
10. If something doesn't work, try something else
Sometimes, people insist on doing something that doesn't work, and they
also don't change the way they do. At this point, the famous phrase "don't
expect different results if you always do the same" makes sense. NLP
professionals aim to help recognize and modify those behaviors that are not
effective and that make you stumble, again and again, with the same stone.
 
 

NLP Techniques
 
NLP techniques are useful for all those who need a guide to overcome
obstacles and who have resistance to change to get out of the well-known
comfort zone.
They serve to provide you with the necessary resources, although to achieve
this, it is vitally essential to want to carry out the change and have the belief
that reaching the objective is possible and useful for you.
As you get closer to your goals, your well-being with yourself will increase.
The more energy you use in the resources that NLP offers you, the more
likely you are to succeed. These resources are designed to be applied in
your daily life and improve your quality of life.
Next, I am going to explain the most used techniques in NLP.
Rapport
This approach is demonstrated in circumstances where we would like to
improve our contact with anyone in the community, whether they are
working or personal.
This aims at creating an environment of cooperation and confidence in
which there is no conflict, debate, or judgment, and there is active listening
between the two. The interpretation of the message the other party wants to
transmit is being worked on, as well as being able to communicate just the
message we want to send to our listeners.
We are going to use the mention of those things we know that connect us to
our listeners. In reference, body language is vitally important in addition to
using verbal language.
Covert orders

According to this technique, questions are usually formulated, ending with
an ascending musical intonation, while orders are crafted with a descending
intonation.
Thus, NLP proposes to intone the questions in a descending way, as an
order, to achieve the desired effect.
Anchorage
We spoke about anchoring as a method to reduce the feeling of distress in a
stressful situation, such as fear or anguish. This method is based on social
learning conditioning.
Physiology
It is about knowing the functioning of our body and how the postures, the
type of breathing, and the heart rate, among others, influence our behaviors
and our emotions.
If we modify our body postures and learn to breathe correctly, we can
change our behavior and, consequently, what we transmit to the outside.
Eye access
Ocular accesses are part of physiology and refer to the sequence of eye
movements referring to the intention of the person.
Internal or external reference
References are a form of metaprogram, that is, mental patterns that are
unconscious and systemic.
Being mindful of both our actions and those of others allows us to increase
our understanding of ourselves and empathy for others.

The reference norm, in particular, allows us to know what the principles and
standards of our behavior are focused on. That is where our decision-
making process resides.
We can distinguish two styles of reference:
Internal Reference: People who use this guide focus on their
perspective, their view of the world, and their feelings. If we want to
sway their opinion, we're going to use questions like: How do you
feel about the decision you're going to take?
External reference:  Those with that kind of experience attach great
importance to others' views and seek agreement with the rest of the
people around them. The phrases we will use will be geared towards
revealing our point of view, as the individual will consider it.
Visual / auditory / kinesthetic
Every person has different channels of choice (visual, auditory, or
kinesthetic) for decision making.
For example, if we want to convince a person whose preferred channel is
the auditory one, we would use that to propose our target.
Change of beliefs and empowerment of identity
If we have beliefs as a basis to determine our reality, to identify our current
beliefs, our internal conflicts, and to be aware of a change in these, we can
change our reality.
Alternative illusion
The purpose of this approach is to convince the other person to do what we
would like them to do. It consists of offering the individual many decision-
making choices, but all of them will be guided at what we want to
accomplish.

For instance, if our goal is to go to the beach, the question we must ask to
meet our goal will be: are we going to the beach by car or train? Why don't
we go to the beach instead?
Modal operators of possibility or necessity
Metaprograms are firm thinking strategies that act unconsciously in people,
according to NLP. Inside these are the possibility or requirement modal
operators in the form of implicit instructions from our internal dialogue.
Such implicit commands are expressed in the form of words such as I must,
ought, need, etc. Each in the individual creates an emotion.
I will provide a concrete example so that it can be understood better. Using
the expression "you can't do this" as an excuse for not acting is quite
common, and the question we usually ask is why you can't?
If we answer this query, the individual will be able to send us an endless list
of excuses for not being able to perform the behavior. On the other hand, if
the question that we are returning is "What stops you? With this question,
we direct the person to find potential solutions to his or her dilemma, rather
than to think of excuses. That is, it focuses attention on the solution.
 

Benefits derived from the use of NLP
 
The strategies used in NLP include a set of advantages that address a wide
variety of needs and aspirations that anyone should recognize at any point
in their lives.
We are increasing our perception of ourselves.
Managing emotions: In any situation, a person can control and
manage their emotions and actions (for example, it can help you face
a job interview successfully).
Through our communication techniques: When coping with stressful
situations, NLP uses anchoring as a way to reach targets or solve
other problems. One of the most common issues in the field of
communication is the fear of speaking in public. Generally, this
condition produces feelings of frustration and anxiety. A fun,
comfortable, and optimistic moment that we have in our mind is
"anchored" through the anchoring process, and we relate it to the
stressful situation at the exact moment through visualization
techniques.
Learn Strategies for Creativity.
Increase motivational strategies: both to achieve personal and
professional goals, helps to increase and make the motivational
strategy more successful.
Understand our style of learning and that of others: our questions are
often informed by something that has been learned over time.
Cognitive patterns, antecedents that have contributed to the
development of a way of thought because it has happened frequently,
and it gets to a point where it is hard to modify.

Increase our ability to attain personal goals: reasons concealed in the
unconscious and made unconsciously allow us to delay beginning to
accomplish our objectives. This consists of identifying the cause,
making it aware of it so that it can be changed later, and taking the
decision to act.
Develop effective decision-making techniques.
Comprise, embrace, and learn to manage cycles of personal and
professional transition.
Removing the fears and phobias.
 

Manipulating the Mind Through NLP
 
Those who deal with NLP are quickly confronted with the accusation of
manipulation. Critics accuse NLP of being selfish, manipulative, and
unethical because it puts personal interests first.
From a value-neutral point of view, every action and communication are on
"manipulation." That is the reason to do something or say: to get in touch
with someone and make something at the other. Instead, the question arises
as to whose cost something is being done. Whoever deceives his
counterpart acts at his expense. If benefits, advantages for the
communication partner are not taken into account, any act on is negatively
manipulative. On the other hand, NLP wants to create so-called
innovations: conscious influence, practical actions in the sense of successful
communication for mutual benefit.
The 15 basic assumptions in the NLP
The so-called basic assumptions describe fundamental and useful theories
of how excellent communication can work.
1. People are unique and experience the world in different
ways
People are different; each is unique in itself. However, people tend to see
themselves as a yardstick, starting from their world.
Accepting the uniqueness of the other means recognizing his value,
respecting him and his individuality. It is essential not to allow diversity, to
appreciate it, and not to rate "be different" as "better" or "worse." It also
means that each person takes up his environment differently and chooses

from the many stimuli according to his criteria. The result is individual
images, priorities, and conclusions that can stand respectfully side by side.
2. Mind, body, and environment form a system that
influences each other
The mental attitude of the person influences his psychic and physical well-
being; his behavior affects his thinking. If you change a part in this system,
the whole system changes like a mobile.
3. Any behavior is communication
Each behavior contains messages to the other person, whether it's visible
movements, things, postures, or "non-retention," such as silence. A person's
actions are the only visible, audible, and tangible reference to the
neurological processing processes that take place internally. A person's
abilities and values are not directly perceptible, but can only be seen and
experienced through his specific hands. Everything else is conjecture,
evaluation, and interpretation.
4. The importance of communication arises from the
reaction it provokes
This is a crucial question, namely: who is the cause of good, successful, or
bad communication – the sender of a message or the one who receives a
message? "You misunderstood this" and "I expressed myself inaccurately"
reflect the two opposing poles as statements. If, for example, the
communication occurs adverse reactions, there is little to blame the
recipient. On the contrary, the sender must supersecret statements and
formulations in such a way that the addressee understands them in his or her
sense.

The receiver, not the transmitter, is essential. It is not about the latter's
intention, not about what he wants to say, but about what arrives at the
interlocutor, what he can and wants to understand. The Sen. must take
responsibility for his communication.
5. People orientate themselves on spiritual maps
A map is never the actual landscape, just as the menu is not the food, or the
score is not the music. It is an image of reality, a model of reality. The map
shows the user where they are, which areas are where, and how far they are,
for example, to the destination. This applies not only to road maps but also
to find their way around the world in general.
In spiritual maps and models, the sensory pressures are stored. They are not
the real world, but they make it possible to find their way around them.
Everyone has different spiritual maps that are no better or worse than those
of others. For example, people have so-called perception preferences, i.e.,
they use their sensory organs and evaluate the stimuli differently. These
differences are often the reason for conflicts and misunderstandings. The
first step towards understanding and successful communication is to get to
know and understand the map of the area. Different maps appear in the
language: words are used differently or linked to other content.
The usefulness of spiritual maps depends on the purpose for which they are
used. People consciously or unconsciously align their actions according to
their maps. They can't change reality, but their mental image: scales,
ratings, the use of different maps for different goals – if the user manages to
vary here, the use of the maps increases. The potential of the maps lies in
the unused, individual choices.
6. It is better to have choices than to have none

Whether it's a choice from a wide range of goods or between different
options for reaction, it's good to have the choice. NLP methods are intended
to create new margins and alternatives. However, there is only one real
choice with at least three different options:
If there is only one way available, this means a compulsion, a must.
Two possibilities are better than a compulsion, but a dilemma arises:
the decision for something or against, an either
Only from three or more alternatives, there is a real choice, a free
choice.
7. People make the best choice from what is currently
available to them
Every person has a life path. He has learned what he can do and how to do
it in the best possible way. What is of the most significant benefit comes to
the application. If a person considers the benefits insufficient or encounters
problems, he must develop new, better, and more suitable alternatives for
action.
8. Any behavior makes sense
This means that people always function correctly in their world and map.
Perhaps the meaning does not always open up to a viewer, but it is present
from the parted.
9. Each behavior is based on a positive intention
This NLP often on skepticism. How can behavior be positive that has
negative effects on other people, such as if an employee deliberately fails to
inform her colleague? This basic assumption separates a person's behavior
from their intent. In other words, against the background of the individual
map of the actionable, the behavior is correct and beneficial. The benefits,

often unheard of that are behind unproductive behavior, are called
secondary gains.
10  Any behavior is useful in a specific context
Behaviour is learned and applied in a particular situation. Then it is
appropriate and helpful. However, these behaviors are often transferred to
other associations, places, and times when they are no longer fit and lead to
negative consequences. The aim is to carry out the appropriate, appropriate
action in every context.
 
11. People have all the resources they need for change
Everyone has a variety of skills and resources that they don't make full use
of. At the heart of this very positive assumption is that people can learn,
grow, and make full use of their potential.
12.  All that man can learn is
NLP assumes that everything that a person has ever learned and mastered
excellently can be known. Excellent behavior can be looked at, recreated,
so to speak, by others. Motivation, dynamism, decision-making, creativity,
self-confidence, and other skills can be learned. The first steps in the NLP
are based on this basic assumption. It is a question of learning from a model
and going through the same neurological processes in the course of the
learning process, using the same spiritual maps as the model. He succeeds,
and excellencies have a structure – and this is learnable in cash.
13.  There is no failure, only feedback
An error is a feedback, and it names the deviation from the desired target.
When people seize it as an opportunity, the perspective changes. From this

point of view, mistakes are the basis for solutions. For they define the
degree of further improvements, show the way to the goal.
Checklist: How errors become chances
Questions you should ask yourself
What has been achieved so far?
What can I learn from this?
What works well?
What else is there to do?
What can I do instead of the previous solution?
What room for maneuver is there?
What are the alternatives on the way to the goal?
What is the current state of affairs?
14. If what you do doesn't work, do something else
Of course, this basic assumption only applies if someone has choices. Many
people continue to use and even reinforce their previous behavior in the
case of problems; for example, they become even louder in a conversation
when there are difficulties in understanding. In most cases, such a
procedure does little. Flexibility, i.e., doing something completely different,
often brings the solution. The personal opportunity for development lies in
creating those extra margins.
This view leads from the principle of guilt: not the other is to blame for my
situation. I don't expect my environment to change to make a difference. I
take responsibility for myself and change my behavior.
15. The most flexible element in a system controls the
system

Being flexible means having a wide range of choices. The person with the
most excellent flexibility to submit new proposals is most likely to put an
end to a deadlocked, debilitating state. The more alternatives to action
someone have at their disposal, the more likely they are to obtain the
communicative partner's desired reaction.
How our perception works according to the NLP
There are many theories about how a man thinks. NLP assumes that he uses
the senses inwardly, i.e., when we think or remember, we see images, hear
sounds, smell, and taste, and feel touches. This means that all mental
processes can be experienced and designed with sensual elements. The
precondition is that content is absorbed through the senses, processed, and
thus become so-called representation systems: the representation in the
brain of what we have realized about the senses forms the basis of thought.

Strategies to Increase Self-Esteem Through NLP
 
When we only see our weak points. When we are not able to see the good
things we do. When we don't value each other, all this indicates that we lack
self-esteem, and NLP can help us reverse this dynamic.
 
Self-esteem, self-confidence, and NLP
Self-esteem part of respect for the person with their strengths, weaknesses,
and abilities. It is a feeling related to personal worth, that is, having a
purpose and giving it the importance it deserves. On the other hand, self-
confidence, which is closely linked to self-esteem, consists of satisfaction
with our life and the perception of being happy. Some people complain
about the lack of self-confidence, self-esteem, feeling of worth, and
security.

From NLP, it is proposed that these feelings are the result of a bad
combination of the different parts of the personality that we saw in previous
subjects. The critical part is precious, but its fundamental task is to
disassemble everything that has been built, imagined, or thought.
The NLP considers that each person has the forces they need. All the
resources available to a person are made up of the sum of the elements that
underlie the experiences and perceptions.
Thus, some people think they do not have enough patience, but who can say
that they never have, at any time, and for any second, disposed of such a
resource? Each person carries the resources with them; what happens is that
they do not perceive them.
Almost everyone has ever experienced how, in an extreme situation or
under tremendous pressure, he has had unknown strengths and abilities.
What is now is to make the most of personal resources without waiting for
these borderline situations to appear.
The role of beliefs in self-esteem
Beliefs are generalizations about causes, meanings, and limits related to the
environment, specific behaviors, abilities, and identity. Together with
values, they are the essential sources that make up our way of being. Beliefs
do not necessarily have to be based on a logical framework. Many stand out
for their lack of logic, despite which we continue trying to adjust them to
our reality by rejecting any other contrary idea.
Limiting beliefs prevent the development of self-confidence. Thinking "I
am a failure,” "I am not important,” "I lack the strength to act like this," are
some examples of phrases that people continuously formulate and in which
they end up believing. Self-esteem is on the opposite side, and it allows us
to be sure that we have the necessary internal resources to overcome the

difficulties and use them. In labor matters, it is normal to have overwork.
However, it is not normal that as a result of the accumulated beliefs the
person feels guilty of not answering, he would like to the continuous
demands of his boss, his clients, or his environment in general.
Reverse limiting beliefs
To change limiting beliefs, a series of steps are proposed:
The first step in changing limiting beliefs is to detect them. Once
identified, the formulation that causes negative feelings is sought.
Let's observe how we react, what emotions do you wake up?
The second step is to locate a state that has sufficient resources and
anchor them. To do this, let's look into our lives for a situation in
which we have truly felt good. Imagine that situation as intensely as
we can, and as soon as we notice that positive feelings grow, let us
anchor this state of memories.
Next, as a third step, we relive that situation while trying to change
the way we state our limiting beliefs.
Build trust
To have little self-confidence is to have an image of oneself in which
something important is missing: trust. Each person has an image that he
interprets as a reference for his assessment, formed from a combination of
images, sounds, movements, feelings. Therefore, what it is about is to
obtain a positive image of oneself to increase self-confidence. To do this,
the following steps are proposed:
View the current image of oneself in an associated way. Build an
image of one regarding how it is perceived. We must pay attention to
the perception of the body, the posture, the comments in which we
describe ourselves.

Display the image in a dissociated way. In this step, we distance
ourselves from that image, we leave it, and we observe ourselves as
an outsider: How do we see each other? What differences do we
observe with the idea of the first step?
The third step is to visualize a "copy" of the dissociated own image
and positively modify those aspects that are less pleasant. Then we
try to make our image even more enjoyable, experimenting until we
find nothing that makes the image more pleasant.
The fourth step is to incorporate the modified copy of our dissociated
image into the associated image, that is, to make the image we have
created ours, the one that defines us.
 

Methods for rescuing self-esteem recommended by
psychologists.
 
Do you feel overwhelmed with self-esteem down there and don't know what
to do to get more satisfaction in your personal and professional life? Would
you like to have a healthier and more harmonious marital relationship,
develop professionally, and be less anxious about over-responsibility?
Breathe in and breathe! All these yearnings are the result of a lack of self-
confidence and emotional and emotional needs. The good news is that they
can be soothed and balanced with psychological techniques and methods
for restoring self-esteem.
1. Be more constructive and think positive
The method of cognitive and behavioral restructuring is critical for rescuing
and understanding the limiting and negative beliefs learned in childhood
through family education, school, or other social spaces.
Through this method, you will learn to think more positively and act more
constructively. This will make it easier for you to move away from negative
people and calm your mind. Automatically, you will feel more confident
and secure.
In a time of distress or more intense emotion, seek to arouse positive
thinking. This way, you can change the way you interpret your experiences
in a different way of dealing with other circumstances.
2. Valuing yourself to rescue self-esteem
Accepting all the flaws and imperfections and vibrating with the little
achievements of everyday life is very important. Whether in relationships at

work or in other areas of your life, have fewer expectations of others'
attitudes and judgments. These are some of the ways that can help you
regain your self-esteem.
Inferiority complexes and lack of family references can affect your self-
confidence, but these frameworks can be reversed through understanding
your boundaries and self-affirmation exercises.
So, push away ideas that insist on tormenting you about someone else's
judgment on you and keep in mind your strengths and achievements. Try to
be good, above all, within your conceptions, not in others.
3. Avoid Making Comparisons
One of the most challenging aspects of comparative behavior is
understanding the negative impact it has on us. The first step is to know
why these comparisons, when you started comparing yourself, and how this
attitude affects you.
Breaking through these thinking patterns is sure to be a significant
differentiator in gaining a sense of who you are and how different you
might be from others.
Regularly review its essentiality and seek to know its flaws and qualities,
seeking to learn that each human being has its characteristics.
4. Learn to deal with life's frustrations
Life's "no's" closed doors, and limitations are very frustrating situations.
However, each person reacts differently to the same situations and
experiences. It is, therefore, essential to be open to behavioral changes to
overcome frustrations.
Face the frustrations and hardships of your life as challenges and try to
learn from every situation you experience so that at the end of a

complicated process, you will come out strong and mature.
Invest in a change of habits and conceptions to achieve the expected
transformation. Combining this with best practices will make your self-
esteem recovery process faster and lighter. Also, consider assisting a
psychologist in collaborating with your mental stimuli.
5. Spend more time with the people you like
The feeling of "belonging" means that we need to feel like part of a place or
group of people and, at the same time, consider that they are part of us as
well. He is one of the pillars of self-esteem that makes you feel good and
satisfied just by being around people you care about.
Try to find an opportunity during the day to be with your family. The
welcome it provides is refreshing and aids in growing self-confidence, and
is considered essential for success in life.
Set aside time each month or week, depending on your availability, to meet
friends and socialize with them. It is even enjoyable to try to include that
class of friends from the time of adolescence because keeping in touch with
them reminds you of your old dreams, beliefs, and ambitions, which are
essential activators of self-esteem and favor self-knowledge.
6. Be convinced of your goals
Every accomplishment begins with the goals we set in our mind. When we
reflect on how much we can achieve our goals, self-esteem drives us to
think more and better. So, use all your mental resources to visualize what
you crave.
For example, if you want a promotion or have more freedom to express
your ideas - it can be in the workplace, personal or family - stimulate your
self-confidence and demonstrate your skills more effectively.

Set goals with which you can check your progress. Determine concrete
criteria to measure the growth in the achievement of each goal you set, as
this provides more security during your planning.
7. Talk to a Psychology Professional
Consulting with a psychology professional is one of the best solutions for
restoring self-esteem. Do not let the situation get worse! Seeking help from
a psychologist can reduce your suffering or even eliminate it once and for
all in your life.
It is also necessary for you to make a personal reflection of how much the
situation is - or not - in your control, never to allow a depressive degree to
be reached. To do so, seek proper guidance.
If you don't have time to go to a clinic in person, how about getting online
psychological help to answer your questions and concerns? Even if you
can't during the day, you can enjoy the night or weekends when you're not
doing things.
 
 

CHAPTER THREE
Psychological Manipulation Techniques
 
 
The art of subtly influencing others psychologically is one that can lead you
a long way in life and help you to be a great leader and to follow your path.
If that sounds as if it isn't very good, and that's because it isn't, but whether
or not it depends on how you use it.
There are several techniques to be effective in psychological warfare and to
influence the views or perceptions of others subtly. One is to recognize a
person's facets easily so that you can understand them better. It is
sometimes referred to as the 'art of deduction' as taught by Sherlock
Holmes, or the 'science of deduction.' In NLP (Neuro-Linguistic
Programming), a person is trained to deduce quickly what kind of 'input' a
person uses to appeal to his/her sensitivity. If somebody says 'see here,' then
maybe they'll be interpreting information 'visually' and appealing to that

meaning would have the most effect on them, while if they're saying 'listen
to me,' you may want to try a more audible assault.
You may also use specific tried and tested approaches to cater to a broad
spectrum of people, as well as using the art of inference and NLP to classify
information about an individual. Another is to build a 'relationship' by
subtly mirroring the actions and expressions of others. One is to refer to
facts and figures or to use sentiment in your argument, to try to get others
behind you.
They're found most frequently in places we frequent. It may be our
supervisor, our neighbor, a colleague, a customer, a distant relative, or an
acquaintance. We are thinking about people who possess complete mastery
of specific methods of deception and who use them to confuse us.
Despite being right around us, these people are not easy to discover. Their
characteristics and personality traits are not evident. No one carries a sign
on their foreheads saying they are either a narcissist or a sociopath. How
can we avoid them?
These people feed on someone else's suffering. So, it is not we who are
weaker, helpless, or different. We are just another victim in their eyes.
Another number.
As a consequence of those circumstances in which we were involved, we all
felt guilty or distrusted. And the worst thing about it is that we think so
without knowing how or why. Yet the results are branding us, weakening
our confidence, complicating our lives, and growing our insecurities. But
how can they do that without actually realizing it to us?
What are manipulators looking for

There are several groups of deceptive people in general: sociopaths,
narcissists, liars, and so-called emotional vampires. And it is more a
practical question to consider them than a theoretical one. For this purpose,
if you've been victims of them at times, it's easier for you to identify and
precede them now.
However, it can be said that deceptive people's aims are very
straightforward, instrumental and that they follow a specific pattern. Most
of them include:
Cancel your willpower: they're trying to sow suspicions and want to
bind you to their safety.
Destroying your self-esteem: bringing a spoken word into the wheel
of all you do or have done. We are not helpful, and they just want to
point out the shortcomings.
Passive-aggressive revenge: By avoiding you, they threaten you.
They neglect you when you need them; it's enough to ask them
something, to get them to stand up and not even speak to you.
Prevent reality: they enjoy confounding people and creating
misunderstandings and discussions. We step back after provoking a
debate, loving the rants of others.
What are the psychological manipulation techniques?
Gaslighting
Gaslighting is one of the most subtle methods of deception. "It's never
happened," "Imagine you," or "You're kidding?" These are some of the
words that they use to manipulate and confuse our perception of reality,
which makes us believe things have changed.
This instills an intense sense of anxiety and uncertainty in the victims, to
the point of causing them not to trust in themselves, their memory, their

understanding, or their judgment.
Projection
The manipulator transfers the negative characteristics to another person or
shifts blame for his actions. This is being used heavily by narcissists and
psychopaths, saying that the wickedness that surrounds them is not their
fault but anyone else's.
Meaningless conversations
The conversation lasts ten minutes. Now is the time for you to leave the
conversation. Manipulators say nonsensical things, offer illogical excuses,
refer to past events, and throw smoke in the eyes ...
We generate discord and misunderstanding. We are doing monologues, and
they are trying to confuse you with their gab. Some advice? Get straight to
the point and then better if you can leave after 5 minutes. Your feelings
would be thankful.
Generalizations and denigrations
They make generic, vague, and abstract statements. They may seem
intellectual. In reality, they are just elusive. Their conclusions are too
general; their goal is to demean your e debilitate your opinions.
For example, "you always want to be right," "anything annoys you," "never
once you agree." Keep calm. You can opt for irony, with a simple "thank
you," or you can ignore them with a curt, "I think you're a little upset, we'll
talk later."
Absurdity
Remember that they try to undermine your morals and cause you to
question what you believe. They can put words you have never said in your

mouth; they will make you think you have the superpower to "read your
mind." But that's not the case, and they are just tricks and deceptions. You
can help yourself with simulated defeat. Tell them they are right for them to
believe it, but stick to your position. You can also respond to their blackmail
with an "okay" or with laconic sentences.
The important thing is that you take your self-esteem out of their hands.
Remember that they want to demoralize you so that they can control you.
After making you weak, the task will be much easier.
Good mask
"Yes, but…". If you manage to buy a house, they will tell you that it is a
pity that you do not yet have a place by the sea; if you are dressed more
elegant than ever, they will tell you that another pair of earrings would have
been better for you ... If you have written an impeccable report, they will
tell you that the staple is not well fixed.
But don't let yourselves be influenced: you know what you are worth! Your
successes and virtues are worth more than their manipulation techniques. 
Don't give them any credibility and hang out with people who spend more
time pointing out the positives and encouraging you; those who compliment
you when you deserve them and who make constructive, non- destructive
criticisms.
Positive reinforcement
Through positive reinforcement learning, behavioral performance is linked
to achieving a good outcome. This does not have to be an entity, not even
tangible; in many cases, food, liquids, a smile, a verbal message, or the
presence of a friendly emotion are likely to be seen as favorable
reinforcement.

A father who congratulates his young daughter if she uses the toilet
correctly promotes positive reinforcement learning; the same thing happens
when a business offers cash incentives to its most successful workers, and
also when we get a bag of potato chips after placing a coin into a retailer.
The definition of "positive reinforcement" refers to the reward that
accompanies the action, while positive reinforcement is the process that
creates the connection the learner produces. Nevertheless, the words
"reinforcement" and "reinforcement" are frequently used interchangeably,
possibly because such a distinction does not exist in English.
From a technical point of view, we can conclude that there is a favorable
variance between a particular response and an appetizing stimulus in
positive reinforcement. The knowledge of this risk motivates the subject to
act to get the reward (or strengthening).
Negative reinforcement
In comparison to what occurs in the positive, the instrumental response in
the negative reinforcement includes the absence of an aversive stimulus,
i.e., an event or condition that motivates the subject to avoid or attempt not
to come into contact with it.
In behavioral terms, the reinforcement of this technique is the absence or
non-appearance of the aversive stimulus. As we stated earlier, the word
"negative" refers to the fact that the reward does not consist in obtaining an
inspiration but in the absence thereof.
This type of learning is divided into two processes: training to escape and to
train to prevent it. The conduct precludes the presence of the aversive
stimulus in the negative reinforcement of avoidance; for example, when an
agoraphobic individual avoids using public transport to escape the fear this
presupposes, it is reinforced negatively.

The escape, on the contrary, is the disappearance of an aversive stimulus
present before the subject executes the behavior. Some examples of
negative escape reinforcement include an alarm clock that stops by pressing
a button, a mother buying a request for her child to stop weeping, or taking
a pain reliever to relieve pain.
Brainwashing
The concept of brainwashing is very close to that of 'mind control.' It is an
idea without a strictly scientific basis that suggests that the will, thoughts,
and other mental facts of individuals can be modified through techniques of
persuasion that would introduce unwanted ideas into the psyche of the
'victim.' If we define the concept in this way, we see that it has a marked
similarity. However, the term "suggest" is less ambitious.
Although the idea of brainwashing is not entirely wrong, this popular
concept has some scientific connotations which have led many experts to
reject it in favor of more modest ones. The instrumental use of the term in
legal proceedings has contributed to this, in particular, in child custody
disputes.
Mind control is also known as brainwashing, coercive persuasion, mind
control, and mental manipulation. All these terms mean a process that a
group or individual systematically uses to force someone to do what they
want through the process of thinking of that person. In the majority of
cases, these systematic processes are realized without the conscious
knowledge of the person.
There are times when we can use mind control over ourselves for a variety
of reasons. Self-hypnosis is in this category. We use this kind of mind
control, which is voluntary on our part, with our conscious consent, to
reinforce a positive idea or to change our minds.

However, this is not the same as the "mind control" phase, or it involves
brainwashing. These phrases mean that a person's mind is systematically
changed without knowing it, either in the agreement or even against his
will.
They are carried out through unethical, manipulative tactics, and other
means, all designed to control the mind of someone. In such cases, they are
realized in such a way that one person or group can take full control of the
thoughts and actions of others. So, when the terms "mind control" and
"brainwashing" are used, it is said that specific tactics are used to take
control of another at the expense of the manipulated person.
This is interesting because the idea of brainwashing falls under the category
of social influence. This is because the concept of brainwashing is used to
induce a victim's mental manipulation. This means that brainwashing and
mind control are used to completely change the way someone thinks and
perceives things concerning their beliefs in a particular social device. This
is achieved by using various means to change the attitudes, behaviors, and
thoughts of a person. The person is like a puppet who does everything the
manipulator wants.
 

Psychological Manipulation In Communication
 
As we think in conversation about psychological manipulation, we see the
first something happens: a relationship imbalance. To exploit means to use
language for your gain, not just to dominate the other, but also to do harm.
As the mechanism of this violence is set in motion by the most visceral
emotions.
Aldous Huxley said words could be much like X-rays. Used in a
Machiavellian style, they will go through everything: self-esteem, integrity,
and even the other's identity. Let's learn to see them arrive, to grasp this
disruptive process a little more on a personal level.
1. Handling the facts
Any specialist in psychological communication deception is a great
strategist who distorts the facts. He will still turn it to his benefit and may
himself to blame all of us. You can avoid overuse and hold key details to
clarify the facts further and ensure that the balance is still "your reality."
 
2. You will be told that it is impossible to talk to you
This prayer is simple, direct, and useful. If someone tells us, "it is
impossible to talk to us," avoid precisely what they do not want: to talk
about this problem. Therefore, it is customary to be told that we are too
emotional, that we always take ourselves too seriously, and that lately, it has
become tough to talk to us. These people project something they deeply
lack: communication skills.
3. Intellectual harassment

The psychological and emotional manipulator also uses a wider
communication strategy. This is intellectual harassment, which is only
aimed at We bring a considerable amount of arguments, information, facts,
and complex reasoning to convince ourselves of one thing through
information exhaustion and overload.
4. Ultimatums and little time to decide
"If you don't accept what I propose, it's the end, and I'll give you until
tomorrow so you can think about what I told you." This type of
communication strategy is very painful and distressing. They put us back on
the wall, which creates anxiety and plunges us into states of great emotional
distress.
5. The person very often says our name during the conversation
When, in talk or discussion, someone pronounces our name almost
continuously and exaggeratedly, they are using a very clever control
mechanism. Doing so forces the other person to pay attention to you and, at
the same time, plunges them into a constant state of intimidation.
6. Irony and black humor
Irony and the use of a sense of humor that humiliates, ridicules, and
denigrates us is another sign of psychological manipulation in
communication. The aggressor or manipulator tries to make us feel very
small and impose on us his supposed psychological superiority.
 
7. The use of silence or evasions
I don't want to talk about it. This is not the time. Why are you talking about
this now? … This type of dynamic is very recurrent in emotional

relationships, especially if one of the parties lacks communication skills,
commitment, and a sense of responsibility.
8. Feign ignorance: "I don't understand what you mean."
It is a very classic tactic. That which consists of making the one who does
not understand what the other wants to say or do. This means playing with
the other person, making him see that he complicates things too much; she
brings the conversation to a level that does not make sense. We are faced
with a classic passive-aggressive manipulative strategy that avoids taking
responsibility and trying to hurt others.
9. We will let you speak first
The signs of psychological manipulation the most difficult to perceive in
communication. It was found that of the person who tries to speak first.
Thanks to this strategy, she manages to do several things. First, save time
preparing your argument, and second, find our weak spots.
In addition, it is expected that, after listening to us, the emotional
manipulator avoids exposing their ideas or opinions. You can limit yourself
to asking us questions to exploring points that, far from being useful for a
possible agreement, we seek to reveal our defects, guiding the problem on
its ground and pretending to be moles, weak, or exaggerated all the time.
 

Emotional Blackmail and Manipulation
 
Emotional blackmail is a type of control that makes use of guilt, obligation,
or fear. The goal is to get another person to behave according to interests
that are in the blackmailer's favor. It's a way to exploit others 'will that's
focused on triggering unpleasant feelings that the blackmailed person
doesn't seem to be able to get out of unless he does what the blackmailer
wants.
Emotional blackmail is a type of control that uses guilt, obligation, and fear
to get someone else to be in the interests of the blackmailer. One way of
manipulating others 'will is to trigger unpleasant feelings, which the
blackmailed individual can't seem to get out of unless he does what the
blackmailer wants.
Emotional coercion infiltrates our relationships, which often makes it hard
to decide if we're being blackmailed or blackmailers. It is usually performed
unconsciously, and deception is more comfortable to detect. Phrases like
"Oh, what you do? "It's up to you," "If you loved me, you wouldn't," are
examples of how seemingly innocent messages can be used with the
intention of putting fear in the other person if they don't cede to the wishes
of the blackmailer.
Usually, we associate deceit with Machiavellian, twisted, greedy men. In
reality, though, we all resort to some kind of emotional blackmail.
Whenever a person plays the role of a manipulator, and when he attempts to
manipulate what another person does or does, he asks for something. He
does not offer a choice alternative or trigger another's self-esteem. In a
relationship, the object of emotional manipulation often is to gain control.

We have all been involved in a similar siege at some time, either as victims
or as executioners. But, why do we manipulate or let them use us?
 
Signs of Emotional Blackmail
1. Threats to people or things dear to the victim
Emotional blackmail always includes risk, but only the threat object can be
different: it is a physical object (person or object), as well as something
more abstract, like a close relationship or reputation at work. The victim
should feel that she should obey the blackmailer so as not to harm herself
and her relatives.
2. Threats to the victim herself
Although direct blackmail is less common, it is also a clear sign. A
blackmailer may threaten physical violence for not fulfilling his demands
directly to the victim. For such an aggressor to achieve the goal, he must
know precisely what the victim is afraid of. Usually, these are deep fears:
the fear of separation, loneliness, humiliation, and failure. Of course,
physical violence is unlikely to happen. However, it is a powerful
manipulative means of control and pressure.
3. Threats to oneself
Emotional blackmailers (partners, parents, relatives) may use different
tactics and threaten to harm themselves. It may seem that you have no
choice but to do what a person requires to avoid tragedy, but it’s better to
protect yourself and protect yourself. The threat of harming oneself (up to
suicide) is a way to gain control over the situation and force the victim to
fulfill the requirements, knowing that the victim loves the blackmailer and
does not wish him harm.

4. Provoking guilt for blackmail and manipulation
Often, an emotional blackmailer will use threats in conjunction with
provoking feelings of guilt to convince a person to succumb to his demands.
The risk is designed to make the victim feel guilty that the manipulator is
supposedly ill. For example, a blackmailer may justify why he stole money
from a victim, appealing to her conscience and complaining about his
problems. His task is to make you feel guilty for your inattention and
insensitivity to his needs and his situation.
When you know what emotional blackmail is and clearly define it, you can
already deal with it. There are some key points that you should always
remember if you are already dealing with a person who uses such blackmail
as a manipulation tool.
5. Do not give in to requirements
Even if the situation is somewhat threatening, fulfilling the demands of the
blackmailer only stimulate him, and the problem only worsens. Be firm and
steady and refuse to do what the manipulator wants, especially if his threat
is violence against himself or others.
6. Remember that people do not blackmail those they love
This can help you ignore the situation and facilitate the refusal to comply
with his requirements. Just admit to yourself that a loving person will never
behave this way and do this to you.
 

How to Avoid Emotional Manipulation and Cope
with Manipulation?
 
1. There is no point in trying to be honest with an emotional
manipulator.
You make a point, and that's going to get twisted. Example: I'm furious
you've forgotten my birthday. Answer: "It makes me sad that you think I'm
missing your birthday, I'd have to tell you how hard my life is right now, but
you see, I didn't want to interrupt you. But you're right, and I'd have to put
aside all that pain (don't be shocked to see real tears at this point) and
concentrate on your birthday. But there isn't much you can say because his
words are actual. Then all of a sudden, you hold your anxieties high! In any
case, don't capitulate if you get this feeling! Do not heed; do not accept an
apology if you believe they are not sincere. When you get the feeling, it's
because you certainly are right. Trust your judgment when it comes to a
master singer. Rely on your senses. If the emotional manipulator is
significant, he will add it to his list of work-related items and tell you this
stuff regularly.
2. An emotional manipulator gives the image of someone who is
at the service of others.
They'll almost always agree if you tell them to do anything, they'll even
volunteer before you can ask them something. Then when you say "yes,
thank you," they make a lot of sighs or signals that let you know they just
don't want to do this service. When you tell them, you believe they don't
seem to want to do that; they'll return the situation by telling you, "of
course," because you're not fair to think that way.

It's sort of a tactic, and in this game, the emotional manipulators are
powerful. When a manipulator says YES, rule number two; keep them
responsible for their commitments; Do not tolerate sighs and subtleties,
because you just have to move on and leave them in their delirium if they
don't want to do whatever they say to you.
3. A reversal, say one thing and later make sure they did not tell
you.
If you find that you are in a relationship where you have understood that
you should start saving a diary of everything that has been said, because
you begin to ask yourself questions about your mental health, you are
experiencing emotional manipulation. An emotional manipulator is an
expert at reversing the situation, rationalizing, justifying, and explaining
things. They can lie so well that you can sit down and look in the dark, and
they will say it's white, and they will argue in such a way that you will
begin to doubt yourself. Over time, it's so insidious and tiring that it can
change your sense of reality.
Emotional manipulation is VERY dangerous! An emotional manipulator
will be confused if you start having a journal and a pen on you to take notes
during your conversations. Feel calm to let them know that you do not have
all your head right now and that you do not want to forget his sweet words.
The craziest thing is getting there, which is why you should seriously think
about getting out of this kind of unhealthy game. If you have to pack around
with a notepad to protect yourself, it's time to start asking the right
questions!
4. Guilt. Emotional manipulators are excellent propagators of
responsibility.

You will make you feel bad for talking or not talking enough, being
emotional or not being emotional enough, giving and being cared for, or
targeting it. All is a guilty game with an emotional manipulator. Emotional
manipulators never freely express their wishes or desires; they get what
they want through emotional manipulation. Guilt is heavy. Many people are
trained enough to do something to reduce this sense of remorse. Sympathy's
another strong emotion.
An emotional manipulator is a great target. It conveys a deep feeling that
makes us love, care, and nurture it. Emotional manipulators rarely fight
themselves and stop dirty work. The craziest thing is that when you do it for
them (which they can never ask directly), they can turn around and say they
don't want it, and they don't expect it from you! Try not to fight wars or do
the dirty work for them. Here's a sentence you can say, "I have every faith
in your ability to solve this question, I know you can do it," write down
their response and remember their reaction.
5. Emotional manipulators make low blows.
We don't face issues directly. They'll talk behind your back, and finally
place you in a position to tell you what they can't tell you about themselves.
They're passive-aggressive, meaning they're finding subtle ways to let you
know they're not content, intrepid. They will tell you what you think about
building confidence. Example: "Of course, my heart, I help you. But the
day before the test, he invites his buddies to play poker when you're sitting
at the table studying. At that moment, you hear the cries of kids weeping,
the television that sounds, and the dog barking! And you wonder where the
so-called" My Heart "has gone ... Can you react to such a comment that
you're likely to hear like," You can't hope to hear it?

6. If, by any chance, you have a headache, and emotional
manipulator will have a brain tumor!
Whatever situation you've encountered or are experiencing, the emotional
manipulator either encountered it worse or is experiencing it now. After a
while, remaining emotionally linked to an emotional manipulator is hard
because they have a way to turn conversations around and concentrate on
themselves. When you point them out, they'll probably get angry or irritable
by telling you you're greedy and saying you're just focusing on you anyway.
But if you know, that isn't the case, and you'll always have to explain
yourself. It doesn't matter, trust your instincts, and withdraw!
 

How Do You Understand and Stop Your Partner's
Emotional Manipulation?
 
Emotions are the dimensions that make us human, incredible sensations that
can range from the quietest happiness to the bleakest sadness. We are rarely
more vulnerable when we are in love. At this point, it is more challenging
to realize the famous emotional manipulation by our partner.
You may be surprised, but emotional manipulation is not so easy to identify.
But why? Because we are talking about this complex and intense
dimension, that is love.
Many people confuse, for example, “domination” with love: “my mate is
jealous because he likes me” … It is undoubtedly one of the most common
phrases and one that brings more problems in the long run. But let's dig
deeper into the topic.
1. To love is not to possess
There are many couples who usually do everything together. Going out,
traveling… This is very positive and even necessary, but only good when
there is no “control.”
Some, for example, disagree with their partner leaving home alone, having
their own friendships, and even more, having their work and professional
life.
We have to go carefully. Love does not show itself by controlling a person,
let alone forbidding him to do anything.
2. The need to take care of our self-esteem

Emotional manipulation is directly linked to our self-esteem. In a
relationship, we do everything for the other person, love him or her above
anything else, and we would do everything for them.
This is all sincere and good, but we also have to know how to protect
ourselves.
If your partner values ​your own needs more than yours and acts selfishly,
day by day, you will suffer the effects and feel worse.
Most people conceive of love as an exchange of affection and desires,
where there is a balance between what we give and what we receive.
If we are the ones who give everything, we will feel empty, manipulated,
and with very low self-esteem, which will make it very difficult to find
happiness in everyday things.
3. When we gradually lose our identity
It may be that before you entered into a relationship, you were part of a
social circle that made you happy, and you had vital projects that you tried
to reach day by day.
But sometimes we fall in love with those we should not, all because, on
many occasions, it is something we cannot master, which occurs suddenly,
and we fall into a carousel of intense emotions.
Although there are people who are not mature enough to be in a healthy
relationship, they, instead of making us happy and helping us grow as a
couple, are taking away our identity.
 

Behavioral and Character Traits of the
Manipulators
 
Throughout your life, you will encounter manipulative people who pursue
your selfish purposes, for whom they have no qualms about causing harm to
you.
Generally, manipulative people have no qualms or compassion when they
find a new victim for their plans since they are individuals dedicated to
exploiting other people's weaknesses to achieve their benefit, regardless of
what they have to do for it.
The manipulative method used in his approach focuses on emotional
blackmail, involving people with false words and deeds. In this way, their
victims trust and yield to the supposed good intention of this manipulative
mind, which pretends to feel sympathy and appreciation for others.
Hence the danger posed by manipulative people to anyone's life, as for
them, there is no moral limit or obstacle between their goal and themselves.
This allows them to easily crush, use, and dispose of people affected by the
way they act.
Despite knowing the threat that manipulative people pose in their life, it is
quite challenging to differentiate them into a group of acquaintances or
coworkers since you can even fall victim to someone without realizing it
until you are affected by their evil influence.
That is why we present five typical characteristics of a manipulator to help
you identify and recognize this type of predator that lurks in your social
circles.

Five common traits in manipulative people
Innate speakers
Manipulative people demand their best speech skills to convince their
victims of their false good intentions to deal with the gift of speech
effectively.
They can transform any situation they find themselves in to convince others
of their innocence. Coming to create a false image in the minds of those
who fall for their mind games.
They maintain excessive control over the situation, always obtaining the
most significant benefit in exchange for others' hard work. His word tends
to confuse and manipulate his victims efficiently, to the point of remaining
unaware of a bad way of acting.
Manipulative people are greedy.
Manipulators do not pursue a simple goal that they can achieve on their
own; on the contrary, and they are always looking for a more significant
objective that continuously compresses their victims.
The hunger for power and control is also a reflection of the great ego that
manipulative people tend to possess—those who over-rely on their
manipulation to the point of feeling invincible, lest they set future limits.
They tend to assume the role of the victim.
Being a victim implies significant vulnerability and innocence, so it is the
preferential role of manipulative people. Since people around you never
think that the victim is the victim.
In this way, they manipulate other people emotionally, playing with their
feelings. Therefore, confrontation with a manipulator can make you believe

that he is the victim, and you are the aggressor.
Create a false image of the need
Righteousness is the emotion that manipulative people tend to hold on to.
To do this, they use an image of weakness and fragility, to which their
victims fall easily, wanting to help someone in need.
After deceiving people with their false need, a manipulator makes his
victims feel responsible for their health, food, money, and any other
benefits they can obtain from that individual.
Manipulative people always lie.
Inevitably, lying is part of any manipulator's repertoire. They deal with this
ability naturally, without showing doubts or any characteristic that allows
their victims to detect the truth behind their false facade.
Manipulative people are masters of lies, to the point of lying in any aspect
of their lives, regardless of whether it is minimal or essential. Because,
through deception, they can approach the goal they are pursuing.
For lack of a moral compass, there is no limit to the lies of a manipulator.
For him, lies are part of the tools he needs to achieve his goal, regardless of
who causes harm.

CHAPTER FOUR
Covert Emotional Manipulation
 
 

In our gut, we may have
an awkward feeling that does not suit the words of the manipulator or feel
stuck in agreeing to a proposal. Most people respond in ways that
exacerbate violence or play into the abuser's hands and feel small and
guilty, but withdraw and permit unacceptable conduct. If you had a

deceptive parent, recognizing in a partner may be more difficult because it
is familiar.
Ancient wisdom is essential when dealing with a manipulator to "know
your opponent" Being able to spot those secret arrows helps you to respond
to subtle exploitation strategically. Comprising what they are up to inspire
you.
When people act passively-aggressively, implicit aggression is what tends
to be passive or defensive. The degree to which their action is conscious or
unconscious is debatable.
No matter to the survivor. The impact is similar. Being too empathetic
places you in danger of being mistreated over and over again. They become
violent when someone is threatening you directly or covertly. Psychologist
George Simon claims that these secret manipulators consciously say and do
stuff for power and influence to get what they want.
He insists that for character-logically impaired individuals, such as
sociopaths and narcissists, and even individuals with a borderline
personality disorder, their strategies are not unconscious in the way
defensive mechanisms usually work. But their action becomes so ordinary
that it is reflexive over time. They are not talking about it, but they are still
aware of it.
 

Signs of Emotional Manipulation
 
Emotional manipulation is not always obvious… Manipulators can be very
good at what they do and go unnoticed. So how to identify such a situation?
Read the text and check out eight signs of emotional manipulation
Manipulate by words
A handler can say things in a way that seems genuine and honest. They are
adept at hiding their true intentions. For example, you might express anger
at them for missing a birthday / special occasion, and they respond to
something like, "wow, you make me very sad to think that I would forget
your birthday." Or, "Wow, I lie because you make me."
It is widespread for them to use words to make you feel guilty for
something that you are not to blame. It can be a simple matter of forgetting
your birthday and stopping even the most severe aggressions.
Distort facts
Another form of manipulation is when they distort what happened or what
you said. Use phrases out of context or retell a fact in their view. And some
are so good that they can make you believe that. Usually, they justify their
bad behavior and blame you.
 
They are great at making you feel guilty.
Guilt is one of the great weapons of emotional manipulation. It is always
you. You stopped talking or talked too much. You worry too much, or you
don't care. You're too careful or sloppy… Anyway, the handler will always

try to convince you that it's your fault for the bad behavior. And they are
great at putting themselves in the victim position.
Minimize Your Problems
Emotional manipulators do not care about their problems. Whenever you
say something like “wow, I have a migraine,” they will find a way to
convince you that they have a much worse problem. They will take your
lines and make you feel guilty for saying anything, as their problems are so
much worse, their work is more stressful, their lives are harder… or they
will try to make you believe that.
Passive-Aggressive
Passive-aggressive behavior is widespread in emotional manipulation. They
often say good things to you but superficial. Then they will depreciate you,
make up some problems, messing up your psychological health. Or they
will simply be silent out of nowhere, making him even more guilty, wanting
to find out what he "did wrong."
Energetic Vampires
Emotional manipulators have a dark cloud that follows them wherever they
go. When they enter the room, the cloud envelops everyone, so attention
falls to them. Gradually we feel weakened. They are toxic and will always
try to take away our joy. The best thing we can do is walk away.
Aggression
Handlers often use aggressive language and actions to intimidate you. If
they realize that you do not confront them, they will make you feel
uncomfortable, and therefore they will get what they want easily.
Aggressions tend to get worse and worse and may escalate into abuse as
they "advance" in their form of emotional manipulation.

 

How to deal with an emotional manipulator?
 
Try to Understand This Person's Need for Acceptance
If the person acting in a manipulative manner is a member of the family or
someone with whom you believe the relationship should be maintained and
helped, try to analyses their attitudes and understand the origin. It can be
insecurity, and it can be a lack of self-esteem. Each of these feelings is a
sign of a kind of need, and you can help it, demonstrating that this gap can
be filled without depending on, interiorizing, or manipulating others.
It is worth remembering that it is essential to stop giving in to blackmail
and attempts at manipulation if you intend to help. Loving is also knowing
how to say no when necessary, and being firm to have a healthy
relationship, be it of love, friendship, work, or family, is essential. Dialogue
is a crucial thing to seek understanding, too.
Seek Self-Knowledge and Understand Your Needs
Self-knowledge is the solution to most of the issues we may have
concerning our feelings. A manipulative situation also constitutes a
relationship of dependence between both parties. If you tend to get carried
away by somebody is blackmail, it is because, perhaps, you also need
acceptance and feel loved that makes you give in to the other's will, even
without wishing to.
Knowing your feelings will help you to understand why you tend to give in
to manipulation. You will be able to stand firm through this understanding
and come to the conclusion that you do not need to act against your
convictions and wishes just to be accepted by someone. By demonstrating
security over what you want, the manipulative person will see he no longer
has power over you.

When is it best to walk away?
There are cases where the best thing to do is move away, preventing the
manipulative individual from continuing to make you feel ever more
dependent and inferior. This attitude is necessary, mainly in abusive-type
amorous relationships, in which the other needs to remain in control of the
situation and, for this, emotionally and, in the most severe cases, even
physically mistreat their partner.
Breaking a relationship can be very delicate, but you need to recover your
freedom and individuality in many cases. Remember always that your
happiness and safety must come first, and that it may not be the best choice
to sacrifice just to stay with someone who uses harmful devices like
blackmail.
Analyze the relationship as a whole and ponder how it usually makes you
feel most of the time. That way, you can find the answer to how you should
be acting. And if you already know what to do, encourage yourself, and
make your physical and mental well-being and happiness a priority.
A relationship, whether it is loving or not, should be based upon respect for
the individualities and desires of each individual. It is essential that you
know your feelings and wishes so that when someone tries to manipulate
you, you can identify and lead you to act differently than you think. Watch
this out, empower yourself, and take control of your life!
 

Emotional blackmail and manipulation in
relationships
 
1. Does the partner laugh at your feelings, consider them
insignificant?
Emotional manipulators care exclusively about their feelings and needs.
And if you try to start an open and honest conversation with them about
those moments when you feel underestimated or when it hurts you, your
interlocutor will try to “minimize” this conversation as soon as possible. He
will argue that you are acting silly, childish, or, say, overreacting to
everything.
Psychotherapist Petty Blue Hayes claims that “their calm and external
rationality, combined with your “inflated” state and sensitivity in such
situations, often make you doubt yourself and your feelings. And over time,
you begin to wonder if they are right.”
An emotional manipulator will never apologize to you for anything ...
Instead, he will blame you for this situation. He will try to make you doubt
your own emotions.
So, if you start to catch yourself on the fact that at the suggestion of a
partner, you ask yourself over and over that maybe he’s right and you are
really too sensitive or take everything too close to your heart ... This may
mean that it’s time for you to leave this relationship is behind.
2. Does a partner humiliate you?
If a partner constantly insults you or laughs at you in public, then the
likelihood that he or she is an emotional manipulator is very high. Such
people take advantage of your self-doubt to get what you want, but their

tactics are not always obvious. Outwardly, it may seem to your friends and
relatives that the partner is merely joking with you and that you do not
mind, although you want to scream in pain from a scream.
For example, an emotional manipulator, knowing that you are worried
about gaining a little extra weight lately, may begin to shame with your
friends that you ate three slices of pizza, shaking your head sympathetically
and saying something like: "Yes, dear, you have to change clothes from the
tents."
RESEARCHERS point out that, unfortunately, many women who were
raised in families where their parents constantly humiliated them are used to
similar behavior from close people. Moreover, they even consider it quite
normal. Therefore, we must clearly draw a line for ourselves between what
is permissible and what is not.
3. Does the partner accuse you of your bad deeds or bad
behavior?
An emotional manipulator will never accept responsibility for his actions.
Instead, he will try to dodge in such a way as to put all the blame on you
and prove that his actions were justified. An emotional manipulator always
makes his partner doubt the veracity of his feelings and the justification of
resentment.
For example, a simple reminder to a partner that he promised to pay utility
bills can cause a flurry of reproaches and accusations in your direction.
Like, he has recently become exhausted at work, that he simply does not
have time for all kinds of little things, and that you could do it yourself ...
And all this instead of recognizing that he forgot about his promise and
correcting everything.

4. Does the partner refuse to explain his actions?
Emotional manipulators often use phrases like “you still won’t understand,”
because they don’t want to establish full, real communication with you.
They try to assert themselves, to put themselves above you, claiming that
their thoughts and feelings are so complex that you cannot even fully
understand them.
As a result, you almost always expect your partner to get angry because you
did not do something that you did not even know about.
5. Does he try to make himself the most miserable and
offended?
If you tell such a partner that you had a bad day at work, then instead of
comforting, he will immediately begin to convince that your day was still
nothing, but he had a real nightmare.
In a word, your feelings again turn out to be depreciated, and you begin to
feel guilty for having started talking about your problems.
6. A partner is “corrected” only when you understand that you
have enough?
Emotional manipulators feel as if by some sixth sense when you find
yourself almost ready to give up and leave them.
Just when you are already brave enough to say goodbye, your partner turns
into kindness, charm, and courtesy, delighting your hearing with something
very similar to an apology ... But if you have mercy and forgive him, the
relationship is right there, beginning to return to the knurled track.
 

Emotional Manipulation in The Workplace
 
Emotional manipulation is rampant in many workplaces. A manipulator's
primary goal is to influence and control the action and behavior of others.
They use tactics such as factual distortion, lying, hidden threats, and
discrediting others. Manipulative people will detect your weaknesses and
use them against you. To avoid being exploited, proactive steps need to be
taken to address the situation.
Here are some tips for dealing with emotional manipulation at work:
1. Stay away
The manipulator's actions typically differ depending on the situation they
are in. For instance, a manipulator may talk rudely to someone and behave
politically in the next moment. It is advisable to stay away from them when
you sometimes see these extremes in a person. Do not communicate with
this individual unless necessary. This defends you from being abused.
2. Know your rights
Knowing your rights is very important when handling a manipulative
individual. Also, you should be ready to defend yourself when you feel
your rights are being violated. Here are some of your fundamental
workplace rights:
The right to express opinions, feelings, and wishes
The right to respect
The right to say "no."
The right to have your priorities
The right to protect yourself from emotional, mental and physical
harm

Emotional manipulators will try to violate your rights to take advantage of
you. Take control, and don't let anyone cross your borders.
3. Ask questions
An essential tactic of manipulators is the unreasonable request on your part.
They will then expect you to do whatever it takes to meet your needs. When
you hear such requests, you have to counter them with probing questions
that the manipulator has to answer. For example, you can ask:
Is what you are asking, right?
Is it a request or an order?
Is my opinion on this important?
How can I benefit from this?
Do you seriously expect me to (repeat the request)?
Asking such questions will cause the manipulator to question their motives.
As a result, some are likely to withdraw. However, others will simply ignore
your questions and continue to make requests. In this case, you can apply
any other tactics.
4. Buy time
Most manipulators will want you to respond to their requests immediately.
This is a tactic commonly used by sellers when trying to close a sale.
However, don't succumb to the pressure to respond immediately. Instead,
find a way to buy time and withdraw from the person. You can just say, "I'll
think about it." They are powerful words that will allow you to escape and
evaluate the situation.
5. Learn to say "no."
When it comes to communication, knowing when and how to say "no" is
very important. When said diplomatically, it allows you to defend your

rights by maintaining good working relationships with your colleagues. If
someone is unwilling to take "no" for an answer, it is necessary to mention
the consequences of violating their rights. For example, you could threaten
to report the matter to your supervisor.
 

CHAPTER FIVE
Understanding Body Language
 
 
Body language has significantly affected interpersonal relationships. And
basic hand motions can be interpreted in various ways. Other body
movements and facial expressions can alter a hand gesture to complicate
matters further. And it may not be as straightforward as body language.
Individuals still do not know it, but their body movements are an indicator
of unwanted actions that can be transmitted to others. Since different
personality types show different behaviors, you need to be aware of how
you travel, because the behaviors you demonstrate can judge you many
times.
It is important to note that not only the movements we call body language
can tell us a lot about other people, but these physical manifestations can
also tell us something about ourselves. Since our attitude, body language
can be described as a mirror to the soul, and physical movements usually
represent what we feel. Actually, we are going to tell us what emotions we
feel.
The fascinating thing about non-verbal communication is our product of
physiology, environment, and culture. Maybe we can warn others about our
attitudes. We may inherit specific characteristics that affect how we project
ourselves to others and depending on our relationships, and we continue to
use different types of nonverbal communication. For example, you can
present yourself to work with colleagues differently from family members.

Maybe because the comfort zone changes, you are more vigilant in different
circumstances, influencing your response.
You do not show yourself to others visually. Although some movements are
intended, in nature, when we interact with others, many of the body's
responses seem more unconscious. Unfortunately, often implicit body
language gives us information that we do not want others to know about us.
There are some physical indicators that can provide us with hints or feelings
about our emotional state.
We observe and process others' body language, especially when talking.
Facial and hand motions contribute to the discussion. If we were not aware
of this, another person's words might not have the same effect.
One way to more effectively perceive other signals is to become more self-
aware. Heed expressions and emotions. Try to see the link between your
non-verbal communication and words to convey a feeling. By learning to
read your own body language, you begin to understand your interactions
with others.
Children are a prime example of unconscious body language. Young
children sometimes express their feelings non-verbally, even after learning
vocabulary. Usually, you can tell a child if she is frustrated or sad. Toddlers
and preschoolers tend to express themselves verbally. Likewise, babies and
kids understand our body language very well.
Interestingly enough, the movements that children use to express their
needs will eventually help their brains develop, leading to later verbal
communication. From the outset, children pay attention to an adult's face
while talking to them. Why did they know that? Genetics is the underlying
explanation, so maybe eyes are portals of the soul!
 

What Is Body Language
 
Humans have the ability to interact. It can happen in unobtrusive and
straightforward ways. We speak, we write. We can also communicate
without using words, though. When words are used to express information,
this nonverbal contact addresses our relationships. Perhaps more relevant
than getting the message across. We're meta-communicating about contact!
If words just don't do it, if we speak to an individual, we also need to make
clear how to interpret our message material. The way we do this speaks of
this person's relationship, or at least the way we think about this other.
Sounds can't do that. Showing is better than thinking about our feelings.
Our words' meaning is produced through body language. In the Saussurian
context, this language is used for nonverbal communication. We do have it.
We don't even care about using it often. Touching someone in conversation
means something completely different from not touching our partner in
dialogue. Communicating without using non-verbal words is just not
feasible-writing is the only exception.
Body language is a form of non-verbal communication, where the body
"speaks" through gestures, facial expressions, and postures.
Body language appeared long before verbal language, and even today, it
represents one of the most basic forms of communication for human beings.
Experts say that approximately 93% of all human communication is non-
verbal. 55% of the communication is done without the use of words; that is,
it is related to postures, facial expressions, and gestures. Loudness and
vocalization (tone of voice, rhythm, and speed of speech) are also essential
and correspond to 38% of messages transmitted.

The posture of the arms, legs, head, and facial expression can convey
various feelings. For example, if a person does not maintain eye contact
while someone else is talking to them, it may mean that they are not
interested in the conversation or the person. On the other hand, when a
person has his arms crossed, this posture can be considered defensive,
revealing insecurity. The distance between the speaker and the speaker can
also indicate tension between the two.
Social psychologist Amy Cuddy says that our posture can change not only
the opinion of others about us but also influences our view of ourselves.
Cuddy also identifies powerful and non-powerful attitudes, which can have
a positive or negative impact on our self-esteem. An appropriate posture
can contribute to several scenarios, such as job interviews, for example.
Developing
Sometimes a text is used instead of a word or a sentence, or something is
drawn with the hands to complement what is said orally. For example, the
signal of what is said goes between quotation marks are made with the
index and middle fingers of both hands. For example: to indicate late
arrival, the clock is tapped. It belongs to the category of paralanguages,
which describe all forms of non-verbal human communication. This
includes the most subtle and unconscious movements, including winking
and slight eyebrow movements. Also, body language can consist of the use
of facial expressions and posture.
Paralanguage (including body language) has been extensively studied in
social psychology. In everyday discourse and popular psychology, the term
is often applied to body language considered involuntary. However, the
difference between what is deemed to be voluntary and involuntary body

language is often controversial. For example, a smile can be triggered
consciously or unconsciously.
Body posture
Body posture is the posture of the body or its parts about a reference
system, either the orientation of an element of the body with another aspect
or with the body as a whole, or its relationship with another person.
Within the body language, one talks about open or closed postures. The first
ones are those postures where there are no barriers such as arms or legs
between one interlocutor and others, otherwise in closed postures, where for
example, crossed arms are used to isolate or protect the body
(unconsciously in many cases). Furthermore, it is essential to consider the
ideal positions to speak according to the point, for example:
In competitive situations: face to face
To help or cooperate: next door
To chat: at a right angle
Head posture
Side to side movements: denial.
Up and down movements: assent.
Above: neutral or evaluation.
Laterally tilted: interest.
Tilt down: disapproval, negative attitude.
Arms pose
Standard crossing: defensive posture, can also mean insecurity.
Crossing them while keeping your fists closed indicates a sign of
defense and hostility.
Crossing your arms holding your arms is a sign of restriction.

Leg pose
Standard crossing: defensive attitude.
Cross in 4 (“in Indian”): competition, discussion.
Cross while standing: discomfort, tension.
Cross the ankles: used to conceal a negative attitude.
Important considerations
If you lean too much towards the other person, you will be invading their
personal space, and this should not be done when there is still not much
confidence, and you will appear too aggressive.
Arms crossed are a sign. Keeping your arms crossed is a sign of
withdrawal; it means that the person does not want to be intimate, that they
do not feel confident, or that they are not entirely well.
A shrunken posture means boredom.
Maintaining a relaxed position with slightly open arms and legs
demonstrates self-confidence and security.
Getting closer than you should or a rigid body can demonstrate
aggressiveness.
Showing yourself upright is the best thing for when you want to
demonstrate security, courage, and importance in what you do.
Hands-on the waist: defiance, aggressiveness.
Thumbs on the waist or pockets: manhood.
Finger-pointing: challenge.
The gestures

A gesture is a form of non-verbal communication executed with some part
of the body and produced by the movement of the joints and muscles of the
arms, hands, and head.
The language of gestures allows a variety of feelings and thoughts to be
expressed, from contempt and hostility to approval and affection. Virtually
all people use gestures and body language in addition to words when they
speak. There are ethnic groups and specific communication languages ​that
use many more gestures than the average. Certain types of gestures can be
considered culturally acceptable or not, depending on the place and context
in which they are performed. Five categories of gestures are distinguished,
proposed by Paul Ekman and Wallace Friesen:
Emblematic gestures or emblems: they are signals emitted
intentionally and that everyone knows their meaning. (thumb raised)
Illustrative or illustrative gestures: gestures that accompany verbal
communication to clarify or emphasize what is said, to impersonate a
word in a difficult situation, etc. They are used intentionally. These
gestures are instrumental in speeches and when speaking in public.
Regulatory or regulatory gestures of interaction: with them,
communication is synchronized or regulated, and the channel does
not disappear. They are used to take over in conversation, to start and
end the interaction, to give way to speak... (shake hands).
Gestures that express emotional states or displays of affection:
this type of gesture reflects the emotional state of the person and is
the emotional result of the moment. As an example, we can mention
gestures that express anxiety or tension, grimaces of pain, triumph,
joy, etc.
Adaptation or adapting gestures: these are gestures that are used to
manage emotions that are not wanted to be expressed. Here you can

distinguish signs directed at oneself (such as pinching oneself),
directed towards objects (pen, pencil, cigar, etc.), and those directed
towards other people (such as protecting another person). Adapters
can also be unconscious; very clear examples are biting a fingernail
or sucking a finger, very common in young children.
Facial expression
With the facial expression in many moods and emotions are expressed. It is
used to regulate interaction and to reinforce or emphasize the content of the
message addressed to the recipient. The facial expression is used to describe
the mood, indicate attention, show disgust, joke, blame, reinforce verbal
communication, etc. Paul Ekman developed a method to decipher facial
expressions while working with Wallace Friesen and Silvan Tomkins. It is a
kind of atlas of the face that is called FAST (Facial Affect Scoring
Technique). FAST classifies images using photographs (not verbal
descriptions) and dividing the face into three areas: the forehead and
eyebrows, the eyes, and the rest of the face, that is, the nose, cheeks, mouth,
and chin.
The look
The gaze is studied separately for its importance, although it is part of the
facial expression. The gaze fulfills a series of functions:
The regulation of the communicative act.
Source of information.
Express emotions.
Communicate the nature of interpersonal relationships.
The study of the gaze contemplates different aspects, among the most
important of which we can mention: the dilation of the pupils, eye contact,

the act of blinking, and the way of looking:
The dilation of the pupils indicates interest and attractiveness, and
they dilate when something interesting is seen.
The number of times you blink per minute is related to calm and
nervousness. If you blink a lot, it is a symbol of nervousness and
restlessness, and the less you blink, the calmer you will be.
Eye contact consists of the gaze that one person directs to the gaze of
the other. Here we must mention the frequency with which we look at
the other person and the maintenance of eye contact.
The way of looking is one of the most relevant behaviors to
distinguish high-status, dominant, and powerful people from low-
status people who are not powerful.
The smile
Although the smile is included or can be included in the facial expression, it
deserves to be explained in detail. It is used to express happiness, joy, or
sympathy. The smile can even be used to make situations more bearable. It
can have a therapeutic effect on pessimistic or depressed people.
Simple smile: with this type of smile, an insecure, doubtful message
of lack of confidence is transmitted. It should be avoided if you want
to give an impression of firmness and confidence.
Simple smile of high intensity: this smile occurs with a more
pronounced separation of the corners of the mouth, and this rise
more. A small part of the upper teeth can be seen. It transmits
confidence and heat.
Upper Smile: The upper lip retracts so that almost or all of the teeth
can be seen. A message of some satisfaction is transmitted by seeing
someone.

Superior smile of high intensity: it opens the mouth more, and the
teeth are seen more. A light closure of the eyes usually accompanies
it. Apart from conveying happiness, it is often used to say a happy
question or to represent a funny surprise. It is often used deceptively;
for this reason, care must be taken.
Wide smile: it is one in which the gaze narrows slightly. The upper
and lower teeth are fully exposed. This type of smile expresses the
highest intensity of joy, happiness, and pleasure.
Laughter: it is the one that goes beyond the broad one. It is the most
contagious and occurs in a group of people.
Importance of Body Language
 
The human being can always communicate because even when not utter
words, transmit something to others through your body presence, your
physical appearance, your facial features, your dress, your posture ... Body
language has more impact still in the receiver that words because an image
has a lot of power, and through the sense of sight, a person captures a lot of
information from another in a single visual hit.
The body language shows the gestural ability of a human being. Within the
different parts of the body, it should be noted that the face has a tremendous
expressive capacity because the look and the smile have a lot of power.
Having control over your body communication helps you to be aware of the
message you transmit in everyday situations such as a job interview, a first
love date, a couple's discussion ...
If what you express through the body contradicts what you say in words,
then you transmit a confusing message to the recipient. For example, if,
despite the fact that a person has an excellent resume, he attends a job
interview with a sloppy look and arrives at the appointment late, then he

transmits a lack of interest in that job. Paying attention to detail is essential
to communicate better.
However, even though there are many studies on body language, it is
essential to understand that it is not possible to analyze scientifically what
each gesture means. For example, a yawn can be a symptom of boredom.
However, it can also mean feeling hungry or that the person is sleepy
because they have not slept all night. Putting things in context is essential to
avoid making hasty deductions from certain gestures. To know a person is a
long process that requires time and many hours of conversation.
The body language shows the reality of the human being composed of body
and mind. While you transmit your ideas through your word, the body
expresses its discomfort or well-being through bodily presence.
If you want to learn to have a better command of the communication of
your own body, then I encourage you to participate in a public speaking
course where you will get enough information. You can see the importance
of body language by doing the exercise of watching a movie on TV without
volume. You will notice how you capture information from what you
observe.
Our communication consists of verbal and non-verbal, in which we
communicate non-verbally up to 93 percent of the time. The tone of voice,
stance, hand motions, facial expressions, all this and more are our non-
verbal communication.
Our vocabulary learns to talk, builds it in school, but our body's language is
not taught. That's something we're doing alone. The way we stand to look at
others this means something. How well we can use them becomes essential.
Our body language changes when we meet people. For example, if we meet
our school teacher, we stand straight, don't fidget, and be friendly, but on

the other hand, if we meet our mates, we change the style by going and
giving them a handshake/hug and loosening. We're most drawn to someone
with a strong attitude and a friendly smile.
Another essential feature of the language of the body is to tell what we are
thinking about here. The corporeal language will help us find out how
someone feels about what they say. For example, someone may tell their
boss she'd be happy to take this into account, but her body language might
suggest she's not happy about it in reality. This will help a boss determine
who is best in handling this task. This can be an essential hype. If she
doesn't have a conscience, she can do an acceptable role if another
employee will make a life-long client of this small work.
The deciding factor in a work interview maybe body language. When the
body language of the candidate shows that he is easy to manage and trust,
he is more likely to get the job, particularly in this challenging job market.
We addressed the fact earlier that particular body language is considered
awkward and unregulated. These are some of the same characteristics
which make a worker less confident and relaxed.
Through friendship, the language of one's body may show that someone
takes care of what the other person says or doesn't care. Leaning into the
conversation indicates that he is interested in listening to what the other
person says. Leaning back will suggest that he was unselfish or thought
superior. Sitting up and standing near during speech may mean that
someone actively attempts to convince or control the discussion. Hearing
someone when you don't have eye contact means you aren't alert, just
waiting for the chance to speak. It gives your friend the impression that you
just don't know what they say, and that they cannot listen carefully when it's
your turn to chat.


 
Body Language of Each Personality Type
 
Communication is essential to the human being so that he can live in
society and understand and appreciate us. Fortunately, for that: language,
we have a resource beneficial. Nevertheless, there is no universal language
so that we can use various forms of language in our interactions with others.
Body language is, in fact, one of our best communication devices. There is
also a link between our personalities and the linguistic style we use.
However, to understand this, we must first take into account that language
is capable of taking many forms and that our way of being is not only
embodied in what we literally say through words.
Although usually when we talk about language, speech, and verbal
communication are thought of, we understand by language all the system
used by one or more individuals to transmit information through a series of
symbolic elements or signs whose meaning is shared by both interlocutors,
which may be said issuance of voluntary or involuntary information.
This communication is established with a specific objective, and the act
may have different functions such as informing, persuading, organizing
one's conduct, or socially linking.
 

The types of body language
 
emblems
If we don't know something, we shrug our shoulders. If we are angry with
someone, we show the stink finger. If we want to greet someone, we wave
our hand or just raise our hand. If we are angry, we clench a fist. It's
something we learned very early on. We use body language to save words.
Emblems are body language placeholders for words. However, emblems are
culture-dependent. African American cultures, for example, have their
emblems. These can also contradict ours.
illustrators
As emblems pile up, the number of illustrators decreases. Illustrators are the
background to a statement. For example, a speaker on stage. He often backs
up statements with his hands. Draws things in the air or gives them accents.
The eyebrows are also used, for example, to show astonishment. We use
illustrators to describe away, to explain a zigzag, or to describe a spiral
staircase. Illustrators are also culture-dependent.
manipulators
Manipulators are gestures of reassurance. We use calming gestures when
we are under stress. Most of the time, we stroke ourselves, drive our way
through our hair or rub against our bodies. Some chew their fingernails,
others caress their necks or play with their chains or watches. If the number
of manipulators increases, this is an indication of a heavy emotional burden.
 

Body language of self-confidence
 
It is not enough just to understand what should not be done.
It is essential that the attitude also demonstrates what you want to expose.
Assertive body language impresses customers, colleagues, or anyone.
When showing authority, performance in professional and personal life
tends to increase.
Everyone likes to be around someone who feels safe in their skin.
And that is what you will learn. So, stay tuned for tips.
1- Be dominant in the handshake
When talking to a business partner or customers, pay attention when
complying.
Much more than a handshake, this gesture shows who dominates the
conversation.
If you extend your hand with your palm facing downwards, it indicates that
you lead the conversation.
If you do the opposite, palm up, you expect the other to take the lead.
Using hugs in body language in business is rarer, but it can happen when
there are a deep friendship and companionship.
But be aware: in certain cultures, this is unacceptable.
2- Breathe deeply
The rhythm of breathing reveals many signs.
When inhaling and exhaling in a superficial and fast way, the impression
that remains is of stress, nervousness, and fear.

If you want to show self-confidence, use a technique: take a deep breath
until you feel the broader abdomen and the ribs expanding.
Slow, deep breathing helps to control anger and anxiety.
3- Fix your eyes between the other person's eyebrows
Speaking, looking into someone's eyes can be difficult for many.
However, the way of facing the other shows who is in control of the debate.
An easy way to use the look of power is to imagine a point between the
person's eyebrows and keep your eyes there.
That way, you will be showing security.
4. Speak calmly
The voice is essential to get the right message across. It helps to convey the
feeling of credibility and authority.
During your speech, articulate each word well, take breaks, and breathe
easily between sentences.
This ensures that the other person understands what is being said.
5- Look for a neutral posture
Crossed arms indicate annoyance or that you are closed to the subject.
However, the hands beside the body, in a light way, is a message of
neutrality.
A good tip is to try to mirror the gestures of whoever is talking to you.
This creates an atmosphere of sympathy and friendship.
With these body language techniques, you will pass on the correct image to
your interlocutors.

With them, you will make negotiations with your customers much easier
and gain respect in your work environment.

CHAPTER SIX
The Five C's of Body Language
 
 
Regardless of an organization's focus or size, communication is often
identified as an area of organizational improvement. Paradoxically, this
deficiency survives for decades, being on the list of steering committees
more than ever. The question is this:
How can it be that in an era where information sharing is easier than ever,
effective communication remains such a common business challenge?
Does not it seem surprising that when sharing information is the easiest,
organizations have not made progress in offering their employees a useful
communication framework?
It is not surprising in many ways. Communication preferences vary between
people; some prefer written information, other visual communication, and
much more verbal communication.
Interest may also vary; what a collaborator wants or needs to know can
differ significantly from what matters to another. Similarly, communication
remains mostly dependent on people, and the lack of a practical
communication framework makes each leader use his "manual" and
interpretations, which can cause flow, type, and quantity information to
vary significantly between departments and locations where different
employees work.
Effective and high-performance communication.

Despite these differences in communication preferences and practices, high-
performing organizations have taught us a direct path to better
organizational communication.
Over the past fourteen years, our research and work have enabled us to
decipher effective models and methodologies for their development. We
frame the four essential characteristics of high-performance
communication:
Let us see briefly what is behind each axis that defines the characteristics of
high-performance organizational communication:
Consistent - Regular and predictable communication in any
circumstance.
Ensuring regular and predictable communication is essential to building
trust in collaborators and teams of an organization. To do this, select from
several approaches to improve information flow through organizations.
Some of our preferences for greater organizational efficiency are the C-
Suite blog, the weekly newsletter, leadership pills, quarterly town hall
meetings, and management breakfasts.
Whichever option is chosen, the most important thing is that leaders
carefully consider the ability to fulfill their commitments without deviations
before committing. Otherwise, announcing a new initiative that does not
execute as expected or that does not continue for a significant period will
only break the framework of mutual trust to improve communication.
This consistency should also include monitoring and reporting on
previously discussed topics in which future actions or developments were
planned. Similarly, ensuring adequate answers to any questions arising from
organizational communication is a fundamental aspect of consistency.
Communication

A culture of organizational transparency requires honest communication.
Even if the communication is conducted regularly, if it does not address the
interests of the collaborators or does not address what is relevant in the day-
to-day running of the organization, our teams may feel alienated or even
disappointed by the organization's reality.
In this sense, a current issue may also have an uncertain framework or may
not be thoroughly discussed. In these situations, collaborators appreciate
their leaders' recognition on the matter, even when much of the information
about it is unknown or cannot be communicated.
An honest statement about what is known and can be shared with a
communication plan will establish honesty as an organizational
communication value.
Convenient - Timely.
Another way to ensure that the organization's communications are
convenient and meaningful is to strive for its timeliness, that is, for its
punctuality. In this sense, we must understand the opportunity in three
phases of time:
Before: What information or preparation should be provided to
collaborators and teams so that they are well-positioned to innovate,
meet the future's needs, and take advantage of the key opportunities it
can provide?
During: What is happening that may provoke questions from
collaborators and teams that require more information?
Next: What milestones have been achieved recently that can be
celebrated, learned, or shared to build on?
Organizations typically have room to improve communications in each of
these phases, but the "during" phase can be particularly tricky when

something is not entirely clear or causes concern among teams.
Again, in these cases, communicating about known information promptly is
better than saying nothing until every response is known. Rumors are the
worst enemy of high-performance organizational communication.
Complementarity
In the previous point, the leader and his role in coordinating team members
were discussed, choosing the best prepared for each task. The
complementarity is to count on the team with people with particular
knowledge and skills to respond to the needs of the clients globally.
The training and experience, both personally and professionally, will enrich
the results of everyday work.
Therefore, whenever possible, it is essential to form teams in which their
members complement each other. Knowing each person beforehand favors
the coordination of tasks. It is an excellent option to bet on the creation of
teams of people with different profiles, even if the coordination is more
complicated since, in this way, the results will be enriched.
Collaborative - connecting creativity and talent.
Ensuring an organization shares relevant information consistently, reliably,
and time is critical to high-performance organizational communication. But
that is not enough.
Communication must be a conversation that connects hierarchies, divisions,
functions, locations in both directions to create an ecosystem of mutual trust
and real commitment.
Based on our experience in developing worldwide high-performance teams,
corporate social media provides the perfect environment. However, to make

conversation possible, leaders play a fundamental role as role models,
eliminating fear and connecting opportunities.
When this happens, corporate social media conversations create learning,
collaboration, re-application, and innovation bonds.
 

How to identify the subtle inputs sent by the body
The brain is your boss
While you are doing an important math test, you know your brain is very
hard at work. But your mind does more than just recall formulae. Do your
hands start sweating when the test is given? It is because the brain works.
Do you feel a great relief when you realize the answer to a question is
known? That is your brain too. And yes, it is also your brain that is
responsible for the daydream about the big party you are going to be going
to next Friday.
The brain is the bossiest organ in the whole body: it commands virtually
every other part of the body, continually telling them what to do, no matter
if you are aware of it or not. Not only does it control what you think and
feel, how you learn things, and remember them and how you move, but it
also controls many things you are less aware of, such as a heartbeat, sleepy,
or awake.
Daily brain and nervous system
If the brain is imagined as a central computer that controls all of the
organism's functions, then the nervous system becomes a network or
network that sends messages in both directions between the brain and the
various parts of the body. This is done through the backbone, starting from
the brain and going down the back and containing filaments linked to other
organs and parts of the body. This is done via the spinal cord.
Upon entering the brain, a message tells the body how to respond. For
example, if you accidentally touch a hot oven, the nerves in your skin can
send a message of pain to your brain. The brain responds by sending a

message to delete muscles. Luckily this neurological relay race takes much
less time to read its definition!
How the brain functions
The human brain is exceptionally lightweight and weighs just over 3
pounds (1,360 g), considering all it does. It does have a multitude of folds
and grooves, however, which give it the surface to store all the essential
body details.
The spinal cord, meanwhile, is about 18 inches long (45 cm) and just below
2 cm thick, with a long bundle of nerve tissue. This extends from the
bottom of the brain down to the backbone edge. During the whole journey,
specific nerves radiate to the rest of the body. These form the peripheral
nervous system.
A series of ring-shaped, intertwining bones called the vertebrates protecting
the brain and spinal cord with bones, the brain with the skull bones, and the
spinal cord. The membrane layers called meninges, and a special fluid
named cerebrospinal fluid are both protected and cushioned. The fluid
assists in protecting, sustaining, and removing excess nerve tissue.
The brain consists of three principal components: the forebrain, the
midbrain, and the hindbrain.
The forebrain
The forebrain is the human brain's most voluminous and complicated part.
It consists of the telencephalon — the area with all the folds and grooves
typically reproduced in brain illustrations — and other structures below the
telencephalon.
The telencephalon contains information that makes us feel and move:
intelligence, memory, personality, emotions, speech, and ability. Some

specific telencephalon areas are responsible for processing different
information types. They are called lobes, with four lobes in total: frontal,
parietal, temporal, and occipital.
The telencephalon is divided into two halves, called hemispheres,
connected by a bundle of nerve fibers (corpus callosum) that allows them to
communicate.
While the two halves may seem identical as an image and reflection, many
scientists believe they have different functions. The left hemisphere is
logical, analytical, and objective. Law is more intuitive, creative, and
subjective. So, while solving a math problem, you use the left hemisphere,
while you use the right when listening to music. Scientists believe that the
left hemisphere predominates in some people or the right and that no
hemisphere predominates in others, since both hemispheres are used to the
same extent.
The telencephalon's outermost layer is called the cortex (also known as
"grey matter"). The information the five senses collect reaches the brain
through the spinal cord. This information is then sent to other nervous
system parts for further processing. For example, when you touch a hot
oven, this information will not only be processed to move your hand but
will also be sent to other parts of the brain to help you remember not to do it
again.
Thalamus, hypothalamus, and hypophysis are inside the forebrain. The
thalamus transmits signals from sensory organs such as eyes, ears, nose, and
fingers to the cerebral cortex. The hypothalamus controls temperature,
thirst, appetite, sleep patterns, and other body processes automatically. It
also regulates growth hormones, metabolism, mineral and fluid balance,
sexual maturation, and tension.

The midbrain
The midbrain (midbrain), located below the central part of the forebrain,
acts as a master of ceremonies, coordinating all the messages that reach the
brain and those that go to the spinal cord.
The hindbrain
The hindbrain (brain pons) is located below the posterior part of the
telencephalon and encompasses the cerebellum and medulla. The
cerebellum - also called a "little brain" because it looks like a small-scale
version of the brain; it controls balance, movement, and coordination. The
bridge and the medulla, together with the midbrain, make up the so-called
brain stem. The brain stem receives, sends, and coordinates all brain
messages. It also controls many functions that the body automatically
performs, such as breathing, heart rate, blood pressure, swallowing,
digestion, and blinking.
The way the nervous system works
A multitude of small cells called neurons depends primarily on the basic
functioning of the nervous system. The brain contains millions of those
cells, which are specialized in many types of functions. For example,
sensory neurons pick up sensory information in the eyes, ears, nose, tongue,
and skin and send it to the brain. Motor neurons transmit messages from the
brain and send them to the rest of the body.
All neurons transmit information to each other through a complex
electrochemical process, establishing connections with each other that
affect the way we think, learn things, move, and behave.
Intelligence, learning, and memory

When you learn something, messages repeatedly travel from one neuron to
another. Then the brain creates neuronal connexions (or pathways) to make
it easier and better.
The brain is extremely adaptable to children. When one part of a child's
brain is injured, another part often performs some of the functions lost. But
as we get older, the brain has a more challenging time creating new
connexions or neural networks, making it harder for us to learn new tasks or
change established behavior. That is why many scientists believe it is
important to keep challenging our brains by proposing new learning and
establishing new connexions, as this will help keep the mind active for the
rest of our lives.
Memory is another dynamic brain function. The things we do, learn, and
see our first processed in the cerebral cortex. Then if that information is
sufficiently important to be worth remembering permanently, it is sent to
other parts of the brain (such as the hippocampus and the amygdala) to keep
it in long-term memory. As these messages travel through the mind,
connexions (pathways) are created as memory foundations.
Movement
Different parts of the telencephalon are responsible for moving other parts
of the body. The left side of the brain controls movements on the right side
of the body, and the right side of the brain controls actions on the left side
of the body. For example, when you kick a soccer ball with your right foot,
the left cerebral hemisphere is in charge of sending the message that allows
you to do it.
Basic bodily functions
The autonomous nervous system is part of the peripheral nervous system,
and it controls a large number of processes in the body, such as breathing,

digestion, sugaring (or sweating), which we do not have to consider. The
autonomous nervous system consists of two subsystems, together with the
sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous systems.
The nervous system, like a robbery, is sympathetic and prepares the body
for rapid responses. The sympathetic nervous system makes the heart pump
faster when something dangerous happens, so it sends more blood to the
different parts of the body, which may need it. It also causes the adrenal
glands above the kidneys to release adrenaline, which helps to give muscles
additional strength for rapid escape. This process is termed a response to
"fight or flight."
The parasympathetic nervous system does precisely the opposite; it
prepares the rest of the body. It also helps the digestive system, so that the
body can assimilate the nutrients in the food we eat effectively.
The senses
Your eyes can see your best friend approaching. But if you didn't have a
brain, you wouldn't even recognize it. Your favorite pizza is sure to be
delicious. But if you didn't have a mind, your taste buds wouldn't let you
know if you're eating a pizza or the cardboard box it came from. None of
the sense organs would be of any use without sensory information
processing in the brain.
Eyes. The view probably tells us much more about the world around
us than any other sense. The light that enters our eyes projects an
inverted image onto the retina. The retina transforms light into nerve
signals and sends them to the brain. The brain inverts the image so
that we see it from the right and tells us what it is that we are seeing.
Ear. All the sounds we hear are the result of sound waves that enter
our ears and cause vibrations in our eardrums. Those vibrations are

transferred along the ossicle chain of the middle ear and transformed
into nerve signals. Then the cerebral cortex processes those signals
and tells us what we are hearing.
Taste. The tongue contains clusters of sensory cells called taste buds
that react to chemicals in food. The taste buds respond to the sweet,
sour, salty, and bitter flavors. They are responsible for sending
messages to the areas of the cerebral cortex responsible for
processing flavor.
Smell. The olfactory cells in the mucosa that lines the inside of the
nostrils react to the chemicals that we breathe in and send messages
to the brain through specific nerves. According to experts, the brain
can distinguish between more than 10,000 different smells. With such
a highly developed sensitivity, it is not surprising that researchers
suggest that smells are intimately linked to memories.
Touch. The skin has more than 4 million sensory receptors — mainly
cantered on the fingers, language, and lips — that catch touch, sound,
temperature, and pain-related details. To process and react, send them
to the brain.
 
Brain conditions
Since the brain controls practically everything, when there is a problem in
mind, it is usually severe and can affect many parts of the body. Hereditary
diseases, brain disorders associated with mental illness, and trauma to the
head can affect how the brain works and disrupt other parts of the body's
daily activities.
Here are some of the problems that can affect the brain:

Brain tumors. A tumor is an abnormally caused tissue growth. A tumor in
the brain can grow very slowly, causing very few symptoms until it reaches
a significant size. Also, cancer can grow and spread rapidly, causing severe
and rapidly deteriorating symptoms.
Tumors of the brain may be benign or malignant. Benign ones are generally
limited to a specific area and can be surgically cured if they are in places
where they can be removed without damaging adjacent tissues. Malignant
tumors are cancerous and tend to grow and spread more quickly.
Cerebral palsy. Cerebral paralysis results from a developmental defect or
brain injury that is violent, labor-related, or early years. Cerebral paralysis
affects the motor areas of the brain. An individual with cerebral paralysis
may have an average understanding of severe mental or developmental
delays.
Cerebral paralysis can affect body movement in many ways. In milder cases
of cerebral palsy, the individual concerned may have only slight weakness
in the muscles of the arm and leg. In other cases, a higher degree of motor
disability can occur-the person may have trouble speaking and making basic
movements like walking.
Epilepsy. Epilepsy is a condition of the nervous system that can cause
seizures. Partial seizures only affect specific areas of the brain, and
symptoms vary depending on the epileptic focus's location. Other seizures,
called generalized seizures, involve a larger part of the brain and are
generally associated with the body's uncontrolled movements and loss of
consciousness. Although, in many cases, doctors don't know its cause,
epilepsy can be related to brain injuries, tumors, or infections. The tendency
to develop epilepsy can be inherited from the family.
 

Headache. There are many types of headaches; the most frequent are:
tension headache (the most common pain of all) is caused by accumulated
muscle tension in the head, neck, and shoulders migraine is a strong and
recurring headache of unclear cause Outbreak headache is often considered
a form of migraine
Migraines can appear with or without notice and last for several hours or
days. The tendency to have a migraine seems to have a hereditary basis. A
person with migraines can experience such an episode when exposed to a
"trigger" (for example, a particular food), and may experience dizziness,
numbness, nausea, sensitivity to light, and see zigzagging lines.
Meningitis and encephalitis. These are infections of the brain and spinal
cord that are usually caused by bacteria or viruses. Meningitis is an
inflammation of the membranes that line the brain and spinal cord, and
encephalitis, an inflammation of brain tissue. Both of these disorders can
cause permanent brain damage.
Mental illness. In terms of thinking and working, mental illness
encompasses a broad range of issues. Experts know that some mental
illnesses are associated with structural or chemical abnormalities present in
the brain. Some mental illnesses are inherited, but although researchers
know those illnesses are inherited, they have yet to identify their cause.
Brain injuries and drug and alcohol abuse can also trigger some mental
illness.
Signs of chronic mental illness, such as bipolar disorder or schizophrenia,
may begin to manifest during childhood. Mental illnesses that can affect
teens include depression, eating disorders like bulimia or anorexia nervosa,
obsessive-compulsive disorder, and phobias.

Cranioencephalic trauma. Traumatic brain injuries fall into two
categories: internal and external (usually affecting the scalp). Internal
trauma can affect the skull, the inside of the blood vessels of the brain.
Fortunately, only the scalp is injured in most falls and blows to the head,
which is often more fearsome than dangerous. Internal trauma is usually
more severe because the skull acts as a delicate brain-protective helmet.
Concussions are a type of traumatic internal brain injury which causes a
temporary loss of normal brain function. Repeated concussions can
permanently damage the brain. Practice in sport is one of the activities
where adolescents suffer the most concussions. Therefore, when practicing
sports, you have to wear the appropriate protective equipment and stop
practicing it when you are suffering a traumatic brain injury.
 

Mastering the Secrets of Non-Verbal
Communication
 
In this section, I will explain how to learn non-verbal communication and
master it correctly until you can get what you want from people by using
the right levers. But before going into the details, I must give you this
essential little reminder to understand what it is all about.
Do you know why most people hate phone calls? Because they
unconsciously feel that they are restrained in their expression with their
interlocutors. They think that they cannot communicate fully, as in a face-
to-face dialogue. They know that there is a lack of data, of information, in
what they transmit. Why? It's simple: on the phone, everything goes
through the words expressed. The only non-verbal communication is in the
tone of the voice—everything else, body language, micro-expressions, all
that, it doesn't exist on the phone.
Why learn non-verbal communication is important:
Specialists agree that non-verbal communication represents 70 to 80% of
the message transmitted to the other party in a conversation or an exchange
between human beings.
I don't know if you realize it, but it's huge. Imagine for a moment, a
conversation in which 80% of the words are deleted. Or a book from which
80% of the chapters are removed. The importance of non-verbal
communication is at this point.
There is a second thing on which communication specialists agree: one
cannot communicate. This means that your body language always expresses
something, even when you try to make it communicate nothing. Even 'non-

communication' is a form of communication. And it will influence your
interlocutor, who will see a closed posture there, with all that it sends us a
message.
If your goal is to learn non-verbal communication, you will make the right
choice because it will open a lot of doors for you. You will be able to
influence your interlocutors without using words, to get your ideas across
smoothly. Above all, you will be able to decode what people say beyond
their words. This will allow you to ' understand ' people, to feel their needs,
and to gain their confidence quickly by anticipating what they cannot
express themselves in words.
Non-verbal communication is like a second language. It is better than that:
it is a language that does not lie because 99% of people do not even realize
everything they under-communicate with their bodies. Knowing how to
read body language is a bit like reading people's minds; it's a kind of
superpower (and you quickly become addicted), like The Mentalist.
How to decode non-verbal communication
Each gesture, each posture, each micro-expression sends signals to the
person in front of you. A slight raising of the eyebrow, a crossing of the
arms, a rocking movement of the foot, all the gestures that one makes
without realizing it means something, and are unconsciously translated by
your interlocutor.
Besides, all human beings know how to recognize the great signals of non-
verbal communication. I'm not going to list you; in the vast majority of
cases, a broad smile means that you feel good, your clenched fist means
anger, and tears mean sadness…
If you know that, I will reassure you for the following: you can learn body
language. The main task is to succeed in detecting the less noticeable or less

marked emotions. Everyone notices when someone has a huge tantrum, it's
not complicated.
On the other hand, being able to spot hidden, buried emotions, such as
when we tackle a sensitive subject for someone, or when we offend a
person or even know if they are lying to us, becomes more subtle and
requires training. Here's how to get there.
Sharpen your sense of observation
The first step in learning non-verbal communication is to work on your
sense of observation to spot any small signs of any feeling or emotion in
your interlocutors. Most of the signals sent by people are quite subtle. It is
not necessarily easy to know the emotional state of a person who has taken
the habit of hiding his emotions since his entry into adulthood.
So, you have to be on the lookout for small signals. For example, when you
speak, look at the person's face, especially their eyebrows, which may show
astonishment, joy, anger, etc., depending on their movements or position.
Likewise, remember to observe the hands (is the person twisting their
fingers? Are they lying on the table? In the pocket? Etc), the general
posture of the body (closed or open), also observe the lips (especially the
slight grin from the mouth which also expresses many things).
In poker's language, we talk about 'tells,' to talk about small, almost
invisible gestures that describe the emotional state of the player, to know if
he is bluffing or not. These 'tells' that you have to learn to spot in people, in
everyday life, to decode their emotions, intentions, and inner states. And for
that, no secret, you have to work on your sense of observation. Besides,
poker is a great way to develop it (both to 'read' others and to learn to
master your body language). If you are new to this game, you can easily
find web pages to help you practice better. Then, I recommend that you find

a club near you to play in real life and be directly confronted with intense
observation situations. You will see, there is something really fun about
discovering the emotions of others.
Cross the different information received
Keep in mind that each of these elements taken out of context does not
necessarily mean much. Someone who touches his nose is not necessarily
lying or preparing a bad blow; he may simply have something that tickles
his nostril. On the other hand, if you have a fleeting glance, contact with the
nose, gestures of the hand a little too pronounced, and that it is coupled with
a certain tone in the voice, then yes, you certainly have some face to one
who lies to you.
What I want you to understand is that we should not conclude too quickly.
The woman who touches her hair to seduce the man in front of her is a
myth. This only means something if the rest of her body language
communicates interest to her interlocutor (leaning forward, open posture,
body language modeled on the one she appreciates, etc.).
Tell yourself that you need at least two distinct signs to get an idea of ​the
person's emotional state in front of you.
Trust your instinct, your sixth sense.
There are dictionaries for non-verbal communication, body language. But
there is something at least as powerful in my opinion: your sixth sense.
Learn to listen to your little voice inside you, your gut feeling, which tells
you “this guy is lying,” or “he doesn't believe me,” “I hurt him,” etc. By
working to improve your sense of observation, you will develop a real
ability to feel what the person feels in front of you immediately. Believe
me. You will be less often mistaken in being attentive to your little inner

voice which tries to slip its good advice to you, rather than by referring to
any dictionary of non-verbal communication, as complete as it is.
Practice as much as possible
Once you get there, you will already have an excellent level of body
language decoding. You will be able to interpret more things than most
people, and therefore be more subtle in your communication with people.
To progress quickly, you must practice continuously. Observe the people
around you, on public transport, in cafes, etc. Don't lose a crumb of all the
information that comes before your eyes.
One great exercise I can give you is putting on a movie or series that you
like and turning off the sound. Observe the gestures of the actors, their
facial expressions, their successive postures. And try to guess what's going
on to recognize situations. Then correct your exercise by repeating the same
scene with the sound, and see if you had just fallen on the emotions of the
characters. For my part, I did this exercise there on Big Bang Theory, but it
works with everything!
Besides, the advice I just gave you should make you tilt: by definition, you
observe actors, who play a role, therefore who can 'faker' an emotion by
using their body language to perfection. This means, in particular, that you,
too, can learn to express yourself through non-verbal communication, by
perfectly mastering what is released from your body. This is the subject of
the next part of these chapters.
 

Master your non-verbal communication
After learning to decode the non-verbal language of the people around you,
it is essential to take the next step in the process: successfully mastering
your body communication. In other words, manage to get the messages you
want unconsciously to the people you want. It almost sounds like science
fiction when I say it like that, yet that's the reality. I'll take the example of
film actors, that's exactly what they do: they use every millimeter of their
body to transmit emotions in you when you look at them on the other side
of the screen. It’s tough, but it’s not impossible to master, and either way,
you probably don't need to win an Oscar.
Here are the steps to master your non-verbal communication.
Become aware of your body language
This requires being fully in the present moment. You have to be focused on
your body, feeling every bit of skin, from your toes to the top of your head.
If this seems difficult to you, I recommend that you start with a regular
practice of meditation. Ten minutes a day is enough to successfully calm the
flow of thoughts, clear your mind, and be fully aware of all the sensations
going through our body.
Make it a habit, regularly, to surprise your posture and observe yourself.
How do I stand? What head do I make right now, when this person speaks
to me? Where are my hands? What do I do with my fingers, my arms?
What is the position of my legs? Be aware of your body, what it is
communicating to you. For example, in an embarrassing conversation, your
legs are likely turning outward to escape the confrontation. Or if you're
stressed, find yourself twisting your hands or frantically moving your toes.
Observing your body language and associating it with your emotions also

allows you to make your dictionary. And then, to be able to recognize
elements of body language in others and associate them with their own
emotions.
Concretely, from today, I recommend that you proceed as follows:
Pay attention to your emotions
As soon as you spot one, whatever it is, observe your body language
and write it down in a notebook
Repeat the process to create your own personal 'dictionary' of your
non-verbal communication.
Over time, you will have in mind a whole list of attitudes, behaviors, ' tells,
'which relate to your inner emotions. You will know, for example, that when
you are angry, you will clench your jaw, and your nostrils will widen
slightly. And it will be the same for all types of emotion that you can feel
every day.
Correct your gestures permanently
Once you've gotten into the habit of observing yourself and paralleling your
body language with your internal emotions, it's time to take the next step. It
consists of correcting what you communicate to the unconscious of people.
For this, we will use two things:
The custom dictionary of your body language, which you built up in
the previous step, over time.
The emotions you want others to think you are feeling (are you
following?).
Basically, to use the example from the previous step, if you want to make
someone understand that you are angry with them, clench your jaw, swell
your nostrils slightly, frown, and that's it, don't verbalize, the message

should get through. You can even train with friends to see if your acting
plays off.
Where it gets interesting is in certain situations, especially when you have
to convince people. During a job interview, during a romantic date, all you
have to do is adopt the posture and body language you want to get the
message of your choice. For example, if you want to show someone that
you are confident, based on your dictionary, you can occupy more space
with your arms, stand straighter, look the person in the eye, etc. And all
that, even if you are deep in fear.
All you have to do is transform yourself into a studio actor on demand to be
able to use non-verbal communication to your advantage. And believe me,
it is an extremely powerful tool that will take you far beyond anything you
could have imagined. By mastering this art, you will:
Succeed in putting people in your pocket by systematically making a
good first impression,
Anticipate the needs of those around you by detecting how they feel
before they even verbalize it
Give off the charisma necessary to move forward in your life as you
wish
Many other benefits you will discover as you go on this wonderful journey
into the world of non-verbal communication.

CHAPTER SEVEN
Verbal Communication and Nonverbal
Communication
 
 
Verbal and nonverbal communication makes up our interactions with others
in business and interpersonal relationships, as well as in our financial,
personal success, and our physical and psychological well-being.
Understanding the different aspects of verbal and nonverbal
communication, and the essential roles they play in our interactions with
others is the first step in improving communication.
Verbal communication: characteristics

Verbal communication is one in which the sender uses words, whether
spoken or written, to transmit the message to the recipient. It is the most
effective form of communication because the exchange of information and
feedback are speedy. There is less chance of misunderstanding since the
communication between the parties is clear; that is, the parties are using
words to express those they want to say.
Communication can be done in two ways:
Face-to-face communication: oral, conferences, phone calls,
seminars, etc.
In writing: letters, emails, text messages, etc.
There are two main types of communication:
Formal communication, also called official communication: it is a
type of communication in which the sender follows a predefined
channel to transmit the information to the receiver.
Informal communication: is the type of communication in which
the sender does not follow any predefined channel to transmit the
information.
Nonverbal communication: examples and types
Nonverbal communication is based on the understanding or interpretation
of each of the parts that are part of the communicative act since the
transmission of messages does not occur through words but with signs.
Therefore, if the receiver understands the message completely, and there is
adequate feedback, the communication will be successful. A very clear
example of this type of communication is facial expression, gestures, and
body position when speaking.

In many situations, it complements verbal communication to obtain a more
global vision of the situation, to understand the state of people (if they are
nervous, relaxed, sad ...) and certain personality characteristics (if the
person is shy, outgoing ...). Therefore, it serves to obtain that information
that the discourse does not provide. The types of nonverbal communication
are as follows:
Cronemia: is the use of time in communication. For example,
punctual or unpunctual people, speed of speech, etc.
Proxemic: is the distance maintained by the person concerning others
during the communicative act. The Proxima tells us when the
communication is intimate, personal, social, and public.
Vocal: the volume, tone and voice ring used by the transmitter
Haptic: is the use of touch in communication that expresses emotions
and feelings
Kinesia: is the study of the person's body language: gestures,
postures, facial expressions ...
Artifacts: it is the appearance of the person who shows aspects of his
personality, for example, the way of dressing, jewelry, lifestyle, etc.
Differences between Verbal and Nonverbal Communication
Verbal communication is a form of communication in which words are used
to exchange information with other people, either in the form of speech or
in writing. On the contrary, nonverbal communication does not use words,
but other modes of communication, such as body language, facial
expressions, sign language, etc. are used. These are some of the differences
between verbal and nonverbal communication:
Words are used in verbal communication, while non-verbal
communication is based on signs.

There is less chance of confusion between the sender and receiver in
verbal communication while in non-verbal communication,
understanding is more difficult since language is not used.
In verbal communication, the exchange of messages is faster, which
makes feedback very fast. Nonverbal communication is based more
on understanding, which takes time and, therefore, is slower.
In verbal communication, the presence of both parties in the place is
not necessary, since it can also be done if the parties are in different
places. On the other hand, in nonverbal communication, both parties
must be there at the time of communication.
In verbal communication, documentary evidence is maintained if the
communication is formal or written. But there is no conclusive
evidence of nonverbal communication.
Verbal communication fulfills the most natural desire of humans to
speak. In the case of nonverbal communication, feelings, emotions,
or personality is communicated through the acts performed by the
parties in the communicative act.
It is important to comment that both types of communication
complement each other and, in many cases, occur simultaneously.
 

Rapid Cynological Or Nonverbal Language
Decryption.
 
The voice.
It's our word's first vector. We can say if they are nervous, relaxed, smiling,
etc., without even seeing the person talking to us.
The voice elements are as follows (decode): The following.
Timbre: it's unique to each person and ranges from extremely serious
to very acute.
Volume: level of sound to be adapted to the context and the audience,
one or more persons, friendly or public speaking, etc. A speech that is
hard to hear or that doesn't penetrate an entire audience represents a
sense that the speaker is uncontrolled, nervous, or unsure.
Flow: that's the speed we're talking about. Pay particular attention to
your speed if you have to speak openly because when speaking
before an assembly, it is common to speak too quickly and thereby
indicate some nervousness.
The sound: the tone of the voice brings words to life. It's the kind of
melody we're talking to.
It is important to modulate your voice's tone to capture the attention of your
/ your interlocutors, for example, or to awaken a sleeping audience.
Physical appearance
If we are used to saying that the habit does not make the monk - which is
intrinsically true, remains that our general physical appearance (decoding)
and clothing convey many messages about our personality.

Also, if you are well in your outfit, you will appear more confident and
inspire more confidence in others.
Unconsciously, before our interlocutor has even said a single word, our
brain analyzes its overall appearance.
Without wanting to learn more, many people stop at this first impression.
The same is true of a recruitment interview; you use more or less
deliberately, just like some more abstract aspects of your personality, certain
qualities, skills.
For example, you might have a neglected appearance because of
responsibility.
Also, dressed like most people in the business you apply for gives you an
advantage because you have the impression because you belong to the same
group.
It is the mirror, which induces sympathy and positivity instantly and
unconsciously.
So you must follow the dress code of the profession and the spirit of the
business you apply for during a work interview.
The colors of our minds and personalities are also a great deal.
Posture and gestures
Your movements and your way of doing them indicate strongly how you
feel within yourself and your real intentions. Your face-to-face, side-by-side
determine your relationship to the latter, sitting, standing, etc.
Posture
Your general location (decode), head disposition, and location before an
interlocutor sends out unconscious messages: are you any threat to him?

Are you exuberant of warmth and friendliness or hostility and aggression?
If you sit facing the speaker, do you lean to the second or rather wedge the
upper body at the back instead of the back?? Cross your legs, don't you?
Where are your hands, and what do you do?
Without a word spoken, our interlocutor's attitude lets us read various
information.
Feet fixed in the ground, straight back, relaxed hands, non-fleeing look...
They are all elements that have a specific charisma, self-confidence,
soundness, and energy.
On the opposite, a heavy sense of shyness, discomfort, lack of self-esteem,
nervousness, etc. Back leaning forward, blank eyes, hands tortured
constantly.
Crossed arms or legs suggest a shut attitude.
Gestures
You are in a state of rest, anxiety, warmth, hostility, hostility, threat,
openness, closedness...
Your interlocutor interprets each of your actions unconsciously and can, for
example, determine the result of negotiations or discredit somebody's
intervention.
Running your hand through your hair (decode), rubbing your nose, mouth,
or chin is a matter of lying and fear. Similar to jerky or fast motion.
Instead, large, controlled, and slow moves are signs of trust and comfort.
Among the major gestures, we can mention the handshake that has been
more or less soft, supported more or less, the index accusing, indicators
simply, permission noddings, etc.

The look
Is it not the mirror of the soul that we are saying? In addition to that
formula, the gaze gives people who know how to decode a lot of details.
Eye contact is often necessary to answer a query. The latter's strength can
make the person easy to turn to or, instead, annoy him or her, even
destabilize or scare them.
The gaze can be there, assisted, set, unstable, fleeing, turning up or to the
ground, straight, and can submit various information: dominance, coercion,
flight, fear, irritation, boredom, rage, warmth, goodwill, etc.
Please take care not to be too pushy to look at your contact person(s) in
your eyes that will make them uncomfortable.
Facial expressions and micro-expressions
Gestures and attitudes were certainly the first means of communication
between humans and constituted a veritable paralanguage that accompanies
and completes the verbal message.
The body language manifests itself in postures which may concern: the
head, the bust, the pelvis, the legs, and the arms.
Through gestures, we express ourselves, and we can be defensive or
aggressive.
The nod of the head back and forth which signifies approval,
The outstretched hand in a sign of peace,
The raised fist in a sign of revolt,
The armor the finger of honor,
Etc.
An upward eyebrow, an edge of the mouth, a curling eye, a front that folds,
tense lips ... Some facial expressions are unwittingly moved by our muscles

and are easily detected (decoding).
But for most of us, others, which are more subtle, but just like unwitting,
pass unknown, reveal invaluable information.
It is known as micro-expression. The latter are universals, extremely
stubborn (less than half a second), and the expressions of one of our seven
emotions (joy, sadness, fear, anger, degustation, surprise, contempt,
underlined by Paul Ekman-American psychology specialized in the study of
emotions.
The former needs extensive knowledge and training to use them as
benchmarks if it is easy to interpret.
Pupils' dilation, a slight blink of eyes, and half-open mouth are subtle and
yet very talkative for the uninformed eye.
The mentalists, especially, master this Art, among other things, beautifully
and frequently bluff the public, which remains astonished in the face of so
much power.
If we are implicated, arrested, then we have barrier gestures.
Among the most common:
hands-on ears, eyes or mouth,
arms crossed,
rubbing hands,
forms of readjustment: the lock of hair, the fold of a pantaloon, a
skirt, imaginary dust, clearing of the throat…
We also communicate through conventional signs:
the finger pointed towards the door means “get out! ”
the sign of the hand to say“goodbye ”
the nod of the head to say“yes ”

the clapping of hands (applause) to show our satisfaction in front of a
demonstration.
 
Space and distance
The distance
Edward Twitchell Hall - the American anthropologist specializing in
interculturalism at the beginning of the XXth century - brought to light the
proxemic concept through which he classifies the type of relationship
between 2 protagonists to the physical distance separating them during an
interaction and fine cultural rules. He thus highlighted four zones, varying
according to the habits and customs:
Intimate: highly emotional range between 15 cm and 45 cm; this is the
distance between, for instance, two members of the same family, whose
emotionally strong links (physical contact, whispers, etc.). A person outside
the area does not perceive the dialogue (s) (decodes). The distance from
secrecy is often called.
Personal: it is referred to as the effective zone from 45 cm to 1.20 m.
Emotionally, but enough to tick the effect, the bonds are less intense. This is
the difference between two people who know each other well (friends), for
example, for a specific discussion. The dialogues are audible but relatively
silly. Distance from the trust is named.
Social: 1.20 meters to 3.60 meters; this is the socialization zone with
interactions between people that regularly know each other or rub each
other (connections, colleagues, and so on). Without effort, the voice is heard
and heard.

The distance between a person and a group of individuals (for example,
lecturer facing his or her audience) is no physical contact or direct
interaction. Public:
Each individual has their perception of these areas, which it is essential to
respect; otherwise, the discussion will be overturned before it has even
started.
You will have to change depending on your background, temperament, or
even the essence of your touch. Don't pass an area's threshold unless
invited!
Space
The space in which communication takes place also affects us.
The gestures are performed in space. This space is codified. We know the
expression, "keep your distance."
Each of us marks our distance by talking to the other. There are four
communication zones:
intimate zone (15 to 45 cm), tone of confidence,
personal zone (between 45 and 1.20 m), professional, even friendly
relationships,
social zone (1.20 to 3, 50 m), marks the function of each,
public area (> 3.50 m), facing an audience.
Anyone who enters an area that is not reserved for him commits a fault, and
the person who is the victim feels uncomfortable, destabilized, attacked.
We all have a personal territory that we protect from their external
charisma.
This space and the objects in it can become an extension of our physical
body. (Car, chair, desk, etc.)

The layout of a room, the layout of the tables affect our communication,
which plays in favor of their persuasive force.
Power of body language
Listening and understanding one's interlocutor beyond their words is a huge
asset in many situations. This allows, among other things, to:
Interact clearly and effectively with their interlocutors: particularly in
sales interviews or a job interview.
More easily convince by taking the right position and appropriate
gestures.
Redirect negotiations to a closed contact person by identifying signs
of anger, interest, etc. and correct the shot.
More accurately identify the personality and signs of nerve or lying
of a recruiting candidate.
Manage conflict decoding and detecting the unpublished more
effectively.
Detect shift resistance until it is explicitly defined.
Facial expressions and body movements
These are the facial expressions that manifest emotions: joy, surprise,
disgust, sadness, anger, fear...
These expressions can reinforce the message, but they can modify it and
change its meaning.
the wink indicates that what is said should not be taken seriously,
steadfast gaze signifies hostile intent,
- the panoramic view involves all the interlocutors so that everyone feels
concerned by the message.

Facial expressions may be intended, such as a smile, but are often
uncontrolled and involuntary (wide-eyed in amazement, frowning in anger,
etc.). They are an integral part of our overall behavior.
The look is certainly the part of the body that expresses most of us, "the
eyes are the mirror of the soul" (J. Cocteau).
It is essential to take into account facial expressions and body movements
to avoid misunderstandings.
 

Body language in the workplace
 
We tell each other without words. Even if this sentence drips with romance,
it contains truths that have been scientifically proven. According to a study
by the psychologist Albert Mehrabian on the factors involved in persuasion,
55% of the effectiveness of a speech is based on body language, followed at
some distance by the tone (38%), and finally, the choice of words (7%).
Therefore, we can not allow ourselves to pay attention to our appearance,
our attitudes, and gestures, because others do it very well!
Tips for mastering body language in the workplace
 
1. When talking or having to deal with an angry colleague.   The goal is
to engage with this angry person to relieve tension. Your body can help you
in the following ways:
Use physical expressions that convey active listening and
understanding. For example: Bend the upper body slightly toward the
person or bring your hand to your chin while you nod.
Put your hands up with your palm: this shows honesty. Otherwise,
you convey an attitude of control or superiority (or extinguish a fire
with gas?).
2. during a job interview. Prove that you are very excited about this
opportunity and willing to give everything in the selection process.
Bend your body towards the person you are talking to so that you are
in the moment of your full attention and interest.
Use the mirror technique to create an affinity with the hiring
manager. In other words, try to imitate his gestures, of course, or

better, do not stop your automatic imitation. This is a way to show
that you share values ​and opinions.
Hold and seek eye contact. If you do not, the reason may be
nervousness, and you may not be very trustworthy and competent.
There are gestures that hurt you, and they should definitely keep you locked
up in crucial moments:
Holding your hands on your hips, with your arms bent, gives you
aggression and impatience.
Constantly looking at the clock, or rubbing your eyes, ears, or cheeks,
indicate a lack of interest and boredom concerning the conversation,
the situation, or the conversation partner.
Always cross your legs or arms makes you seem aloof and
uninvolved. But you should not sit with your legs apart ... That does
not look decent and not professional.
Playing with your hair or constantly repeating a gesture reflects
insecurity.
3. When you meet with a potential customer. Here are the previous tips,
but also you should ... smile! After all, you build a new relationship. As
with everything in life, do not overdo it. Otherwise, you might think you are
flirting.
4. When presenting a project.
Turn to your audience. Do not turn your back on him! The projector
does not decide, has no feelings, and does not need to understand
anything. Show who all your services are for.
Do not look at the monitor all the time. It's your project, right? So,
show that even if a Tyrannosaurus pops up suddenly and confuses the

screen with chewing gum, you can perfectly continue the
presentation.
Do not stay stiff in one place throughout the presentation. Use your
movements to amplify your speech and show that you are in your
element.
The eyes capture 82% of the world. It is up to us to try to be positive about
what we see!
 

CHAPTER EIGHT
How To Analyze People
 
 
It can be really difficult to understand what a person is thinking, to feel his
feelings and mood. Without certain knowledge and skills, most likely, you
will not be able to do this. But, there are some effective methods that will
help you understand how to learn to analyze people, understand them, and
see a person as a whole as a person.
First, you must start with yourself. You must realize who you are. It may be
the most difficult for a person to understand himself. What do you want
from life? What are you striving for, and what do you want to achieve?
What are your positive aspects, and what else do you need to work on? If
you can understand yourself, you will already take a big step towards
learning how to analyze people.
What is the nature of the person you are trying to analyze?
We are all social beings, and everyone has basic needs. These are safety, the
need for communication, self-realization, physiological and social needs -
who we are in society. Once you understand the basic needs of a person,
you can better understand him. Next, pay attention to its nature. What is the
nature of the person you are trying to analyze? How to determine this? Pay
attention to what he does. By what a person does, much can be said about
his character. To analyze a person, you have to ask yourself a couple of
questions:
What motivates a person to engage in his activities?

Does he or she have an active social life?
What does this person need, and what does he need?
When you ask these questions, you can come to some conclusion. If a
person is active in society, this may mean he cares for others and is socially
active. For example, I have a friend who supports several charities, helping
people. His social life is about helping others. He has many friends and an
active social life. He does everything with sincerity and pure heart. That
person has a good soul. He is always ready to help and quite conscious. He
understands that not only money, power, and recognition are important in
our world, but also many other human values.
Pay attention to what the person says
To learn to analyze people, you must pay attention to some small things.
What is the person you want to read talking about? Is he talking about his
problems, or is he trying to learn more about you and interested in you?
Follow his communication. Does he behave confidently and communicate
openly, or does not he talk comfortably with you and does not know what to
say? A person who communicates a lot can be told about his personality.
Confident, self-sufficient people speak quietly and meaningfully. And if a
person is hurried and jumps from phrase to phrase, it means he is hiding
something, or he is simply not interested in you.
Pay attention to body language
The next way to learn how to analyze people is the language of the human
body. This will help you see his inner mood and state. People who have a
good life, as a rule, walk and behave quite happily. They are very active,
radiating energy. Instead, people walking with a drooping look and head
bowed. They are shy, secretive. Such people generally do not have their
own opinions and are introverts.

If a person seems negative to you, he cannot achieve something, and his life
does not go well. If our basic needs are not met, we can respond in various
ways. One is that it becomes evil and aggressive. See if he is a loner or has
a certain social circle? If a person communicates with two or three
acquaintances, for some reason, he may feel comfortable with them. We
tend to love people who are more like us.
When a person communicates with many people, it can be assumed that he
is open and friendly. And if he is inside himself and communicates a little,
he may not feel the need to communicate with others. Why will someone
not communicate with someone? This may have several reasons. One is a
person who may not feel they belong to these people. Another reason may
be his social fear.
Ask the person more questions.
There are some reasons why a person behaves in a certain way or does
something. You can learn more about a person if you are sincerely
interested in him. When you understand what the motives and goals of a
person are, it will be much easier for you to analyze him. Yes, not all people
will be open with you. But even in the case when a person will move away
from questions, it will be possible to conclude that he is secretive and afraid
to show his true self.
To know about cultural differences
To learn how to analyze people, you need to know and understand their
culture. A person can behave in a certain way because his culture is
different from yours. When you are trying to analyze someone, it is
important to pay attention to where he was born. When you learn a little
more about where a person is from, you can have a certain idea of ​his
personality, manner of communication, and behavior.

 

How to Influence People
 
When we need to convince someone, we can use many techniques. If we
make a good proposal, we have valid arguments, and what we want to do is
a win-win. It will be easy to convince our interlocutor of our interests.
But apart from the content, there are some small tricks that we can use to
influence the people we talk to and achieve our goals.
The way we talk, our attitude, and know how to handle the conversation can
be the key to getting a favorable response to our interest.
1. Smile
A smile on your face is the first thing we have to do if we want to influence
people. When someone smiles, conveys happiness, and well, and we all like
to feel good.
When a proposal is made with a smile on our face, we are more predisposed
to accept what they are asking.
2. Take advantage of fatigue.
When we are tired, we don't feel like arguing, and we are more willing to
say yes (even if they leave us alone).
Cults know this perfectly. Therefore, the sessions where you "brainwash"
are always long and exhausting. They know that a tired person has low
defenses and is more willing to obey and accept how true what you are
saying.
3. Make the ball
The ego is one of the weak points of all people. We all like to be told how
good we are, and we are more willing to serve a person who makes us feel

good.
It is not easy to flatter without it noticing. So, if you're beating someone to
convince him, do it subtly and credibly.
4. Tell him many times YES
If you want to influence someone, let them say yes. When in a
conversation, we say many times, yes, our brain understands that we are in
tune with the person with whom we speak and the inertia of responding that
if it can be a good tool to get us to respond affirmatively to what we want.
Cold-door commercials are one of the strategies they use very often:
Do you want the best for your family?     Yes
Do you like to save on the fixed expenses of your home?    Yes
Do you live in this address? Yes
Do you like things to work correctly? Yes
Do you want me to make a special offer for you? Yes
Make the ball and let us say many times IF they are two of the basic
techniques of commercials (another day I will write on this subject).
5. Do not take the reason from your interlocutor
Showing someone who is not right in what he says and that if you have, it is
a good strategy to feel good and have the feeling of "having won the
argument."
But it is not a good strategy to influence another person.
When we argue, most of the time, we end up curling ourselves even more in
the position we defend.
If you want to influence another person, you better not discuss and ignore
the negative arguments of the other person (this strategy is one used by all

politicians in our country).
6. Extra trick: Use your voice well
The voice is a key element when it comes to influencing others.
There are four aspects of the voice to consider; these four elements, which
make us perceive a certain voice differently, are; intensity, tone, timbre, and
duration.
On the union of all parties, it will depend on a voice being more or less
persuasive. The ideal formula to be persuasive with our voice would be like
that; medium-strong intensity, serious tone, open bell, and medium-fast
duration.
 

How to Analyze Your Relationship?
 
While relationships are complex, they do not necessarily have to be difficult
as long as they are evaluated. For them to be healthy, it is enough that both
members work their insecurities, separate previous bad experiences, and
strengthen empathy.
Being affectionate, communicating correctly with our partner, having a
good level of sexual desire, developing the capacity for consensus, being
willing to solve problems, respect each other, set goals together, and
balance our individuality with life as a couple are the main factors that The
Nicolás Moreno Clinical Psychology Center, in Granada-Spain, underlines
the fundamentals for a couple to succeed.
Now, regardless of the time we have with our partner, it is important that we
periodically evaluate our relationship in order to analyze the positive and
negative before a small problem grows and crises. Prevention is always
better than regret.
Relationships are dynamic experts say that this dynamism is that which
allows the courtship or marriage to evolve and its members to grow
personally and as a team. Every union implies agreements that are by no
means static, so permanent evaluation can help us reconsider approaches we
may have made at the beginning of our relationship, but they are no longer
working.
The doctor and counselor of couples, Monsita Nazario, argue that assessing
the relationship can ensure the health and future of the union. It even
emphasizes that the direction taken by divergence and incompatibility,
which appear over time, must be noted to make sound decisions regarding
life in common.

Key points to assess the relationship
The specialist highlights three key points to consider when assessing the
relationship:
Periodic Analysis:
Constantly assessing the relationship allows us to raise awareness, stay
alert, and make life a couple a priority. Nazario recommends that this be
done daily, because knowing that we are in the process of constant
evaluation, we strive to do better and better and avoid becoming
demotivated, neglected, and tired. "Failure to follow up on the processes
damages them and puts them at risk of failure," he says. Besides, it
highlights that the periodic analysis should be considered as one of the
fundamental agreements at the beginning of the relationship to be able to
tackle the reasons that lead to distancing and separation in time.
Reinventing yourself is the key:
The success of a relationship is not proportional to how long it lasts; In fact,
many years of life as a couple do not guarantee the thorough knowledge of
both members.
Getting to know each other is a lifelong process, so the expert ensures that
the key to happy couples is to grow and reinvent themselves based on the
stage in which the relationship is because conflicts cannot be avoided but if
they reduce its impact with a timely evaluation.
To love us is to be able to transform ourselves, and each couple will do it
differently; Of course, the doctor emphasizes that the transformation must
occur consciously and by both members to avoid dysfunctionality.
Love Maps:

Loving someone implies knowing him, so the precise counselor is essential
that the couple knows each other deeply: their tastes, history, concerns,
manias, ways of thinking, and postures on different issues.
They are the so-called “love maps,” and you have to keep them up to date
to handle the circumstances presented to us more effectively. In our
evaluation, Nazario proposes an essential question: “What would it be like
to be married to someone like me?” The answer will undoubtedly make us
more aware of the weaknesses and strengths we have and how to take care
of them.
Likewise, the consultant warns of the existence of certain actions classified
as “horsemen of the apocalypse”: criticism, complaint, contempt, defensive
attitude, and evasion, which are present in every relationship, so our task is
to warn them, stop them, and neutralize them.
To do this, it is recommended to write monthly the purpose of life in
common to stay connected.
On the other hand, the psychologist Miriam Martín invites us to ask
ourselves the following questions to evaluate our relationship: Does this
link add or subtract us? Does it help us to be better and develop as people?
Does it limit us and generate negative emotions? Based on them, we can
measure how well we are going and decide what changes to make.
Keys to a healthy relationship
There are no partner schools, but there are many tools to learn, even
informally, to have a relationship that provides us with well-being. That is
why we include some keys to make this experience healthy:
Avoid emotional dependence to maintain high self-esteem.
Depending on the tastes and needs of the couple promotes distancing,

that is why we must preserve our autonomy and maintain interest in
work, friends, and hobbies. All this will balance the personal space
with the shared one and will provide stability.
Respect the privacy of the other, accept their decisions and way of
being. Do not manipulate or pretend that he or she changes, and it
may be better to change ourselves, especially the perspective from
which we see what bothers us about our partner.
To be authentic, that is, not to be permanently trying to show our best
version because it is unreal and more than generating closeness with
the other will end up chasing it away. The true interest of every
human being is when we feel we have access to it when it shows us
its hidden aspects and emotions without shame.
Communicating assertively is essential. Good communication can
make a discussion constructive. We must talk a lot with our partner to
strengthen the relationship and learn to negotiate without reproach or
evasion. Listening carefully, understanding your point of view, letting
you see that we understand what you have said, and expressing our
point of view in a friendly tone will allow us to find consensual
solutions with which we will both win.
Take care of the details to maintain the relationship. Say and do what
at first generated so much happiness in the other and that due to lack
of time or routine, we sometimes leave aside. Gestures should not
diminish over time, on the contrary.
Respect and trust the other. Jealousy will only bring us discomfort
and make the relationship fail. A little security is not over.
Have common goals that generate interest and enthusiasm. This will
avoid the monotony and boredom that both deteriorate life as a
couple.

Share quality time in doing what we enjoy together.
Maintain social relationships to enrich our life and revitalize it.
Let us consider what works for us, for now, and we can evaluate ourselves
and pay more attention to our relationship because it is one of the most
important we have, and it is always worth cultivating.
Powerful Questions
To analyze and strengthen your relationship:
What do you admire about your partner?
What do you thank your life partner?
What has your partner contributed to your personal or professional
achievements?
What do you like about the way you are?
What goals do they have together in five years?
What things should improve in the relationship, according to your
partner?
What behaviors on your part may be destabilizing the relationship?
What situations generate conflict between the two?
What should happen in the relationship, so that everything is much
better?
What moments or behaviors would be worth recovering?
What agreements would you like to propose to your partner?
What has to happen for these common goals to be met?
What can you do differently with your partner today?
What recognition does your life partner deserve?
What love story do you want to tell your children about their parents?

CHAPTER NINE
Brainwashing
 
 
The definition of brainwashing is very close to that of 'mind control.' This is
an idea without a purely empirical foundation that implies that the will,
thoughts, and other mental facts of individuals can be manipulated by
persuasion techniques that would insert undesirable ideas into the 'victim'
psyche. When we describe this definition, we see that it has a marked
resemblance. The word 'say' is less optimistic.
While the notion of brainwashing is not entirely false, some scientific
connotations of this common term have led many experts to dismiss it in
favor of more modest. This has helped to use the word instrumentally in
legal proceedings, especially in child custody conflicts.

Brainwashing, emotional coercion, and mental control are also known as
mental control. In reality, all these words mean a mechanism that a group or
entity deliberately uses to manipulate others to do what they want in their
thinking. In most cases, these systemic procedures are performed without
awareness of a person.
Sometimes, for a variety of reasons, we use mind control over ourselves.
Self-hypnosis under this group. Through our informed agreement, we use
this kind of mind management, on our part voluntary, to reinforce a good
concept or alter our minds.
 
That is not the same as "mind control," though, as it requires brainwashing.
Such phrases often mean a person's mind is systematically modified without
realizing it, either in the agreement or even against his will.
These are immoral, coercive methods, and other means all designed to
manipulate someone is mind. In these situations, they are understood as
encouraging one person or group to take full control of other's thoughts and
acts. When using the words "mind control" and "brainwashing," it is
implied that similar techniques are used to gain control of another at the
cost of the controlled individual.
It is important as brainwashing falls under the category of social impact.
Because they use brainwashing to trigger emotional abuse in a victim. In a
single social system, brainwashing and mind control is used to transform
the way someone feels and perceives their values fully. Using different
ways to change the perceptions, habits, and values of a person. The person's
like a puppet doing whatever the manipulator wants.
 

Mind Control Brainwashing - 3 Common Ways it is
Used to Manipulate Others
 
Mind control brainwashing is a mechanism where someone uses coercion
and unethical tactics to convince others to obey the controlled person's
wishes. Typically this phase occurs to the detriment of brainwashed
humans. Many common names include coercive coercion, through change,
and control of thought, among others. One way to use authoritarian
coercion is by totalitarian regimes worldwide policies. Such governments
are not shy about using force to get what they want, even though that force
is disproportionate and immoral. We were known to succeed in
indoctrinating their prisoners of war with various methods, including
relentless propaganda and torture.
These brainwashing techniques are also used in new religious movements.
Many new religious groups that pop up are led by very charismatic
individuals who possess extremely persuasive powers of persuasion, as well
as the ability to brainwash others by different strategies, one of the key ones
being alienation from family and friends who are not fellow members. In
being separated from others, you are more deeply rooted in the values of the
party.
A final scenario is less serious, but it can still lead to disastrous
consequences when taken to extremes. Members of fraternities and
sororities are often abused and forced to suffer numerous forms of
psychological and physical abuse and humiliation to become part of the
community. By destroying the ego by submitting to a higher group
authority or performing different actions that are often humiliating, the
person begins to establish a very strong group identity and loyalty.

Sometimes, the extreme nature of some of the aspiring members 'physical
tests can cause severe bodily injury and even death. This brainwashing
technique leads leaders of other brotherhoods to do things they wouldn't do
if not for group pressure driving them along.
 

Brainwashing: Coercive Persuasion Techniques
 
Some films are warning us about brainwashing, including those showing
how Vietnam's communists brainwashed American soldiers. But far from
these films being dramatized, brainwashing is best understood if we call it
coercive coercion, which is manipulating, pushing. This method of
persuasion is the strongest and most intrusive of religions, totalitarian
governments, terrorist groups, and kidnappers, among others.
Washing a person's brain, or more accurately applying coercion, is not easy.
To alter an individual's entire belief system, thought, feeling, and behaving,
many strategies must be used. These manipulative manipulation methods
can be classified into four types: physical methods, emotional techniques,
cognitive techniques, and techniques that induce dissociative states.
1. Social techniques
In this case, techniques are used that are intended to manipulate and control
the environment of the person being brainwashed. The goal is to weaken the
resistance of the person in question, making it easier to convince him. Some
of the coercive persuasion techniques that anyone can use are:
Insulation: this makes it a lot easier to brainwash someone. It means
that someone is mentally, socially, and physically cut off from the rest
of the world.
Information management: manipulating and checking the
information that someone receives is a form of isolation. The less
information a person has, the fewer options he has to choose from. As
a result, his critical mind is very limited.
Creating a state of existential dependence: this means making
someone believe that his existence depends entirely on someone else.

Usually, that person is a kind of leader. In practice, it means: fully
meeting one's primary and secondary needs until he develops
complete dependence.
Psychophysical weakening: some types of physical weakening are
associated with psychological weakening. This, in turn, leads to a
weakened ability to resist persuasion techniques.
 
2. Emotional techniques
Motivations are emotionally conditioned. So if you can influence people's
emotions, you can also influence their motivations and behavior.
Emotional activation of pleasure:  charm and treat someone well.
People use this technique to attract others and attract their attention.
Emotional activation of fear, guilt, and tension: use rewards and
punishment to induce emotional reactions such as fear, guilt, and
anxiety. These emotions encourage dependence and submission.
 
3. Cognitive techniques
These methods are based on the two methods that we discussed above. A
person who is physically weak and feels guilty is in an ideal brainwashing
position.
Thoughtful in critical thinking: the offender shows the other why it
is not wise to follow his thoughts. Because of this, he will suppress
every thought he wants.
Use of deception and lies: distorting reality by hiding, lying, or
deceiving information.

A requirement for submission: Ensuring compliance with group
ideas. Demand that the person obeys what the group decides. In other
words: develop compliance and submission.
Group identity: identity must be collective. As a result, people lose
their individuality and accept group identity. As a result, people may
lose their identities.
Attention control: manipulating what the person’s attention is
focused on means that you can also make him pay attention to your
persuasion methods.
Language control: speaking in a controlling way means that you are
restricting your freedom. Skipping certain words or phrases is a way
to avoid specific questions or ratings.
Change in the source of power. As soon as you violate someone’s
principles of power, you expose him to totalitarian power. As a result,
this power gains full power. Everyone else must obey him.
 

Brainwash Yourself to Higher Self-Esteem
 
Most people who come to me say, "I realized I need to improve my self-
esteem, but I don't know how." Switching to high self-esteem is nothing you
do overnight. There's no miracle cure. And I, as a self-esteem mentor, have
no magic wand I can wave over you, so you instantly start loving yourself.
Moving towards higher self-esteem means replacing the thoughts that fill
your mind with new ones. Think about it, and your self-esteem depends on
your feelings, the feelings you think about yourself. All the feelings you've
ever felt about yourself have now developed into the sense of self-worth (or
lack of self-worth) you're experiencing.
It would be very easy if you could just buy a package of new thoughts at the
pharmacy, or go to a surgeon who opened your brain, take out the old stuff,
and bring some new fresh stuff in. Unfortunately, swapping your old
mindset for a more resourceful approach will cost you time and energy.
Think about how you got the thoughts that fill your everyday life now.
You've been affected by your family, education, media, culture, etc. You've
been brainwashed 24 hours a day since your birth! It may not take too long
to start thinking more useful thoughts, but it may take a lot of time because
you need to unlearn everything you've learned up to this point in your life.
The solution? Brainwash yourself with positive thoughts about yourself!
How? Ok, here are some techniques:
Write affirmations-Affirmations are the new things you have decided
to say, for example, "I'm so happy and grateful that I have so many
friends who love me," or "I feel and look so beautiful and sexy that
I'm just irresistible." Put the statements anywhere you can recall

them, on the fridge, in the car, on the bathroom mirror, on your
bedside table, in your wallet...
Stand before a mirror and praise yourself. Aim for at least 1 minute.
Your brain builds new pathways between the optimistic words you
say and the self-image.
Stand before a mirror and smile (for at least one minute). This may
sound much dumber than complimenting yourself, but it's nice to
build brain paths between you and a good feeling.
Build a music playlist that really cheers. Brainwash yourself with
songs that you're amazing! It is a simple way to put new ideas into
your mind.
Write a list of things you've done well every day before you go to
sleep. It will help you find the good things you do in your life.
Hypnotizing yourself! Yeah, hypnosis works, and hypnosis CDs are
designed to increase self-esteem. Look at the platform!
Get a coach to help! I'd love to shower you with fresh, resourceful
ideas and make sure they stick in your brain!

CHAPTER TEN
Understanding Persuasion
 
 
 
Persuasion is the ability that people have to transmit ideas and that they are
disseminated by those who act as recipients of them. This translates more
effectively as the ability that human beings have through a relationship, to
convince others. Persuasion is a tool that can be used in fields such as
marketing, advertising, and commerce, basically sectors of the economy in
which the public is sensitive to various interactions with environmental
media and where the decision is the objective of who persuade
Let us elaborate on a scene in which a seller wants his products to be
acquired by the buyers, these besides being useful, must be attractive and,
in one way or another, more desirable than that of the competition. This is
achieved with persuasion, which attracts customers by offering the best
attributes of the product or service, effectively providing comfort to the
buyer by relating the most promotional aspects to the most personal.
Persuasion, in turn, generates competition and demand in the market,
generating dynamism of intentions and offers that fosters the development
of sustainable economies.
Another use of persuasion that we see in a society constantly is in the
application of the law. In a trial, the lawyers, in addition to using the law as
the main tool, use the elements in their favor and persuade the jury and the
judge that they are valid to win the case.

We are always waiting for others who live in our environment to reproduce
or share our ideas, even unintentionally, people seek to persuade others so
that their ends are fulfilled. A wife who asks her husband to optimize
expenses is trying to convince him that it is the best for both. Either way,
each person's ideas will be interpreted as an intention for others to apply
and build their ideas based on the initial idea. Persuasion can be so extreme
that they can change the way a person thinks. It all depends on what the
person who persuades another looks for.
 

Key elements of persuasion
 
To better understand the process by which one person or medium can
influence another by changing their mind, it is necessary to take into
account the key elements of the process, these being the issuing source, the
receiver, the message itself, and the technique that It is used to transmit it.
1. Issuer
Regarding who transmits the information, the source that tries to persuade,
two characteristics are taken into consideration when it comes to being or
not being persuaded: its attractiveness and credibility. It has been shown in
multiple experiments that we generally consider those individuals we
perceive to be more reliable (partly because of the halo effect, in which we
assume that someone who has a good quality will surely have others). This
is the reason why men and women of great physical attractiveness, or well-
valued celebrities, frequently appear in advertising in order to sell us a
product.
However, the most influential feature of the source when it comes to
persuading us is credibility, which is given to the level of competence of the
source in the subject matter and the perceived sincerity.
2. Receiver
Concerning the recipient of the message, the main characteristics that affect
the time of being influenced are the level of intelligence, self-esteem, and
the level of involvement with the subject.
It must be taken into consideration that the effect of the intelligence level
should not be taken as a direct measure. It is not that who is more
influential is less intelligent, but someone with higher intelligence will have

more resources to question the arguments put forward in persuasion. By
having a higher capacity to learn and use in real-time the information
memorized, the way of a dialogue of the most intelligent people is more
fluid and consistent, something that is reflected in the results they obtain
when it comes to convincing.
With regard to self-esteem, we generally find that the lower self-esteem, the
less likely we will consider our arguments as valid, more easily accepting
those of others.
3. Message
Another of the main elements when it comes to persuading someone is the
message itself. Several studies indicate that the fact of using a more rational
or more emotional message will depend on the type of response you want to
favor. It also affects the message incorporating elements that cause fear or a
sense of threat: according to Rogers protection motivation theory, we will
tend to seek and consider more certain words that allow us to minimize or
avoid damage.
The fact that persuasion occurs more often with a closed or open message
has also been investigated, indicating that it is generally better to leave a
conclusion open to interpretation, although guided in the direction of which
one wishes to persuade. This may be because, in this way, the listeners are
more satisfied when they reach those conclusions, something they
experience as if it had been a discovery made by themselves, without
someone trying to impose an idea from outside.
 

Principles of Persuasion
 
1. Reciprocity
During his research, Robert Cialdini proved a principle that many already
sensed by common sense. According to their research, people treat others
the same way they are treated. So, for example, we tend to be kind to those
who treat us kindly. That is where a great power lies: we can make a person
appreciate us more or less over time.
Advertising makes use of this principle. The reason a brand sometimes
offers its products "as gifts" is precisely the principle of reciprocity. They
know that consumers appreciate this gesture and will become more brand
loyal for this reason.
2. The scarcity principle
Robert Cialdini found that people tend to value more what they perceive as
rare or exclusive. It doesn't matter if it's real or not. The rarer and unusual
something is, the more it arouses our desire.
Advertising also takes advantage of this principle. It is the basis on which
campaigns such as the “promotion for a few days” or “discount for the first
50 buyers” are built. And it usually works very well. On the other hand, a
continuous succession of “last opportunities” for the same product
dissipates this effect. We must deliver on our promise, as scarcity involves
credibility.
3. The principle of authority
This principle states that people who have a position of leadership or
notoriety enjoy greater credibility, among others. People tend to believe

everything they say. We tend to be less critical of celebrities, for example.
That is why there is such a lucrative business around the so-called
‘influencer.’ Others identify with them and imitate them. In this case, we
are less demanding about the consistency of what they represent, and we are
more likely to believe what they say.
4. Commitment and consistency
Robert Cialdini says that the principle of commitment and consistency
implies that people are more willing to take action, consistent with what is
familiar. It is, therefore, important to adopt attitudes that create a
commitment to your client and be consistent with the commitment made.
Offer only what you can deliver. Keeping an old customer is easier than
capturing new ones.
This principle of persuasion is widely applied in sales. To attract new
customers, their behaviors and customs are studied to know what type of
offer to make. If they are, for example, impulsive people, situations are
generated that lead them to act impulsively to buy.
5. Consensus or social approval
This principle states that people tend to join the majority: they often see
what others are doing to act accordingly. We usually accept the opinion of
the majority. If many people believe something is right, we will believe it is
right. If most believe that something is wrong, we will also believe that it is
wrong.
Thus, in both business and politics, great efforts are made to "create trends."
These trends are not always inspired by the right or reasonable elements.
However, once they begin to “wave,” they are usually successful.
6. The principle of sympathy

This principle has to do with the so-called halo effect. It is related to the fact
that the most physically attractive people have a greater persuasiveness.
They are unconsciously associated with other positive values ​, such as
honesty and success. This effect also occurs with people who are
sympathetic to attributes other than the physical.
Thus, advertising almost always uses stereotypes that generate this principle
of sympathy. Usually, the models are beautiful or beautiful, or people who
represent the appearance that arouses the identification or desire of the
public.
 

Persuasion Techniques
 
Influencing and persuading are everyday tools of any project manager. It is
therefore essential to know some "tools" that can be used for this purpose
(mostly psychological):
Social Compatibility - “we decide what is right or not, depending on
what others think is right” - how often does this come about when we
are evaluating something they are presenting to us? The fact that we
are presented with evidence or examples of the use of something that
we are trying to persuade is halfway to being convinced to follow the
same examples.
Agreement - “It is easier to get the person who wants to persuade to
change their minds when we call on someone like him or her and
respects and shares their opinions” - it is essential to create a platform
of understanding where our opinions are shared by others, making it
more comfortable to accept future ideas.
Empathy - “When you want to persuade, you want others to
empathize with the idea. You want them to identify with it and to
understand its situation, its motives, and emotions. And with
empathy, they will tend to find their conclusions correct. ”- The more
emotional the story and appealing to audience-like experiences to
persuade, the higher the empathy and the more effective the
persuasion.
Inconsistency - “It’s a stealthy persuasion strategy because it leaves
the feeling of accomplishment” - small ideas are being implemented
with the persuader accompanying the whole process, solving small

problems step by step increases trust and strengthens the relationship,
making easier to persuade a great idea.
To be appreciated - “ we accept the ideas of someone we like more
easily than those of whom we are indifferent ” - it is essential to build
a relationship with whom we want to persuade, are in small gestures
of daily life, in sympathy, confidence, and trust. It is an excellent
education that the relationship becomes closer and makes us more
easily appreciated and, therefore, stronger in the art of persuasion.
Giving to receive - “when we give we unleash one of the most
powerful ideas of human beings, and when we receive we feel
obligated to repay ” - it's called the principle of reciprocity, and we all
do it at some point in time.
Accountability - “One of the first lessons we learn in life is to keep
our word” - getting the other to take responsibility for something is
the first step to persuading.
 

Psychological Tricks to Increase Your Persuasive
Power
 
1. Keep in mind that persuasion is different from manipulation.
To manipulate is to coerce someone into doing something that is not in their
best interest. Persuasion, however, is the art of persuading people to do
something that is in their interest and, on top of that, benefits you.
2. Evaluate context and time
The foundation for increasing your power of persuasion is context and the
exact time. The first requirement sets a standard for what is acceptable and
can be done, while the right timing makes your chances increase or
decrease considerably. Trying to persuade your boss to raise you well when
he is nervous or discussing an important issue is not a timely approach,
right? Therefore, having this notion of timing is critical in the persuasion
process.
3. Speak what people want to hear
You will not be able to persuade someone who has no interest in what you
are saying. Generally, people are interested in themselves and spend most of
their time thinking about money, love, or health. Therefore, to increase your
power of persuasion, it is necessary to learn to talk to people about
themselves consistently. Remember: If you show interest in what they want
and say, you will always have your attention.
4. be persistent
Have you noticed that historical figures who persuaded large masses
achieved this with much persistence in their messages? If you focus on

demonstrating value and staying focused, you are much more likely to get
what you want. When considering giving up, take a look at the example of
Abraham Lincoln, who lost his mother, three children, a sister, his
girlfriend, failed in business, and lost eight elections before being elected
president of the United States.
5. Greet People Sincerely
We are all affected by compliments, whether we like it or not. And people
tend to believe more in someone who gives them good feelings. So greet
people when they deserve it, highlight their qualities and achievements. You
will see how, practically and honestly, you will be able to persuade someone
more easily. Investing in reciprocity is also very effective in this process;
after all, when you do something for someone, that person feels compelled
to do something for you too. This is part of the evolution of our DNA.
6. Create a sense of urgency
To increase your persuasive power, you need to create a sense of urgency in
people by making them want something or take action right now. If you're
not motivated enough to want something right now, you probably won't
want it in the future. Therefore, invest in your power of persuasion in the
present, betting on the urgency of things.
7. Value the images
Remember: what we see is more important than what we hear. Therefore,
hone your first impressions to increase your persuasive power by increasing
your ability to paint an image of experience you can offer others in the
future.
8. be flexible and communicate simply

Have you noticed how flexible children are in their behaviors? They do
everything they can to get what they want from their parents, and most of
the time, they can. Therefore, adopting a rigid posture is never a good way
to increase your persuasive power. Communicating is also another
important point because the art of persuasion is to simplify something so
that it is quick and simple to understand.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
How to Differentiate Between Persuasion and
Manipulation
 
Integrity of Persuasion
Although people manipulate and persuade them to get others to do what
they want, persuasion is more honest. When you convince someone, you
are only presenting your product, service, or argument to the best of your
ability. You need not lie, omit information, or intimidate another person.

Instead, the persuasion is right - the facts presented are real. It is giving
people information they previously did not have clearly and logically in
order to convince them by informing them rather than manipulating them.
Handling and False
To manipulate is to get people to do what you want in provocative ways that
are truly lacking. So while someone can convince someone else by giving
them facts, a handler creates or insinuates them. They do not care how they
achieve their results as long as they reach; it means they are less concerned
with the facts and the integrity of their processes.
Facts versus Emotions
Persuasion uses facts, while manipulation is based on emotions. This is
because emotions are small, concrete, and harder to define than facts. If, for
example, one car is 20% better than another, a salesperson would have to
use manipulation to sell the second car to a financially shrewd customer.
Instead of focusing on the raw facts (the mileage), the salesperson can
manipulate the customer to sell the second car in terms of how it makes
them feel.
Goals
Bob Berg, a successful salesman, speaker, and writer, describes persuasion
and manipulation in terms of what the persuader (or manipulator) wants.
Persuasion will serve the person he is persuading, and he will sell a product
or service that he truly believes will add value to his client's business or life.
A manipulator, on the other hand, focuses only on himself. He is not
serving the other person, but instead makes him or her a target for his own
ends. This is the main difference between convincing and manipulating.
 

Gestures to Increase Your Power of Persuasion
1. Know how to place yourself...
In negotiation, in the sales situation, or even during interactions, we tend to
place ourselves in front of the interlocutor. Yet this positioning
unconsciously creates a climate of confrontation and not of cooperation.
During interviews or certain negotiations, you sit in front of your
interlocutor with a table that separates you. This use makes you face each
other, face to face.
If you want to create a climate of sympathy, the ideal is to be side by side.
Take the example of some stores where vendors will approach you on the
side and advise you by your side, both facing the product, rather than face
to face. This also applies in seduction; an unknown person will be more
easily approached on the side than in front.
2. Take your distance ... but not too much!
The distance you have towards the other person also plays a very important
role. A radius of 45 centimeters corresponds to the intimate zone, from 1.30
meters to the personal zone, from 4 meters to the social zone. Beyond that,
it is the public area.
If you do not know the person, the intimate zone is to be banned, except
exceptional situation. You can use the personal area to create a climate of
sympathy and trust with the person. If, for example, you are speaking to a
group, do not hesitate to move to be close to everyone, and give each
person importance.
The best example is the situation of debate between several people. It is
often more appropriate to place everyone in a circle rather than face to face

to avoid face-to-face confrontation.
3. Use the touch well ... without overdoing it!
An application accompanied by physical contact with the person to whom
you are applying is rarely refused. Touch, well used, creates excellent
sympathy.
Do not hesitate to support your speech with slight pressure on your arm or
shoulder.
However, there is a rule for touching the hierarchy. In a professional
context, it is the superior who has the right to touch and not the opposite.
Again, it depends on the people in front of you and the context. Everyone
does not have the same "tactile" relationship with others. Many elements
come into play: education, environment, culture, values, etc.
Generally, you feel immediately if you can afford it with the person in front
of you or not. It's a question of feeling during interaction and especially
context.
However, do not hesitate to use it in an informal climate and abuse it in
seduction.
4. Imitation: the key to success
The famous synchronization technique, which you most certainly know, is
the most powerful in terms of influence. We love those who look like us!
A person will feel more in tune with you if you synchronize on his gestures,
like a mirror.
Be careful, and it's not about making a monkey. You're just going to adopt
the same postures and the same attitude as the other. If he crosses his arms,
do the same, if he scratches his head, imitates a few seconds later ... but do
it in a discreet and natural way, of course.

Likewise, the other person will tend to adopt the same attitude as you:
In front of a warm person, you will be warm,
Facing a cold person, you will be neutral,
Faced with a tense person, you will be tense,
If the person speaks loudly, speak,
If the person speaks slowly, speak slowly.
Short. You understood. By synchronizing with each other, you get in tune
with him. This is an indispensable technique well known in NLP and
influence. Use and abuse!
5. Do not close the doors
Many gestures cut off communication. The gestures to banish are:
Cross arms and legs
Look elsewhere or focus on something other than the other party
Put your hands in your pocket
place your hand in front of your mouth while talking
Carry an object and put it between you and the other
Also, avoid distracting or parasitic gestures that divert attention from the
other:
Play with an object in your hands
Scratching all the time
Play with your fingers
You're biting your nails
Parasitic mimicry
 

Persuasion Tactics to Influence Anyone in The
Most Effective Way
 
Tactical Persuasion # 1: Start your discussion on the right
track.
One of the biggest mistakes people make in persuading them is that they
start talking about a topic or situation that the other person doesn't know or
doesn't know yet.
I have a friend who usually dives in the middle of a story or topic, which
leaves me (and I think many other people) have no idea what he's talking
about. It is essential to start your discussion at a point that people can relate
to, preferably from the beginning, unless you are sure you already know the
basics of the discussion topic.
Persuasion Tactic # 2: Be clear in conveying your message.
When you say, "He's angry," do you mean he's angry, or are you crazy?
Whenever you say or write something vague or that may lead to
miscommunication, it is strongly recommended that you change the words
to convey a clear message.
Persuasion Tactic # 3: Summarize or overview the big picture.
This is vital when it comes to something that takes a little (or longer) to
understand. This way, they can better relate the discussion to the overall
scenario and "absorb" what you are saying.
Persuasion Tactic # 4: Be Humble.

Never brag or be arrogant because it's a big detour. The other side may
think (in your mind) that he is better than you, and you will simply hurt his
ego.
You can even pretend not to know the things you already know if it gives
you an advantage in convincing you. Give him the impression that you are
an ally and do not compete with him.
Persuasion Tactic # 5: Pay attention to what is said rather than
what you will say next.
This can be a little difficult to do initially. This is why it is essential to
practice and improve your persuasion skills until it becomes part of you.
When listening, do not interrupt while they speak. Wait a second or two
before speaking. Avoid changing the subject as this indicates your
disinterest.
Persuasion Tactic # 6: Choose the right time.
When you are not in the mood or pressed for time, your persuasion efforts
may fall on deaf ears because they will not pay attention to you.
Ask first if you can have a few minutes of your time. If they say this is not a
good time, ask for a schedule that suits your plan.
Persuasion Tactics # 7: Never disrespect anyone.
Beware of the body signals you are giving. You may be pouting, breathing
heavily, shaking your head, or rolling your eyes without realizing that you
are offending others.
 

Persuasive Communication and Interpersonal
Relationships. How Does It Help Us?
 
The persuasion - manipulation- cannot be very useful in our relationships,
both professional and personal. Who dominates persuasive communication
determines the ideas that are taken into account and those that stay in the
way?
Think of running, and the question is not whether you know how to run or
not; The question is whether your way of running allows you to win races.
And in our day to day, we aim to win some. Have you ever wondered how
you can conquer a boy? Would you like to be an attentive person? Have you
ever been told that it seems that you are not listening? If you have answered
any question, yes, this post interests you.
One of the factors that influence these issues is the type of persuasive
communication. But what do we mean by compelling communication?
Persuasion attempts to modify a person's behavior, attitude, or behavior,
directly influencing their intentions, beliefs, or motivations. Fleeing always
from manipulation or disrespect, persuasive communication is a subtle and
healthy way to influence the thinking of the listener.
Personally, an emotional discussion is easily recognizable in which two
people try to convince the other person based on feelings. In the field of
business, the most rational methods are often abused. It is important to
know the right measure between both methods and combine them so that
persuasive communication is effective.

We may not be aware of this, but communicating is the behavior of a social
nature that we perform most throughout the day and, nevertheless, it is also
the one over which we have less conscious control. Therefore, being aware
of and making good use of this capacity can make a difference in our social
relationships.
Characteristics of a person who uses persuasive communication: 
It gives confidence to the interlocutor.  When we are interested in
meeting someone, we want to show this interest in the best possible way.
Before speaking without contributing, it is more coherent to listen carefully,
avoid hesitation, and contradict. These are some of the bad practices that we
carry out in these situations pretending to please or to imply that we are
attentive. We need to show that we are people that can be trusted and,
although it is not easy - especially in those situations in which we have just
met the listener - we must develop skills that enhance this characteristic.
He has as much knowledge as possible.  If you do not know the person, it
is common for doubts and questions to arise. If you are interested in
something specific, let them know by preparing the context and clarify, if
necessary, why you are interested in knowing it. Having information that
gives us knowledge about the other person is crucial to understand better
the information that is transmitted to us and return it
Listen. Much of the art of persuasion lies in the ability to actively listen to
the other person and discover their needs and concerns. Ask questions about
the content, paraphrase the information that has been transmitted to you,
emphasize what has caught your attention.
Be empathetic.  Concerning the previous point, we must also show the
interlocutor that we understand his point of view and value it, although this

does not mean submitting to all his requests, but rather seeking a meeting
point where both parties win. The operation of persuasion is a win-win.
Take care of all communication channels.  We must put so much care in
what we say, as in how we say it: our tone of voice, the movements, our
appearance, the stage, or the chosen channel. These are factors that also
influence the ability to persuade. Look at the other person, and sometimes
with only this ability, we know how we are doing it!
 

Discover When You Are The Target
 
Are you the puppet of others? Learn the three steps to cut the threads that
bind you to those who try to handle you...
I don't understand how it happens, but every time I meet my sister, I lose.
When Lidia wants me to do something for her, she always succeeds! Again,
I don't know how it happens, but does the situation unfold in a way that
leaves me no choice but to do what she wants?
This is Francis' complaint, Lidia, his older sister, is a teacher in the art of
manipulation. And Frank is not alone; Your sister's name can be substituted
for a son, a husband, a mother-in-law, a colleague, or even a best friend.
And is that there are people who, to get away with it, handle others as if
they were puppets.
The manipulators, those skilled "puppeteers," know how to handle the
strings of those who fall into their orbit to achieve their goals. Some do it
consciously because their plan is coldly calculated; others act like this
because it is the only way they know to get away with it. But everyone,
without exception, can continue to work that way because they have a great
partner. Guess who? The person who lets himself be manipulated. In many
cases, she is not a victim, but a volunteer in that frustrating game. In other
words: manipulation happens and persists because the manipulated allows it
to happen.
Review your case. Perhaps you give in out of grief, out of a sense of
obligation, because you fear offending that person or keeping the peace.
Many times you feel that the circumstances have conspired in a way that
leaves you no choice but, once again, to dance to the music you are playing
(the most typical case is the vendor who warns you to act now! because the

"wonderful" offer ends in five minutes). You end up feeling frustrated,
irritated, exhausted, and full of resentment. The truth is that your
relationships with these "puppeteers" are not the best. Also, how much time,
money, resources, and peace of mind have you lost in the hands of the
manipulators!
But is there a light at the end of this tunnel? The good news is that while
you are responsible for what happens, in the same way, you can take control
of your life and cut the threads that tie you to the manipulator. Here are
three steps to achieve it.
1. Recognize The Game
Some victims of manipulation feel uncomfortable after dealing with one of
these specimens but cannot identify exactly why. As Francis says, "I don't
know how, but my sister always gets me to do what she wants."
That is why the first step to cut the threads that tie you to the manipulator is
to recognize what your game is. In other words: discover what weapons he
uses to wield you. Do you employ the penalty? "I have not had as good luck
in life as you." Maybe it controls you with guilt feelings. "If you don't help
me, my children, your nephews! Will go bankrupt." Or he presents you with
the fait accompli, believing that "it is better to ask for forgiveness than to
ask permission." Example: "I took the liberty of taking this from your
home." You must know their strategies so that you are prepared and not
taken by surprise. «I discovered that my sister's tactic is to use the penalty.
Does she play the unhappy, plagued by bad luck? And I always fall, "admits
Francis. Once you recognize this person's modus operandi, take the next
step.
2. Discover Your «Buttons»

The manipulators have an effective secret: they use the appropriate tactics
for each person because they know which one works with each individual.
With one is the feeling of guilt, while with another, it is a pain; with some,
it is vanity (the manipulator pretends to be incompetent to be rescued,
making the rescuer feel important - without realizing that he has been used)
or even fear of divorce, dismissal, abandonment or ruin.
What is your Achilles heel? Discover the «buttons» that you have, and that
press you to operate as if you were a robot. When you determine that you
always fall out of grief, vanity, or because you don't know how to act when
you are presented with a fait accompli, stop. Discuss why you have that
particular "button" and what your fear is if you don't budge. Are they
realistic? Or are you allowing yourself to be influenced by the "puppeteer"?
Is it fair with yourself that you feel influenced by the “puppeteer? And that
you think like this? How does it affect you or harm you? And what effect
does it have on your relationship with that person? Do you want to keep the
threads that bind you to the «puppeteer»? If you want to cut them and be
free, continue to the next step.
3. Modify Your Behavior
Now that you know what tactics these people use to manipulate you and
you recognize why you fall into the trap, you should modify your behavior.
-Recognizes tampering
-Don't be rushed. Take all the time, and you need to assess the situation
and determine how you want to respond.
-Mentally prepare yourself for everything you will feel in those
moments: grief, fear, guilt, and anxiety. Let those feelings flood you? And
pass, like a wave that envelops you and then drifts away. Remember: the
"puppeteer" uses them precisely because they are effective. Accept the

possibility that some people will stray from you or that some relationships
will radically change. But if you are clear that none related to being based
on manipulation is positive, you will be at peace with that possibility.
-Expresses your preference or your position with kindness, but with
total firmness. If the person insists, be consistent, since it is you who will
teach others how they can be with you, simply by the treatment you allow.
Be prepared to repeat the same thing a thousand times, and for the
"puppeteer" to find other tactics to handle you. Again: be consistent. The
moment you stop accepting manipulation, the person will understand that
their tactics do not work for you - and you will be free.
When You Should Seek Help
Sometimes the situation reaches levels that you cannot handle using the
same tactics as if they work in normal situations. If you are dealing with an
unstable person, physically abusing you, threatening suicide, or committing
"crazy," take that situation very seriously and seek help urgently. Both you
and others affected must be safe from a dangerous situation.
 

How to increase our capacity for persuasion
 
As John Ruskin said, "He who has the truth in his heart must never fear that
his tongue lacks the power of persuasion. " Probably this is the best option.
However, psychology has studied other theories that can be very useful in
certain specific situations.
Before continuing, know that by persuasion, we mean the ability to seduce,
convince, impress, or fascinate a person.
Some psychological theories to improve persuasion.
The term "persuasion" may have had some negative connotations in recent
years. We live in a world of global uncertainty and strong consumerism, and
we are continually bombarded with advertisements that appear to be
convincing, whose motives are not necessarily as straightforward or simple
as they should be, but far from belonging to worthy causes.
It is therefore important to make the difference between persuasion and
manipulation, and the latter lies in honesty, which exists in persuasion but
not in manipulation; from a persuasive perspective, the other knows, since
this is how it was presented to him, that we are trying to convince him of
something. In contrast, from a manipulative perspective, this information
tends to be concealed, hidden.
Persuasion is understood as the ability to influence another person honestly,
which gives a great advantage to the people who developed it. This is why
it is important to know some theories that are valid over time.
The amplification hypothesis
A firm mentality, conveyed with confidence, is very immune to convincing.
However, it softens if it is expressed with uncertainty. In this case,

arguments based on an emotional basis are very resistant to logic, and vice
versa.
So, by carrying this hypothesis promulgated by Clarkson, Tbormala, and
Rucker to practice, your possibilities of influence will increase if the
attitudes that you project have the same meaning as those of the
interlocutor. This is precisely what gives a name to the theory: if you want
to persuade someone on a sport-related subject and you both support the
same sports team, for example, the power of your arguments will then be
amplified.
The manipulation theory
This theory handles four maxims to seduce a person, ensuring that the
information is as complete as possible, ensuring the authenticity of this
information, its relevance to the subject matter, and presenting it in such a
way that it can be fully understood by the 'other.
This hypothesis, which might sound very poor, is very rational and fair. As
Ruskin said, if you have the facts on your hand, you don't have to think
about not being convincing. However, it is necessary to be well prepared
and to have great knowledge of the subject, as well as to know how to
explain them, to convince someone.
However, it is difficult to defend yourself against such a strategy, especially
if your interlocutor is skillful with words. It is necessary to observe his
nonverbal language, which reflects contradictions between the assurance of
his speech and what his gestures say. Having a little idea of ​the subject, I
can point out what the most fragile part of his argument is.
The priming theory

This psychological method of persuasion is commonly used in the
advertisement. It is focused on the networks of interaction that we need to
create in our minds. Indeed, when memory is activated, a concept or a
feeling, in turn, allows the activation, for a limited time, of everything
associated with this memory. For example, if you are told about the
breakfasts of your childhood, it will be much easier afterward to make you
buy milk.
The priming must be very subtle; thus, the person being stimulated is not
aware of how he is influenced, even if he knows that he is in an influence
brand since it is a publicity question. In another case, we would speak of
manipulation.
The standard of reciprocity
This is a widely accepted social norm. It's as simple as giving something
and waiting to be returned. It is not a voluntary act, but established and
accepted by all.
Carrying out this standard can be as simple as saying thank you. Faced with
the offer you make to him, you wait for your interlocutor to send you this
courtesy, and reciprocity must be proportional to the type of service
rendered.
The principle of scarcity
In a way, all human beings need to control their world. Having free will
over what surrounds us is important. This is why when something is scarce,
the desire to have it increases.
This psychological technique is also widely used in the advertising world;
think of the famous slogans. So if you consider yourself a victim of this

practice, ask yourself if you need the rare good, feeling, or emotion that is
offered to you.
All of these psychological theories of persuasion go beyond the mere
theoretical field. They have been put into practice and demonstrated to be
functional. You have likely used them at some point in your life without
even being aware of them.

CHAPTER TWELVE
What Is Deception
 
 
Firstly, the concept of what disappointment is. Deception, along with
subterfuge, mystification, deception, trick, and beguilement, is an act the
agent uses to spread ideas about events that are falsehoods or only partial
truths.
Deception includes many things like concealment, disguise, diversion,
sleight of hand, deception, and dissimulation. The agent will monitor the
subject's mind because the subject trusts them. The item may believe what

the agent says and might even base plans and build their life on the things
the agent told them.
Unless the agent follows the deception procedure, the statements they told
the subject will be false. Trust can easily be lost if the issue finds out, which
is why the agent must be talented at the deception process and good at
turning things around if they want to proceed with their subject.
Deception also occurs in connection, and it may contribute to feelings of
mistrust and deception between the two partners in the relationship. This is
because deceit breaks most relationship laws and is often seen to harm the
perceptions that come with the relationship.
Many people hope to have a real conversation with their partner; if they
knew that their partner is manipulative, they would have to learn how to use
misdirection and deception to get the honest and truthful details they need.
The faith will also leave the relationship, making it difficult to bring the
relationship back to where it once was.
The topic will also doubt the statements the agent told them, questioning
whether the story was real or something made up. Because of this new
mistrust, most relationships end until the subject finds out the agent's
deception.
Types of Deception
Deception is a form of communication that relies on omissions and lies in
order to convince the subject of the world that best fits the agent. Since
there is communication involved, there will also be several different types
of deception that could be occurring. According to the Interpersonal
Deception Theory, five different types of deception are found. The five
main forms of deception include:

 Lies: this is when the agent makes up information or gives information that
is completely different from what is the truth. They will present this
information to the subject as fact, and the subject will see it as the truth.
This can be dangerous since the subject will not realize that they are being
fed false information; if the subject knew the information was false, they
would not likely be talking to the agent, and no deception would occur.
Equivocations: this is when the agent will make contradictory, ambiguous,
or indirect statements. This is done to lead the subject to get confused and
do not understand what is going on. It can also help. The agent to save face
if the subject comes back later and tries to blame them for the false
information.
Concealments: this is one of the most common types of deception that are
used. Concealments are when the agent omits information that is relevant or
important to the context, intentionally, or they engage in any behavior that
would hide information that is relevant to the subject for that particular
context. The agent will not have directly lied to the subject, but they will
have made sure that the important information that is needed never makes it
to the subject.
Exaggeration: this is when the agent will overstate a fact or stretch the
truth a little bit in order to turn the story the way that they would like. While
the agent may not be directly lying to the subject, they are going to make
the situation seem like a bigger deal than it is, or they may change the truth
a little bit so that the subject will do what they want.
Understatements an understatement is the exact opposite of the
exaggeration tool in that the agent is going to downplay or minimize
aspects of the truth. They will tell the subject that an event is not that big of
a deal when, in fact, it could be the thing that determines if the subject gets

to graduate or gets that big promotion. The agent will be able to go back
later and say how they did not realize how big of a deal it was, leaving them
to look good and the subject to look almost petty if they complain.
 

Main Components of Deception
 
While it may be difficult to determine which factors show when deception
is occurring, some components are typical of deception. Often the subject
will not realize that these components have occurred unless the agent has
told an outright lie or been caught in the act of deceiving. These are
components that will be recognized later on if the agent is using the process
of deception in the right way. The three main components of deception
include camouflage, disguise, and simulation.
Camouflage
The first component of deception is camouflage. This is when the agent is
working to hide the truth in another way so that the subject will not realize
that they are missing the information. Often this technique will be used
when the agent uses half-truths when they are telling information.
The issue will not recognize that the camouflaging has occurred until later
when these truths are revealed in some way. The agent will be skilled in
camouflaging the fact so that it is challenging for the subject to find out
about the deception by chance.
Disguise
Disguise is another component that can be found in the process of
deception. When this occurs, the agent is working to create an impression
of being something or somebody else.
This is when the agent is hiding something about themselves from the
subject, such as their real name, what they do for a job, who they have been
with, and what they are up to when they go out.

This goes further than just changing the outfit that someone wears in a play
or a movie; when the disguise is used in the process of deception, the agent
is trying to change their whole persona in order to trick and deceive the
subject.
There are several examples that can illustrate the use of disguise in the
process of deception. The first is in relation to the agent disguising
themselves, usually as another person, so that they are not recognizable.
The agent may do this to get back into a crowd of people that do not like
them, change their personalities to make someone like them, or for another
reason to further their goals.
In some cases, the word disguise can refer to the agent disguising the true
nature of a proposal in the hopes of hiding an effect or motivation that is
unpopular with that proposal. Often this form of disguise is found in
propaganda or political spin.
Disguise can be harmful because it is hiding the true nature of what is going
on. If the agent is hiding who they are from the subject, it can be
challenging for the item to determine who they really are.
When information is withheld from the subject, it clouds the way that they
can think since they do not have the right information to make logical
choices. While the issue may believe that they are making reasonable
choices of their own free will, the agent has taken away crucial information
that may change the subject’s mind.
Simulation
The third component of deception is known as simulation. This consists of
showing the subject information, which is false. There are three techniques

that can be used in the simulation, including distraction, fabrication, and
mimicry.
In mimicry or the copying of another model, the agent will be
unconsciously depicting something similar to themselves. They may have
an idea that is similar to someone else’s, and instead of giving credit, they
will say that it is all theirs.
This form of simulation can often occur through auditory, visual, and other
means. Fabrication is another tool that the agent may use when using
deception. What this means is that the agent will take something that is
found in reality and change it so that it is different.
They may tell a story that did not happen or add in embellishments that
make it sound better or worse than it was. While the core of the story may
be real, yes they did get a bad grade on a test, it is going to have some extra
things put in such as the teacher gave them a bad grade on purpose. The
reality is that the agent didn’t study, and that is why they got the wrong
grade in the first place.

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
The Role of Defence in 9 Steps
 
 
To avoid falling victim to manipulators, you have to build your defenses so
that you are prepared for any manipulative strategies that they may try to
use on you. The best way to build your defenses is by taking steps to
improve your self-esteem and your willpower. However, as a point of
caution, you should be very careful about how you build your defenses
because you don’t want to create restrictions that will keep you from living
a fulfilled life.
 
For example, as you try to guard against manipulation, you can’t act out of
fear. You can’t hide from the world just to avoid scenarios where someone
might want to take advantage of you. Remember that the world is full of
people with dark personality traits who may harbor malicious intentions, so
acting out of fear won’t protect you from anyone. In fact, it will just make
you more of a target. As you build your defenses, make sure that start on
the premise that you are willing to confront manipulators head on, and you
will never run away or recoil. If you act out of fear, you lose by default.
 
The steps to raise self-esteem: To help you build your defenses, we will
discuss the nine steps that you have to take in order to raise your self-
esteem and to increase your willpower by extension. 
 

1. How to Spot Lies with Deception Detection
Techniques
 
We have different ways to communicate with people — verbal and non-
verbal. Unfortunately, we've learned how to get through verbal contact
traps. Some of us have mastered lies-telling art. Nevertheless, controlling
our non-verbal acts is a little harder. That's where manipulation strategies
come in.
Such methods can help you decide whether a person says or makes up
something. And while most of these deception detection strategies are non-
verbal, there are several verbal signs you should search for.
Voice Quality
You will begin to figure things out by listening to the person's voice. Crack
or move from the standard pitch?
We've also seen pictures on television where a character experiences a shift
in voice tone if he tells a lie. Both of these examples are correct.
Occasionally it gets louder. It becomes smaller occasionally.
Body Language
Lying isn't normal to us. That's why a liar, particularly an inexperienced
one, freezes when he or she's in the middle of saying something wrong.
As described earlier, deception detection techniques rely heavily on non-
verbal signs. Through being just a little more observant, you can decide
whether or not you hear the facts.
Eye Contact

They say lying people can't look straight in your head. So what if you treat
professional liars here? What are introverts, extroverts?
Okay, manipulation detection strategies will tell you what kind of person
you're dealing with first. If the liar is an introvert, it may not meet your
eyes. However, if your liar is an extrovert, he or she can look more
confidently into your eyes.
Reading people is a cinch with these identification techniques. The
indicators can be easy but fairly reliable. So, the next time you're unsure
about anything, consider listening and watching for unusual shifts.
 

2.Techniques for defending against manipulation
 
1. Shifting blame
Nothing makes a person more susceptible to manipulation than a sense of
guilt, for which a person will do anything to redeem himself. The feeling of
guilt makes the person vulnerable, and a sense of unease in communication
develops. Aggressive people most commonly use this method. If you notice
that someone constantly reminds you of something you have been hiding,
especially in situations where it is not a topic of conversation at all, you can
suspect manipulation. It is important then to defend yourself in the right
way.
2.  Playing the victim
In theory, this behavior is also known as the Kalimer effect, which points to
the eternal pursuit of some justice, with the continued emphasis on the
person in question drawing the thickest end.
3. Pressure and insistence
The principle of this manipulation technique is that the tactics of gradual
pressure boosting have greater effects, and often the interviewee is not
aware that he has been manipulated.
 
3.Acceptance
Acceptance is about assenting to the reality of a given situation. It’s about
recognizing that a certain condition or process is what it is, even if it’s
characterized by high levels of discomfort and negativity. It’s about
consciously submitting to the fact that something cannot be changed, and

that its reality is not subject to interpretation. It’s about making peace with
the situation that you are in.
 
Acceptance is the opposite of denial. Even the most rational among us tend
to be in denial about lots of things in their lives, which are settled facts in
real sense. Denial can be a coping mechanism, one that can keep us from
being overwhelmed by the reality of a given situation. However, denial does
us more harm than good, because unless we can accept something, we can’t
change it, and we will be stuck looking for alternative interpretations and
explanations for our prevailing circumstances.
 
Without acceptance, the door remains wide open for malicious people to
exploit us. Take the example of a patient who is told that he/she is
terminally ill. After seeking the opinions of several medical professionals
and getting the same diagnosis, the patient is still left with the choice of
either accepting or denying the situation. The one who accepts it will make
peace, and try to make the best out of what little time he has. The one who
stays in denial will become susceptible to tricksters who may offer
"alternative cures," and he may end up losing all his savings paying such
people so that in the end, he leaves his family with nothing. That is an
extreme example, but it perfectly illustrates why acceptance is important in
avoiding manipulation, even if the reality may seem too painful to accept.
 
The most crucial form of acceptance is self-acceptance. It refers to the state
of being satisfied with yourself, the way you currently are. Self-acceptance
is a kind of covenant that you make with yourself, to validate, support, and
appreciate who you are instead of constantly criticizing yourself and
wishing you were someone else. Most people have trouble accepting

themselves as they are. We are all in a constant strive for self-improvement.
We want to be more successful, to be wealthier, to be more attractive, or to
be perceived more positively by others. Even the most accomplished among
us have issues with self-acceptance.
 
In many ways, the desire to be a better version of yourself can be seen as a
positive thing; it can help you study harder in school, work harder to earn a
promotion at work or exercise more to get in shape. However, the problem
is there is always room for improvement, so no matter how high you
ascend, the dissatisfaction will always be there, and it will make you
vulnerable to manipulation by people who want to take advantage of your
desires.
 
To defend against manipulation, you have to accept your reality, and you
have to accept yourself. People tend to think that if they accept themselves,
they won’t try to improve – that couldn’t be further from the truth.
Accepting yourself means owning up to your flaws, and that gives you
control over your life. With self-acceptance, attempts at self-improvement
would come from within, so when you decide to change, you will be doing
it for yourself and not for anyone else.
 
4.Increase awareness
Increasing your awareness means having a higher level of alertness when it
comes to understanding what’s going on in your environment. It means
paying close attention to your surroundings, and to the way, people behave
around you. The higher your level of awareness, the better you will be when
it comes to adapting to your surroundings and understanding the
motivations of the people you interact with.

 
When you become more aware, you will be able to catch on quick when
people try to manipulate you. Many of us tend to be preoccupied with our
own thoughts that we hardly ever notice the cues of the people we interact
with. We tend to live life on autopilot, so when other people try to seize
control over our lives, we only notice it when it’s too late. If you increase
your awareness, you will be equipped with the skills necessary to identify
all the red flags, and you will be able to stop most manipulators on their
tracks before they can do any real harm.
 
The first step towards increasing your awareness is to learn about the
tendencies of manipulative people. Reading this book puts you ahead of the
curve; you now know enough to be able to spot people with ill motives, but
you should understand that the worst kinds of manipulators are very good at
concealing their motives, so you have to keep working on increasing your
awareness.
 
To be truly aware of manipulative people, you have to approach all
interactions with some levels of skepticism. We are not telling you to turn
into a paranoid person who doesn't let anyone in; we are just saying that
you should take a deeper look each person you interact with. Try to study
their body language and their words, and try to see if they are trying to hide
something.
 
Apart from increasing your awareness, you have to increase your self-
awareness as well. Many people confuse those two things, but them entirely
different concepts. Self-awareness is about understanding yourself. It’s
about having a clear concept of your own personality. You have to examine

yourself and figure out what your strengths and weaknesses are, what your
values and motivations are, and what kind of thoughts and emotions you are
likely to have in specific situations. Self-awareness helps you understand
both who you are and how other people perceive you.
 
Self-awareness works as a defense against manipulation because when you
know who you truly are, it becomes more difficult for someone to alter your
thoughts and perceptions. If you have strong and well-articulated values, it
becomes harder for a manipulator to get you to abandon those values.
People who like self-awareness are more likely to be gaslighted or to be
subjected to other forms of mind control.
 
If you end up in a relationship with a manipulative person, self-awareness
can help you keep your identity. Manipulators will try to tell you what to
think and how to behave, but if you are self-aware, you will experience
cognitive dissonance, and your brain will push back against any attempts at
manipulation.
 

5.How to increase self-esteem and gain confidence?
 
Self-esteem is your opinion of yourself and your abilities. It can be high,
low, or somewhere in between. While everyone sometimes has doubts
about themselves, low self-esteem can make you feel insecure and
unmotivated. You may be able to identify a few things that affect your
opinion of yourself (maybe you are bullied, or you feel lonely), or it may be
a mystery. Either way, there are many things you can do to improve your
self-esteem.
The self
In today's society, the appreciation of those around you matters a lot. At
work or among friends, we often seek the appreciation of others to increase
our self-esteem. Specialists tell us that we no longer have to wait for the
confirmation of others. We must become aware of our worth, learn to
appreciate ourselves.
Comparison with other people should be avoided
We will never be able to achieve high self-esteem if we always compare
ourselves with office colleagues, friends, or other family members. The
moment we stop comparing ourselves to others, it means that we accept
ourselves as we are and appreciate ourselves at their true value.
Appreciation of the positive aspects
Psychologists tell us to appreciate the positive aspects of our lives. These
are the issues we need to focus on and not what bothers us.
Meditation
Some therapists advise their patients to meditate. It is recommended that the
patient "empty" his mind and then focus on the present, on what is

happening exactly at that moment.
Reaffirming positivity
It is important to have a few trusted friends who will regularly remind you
of the reasons why you need to have high self-esteem. You have to do the
same thing every day.
Sport
Sports and outdoor walks help increase self-esteem. Try to exercise for at
least half an hour every day.
 
6.Change reactions
To defend against manipulation, there is one important thing that you need
to realize; the only person you can control is you. You have absolutely no
control over what other people might say, or how they might act. Your
reaction is the only thing that is within your control. Even if you are a
victim, and someone limits your choices considerably, at the end of the day,
the power to choose how to act or react is still in your control.
 
Think of all the civil rights icons you learned about in school; all of these
people were victimized in one way or another, but they came out on top
because of the way they chose to react to that victimization. So, to defend
against manipulation, you have to change the way you react to the words
and actions of manipulators.
 
First, when someone does something to set you off, try to approach that
situation with calm rationality. Focus on resolving the conflict instead of
debating whose fault it is. When you react with anger in response to an

accusation, or if you start passing the blame back and forth, you are playing
right into the hand of the manipulator. When you change the way you react,
you will be creating your own rules for the game that the manipulator is
trying to play, and that will keep you from falling into his trap.
 
Never lead with your emotions. Instead, you should practice thinking things
through before you react. In other words, instead of reacting
instantaneously, train yourself to respond in a calculated way. When
someone upsets you, refrain from lashing out angrily, and try to figure out
what their motivations are. You can manage your reactions by using the
same techniques that are used in anger management therapy; take a deep
breath and weight the situation before speaking out. 
 
It may not seem so, but the simple act of taking a deep breath can do a lot to
center you and to help you react better in any stressful situation. When you
take a breath, it puts some distance between your reaction and the trigger
situation, and that small window of time is enough for your brain to
deliberate on things and to create a better response.
 
You also have to understand that things only have the meanings you give
them. When a manipulator calls you names or yells at you angrily, it’s
completely up to you to decide whether you’ll let it roll off you like water,
or whether you will internalize it. It’s true that people only treat you the
way you let them.
 
You can change your reaction by changing the questions that run through
your mind when you are in a negative situation. If someone is attacking
you, the questions running through your mind could be: Why is he doing

this? Who does he think he is? You can try to change those questions so that
you start thinking: How can I quickly resolve this? How can I keep my
dignity here? When you ask yourself the right questions, you have a better
chance of finding a proper way to react.
 
7.Be assertive
Someone can only successfully manipulate you if you are not willing to
stand your ground and be assertive. Some psychologists have pointed out
that being assertive is the middle ground between being passive and being
aggressive. Aggressive people bully others to get what they want, and
passive people let others walk all over them, so they don't get what they
want. Assertive people, on the other hand, stand strong and ask for what
they want in a firm and diplomatic way. 
 
When you are assertive, you communicate in a way that's respectful
towards the needs, feelings, and opinions of others, but you are unwavering
in advocating for your own needs. You make requests that are reasonable,
and you try to avoid infringing on the rights of others. In case of a dispute,
you seek a compromise that is objectively fair to everyone. You draw clear
boundaries, and you let people know when they are crossing those
boundaries.
 
The most crucial aspect of assertiveness is being a good communicator.
Assertive people have voices that are relaxed but firm. They speak fluently,
and they come across as sincere. When they have to work with others, they
are cooperative, and they contribute in a constructive way. They don't raise

their voices when things get heated; they stay steady, unshaken, and
unfailingly logical.
 
Assertive people are also good at using non-verbal cues to communicate
effectively. They maintain eye contact with the people they are talking too.
They have open body stances and good posture, which helps project
strength and confidence. They smile when they are pleased, and they frown
when they are displeased. 
 
Assertive people are very direct, and they know what they want from the
very beginning. As a result, it’s very difficult for you to manipulate them.
Manipulators like to use mind games and other little tricks to conceal their
ill intentions, but assertive people will cut through all that by enforcing
straight and clear two-way communication. When ordinary people suspect
that they are being manipulated, they may keep those suspicions to
themselves, but assertive people will come out and ask the manipulators
what their intentions are; this throws the manipulators off balance and
forces them to back off or switch gears.
 
Being assertive means having the skills to communicate with both
aggressive people and passive people. They don't let anger or fear keep
them from putting their point across when they are dealing with aggressive
people. However, when they are dealing with passive people, they also don't
let other people's meekness, deter them from demanding what they are
entitled to.
Assertive people are also well attuned with their own emotions. When they
are upset, they don’t let their own negative feelings derail them from
asserting for themselves in a rational manner.

 
8.Feed yourself
The idea that the food we eat affects our self-esteem has been around for a
very long time. There is a lot of scientific evidence that shows a correlation
between the type of food we eat and our levels of confidence, as well as our
general mental wellbeing. The food you eat has an effect on your mood,
your levels of anxiety, and how you feel about yourself as a person.
 
When we lack the right balance of nutrients in our bodies, it affects the
levels of certain hormones, and as a result, we experience a shift in our
moods. That explains why we tend to be more active and stimulated when
we consume sugar, coffee, or foods with high levels of carbohydrates.
There are also other foods that make us feel lethargic when we eat them.
 
Some researchers have found out that when we fail to take in enough
vitamins, fatty acid, and certain mineral, and omega three oils, we could
experience depression. Because of their ability to keep depression at bay,
these foods are referred to as "mood-boosting foods."
 
Carbohydrates are usually broken into glucose, which is used as energy in
the brain and in the muscles. If we don't eat enough carbohydrates, we will
lack the energy to concentrate and to make good judgments, and that can
affect our self-esteem and make us more susceptible to manipulation. On
the flip side, eating lots of carbohydrates lead us to gain weight, and that
can have a negative effect on our self-esteem. So, if positive self-esteem is
your goal, you need to eat the right amount of carbohydrate; don't kick them
off your diet, but also don't overindulge in them. Try to eat carbohydrate
from whole-food sources instead of refined sources. Unrefined

carbohydrates release energy slowly and give you a mood boost for much
longer while providing you with much-needed fiber.
 
Foods that are rich in omega-3 fatty acids prevent low moods and can help
keep you from getting depressed. Based on that, some scientists have
argued that eating more fish can help improve your self-esteem. As you
plan out your diet, you can make sure that you have at least one portion of
fish a week. As a point of caution, avoid eating too much fish if you are
pregnant or breastfeeding.
 
Foods that are rich in vitamin B, such as spinach, broccoli, meats, eggs, and
dairy, have the ability to boost your energy levels and your mood, so they
can contribute towards you having a more positive outlook. Vitamin D food
sources such as eggs, cereals, and oily fish can increase serotonin levels in
your brain and make you feel good about yourself. Of course, you can also
get vitamin D from the sun, so letting in the light or talking a walk outside
every now and then can be good for your self-esteem as well.
 
Excessive sugar, too much caffeine, and a high amount of alcohol can affect
your self-esteem in a negative way. When you have a sugary snack, it
increases your blood sugar levels and causes a spike in energy, but that is
just momentary. After that, you will experience a "crush." That, combined
with the feeling of guilt that comes from consuming "empty calories" can
dampen your mood and lower your self-esteem.
 
Caffeine also has a similar effect. It will stimulate you, for a moment and
improve your mood, but once it starts wearing off, your mood will go down.
 

Alcohol has the effect of improving your confidence and lowering your
inhibitions, which is why it’s referred to as a "social lubricant." However, it
is also a depressant, which means that it will make you feel anxious and
irritable the following day, and that is bad for your self-esteem. By lowering
your inhibitions, alcohol can also make you more susceptible to
manipulation.
 
9.Become autonomous and take control
To increase your self-esteem and to become less susceptible to
manipulation, you have to become autonomous and to take control of your
own life.  Researchers have found that autonomy is more highly correlated
with happiness than any other factor out there. People who are autonomous
tend to be more satisfied than those who are wealthy. That is because
autonomy represents the core value that makes us human; the ability to
exercise free will. 
 
In many social sciences, autonomy is defined as the quality of being able to
make decisions according to one’s own free will. Since we are social
beings, it can be argued that we don’t have absolute free will because the
things we do are constrained by the rules of the societies we live in, but the
important thing is that autonomy should be characterized by a feeling of
freedom. In other words, it’s about being able to do things within being
coerced by either internal or external pressures. To put it simply, autonomy
is having your own identity, and being the only one that controls it.
 
It’s very easy to lose your autonomy when you are in a relationship with a
controlling person. Even if you are part of a couple or a family, autonomy

means that you do things because you want to and not because you are
obligated to do them. It means that there should be a clear distinction
between you and your partner and that everyone should have their goals and
ambitions, independent of each other. If you are in a relationship where you
are subservient to the other person, then you lack autonomy.
 
To maintain your autonomy and improve your self-esteem, be very careful
about who you choose to date, and the people you choose to associate with.
Even if you are committed to the person, you have to know at all times
what your values are, what you want out of life, and who you are as a
person. You need to hold onto those foundational values, and you should be
wary of anyone who tries to make you compromise on them.
 
You have to retain control over your life, no matter how much it’s
intertwined with someone else’s. If you can’t define yourself, someone else
is going to do it for you, and then you will become a mere extension of
them. In other words, they will succeed in completely dominating and
controlling you.
 
You can take control of your life by setting aside some “me time” for
yourself. It’s okay to take care of your family, friends, or partner, but if you
let them have all your time, then you lose control over your life, and your
identity will disappear. Set some time aside for yourself, and make sure that
everyone respects it.
 
You also need to draw clear personal boundaries and to learn to say "no" to
people. When someone asks you to do something, make an objective
assessment of the request; if it adds no value to your life, then turn it down.

Manipulative people will want to turn you into their "errand boy," so from
the very first time you meet anyone, make sure that you don't let them use
you.
 

Deal with toxic people
 
Dealing with toxic people is a situation that, at some point in life, we ​will
have to go through.
You may come across narcissists, liars, compulsives, manipulators, just to
mention a few.
The problem with toxic people is that even if you want to avoid them, they
always find a way to get into your life. Your actions are born of the need to
belong to some group, and you can be the chosen one.
Luckily, there are some alternatives that smart people use to prevent toxic
people from settling into their lives once they have been identified.
Let’s look at a lot of advice for dealing with toxic people. Enjoy them!
Smart people:
1. Do not pay attention to toxic people
What toxic people seek most is attention? They want someone to see them
and make them feel important. At any cost, they will endeavor to focus on
each event or situation.
When you realize that one of these people has got your wish, ignore it and
pay no attention to it. If the toxic person dominated a conversation, change
the subject, and allow others to talk.
Most often, this person will try to draw the conversation where he or she
feels safe. You can avoid this by explaining that the topic is past and are
now in another subject.
In a matter of minutes, the toxic person will walk away. Over time, it will
move away completely when you notice that you do not receive the

attention you seek.
2. Don't tell your gossip secrets
How bad can a person who can't keep a secret do! Toxic people have no
problem disclosing what you said. In addition, they criticize and talk badly
behind their backs.
Identifying these people is sometimes tricky because they often seem
trustworthy and kind. But there are signs that will help you:
They speak ill of others.
Always comment on the secrets entrusted to them.
They look for people to trust them as soon as they know them.
When you comment on someone else, they will tell her/him.
The best antidote for gossip lovers is to tell them nothing.  Simply live your
life without inviting them. If you have entered your social circle, keep your
distance.
3. Spend time, a lot of time, with your real friends.
Smart people know that having a strong support network is important in
life. When you have this, you don't even have to worry about toxic people.
You will simply have people who support you the moment you need it.
Smart people know that true friends are more valuable than any material
good.
4. Avoid Handlers
Smart people know that manipulators can ruin a life. People who
manipulate hurt to reach their goals.
To avoid handlers, you first need to learn to identify them.  You will know
that they are manipulative because all their feelings become negative.

5. Let liars get involved in themselves
Toxic people often lie compulsively to other people and to themselves.
They need to convince themselves that they are telling the truth to feel
better. Unfortunately, for them, lies are always discovered.
Smart people don't get mad at lies, nor argue, just let the truth fall by its
weight.
This usually happens sooner or later, because maintaining a false story is
difficult, and contradictions do not take long to appear.
6. Do not engage in drama or discussion
Toxic people are experts at arguing for anything. If something doesn't go
your way, get ready for a discussion and drama that will last for hours.
They like everyone to know about their problems. They love to be the
center of attention and do not miss the opportunity.
If you are in this situation, act rationally.  Try to talk to the toxic person
calmly if you cannot finish the discussion by explaining that you will not be
able to come up with a solution and ask for it later.
If the problem has no solution or the person does not want to solve it,
simply say that it is no longer your business.

CONCLUSION
 
 
Dark Psychology claims that all humanity has a reservoir of malevolent
intent towards others, ranging from minimally obtrusive and transient
thoughts to absolute deviant psychopathic actions without any apparent
reasoning. Like everybody in society, we are vulnerable to manipulation
and using other people to fulfill our needs, either directly or indirectly, so
we must know each other; know what our strengths and weaknesses are by
exploiting and repairing them with a shared sense. The only way to
manipulate social peace. Balancing means developing: individual, personal,
care, financial, educational, spiritual, etc.
Like other cultures, we are subject to coercion and using other people to
fulfill our needs, either directly or indirectly, so we need to know each other
fully; know what our strengths and weaknesses are by manipulating them
and fixing them in a critical way. The best way to fight coercion is a
personal balance. We need to grow in balance fields: human, family, love,
social, economic, spiritual, etc.


BOOK 3:

Manipulation and Body Language
 

INTRODUCTION
 
 
 
We'll be exploring an essential subject in this Book, because of which many
people have an interest in psychology. This is a topic of exploitation that we
experience all the time in life. I'm unlikely to be wrong if I suggest someone
is actively trying to exploit us, and we're trying to control us, as much as
possible. And more often than not, we do so unintentionally, intuitively, and
often ineptly, because of which our manipulations do not always lead us to
the desired result, and just like other people do not always manage to
manipulate us effectively. And people embrace endless attempts to exploit
one another. Hence understanding this topic is very relevant. We will speak
in this document about what coercion is, how it works, how effective it is
and what can and should be done,
Manipulation is a secret psychological tool by which you can force any
person to perform the acts that you need against his will and interests, and I
emphasize everyone. Yet this is the default concept of coercion. Let us offer
a broader and more realistic description of that skill. Manipulation is a
psychological weapon which, like other types of weapons, gives an
individual the same (and even more significant) advantage over others. You
can assault and capture with that weapon, and you can protect and defend it.
It leads to survival and development.
A good manipulator, that is, a person skilfully possessing secret
psychological tools, is far more reliable than a person to the teeth who is
trained. Why? For what? Because he can encourage the actions, he needs to
a variety of people, and thus solve any problems and tasks. And what would

a person armed with a weapon rooted in our understanding be able to solve
problems and tasks? Only a couple, huh? The strength of a weapon has its
limits. Yet there are no limits to the abuse. No exception, you can control all
men, both the most ordinary and the most powerful and strong. Your only
weakness is capacity.
The better your abilities in persuasion, the more you can exploit people.
There's no restriction to the manipulations themselves-you can exploit
anybody. Yet there are no limits to the abuse. No exception, you can control
all men, both the most ordinary and the most powerful and strong. Your
only weakness is capacity.
The better your abilities in persuasion, the more you can exploit people.
There's no restriction to the manipulations themselves-you can exploit
anybody. Yet there are no limits to the abuse. No exception, you can control
all men, both the most ordinary and the most powerful and strong. Your
only weakness is capacity. The better your abilities in persuasion, the more
you can exploit people. There's no restriction to the manipulations
themselves-you can influence anybody.
To somebody, an awful thing, however nice to somebody in manipulation,
is people's inability to accept the fact that they are being exploited. When
you convince a person that he was a victim of coercion by others, then he
will most likely deny it and continue to do what he has done, including
showing to himself and you that his decision is his decision and no one is
manipulating them. Sometimes, my ego doesn't want to admit that I'm being
exploited, although I know for sure it is. My feelings, opinions, acts - can't
be entirely free of others' influence; it's challenging to do that. And I realize
that so to speak, many of my choices aren't entirely right because I make
them under the influence of facts from other people coming to me. I don't
have to deny it-I need to get it under control.

All who deny they are abused-deprive themselves of the ability to protect
themselves against it. It is the power of deception-it influences people not
only secretly, but even people themselves do not want to expose them. Once
used, traditional guns quickly turn the aggressor into an opponent and start
battling with him. Yet people don't see the manipulations and don't want to
know, so they follow them obediently. And consider what power you can
gain by learning how to exploit men.

CHAPTER ONE
What’s Dark Psychology?
 
 
Triad of darkness
Both world history and everyday life are full of examples of people
behaving ruthlessly, mischievously, or selfishly.
In psychology as well as in everyday language, we have many names for
the various dark patterns that the human being may have, including
psychopathy (lack of empathy), narcissism (excessive self-absorption), and
makeup (the belief that the ends justify the means).

These three traits, in particular, form what psychologists call the "triad of
darkness," to which others are added, such as selfishness, sadism, or evil.
What has now been found is that these "dark side" traits seem to share a
common dark core: whoever has one of those tendencies is more likely to
have one or more of the others as well.
Although at first glance there appear to be noticeable differences between
these traits or may seem more "acceptable" to be an egotistical person than
a psychopath, for example, new research shows that all dark aspects of
human personality are closely linked and based on the same trend.
 

Dark Psychology to Influence People
Before starting, it is essential to note that none of these methods falls into
the hidden arts of people's influence. Any technique that could harm
someone in any way, especially their self-esteem, is not included here.
These are methods to win friends and influence people using dark
psychology. Without being stupid or making someone feel bad.
 
1. Ask for favors Trick: Ask a favor from someone-also known as the
Benjamin Franklin Effect. The legend says Benjamin Franklin attempted to
captivate a man who did not like him. He begged the man to give him a rare
book and graciously thanked him for having the book. As a result, this man,
who had never before wished to speak to him, became a great friend of
Franklin.
Quoting Franklin: "He who once made you kind will always be more
prepared to make you different than the one you forced him to do so."
Scientists tested this theory and found that those whom the researcher asked
for a personal favor were far more favorably rated than the other groups. It
may seem irrational, but it is a valid theory. If somebody does you a favor,
he probably thought it was worth doing the favor for you, so he decided he
wanted you.
2. Ask a lot, Trick: Ask for much more than you would first want, then
narrow it down. This trick is known as the "door to face" approach to
influencing people. You begin by making an inadmissible request to
someone-a request, which is likely to be rejected. Then, a short time later,
you are asking for something that is far less unreasonable-something that
you wanted first.

This trick may seem unrelated, but the idea behind it is to make the person
feel he needs help now (since he initially refused). Scientists have found
this method to have worked exceptionally well as long as requests are made
to the same person because they will only feel obliged to help you around
the second time.
3. Names Trick: Use the name or title of the person according to the
situation. Dale Carnegie, author of How to Make Friends and Influence
People, though it was incredibly important to use a person's name. He said
the name of a person was for him the most appealing sound in any
language. The name is the core part of your identity, and listening to it
validates your existence and makes us much more willing to be positive
with the person who validated us. But according to this principle, the use of
a title can also have positive effects.
The idea is that if you act according to some type of person, with little self-
realization, you will become that person. You can say what kind of person
you would like them to be to influence people, so they will start acting
accordingly. It can be something simple, like calling someone "friend" or
"colleague" whenever you see him or referring to someone you would like
to work for as a "boss," but be warned: this might sound very tacky.
4. Praise Trick: Praise carries you wherever. This trick may seem obvious,
but there are important caveats over people's influence. It is important to
note for those starting that if the compliment is not sincere, it will do more
harm than good. Researchers looked at the reasons behind people's praise
reactions and found important information.
They found that people were paying attention to the mental balance,
keeping organized their thoughts and feelings. And, if you flatter someone

who is perceived as having strong self-esteem, as being honest, they will
value you more as it validates how they feel for themselves.
Nevertheless, if you compliment someone who has low self-esteem, there is
a risk that the shot will backfire and make them even less like you because
it interferes with their view. This does not, of course, mean that you will
demean someone with low self-esteem!
5. Mirror Trick: Mirror conduct. Mirroring is also called mimicry, and
some people do this naturally. People with this ability are considered
chameleons; they attempt to blend in with the environment by copying the
behavior, mannerisms, and speech patterns of other people.
But this ability can also be consciously used, and it is a great way to make it
more enjoyable. Scientists have researched mimicry and discovered that
imitators are far more likely to respond positively to those who replicated
them.
Even more interesting was the second finding that showed that people who
imitated their behavior became kinder and more generally supportive of
others, even those who did not get involved in the situation. The reason this
probably works is that they feel validated by mirroring someone is
behavior. Although this validation is positively associated with the person
who validated them, they feel better self-esteem and then become more
confident, happier, and well disposed towards others.
6. Use tiredness Trick: When the person is tired, ask for favors. When
tired, people become more susceptible to everything that anyone can say,
whether it is an order or a request. The reason for this is that when people
get tired, they decrease not only their physical strength but also their level
of mental energy.

You probably will not receive a definitive answer when you ask someone
tired, but an "I do it tomorrow" because, at that time, the person does not
want to deal with the decisions. The person will follow through with the
deal the next day, as they tend to want to keep their word. Following up on
something you said you would be doing is psychologically natural.
7. Offer cannot be refused Trick: Start with an offer you can't refuse and
increase from there. This is the reverse of the door-to-face technique.
Instead of starting with a big request, start with something small. When
someone commits to helping, they are more willing to agree to a more
significant request. Scientists have tested this phenomenon about
marketing.
First, they asked people to express their support for tropical forests and the
environment, which is a simple request. They found that once they got
people to support the environment, it was much easier to convince them to
buy products that helped tropical forests and the like. However, don't start
with one order and immediately place another. Psychologists have found
that it will be much more effective if you wait a day or two before placing
your second order.
8. Be quiet, Trick: Do not get people right when they are wrong. Carnegie
also pointed out in his famous book that telling a person he is wrong is
usually unnecessary, and will do the opposite to captivate him. There is a
way to demonstrate your disagreement and turn it into polite conversation,
without saying it is wrong, which would attack your ego's core.
It is known as the Ransberger Joint, created by Marshall Fritz and Ray
Ransberger. The idea is simple: Listen to what the other person has to say
instead of arguing. Try to see how she feels and why. So, talk about the
things that you have got in common. Explain your point of view using this

as a starting point. This will increase your chances of getting the person to
hear what you have to say and enable you to correct them without losing
control.
9. Repeat Trick: For people to paraphrase, to repeat what they said. Some
of the most effective ways of influencing people are to show you
understand what they want from them and what they want. Paraphrasing
and repeating what were said, also known as reflective listening, is one of
the most efficient ways to do this.
Studies have shown that they feel more willing to show their emotions and
have a better relationship with the therapist when therapists use reflective
listening. Moving into a chat with your colleagues is easy. If you listen to
what they are saying and ask it as a request, they will feel more relaxed
talking to you to make sure you hear. Friendship with you will improve
because they will be more likely to listen to what you have to say. You
have, after all, proved that you value it.
10. Wave to influence people Trick: Nod your head when you talk,
particularly when you ask for a favor. Scientists have found that people are
prone to agree when they nod their heads while listening to something.
They also found that it is natural for them to do the same when someone is
waving in front of them.
This is an obvious fact since it is known that man imitates behaviors—
particularly those who have positive connotations. So, wave regularly
during the conversation if you want to be more convincing. The person you
are talking to will find it hard not to wave too and will start feeling more
inclined to agree with what you are saying, even without knowing.

CHAPTER TWO
The Dark Psychology Traits
 
 
People can be classified according to their personality and the traits that
compose it, and different types are differentiated by their way of acting,
self-confidence, and the way they deal with the rest.
Just as there are different ways of being, there are also personality disorders
that are dangerous and harmful. In this section, we tell you what the four
types of personalities that science calls dark is.
 

Narcissistic
“Everything is allowed to me” or “Others are only there to worship me” are
typical examples of narcissistic- dominated thoughts. They are selfish
people, with a sense of egocentric right and a positive self-image, although
unrealistic if you consider the opinion of the people around you.
Narcissists are "snake charmers." At first, they are very dear to others, their
behaviors are pleasant and attractive, but over time, they can become very
dangerous. They may even unintentionally show what their true intentions
are: to gain more admiration and power.
They often get bored with the routine, so look for tough challenges. The
most narcissistic demand a leadership position, law, or any other profession
that involves high levels of stress. According to psychoanalyst Michael
Maccoby, narcissism is an increasingly frequent disorder in the upper levels
of the business world and is directly related to competition, salary, and
glamour.
One of their strengths is their great persuasiveness. Thanks to this, they
surround themselves with a large following, can convince without any
effort. In short, they always get what they set themselves. Moreover, as they
are not empathic, they are not scrupulous about the means and strategies
they use to achieve their goals.
The narcissists' interest and concern for others are zero despite their high
theatricality. They feel no remorse and are impassive to the needs and
feelings of the people around them.
Now your Achilles heel is your self-esteem. Narcissists often have very low
self-esteem, which is accompanied by internal vulnerability and some

instability. Therefore, they usually seek to relate to people they consider
inferior to exercise their dominance and feel powerful.
 

Machiavellian
For the "Machiavellians," the end justifies the means, regardless of the
consequences that may arise. They are very calculative and cold people,
destroying any real emotional connection with others. Although they have
traits in common with narcissists, such as selfishness and the use of others,
there is one distinguishing feature: they are realistic in their perceptions and
estimates of their abilities and the relationships they maintain.
The "Machiavellians" don't try to impress anyone, on the contrary. They
show themselves as they are and prefer to see things better because, in this
way, they can better manipulate each other. Their focus is on the emotions
of the people they would want to use to get what they want. If they know
your feelings, it will be easier to choose the best strategy to manipulate
them.
According to Daniel Goleman, people with Machiavellian characteristics
may have less empathy for others. Their coldness seems to stem from a lack
of processing both their own emotions and those of others.
Their emotions are so baffling that when they are anxious, they often cannot
tell whether they are sad, tired, or just not feeling well. However, they have
a remarkable ability to perceive what others think. But, as Goleman says,
"Even if your head knows what to do, your heart has no idea."
Machiavellianism Characteristic Warning signals from a toxic
Machiavelli’s
You can work for one, date one, or you, yourself, could be one. How can
you know for sure if someone has characteristics of Machiavellism?
Before you point your fingers at people and tell them that they have
Machiavellian characteristics, which makes you look super intelligent, if

you use it properly, you need to know what it means.
Machiavellism, as the Oxford English Dictionary says, "is the use of
cunning and duplicity in statesmanship or general behavior." Now let's
delete that sentence and make it genuinely readable * thank you, Oxford
Dictionary *. What it refers to is someone who focuses purely on his self-
interest and manipulates, cheats, and misused others to achieve his personal
goals. They don't look like great people.
Machiavellism traits to watch out for
Interestingly, Machiavellianism is part of the "dark triad" of the three
negative personality traits: narcissism, Machiavellism, and psychopathy.  If
someone has these qualities, they are more likely to perform actions that are
considered harmful. In other words, they are bastards.
If someone has these Machiavellian traits, at least one of them, they are
more likely to commit crimes and cause social distress.  Are there people
suddenly appearing in you? If someone has these qualities, you should keep
a close eye on them.
 If they are Machiavellian, they can be a psychopath. Now I am not
trying to scare you, but it is known that Machiavellianism is strongly
correlated to psychopathy. Does this mean that this person is going to
kill you? No. But it does mean that they have little empathy, mixed with
high levels of impulsiveness. It is, therefore, not the right combination to
date or to have children with if you get what I say. If I can make it
brighter, stay away from this person.
They show signs of duplicity. Duplication means, and again, thank you
Webster's Dictionary, the "contradictory ambiguity of thought, speech, or
action; especially, confessing one's true intentions through deceptive

words or deeds. " you have no idea where their right plans are because
they continuously tell you one thing and do another.
They are focused on their well-being. Listen, we are all animals, so it is
normal for everyone to be selfish and focused on their well-being. You
can't call someone Machiavellian to take care of themselves. However,
there is a moment when it goes overboard. People who score as
Machiavellianism think that to get ahead, they have to be misleading.
They are tactical. If they disclose information to you, this happens for a
specific reason and usually because it is beneficial to them. So, if you
feel like you are missing a piece of the puzzle, it's because it's you. And
if you think you've received all the right information, there is a reason
why. They never let you know anything just because you know it.
They manipulate and control. They study the people around them. They
know very well where everyone taps around them. That is why they are
successful in getting ahead of you. You may not even see their
manipulation until you realize that you are entirely dependent on it —
your talents, skills, and abilities they simply use to exploit.
It's about getting ahead. This is all a massive game for them. Intimate
relationships, if any, work, friends, are carefully selected, as if they were
chosen, to gain or retain power. But let's be sincere; these people are not
in the game of maintaining power; they always want more.
They are narcissistic. If they were not narcissistic, it would not make
sense. These people are only concerned about themselves. They sit high
on a pedestal and feel extremely important. Yes, self-interest is one
thing, but they are on a very different level because they think they are
the most critical people on the planet. That means they use you and
throw you away if it means they are making progress.

The ends justify the means. They don't care how they climbed the top of
the ladder to that cushy CEO position, and the point is they made it. All
the dirty work they had to do to get there makes perfect sense, and they
had to do it. Or else they would not have achieved what they were doing
or at least not in this period. They do not feel bad for their actions
because they have finally made their goal.
These people usually do not seek therapy. Usually, because they see
nothing that they are doing wrong or because they do not want to see a
therapist because they believe that people are generally unfair and do not
trust. Usually, when they go to therapy, it is due to family members,
friends, or a court order that forces them to do so. This doesn’t mean that
they will be successful with therapy; it must be wanted.
You will be charmed. They are very charming. If they were different,
you wouldn't pay attention to them, or you'd think they're bastards. But
they know how to get people to worship, respect, and fear them.
Although they may not have the desired skills, it doesn't matter, and they
have charm. As soon as they see something in you that they need, they
put that charm on and give you the feeling that you are a particular
person.
These people are toxic. If you read this because you think you know
someone who has Machiavellian traits, you can only do one thing:
remove them from your life. Yes, I know it sounds loud. Listen, people
like this don't change because they don't see a problem. The only thing
you can save yourself is to remove them from your life. Believe me, and
they will find a replacement for you soon.

Psychopaths and Sociopaths
The most dangerous of all dark
personalities, psychopaths being an essential part of serial killers who are
characterized by their cruelty and not only lack of empathy with the
suffering of the other, but also enjoy the evil of others.
Although psychopaths and sociopaths fall under the same dark personality
classification, psychopaths will sooner or later act as it is tough for them to

control their impulses. The sociopath is more intelligent, and although he
enjoys the suffering of others and causing pain, he goes more for the
psychological rather than the physical side.
A sociopath can live perfectly well without committing crimes, making
them more challenging to detect. In addition to dark personalities, both are
considered a harmful disorder that makes them dangerous for society since
there is no way to reform them, and they are born that way.
 

Sadism
Sadism is a word derived from Donatien Alphonse François de Sade, better
known as Marquis de Sade. It is a writer and philosopher who was born in
1740 and died in 1814 and who remained in history for narrating various
paraphilias and vices.
The notion of sadism, in this way, is used to name the perversion that
consists of obtaining pleasure from exercising cruelty on another living
being. The sadist, therefore, enjoys causing pain to others.
The usual thing is to associate sadism with the sexual: the sadist gets
excited and gets pleasure from humiliating the other or generating some
type of damage. Arousal is produced by humiliation and harm, and not by
the sexual practice itself.
Tying the couple with handcuffs, spanking, or locking them are some of the
behaviors of sadism. The sadist can also resort to rape his victim.
In addition to all the above, we cannot ignore other important aspects
related to sadism, such as these:
It becomes a negative paraphilia as long as it produces damage to third
parties.
According to the studies carried out in this regard, it has been shown
that, after studying the brain of sadists, they have a very high sensitivity
regarding what other people's pain is. Specifically, this conclusion has
been reached after checking how the amygdala, which processes,
reactions to what emotions are, was activated in the brains of these
individuals when they saw images of suffering and violence.
Many people practice sadism with their partners because both parties
agree and accept it. However, they must take certain precautions and

impose certain limits since some actions can directly be hazardous and
cause severe damage to one of them, including death. We are referring to
actions such as beating, raping, electric shock, torture, trying to strangle
her...
It is considered that there are a series of disorders that are associated
with a specific frequency to what is sadism. We are referring to
depressive disorder, antisocial disorder, narcissistic personality
disorder... In some cases, we can establish that, in addition to all the
above, it can also be associated with what is the consumption of
psychoactive substances.
 
Beyond sexuality, sadism is understood as an act of cruelty that a person
performs for his delight. A man who mistreats a dog for fun will be
incurring sadism: his action generates joy from the suffering of the animal.
He who kidnaps a child locks him in a room without light or ventilation,
denies him food, and only enters the room to hit his victim, will also be
developing behaviors of extraordinary sadism since he does not seek
anything other than to take pleasure in the abuse he exercises.
He who kidnaps a child locks him in a room without light or ventilation,
denies him food, and only enters the room to hit his victim, will also be
developing behaviors of extraordinary sadism since he does not seek
anything other than to take pleasure in the abuse he exercises.
We could consider that sadism to be one of the characteristics of the dark
personalities that we have already named, but a sadist takes his actions
much further than in other cases.
The sadist enjoys causing the most significant amount of suffering in the
other and at a higher level of cruelty. Their difference from psychopaths is

that sadists are not impulsive.
People with a sadistic personality seek to belong to groups or have jobs
where they have power over the application of control and violence over
others. A sadist is dangerous, but sadly he knows how to hide his actions as
well.
It is not necessary to gather all the traits to belong to one of these groups of
dark personalities since, like everything in human psychology, it is
presented in different degrees and not all reach the most harmful and
dangerous level.

CHAPTER THREE
What Are the Psychological Manipulation
Techniques?
 
 
A manipulation is an act involving the misuse of power as it requires the
use of discursive elements to manipulate one or more people's thoughts,
affections, and behaviors. Sometimes it is confused or combined with other
related processes: argumentation and persuasion, but they are not identical.
They clarify what manipulation is in this chapter and how it is different
from persuasion and argumentation. We also give several examples of
commonly used manipulation techniques.
 
Arguing, persuading and manipulating are not the same
All argumentation and persuasion and coercion may take the form of oral or
written speech and serve to justify an idea or an attitude in very general
terms, so it is very easy to confuse them. What separates them is the aim of
every pursues, as well as its particular elements.
The argument is an action in which an idea is given logic and coherence to
justify it. In other words, it is when we set up a justification for a particular
purpose: to explain or contradict the same justification or another.
On the other hand, persuasion happens when the argument has one more
purpose: it is used not only to justify or refute an idea but also to change the
interlocutor's behaviors.

 
So, coercion is when the argument is used to alter or direct the behavior of
the interlocutor. It is nevertheless based on two key elements and purposes:
control, or rather the misuse of power, which translates into domination.
This can be very subtle (usually goes unnoticed) and can be the basis for
symbolic abuse since it helps to support the interests of one party and
damage those of the other.
For this reason, manipulation can be analyzed from three dimensions (Van
Dijk, 2006): a social dimension exercised by the elites who have access to
public discourse, so their influence is broad; a cognitive dimension
consisting of controlling mental models and social representations, and a
discursive dimension consisting of using linguistic elements to be able to
influence both.
 
Some manipulation techniques
In recent decades, studies on how some groups or individuals manipulate
others have become very frequent, particularly in the area of media,
advertising, and political activity.
Due to this, we have been able to recognize specific methods of coercion
that we can very quickly fall into without knowing it, both in our
interpersonal interactions and in what we see on television or the Internet
every day.
While much more may be exemplified, below, we will examine the most
popular techniques of manipulation:
1. Gaslighting

Known as "gaslight," it is among the most insidious of all. "That never
happens," "You imagined it," or "Are you crazy?" These are some of the
expressions they use to distort and confuse your sense of reality, making
you believe something that did not happen.
Barton and Whitehead (1969) defined "gaslighting" as "the intentional
pursuit of making a person look crazy and make a profit from him." It
instills in victims an extreme sense of anguish and confusion, to the point
where they cease to trust themselves, their memory, perception, or
judgment.
In an investigation conducted by Galán and Figeroa (2017), they describe
making "gaslights" with denial of the damage caused, creating lies, offering
false information, and disqualifying the victim's feelings. It is also a method
of confusing the partner, manipulating, blaming, and downplaying the
experiences and thereby destroying the victim through their mental health.
The attacker's communication to the victim is hostile through silences,
complaints, bad jokes and humiliations, threats, etc. According to the
authors, the consequences on the victim can be several:
 
Guilty feeling.
Disorientation.
Panic.
Anger.
Duel.
Low self-esteem.
Lack of autonomy.
Emotional dependence.
Alcohol consumption

Even suicide.
 
2. Projection
The manipulator transfers his negative traits or shifts the responsibility for
his behaviors to another person. The narcissists and psychopaths the
overused, claiming that the evil that surrounds them is not their fault, but
yours.
3. Play with feelings and emotions
Controlling the effective aspect is one of the most critical devices as it helps
recipients reaffirm their beliefs and positions without actually having
passed rational, analytical, or vital thinking through.
An example could be the activity of the tabloid press, which is the one that
exaggerates the news giving the information a touch of sensationalism
rather than rigor, because the aim is precisely to appeal to the emotional
dimension of the readers and their previous experiences, and thus to
increase visits or sales.
4. Simplify the message and include strong affirmations
It consists of controlling the cognitive elements that allow us to process and
understand a message. It is when you use quick and resounding guesses that
do not give the possibility of in-depth analysis, which is intentionally
hindering the understanding of the argument.
For example, when a small part of a text is printed in large letters,
underlined and at the beginning, which in addition to immediately attracting
our attention and activating short-term memory, causes us to have a partial
or biased understanding of the information.
5. Use what authority says or thinks

It is when introducing an individual or leader who is socially accepted as a
competent authority justifies a role. It is beneficial as we also prefer to think
more strongly about the views, actions, or behaviors of someone we respect
or someone in a position of influence.
It can mean that of an artist or a family member from the opinion of a priest
or president, and its usefulness depends on the context in which the
community or individual works.
6. Individualize conflicts and suggest that they are always the same
This is when a situation, mainly when it is a contradictory situation, is
reduced to what a single person or group of people does, does, or feels,
ignoring all the other factors, agents, or groups that also influence or are
influenced by that situation, leading to general awareness, love, attitude or
ideology.
An example can be found in the situations that arise where an incident is
portrayed as an isolated occurrence in the news media, or as the act of a
"madman" (with whom we are encouraged to hate everyone that it seems),
rather than being interpreted as the product of complicated political and
social disputes.
7. Use and reinforce stereotypes
Stereotypes are behavioral qualities that are attributed in a simplified and
almost automatic way to a person or a group of people.
They are useful as a persuasion technique because they allow controlling
values ​and judgments without having to justify the arguments deeply and
without allowing the recipient to question himself widely. That is, interest
in deep and reflective information is not favored.
 

Behavioural and Character Traits of the
Manipulators
Throughout your life, you will encounter manipulative people, who pursue
your selfish purposes, for whom they have no qualms about causing harm to
you.
Generally, manipulative people have no qualms or compassion when they
find a new victim for their plans since they are individuals dedicated to
exploiting other people's weaknesses to achieve their benefit, regardless of
what they have to do for it.
The manipulative method used in his approach focuses on emotional
blackmail, involving people with false words and deeds. In this way, their
victims trust and yield to the supposed good intention of this manipulative
mind, which pretends to feel sympathy and appreciation for others.
Hence the danger posed by manipulative people to anyone's life, as for
them, there is no moral limit or obstacle between their goal and themselves.
This allows them to easily crush, use, and dispose of people affected by the
way they act.
Despite knowing the threat that manipulative people pose in their life, it is
quite challenging to differentiate them into a group of acquaintances or co-
workers since you can even fall victim to someone without realizing it until
you are affected by their bad influence.
That is why we present five typical characteristics of a manipulator to help
you identify and recognize this type of predator that lurks in your social
circles.
 

Five common traits in manipulative people
Innate speakers
Manipulative people demand their best speech skills to convince their
victims of their false good intentions to deal with the gift of speech
effectively.
They can transform any situation they find themselves in to convince others
of their innocence. They are coming to create a false image in the minds of
those who fall for their mind games.
They maintain excessive control over the situation, always obtaining the
most significant benefit in exchange for others' hard work. His word tends
to confuse and manipulate his victims efficiently, to the point of remaining
unaware of a bad way of acting.
Manipulative people are greedy
Manipulators do not pursue a simple goal that they can achieve on their
own; on the contrary, and they are always looking for a greater objective
that continuously compresses their victims.
The hunger for power and control is also a reflection of the great ego that
manipulative people tend to possess—those who over-rely on their
manipulation to the point of feeling invincible, lest they set future limits.
They tend to assume the role of the victim
Being a victim implies significant vulnerability and innocence, so it is the
unique role of manipulative people. Since people around you never think
that the victim is the victim.
In this way, they manipulate other people emotionally, playing with their
feelings. Therefore, confrontation with a manipulator can make you believe

that he is the victim, and you are the aggressor.
Create a false image of the need
Piety is the emotion that manipulative people tend to hold on to. To do this,
they use an image of weakness and fragility, to which their victims fall
easily, wanting to help someone in need.
After deceiving people with their false need, a manipulator makes his
victims feel responsible for their health, food, money, and any other
benefits they can obtain from that individual.
Manipulative people always lie
Inevitably, lying is part of any manipulator's repertoire. They deal with this
ability naturally, without showing doubts or any characteristic that allows
their victims to detect the truth behind their false facade.
Manipulative people are masters of lies, to the point of lying in any aspect
of their lives, regardless of whether it is minimal or essential. Because,
through deception, they can approach the goal they are pursuing.
For lack of a moral compass, there is no limit to the lies of a manipulator.
For him, lies are part of the tools he needs to achieve his goal, regardless of
who causes harm.
 

CHAPTER FOUR
Signs That You're Being Manipulated
 
 
There is a category of manipulators who try to influence people, fully aware
of what they are doing. To manipulate is to persuade a person to fulfill his
will to gain profit. A person unconsciously manipulates from an early age.
Already, pre-schoolers can use primitive manipulation techniques to get
what they want from their parents.
Most adults also use manipulation techniques, but more often, they do it
unknowingly. But there is a category of manipulators who try to influence
people, fully aware of what they are doing. Such people are called energy
vampires, and maintaining close contact with them is sometimes very
dangerous.

How to recognize who is in front of you - an experienced manipulator,
aware of his actions, or just a person acting out of habit, unconsciously?
Consider these signs that you are being manipulated consciously.
1. The model of behavior
If we talk about experienced manipulators who are used to achieving their
goals by controlling people through their subconscious fears and
weaknesses, they differ in a particular behavior model. Conscious
manipulations gradually lead to personality deformation. Several behavioral
features are considered typical. The first thing you need to pay attention to
is excessive, ostentatious emotionality.
Second, such people are attentive and observant, and you can notice how
they sometimes peer at people. A professional manipulator will never listen
to a person inattentively. He listens sympathetically, actively participates in
conversations, can assent. And of course, the third - the manipulators take
small pauses between the emotional reactions and the events that provoked
them. This happens only because their body needs a little more time to
synthesize emotions, which are often an instrument of control and
influence.
2. Unpredictability
As a rule, it is impossible to predict or predict such a person's words and
actions in advance. This distinguishes manipulators - they have flexibility,
and they always adjust their actions depending on the situation, and on how
open the interlocutor is. Unpredictability is inherent in every person, but
usually, the actions and words of such people in most cases can be
predicted. Manipulators often use it as a technique that discourages the
interlocutor, disorients, and plunges into confusion. It is at such moments

that people are most open to manipulation, and one who uses this method of
influence consciously often uses unpredictability.
3. The lack of direct answers
As a rule, an unconsciously manipulating person does not care that they can
figure it out. However, professionals know what they are doing and why,
and are as cautious as possible in their speeches. Therefore, they often
answer evasively or may even evade answers if it is not convenient for them
to answer questions.
4. Inconsistency of gestures and emotions
This is a typical sign of insincerity that accompanies all the speech of
manipulators using unclean tricks in dealing with people. You can replace
the difference between what kind of emotional tone a person speaks and
what his gestures are. As a rule, manipulators actively gesticulate, and it is
difficult not to notice it. Unconscious manipulation is distinguished by the
fact that a person does everything automatically, and the pros perfectly
understand their insincerity and try to hide behind an emotional
background.
5. Conversations in private
Each of us sometimes needs to discuss something with someone in private.
This is the norm and does not contain any toxic elements. But a consciously
manipulating person almost always calls his potential victim into a solitary
conversation, since in this case, he will have to face the least resistance. A
person who realizes that he plans to persuade someone through
psychological pressure to fulfill his will not do this in public, where there is
a high risk of exposure.
6. Valuation judgment

Pro manipulators use-value judgment more often than ordinary people.
They intend to expose the world, people, phenomena, and actions in black
or white, without shades. They have only "very good" - this is usually what
is beneficial to them. And "very bad" is what they do not need at all.
7. Eye-to-eye look
As a rule, psychologists recommend recognizing liars and manipulators by
a wandering gaze. People often look away when they are not completely
sincere, but this is most often done by those who do this unconsciously. An
energy vampire who knows his job, on the contrary, tries to look directly
into the eyes of his interlocutor, and rarely looks away. Because of this
gaze, people get confused quicker and can make concessions easier.
8. Speed
The manipulator, acting consciously, does not give the interlocutor time for
thought and does it very skillfully. It requires an immediate response, and
always adjusts the circumstances in such a way as to increase the likelihood
of agreement. They do everything very quickly, do not insert pauses in
conversations, and are always in a hurry. Modern psychologists have begun
to study the fraud's problem to uncover as many criminal schemes as
possible aimed at taking away other people's money.
Relatively recently, psychologists around the world have become interested
in the so-called "toxic charges." We are talking about fraudulent
fundraising, allegedly for sick children. Law enforcement authorities have
uncovered several such cases. And psychologists noted that in all messages
of scammers, there was an emphasis on urgency.
9. The tendency to downplay

This is another psychological technique that is not always used consciously.
The tendency to downplay is inherent in absolutely all categories of
manipulating personalities, but those who do this intentionally use this
technique more often and more persistently. Such a person likes to
periodically accept the victim's image because having caused pity in the
interlocutor makes it easier for him to manage him.
10. Aura of hopelessness
If the manipulator acts consciously, it does not just play down, which
thickens colors to hopelessness. The complete hopelessness that he can
draw in the imagination of the interlocutor is not a reliable reflection of
reality. The manipulator presents only negative facts, skillfully hiding the
positive aspects and keeping silent about them.
To learn to recognize manipulators and understand whether they manipulate
consciously or unconsciously, experience and practice are needed.
Unfortunately, it is far from always possible to figure out an energy vampire
right away, but with experience, this skill will come.
 

How to Defend Yourself from a Manipulative
Person
Know our Fundamental rights
The single most important guideline when dealing with a manipulative
person is knowing our rights and recognizing when they are being violated.
As long as it doesn't harm others, we have the right to stand up and defend
our rights.
We have the right to: Be treated with respect, express our feelings and
opinions, set our priorities, refuse something, differ in views, take care of
ourselves, set limits, and be happy.
Understand the characteristics of a manipulative person
The observation of their behaviors is essential since they are not always
very evident to the naked eye, but little by little we can discover them, and
if we are patient, they will reveal they are true intentions
Try to change ourselves, not the manipulator
We must focus on not being vulnerable and easy targets for a manipulator,
and it is easier for us to change than for them to change.
Another change that we can make is in the dynamic that is established
between the manipulators and us. Altering this dynamic makes the
manipulators stop having control and thus often give up their manipulative
intentions.
Keep distance
One way to detect a manipulator is to see if a person acts with different
faces in front of other people and different situations. When this type of
behavior is observed, the most advisable thing is to maintain a healthy

distance and avoid getting too involved with that person, since otherwise
we can be affected.
Avoid making it personal
The manipulator seeks to exploit our weaknesses, and it can make us feel
inadequate or even guilty. For this, it is essential to remember that we are
not the problem, nor are we to blame; they are merely trying to make us feel
bad or guilty to gain more power and control over us. We must think about
whether the other person's demands are reasonable, whether we feel good
about ourselves being with that person, and whether we are being respected.
Focus on them by asking probing questions
Inevitably, psychological manipulators will make requests (or demands) of
us, and these often focus on satisfying their desires. We must pay attention
to whether the requests are reasonable. Sometimes it is useful to focus on
them and ask them if they can recognize the unreasonableness of their
request; by doing this, we put a mirror on them to see if it can realize their
intentions and withdraw the request.
take our time
Handlers often expect an answer immediately and apply pressure by
reducing the time they give to receive the response. Distancing yourself
from the influence of the manipulator to think before answering usually
helps us to decide better, since we can evaluate the pros and cons with
greater confidence.
Learn to say "No" diplomatically
Making one of an assertive communication allows us to express our wishes,
without our choice being violated more easily. We should not be afraid to

deny ourselves something, nor feel guilty for not meeting someone else's
demands.
Confront
Staying passive and docile makes it easier for manipulators to exert
influence over us, as they will find us weak, so we must show ourselves
strong and secure when defending our rights.
Confronting someone puts us in a safe position and takes us out of
vulnerability since by facing them, we make them see that we are aware of
their purpose and that their manipulation strategies are not going unnoticed.
 

Practical Tips for Dealing with Predators
With an emotional predator, we should have sound social and psychological
support. An emotional predator's victim does not always have sufficient
resources to deal with this conduct. It is thus common to be entirely
dependent upon the first person who feels the victim of a psychological jail
and, in turn, is trapped by fear.
In those cases, it is always vital that we have social and health support,
besides making use of adequate psych emotional skills. As striking as it
may seem, all of us can sometimes fall into such damaging links. Our
gender, social position, or previous experience does not matter.
The emotional predator lives almost everywhere. Moreover, behind these
behaviors, there is sometimes a narcissistic profile, a personality that is
highly specialized in psychological manipulation, darkness, and
domination. In all cases, knowing how to act is critical.
Identify the emotional predator
There is a first aspect we must consider. We must be sensitive and know
how to react in time to all emotional predation processes. We cannot forget
that this reality occurs too often, defining a widespread type of
psychological abuse.
To do this, we must put aside the blame and gradually abandon tolerance,
recognizing that the person with whom we are may have a possible
personality disorder or simply be someone with dangerous behavior.
Therefore, it is essential to understand their tactics and how they work with
psychological help and support from our environment.
Let's see some characteristics.

How is the emotional predator?
He yearns for control at all times.
He despises and humiliates the other person. In case you offer
reinforcements or positive acts, it will be done for personal interest or
to get something.
It manipulates reality, makes us believe that we are wrong or that we
are naive.
You victimize yourself to be in control.
Ironic, critical, sarcastic language.
Grandiose airs.
He punishes us often with indifference and with the idea of ​severing
the relationship.
Project the blame on us.
As a curiosity, according to a study carried out at the University of
Innsbruck, Germany, by doctors Ursa Nagler and Katharina J.  Reiter, the
emotional predator is highly skilled in Emotional Intelligence. However, be
careful because that ability is used to control others.
Stop justifying yourself
It is essential to keep this message in mind when you are faced with an
emotional predator. The victim will indeed want to justify himself since the
aggressor's speech is riddled with lies, but the explanations and
justifications will only lead to getting more stuck at that moment:
The emotional predator will use all the mistakes and inaccuracies that
his victim has made against him, even if they had good intentions.
Therefore, silence is better, since anything we do or say can turn
against us.

If we are facing a moment of separation, the harassment process can
be carried out by phone or through messages.
For them, it is recommended if it is possible to change the number or email,
filter them, or have a third person to help us. It is whoever intervenes since
if it is the victim who responds again, they can re-immerse themselves in
the process of emotional predation, destabilizing their separation and
independence.
Act
As the mental process of separation progresses, and the victim finds himself
strong and resilient, he can change his strategy and act firmly, without fear.
The crisis will allow the victim's life to be reborn again. We must end this
link clearly and definitively.
To resist
It is essential to know that to resist psychologically, and you need some
support to restore the lost self-confidence of the victim.
Good support is content to be on the victim's side when the victim needs it,
without making judgments or being fooled by reproaches and
manipulations.
Furthermore, it is advisable to go to professionals (psychologists,
psychiatrists, etc.) to help restore our well-being and personal autonomy
and to restore confidence and face our fears.
Justice intervention
A crisis or conflict of this kind can only be resolved with justice. However,
the evidence is necessary for these processes. This is where more
complications usually occur because humiliations, contempt, insults, and

offenses are hard to prove unless there is a third party when they occur,
which may be the key.
It is also suggested that all written documents be kept as evidence. It is an
arduous process, full of uncertainty, as many judges are suspicious.
Perhaps the only way to protect the victim is to establish strict judicial
orders and avoid inter-party contact. Finally, being a matter of justice,
taking adequate protection measures to prevent the resurgence of emotional
predation relationship.

CHAPTER FIVE
Deciphering Personality Types
 
 
 
How many human personality types have is one of psychology's most
widely discussed topics? Understanding other people is beneficial in
establishing effective relationships with others. For many experts, how to
identify each has been the subject of research for years, and it seems that a
team has now managed to divide it into several different classes.
Several expert scientists have used the five widely accepted basic
dimensions of personality: neuroticism, extraversion, openness to new
experiences, agreeability, and responsibility to determine four main groups.
The extensive research project, led by Northwest Engineering's Luis
Amaral and comprising data from more than 1.5 million respondents,
identified them as: "average," "reserved," "self-centered," and "role models.
The questionnaires, developed over the decades, have between 44 and 300
questions. People volunteered online tests attracted by the opportunity to
receive comments about their personalities. Additionally, this data is now
available for independent analysis of other scientists.
Researchers emphasize that personalities change over the years.
While psychologists have long been quite skeptical about personality tests
and their effectiveness, the large number of results recorded in this
particular study suggests that experts could work with these new categories.
In the mean

This type was the most repeated in the questionnaires, and we could call
them "normal." They show moderate traits of responsibility (awareness and
consideration of a person) and kindness (understanding, little hostility),
extraversion and emotional instability (or neuroticism: mood swings,
tendency to feel angry or sad), and with few expectations (curiosity and
search for new experiences and low learning).
Reserved
They are people with high emotional stability and a normal character,
neither open nor neurotic. They are not known as outgoing but friendly and
responsible. They are somewhat shy, they usually do not look at the eyes,
and they put great distances with others. They are generally quite insecure
and store emotional information (both positive and negative). Their
disposition is usually empathetic and correct, and they usually get annoyed
if, for no reason, someone raises their voice.
Egocentric
According to scientists, they are not very pleasant to others. They combine
a lower score in kindness, openness, and responsibility. They have high
extroversion, but little frankness and conscientiousness. They also focus on
themselves and prefer not to live new experiences.
They believe they know all and impose their opinion on any subject. They
are superior, do not take advice, and always try to control the situation.
According to the study, it is a type of toxic personality, not just for others
but for themselves. They like compliments and hint at the great source of
wisdom at all times.
Role models

They have high levels of extraversion, kindness, and accountability with
low neuroticism. They are exceptionally scrupulous in every way. Traits
that predominate in women, cultivated with age. They are also always
interested in what others have to say. They are leaders, emotionally stable,
hard-working.
Weinberg College of Arts and Sciences Professor of Psychology William
Revelled showed the classification to a skeptic of personality types. "I am
very direct," he warned. "My first reaction was to say that it was stupid."
However, he was so interested that he became a co-author of the study
published in 'Nature.' "People have tried to classify personality types since
the time of Hippocrates, but previous scientific literature found it to be
meaningless. Now, these data show that there are higher densities of certain
types.
Changes over time
Researchers note there is an evolution as the years go by. The data analyzed
reveal something everyone knows from their own experience: it is
widespread for us in adolescence to be subjects focused on ourselves
(mostly men). Neurotic tendencies decrease over time, and responsibility
and kindness increase.
The questionnaires used range from 33 to 400 and are reliable due to a large
number of participants
Amaral says, "When you study very large population groups, clear trends
appear to change depending on the age group." Scientists argue that their
findings will be of great help to psychologists and psychiatrists who, thanks
to them, will have a reference model for diagnosing mental illnesses.
"What is cool is that a study with such a large set of data would not have
been possible before the internet. Previously, researchers might recruit

students on campus and maybe get a few hundred people. Now, we have all
these online resources, and more data can be shared," he adds.
 

Five Subtypes of Paranoid Personality
Sensitive Personality
Most important of all, paranoid subtypes. It is the closest entity to paranoid
psychosis; it is also called benign paranoia, relational paranoia, or abortive
paranoia. It was described in 1918 by the German psychiatrist Ernst
Kretschmar (The Sensitive Reference Delusion), who already gave
psychological factors a significant role.
In it, personality is the nucleus of disorder, and the delirium, almost always
absent in the paranoid personality, appears temporarily as a reaction to an
emotional stress situation. Delirium does not seriously alter the subject's life
as it does not invade the issue as a whole as it occurs in paranoia. When
they leave, they criticize the delusional contents ("I see that everything was
my imagination').
These are patients with significant childhood emotional disaffections,
grown-up without close supervision, who have been forced to decipher the
world for themselves since their tenderest years, without anyone giving
them the keys to doing so.
Like children, patients with sensitive personalities interpret everything that
happens around them as referring to them and with intense guilt burden.
Their hypervigilance state makes them very sensitive, and they capture
details that others go unnoticed that they see them related.
These are patients with significant childhood emotional disaffections,
grown-up without close supervision, who have been forced to decipher the
world for themselves since their tenderest years, without anyone giving
them the keys to doing so. They observe reality from a barrier they believe
is insurmountable, always outside.

Usually, they are peaceful, pessimistic, stubborn, introverted, sad, and
lonely subjects because they never felt entitled to be part of the world. They
tend to be self-critical, often feeling inferior. They perceive any comment
around them, especially from hierarchical superiors, as a pejorative and
critical allusion to them. They will also consider it humiliating and possibly
deserved, but never express their anger until it explodes in delirium.
The paranoid fanatic
This, along with the following five categories, was suggested by brilliant
American psychologist Theodore Millon, an example of a smart integrative
personality vision.
They often had an over-protective upbringing that nurtured an idealized
self-perception. He has some commonality to his paranoid traits with
narcissistic personality (they are arrogant, pretentious, and expansive). Still,
unlike the narcissist's success, the fanatic collides with reality and fails.
Their resentment for the injury they have suffered causes them to seek
success through outlandish claims and complex fantasies in which they are
the victims of intangible conspiracies and hidden powers. It is common in
populist political leaders, dictators, and sect heads. Adolf Hitler fits this
perfectly.
The evil paranoid
This subtype shares sadistic personality traits besides having a paranoid
core. They are convinced that as others seek to attack and subdue them,
they must conquer the power to dominate at all costs before they can be
dominated. Their language is always threatening, and they pursue revenge
on past damage.
They seek their full autonomy from what they consider to be evil external
influences, which, together with the fact that they always arouse intense

antipathy, reinforces their antagonism with the group.
This subtype is the one that maintains the most fierce and inexhaustible
struggle for a permanent power struggle with the environment. They occupy
central roles in movies and stories ("ambitious baddie"). Finding one among
political leaders is not unusual. The prototype is Joseph Stalin and his
acolyte Lavrenti Beria, among others, who saw his fears fulfilled and
executed by Nikita Kruschev (yes, after "preventively" massacring millions
of Russians).
The stubborn paranoid
In this case, obsessive personality traits appear (rigidity, perfectionism,
inflexibility, need for control, etc.) but with much greater instability and
reality disconnection. When they reach a position of power, they can reach
unbearable toxicity levels, imposing unattainable goals and impossible
standards.
The patient defies any external limitation and power expression to regain
control and remedy old injustices. He despises all as weak, undisciplined,
hypocritical. They are too "sticky," unavailable to defeat, and never let go
of what they are fighting.
They are the protagonists of decades of administrative disputes, never
renouncing their victory—nothing worse than litigating with a stubborn
paranoid or being confronted with neighborhood issues. Never give up.
Simultaneously, they are dominated by feelings of guilt for their attacks and
persecutory fear of revenge from others.
The querulant paranoid
Paranoid traits are combined in this subtype with negativistic personality
(discontent, pessimistic, stubborn, insecure, and vindictive). He does not

pursue power and focuses his efforts on crushingly repairing the damage he
believes he is suffered.
He is sullen, fussy, resentful, jealous, argumentative, obstructive, and
accusing. They are always litigating to repair what they consider unfair
treatment. They boast of autonomy and renounce their social relationships,
but suffer from isolation and present depressive symptoms they hide. In
handling affections, it is very ambivalent, and they seek affection while
rejecting it.
The isolated paranoid
It is a paranoid subtype combining evasive or phobic personality traits.
Instead of trying to meet the persecuting elements, they isolate themselves
to avoid confrontation and not revenge. They are moody, apprehensive, and
critical-sensitive. They are terrified by their enemies' humiliation.
Your inner world ends up becoming an amalgam of disjointed and distorted
ideas that can easily lead to delusion.
 

What is Covert Emotional Manipulation?
In our gut, we may have an awkward feeling that does not suit the words of
the manipulator or feel stuck in agreeing to a proposal. Most people respond
in ways that exacerbate violence or play into the abuser's hands and handle
small and guilty, but withdraw and permit unacceptable conduct. If you had
a deceptive parent, recognizing in a partner may be more difficult because it
is familiar.
Ancient wisdom is essential when dealing with a manipulator to "know
your opponent" Being able to spot those secret arrows helps you to respond
to subtle exploitation strategically. Comprising what they are up to inspire
you.
When people act passively-aggressively, implicit aggression is what tends
to be passive or defensive. The degree to which their action is conscious or
unconscious is debatable.
No matter to the survivor. The impact is similar. Being too empathetic
places you in danger of being mistreated over and over again. They become
violent when someone is threatening you directly or covertly. Psychologist
George Simon claims that these secret manipulators consciously say and do
stuff for power and influence to get what they want.
He insists that for character-logically impaired individuals, such as
sociopaths and narcissists, and even individuals with a borderline
personality disorder, their strategies are not unconscious in the way
defensive mechanisms usually work. But their action becomes so ordinary
that it is reflexive over time. They are not talking about it, but they are still
aware of it.
 

Signs of Emotional Manipulation
Emotional manipulation is not always obvious… Manipulators can be very
good at what they do and go unnoticed. So how to identify such a situation?
Read the text and check out eight signs of emotional manipulation
Manipulate by words
A handler can say things in a way that seems genuine and honest. They are
adept at hiding their true intentions. For example, you might express anger
at them for missing a birthday / special occasion, and they respond
something like "wow, you make me very sad to think that I would forget
your birthday." Or, "Wow, I lie because you make me."
It is widespread for them to use words to make you feel guilty for
something that you are not to blame. It can be a simple matter of forgetting
your birthday and stopping even the most severe aggressions.
Distort facts
Another form of manipulation is when they distort what happened or what
you said. Use phrases out of context or retell a fact in their view. And some
are so good that they can make you believe that. Usually, they justify their
bad behavior and blame you.
They are great at making you feel guilty
Guilt is one of the great weapons of emotional manipulation. It is always
you. You stopped talking or talked too much. You worry too much, or you
don't care. You're too careful or sloppy… Anyway, the handler will always
try to convince you that it's your fault for the bad behavior. And they are
great at putting themselves in the victim position.
Minimize Your Problems

Emotional manipulators do not care about their problems. Whenever you
say something like “wow, I have a migraine,” they will find a way to
convince you that they have a much worse problem. They will take your
lines and make you feel guilty for saying anything, as their issues are so
much worse, their work is more stressful, their lives are harder… or they
will try to make you believe that.
Passive-Aggressive
Passive-aggressive behavior is widespread in emotional manipulation. They
often say good things to you but superficial. Then they will depreciate you,
make up some problems, messing up your psychological health. Or they
will simply be silent out of nowhere, making him even more guilty, wanting
to find out what he "did wrong."
Energetic Vampires
Emotional manipulators have a dark cloud that follows them wherever they
go. When they enter the room, the cloud envelops everyone, so attention
falls to them. Gradually we feel weakened. They are toxic and will always
try to take away our joy. The best thing we can do is walk away.
Aggression
Handlers often use aggressive language and actions to intimidate you. If
they realize that you do not confront them, they will make you feel
uncomfortable, and therefore they will get what they want easily.
Aggressions tend to get worse and worse and may escalate into abuse as
they "advance" in their form of emotional manipulation.
 

How to deal with an emotional manipulator?
Try to Understand This Person's Need for Acceptance
If the person acting in a manipulative manner is a member of the family or
someone with whom you believe the relationship should be maintained and
helped, try to analyze their attitudes and understand the origin. It can be
insecurity, and it can be a lack of self-esteem. Each of these feelings is a
sign of a kind of need, and you can help it, demonstrating that this gap can
be filled without depending on, interiorizing, or manipulating others.
It is worth remembering that it is essential to stop giving in to blackmail
and attempts at manipulation if you intend to help. Loving is also knowing
how to say no when necessary, and being firm to have a healthy
relationship, be it of love, friendship, work, or family, is essential. Dialogue
is a crucial thing to seek understanding, too.
Seek Self-Knowledge and Understand Your Needs
Self-knowledge is the solution to most of the issues we may have
concerning our feelings. A manipulative situation also constitutes a
relationship of dependence between both parties. If you tend to get carried
away by somebody is blackmail, it is because, perhaps, you also need
acceptance and feel loved that makes you give in to the other's will, even
without wishing to.
Knowing your feelings will help you to understand why you tend to give in
to manipulation. You will be able to stand firm through this understanding
and come to the conclusion that you do not need to act against your
convictions and wishes just to be accepted by someone. By demonstrating
security over what you want, the manipulative person will see he no longer
has power over you.

When is it best to walk away?
There are cases where the best thing to do is move away, preventing the
manipulative individual from continuing to make you feel ever more
dependent and inferior. This attitude is necessary, mainly in abusive-type
amorous relationships, in which the other needs to remain in control of the
situation and, for this, emotionally and, in the most severe cases, even
physically mistreat their partner.
Breaking a relationship can be very delicate, but you need to recover your
freedom and individuality in many cases. Remember always that your
happiness and safety must come first, and that it may not be the best choice
to sacrifice to stay with someone who uses harmful devices like blackmail.
Analyze the relationship as a whole and ponder how it usually makes you
feel most of the time. That way, you can find the answer to how you should
be acting. And if you already know what to do, encourage yourself, and
make your physical and mental well-being and happiness a priority.
A relationship, whether it is loving or not, should be based upon respect for
the individualities and desires of each individual. It is essential that you
know your feelings and wishes so that when someone tries to manipulate
you, you can identify and lead you to act differently than you think. Watch
this out, empower yourself, and take control of your life!

CHAPTER SIX
Understanding Body Language
 
 
 
Body language has been known to affect interpersonal relationships
significantly. And there are several ways in which basic hand motions can
be interpreted. Other movements of the body and other facial expressions
can alter the sense of a hand gesture to complicate matters further. And it
may not be as straightforward as appearing to be reading body language.
It is still not known to individuals, but their body movements are an
indicator of unwanted actions that can transmit their thoughts to others.
Since different personality types show different behaviors, you need to be
aware of how you travel, because the behaviors you demonstrate can judge
you many times.
It is important to note that not only the movements we call body language
can tell us a lot about other people, but they can also tell us something
about ourselves about these physical manifestations of what we think. Body
language can be described as a mirror to the soul, as usually, our attitude
and physical movements represent what we feel. The way we deal with
ourselves will tell us what emotions we feel.
The fascinating thing about nonverbal communication is it is our product of
physiology, environment, and culture. Maybe that is why we can warn
others about our behaviors. We may inherit specific characteristics that
affect how we project ourselves to others and depending on our
relationships, and we continue to use different types of nonverbal
communication. You can present yourself to colleagues at work, for

example, differently from members of your family. You might be more
vigilant in different circumstances, influencing how you respond, because
the comfort zone changes.
There is no way you will be visually showing yourself to others. Although
specific movements are intended, many of the body's responses seem more
unconscious when we interact with others. Unfortunately, implicit body
language often lets us show information about us that we do not want others
to know. Some physical indicators can give us hints about our state of
emotion or what we might feel.
We observe and process other people's body language, especially when
talking. Facial expressions and hand motions accompany the discussion. If
we were not aware of these things, somebody else's words might not have
the same effect.
One way to more effectively perceive the signals from others is to become
more self-conscious. Pay attention to the motions and expressions. To
convey a feeling, try to see the connexion between your non-verbal
communication and the words. You will begin to better understand your
interactions with others by learning to read your body language.
Children are a prime example of our body language, which is unconscious.
Sometimes young children express their feelings non-verbally, even after
learning the vocabulary. Usually, you can tell a child how frustrated or sad
she is. Toddlers and preschoolers tend to be able to express themselves
verbally. In the same way, babies and children understand our body
language very well.
Interestingly enough, the moves children use to express their needs will
eventually help their brains develop and lead to later verbal communication.
Children pay close attention to an adult's face whilst talking to them from

the beginning. Why did they not know that? The underlying explanation is
genetics, so perhaps the eyes are the portals of the soul!
Developing
Sometimes a text is used instead of a word or a sentence, or something is
drawn with the hands to complement what is said orally. For example, the
signal of what is said goes between quotation marks are made with the
index and middle fingers of both hands. For example: to indicate late
arrival, the clock is tapped. It belongs to the category of paralanguages,
which describe all forms of non-verbal human communication. This
includes the most subtle and unconscious movements, including winking
and slight eyebrow movements. Also, body language can consist of the use
of facial expressions and posture.
Paralanguage (including body language) has been extensively studied in
social psychology. In everyday discourse and popular psychology, the term
is often applied to body language considered involuntary. However, the
difference between what is deemed to be voluntary and involuntary body
language is often controversial. For example, a smile can be triggered
consciously or unconsciously.
Body posture
Body posture is the posture of the body or its parts about a reference
system, either the orientation of an element of the body with another aspect
or with the body as a whole, or its relationship with another person.
Within the body language, one talks about open or closed postures. The first
ones are those postures where there are no barriers such as arms or legs
between one interlocutor and others, otherwise in closed postures, where for
example, crossed arms are used to isolate or protect the body

(unconsciously in many cases). Furthermore, it is essential to consider the
ideal positions to speak according to the point, for example:
In competitive situations: face to face
To help or cooperate: next door
To chat: at a right angle
Head posture
Side to side movements: denial.
Up and down movements: assent.
Above: neutral or evaluation.
Laterally tilted: interest.
Tilt down: disapproval, negative attitude.
Arms pose
Standard crossing: defensive posture, can also mean insecurity.
Crossing them while keeping your fists closed indicates a sign of
defense and hostility.
Crossing your arms holding your arms is a sign of restriction.
Leg pose
Standard crossing: defensive attitude.
Cross in 4 (“in Indian”): competition, discussion.
Cross while standing: discomfort, tension.
Cross the ankles: used to conceal a negative attitude.
Important considerations
If you lean too much towards the other person, you will be invading their
personal space, and this should not be done when there is still not much
confidence, and you will appear too aggressive.

Arms crossed are a sign. Keeping your arms crossed is a sign of
withdrawal; it means that the person does not want to be intimate, that they
do not feel confident, or that they are not entirely well.
A shrunken posture means boredom.
Maintaining a relaxed position with slightly open arms and legs
demonstrates self-confidence and security.
Getting closer than you should or a rigid body can demonstrate
aggressiveness.
Showing yourself upright is the best thing for when you want to
demonstrate security, courage, and importance in what you do.
Hands-on the waist: defiance, aggressiveness.
Thumbs on the waist or pockets: manhood.
Finger-pointing: challenge.
The gestures
A gesture is a form of non-verbal communication executed with some part
of the body and produced by the movement of the joints and muscles of the
arms, hands, and head.
The language of gestures allows a variety of feelings and thoughts to be
expressed, from contempt and hostility to approval and affection. Virtually
all people use gestures and body language in addition to words when they
speak. There are ethnic groups and specific communication languages ​that
use many more gestures than the average. Certain types of gestures can be
considered culturally acceptable or not, depending on the place and context
in which they are performed. Five categories of gestures are distinguished,
proposed by Paul Ekman and Wallace Friesen:

Emblematic gestures or emblems: they are signals emitted
intentionally and that everyone knows their meaning. (thumb raised)
Illustrative or illustrative gestures: gestures that accompany verbal
communication to clarify or emphasize what is said, to impersonate a
word in a difficult situation, etc. They are used intentionally. These
gestures are very useful in speeches and when speaking in public.
Regulatory or regulatory gestures of interaction: with them,
communication is synchronized or regulated, and the channel does
not disappear. They are used to take over in conversation, to start and
end the interaction, to give way to speak... (shake hands).
Gestures that express emotional states or displays of affection:
this type of gesture reflects the emotional state of the person and is
the emotional result of the moment. As an example, we can mention
gestures that express anxiety or tension, grimaces of pain, triumph,
joy, etc.
Adaptation or adapting gestures: these are gestures that are used to
manage emotions that are not wanted to be expressed. Here you can
distinguish signs directed at oneself (such as pinching oneself),
directed towards objects (pen, pencil, cigar, etc.), and those directed
towards other people (such as protecting another person). Adapters
can also be unconscious; apparent examples are biting a fingernail or
sucking a finger, very common in young children.
Facial expression
With the facial expression in many moods and emotions are expressed. It is
used to regulate interaction and to reinforce or emphasize the content of the
message addressed to the recipient. The facial expression is used to describe
the mood, indicate attention, show disgust, joke, blame, reinforce verbal
communication, etc. Paul Ekman developed a method to decipher facial

expressions while working with Wallace Friesen and Silvan Tomkins. It is a
kind of atlas of the face that is called FAST (Facial Affect Scoring
Technique). FAST classifies images using photographs (not verbal
descriptions) and dividing the face into three areas: the forehead and
eyebrows, the eyes, and the rest of the face, that is, the nose, cheeks, mouth,
and chin.
The look
The gaze is studied separately for its importance, although it is part of the
facial expression. The gaze fulfills a series of functions:
The regulation of the communicative act.
Source of information.
Express emotions.
Communicate the nature of interpersonal relationships.
The study of the gaze contemplates different aspects, among the most
important of which we can mention: the dilation of the pupils, eye contact,
the act of blinking, and the way of looking:
The dilation of the pupils indicates interest and attractiveness, and
they dilate when something interesting is seen.
The number of times you blink per minute is related to calm and
nervousness. If you blink a lot, it is a symbol of nervousness and
restlessness, and the less you blink, the calmer you will be.
Eye contact consists of the gaze that one person directs to the gaze of
the other. Here we must mention the frequency with which we look at
the other person and the maintenance of eye contact.
The way of looking is one of the most appropriate behaviors to
distinguish high-status, dominant, and powerful people from low-
status people who are not powerful.

The smile
Although the smile is included or can be included in the facial expression, it
deserves to be explained in detail. It is used to express happiness, joy, or
sympathy. The smile can even be used to make situations more bearable. It
can have a therapeutic effect on pessimistic or depressed people.
Simple smile: with this type of smile, an insecure, doubtful message
of lack of confidence is transmitted. It should be avoided if you want
to give an impression of firmness and confidence.
Simple smile of high intensity: this smile occurs with a more
pronounced separation of the corners of the mouth, and this rise
more. A small part of the upper teeth can be seen. It transmits
confidence and heat.
Upper Smile: The upper lip retracts so that almost or all of the teeth
can be seen. A message of some satisfaction is transmitted by seeing
someone.
Superior smile of high intensity: it opens the mouth more, and the
teeth are seen more. A light closure of the eyes usually accompanies
it. Apart from conveying happiness, it is often used to say a happy
question or to represent a funny surprise. It is often used deceptively;
for this reason, care must be taken.
Wide smile: it is one in which the gaze narrows slightly. The upper
and lower teeth are fully exposed. This type of smile expresses the
highest intensity of joy, happiness, and pleasure.
Laughter: it is the one that goes beyond the broad one. It is the most
contagious and occurs in a group of people.
 

Make Body Language Your Superpower
It is common for tension to invade us in situations of pressure, such as
taking exams, speaking in public, job interviews, etc. But did you know that
you can easily manipulate your body chemistry to feel safer and more
powerful? Studies indicate that you can achieve this by merely practicing
specific changes in your body posture before undergoing stressful
situations.
It is already known that our postures and gestures, often unconscious,
communicate and allow others to have an idea of ​how we are or how we
feel; this is called the body or non-verbal language.
Experts in the field of psychology and communication have devoted
countless studies to understanding the effects of body language when
looking for persuasive communication or an optimistic projection towards
others. Still, Amy Cuddy, a specialist in social psychology at Princeton
University, highlights that our body language not only influences how
others see us but can determine how we feel (literally).
Cuddy explains that although the smile is the physical and physical way in
which we demonstrate the feeling of happiness, studies show that we can
consciously provoke the same sense of happiness by holding a pencil
between our teeth and smiling for a few seconds. This means that not only
does our mind dominate our body, but we can also use our body to
manipulate our mental state.
According to these same studies, powerful people tend to have more
positive, confident, and risky attitudes than non-powerful and insecure
people, and this is reflected in their body language. While a secure person
shows openness, the insecure person hides his body more in rigid and

collected postures. Biologically we can find similar differences between the
power poles, where the powerful have high levels of testosterone (hormone
of domination) and low levels of cortisol (stress hormone). At the same
time, insecure people show low levels of testosterone and high levels.
Cortisol.
Based on this relationship between our chemistry and our body language,
Cuddy carried out several experiments to check whether taking different
positions can affect our internal chemistry and, with this, consciously
change how we feel.
The experiment consisted of taking different types of postures for 2 minutes
and then taking saliva samples, gambling, and answering questions to
determine the level of power/confidence he felt after adopting the two types
of posture.
Results in individuals who adopted “High Power” positions:
They decided to bet: 80%
Testosterone level: 20% increase
Cortisol level: Decrease by 25%
Results in individuals who adopted “Low Power” positions:
They decided to bet: 60%
Testosterone level: Decrease by 10%
Cortisol level: 15% increase
The experiment showed amazing results, noting that with just 2 minutes of
practicing the different postures, the internal chemistry of the body changed
in significant percentages, determining how individuals felt about
themselves and influencing their attitude and decision-making.

A second experiment, which involved people practicing the same postures
before a job interview, verified the positive effects of adopting "High
Power" postures, since those who practiced these postures were more
confident and assertive during their interviews, favoring their selection by
85%.
 

Detecting Deception, Proceed with Caution
Do you think you are good at detecting when someone lies?
Maybe you are. Or perhaps you think you are because, on average, we are
only able to discover a lie in 54% of cases. Come on, throwing a coin in the
air, and we have almost the same probability of hitting.
And it is that many of the behaviors that are supposed to accompany a lie
(avoid eye contact, get nervous, dilate the pupils, scratch the nose, etc.) can
also appear in honest people who are merely shy or have challenging time-
intense situations.
Below you'll find several myths about the science of lying that haven't
proven useful.
1. Lying has its body language
Although the popular belief is that the body sends signals when we lie, no
study has been able to relate a specific sign to deception.
Why? Because we all behave differently when lying, so do not believe that
if someone does not look you directly in the eye or touch your face, they are
deceiving you.
For every study that says liars scratch their noses, there is another that says
otherwise. In an investigation, the gestures that appeared or disappeared
when people lied were searched, but as you will see below, not enough
differences were found to be able to generalize.
For example, people who lie stare in 67% of cases, but people who tell the
truth also stare at 58%. There is nobody gesture that helps you accurately
detect when you are being lied to.
2. Don't trust what they tell you

Although the general idea is that body language is more important than
verbal language, that is also not true.
Body language may offer clues, but what is said maybe even more reliable.
In a 2004 study, a group of police officers watched a series of videos, and
those who looked for inconsistencies in verbal cues (contradictions, doubts,
etc.) were able to distinguish better lies than those who relied only on body
signs (gaze direction, posture changes, etc.).
When you doubt if someone is telling you the truth or not, the most reliable
thing is to find inconsistencies in their history. Later I will show you how.
3. The direction of the eyes gives clues
According to NLP (neurolinguistic programming), when someone moves
his eyes to his right, it means he is lying, while if he moves his eyes to the
left, he tells the truth.
If that were true, there would be no need to investigate further, and all liars
would go with sunglasses, but it is false.
In this 2012 study demonstrated that the direction in which someone looks
is independent of the integrity of his story, so watch those gurus who
promise PNL magical powers.
The people who lie the most do not look sideways or look away. If
anything, they look at you more intently because they want to verify that
you believe their lie.
4. The polygraph never fails
Another myth. As much as junk movies and television shows are trying to
sell us the reliability of these devices, in one of the most rigorous studies,
their percentage of success was established at only 65%. The main problem

is her number of false positives: she often identifies people who are telling
the truth as liars.
The reality is that detecting lies is VERY difficult. The reason is that most
of us mix lie with true stories, which allows us to add real details that give
more credibility.
Furthermore, each individual is so unique that there is no universal sign of
lying. Not all of us have the same behavior when we lie: while I can avoid
eye contact, maybe you will keep it.
It is for this reason that training to detect lies through the body or verbal
language, the success rate reaches at most 60%, only 6 points more than
without any preparation.
 

How do to know if a person is lying?
Below I will explain the exact tools to achieve it, but to start, you must be
very clear about three fundamental concepts:
1. Look at the details and behavior changes
Merely paying attention to detail will do you better at spotting lies. It's that
simple.
When someone lies, small differences may appear in their behavior or the
story they are telling, and several studies have shown that focusing your
attention on details will improve your ability to detect deception.
This is why women tend to be more skilled than men: they focus more on
specific aspects of the stories and changes in behavior.
2. Try to isolate yourself from your emotions
I know it is complicated, but if you get angry, sad, or too happy, you will
stop seeing those details.
When you are very emotional, your mind goes on automatic pilot. Disable
some of its rational functions, and you will miss clues that could reveal that
the other person is lying to you.
The most experienced liars want to do just that: put you in an altered state
so that you stop asking questions and start making wrong decisions. So,
keep a cool head and don't get turned on by big promises or angry at huge
suspicions.
3. In the end, you only have your instinct
The final step, once you have observed the details as coldly as possible, is
to listen to your instincts.

Trust your intuition, because as it has been scientifically proven, we are
more effective detecting lies when we do it unconsciously than if we try to
tie all the ends rationally. The reason is that on an irrational level, you can
see signs that your conscious mind overlooks.
So, pay attention, let some time pass, and be guided by your instinct. You
will increase your chances of hitting.
Although these three keys are essential, to have greater certainty that
someone is lying to you, you need your signs of deception, such as changes
in behavior or contradictions in their history, to be evident.

CHAPTER SEVEN
The Secrets of Body
 
 
 
The capital importance of body language
Our bodies cannot show anything but what is in us. Our emotions use the
sounding board. Therefore, we understand that our body's non-verbal part
of communication always reflects our mental state, whatever the situation.
Indeed, where does it come from, if not our psyche?
Body language is subject to physical law: energy does not vanish; it
transforms. As electricity becomes light, heat, or movement, our psyche
becomes body language.
Beware, the same gesture may have different meanings. For example, a
person with arms crossed, a gesture generally interpreted as a negative
signal. Indeed, arms crossed the pass to outsource refusal, withdrawal,
skepticism, antipathy, etc. Sometimes this interpretation is true, but not
always. What about a man crossed, waiting for the bus? Is it expressly
rejected? If so, to whom? Facing the bus? To other people like him at the
bus stop? What if nobody exists? In this situation, arms crossed indicate
nothing but being able to do nothing but wait. No reason to move, our man
folds his arms.
To correctly decipher body language, you must first consider the action
context. Also, as with verbal language, an "expression" that does not fit into
a situation will have a high potential for misunderstanding.

False posture can reveal insecurity, fear, distrust, etc.
 
On the other hand, the right posture gives the impression of strength, power,
and confidence.
Understand more about using body signals to convey the desired
impression.
Negative body language
Often, during a conversation, you can pass negative body language without
realizing it.
Facial expressions and gestures end up showing several details.
Some negative postures that you should avoid in your client meetings:
hands-on-hips or pockets;
knees pointing to the exit door;
legs wide open;
crossed arms.
These attitudes are perceived, even if unconsciously, by the other person,
and can ruin a sale's progress.
Know other signs you should avoid avoiding transmitting the wrong body
language.
1- Hand to mouth
Experts analyze that when a person is not telling the truth, they usually
cover their mouths.
Variations of this posture addiction are:
rub your lips;
touch the chin;

put objects in front of the mouth.
2- Compressed lips
Another negative body language is to compress your lips.
This act shows that the person is trying to avoid saying what he thinks.
That is, hiding your lips reveals that you don't want to answer any
questions.
3- Defocused look
Body language says a lot by looking.
A look without focus, or looking up and to the right, indicates confusion.
This is because, when looking away, the person is looking for a mental
image.
Therefore, he shows a lack of clarity in his speech, as well as insecurity.
4- Forehead contracted
In conversation, if the other person wrinkles his forehead, that's not a good
sign.
These horizontal lines show a certain level of tension, doubt, or
nervousness, which is a bad sign of body language.
5- Restricted hand and arm movements
Keeping your hands behind your back or clinging to your body conveys the
message of little confidence.
Another gesture to be avoided is to put your hands back or feet crossed
behind the chair.
These are signs of discomfort.
 

Body language of self-confidence
It is not enough just to understand what should not be done.
It is essential that the attitude also demonstrates what you want to expose.
Powerful body language impresses customers, colleagues, or anyone.
When showing authority, performance in professional and personal life
tends to increase.
Everyone likes to be around someone who feels safe in their skin.
And that is what you will learn. So, stay tuned for tips.
1- Be dominant in the handshake
When talking to a business partner or customers, pay attention when
complying.
Much more than a handshake, this gesture shows who dominates the
conversation.
If you extend your hand with your palm facing downwards, it indicates that
you lead the conversation.
If you do the opposite, palm up, you expect the other to take the lead.
Using hugs in body language in business is rarer, but it can happen when
there are a deep friendship and companionship.
But be aware: in certain cultures, this is unacceptable.
2- Breathe deeply
The rhythm of breathing reveals many signs.
When inhaling and exhaling in a superficial and fast way, the impression
that remains is of stress, nervousness, and fear.

If you want to show self-confidence, use a technique: take a deep breath
until you feel the wider abdomen and the ribs expanding.
Slow, deep breathing helps to control anger and anxiety.
3- Fix your eyes between the other person's eyebrows
Speaking, looking into someone's eyes can be difficult for many.
However, the way of facing the other shows who is in control of the debate.
An easy way to use the look of power is to imagine a point between the
person's eyebrows and keep your eyes there.
That way, you will be showing security.
4. Speak calmly
The voice is essential to get the right message across. It helps to convey the
feeling of credibility and authority.
During your speech, articulate each word well, take breaks, and breathe
easily between sentences.
This ensures that the other person understands what is being said.
5- Look for a neutral posture
Crossed arms indicate annoyance or that you are closed to the subject.
However, the hands beside the body, in a light way, is a message of
neutrality.
A good tip is to try to mirror the gestures of whoever is talking to you.
This creates an atmosphere of sympathy and friendship.
With these body language techniques, you will pass on the correct image to
your interlocutors.

With them, you will make negotiations with your customers much more
straightforward and gain respect in your work environment.
 

Reading Body Language
 
Reading body language may help to assess the feeling behind or instead of
the words spoken. The adult can understand quickly, and instinctively, that
when they see the child screaming and covering their ears, a child is
frightened by thunder. However, there are misconceptions about body
language, which could cause miscommunication unless the whole-body
language is read.
The eyes have long been called the windows to the soul, and it may be this
concept that created the greatest myth in bodies of reading. It is widely
assumed that if a person avoids eye contact or does not hold it, that person
does not say the facts. This is a mistaken assumption though popularly
known. Pathological liars may maintain sustained contact with the eyes
because they realize most people assume that looking away from the eyes
shows an untruth. People who say the truth do not keep eye contact because
they clearly state evidence and feel no need to convince anyone of this.
When a person is depressed or uncomfortable, and avoidance of eye contact
occurs. For example, a child being chastised by a parent would always look
down on the ground instead of looking in the parent's eyes. Painfully shy or
nervous people, too, are having a tough time meeting another person's eyes
in conversation. Someone with little true knowledge of reading body
language would find the people in each of these instances to be lying by
standard error because, instead, the child shows the position of authority,
the adult, they are contrite, and the shy person shows a typical sign of
distress or uncomforted.
In addition to the eye movement, the overall body language used needs to
be looked at. Fidgeting, drumming fingers, or playing with hair matched to
a lack of eye contact are signs that a person is dissatisfied with the situation

or topic of discussion. Still, eyes fixed on a distant point by a person with
arms crossed, one who is attentive to the conversation, shows, instead, deep
attention and intense thinking on the topic of discussion.
The precise interpretation of body language may provide an insight into
another person's thoughts, feelings, and emotions. However, to read
correctly, it is essential to remember to look at the entire body's movements,
or words, rather than treating part of the body as separate from the other
parts.
 

Keys to Reading Body Language
 
Body language is the type of communication a person uses to respond to
circumstances, including facial expressions. Among people, more than 54%
of the way we communicate with each other consists of body language,
39% consists of the way the voice is used, and just 7% consists of the words
spoken. Developing one's ability to interpret and understand gestures and
signs of body language would be of great benefit because it will help to
better understand and interact with other human beings.
Body language involves body expressions, gestures, eye contact, muscle
tension, skin coloring, breathing rate, etc. Of course, you should remember
that body language is different from people to people and various
nationalities and cultures. Therefore, it is always good to check what is seen
in a person. This can be achieved by answering similar questions and
endeavoring to better-known individuals.
There is also a lot of myths about interpreting body language. Most
deceptive books and internet guides don't teach people the right thing.
There's the truth you need to learn about this, while popular reasoning can
trick you into believing a person's ability to read body language is the real
secret to finding lies. Some important body language secrets are:
Posture
In most situations, if you take the correct pose, you should be able to build
the right impression in people. Leaning a little towards a person can create
an image of friendliness. It could also mean that you have an interest in
others. At the same time, seeing a level head establishes a sense of self-
assurance and trust.

Legs
When a person is anxious, the legs are always moving around. It happens
when the person tells lies and is bored too. It is safer to keep those legs
crossed or even to give the opposite impression, to appear confident and
polite to others.
Eye contact
If you keep healthy eye contact, you show concern and respect for others.
And you still need to find a balance. When you hold too much eye contact,
the other person would feel self-conscious. Sometimes, if you don't have
enough eye contact, you can make the other person believe you're not
involved in what's being addressed.
Arms
If you have main arms crossed, you can make yourself look nervous or
defensive. On the other hand, over, if you hold open arms, you will make
yourself comfortable and able to embrace others.
Distance
If you hold a person close, you can make yourself look pushy or put
yourself in his face. At the same time, keep a distance away may mean that
you don't care about what's being addressed or don't care about it at all.
You can learn a lot about other people through body language. Many people
show all sorts of thoughts in the way they push the body. Here are examples
of how to discover other people's opinions:
Confidence
A comfortable person will always stand tall, holding eye contact sold while
smiling at you at the same time. The person can go even further with the

hands when making gestures.
Defensive
Whoever holding the defensive end always stop facial expressions. Another
thing is they keep the eye in touch with nothing. This is a pose that may
also be combined with the person involver’s anxiety or confusion.
Telling lies
Those saying lies keep eye contact little or no. The person may also hold
the hands before the mouth while speaking. The person can be physical
with you, but there is no mind. During this moment, the respiration rate
often rises for fear of being caught telling lies. It's also possible that a poker
player who's bluffed at the pot (telling a lie) would reveal certain tells.
It is very critical that a person understands the language of his or her body
and the sort of impression that is passed on to others. That is beyond
knowing the body language of the other people you come in touch with. A
strong understanding of the body language helps to show contact and
interaction with others.
It is very critical that a person understands the language of his or her body
and the sort of impression that is passed on to others. That is beyond
knowing the body language of the other people you come in touch with. A
strong understanding of body language helps to show contact and
interaction with others.
 

Tips for Reading Body Language
 
Eye movement, gestures, posture, and facial expressions are some of the
characteristics of human body language. American human behavior expert
Eric Barker explains that it is best to look at "unconscious behaviors that
are not easily controlled and may contain a message." Can anyone decipher
this language? Barker reveals eight tips.
Use Common Sense
For the expert, analyzing the context is essential. Crossing your arms can
mean adopting a defensive posture or even trying to deceive you. However,
if it is cold or if the person concerned is sitting in an armless chair, the
meaning can be different (much simpler and harmless).
Observe the Mime
Imitating a gesture or verbal expression may mean that the person is in tune
with you. The act of agreeing with someone or something is difficult to
fake, so the expert believes that in these cases, the best thing to do is to
believe.
Nerve Energy
The other's level of activity can reveal your interest and enthusiasm for
what you are saying. A study from the University of Manchester in England
states that women shake their feet when they are interested in a man. Men,
on the other hand, tend to do so when they are nervous.
Consistency
Someone who reveals a fluid and consistent speech, emphasizing certain
words, demonstrates control and concentration. Showing determination as
they speak, these people are difficult to influence (and seduce).

 
Don't Care About Individual Signs
It is not possible to know what a person means by body language through a
single action. It is best to look at the actions as a whole, as two or three
signals can help identify what goes in the other person's head.
Create A Reference
Uneasiness and the habit of always talking do not necessarily reveal any
problem. However, something may be wrong when these people suddenly
become calm.
Consider Your Previous Considerations
A judgment about another person will be affected if you have a prior
impression, whether positive or negative. The tendency is to give the
benefit of the doubt to someone you think is similar to you.
The Most Important Thing Is to Look at The Whole Context
Eric Barker argues that the ability to understand body language will
increase when "understanding that body language is part of a larger context.
Then you will begin to pay attention to other facets of interaction: voice,
appearance, clothing, etc."

CHAPTER EIGHT
The Five C's of Body Language
 
 
Regardless of an organization's focus or size, communication is often
identified as an area of organizational improvement. Paradoxically, this
deficiency survives for decades, being on the list of steering committees
more than ever. The question is this:
How can it be that in an era where information sharing is easier than ever,
effective communication remains such a common business challenge?
Does not it seem surprising that when sharing information is the easiest,
organizations have not made progress in offering their employees a useful
communication framework?

It is not surprising in many ways. Communication preferences vary between
people; some prefer written information, other visual communication, and
much more verbal communication.
Interest may also vary; what a collaborator wants or needs to know can
differ significantly from what matters to another. Similarly, communication
remains mostly dependent on people, and the lack of a practical
communication framework makes each leader use his "manual" and
interpretations, which can cause flow, type, and quantity information to
vary significantly between departments and locations where different
employees work.
Effective and high-performance communication
Despite these differences in communication preferences and practices, high-
performing organizations have taught us a direct path to better
organizational communication.
Over the past fourteen years, our research and work have enabled us to
decipher effective models and methodologies for their development. We
frame the four basic characteristics of high-performance communication:
Let us see briefly what is behind each axis that defines the characteristics of
high-performance organizational communication:
Consistent - Regular and predictable communication in any
circumstance.
Ensuring regular and predictable communication is essential to building
trust in collaborators and teams of an organization. To do this, select from
several approaches to improve information flow through organizations.
Some of our preferences for greater organizational efficiency are the C-

Suite blog, the weekly newsletter, leadership pills, quarterly town hall
meetings, and management breakfasts.
Whichever option is chosen, the most important thing is that leaders
carefully consider the ability to fulfill their commitments without deviations
before committing. Otherwise, announcing a new initiative that does not
execute as expected or that does not continue for a significant period will
only break the framework of mutual trust to improve communication.
This consistency should also include monitoring and reporting on
previously discussed topics in which future actions or developments were
planned. Similarly, ensuring adequate answers to any questions arising from
organizational communication is a fundamental aspect of consistency.
Communication
A culture of organizational transparency requires honest communication.
Even if the communication is conducted regularly, if it does not address the
interests of the collaborators or does not address what is relevant in the day-
to-day running of the organization, our teams may feel alienated or even
disappointed by the organization's reality.
In this sense, a current issue may also have an uncertain framework or may
not be thoroughly discussed. In these situations, collaborators appreciate
their leaders' recognition on the matter, even when much of the information
about it is unknown or cannot be communicated.
An honest statement about what is known and can be shared with a
communication plan will establish honesty as an organizational
communication value.
Convenient - Timely

Another way to ensure that the organization's communications are
convenient and meaningful is to strive for its timeliness, that is, for its
punctuality. In this sense, we must understand the opportunity in three
phases of time:
Before: What information or preparation should be provided to
collaborators and teams so that they are well-positioned to innovate,
meet the future's needs, and take advantage of the key opportunities it
can provide?
During: What is happening that may provoke questions from
collaborators and teams that require more information?
Next: What milestones have been achieved recently that can be
celebrated, learned, or shared to build on?
Organizations typically have room to improve communications in each of
these phases, but the "during" phase can be particularly tricky when
something is not entirely clear or causes concern among teams.
Again, in these cases, communicating about known information promptly is
better than saying nothing until every response is known. Rumors are the
worst enemy of high-performance organizational communication.
Complementarity
In the previous point, the leader and his role in coordinating team members
were discussed, choosing the best prepared for each task. The
complementarity is to count on the team with people with particular
knowledge and skills to respond to the needs of the clients globally.
The training and experience, both personally and professionally, will enrich
the results of everyday work.

Therefore, whenever possible, it is essential to form teams in which their
members complement each other. Knowing each person beforehand favors
the coordination of tasks. It is an excellent option to bet on the creation of
teams of people with different profiles, even if the coordination is more
complicated since, in this way, the results will be enriched.
Collaborative - connecting creativity and talent
Ensuring an organization shares relevant information consistently, reliably,
and time is critical to high-performance organizational communication. But
that is not enough.
Communication must be a conversation that connects hierarchies, divisions,
functions, locations in both directions to create an ecosystem of mutual trust
and real commitment.
Based on our experience in developing worldwide high-performance teams,
corporate social media provides the perfect environment. However, to make
conversation possible, leaders play a fundamental role as role models,
eliminating fear and connecting opportunities.
When this happens, corporate social media conversations create learning,
collaboration, re-application, and innovation bonds.
 

How to identify the subtle inputs sent by the body
The brain is your boss
While you are doing an important math test, you know your brain is very
hard at work. But your brain does more than just recall formulae. Do your
hands start sweating when the test is given? It is because the brain works.
Do you feel a great relief when you realize the answer to a question is
known? That is your brain too. And yes, it is also your brain that is
responsible for the daydream about the big party you are going to be going
to next Friday.
The brain is the bossiest organ in the whole body: it commands virtually
every other part of the body, continually telling them what to do, no matter
if you are aware of it or not. Not only does it control what you think and
feel, how you learn things, and remember them and how you move, but it
also controls many things you are less aware of, such as a heartbeat, sleepy,
or awake.
Daily brain and nervous system
If the brain is imagined as a central computer that controls all of the
organism's functions, then the nervous system becomes a network or
network that sends messages in both directions between the brain and the
various parts of the body. This is done through the backbone, starting from
the brain and going down the back and containing filaments linked to other
organs and parts of the body. This is done via the spinal cord.
Upon entering the brain, a message tells the body how to respond. For
example, if you accidentally touch a hot oven, the nerves in your skin can
send a message of pain to your brain. The brain responds by sending a

message to delete muscles. Luckily this neurological relay race takes much
less time to read its definition!
How the brain functions
The human brain is extremely lightweight and weighs just over 3 pounds
(1,360 g), considering all it does. It does have a multitude of folds and
grooves, however, which give it the surface to store all the essential body
details.
The spinal cord, meanwhile, is about 18 inches long (45 cm) and just below
2 cm thick, with a long bundle of nerve tissue. This extends from the
bottom of the brain down to the backbone edge. During the whole journey,
specific nerves radiate to the rest of the body. These form the peripheral
nervous system.
A series of ring-shaped, intertwining bones called the vertebrates protecting
the brain and spinal cord with bones, the brain with the skull bones, and the
spinal cord. The membrane layers called meninges, and a special fluid
named cerebrospinal fluid are both protected and cushioned—the fluid
assists in protecting, sustaining, and removing excess nerve tissue.
The brain consists of three principal components: the forebrain, the
midbrain, and the hindbrain.
The forebrain
The forebrain is the human brain's most voluminous and complicated part.
It consists of the telencephalon — the area with all the folds and grooves
typically reproduced in brain illustrations — and other structures below the
telencephalon.
The telencephalon contains information that makes us feel and move:
intelligence, memory, personality, emotions, speech, and ability. Some

specific telencephalon areas are responsible for processing different
information types. They are called lobes, with four lobes in total: frontal,
parietal, temporal, and occipital.
The telencephalon is divided into two halves, called hemispheres,
connected by a bundle of nerve fibers (corpus callosum) that allows them to
communicate.
While the two halves may seem identical as an image and reflection, many
scientists believe they have different functions. The left hemisphere is
logical, analytical, and objective. Law is more intuitive, creative, and
subjective. So, while solving a math problem, you use the left hemisphere,
while you use the right when listening to music. Scientists believe that the
left hemisphere predominates in some people or the right and that no
hemisphere predominates in others, since both hemispheres are used to the
same extent.
The telencephalon's outermost layer is called the cortex (also known as
"grey matter"). The information the five senses collect reaches the brain
through the spinal cord. This information is then sent to other nervous
system parts for further processing. For example, when you touch a hot
oven, this information will not only be processed to move your hand but
will also be sent to other parts of the brain to help you remember not to do it
again.
Thalamus, hypothalamus, and hypophysis are inside the forebrain. The
thalamus transmits signals from sensory organs such as eyes, ears, nose, and
fingers to the cerebral cortex. The hypothalamus controls temperature,
thirst, appetite, sleep patterns, and other body processes automatically. It
also regulates growth hormones, metabolism, mineral and fluid balance,
sexual maturation, and tension.

The midbrain
The midbrain (midbrain), located below the central part of the forebrain,
acts as a master of ceremonies, coordinating all the messages that reach the
brain and those that go to the spinal cord.
The hindbrain
The hindbrain (brain pons) is located below the posterior part of the
telencephalon and encompasses the cerebellum and medulla. The
cerebellum - also called a "little brain" because it looks like a small-scale
version of the brain; it controls balance, movement, and coordination. The
bridge and the medulla, together with the midbrain, make up the so-called
brain stem. The brain stem receives, sends, and coordinates all brain
messages. It also controls many functions that the body automatically
performs, such as breathing, heart rate, blood pressure, swallowing,
digestion, and blinking.
The way the nervous system works
A multitude of small cells called neurons depends primarily on the basic
functioning of the nervous system. The brain contains millions of those
cells, which are specialized in many types of functions. For example,
sensory neurons pick up sensory information in the eyes, ears, nose, tongue,
and skin and send it to the brain. Motor neurons transmit messages from the
brain and send them to the rest of the body.
All neurons transmit information to each other through a complex
electrochemical process, establishing connections with each other that
affect the way we think, learn things, move, and behave.
Intelligence, learning, and memory

When you learn something, messages repeatedly travel from one neuron to
another. Then the brain creates neuronal connexions (or pathways) to make
it easier and better.
The brain is extremely adaptable to children. When one part of a child's
brain is injured, another part often performs some of the functions lost. But
as we get older, the brain has a harder time creating new connexions or
neural networks, making it harder for us to learn new tasks or change
established behavior. That is why many scientists believe it is important to
keep challenging our brains by proposing new learning and establishing
new connexions, as this will help keep the mind active for the rest of our
lives.
Memory is another dynamic brain function. The things we do, learn, and
see our first processed in the cerebral cortex. Then if that information is
sufficiently important to be worth remembering permanently, it is sent to
other parts of the brain (such as the hippocampus and the amygdala) to keep
it in long-term memory. As these messages travel through the mind,
connexions (pathways) are created as memory foundations.
Movement
Different parts of the telencephalon are responsible for moving other parts
of the body. The left side of the brain controls movements on the right side
of the body, and the right side of the brain controls movements on the left
side of the body. For example, when you kick a soccer ball with your right
foot, the left cerebral hemisphere is in charge of sending the message that
allows you to do it.
Basic bodily functions
The autonomous nervous system is part of the peripheral nervous system,
and it controls a large number of processes in the body, such as breathing,

digestion, sugaring (or sweating), which we do not have to consider. The
autonomous nervous system consists of two subsystems, together with the
sympathetic and the parasympathetic nervous systems.
The nervous system, like a robbery, is sympathetic and prepares the body
for rapid responses. The sympathetic nervous system makes the heart pump
faster when something dangerous happens, so it sends more blood to the
different parts of the body, which may need it. It also causes the adrenal
glands above the kidneys to release adrenaline, which helps to give muscles
additional strength for rapid escape. This process is termed a response to
"fight or flight."
The parasympathetic nervous system does precisely the opposite; it
prepares the rest of the body. It also helps the digestive system, so that the
body can assimilate the nutrients in the food we eat effectively.
The senses
Your eyes can see your best friend approaching. But if you didn't have a
brain, you wouldn't even recognize it. Your favorite pizza is sure to be
delicious. But if you didn't have a mind, your taste buds wouldn't let you
know if you're eating a pizza or the cardboard box it came from. None of
the sense organs would be of any use without sensory information
processing in the brain.
Eyes. The view probably tells us much more about the world around
us than any other sense. The light that enters our eyes projects an
inverted image onto the retina. The retina transforms light into nerve
signals and sends them to the brain. The brain inverts the image so
that we see it from the right and tells us what it is that we are seeing.
Ear. All the sounds we hear are the result of sound waves that enter
our ears and cause vibrations in our eardrums. Those vibrations are

transferred along the ossicle chain of the middle ear and transformed
into nerve signals. Then the cerebral cortex processes those signals
and tells us what we are hearing.
Taste. The tongue contains clusters of sensory cells called taste buds
that react to chemicals in food. The taste buds respond to the sweet,
sour, salty, and bitter flavors. They are responsible for sending
messages to the areas of the cerebral cortex responsible for
processing flavor.
Smell. The olfactory cells in the mucosa that lines the inside of the
nostrils react to the chemicals that we breathe in and send messages
to the brain through specific nerves. According to experts, the brain
can distinguish between more than 10,000 different smells. With such
a highly developed sensitivity, it is not surprising that researchers
suggest that smells are intimately linked to memories.
Touch. The skin has more than 4 million sensory receptors — mainly
cantered on the fingers, language, and lips — that catch touch, sound,
temperature, and pain-related details. To process and react, send them
to the brain.
Brain conditions
Since the brain controls practically everything, when there is a problem in
mind, it is usually severe and can affect many parts of the body. Hereditary
diseases, brain disorders associated with mental illness, and trauma to the
head can affect how the brain works and disrupt other parts of the body's
daily activities.
Here are some of the problems that can affect the brain:
Brain tumors. A tumor is an abnormally caused tissue growth. A tumor in
the brain can grow very slowly, causing very few symptoms until it reaches

a significant size. Also, cancer can grow and spread rapidly, causing severe
and rapidly deteriorating symptoms.
Tumors of the brain may be benign or malignant. Benign ones are generally
limited to a specific area and can be surgically cured if they are in places
where they can be removed without damaging adjacent tissues. Malignant
tumors are cancerous and tend to grow and spread more quickly.
Cerebral palsy. Cerebral paralysis results from a developmental defect or
brain injury that is violent, labor-related, or early years. Cerebral paralysis
affects the motor areas of the brain. An individual with cerebral paralysis
may have an average understanding of severe mental or developmental
delays.
Cerebral paralysis can affect body movement in many ways. In milder cases
of cerebral palsy, the individual concerned may have only slight weakness
in the muscles of the arm and leg. In other cases, a higher degree of motor
disability can occur-the person may have trouble speaking and making basic
movements like walking.
Epilepsy. Epilepsy is a condition of the nervous system that can cause
seizures. Partial seizures only affect specific areas of the brain, and
symptoms vary depending on the epileptic focus's location. Other seizures,
called generalized seizures, involve a larger part of the brain and are
generally associated with the body's uncontrolled movements and loss of
consciousness. Although, in many cases, doctors don't know its cause,
epilepsy can be related to brain injuries, tumors, or infections. The tendency
to develop epilepsy can be inherited from the family.
Headache. There are many types of headaches; the most frequent are:
tension headache (the most common pain of all) is caused by accumulated
muscle tension in the head, neck, and shoulders migraine is a strong and

recurring headache of unclear cause Outbreak headache is often considered
a form of migraine
Migraines can appear with or without notice and last for several hours or
days. The tendency to have a migraine seems to have a hereditary basis. A
person with migraines can experience such an episode when exposed to a
"trigger" (for example, a particular food), and may experience dizziness,
numbness, nausea, sensitivity to light, and see zigzagging lines.
Meningitis and encephalitis. These are infections of the brain and spinal
cord that are usually caused by bacteria or viruses. Meningitis is an
inflammation of the membranes that line the brain and spinal cord, and
encephalitis, an inflammation of brain tissue. Both of these disorders can
cause permanent brain damage.
Mental illness. In terms of thinking and working, mental illness
encompasses a broad range of issues. Experts know that some mental
illnesses are associated with structural or chemical abnormalities present in
the brain. Some mental illnesses are inherited, but although researchers
know those illnesses are inherited, they have yet to identify their cause.
Brain injuries and drug and alcohol abuse can also trigger some mental
illness.
Signs of chronic mental illness, such as bipolar disorder or schizophrenia,
may begin to manifest during childhood. Mental illnesses that can affect
teens include depression, eating disorders like bulimia or anorexia nervosa,
obsessive-compulsive disorder, and phobias.
Cranioencephalic trauma. Traumatic brain injuries fall into two
categories: internal and external (usually affecting the scalp). Internal
trauma can affect the skull, the inside of the blood vessels of the brain.
Fortunately, only the scalp is injured in most falls and blows to the head,

which is often more fearsome than dangerous. Internal trauma is usually
more severe because the skull acts as a delicate brain-protective helmet.
Concussions are a type of traumatic internal brain injury which causes a
temporary loss of normal brain function. Repeated concussions can
permanently damage the brain. Practice in sport is one of the activities
where adolescents suffer the most concussions. Therefore, when practicing
sports, you have to wear the appropriate protective equipment and stop
practicing it when you are suffering a traumatic brain injury.
 

Mastering the Secrets of Non-Verbal
Communication
In this section, I will explain how to learn non-verbal communication and
master it perfectly until you can get what you want from people by using
the right levers. But before going into the details, I must give you this
essential little reminder to understand what it is all about.
Do you know why most people hate phone calls? Because they
unconsciously feel that they are restrained in their expression with their
interlocutors. They think that they cannot communicate fully, as in a face-
to-face dialogue. They know that there is a lack of data, of information, in
what they transmit. Why? It's simple: on the phone, everything goes
through the words expressed. The only non-verbal communication is in the
tone of the voice—everything else, body language, micro-expressions, all
that, it doesn't exist on the phone.
Why it is essential to learn nonverbal communication:
Specialists agree that non-verbal communication represents 70 to 80% of
the message transmitted to the other party in a human conversation or
exchange.
I do not know if you do, but it is huge. Imagine a conversation in which
80% of words are deleted. Or a book is removing 80 percent of chapters. At
this point, non-verbal communication is essential.
There is another thing communications specialists agree on: you cannot
communicate. This means that your body language always expresses
something, even if you try to communicate nothing. Even 'non-
communication' is communication. And it will influence your interlocutor,
who will see a closed posture there, sending us a message.

If your goal is to learn non-verbal communication, you will make the right
choice, as it will open many doors for you. Without using words, you can
influence your interlocutors, get your ideas across smoothly. Above all,
decode what people say beyond their words. This will allow you to
'understand' people, feel their needs, and quickly gain confidence by
anticipating what they cannot express in words.
Nonverbal communication is a second language. It is better than that: it is a
language that does not lie because 99 % of people do not even realize
everything; they are under-communicating with their bodies. Knowing how
to read body language is like reading the minds of people; it is a kind of
superpower (and you quickly become addicted), like The Mentalist.
How to decode non-verbal communication
Every gesture, every posture, every micro-expression sends out signals to
the person that is before you. A slight eyebrow lift, a crossing of the arms, a
rocking foot movement, all the gestures you make without realizing it
means something, and your interlocutor is unconsciously translating them.
Besides, all human beings know how to acknowledge the significant signals
of nonverbal communication. I am not going to list you; a broad smile in
the vast majority of cases means you feel good, your clenched fist means
anger, and tears mean sadness ...
I will reassure you if you know that for the following: you can learn the
body language. The main task is to detect the emotions less noticeable or
less marked. Everyone notices this is not complicated when someone has a
huge tantrum.
On the other hand, it becomes more subtle and requires training to be able
to spot hidden, buried emotions, such as when we tackle a sensitive subject

for someone, or when we offend a person or even know if they lie to us.
How to get there here.
Sharpen your sense of observation
The first step in non-verbal communication learning is to work on your
sense of observation to spot any small signs of feeling or emotion in your
interlocutors. Most people's signals are quite subtle. Knowing the emotional
state of a person who has taken the habit of hiding his emotions since
entering adulthood is not necessarily easy.
So, you have to look for small signals. When you speak, for example, look
at the person's face, especially their eyebrows, which may show
astonishment, joy, anger, etc. depending on their movements or position.
Likewise, remember to watch the hands (is the person twisting their
fingers? Are they lying on the table? In the pocket? Etc), the general body
posture (closed or open), also watch the lips (especially the slight mouth
grin, which also expresses many things).
In poker's language, we are talking about 'tells,' talking about small, almost
invisible gestures describing the player's emotional state, knowing if he is
bluffing or not. You have to learn to spot in people, in everyday life, to
decode their emotions, intentions, and inner states. And no secret, you have
to work on your sense of observation. Poker is also a great way to develop
it (both to 'read' others and to master your body language). If you are new to
this game, find web pages to help you practice better. Then, I recommend
you find a club near you to play in real life and face intense observation
situations directly. You will see, there is something really fun discovering
others' emotions.
Cross the different information received

Keep in mind that each of these elements taken out of context does not
necessarily mean much. Someone who touches his nose is not necessarily
lying or preparing a bad blow; he may simply have something that tickles
his nostril. On the other hand, if you have a fleeting glance, contact with the
nose, gestures of the hand a little too pronounced, and that it is coupled with
a certain tone in the voice, then yes, you certainly have some face to one
who lies to you.
What I want you to understand is that we should not conclude too quickly.
The woman who touches her hair to seduce the man in front of her is a
myth. This only means something if the rest of her body language
communicates interest to her interlocutor (leaning forward, open posture,
body language modeled on the one she appreciates, etc.).
Tell yourself that you need at least two distinct signs to get an idea of ​the
person's emotional state in front of you.
Trust your instinct, your sixth sense
There are dictionaries for non-verbal communication, body language. But
there is something at least as powerful in my opinion: your sixth sense.
Learn to listen to your little voice inside you, your gut feeling, which tells
you “this guy is lying,” or “he doesn't believe me,” “I hurt him,” etc. By
working to improve your sense of observation, you will develop a real
ability to feel what the person feels in front of you immediately. Believe
me. You will be less often mistaken in being attentive to your little inner
voice which tries to slip its good advice to you, rather than by referring to
any dictionary of non-verbal communication, as complete as it is.
Practice as much as possible
When you get there, you will already have outstanding body language
decoding. You can understand more details than other people and can be

more subtle when interacting with others.
You must constantly train to advance quickly. See people around you,
public transport, cafes, etc. Do not miss any knowledge that comes before
your eyes.
One great exercise I can offer is putting on a movie or series you like,
turning off the volume. Observe actors' movements, facial expressions,
successive postures. And try to guess what is happening—recognizing
conditions. Correct the exercise by doing the same scene with the music, to
see if you only drop on the characters' emotions. I did this Big Bang Theory
exercise for my part, but it works for everything!
Besides, the advice I just gave you will make you tilt: by nature, you
observe actors who play a part, hence who can 'facture' an emotion by
perfecting their body language. This implies, in particular, that you should
learn to express yourself by non-verbal communication, understanding
beautifully what is emitted from your body. This is the next section of these
chapters.
 

Master your non-verbal communication
After learning to decode the non-verbal language of the people around you,
it is essential to take the next step in the process: successfully mastering
your body communication. In other words, manage to get the messages you
want unconsciously to the people you want. It almost sounds like science
fiction when I say it like that, yet that's the reality. I'll take the example of
film actors, that's exactly what they do: they use every millimeter of their
body to transmit emotions in you when you look at them on the other side
of the screen. It’s tough, but it’s not impossible to master, and either way,
you probably don't need to win an Oscar.
Here are the steps to master your non-verbal communication.
Become aware of your body language
This includes being completely present. You must concentrate on your
body, feel every bit of skin, from your toes to your head. If this sounds
daunting to you, I suggest beginning with daily meditation practice. Ten
minutes a day is enough to effectively regulate the storm of emotions, clear
your mind, and be completely conscious of all our body's sensations.
Make it a routine, daily, to surprise and observe yourself. Where am I
standing? What head do I make when this person talks to me? Where are
my hands? What are my feet, my arms? What is my legs' position? Know
what your body communicates to you. For example, in an awkward
discussion, your legs can turn out to avoid confrontation. Or, if you are
nervous, get your hands twisted or your toes frenzied. Observing and
associating your body language with your feelings also helps you make
your dictionary. And instead, identifying components of body language in
others and associating them with their own emotions.

Concretely, from today, I recommend that you proceed as follows:
Pay attention to your emotions
As soon as you spot one, whatever it is, observe your body language
and write it down in a notebook
Repeat the process to create your own personal 'dictionary' of your
non-verbal communication.
Over time, you will have in mind a whole list of attitudes, behaviors, ' tells,
'which relate to your inner emotions. You will know, for example, that when
you are angry, you will clench your jaw, and your nostrils will widen
slightly. And it will be the same for all types of emotion that you can feel
every day.
Correct your gestures permanently
Once you've gotten into the habit of observing yourself and paralleling your
body language with your internal emotions, it's time to take the next step. It
consists of correcting what you communicate to the unconscious of people.
For this, we will use two things:
The custom dictionary of your body language, which you built up in
the previous step, over time.
The emotions you want others to think you are feeling (are you
following?).
Basically, to use the example from the previous step, if you want to make
someone understand that you are angry with them, clench your jaw, swell
your nostrils slightly, frown, and that's it, don't verbalize, the message
should get through. You can even train with friends to see if your acting
plays off.

Where it gets interesting is in certain situations, especially when you have
to convince people. During a job interview, during a romantic date, all you
have to do is adopt the posture and body language you want to get the
message of your choice. For example, if you want to show someone that
you are confident, based on your dictionary, you can occupy more space
with your arms, stand straighter, look the person in the eye, etc. And all
that, even if you are deep in fear.
All you have to do is transform yourself into a studio actor on demand to be
able to use non-verbal communication to your advantage. And believe me,
it is an extremely powerful tool that will take you far beyond anything you
could have imagined. By mastering this art, you will:
Succeed in putting people in your pocket by systematically making a
good first impression,
Anticipate the needs of those around you by detecting how they feel
before they even verbalize it
Give off the charisma necessary to move forward in your life as you
wish
Many other benefits you will discover as you go on this wonderful
journey into the world of non-verbal communication.
 

Body Language: Keys to Improve Your Safety and
Convince Others
 
Our body language is like a silent orchestra, which is not always conscious
and yet has a direct impact on our environment and the people who shape it.
Mastering it, knowing it, and understanding its secrets will make it easier
for us, for example, to improve our first impressions, make us more
attractive, or better persuade others of certain things.
This is not about teaching strategies that marketers or even politicians use
to the public.
We mean the ability to improve our security a little more, to have better
control over our conversations, job interviews, and even, why not, our way
of seduction.
1. Body language and its visual language
The brain conveys our intentions, and if we want something, our gaze is the
first to seek that purpose, the first to reflect our intentions.
Therefore, our eyes are the first channel and the primary body language
tool, so why not make the most of it?
Never look down during a call.
Look directly into a person's eyes as you approach her.
Remember that your emotions are reflected in your eyes, so try to
convey peace, determination, and personal safety.
2. The right posture and privacy
When talking to the person in front of you, it is essential to take care of
your position.

The back should remain straight, your shoulders rest, your neck straight and
not tilted.
Posture is a reflection of your attitude, and to improve your safety
and convince others in your words, you should not go to extremes,
i.e., you do not need to take a military stance, nor be too careless or
evasive.
The ideal is to combine naturalness with safety, and that is why it is
also essential to take care of your personal space.
Stand at a safe distance where you do not "suppress" the other person,
but where, for your part, there is a certain closeness in which the
dialogue is natural and the appearance is even.
3. Always visible hands
If you are in a job interview, a special dinner, or a serious conversation with
another person, never hide your hands. Do not put them in your pockets or
under the table, or make the mistake of crossing your arms.
4. Peace and quiet at any time can be a good strategy
Let's continue with the metaphor that our body language is like an
orchestra, like a group of musicians playing a score to excite the audience.
As we already know, music would not be the same if it were not for
silence. Therefore, to have a direct impact on who is ahead of us, we
must use them from time to time.
For example, when the other person expresses something you
disagree with, instead of going into censorship or immediate reaction,
use silence and a smile. Relax.
Sometimes silence is an expression of wisdom. Let's use it well.
5. Pick up an object as you speak

To create a direct impact on someone or even a group of people, it is always
helpful to bring a pen or even a pair of glasses as we speak.
The presence of these objects or accessories with an "intellectual"
connotation creates an image of safety for the audience.
Also, having something on our hands helps us to ease our anxiety a little.
6. I agree with the head
Shaking your head is an essential strategy in our body language. It is a way
of connecting with the person before us, of confirming what he tells us, of
openness and interest.
This does not necessarily mean that we agree with what he tells us; it is part
of a ritual of respect and trust where we can create a favorable climate for
agreement, giving a positive, respectful and intelligent image.
7. Don't pay. Find a place to feel comfortable
You don't have to be an actor to convince others of something. Do not fall
into exaggerated gestures or this excessive discourse that you do not allow
others to speak.
Body language training is the art of being ourselves, controlling these keys
to create impact, but without falling into theatricality.
We need to work hard on our self-esteem, self-confidence, and even those
nerve ticks or screams that we sometimes use to hide or make nervous or
insecure.

CHAPTER NINE
How to Interpret the Verbal Communication?
 
 
 
Non-verbal communication with professional efficiency involves very
specific know-how to interpret body language. In this segment, we will
provide answers to recurring questions: How to understand the significance
of the message transmitted by the body? How to decode non-verbal
elements and use them to communicate better ...?
Non-verbal communication is the transmitting of messages or signals via a
non-verbal medium such as eye contact, facial expressions, movements,
attitude, and the distance between two persons.
Multiple channels characterize this form of communication, and researchers
argue that non-verbal communication can convey more meaning than verbal
communication. How to decipher these non-verbal elements? How to use
them to communicate better?
An individual must judge and make his first impression a 10th of a second.
Permanent non-verbal communication is the first impression.
How a person introduces himself at the first meeting is an observation that
is not verbal.
"The first impressions are lasting. Positive and negative experiences can
occur. How people view themselves will create positive experiences.
Clothing and other recognizable features can be included. Negative
experiences can also be focused on personal expectations and

representation.
First impressions, while always unreliable, will accurately represent others
in many instances.
Non-verbal communication and political speaking
A number: 93% of our communication is non-verbal, words only represent
7%.
Mastering non-verbal communication is essential in the advent of an era of
image and virality:
Detect and analyze your contact
Control and use your body language
Strengthen your image as a communicator, gain legitimacy.
Convince your interlocutor
Non-verbal communication is the oldest known form of expression.
Psychologist Paul Ekman has identified seven major emotions that are
considered universal because they can be expressed by everyone, only with
facial expressions:
Sadness
Joy
Anger
Fear
Disgust
Surprise
Contempt
According to him: "the face is the first signal of emotion, the voice the
second."

The milestone and founding event: the debate for the American presidential
election between Nixon and Kennedy in 1960:
Nixon convinced radio listeners.
Viewers by Kennedy
The decisive influence of the image and body language: Kennedy wins
thanks to his ease, his gestures, and his relaxation, while Nixon did not
work on this aspect.
Following this debate, politicians began to work better on their non-verbal
communication.
Decode body language
To communicate, we use much more than words: in our interactions with
others, our body also has its language.
Our gestures, the way we sit, speak, and make eye contact are all non-
verbal means of communication that influence the messages we transmit
verbally.
Non-verbal communication: silences, gestures, postures, facial expressions,
tone of voice, the rhythm of speech, clothes... complete the verbal message.
Sometimes it even expresses our emotions, feelings, values ​without our
knowledge.
Non-verbal language allows communication between people of different
languages: laughter and the expression of pain is among the universal non-
verbal expressions.
But their signals are not universal and must be interpreted according
to the socio-cultural context.
Recruiters, for example, have understood this and scrutinize beyond
words during their job interviews.

 

What is non-verbal communication?
Verbal messages are communicated through the words we use.
The verbal message is an important aspect of communication, but how we
communicate non-verbally is just as important, if not more.
Non-verbal communication includes the following:
Tone of voice
Voice rate and volume
Word articulation
Rhythm, intonation, and emphasis on words
Facial expression
The intensity of eye contact established
Gesture and touch
Body language and position
While very uncommon, nonverbal phenomena are very common in human
communication and are used elsewhere in many fields such as theatrical and
dramatic arts, some cultures' sign languages (deaf, monks) ...
Non-verbal communication thus includes anything related to the body
language that serves as an implicit vector of our emotions (decoding):
postures, styles, movements, facial expressions, intonation, micro-facial
expressions, physical contact, movement, etc.
These elements reflect our deep feelings, especially when we communicate
with others and often serve others, disrepute a speech that, however, is well
written and well prepared or even simply betrays us.
When we communicate with others, our words only account for around 5
percent of the information provided by our interlocutor.

Around 40 percent of his feelings about our interference is expressed by
intonation. Therefore, our body language (decoding) transmits our message
to the overwhelming majority. This shows the importance of learning,
understanding, and, above all, mastering the elements of nonverbal!
For example, in public speech or negotiations, it is necessary to master
these elements beautifully as nonverbal brings precious knowledge to those
who can analyze it finely.
Decode the elements of the non-verbal
It is our very nature to judge others easily by their personality, appearance,
understanding, and gestures. Take an example of what nonverbal
communication is: communicating by special systems that involve different
kinds of systems: sound, movements, facial expressions, postural, chemical,
thermal, tactile, and electrical ones, among others.
There are several disciplines interested in nonverbal communication,
including biology, neuroscience, sociology, and psychology.
Posture, speech, tone of voice, body language, and look are harmless
elements that say much more about our real intentions and emotions.
This type of communication reinforces and gives credibility to verbal
communication when it is adapted, but can discredit it, conversely.
The American researcher Mehrabian says that 7 percent of the
communication is oral, 38 percent is vocal, and 55 percent is verbal or
vocal.
 

Rapid Cytological or Nonverbal Language
Decryption
The voice
It's our word's first vector. We can say if they are nervous, relaxed, smiling,
etc., without even seeing the person talking to us.
The voice elements are as follows (decode): The following.
Timbre: it's unique to each person and ranges from extremely serious
to very acute.
Volume: level of sound to be adapted to the context and the audience,
one or more persons, friendly or public speaking, etc. A speech that is
hard to hear or that doesn't penetrate an entire audience represents a
sense that the speaker is uncontrolled, nervous, or unsure.
Flow: that's the speed we're talking about. Pay particular attention to
your speed if you have to speak openly because when speaking
before an assembly, it is common to speak too quickly and thereby
indicate some nervousness.
The sound: the tone of the voice brings words to life. It's the kind of
melody we're talking to.
It is important to modulate your voice's tone to capture the attention of your
/ your interlocutors, for example, or to awaken a sleeping audience.
Physical appearance
If we are used to saying the habit does not make the monk-which is
fundamentally real, it remains that our general physical appearance
(decoding) and clothing conveys many messages about our personalities.

If you are in your outfit well, you will also look more relaxed and
encourage more faith in others. Unconsciously, our brain analyses its
overall appearance well before our interlocutor has even spoken a single
word.
Many people stop at this first experience without wanting to know more.
The same applies to a job interview; you use your personality, other
attributes, abilities more or less consciously, much like other more abstract
aspects.
For example, because of the obligation, you may have a neglected
appearance.
Often, dressed in the company you are applying for, like most people, gives
you an advantage because you have the feeling that you belong to the same
party.
It is the mirror that instantly and unconsciously induces sympathy and
positivity.
So, you have to follow the profession's dress code and the ethos of the
industry you are applying for during a job interview.
There is also a range of colors of our minds and personalities.
Posture and gestures
Your movements and your way of doing them indicate strongly how you
feel within yourself and your real intentions. Your face-to-face, side-by-side
determine your relationship to the latter, sitting, standing, etc.
Posture
Your general position (decode), heading structure, and position until an
interlocutor sends unconscious messages: are you intimidating him?

Are you exuberant with love and compassion, or with animosity and
aggression? If you sit in front of the speaker, do you lean to the left or even
wedge the upper body instead of the bottom?? Will you cross your hands,
right? Where are your hands, and what is it you are doing?
Without a word spoken, the attitude of our interlocutor lets us read different
stuff.
Feet set straight back into the ground, hands relaxed, look non-fleeing ... All
of these are elements with a particular charm, self-confidence, soundness,
and strength.
On the contrary, a strong sense of timidity, anxiety, loss of self-esteem,
nervousness, etc. Back facing forward, eyes blank, hands continuously
tortured.
Arms or legs crossed indicate a shut-down disposition.
Gestures
You are in a state of rest, anxiety, warmth, hostility, hostility, threat,
openness, closedness...
Your interlocutor interprets each of your actions unconsciously and can, for
example, determine the result of negotiations or discredit somebody's
intervention.
Running your hand through your hair (decode), rubbing your nose, mouth,
or chin is a matter of lying and fear. Similar to jerky or fast motion.
Instead, large, controlled, and slow moves are signs of trust and comfort.
Among the major gestures, we can mention the handshake that has been
more or less soft, supported more or less, the index accusing, indicators
simply, permission nodding, etc.

The look
Is it not the mirror of the soul that we are saying? In addition to that
formula, the gaze gives people who know how to decode a lot of details.
Eye contact is often necessary to answer a query. The latter's strength can
make the person easy to turn to or, instead, annoy him or her, even
destabilize or scare them.
The gaze can be there, assisted, set, unstable, fleeing, turning up or to the
ground, straight, and can submit various information: dominance, coercion,
flight, fear, irritation, boredom, rage, warmth, goodwill, etc.
Please take care not to be too pushy to look at your contact person(s) in
your eyes that will make them uncomfortable.
Facial expressions and micro-expressions
Gestures and attitudes were the first means of human communication and
represented a true paralanguage that accompanies and completes the verbal
message.
The language of the body expresses in postures that may concern: the head,
the neck, the pelvis, the legs, and the arms.
We express ourselves by movements, and we can be defensive or hostile.
The nod of the head back and forth which signifies approval,
The outstretched hand in a sign of peace,
The raised fist in a sign of revolt,
The Armor the finger of honor,
Etc.
An upward eyebrow, a mouth tip, a curling jaw, a folding forehead, tight
lips ... Our muscles unwittingly shift certain facial expressions, and they are
quickly identified (decoding).

But for most of us, others, who are more discreet but just like oblivious,
transfer unknown, disclose useful data.
It is known as micronutrition. The latter are basic, extremely stubborn (less
than half a second) and expressions of one of our seven emotions (joy,
sorrow, fear, rage, taste, disappointment, contempt, underlined by Paul
Ekman-American emotional psychology.
The former requires thorough expertise and training if it is easy to
understand, to use them as benchmarks.
The dilation of the pupils, a slight blink of eyes, and a half-open mouth are
evident to the uninformed eye and yet very talkative.
Among other things, the mentalists master this Art beautifully and always
bluff the audience, which remains astonished in the face of so much force.
If we are active, arrested, then we have got gestures to barriers.
Among the most common:
hands-on ears, eyes or mouth,
arms crossed,
rubbing hands,
forms of readjustment: the lock of hair, the fold of a pantaloon, a
skirt, imaginary dust, clearing of the throat…
We also communicate through conventional signs:
the finger pointed towards the door means “get out!”
the sign of the hand to say “goodbye.”
the nod of the head to say “yes.”
the clapping of hands (applause) to show our satisfaction in front of a
demonstration.
 

Space and distance
Intimate: highly emotional range between 15 cm and 45 cm; this is the
distance between, for instance, two members of the same family, whose
emotionally strong links (physical contact, whispers, etc.). A person outside
the area does not perceive the dialogue (s) (decodes). The distance from
secrecy is often called.
Personal: it is referred to as the effective zone from 45 cm to 1.20 m.
Emotionally, but enough to tick the effect, the bonds are less intense. This is
the difference between two people who know each other well (friends), for
example, for a specific discussion. The dialogues are audible but relatively
silly. Distance from the trust is named.
Social: 1.20 meters to 3.60 meters; this is the socialization zone with
interactions between people that regularly know each other or rub each
other (connections, colleagues, and so on). Without effort, the voice is heard
and heard.
The distance between a person and a group of individuals (for example,
lecturer facing his or her audience) is no physical contact or direct
interaction. Public:
Each individual has their perception of these areas, which it is essential to
respect; otherwise, the discussion will be overturned before it has even
started.
You will have to change depending on your background, temperament, or
even the essence of your touch. Don't pass an area's threshold unless
invited!
Space
The space in which communication takes place also affects us.

The gestures are performed in space. This space is codified. We know the
expression, "keep your distance."
Each of us marks our distance by talking to the other. There are four
communication zones:
intimate zone (15 to 45 cm), tone of confidence,
personal zone (between 45 and 1.20 m), professional, even friendly
relationships,
social zone (1.20 to 3, 50 m), marks the function of each,
public area (> 3.50 m), facing an audience.
Anyone who enters an area that is not reserved for him commits a fault, and
the person who is the victim feels uncomfortable, destabilized, attacked.
We all have a personal territory that we protect from their external
charisma.
This space and the objects in it can become an extension of our physical
body. (Car, chair, desk, etc.)
The layout of a room, the layout of the tables affect our communication,
which plays in favor of their persuasive force.
Power of body language
Listening and understanding one's interlocutor beyond their words is a huge
asset in many situations. This allows, among other things, to:
Interact clearly and effectively with their interlocutors: particularly in
sales interviews or a job interview.
More easily convince by taking the right position and appropriate
gestures.
Redirect negotiations to a closed contact person by identifying signs
of anger, interest, etc. and correct the shot.

More accurately identify the personality and signs of nerve or lying
of a recruiting candidate.
Manage conflict decoding and detecting the unpublished more
effectively.
Detect shift resistance until it is explicitly defined.
Facial expressions and body movements
These are the facial expressions in which emotions manifest: happiness,
disappointment, disgust, sorrow, rage, fear ...
These phrases can enhance the message but can alter it and modify its
context.
The clink says what is said should not be taken seriously,
Robust look means aggressive intent,
Both interlocutors are interested in the panoramic view so that everyone
feels worried about the post.
Facial expressions, such as a smile, can be intended but are often
uncontrolled and involuntary (wide-eyed in amazement, frowning in
frustration, etc.). They form an important part of our overall behavior.
To prevent misunderstandings, it is important to take into account facial
expressions and body movements.

CHAPTER TEN
What Is Neurolinguistic Programming?
 
 
 
NLP is an excellent art and science. It is an art, since everyone gives what
they are doing their own personal and stylish touch, and that can never be
conveyed with words or techniques. It is a science, and for outstanding
results, there is a system and process to discover the models that are used
for outstanding in-dividing in a region. This method is called patterning. In
the field of education, guidance, and industry, the models, skills, and
techniques discovered can increasingly be used to achieve more efficient
communication, have substantial personal growth, and accelerate learning.
Have you ever done something so elegantly and successfully that your time
will be cut short? Have there been moments when you were very pleased
with what you were doing and how you handled it? The NLP shows you
how to appreciate your achievements and arrange them so you can
experience several more moments like this. It is a way of uncovering and
unveiling your talent, a way of bringing out the best of yourself and others.
The NLP is a real ability that produces the outcomes we want in the world
while at the same time valuing others in the process. It is the p of what
distinguishes between the excellent and the nor-evil. It also leaves behind a
whole range of extremely successful strategies on schooling, therapy
systems, business, and therapies.
 

The Origins Of NLP
 
The initial version of the NLP of today originated in the early 1970s.
Richard Bandler, who was at the time a student at the Santa Cruz University
of California, met with John Grinder, assistant professor of linguistics.
Grinder, who was especially interested in advanced teaching techniques,
was rapidly aware of Bandler's research and held a series of seminars in
collaboration with him.
Such seminars originally had the classification of group studies. But with
growing Bandler and Grinder experience and expertise, the participants
encountered more exciting processes of transition ever. This culminated in
an increasingly close relationship between Bandler and Grinder over the
years.
Together they explored the issue as to why certain well-known
psychotherapists had so much success with their patients in their practice
and on what basis this success was based. While several people treating the
same patients with the same conditions have struggled to bring about these
drastic improvements at the same time. The original theory of Bandler and
Grinder was that they believed effective psychotherapists had a common or
similar pattern of action in their work with people, based on which they
might produce these excellent results.
These common or related behavior patterns are now known as NLP, or
magic structure.
So, they started to investigate and evaluate the types of therapy used by the
top therapists:
Virginia Satir, an exceptional family therapist

Fritz Perl’s, an innovative Gestalt therapist and founder of this
direction of therapy, as well
Milton H. Erickson, a world-renowned hypnotherapist.
In doing so, the expectations of finding patterns and structures that could
clarify the success of these top therapists in coping with their clients were
always driven.
Despite the diversity of the three successful psychotherapists, after long and
careful observation, Grinder and Bandler discovered that they used
surprisingly similar basic patterns in their work with others.
Grinder and Bandler put these basic patterns into writing, refined them,
tried them out in their seminars with other students who agreed to do so,
and finally developed an elegant model that applied to achieve more
effective communication, accelerated learning, personal change, and
experiencing more enjoyment and joy in life.
They called it NLP - Neuro-linguistic Programming.
"Neuro" because these are strategies that heavily involve the
functions of our nervous system (brain + spinal cord + senses). The
point is to perceive more precisely and more, to purposefully change
unwanted feelings and behavior patterns in harmony with yourself.
"Linguistics" because it is also very much about the linguistic
aspect. We maintain external communication with other people as
well as internal communication with our wonderful "bio-computer" -
our brain. Unfortunately, not all of the inputs that we make in this
biocomputer are received. Therefore, advanced communication
methods are also required here.
"Programming" means that we want to use systematic methods in
all of this and not learn through trial and error. It's about discovering

procedures and processes that can also be transferred to other areas
and people. Many NLP techniques are content-free, which means that
the same method can be used for headaches, a phobia, or to build an
irresistible motivation. NLP describes procedures and processes that
can and are effective regardless of the content.
Based on this approach, NLP developed in two complementary directions:
In the first direction, as a process for discovering the pattern of brilliant
achievements in every conceivable social area.
In the second direction, as a compilation of the effective ways of thinking
and communicating used by outstanding personalities in this field.
Beginnings of NLP
In the spring of 1972, Bandler himself offered a Gestalt therapy seminar,
inspired by his studies' lack of real significance. This was possible for
students in an advanced semester. He focused mainly on studying the
therapeutic effects of gestalt work in a group and improving his theoretical
skills in practice.
During these seminars, John Grinder became aware of Bandler's research,
joining him and his exploration. From then on, both worked together on
Bandler's workshops, with John Grinder, a beginner to counseling and
psychotherapy.
Between 1972 and 1974, intense and productive cooperation took place,
with Grinder benefiting from Bandler's knowledge of psychotherapy and
Bandler's knowledge of linguistics.
This combination was particularly useful in modeling Virginia Satir's
therapeutic masterpieces, Friedrich Perl's, and hypnotherapist Milton
Erickson. When modeling, a person's unique skills are made learnable and

accessible through systematic and accurate observation and questioning.
Patterns and principles were developed so that interested people could also
emulate the skills.
Bandler and Grinder were not primarily concerned with explaining
something real, but with discovering something useful for others. As proof
of the success of their analyses and observations on Satir and Perl's, they
saw evidence that in other people, they could achieve the same results as
the person who modeled them.
In early 1974, both began designing the first meta-model structures with a
group of students held in Mission Street squat, Santa Cruz. Simply put, and
the meta-model is a set of very specific questions from which to uncover
thinking processes and obtain deep knowledge. The starting point for
research in the meta-model groups was the assumption that verbal
communication between therapist and client is central to any therapeutic
change work. Consequently, it was believed that common language patterns
would crystallize and be cemented in Friedrich Perl’s and Virginia Satir's
verbal communication, making the dysfunctional processes conscious and
causing change.
With John Grinder's linguistic context knowledge, both researchers
succeeded in creating starting points for a model that allowed the targeted
collection of information about a person's imaginary world. They modeled
Perl’s and Satir's critical linguistic skills and were able to explain these
constructs clearly and thus move them on.
From late 1974, Bandler and Grinder regularly participated in teaching
seminars given by hypnotherapist Milton H. Erickson. Again, with the
primary objective of researching Erickson's work with people, discussing
his language patterns and actions. The findings were refined as with Satir

and Perl’s, reported in writing, tested for applicability in student groups,
and integrated into the current knowledge base.
In 1974 and 1975, more formal communication models became the focus of
group study. Since Perl’s' non-verbal actions often appeared to contribute
greatly to the therapeutic impact achieved in addition to language behavior,
the beneficial non-verbal elements were then specifically evaluated and
attempted to address them. The resulting models were later used for both
psychotherapy and daily contact.
Various types of procedures were used and revamped, leading, in addition
to Perl’s and Satir methods, to the current NLP shape. Bandler and Grinder
published their first discoveries in four books from 1975 to 1977. These
were:
The Structure of Magic I and II
Patterns of the hypnotic techniques of Milton H. Erickson I and II.
In 1977, Grinder and Bandler held their first U.S. public seminars. The
seminars were received very quickly. NLP's awareness has grown
noticeably in the following years and is now used worldwide, especially in
therapy, education, and management.
Bandler and Grinder developed reframing in 1982. It shows how one can
contact unconscious parts, causing unwanted behaviors or disease
symptoms. This enabled changes that were previously only conceivable
under classical hypnosis.
1984 introduced the concept of submodalities, inventing one of NLP's most
effective and impressive techniques. The submodalities represent a kind of
brain programming language that everyone can use if they know the
commands. People take information with their five senses, process it, and
store it internally as events and thoughts represented in their senses, the so-

called modalities. These modalities can, in turn, be specified more precisely,
so it is possible to ask more precisely about an experience's inner picture.
The special thing about this method is that it takes advantage of the fact that
not only does the human brain react to WHAT we think, but also how a
person thinks, e.g., more in color pictures or black and white pictures.
James developed Time Line Therapy (Zeitlinie) in 1988. This method is
particularly suitable for gently healing past traumatic experiences. Using
the timeline, unconscious or repressed traumas, causing physical or
emotional problems can be found and mentally processed.
In 1990, Robert Dilts developed reimprinting, a process for changing our
childhood's relational structures to limit beliefs and beliefs. An imprint is a
decisive experience from which the person concerned has formed a belief or
bundle of beliefs that are effective in his world. Such an imprint usually
also includes an unconscious assumption of the role by other important
people involved. The purpose of re-imprinting is to find the missing
resources, change the belief, and adapt the role model developed there to
the actual and acute circumstances of the person concerned.
Unlike popular belief, Grinder and Bandler did not create NLP alone. After
thirty years of silence, a third colleague now goes public: Frank Pucelik.
 

Principles of NLP (Neurolinguistic Programming)
 
The NLP is a collection of techniques focused on recognizing and using
thought patterns that affect the actions of an individual as a way of
improving performance and solving problems.
NLP's aims include, among other things, correcting mental perceptions,
making them more efficient, and offering a set of effective strategies and
skills for the best adaptation of those situations that arise daily.
After explaining the goals of Neurolinguistic Programming, here are the ten
principles of NLP:
1. The inner map is unique
One of the principles of NLP refers to the orientation people have in the
world around them. The way the person is oriented is about the interior of
the map. In the early stages of life, the inner map is simple. However, as we
grow older, the map becomes more complex, and new routes are opened.
The more complete the map is, the more successful the person will be. The
world map is individual, built through our own experiences. Every person
has their map, and there are no two equal maps.
2. The best map is one that offers more than one road
As mentioned earlier, the complete map is also more accurate and will
provide more opportunities to achieve a goal or solve the problem. This has
to do with flexibility and the ability to react in a variety of ways to a vital
event. The map is not the territory it represents, but if it is correct, it will
have a territory-like structure and will be more useful.
3. Every behavior has a positive intention

This may be one of the most discussed principles of the NLP. This point
refers to the fact that every person and every behavior has an inherently
positive intention. For example, there may be some doubt that a smoker has
a positive intention to smoke. But according to this principle, the smoker
could smoke to relax or be socially accepted. The NLP seeks to redirect this
positive intention to a more adaptive and individual-appropriate pattern of
behavior.
4. The structure of experience
This principle shows how each experience is made up of a specific
structure. Every Thought, Feeling, Memory, or Experience Consists of
several elements. This means that if each experience has a structure, thanks
to a change in its composition, its effect can change.
5. All problems have a solution
This principle refers to the fact that all problems have a solution. However,
it seems to be utopian, as sometimes some solutions cannot be
implemented. In other cases, there will be problems that do not have a clear
solution. This has to do with the map the person has since then the fewer
roads or alternatives you have, the fewer solutions you can give to this
situation. Besides, the interpretation of the problem has to do with the
content of the map. A richer map that offers more resources will perceive
some situations as less problematic.
6. Everyone Has the Power They Need
This is one of the principles of the NLP that has to do with the personal
development of the individual, as it states that each individual has the
necessary strength to achieve what is proposed. The problem arises when
one's restrictive beliefs influence self-confidence.

7. The body and mind are part of the same system
This principle refers to man is the body and the mind. In other words, every
emotion and emotion affects the body. This is the other way around. For
example, a disease that affects the body will have psychological
consequences. Therefore, for the NLP, thought changes that modify
physical problems are important. By the way, have you heard about inbuilt
knowledge;
8. The concept of communication depends on the outcome
It is necessary to establish clear communication guidelines, which do not
cause misunderstandings, nor an option for biased personal interpretations
by the recipient of the message.
9. There are no failures but opportunities
When a person is constantly moving, they have different ways of reaching
the goal. Failures should be seen as opportunities, that is, measures that
allow you to overcome and move it in the desired direction.
10. If something doesn't work, try something else
Sometimes, people insist on doing something that doesn't work, but they
also don't change the way they act. At this point, the famous phrase "don't
expect different results if you always do the same" makes sense. NLP
professionals aim to help identify and modify behaviors that are ineffective
and cause you to stumble over and over again with the same stone.

CHAPTER ELEVEN
Is NLP Effective?
 
 
 
With NLP, we can modify these states of low self-esteem, poor motivation,
and problems in communication with people and with ourselves ...
These three aspects, Self-esteem, Motivation, and Communication, are
considered pillars to achieve an improvement in personal and professional
life, and many of the NLP Techniques revolve around these key aspects ...
and are applied to achieve results of excellence.
Regarding emotions, NLP does not intend to rationalize emotions too
much… it is proposed as a discipline capable of helping to gain greater
awareness of them and greater self-control on the part of the person.
Thanks to NLP's varied resources, many negative beliefs are dissolving and
disappearing, giving away too much better, more empowering, and
motivating beliefs.
I can tell you that My friend has experienced many positive changes with
the systematic application of Neurolinguistic Programming in aspects of her
personal and work-life ... aspects that before she did not even encourage to
change or even develop, such as giving group talks or giving courses, or
setting goals for herself. More challenging in different areas of her daily
reality!
With the study and practice of NLP, you can incorporate some concepts
such as effectiveness ... it matters more to become effective in your actions,

simply because it leads to BETTER results and measurable results ... that
can always be improved.
In neuro-linguistic programming, then, "the truth" is not taken as a measure
of judgment ... what is true for someone, for another person it is not,
according to the beliefs of each one ... but rather if the strategy is effective:
it works, or it does not work... and if it does not work you have to do
something different, to obtain different results, of course considering that
what is done... is ecological, that is, that it does not generate internal
conflicts in the person, and that it goes according to their values, culture,
personality, etc.
In short, for NLP, the effective result is more important than the intention ...
I can have good intentions and observe someone to help him... but that
someone can take my observation (according to how he interprets reality) as
an offense!... with which I will not obtain the desired result (help you).
That is why we say that in NLP, what matters is effectiveness (in this case
of the example, applied to Communication).
 

NLP and Belief in "Failing"
Beliefs are a very studied aspect of NLP. Today we refer to a particular
belief that is analyzed in Neurolinguistic Programming's assumptions: the
belief of "failure" or belief in failure.
Believing in failure is a way of "intoxicating" the mind. When we store
negative emotions, we directly affect our physiology (postures, breathing,
attitudes, etc.). The processes of our thought and our state are affected.
Failing is often related to failing
To teach the concept of "possibility thinking," Dr. Robert Schuller asks an
important question that is sometimes asked in NLP and personal
development courses:
What would you try to do if you were sure not to fail?
Think about it. What would you answer to that? If you believed that you
could not fail, you could initiate new actions and produce new, powerful,
and desirable results!
From the NLP, there is talk of activating the virtuous circle, starting from
believing in being able to achieve your Objective, putting into action the
best internal resources, without thinking about failure, but rather in learning
and correcting the course until you reach it.
We, like it or not, always produce a result, and if it is not what we wanted,
the way to go is to modify the actions to obtain new and better results
without being caught by the belief of failure... but rather by the desire to
learn, correct, improve.
Therefore, I propose to cross out the word "failure" and incorporate the
word "outcome," committing ourselves above all to learn from all

experiences.
The leaders, the best in each specialty (people who have personal power),
understand that if one tries something and the outcome is not what is
expected, it is the feedback: one will use that information to adjust further
their distinctions about what you need to do to produce the results you
want.
Buckminster Fuller has written: “Everything that humans have learned, they
learned exclusively as a result of trial and error experiences. Humans have
always learned through their mistakes. "
Sometimes we learn from our mistakes, and sometimes from the mistakes
of others.
Micro-Exercise
Take a minute to reflect on what you consider to be the five biggest
"failures" in your life. What have you learned from those experiences?
They may very well be among the most valuable lessons you've ever
received.
 
The Rudder Metaphor
There is a resource used in NLP, and it is the rudder metaphor. It tells us
that when the rudder of a ship turns to one side or the other, the ship tends
to continue turning beyond what the helmsman intended, who has to correct
the deviation in a continuous process of action and reaction adjustments and
course corrections.
Engrave this image in your mind, that of the helmsman. He governs his
ship, which takes him to his destination, counteracting thousands of

deviations from his theoretical course, no matter how calm the waters are. It
is a very useful image to help us achieve those results that we so desire.
Often, this simple habit used when practicing NLP (imagine, summarize
something through a simple mental image with clear content and a positive
state of mind) can help us to "dismantle" the focus on failure and further
propel ourselves towards the goal.
But unfortunately, most of us don't think this way. Each error, each
deviation, generates an extra emotional charge that negatively affects our
behaviors and the results obtained.
Why? Because they are assumed as "failures" and generate a bad image of
us ... which we end up reinforcing and expressing in the form of limiting
beliefs, generalizing everything: "I failed again," "I failed," "I cannot," "I
am a loser," "The same thing always happens to me" ... etc.
 
Thus, an unwanted result that can be improved spreads like an oil stain
inside the person... taking the form of "belief-failure," becoming
conditioning increasingly...
So, I suggest that you firmly assume one thing right now: failure does not
exist; there are only results that can be improved. Remember the image of
the rudder and apply it to your life, to your goals.
This is a powerful concept of NLP that can undoubtedly guide you on your
path to personal excellence!
 

Guide to Your Success
NLP is a model of excellence that can be a powerful and reliable guide to
personal and professional success.
In NLP, getting results is key. Neurolinguistic programming encourages
experimentation, action, real and concrete results, continuous learning, and
improvement.
For example: Is there something you would like to do in a while but don't
know how to start or how to do it?
If your answer is positive, NLP can be your reference, and it can
specifically help you make that leap from idea to the fact.
The action makes dreams come true. Doing an NLP course, reading a good
book, even doing some NLP therapy, or hiring a coach who applies
neurolinguistics, and facilitates the realization of your dream, could make a
big difference in your life, starting today!
NLP principles are also applied to achieve success in sports and business.
You will often find fitness trainers who use NLP anchoring techniques to
help you achieve that state of self-confidence and self-confidence that is so
necessary before a major competition.
By the way, NLP and its many resources can be your effective personal,
professional guide, feel better, eliminate harmful thoughts and habits, tune
into a state of trust before speaking in public, give an exam, have an
interview, make a sale, resolve family conflicts, improve communication
with yourself and with others, etc.
The truth is that NLP is a widely used tool today and in various fields.

And why is it widely used? Without a doubt, because it works, it is
powerful, reliable, practical, and results quickly ...
It is about taking the first step and adopting neurolinguistic programming as
a guide to success in your life.
It is true ... maybe if you have never practiced NLP, you may feel a little
"strange" doing these things in the beginning. Now, when you learn to
control and manage your internal states, your options will expand, which is
worth it!
 

Explore and Design Your Goals With NLP!
NLP is a key tool for exploring, designing, achieving your goals, and is
widely used in coaching. As a model of excellence, neurolinguistic
programming has studied and decoded how successful people achieve their
goals, and this is applied with great success in various fields.
The difference between dreams and goals is worth clarifying. It is
extraordinary living a dream ... And it is better to realize it. NLP can help
you shape it as a real goal and motorize it to get what you want.
I once read, "A goal is a legs dream ..." Undoubtedly, the goals are what
moves us forward. They are the things we want.
And here comes another aspect very studied in NLP and closely related to
the motivation goals. Indeed, why get out of bed every morning? Because
without a doubt, we want something or do something.
It can be something extra, like breakfast, or something great like improving
someone is life through meaningful work.
 
The goals are key in neurolinguistic programming and the coaching basis.
And coaches are in demand as they become effective facilitators to achieve
their goals.
Coaching NLP aspects helps clients express what they want, have good
dreams, put legs on them, and run with them.
Whether we like it or not, we are always moving towards something. As we
say in NLP, we move from present to the desired state. When we are not
satisfied with what we have, we are heading for something better.

Making a difference in your life — as a goal in itself — is a concept widely
used by the NLP's expert, Anthony Robbins.
What one person wants is what distinguishes him. Whether we achieve it or
not, the fact that we want to make a difference, progress, excellence, even
recognition is inherent in human life.
Some people have living advantages and still feel unsatisfied. Others live
with great simplicity, yet feel comfortable.
Our goals are personal, unique, particular. The NLP highlights something
useful: the opposite of setting goals is thinking about problems. That
focuses on difficulties, what is wrong. Simultaneously, it focuses on the
endless reasons why "you can't."
Importance in setting goals or goals shifts attention from "What is wrong?"
to something more useful and productive: "What do I want?"
This moves us through time, consistently, and sustainably. NLP and
coaching thus help a person explore the present and design the future to
achieve their goals.
They accompany you from where you are today to where you want to be,
giving you many more options and resources. And this implies two
objectives:
The objective-result: it is your final destination, where you are
going, the point you want to get to.
The objective-process: it is your trip itself, what are you going to do
on that trip, how are you going to get to your destination. You plan to
achieve a result-objective ... and include "breaking up" the final
objective into a series of minor and intermediate objectives that will
make up your trip.

 

NLP Exercise to Break the Rapport
1- Appearance and Physiology:
It may be the case that you want to physically move away from someone or
avoid looking or using a gesture to communicate what you want to say.
Therefore, -as examples- the fact of raising the eyebrows, or turning their
backs or crossing their arms as a sign of "closing," or sighing "with
annoyance," are strong messages that indicate a "non-communication."
This may be a "double-edged sword" ... don't do it if you are interested in
continuing the rapport!
2- The tone, volume, and rhythm of the voice:
This is another trick used in NLP ... you can change the pitch, volume, and
rhythm or speed of the voice. Raise or lower it. Also, remember the power
of silence.
An example. If you want to end a conversation on the phone, start saying,
"well, well, I'm going to consider what you tell me ..."
And you turn up the volume of the voice, speaking faster ... this "suggests"
a particular urgency and cuts the tune of the conversation, taking it to your
ground.
3- The words you use:
The word "no," contrary to what is commonly thought, is a positive
statement. Saying does not simply know how to set limits, and it is very
good for self-esteem to be able to mark "our territory."
Sometimes saying "no, thank you very much" is very effective and offers an
elegant and clear cut.
The handling of a "closing" language needs self-observation and practice ...

Observe yourself in different situations and activities. Generally, some
people do not dare to say "no" due to modesty or fear.
Maybe they are always complacent with one or two people, even if they
don't want to.
If this is your case, definitely: don't do it! Defend your right to choose
freely and to set your limits.
4- In NLP, it is very useful also to have the "Sensory Evidence":
How do we know when we need to cut rapport and with that conversation?
By observing ourselves, we can draw very constructive conclusions to
know that we do not want to continue talking!
There are sensory indicators:
We start to establish internal dialogues, and we say "ugh, enough is
enough" =)
We begin to feel uncomfortable, annoying, angry, and begin to
change body posture.
We begin to divert attention and naturally disconnect from the
conversation ...
The conversation makes us tired physically and mentally.
And many more indicators. The important thing is that you can and have
the power to choose freely.
Exercising that faculty of choosing who to be with, who to talk to, how
long, where, etc ... is a symptom of healthy self-esteem.
Knowing how to establish rapport is as useful in life as knowing how to cut
with it. To do this, these NLP tips can help you, especially if you want to
cut with a conversation that generates an unwanted state.

Take into account –mainly- the above key aspects of this NLP exercise and
apply it with respect and consideration…
Many times, the other person does not notice the signals that come from
their interlocutor and that express the desire to end the communication in
that particular moment and context.

CHAPTER TWELVE
The Pillars Of NLP
 
 
 
Neurolinguistic programming is a tool that we talked about and focused on
finding models of effective behavior. To do this, we sought to model the
most influential people in different fields and check what they did to
achieve what they achieved and what made them different.
Whether due to past experiences, environmental or cultural influences or for
various reasons, we find ourselves in certain situations with reactions or
behaviors that we do not like. We want to give a more effective response to
that situation or avoid a specific reaction. Well, NLP is a tool that helps in
those situations, in addition to looking for effective relationships between
all of us.
1. Results
When we start a job, task, project, we propose OBJECTIVES, which is
general and specific. The same happens with NLP: it has clear objectives,
that is, it has results and what you want to obtain NLP applied to humans.
As an example of them, it can be the improvement of interpersonal
relationships, achieving entrepreneurial entrepreneurship, change of
ideology, effective learning, among others, or they can be several
objectives/results at the same time.
2. Effective Communication / Compenetrating

Communication is the activity of sharing a message between a sender and a
receiver. We find oral communication, non-verbal communication, and
written communication. We are talking about the five senses to obtain
truthful and effective communication, hearing, taste, touch, sight, and smell.
When we talk about blending, we aim to achieve optimal transmission of
ideas between two or more people, identify ourselves according to ideas
and feelings, understand and understand our fellowmen reliably.
With NLP, we will learn to communicate and understand each other in such
a way that continuous improvement of interpersonal relationships is
achieved. We become successful people in achieving the stated objectives.
3. Sensory Acuity
The five senses set in motion with such skill that we can perceive what we
have often failed to see, hear, touch, smell, or taste. Acquire the ability to
perceive small details by becoming fully aware of what is present in our
environment.
Through sensory acuity, we will obtain the ability to discern. We will
understand a signal; we will distinguish visual, auditory, gustatory, tactile,
and olfactory stimuli, we will be faced with continuous learning of new
experiences through the senses whose purpose is to obtain emotional well-
being, family, work, social, etc. For our triumph.
4. Flexible Behaviour
The experience of daily living leads us to develop certain habits or
repetitive behaviors, which forms a profile of behavior. With NLP, we will
learn to unlearn, identifying those behaviors that make us go back day by
day in our success, replacing these behaviors for new behaviors, that is,
integrating different habits that lead us to personal victory, that is, towards
the fulfillment of objectives. For example, change my schedule of daily

activities, train in the gym five days a week, read one book per month,
week, or day…. And so, on we are integrating new activities proportionally
to the change we need to adopt.
As we adopt a change of habits, we are developing the flexibility of
behavior; this is not acquired overnight; it is a process that, according to
each being, occurs over time. The important thing is to be willing to
change.
 

How to Apply NLP in Your Life
This work methodology was created by the computer scientist and
psychologist Richard Bandler and the linguist John Grinder, who combined
communication, psychotherapy, and personal development to make a very
effective communication model. Its initials stand for Neurolinguistic
Programming.
The purpose of this model is to motivate change through action to achieve
objectives and improve disorders of any kind, psychosomatic diseases, etc.
How?
Through exercises that help program your mind, through the repetition of
certain actions that seek to integrate success patterns, behaviors, or
strategies that help you achieve what you want.
Most mental processes happen unconsciously; that's why NLP techniques
try to influence this part of the brain.
NLP techniques for self-improvement
Before you start the routine, it is recommended that you read it well and
understand it to avoid distractions by reading the step by step, so you will
be able to concentrate much better, which will be key to obtaining good
results.
Now, we have compiled the most effective exercises to overcome yourself
without obstacles that stop you on the way. We will start with:
Controlling your emotions
The purpose of this exercise is to change what you feel every time you
remember something uncomfortable that happened in the past.
The first thing you should do is:

Remembering something that makes you feel bad or uncomfortable and has
long disturbed you.
Create a space for this memory, that is, visualize it in front of you or to one
side.
Once you see it, imagine it slowly moving towards you, and then return it to
its original position. You have control over that image.
Imagine you have a giant slingshot, put that nasty image on the slingshot,
tighten the fastener tightly, and let go of the image until it disappears.
Then think of something else and go back to the unpleasant thought. If you
can still see it close, repeat the previous step and throw it away again.
The idea is that you repeat this until the memory does not affect you and
that when you remember, you can see only a very distant point. Repeat as
many times as necessary.
Anchor
Another effective NLP technique is anchoring, which helps overcome
difficulties or achieve goals by imagining a situation that causes us anguish
or anxiety. Ideally, we anchor a pleasant or positive moment to that
situation, using association through visualization techniques.
You can remember a beautiful sunset or some melody that you like to
reprogram that moment, weaken the negative and make it a much more
positive and encouraging reality.
You just have to associate that moment with something good and visualize
it. Every time that destructive or distressing thought comes to your mind,
think about what you want it to become until, by repetition, your mind will
associate that situation with something relaxing and stop disturbing you.
Snap

The first thing is to think of something where you are not so good or not
feel motivated. Every time you exercise, for example, things may come to
your mind, such as the unpleasant feeling of tiredness or the discomfort of
sweating, which is martyrdom, and you don't feel like doing it.
This exercise is great for getting you motivated to do those activities that
you don't feel motivated towards.
Start by forming in your mind an image of how you would like to live that
activity. In the case of exercise, imagine the energy that doing this activity
brings you, or visualize how people will admire you for the effort made and
how good you will look after doing it.
In this way, your mind will associate the activity with something much
more motivating, and you will feel like doing the activity.
The expanding point
This exercise is that every time you feel happy, pause, and look for
something negative, visualize it and place a small point in the center or one
of its corners. That point should be the representation of that happy
moment.
Once you have visualized it, click and imagine that the small dot expands to
replace the negative situation completely.
Pause briefly and repeat the procedure until you can easily make the change
by clicking.
Neurolinguistic programming and hypnotherapy, a reinforcement plan
NLP techniques, or Neurolinguistic Programming, are tools that help
improve in different aspects, it is based on making a change abroad, but
first, there has to be an internal change. This is where hypnotherapy comes
into play.

With hypnotherapy, changes are made from the inside, working the
unconscious so that the results can be reflected outside. Nothing will
change if we don't start from the root of the problem. That root is in our
unconscious because there is information that determines our behavior.
Thanks to hypnotherapy, it is possible to communicate with the unconscious
and reprogram the brain through induced positive thoughts, which will help
improve behaviors and change patterns that are hindering the search for
happiness.
By practicing NLP techniques and hypnotherapy sessions, you will be
ensuring a positive change in your life. You just have to be constant with
the exercises, treatments, and therapies to see results quickly.
The goal is to have the opportunity to follow new paths to load up on
positive things and benefit us.
Among the benefits that you will get when joining these two tools, we can
mention you:
Relieve stress
Discover the origin of phobias and eliminate them
Get rid of bad habits
Adopt new beneficial routines for the well-being
Facing trauma
In good time, these two tools have come together to improve your life. Now
it only remains to start a new stage where you will begin to see how
wonderful life can be when you set out to improve.
 
How to Use Them in Your Professional

The techniques of linguistic programming, far from a scientific context,
have succeeded in business and psychological environment many advances
in improving the individual.
NLP techniques are widely used in business coaching processes because the
neurolinguistic programming enhances personal empowerment at work and
life.
What are NLP techniques for?
Through its implementation, you can achieve a considerable improvement
to communicate with third parties, since it optimizes your security and your
way of presenting yourself to others.
By investigating your way of thinking and acting, get you to analyze
everything that happens inside you so that you can discard what is self-
destructive or harmful.
One of the keys that it offers to the individual is the observation of third
parties, to attract himself to behaviors that he feels enriching and beneficial
for his person.
This, in turn, in social relationships, can make your interlocutor feel more
comfortable, due to the connection that takes place as a mirror. This
includes the naturalness with which you must combine their movements
with yours, to harmonize the relationship.
For all of the above, the usefulness of NLP techniques in the HR
departments is optimal. You convey trust, but you become an influencer
from whom appropriate behavior must be copied.
Seek excellence
The first NLP technique you can practice is to model the exemplary
behaviors of those you admire. In other words, enhance your excellence by

internalizing those behaviors that inspire you in the first person.
Positive visualization
Another simple NLP exercise is to practice your dispositive lift. For
example, if you are going to do a job interview, visualize yourself
developing the test successfully. How does this exercise help you? It allows
you to gain self-confidence and optimism by recreating yourself in pleasant
sensations.
Raise the mood
Also, take care of your body posture since your physical position directly
influences your mood. For example, if you are nervous for any reason, sit in
your office with your back straight and breathe deeply. This will help you
generate a new state of mind.
Also, it generates anchors. For example, personalize your computer screen
with a photograph of a natural landscape that inspires the value of calm and
serenity. Anchors are small lucky charms that you create in your life.
Rapport at the job interview
From communication in a job interview or with a business partner, you can
practice rapport. That is, you can match the body language of your
interlocutor. However, you must naturally be their mirror; otherwise, if this
process is artificial, it will not give good results.
Regardless of your specialty, NLP is a vital supplement at work and in your
personal life.
 

Manipulating the Mind Through NLP
Those who deal with NLP are quickly confronted with the accusation of
manipulation. Critics accuse NLP of being selfish, manipulative, and
unethical because it puts personal interests first.
From a value-neutral point of view, every action and communication are on
"manipulation." That is the reason to do something or say: to get in touch
with someone and make something at the other. Rather, the question arises
as to whose cost something is being done. Whoever deceives his
counterpart acts at his expense. If benefits, advantages for the
communication partner are not taken into account, any act on is negatively
manipulative. On the other hand, NLP wants to create so-called
innovations: conscious influence, helpful actions in the sense of successful
communication for mutual benefit.
The 15 basic assumptions in the NLP
The so-called basic assumptions describe basic and useful theories of how
excellent communication can work.
1. People are unique and experience the world in different ways
People are different; each is unique in itself. However, people tend to see
themselves as a yardstick, starting from their world.
Example of biased action
Mr. Meier, a tech-loving salesman, thinks his customers want to be advised
as he appreciates. However, he has difficulty attracting customers whose
emotions play a role through his advice.
Accepting the uniqueness of the other means recognizing his value,
respecting him and his individuality. It is important not to allow diversity, to

appreciate it, and not to rate "be different" as "better" or "worse." It also
means that each person takes up his environment differently and chooses
from the many stimuli according to his criteria. The result is individual
images, priorities, and conclusions that can stand respectfully side by side.
2. Mind, body, and environment form a system that influences each
other
The mental attitude of the person influences his psychic and physical well-
being; his behavior affects his thinking. If you change a part in this system,
the whole system changes like a mobile.
Example of the interaction
A person who begins to deal intensively with environmental protection
perceives different things in his environment than before. For example, it is
noted for structural measures on rivers. His thoughts and emotions are then
reflected in his dissatisfaction with his facial expression and attitude
(influence on the body). He is involved in a corresponding citizen
movement (influence on the environment) in the future.
3. Any behavior is communication
Each behavior contains messages to the other person, whether it's visible
movements, things, postures, or "non-retention," such as silence. A person's
actions are the only visible, audible, and tangible reference to the
neurological processing processes that take place internally. A person's
abilities and values are not directly perceptible, but can only be seen and
experienced through his specific hands. Everything else is conjecture,
evaluation, and interpretation.
4. The importance of communication arises from the reaction it
provokes

This is a crucial question, namely: who is the cause of good, successful, or
bad communication – the sender of a message or the one who receives a
message? "You misunderstood this" and "I expressed myself inaccurately"
reflect the two opposing poles as statements. If, for example, the
communication occurs adverse reactions, there is little to blame the
recipient. On the contrary, the sender must supersecret statements and
formulations in such a way that the addressee understands them in his or her
sense.
The receiver, not the transmitter, is important. It is not about the latter's
intention, not about what he wants to say, but about what arrives at the
interlocutor, what he can and wants to understand. The Sen. must take
responsibility for his communication.
5. People orientate themselves on spiritual maps
A map is never the actual landscape, just as the menu is not the food, or the
score is not the music. It is an image of reality, a model of reality. The map
shows the user where they are, which areas are where, and how far they are,
for example, to the destination. This applies not only to road maps but also
to find their way around the world in general.
In spiritual maps and models, the sensory pressures are stored. They are not
the real world, but they make it possible to find their way around them.
Everyone has different spiritual maps that are no better or worse than those
of others. For example, people have so-called perception preferences, i.e.,
they use their sensory organs and evaluate the stimuli differently. These
differences are often the reason for conflicts and misunderstandings. The
first step towards understanding and successful communication is to get to
know and understand the map of the area. Different maps appear in the
language: words are used differently or linked to other content.

The usefulness of spiritual maps depends on the purpose for which they are
used. People consciously or unconsciously align their actions according to
their maps. They can't change reality, but their mental image: scales,
ratings, the use of different maps for different goals – if the user manages to
vary here, the use of the maps increases. The potential of the maps lies in
the unused, individual choices.
Example of changes in spiritual landscapes
Mr. Keller is overweight. Even as a child, his parents comforted him with
sweets. Whenever he comes under pressure, he reaches for chocolate – his
mental map shows this way out of stressful situations. If he manages to
change his map to show other ways, he can save himself many calories.
6. It is better to have choices than to have none
Whether it's a choice from a wide range of goods or between different
options for reaction, it's good to have the choice. NLP methods are intended
to create new margins and alternatives. However, there is only one real
choice with at least three different options:
If there is only one way available, this means a compulsion, a must.
Two possibilities are better than a compulsion, but a dilemma arises:
the decision for something or against, an either
Only from three or more alternatives, there is a real choice, a free
choice.
Example of choice
Mr. Keller creates alternatives for action: In addition to chocolate, he now
also relies on relaxation exercises or exercise in stressful situations. He can
make a new decision on a case-by-case basis.
7. People make the best choice from what is currently available to them

Every person has a life path. He has learned what he can do and how to do
it in the best possible way. What is of the greatest benefit comes to the
application. If a person considers the benefits insufficient or encounters
problems, he must develop new, better, and more suitable alternatives for
action.
8. Any behavior makes sense
This means that people always function properly in their world and map.
Perhaps the meaning does not always open up to a viewer, but it is present
from the parted.
9. Each behavior is based on a positive intention
This NLP often on skepticism. How can behavior be positive that has
negative effects on other people, such as if an employee deliberately fails to
inform her colleague? This basic assumption separates a person's behavior
from their intent. In other words, against the background of the individual
map of the actionable, the behavior is correct and beneficial. The benefits,
often unheard of that are behind unproductive behavior, are called
secondary gains.
Example of a secondary win
A student who disturbs the lessons wants to annoy the unpopular teacher,
but it seems particularly "cool" in front of his schoolmates and is
recognized by them.
It is important to recognize the positive intention and the secondary gain
behind a behavior. This opens up possibilities for achieving them in a
simpler, more positive way. This is the approach to bring about change from
negative or destructive behavior and unproductive relationships.
10. Any behavior is useful in a specific context

Behaviour is learned and applied in a particular situation. Then it is
appropriate and helpful. However, these behaviors are often transferred to
other associations, places, and times when they are no longer appropriate
and lead to negative consequences. The aim is to carry out the appropriate,
appropriate action in every context.
Example of dependency on context
An attack can be useful in some situations, such as when there is a danger
to life and limb. In other cases, it may constitute a criminal offense.
11. People have all the resources they need for change
Everyone has a variety of skills and resources that they don't make full use
of. At the heart of this very positive assumption is that people can learn,
grow, and make full use of their potential.
Example of resources
Beate is a good student. Only in the subject German, there are difficulties
because the spelling does not fit. Beate prefers the perceptual channel "ear"
when learning. She speaks the sentences in mind, is guided by the sound,
and writes some words as she hears them. A spelling training starts with her
in the development of the other, less frequently used sensory organs. She
learns to imagine images and shapes, to use movements, swing exercises for
word training.
12. All that man can learn is
NLP assumes that everything that a person has ever learned and mastered
excellently can be learned. Excellent behavior can be looked at, recreated,
so to speak, by others. Motivation, dynamism, decision-making, creativity,
self-confidence, and other skills can be learned. The first steps in the NLP
are based on this basic assumption. It is a question of learning from a model

and going through the same neurological processes in the course of the
learning process, using the same spiritual maps as the model. He succeeds,
and excellencies have a structure – and this is learnable in cash.
13. There is no failure, only feedback
An error is a feedback, and it names the deviation from the desired target.
When people seize it as an opportunity, the perspective changes; from this
point of view, mistakes are the basis for solutions. For they define the
degree of further improvements, show the way to the goal.
Checklist: How errors become chances:
Questions you should ask yourself
What has been achieved so far?
What can I learn from this?
What works well?
What else is there to do?
What can I do instead of the previous solution?
What room for maneuver is there?
What are the alternatives on the way to the goal?
What is the current state of affairs?
14. If what you do doesn't work, do something else
Of course, this basic assumption only applies if someone has choices. Many
people continue to apply and even reinforce their previous behavior in the
case of problems; for example, they become even louder in a conversation
when there are difficulties in understanding. In most cases, such a
procedure does little. Flexibility, i.e., doing something completely different,
often brings the solution. The personal opportunity for development lies in
creating those extra margins.

This view leads from the principle of guilt: not the other is to blame for my
situation. I don't expect my environment to change to make a difference. I
take responsibility for myself and change my behavior.
Example of alternative steps
The behavior of an employee is a headache for the head of the department,
Thomas Hoch. Instructions, which he has formulated, do not comply with
this power. Hoch often thinks, "I've already explained this to her a hundred
times" – but a hundred times the same, and so he always achieves the same
results. The solution to the problem lies in changing one's behavior. For
example, he can transfer someone else's guidance, change procedures, or
send your colleague to appropriate training.
The flexible handling of alternative actions also applies to the NLP basic
assumptions themselves: If an assumption no longer helps in the present
situation, it makes sense to assume something else more useful. NLP
assumptions are not the truth but must be verified through personal
experiences and one's senses.
15. The most flexible element in a system controls the system
Being flexible means having a wide range of choices. The person with the
greatest flexibility to submit new proposals is most likely to put an end to a
deadlocked, debilitating state. The more alternatives to action someone has
at their disposal, the more likely they are to obtain the communicative
partner's desired reaction.
Example of solution proposal through flexibility
In a meeting, a discussion has become stuck, none of the participants is
willing to give in. A person from the round seizes the opportunity to
propose new ways of thinking, methods, or changes. This can be a short,
creative pause, changing the seating positions, attracting a moderator, etc.

This colleague proves to be the most flexible element of the group and,
through his proposals, makes it possible to unravel the situation. In this
way, it has a significant influence on the system.
How our perception works according to the NLP
There are many theories about how a man thinks. NLP assumes that he uses
the senses inwardly, i.e., when we think or remember, we see images, hear
sounds, smell, and taste, and feel touches. This means that all mental
processes can be experienced and designed with sensual elements. The
precondition is that content is absorbed through the senses, processed, and
thus become so-called representation systems: the representation in the
brain of what we have realized about the senses forms the basis of thought.
 

NLP Communication - NLP and Communication
 
The human mind has always been a territory of mystery, which not even
neuroscience, with all its advances, has been able to know fully. The
subjectivity of each person, their belief system, customs, habits, etc., are
contents that are stored directly in mind. These are such complex processes
that we cannot decipher them individually. Do you want to know how to
begin to understand the mystery of the mind?
The answer is closer than you think: it is language and communication that
lead to the territory of the mind. It is no accident that philosophers, such as
Martin Heidegger, have said that "language is the house of being." The
research that has given greater practicality in this regard is communicative
action through Neurolinguistic Programming (NLP), created by the
psychotherapist and computer scientist, Richard Bandler and linguist John
Grinder in the mid-70s.
NLP communication is one of the most effective tools for restructuring the
subjectivity of people at all levels. On the one hand, neurolinguistics, which
records brain activity from language, and on the other, communication, in
all its forms (verbal and nonverbal), makes it a very useful instrument. That
is why NLP and communication are necessarily linked. While it is about
programming, it provides you with formal structures for changing your
belief systems. In this sense, if you find yourself stuck in your work or a
romantic relationship, communication with NLP helps you to redirect the
attitudes you face with your life, and thus achieve the success you have
always longed for.
It is from the NLP that it works and effectively activates the communicative
action as a learning method for the development of human capabilities. In

other words, NLP communication brings you closer and closer, not only to
understanding but to programming your mind for the successful
development of your skills.
What is NLP communication?
Neurolinguistic Programming is a method that allows you to access the
mental content of the human being. NLP offers you learning models, for the
optimization of belief systems. She is born in the first instance as a
therapeutic method. However, currently, its scope is much broader:
companies, institutions, and coaching, in general, are increasingly interested
in this method.
Believe it or not, success is just around the corner; you will see that your
communication and speech with neurolinguistic programming, and all
aspects of your life, will change course towards healing, tranquillity, and
the best use of your mind. Remember that your brain acts by repetition that
is, by what is most familiar to you.
Therefore, in any situation, your mind chooses the same route. In contrast,
neurolinguistic programs are learning techniques that improve your ability
to respond to particular situations. If you are still not convinced, we
guarantee you with NLP effective communication, programming of your
mental schemes, the improvement of your speech, confidence, performance,
self-esteem, proactivity, etc.
NLP causes you to change your belief system. By changing beliefs with
NLP, you convince yourself of your success and discard the negative
considerations of yourself. This is established by the co-creator of NLP
communication, Richard Bandler, when he says that “The key to success is
beliefs. I modeled many successful people” (Interview with Richard

Bandler. Coaching Portal. 2006. This is how communication with NLP can
model your mind to achieve success in any area of ​your life.
NLP communication laws
The NLP and communication model are a pragmatic theory that bets on
modeling behaviors to provide you with an improvement in your quality of
life. The laws or parameters of NLP communication can be reduced in three
main features:
It is impossible not to communicate. The most important NLP tool in
interpersonal communication, which is responsible for establishing the link
between successful behaviors and your own subjective experiences.
Your body speaks, move it! When you practice NLP communication, you
must be attentive and anticipate any reaction of nonverbal language, that is,
of body language. Addressing these nonverbal expressions of language is
keys to get better programming of your thinking.
If what you have been doing so far does not give you the well-being you
need, it is time to do new things. In NLP communication, it influences more
than you think to change the attitude with which you interact. You must do
daily exercises, such as talk highlighting the positive; react bodily in a kind
manner; Believe that success is possible in each personal or professional
project you undertake.
NLP communication channels
In this technological era, there are several channels in which
communication and NLP can be transmitted to any type of people, like you
and me. Likewise, the scope of this method is quite wide, and the easiest
way to access its teachings is through the internet, through certain web
portals. However, as modeling your mind is a process that requires patience

and experienced teachers, we recommend you visit reliable websites, such
as the Teleseminar NLP High School.
The NLP Higher School was born in Mexico, thanks to Dr. Edmundo
Velasco (Physician by profession and specialist in Gestalt psychotherapy),
who worked directly with the co-founder of NLP communication, John
Grinder. The vision of this School is to incorporate more and more people
who are willing to work their emotional and productive life through lessons
of NLP and effective communication.
This School of programming is one of the most prestigious in the entire
Spanish-speaking region; its roots are rooted in the foundational principles
of NLP communication. It offers a wide range of courses, from the face-to-
face classes taught by Dr. Velasco himself, to the online workshops, where
after participating in the transformation of your life aimed at success (if you
are one of those who are emerging as leaders), you can obtain a certificate
as a Facilitator of change processes with NLP, and thus master the
communication with NLP and become a positive influence for everyone
around you.
Types of communication in NLP
People are beings of language. Therefore, your own need to express
yourself and communicate is basic. Neuro-linguistic communication and
programming discovered the fact that the integration between language as
spoken or written word and language not spoken, but expressed through our
body, through gestures, expressions, postures, etc., is the basis for the
creation or modification of mental structures and belief systems. Hence,
NLP uses the use of verbal, nonverbal, and visual language as resources to
make effective the mental change of people.
NLP verbal communication

It is, by definition, the type of communication that occurs through spoken
language. Neurolinguistics tell us precisely that with this type of
communication, we can receive the whole world of symbols and meanings
from the outside and finally translate them, in the letter, into spoken word.
Now, when you access hand communication with NLP, you sharpen your
neural receptors to use your verbal communication more effectively and
consistently, as appropriate.
NLP nonverbal communication
When within the NLP method, you hear that there is non-verbal
communication neurolinguistic programming; it is not eccentric or difficult
to reach resource. On the contrary, nonverbal communication is the
immense universe of an unsaid language, that is, the body language and
symbolic systems in which it operates, namely:
Chrononemia: time management
The pimping: a spatial arrangement between bodies
Diacritics: the symbols behind the spatial arrangement of objects and
colors
The paralinguistic: tones of the voice
Kinésica: gestures, postures, movements, and reactions of the body
NLP visual communication
Although verbal and nonverbal communication keys to the proper
management of NLP communication as a method of self-improvement, it is
worth highlighting the visual as the most popular form of communication in
our day, especially with the arrival of new technological devices and the
Massive use of social networks. It is true that the impact generated by a
person, information, or event comes first through sight. That is why NLP

appropriates this resource, intending to channel the way you appear in front
of others, generating the best possible impression.
These types of communication with NLP form a set of applications that you
can put into practice daily and help you gauge your personality to get the
performance and success you need in your life.
 

Body language:
what we communicate and how we do it
Knowing body language is fundamental and can save us in different
situations.
Let's find out why
Difference between informing and communicating
We inform you when we pass information that you don't need or care about
what's next.
I inform you, and this is enough for me.
I want you to take this information and make the use that you think is right
for you.
Communicating is another thing
We communicate because we want something back, even if it is just an
answer.
We communicate because we have a goal to reach, whatever it is.
Every communication has a value; even when we don't talk, we
communicate.
Small things, looks, postures, micro facial expressions give information.
That non-verbal of which the communication is composed, for the most
part, because the messages of the body are the ones that communicate the
most.
How many times did someone happen to tell you something, and despite his
words, they were extra-convincing, the tone of his voice the most

appropriate, yet a little voice inside told you that there was something that
didn't convince you?
Read body language
Our ability to read body language and its signals allows us to get a clearer
idea of ​what people want to say.
People who answer you yes and move their heads saying no.
Who says he is very happy to see you and slowly pulls his body back?
Who tells how much he got bored at that party and quickly licks his lips?
How much our body speaks is interesting to have at least a summary idea of
​what meaning those unconscious gestures have that people make while they
talk to us.
We can divide body language messages into three macro-categories:
messages of satisfaction
waste messages
tension discharges
Messages of satisfaction in body language
These are the subliminal messages that the body of our interlocutor sends
without consciously realizing it. They express appreciation for what we are
saying or what we are doing at that time.
Here are what they are:
So yes with your head
Linguine
Analog kiss
Caressing (hair, body)
Approaches with the body

Arms and legs not crossed
Smile
Messages of rejection in body language
If the approval messages indicate that what is happening between us pleases
our interlocutor, the rejection messages indicate the contrary.
Here are what they are:
Shake your head
Cross legs and arms
Removal of the body
Put yourself sideways
Discharges of tension in body language
These body massages are telling us that what we are saying or doing is
generating a degree of tension in our interlocutor, an accumulation of
energy that needs to be unloaded.
Here are what they are:
Sighs
itching
Patter of fingers
Eat your nails
Nervously move the legs
To blush
Swallow / Scrape with throat
 
They must be contextualized: it is not that if a person crosses his legs, it
means that he is communicating to us that he does not like what we are
saying.

Maybe but certainly not.
If more messages of the same type are present, then the message that arrives
is the right one.
Have fun watching which of these few body language messages are used by
people who will interact with you tomorrow!

CHAPTER THIRTEEN
The Art of Persuasion
 
 
 
Within advertising, politics, and in general, any other area of ​daily life,
persuasion is a skill that we must develop.
Many speak of it and recognize it as a weapon, probably if it is, but a
weapon is within everyone's reach, and that is why I recognize persuasion
as an art.
But why is persuasion an art that we should all develop?
I will give you an example that cannot fail
The famous and scary job interviews... We all have to face them at some
time in our lives.
Have you ever thought about why you didn't get to keep the position?
The first option may be that your profile was not what they were looking
for. Your knowledge and skills were not necessary; in that case, you cannot
do anything, but when the job description and you seem to be the same
person, everything indicates that You will stay with him and when he is not,
what went wrong?
Perhaps your speech was not good enough to persuade the interviewer and
make him see that you are the piece that the company lacks.
Now you have seen how persuading is something that we all must
learn?

But to continue talking about the subject, it is necessary that we first define
what persuasion is, since it is also a concept that has different opinions and
perceptions.
Aristotle is considered the father of Rhetoric, and he was the first to speak
of persuasion. Rhetoric is nothing more and nothing less than the technique
and art of speaking; remember that in Greek society, oral trials and speeches
predominated, which were perfected thanks to it.
So, persuasion is supported by good intentions, must be trustworthy and
transparent, and promote a positive benefit or impact; it does not
manipulate as it is almost always thought.
It should be noted that in most cases, by not generalizing, the result is
impacted by our beliefs and culture; however, persuasion can seek a good
for both parties and not only for one, as our selfishness generally does.
Seem.
Aristotle spoke to us about the existence of 3 pillars on which persuasion is
based:
Pillars of persuasion
Ethos: These arguments are of an affective and moral order and can
be seen in the sender of the message. They appeal to the authority and
credibility of who issues the speech, here the relationship with their
audience is defined.
Pathos: The pathos arguments are effective and are more related to
the receiver of the message. We can remember that what changes
people and causes a change in actions are emotions and not facts.
Logos: Here, more reference is made to discourse itself. The
arguments must be solid, appealing to the reason and intelligence of

the audience. This is where the balance is found between emotional
and analytical discourse. 
In this way and leaving aside all these theoretical parts, let's talk about how
persuasive influences advertising.
For this, we can approach persuasion from different angles and
perspectives, such as consumer behavior, social influence, and design.
Surely when you think about advertising, the first thing that comes to your
mind is manipulation and subliminal messages, but let me tell you that not
everything works like this. Within the consumer, there are already certain
patterns and beliefs that make them act in some way, persuasion the only
thing that does is take advantage of these areas and accentuate the obvious.
What are the needs of consumers?
These personalities change from time to time, even change daily, but we go
a little further to social influence.
When people belong to a group, new needs arise. Think about what were
the needs that were created when you entered your current job?
For example, when people are promoted, they may no longer be able to get
there by public transport, so they need to buy a car; maybe you also had to
buy new clothes.
All these needs arise from a sense of belonging.
So here, persuasion has pretty much won everything.
The need is already created, and arriving at the store means that you must
buy something; you only have to choose one option.
This is what we call consumer behavior; another example of this could be
when you need to buy a new cell phone.

How is the purchase decision made?
Let us take the example of an apple. Within its range of products, it has
three types of phones: cheap, medium, and expensive.
When you get to the store, the seller shows you the first option, and you
think, "it is very expensive."
And then the second option is the cheapest ...
But when you know its price comes to mind, "it is cheaper, surely it has
some error."
Finally, the third option is the most expensive, and you know that you
definitely cannot buy it, so you end up buying the first option, which was
the medium.
This purchase is closely linked to the beliefs we have as a society, and we
always think that if it is cheap, then it is not so good.
Here is part of what you take advantage of when creating a sales strategy,
but that does not mean that "brands want to sell you the most expensive."
Regarding the persuasive design, the information must be presented clearly
and pleasantly, without being so pretentious. Also, depending on what you
want to show, different technical and visual resources must be used, all to
make the user feel comfortable, and you can have a good memory of the
experience you had. This is where we put into practice the pillars of
Aristotle, and you must manage emotions, arguments, and give confidence
to the public you are addressing. The goal is achieved when you generate a
memory in the consumer's mind.
Remember that persuasion is not only used by speakers or politicians in
their speeches; this is a skill that we all must develop to achieve things and
the common good.

Do you remember Emma Watson's speech at the UN?
It is persuasive! And she advocates not only for an objective or benefit for
her but for that of the world.
For work, a raise, at school, with your partner and with your family...
persuasion is everywhere, put it into practice!
If you start creating persuasive designs, your brand will surely be more
successful in terms of positioning in the minds of consumers.
 

The History of Persuasion
Do you know that they have in common a speech by Barack Obama, an
announcement by Chanel, a gamification campaign for the VW Polo, and a
press release by Repsol? The answer is found in work written more than
2,300 years ago! Its title is The Rhetoric and the author, Aristotle. This
treaty establishes the foundations of corporate, advertising, political,
institutional, emotional, and journalistic communication.
Through this section, I will try to discover how the theoretical precepts and
the methodology exposed in The Rhetoric are applied daily and in a
multidisciplinary way in the areas of professional communication. The
conceptual basis of the work revolves around the command of the word and
discourse -discursiveness- as instruments to exercise persuasive
communication.
Along with these elements are the arguments or reasoning that will be
presented to the public to convince them by appealing to their feelings and
emotions. Likewise, Aristotle determines and analyses the protagonists of
this process: sender, receiver, message, and channel or medium. The issue
you must project an image of credibility, authority, and moderation that
facilitates the acceptance of your messages by the interlocutor.
As for the recipient, it will be essential to know their approximate age and
social status. In this way, the contents will be adapted to the particularities
of the audience. E l message is characterized by a simple style but
elaborate, but not convey the feeling of artificiality. The vocabulary will be
clear and intelligible for all audiences. And the use of 'linguistic' resources
that attract the attention of the interlocutor will be pertinent.

Aristotle defines the structure of the messages in preamble, proposition, and
epilogue. The preamble will capture the attention of the public to present
the topic that will be addressed later. In the proposition, all the
argumentative and narrative force of the exhibition will be overturned. The
epilogue will contain a synopsis to summarize and consolidate the
transmitted message. The message will appeal to the rational and emotional
component that predisposes the interlocutor in a sense desired by the
sender. Finally, it specifies that the message and its structures will always
be adapted to the channel or medium through which it is transmitted.
As a result, this section constitutes a look at the past that takes us back to
the original concepts of communication. This appeal is relevant in the
prevailing digital environment in which we are located. In fact, at present,
we use the infinite number of technological supports and channels that are
within our reach. Thus, we are present in traditional social networks
(Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, Pinterest, YouTube, etc.) and other emerging
ones (Periscope, Meerkat). And we are up to date with private messaging
systems like Telegram and innovative applications like Snapchat.
Of course, we know the trends in the creation of branded content (branded
content, storytelling, scroll telling, etc.) And we try to approach the public
through personalized, gamified, gamified, and quality themes, thus
developing the cross-cutting nature of the information. But, simultaneously,
we must not forget that the means -technological support- is not the end, but
must be a tool in the exercise of our profession. And we must remember
that assertion of the classical thinkers: 'the oldest is the most modern.' Past
and present shake hands, since the final objective - to guide, influence the
interlocutor's will using persuasive stimuli and appealing to his emotions -
continues to be the same twenty-three centuries later.
 

Persuasion 101
The Latin word persuasĭo came to our language as persuasion, the
procedure, and the result of persuading. That Latin word, in turn, derives
from a cultism, the verb "persuade," which is made up of two elements: the
prefix "per-," which means "completely," and the verb "suadere," which is
synonymous to "advise."
This action (persuade) consists of convincing a person of something, using
different motives, or appealing to different techniques.
For example: "First we are going to bet on persuasion: if we do not succeed,
we will use force," "It does not serve to impose things with violence, it is
essential to achieve persuasion," "Hours and hours of the talk were
necessary for the persuasion of my parents, but finally I got permission, and
I will be able to travel.
Persuasion is accomplished through influence. The intention is that a
subject modifies his way of thinking or his behaviors, for which it is
necessary to influence him through his feelings or by supplying him with
certain information that, until now, he did not know.
Persuasion can be said to be the opposite of coercion or imposition. While
persuasion is accomplished by suggesting things, coercion and imposition
are accomplished by force. This means that a person, when persuaded, will
act as the other intends but on his own, without fear of a violent or
repressive reaction.
Several factors contribute to persuasion. The usual thing is usually to appeal
to the commitment of the people, convincing them that what is proposed to
them is the right thing. The position of the person trying to persuade
another is also relevant. If the individual in question is an authority or is

popular, his views are likely to have more persuasive power than the views
of others. That is why many political parties bet on bringing celebrities as
candidates in election processes.
To persuade someone, it must be taken into account that there are various
methods, the most significant of which are the following:
-Emotional. Within this group, techniques such as seduction, pity, faith,
tradition are used...
-Rational. In this case, recourse is made to proof, rhetoric, the
establishment of arguments or logic, among others.
-Polemics, such as torture, mind control, and even brainwashing.
Nor can we overlook the existence of a well-known novel that chooses to be
titled with the term in question. We are referring to Jane Austen's
"Persuasion" (1816) (1775 - 1817), known for other works such as "Pride
and Prejudice" (1813) or "Sense and Sensibility" (1811).
Specifically, "Persuasion" is the last book the English author wrote. It takes
as protagonist Anne, a woman who suffered, due to social norms, a hard
blow to love when she had to reject the man she was in love with, simply
because she did not come from a wealthy family. That circumstance has
meant that she has watched the years go by on her own. However,
everything changes when he meets that man again, who is now a highly
recognized and also enriched captain.
 

Discover When You Are the Target
Are you the puppet of others? Learn the three steps to cut the threads that
bind you to those who try to handle you...
 
I don't understand how it happens, but every time I meet my sister, I lose.
When Lidia wants me to do something for her, she always succeeds! Again,
I don't know how it happens, but does the situation unfold in a way that
leaves me no choice but to do what she wants?
This is Francis' complaint, Lidia, his older sister, is a teacher in the art of
manipulation. And Frank is not alone; Your sister's name can be substituted
for a son, a husband, a mother-in-law, a colleague, or even a best friend.
And is that there are people who, to get away with it, handle others as if
they were puppets.
The manipulators, those skilled "puppeteers," know how to handle the
strings of those who fall into their orbit to achieve their goals. Some do it
consciously because their plan is coldly calculated; others act like this
because it is the only way they know to get away with it. But everyone,
without exception, can continue to work that way because they have a great
partner. Guess who? The person who lets himself be manipulated. In many
cases, she is not a victim, but a volunteer in that frustrating game. In other
words: manipulation happens and persists because the manipulated allows it
to happen.
Review your case. Perhaps you give in out of grief, out of a sense of
obligation, because you fear offending that person or keeping the peace.
Many times you feel that the circumstances have conspired in a way that
leaves you no choice but, once again, to dance to the music you are playing

(the most typical case is the vendor who warns you to act now! because the
"wonderful" offer ends in five minutes). You end up feeling frustrated,
irritated, exhausted, and full of resentment. The truth is that your
relationships with these "puppeteers" are not the best. Also, how much time,
money, resources, and peace of mind have you lost in the hands of the
manipulators!
But is there a light at the end of this tunnel? The good news is that while
you are responsible for what happens, in the same way, you can take control
of your life and cut the threads that tie you to the manipulator. Here are
three steps to achieve it.
2. Recognize the Game
Some victims of manipulation feel uncomfortable after dealing with one of
these specimens but cannot identify exactly why. As Francis says, "I don't
know how, but my sister always gets me to do what she wants."
That is why the first step to cut the threads that tie you to the manipulator is
to recognize what your game is. In other words: discover what weapons he
uses to wield you. Do you employ the penalty? "I have not had as good luck
in life as you." Maybe it controls you with guilt feelings. "If you don't help
me, my children, your nephews! Will go bankrupt." Or he presents you with
the fait accompli, believing that "it is better to ask for forgiveness than to
ask permission." Example: "I took the liberty of taking this from your
home." You must know their strategies so that you are prepared and not
taken by surprise. «I discovered that my sister's tactic is to use the penalty.
Does she play the unhappy, plagued by bad luck? And I always fall, "admits
Francis. Once you recognize this person's modus operandi, take the next
step.
2. Discover Your «Buttons»

The manipulators have an effective secret: they use the appropriate tactics
for each person because they know which one works with each individual.
With one is the feeling of guilt, while with another, it is a pain; with some,
it is vanity (the manipulator pretends to be incompetent to be rescued,
making the rescuer feel important - without realizing that he has been used)
or even fear of divorce, dismissal, abandonment or ruin.
What is your Achilles heel? Discover the «buttons» that you have, and that
press you to operate as if you were a robot. When you determine that you
always fall out of grief, vanity, or because you don't know how to act when
you are presented with a fait accompli, stop. Discuss why you have that
particular "button" and what your fear is if you don't budge. Are they
realistic? Or are you allowing yourself to be influenced by the "puppeteer"?
Is it fair with yourself that you feel influenced by the “puppeteer? And that
you think like this? How does it affect you or harm you? And what effect
does it have on your relationship with that person? Do you want to keep the
threads that bind you to the «puppeteer»? If you want to cut them and be
free, continue to the next step.
3. Modify Your Behaviour
Now that you know what tactics these people use to manipulate you and
you recognize why you fall into the trap, you should modify your behavior.
-Recognizes tampering
-Don't be rushed. Take all the time, and you need to assess the situation
and determine how you want to respond.
-Mentally prepare yourself for everything you will feel in those
moments: grief, fear, guilt, and anxiety. Let those feelings flood you? And
pass, like a wave that envelops you and then drifts away. Remember: the
"puppeteer" uses them precisely because they are effective. Accept the

possibility that some people will stray from you or that some relationships
will radically change. But if you are clear that none related to being based
on manipulation is positive, you will be at peace with that possibility.
-Expresses your preference or your position with kindness, but with
total firmness. If the person insists, be consistent, since it is you who will
teach others how they can be with you, simply by the treatment you allow.
Be prepared to repeat the same thing a thousand times, and for the
"puppeteer" to find other tactics to handle you. Again: be consistent. The
moment you stop accepting manipulation, the person will understand that
their tactics do not work for you - and you will be free.
 
When You Should Seek Help
Sometimes the situation reaches levels that you cannot handle using the
same tactics as if they work in normal situations. If you are dealing with an
unstable person, physically abusing you, threatening suicide, or committing
"crazy," take that situation very seriously and seek help urgently. Both you
and others affected must be safe from a dangerous situation.
 

How to increase our capacity for persuasion
As John Ruskin said, "He who has the truth in his heart must never fear that
his tongue lacks the power of persuasion. " Probably this is the best option.
However, psychology has studied other theories that can be very useful in
certain specific situations.
Before continuing, know that by persuasion, we mean the ability to seduce,
convince, impress, or fascinate a person.
Some psychological theories to improve persuasion
The term "persuasion" may have had some negative connotations in recent
years. We live in a world of global uncertainty and strong consumerism, and
we are continually bombarded with advertisements that appear to be
convincing, whose motives are not necessarily as straightforward or simple
as they should be, but far from belonging to worthy causes.
It is therefore important to make the difference between persuasion and
manipulation, and the latter lies in honesty, which exists in persuasion but
not in manipulation; from a persuasive perspective, the other knows, since
this is how it was presented to him, that we are trying to convince him of
something. In contrast, from a manipulative perspective, this information
tends to be concealed, hidden.
Persuasion is understood as the ability to influence another person honestly,
which gives a great advantage to the people who developed it. This is why
it is important to know some theories that are valid over time.
The amplification hypothesis
A firm mentality, conveyed with confidence, is very immune to convincing.
However, it softens if it is expressed with uncertainty. In this case,

arguments based on an emotional basis are very resistant to logic, and vice
versa.
So, by carrying this hypothesis promulgated by Clarkson, Tbormala, and
Rucker to practice, your possibilities of influence will increase if the
attitudes that you project have the same meaning as those of the
interlocutor. This is precisely what gives a name to the theory: if you want
to persuade someone on a sport-related subject and you both support the
same sports team, for example, the power of your arguments will then be
amplified.
The manipulation theory
This theory handles four maxims to seduce a person, ensuring that the
information is as complete as possible, ensuring the authenticity of this
information, its relevance to the subject matter, and presenting it in such a
way that it can be fully understood by the 'other.
This hypothesis, which might sound very poor, is very rational and fair. As
Ruskin said, if you have the facts on your hand, you don't have to think
about not being convincing. However, it is necessary to be well prepared
and to have great knowledge of the subject, as well as to know how to
explain them, to convince someone.
However, it is difficult to defend yourself against such a strategy, especially
if your interlocutor is skillful with words. It is necessary to observe his
nonverbal language, which reflects contradictions between the assurance of
his speech and what his gestures say. Having a little idea of ​the subject, I
can point out what the most fragile part of his argument is.
The priming theory

This psychological method of persuasion is commonly used in the
advertisement. It is focused on the networks of interaction that we need to
create in our minds. Indeed, when memory is activated, a concept or a
feeling, in turn, allows the activation, for a limited time, of everything
associated with this memory. For example, if you are told about the
breakfasts of your childhood, it will be much easier afterward to make you
buy milk.
The priming must be very subtle; thus, the person being stimulated is not
aware of how he is influenced, even if he knows that he is in an influence
brand since it is a publicity question. In another case, we would speak of
manipulation.
The standard of reciprocity
This is a widely accepted social norm. It's as simple as giving something
and waiting to be returned. It is not a voluntary act, but established and
accepted by all.
Carrying out this standard can be as simple as saying thank you. Faced with
the offer you make to him, you wait for your interlocutor to send you this
courtesy, and reciprocity must be proportional to the type of service
rendered.
The principle of scarcity
In a way, all human beings need to control their world. Having free will
over what surrounds us is important. This is why when something is scarce,
the desire to have it increases.
This psychological technique is also widely used in the advertising world;
think of the famous slogans. So, if you consider yourself a victim of this

practice, ask yourself if you need the rare good, feeling, or emotion that is
offered to you.
All of these psychological theories of persuasion go beyond the mere
theoretical field. They have been put into practice and demonstrated to be
functional. You have likely used them at some point in your life without
even being aware of them.

CHAPTER FOURTEEN
The Secrets To Read People
 
 
 
Perceiving other people's feelings and thoughts is an important skill that
helps you navigate interpersonal relationships. Every human being is
different, but we are all wired the same way at the core level. Here, we start
by recognizing subtle clues for a moment.
Establish baseline
I know people. To be able to read someone really, you need to know them
well. Knowing someone personally makes you more about what their likes
and dislikes are, what their common habits are, and what is not necessarily
"spoken" or otherwise I know a lot.
Based on one person's opinion as well as some encounters with
others.
For example, you might have a friend who is generally very uncle. If
so, their fear may not be a sign of lies or tension. When you meet
them on the street, common sense makes them nervous or anxious.
Disagreeable. They have exciting feet.
Pay attention to the habits of others. Do they always maintain eye
contact? Does your voice change when you are nervous? How do
they send it when they are crazy? This will lead you to what you are
looking for when trying to read them.

Ask open-ended questions. When you are reading someone, you are
watching and listening. What you are not doing is to grab the conversation
at the corner and guide it in your direction. So, ask your question and get
out of there. Sit down, relax, and enjoy the show.
Open-ended questions allow them to speak more so that they can talk
longer.
It is best to ask for appropriate and appropriate questions. Saying,
"How are your family?" May give you a messy, messy response that
doesn't help you to better evaluate the information you are looking
for. You may be able to collect more personal information than "What
book are you currently reading?"
Look for baseline conflicts. Something is happening to an ordinarily
loving person who doesn't seem physically present and doesn't want to get
close to someone with a 10-foot stick. The same behavior Boo Radley
shows do not necessarily mean the same thing. If you collect how people
behave in daily life, be aware of things that do not engage.
If something seems to be missing, you need to ask why, at least
initially. They may be exhausted, fight against significant others, get
angry by their boss, or have a small personal problem stuck in c. Do
not assume that it reflects your relationship with that person before
you know all the details.
Work with the cluster. Looking at a single queue is not a reason to jump to
a conclusion. After all, someone may be leaning on you just because the
chair is not comfortable.
Try to get clues from their words, tone, body, and face. If you get one
from each and have a line-up of all of them, it's safe to continue. But
of course, a good way to check if you are right is just to ask directly.

Please know your weaknesses. As a mere human being, you are mistaken
like the Pope. If you see something pretty, you will like it. If you are
wearing a finely tailored Italian suit, you will probably trust it. Are you?
Necessarily.
Humans generally think of dangerous people who are drunk, walking
around the street, and carrying knives. In reality, most psychopaths are
attractive and act together. Note that it is virtually impossible actually to
control. Still, if it is not necessarily the best or most accurate thing, the
subconscious tells you to judge the book on the cover.

CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Strategies to Increase Self-Esteem Through NLP
 
 
 
When we only see our weak points. When we are not able to see the good
things we do. When we don't value each other, all this indicates that we lack
self-esteem, and NLP can help us reverse this dynamic.
Self-esteem, self-confidence, and NLP
Self-esteem part of respect for the person with their strengths, weaknesses,
and abilities. It is a feeling related to personal worth, that is, having a
purpose and giving it the importance it deserves. On the other hand, self-
confidence, which is closely linked to self-esteem, consists of satisfaction
with our life and the perception of being happy. Some people complain
about the lack of self-confidence, self-esteem, feeling of worth, and
security.
From NLP, it is proposed that these feelings are the result of a bad
combination of the different parts of the personality that we saw in previous
subjects. The critical part is very valuable, but its fundamental task is to
disassemble everything that has been built, imagined, or thought.
The NLP considers that each person has the forces they need. All the
resources available to a person are made up of the sum of the elements that
underlie the experiences and perceptions.
Thus, some people think they do not have enough patience, but who can say
that they never have, at any time, and for any second, disposed of such a

resource? Each person carries the resources with them; what happens is that
they do not perceive them.
Almost everyone has ever experienced how, in an extreme situation or
under great pressure, he has had unknown strengths and abilities. What is
now is to make the most of personal resources without waiting for these
borderline situations to appear.
The role of beliefs in self-esteem
Beliefs are generalizations about causes, meanings, and limits related to the
environment, specific behaviors, abilities, and identity. Together with
values, they are the most important sources that make up our way of being.
Beliefs do not necessarily have to be based on a logical framework. Many
stand out for their lack of logic, despite which we continue trying to adjust
them to our reality by rejecting any other contrary idea.
Limiting beliefs prevent the development of self-confidence. Thinking “I
am a failure,” “I am not important,” “I lack the strength to act like this,” are
some examples of phrases that people constantly formulate and in which
they end up believing. Self-esteem is on the opposite side, and it allows us
to be sure that we have the necessary internal resources to overcome the
difficulties and use them. In labor matters, it is normal to have overwork.
However, it is not normal that as a result of the accumulated beliefs the
person feels guilty of not answering, he would like to the continuous
demands of his boss, his clients, or his environment in general.
Reverse limiting beliefs
To change limiting beliefs, a series of steps are proposed:
•       The first step in changing limiting beliefs is to detect them.
Once identified, the formulation that causes negative feelings

is sought. Let's observe how we react; what feelings do you
wake up?
•       The second step is to locate a state that has sufficient resources
and anchor them. To do this, let's look into our lives for a
situation in which we have truly felt good. Imagine that
situation as intensely as we can, and as soon as we notice that
positive feelings grow, let us anchor this state of memories.
•       Next, as a third step, we relive that situation while trying to
change the way we state our limiting beliefs.
Build trust
To have little self-confidence is to have an image of oneself in which
something important is missing: trust. Each person has an image that he
interprets as a reference for his assessment, formed from a combination of
images, sounds, movements, feelings. Therefore, what it is about is to
obtain a positive image of oneself to increase self-confidence. To do this,
the following steps are proposed:
•       View the current image of oneself in an associated way. Build
an image of one regarding how it is perceived. We must pay
attention to the perception of the body, the posture, the
comments in which we describe ourselves.
•       Display the image in a dissociated way. In this step, we
distance ourselves from that image, we leave it, and we
observe ourselves as an outsider: How do we see each other?
What differences do we observe with the image of the first
step?
•       The third step is to visualize a “copy” of the dissociated own
image and positively modify those aspects that are less

pleasant. Then we try to make our image even more pleasant,
experimenting until we find nothing that makes the image
more pleasant.
•       The fourth step is to incorporate the modified copy of our
dissociated image into the associated image, that is, to make
the image we have created ours, the one that defines us.
 

Methods for rescuing self-esteem recommended by
psychologists
Do you feel overwhelmed with self-esteem down there and don't know what
to do to get more satisfaction in your personal and professional life? Would
you like to have a healthier and more harmonious marital relationship,
develop professionally, and be less anxious about over-responsibility?
Breathe in and breathe! All these yearnings are the result of a lack of self-
confidence and emotional and emotional needs. The good news is that they
can be soothed and balanced with psychological techniques and methods
for restoring self-esteem.
1. be more constructive and think positive
The method of cognitive and behavioral restructuring is critical for rescuing
and understanding the limiting and negative beliefs learned in childhood
through family education, school, or other social spaces.
Through this method, you will learn to think more positively and act more
constructively. This will make it easier for you to move away from negative
people and calm your mind. Automatically, you will feel more confident
and secure.
In a time of distress or more intense emotion, seek to arouse positive
thinking. This way, you can change the way you interpret your experiences
in a different way of dealing with different circumstances.
2. Valuing yourself to rescue self-esteem
Accepting all the flaws and imperfections and vibrating with the little
achievements of everyday life is very important. Whether in relationships at
work or in other areas of your life, have fewer expectations of others'

attitudes and judgments. These are some of the ways that can help you
regain your self-esteem.
Inferiority complexes and lack of family references can affect your self-
confidence, but these frameworks can be reversed through understanding
your boundaries and self-affirmation exercises.
So, push away ideas that insist on tormenting you about someone else's
judgment on you and keep in mind your strengths and achievements. Try to
be good, above all, within your conceptions, not in others.
3. Avoid Making Comparisons
One of the most difficult aspects of comparative behavior is understanding
the negative impact it has on us. The first step is to understand why these
comparisons, when you started comparing yourself, and how this attitude
affects you.
Breaking through these thinking patterns is sure to be a big differentiator in
gaining a sense of who you are and how different you might be from others.
Constantly review its essentiality and seek to know its flaws and qualities,
seeking to learn that each human being has its characteristics.
4. Learn to deal with life's frustrations
Life's “no's” closed doors, and limitations are very frustrating situations.
However, each person reacts differently to the same situations and
experiences. It is, therefore, very important to be open to behavioral
changes to overcome frustrations.
Face the frustrations and hardships of your life as challenges and try to
learn from every situation you experience so that at the end of a difficult
process, you will come out strong and mature.

Invest in a change of habits and conceptions to achieve the expected
transformation. Combining this with best practices will make your self-
esteem recovery process faster and lighter. Also, consider assisting a
psychologist in collaborating with your mental stimuli.
5. Spend more time with the people you like
The feeling of “belonging” means that we need to feel like part of a place or
group of people and, at the same time, consider that they are part of us as
well. He is one of the pillars of self-esteem that makes you feel good and
satisfied just by being around people you care about.
Try to find an opportunity during the day to be with your family. The
welcome it provides is refreshing and aids in growing self-confidence, and
is considered essential for success in life.
Set aside time each month or week, depending on your availability, to meet
friends and socialize with them. It is even interesting to try to include that
class of friends from the time of adolescence because keeping in touch with
them reminds you of your old dreams, beliefs, and ambitions, which are
important activators of self-esteem and favor self-knowledge.
6. Be convinced of your goals
Every accomplishment begins with the goals we set in our mind. When we
reflect on how much we can achieve our goals, self-esteem drives us to
think more and better. So, use all your mental resources to visualize what
you crave.
For example, if you want a promotion or have more freedom to express
your ideas - it can be in the workplace, personal or family - stimulate your
self-confidence and demonstrate your skills more effectively.

Set goals with which you can check your progress. Determine concrete
criteria to measure the growth in the achievement of each goal you set, as
this provides more security during your planning.
7. Talk to a Psychology Professional
Consulting with a psychology professional is one of the best solutions for
restoring self-esteem. Do not let the situation get worse! Seeking help from
a psychologist can reduce your suffering or even eliminate it once and for
all in your life.
It is also necessary for you to make a personal reflection of how much the
situation is - or not - in your control, never to allow a depressive degree to
be reached. To do so, seek proper guidance.
If you don't have time to go to a clinic in person, how about getting online
psychological help to answer your questions and concerns? Even if you
can't during the day, you can enjoy the night or weekends when you're not
doing things.

CONCLUSION
5 Clues to Reveal True Intentions
 
 
 
When you find out that someone has hidden intentions, you may feel
anxious about dealing with that person. In this chapter, we are going to look
at five ways to spot hidden intentions and what you can do to prevent them
from being manipulated.
There are undoubtedly very toxic people in the world, and chances are you
have already met many. A person with hidden motives is likely to be selfish
or narcissistic.
You will generally notice that many may seem sympathetic at first, but in
the end, it is only a trick of bewitchment to get something from you later.
These individuals have bad intentions. They don't want to be your friend
just for the sake of being your friend; on the contrary, they use patterns to
manipulate you into doing things they want you to do.
So how do you identify these bad intentions in toxic people from the start?
Some people are extremely subtle with their intent and may turn out to be
the most amazing liars you could meet. But if you can notice any of these
signs in a person, then you have probably spotted them before they can
even take action.
Here are some clues to identify hidden intentions that someone has toward
you and what you can do to avoid dealing with people who are trying to
make you weak.

1. One idea in mind
They continue on their way with an obsession, which ends up bringing you
to their submission. The only reason they do this to everyone is so that they
can achieve whatever goal they have planned in this interaction. You may
notice that they are constantly talking about the same things, in an attempt
to make you get an idea into your head, so you can help them achieve what
they're looking for.
Don't feel like you have to do anything. Refuse to give them what they
want, even at the risk of repeating yourself. You can always say no, move
on or completely withdraw from this situation.
2. Do you have a bad feeling?
You will feel misunderstood, irritated, uncertain, or you will simply have a
very bad feeling after speaking with a toxic person; these signs generally
indicate that you are the prey of a malicious person.
These people give you the feeling of not being heard, a bit like you are
talking to a wall all the time, and you have been playing a trick. Don't be a
victim of these negative feelings; because that's what they're looking for in
the background. They feed on this energy and use it to their advantage.
3. The beautiful speeches
Toxic people have the language of a demon when it comes to persuading
someone to do something they want. For some reason, they have this ability
to spin the words in a fabricated mess that seems almost too good to be true.
They are among the most amazing liars, always testing the people around
them to see who deserves their time.
Do not listen or let their persuasive words make you do something you do
not want to do. Listen to your intuition and withdraw from any situation

that makes you uncomfortable. They will try to manipulate you more if you
don't.
4. Tirelessly needy
Toxic people will often start a discussion and a targeted dialogue with
others only to speak about them. At the start of the conversation, they will
make you feel like you are very interested in what is going on in your
personal life, but will always somehow turn the conversation around.
They will relentlessly flood you with the things they want. It is not just a
general desire or need, and they will tell you exactly what they need from
you or what they want you to do for them. Do not be easy prey to this
manipulation.
5. Irregular body language and eye contact
While it can be very difficult for a liar to maintain eye contact with
someone, they do everything they can to maintain proper body language
and eye contact. To them, it makes them look like "normal" people with
good intentions.
It couldn't be further from the truth. If you start to notice that they behave
improperly, then chances are they want to get something from you. Don't be
fooled, look them straight in the eyes, watch their hand movements to see if
they are trying to cover their mouth or face. Sweating is a good clue, as well
as the constant fluttering of the eyelids.

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

