


DARK PSYCHOLOGY
7 BOOKS IN 1
The Art of Persuasion, How to influence people, Hypnosis
Techniques, NLP secrets, Analyze Body language,
Gaslighting, Manipulation Subliminal,
and Emotional Intelligence 2.0
By
Robert Dale Goleman
,
Daniel Brandon Bradberry
,
Travis Greene Carnegie
Katerina Griffith
, 
Joseph Griffith
,
Caroline Empath
,
Laws Power
,
Jack Mind
 


DARK PSYCHOLOGY AND MANIPULATION (V.1)
Introduction
Chapter 1: An Overview to Dark Psychology versus Normal Psychology
Chapter 2: How to Use Dark Psychology to Manipulate Others
Chapter 3: Analyzing People through Body Language
Chapter 4: Emotional Intelligence
Chapter 5: Importance of Emotional Intelligence
Chapter 6: Mind Control
Chapter 7: Mind Control Techniques
Chapter 8: The Secrets of Neuro Linguistic Programming
Chapter 9: Manipulation and Persuasion
Chapter 10: Characteristics of Manipulators
Chapter 11: Hypnosis
Chapter 12: Brain washing
Chapter 13: Preventing Manipulation
Conclusion

DARK PSYCHOLOGY AND MANIPULATION (V.2)
Book Description
Introduction
Chapter 1 What is Dark psychology?
Chapter 2 Dark psychology Triad
Chapter 3 Manipulation
Chapter 4 Undetected Mind Control
Chapter 5 Hypnotism
Chapter 6 Dark Persuasion
Chapter 7 Tips to read and Analyze people
Chapter 8 One last word

HOW TO INFLUENCE PEOPLE
Introduction
Chapter 1 Understanding influence
Chapter 2 Reading Body Language
Chapter 3 How to Analyze Those around You
Chapter 4 Understanding the people and world around us
Chapter 5: Steps to Increase Your Influence
Chapter 6:  Sources of influence
Chapter 7: The Art of Influence and Persuasion?
Chapter 8: Powerful Verbal and Nonverbal Cues
Chapter 9:  Facial Expressions
Chapter 10:  Distance in Communication
Chapter 11: Dark psychology and manipulation
Chapter 12 Tips and Tricks for Reading and Analyzing People
Conclusion

EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE 2.0
Book Description
Introduction
Chapter 1 What is emotional intelligence, and why is it important?
Chapter 2 The Four Attributes of Emotional Intelligence
Chapter 3 Busting myths about Emotional Intelligence
Chapter 4 Steps on how to grow Emotional Intelligence
Chapter 5 Emotional Intelligence at school/workplace
Chapter 6 Emotional Intelligence and health
Chapter 7 Emotional Intelligence and relationships
Chapter 8 The interaction between EQ and Social Intelligence
Chapter 9 Understanding Emotional drain and dealing with them
One Last word

GASLIGHTING
Chapter 1. Gaslighting
Chapter 2. Understanding the Ins and Outs  of Gaslighting
Chapter 3. How to spot a gaslighter
Chapter 4.Cognitive Dissonance | How Manipulation Affects You
Chapter 5. How Gaslighting Narcissists operate to make their Victim Think that they are
Crazy
Chapter 6. The Effects of Gaslighting
Chapter 7. Signs you are Being Manipulated with Gaslighting
Chapter 8. Things Narcissists Say During Gaslighting.
Chapter 9. Empowering Ways to Disarm a Narcissist and Take Control
Chapter 10. Ways to Stop a Deceiver in Their Tracks
Chapter 11. A Match Made in Hell: Narcissists And Empaths
Chapter 12 – How to stop being manipulated by a deceiver
Chapter 13- Narcissistic Personality Disorder
Chapter 14- Toxic Relationships Recovery
Conclusion

MASTER YOUR EMOTIONS
Master Your Emotions
Introduction
Chapter 1: Emotions
Chapter 2: How to Handle Your Emotions In Relationships
Chapter 3: Methods for Mastering Your Emotions
Chapter 4: Embracing Our Feelings
Chapter 5: The Benefits of Emotional Intelligence
Chapter 6: Communications Skills in the Workplace
Chapter 7: Secrets of Building Healthy Social Relationships
Chapter 8: Tricks & Techniques for Overcoming Negativity
Chapter 9: Unleash The Empath In You!
Conclusion

HOW TO DEAL WITH DIFFICULT PEOPLE
Introduction
Chapter 1 How to identify a difficult person: The big five
Chapter 2 Types of difficult people
Chapter 3 Common traits of difficult people
Chapter 4 Identifying the complicated issue
Chapter 5 Developing Coping and Negotiation strategies
Chapter 6 Steps on how to deal with a difficult person
Chapter 7 What do you do when all these do not work?
Chapter 8 Expert techniques to handle difficult people
One last word
f

Dark Psychology and Manipulation
How to influence People: Guide to Learning the Art of Persuasion,
Hypnosis, Body Language, NLP Secrets, Mind Control Techniques,
And Emotional Intelligence 2.0
© Caroline Empathy & Power Laws

Introduction
Next time you are in a public space look around you and examine the people that are walking about.
What are they doing? Who are they with? In which direction are they going? If you can imagine that
last time you went to your supermarket of choice, you can probably recall people pushing carts of
food around the aisles. Maybe with their spouse and children, or with friends. Maybe alone. Each one
of them has one thing in common: they want to buy their groceries for the week and get on with their
day.
In that sense, the motivation behind their behavior is patently visible. A father walks over to the dairy
section and grabs a gallon of %2 milk. He then scratches off the item from the grocery list and walks
towards the next item. The grocery store is a nice metaphor for motivation in the real world.
Everyone is doing something because they have some item that needs to be crossed out from a list.
At times it will be easily doable, like getting a haircut. At other times it will be complex and time-
dependent, like getting a Ph.D. in astrophysics. 
Whatever the case, people have motivations. Everyone has a metaphorical grocery list they want to
fulfill, whether they know what is on the list or not. There is where human psychology gets tricky.
Some of us know what we want. Some of us don’t know. Some of us are “open” to suggestions and
recommendations. Still, others are constantly seeking for direction from others. Some of us know
what our moral values and core beliefs are. Others do not. One second you can be reaching for the
creamy peanut butter, and the next you are looking at the crunchy version. Or perhaps you drop
peanut butter altogether and look towards the organic nut butter. Or perhaps you reach for the peanut
butter and mixed jelly jar.
To understand what dark psychology is, we first need to establish what psychology is as a whole.
Psychology is defined as the study of the human mind, especially in regard to the connection between
thoughts and behaviors. Even in the times of the great Greek philosophers, scholars were fascinated
by the workings of the mind and how it related to our actions and reactions.
Modern psychology was founded by a German doctor named Wilhelm Wundt. Wundt was a
physiologist and philosopher, and his interest in these fields led to the development of his theories
about the relationship between body and mind.
In 1879, Wundt founded the world’s first psychology laboratory, located at the University of Leipzig.
He was determined to prove that the inner workings of the mind could be measured and examined
much like any other science experiment. He developed theories and experiments based on the
following principles:
Voluntarism
- the process of organizing the mind
Reductionism
- the ability to isolate each part of the mind
Introspection
- the ability to perform detailed self-examination
Using these principles and a modified experiment from his days in physiology, Wundt developed a
method of testing the psyche of his subjects. When he was medical doctor, Wundt had tested the
reaction time of his patients to certain physical stimuli in a controlled environment, like a noise or a
flashing light (the precursors to modern hearing or vision tests). Wundt wondered if he could test the
mind in a similar fashion.

The result was an experiment in which Wundt had his subjects concentrate on a metronome, and then
describe how the metronome made them feel. By detailing the sounds, sensations, and thoughts they
had when focusing on the metronome ticking, Wundt was able to begin determining the way the
brain is affected by controlled stimuli. He even attempted to measure the levels of chemical activity
in the brain during and after these experiments.

While Wundt’s work was primitive by the standards of modern psychology, it was groundbreaking
enough for him to have trained over one hundred students in the budding field, and he inspired the
next generation of psychologists; Sigmund Freud, who fathered psychoanalysis; Carl Jung, who
expanded upon Freud’s theories and developed analytical psychology; William James, who brought
modern psychology to America; and Alfred Alder, who formulated the connections between
emotional needs and social skills. These men created the body of work that would blossom into the
many branches of psychology and psychotherapy we see today, including cognitive-behavioral
therapy.
Dark Psychology is a branch of psychology that fascinates people across the globe who are interested
in topics like understanding the criminal mind, better understanding the darker thoughts that control
human behavior at all ages, and the conscious actions people take to influence others using
psychological manipulation.
At its core, Dark Psychology is the specified study of the more wicked side to human nature: what
defines it, how to observe it, where the lines are and how it can be utilized for both constructive and
nefarious purposes. It covers mild uses like a clever car salesman who continuously has the best sales
numbers on his team because he is able to read his customers and build an amiable connection with
them based on observations to the severe uses like studying the mind of criminals who use their
understanding of human behavior to victimize others.
Persuasion, manipulation, and other forms of influence are ubiquitous. You can pick up on some
obvious signs here and there, but there are also hidden secret ways that others control you which you
might never be able to fully comprehend. 
Many reasons exist that can make you yearn to be a more persuasive person. Perhaps you feel as
though you are already under the deep influence of others and you wish to break yourself free.
Maybe you are the kind of individual that can easily fall for the charm of others and now is the
moment for you to be able to better protect yourself against any types of influence that might happen
to you. 
Perhaps you are trying to sell something, maybe yourself or your brand, and you need to figure out
how to get people to be more persuaded by you in order to help you achieve the things that you want
in this life. No matter where you are or what you are trying to do, you have all the tools that you will
ever need to be persuasive or influential with you already. 
Before getting into this book, there are a few things that you need to know to be introduced to this
topic, in order to get into the right mindset as you read through this text. First, understand that there
are no two manipulators that are alike. There are no two easily persuaded people that are the same
either. Though it might seem like this sometimes, especially since you can influence a group all at
once, you can’t let yourself fall into a thinking pattern where you place everyone in the same
category. 
What you also have to understand is that you should have an open mind with how you interpret the
types of manipulation or persuasion that you will see as you read through the book, and afterwards in
everyday life. We have tips and tricks to assist you be more persuasive, but look for your own
methods as well. Apply the things we are talking about practically in a way that helps your life and
with methods that are individual to your experiences and circumstances. 
Remember, above all this takes practice. You won’t be able to understand the human brain and be a
persuasive person overnight. You will certainly be more aware of these kinds of things and the switch
will be much quicker than you realize. Your perspective has likely started to change already. To really

be an expert, you are going to have to put yourself out there in real situations and go through trial and
error periods of trying to study other people. Don’t blame yourself for not being aware of the ways
that you have been manipulated in the past. Regret isn’t going to do you any good in this journey, so
it’s best to leave those feelings of, “I wish I would have known this sooner,” behind. All that you can
do now is move forward, and we are going to help you on every step of the way!

Chapter 1: An Overview to Dark Psychology versus Normal
Psychology
What Is Normal Psychology?
Normal psychology, otherwise called basic psychology, or simply psychology, is a study of the mind
and behavior. Psychology (Greek - soul; Greek - knowledge) is a science that studies the behavior
and mental processes of people and animals. The psyche is the highest form of the relationship of
living beings with the objective world, expressed in their ability to realize their motives and act on
the basis of information about him. Through the psyche, a person reflects the laws of the world. This
is what psychology aims to understand.
Thinking, memory, perception, imagination, sensation, emotions, feelings, inclinations, temperament
- all these moments are studied by psychology. But the main question remains - what drives a person,
his behavior in a particular situation, what processes does their inner world entail? The range of
issues addressed by psychology is wide enough. So, in modern psychology there are a large number
of sections:
- General psychology
- Age-related psychology,
- Social psychology,
- Psychology of religion,
- Pathophysiology
- Neuropsychology,
- Family psychology
- Sports psychology, etc.
Other sciences and branches of scientific knowledge (genetics, speech therapy, jurisprudence,
anthropology, psychiatry, etc.) penetrate into psychology. In order to live in harmony with himself
and with the world around him, modern man needs to master the basics of psychology.
Psychology operates with the following methods:
1.) Introspection - observation of one’s own mental processes, cognition of one’s own life.
2.) Observation - the study of certain characteristics of a process without active involvement in
the process itself.
3.) Experiment - an experimental study of a specific process. An experiment can be built on the
modeling of activities in specially defined conditions or can be carried out in conditions close to
ordinary activities.
4.) Development study - the study of certain characteristics of the same set of people (children,
a tribe, etc.), which are monitored for several years.
As a science, psychology originated in the second half of the 19th century, having separated from
philosophy and physiology. Psychology explores the mechanisms of the psyche unconscious and
conscious of man.

A person turns to psychology in order to know himself and better understand his loved ones. Such
knowledge is essential in seeing and realizing true motives of their actions. Psychology is also called
the science of the soul, which at certain points in life begins to ask questions - "who am I?", "Where
am I?", "Why am I here?" Why does a person need this knowledge and awareness? To stay on the
road of life and not fall in one ditch, then in another. And having fallen, find the strength in yourself
to rise and move on.
Interest in this field of knowledge is growing. By training the body, athletes necessarily come to
psychological knowledge and expand it. Psychology is actively pouring into training and education,
into business, into art.
A man is not only a storehouse of certain knowledge and skills but also a person with his own
emotions, feelings, ideas about this world. Today, knowledge of psychology is indispensable either at
work or at home. To sell yourself or a product, you need certain knowledge. In order to have well-
being in the family and be able to resolve conflicts, knowledge of psychology is also necessary.
Understanding the motives of people's behavior, learning to manage their emotions, being able to
build relationships, being able to convey their thoughts to the interlocutor - and here psychological
knowledge will come to the rescue. Psychology begins where a person appears and, knowing the
basics of psychology, many mistakes in life can be avoided. "Psychology is the ability to live."
What Is Dark Psychology?
We define Dark Psychology as the art and science focusing on mind control and manipulation.
Psychology, as a general term, aims at studying and understanding human behavior. It is focused on
our thoughts, actions, and the way we interact with each other. Dark psychology, however, just
focuses on the kinds of thoughts and actions that are predatory in nature. Dark psychology examines
the tactics used by malicious people to motivate, persuade, manipulate, or coerce others into acting in
ways that are beneficial to themselves, and potentially detrimental to the other person. 
The best definition for dark psychology is that it is the study of a human status in its connection to
the people’s psychological nature to prey upon other people. The entire humanity possesses a certain
potential to victimize not only their fellow human beings but also other living creatures. Whereas,
other individuals who might want to sublimate or restrain this kind of tendency, there are also others
who opt to act upon some of these impulses. What dark psychology seeks to achieve is to make one
understand those perceptions, feelings, and thoughts that end up leading to the predatory behavior of
human beings. Dark psychology assumes this type of production is done for a given purpose and
contains certain goal-oriented and rational motivation nearly all the time. The remaining portion of
this time is essentially the dangerous victimization of other people with no purposive intent. In other
words, we can perceive and define it by both religious doctrine and evolutionary science. 
The point of dark psychology, as a subject, is to try to understand those thoughts, feelings, and
perceptions that cause people to behave in predatory ways towards each other. Experts in dark
psychology work under the assumption that the vast majority of human predatory actions are
purposeful. In other words, most individuals who prey on others (99.99%) do it for specific reasons,
while the remaining people (0.01%) do it for no reason at all. 
The assumption is that when people do evil things, they have specific motivations, some of which
may even be completely rational from their point of view. People do bad things with specific goals in
mind and specific rationales for their actions, and only a tiny fraction of the population brutally
victimizes others without a purpose that can be reasonably explained by either evolutionary science
or some form of religious dogma.

You have heard many times that everyone has a dark side. All cultures and belief systems
acknowledge this dark side to some extent. Our society refers to it as “evil” while some cultures and
religions have gone so far as to create mythical beings to whom they attribute that evil (the devil,
Satan, demons, etc.). Experts in dark psychology posit that there as some among us who commit the
worst kinds of evil, for purposes that are unknown. While most people may do evil things to gain
power, money, retribution, or for sexual purposes, there are those who do evil things because that’s
just who they are. They commit acts of horror for absolutely no reason. In other words, their ends
don’t justify their means; they cause harm for its own sake. 
Dark psychology is rooted in 4 dark personality traits. These traits are; narcissism, Machiavellianism,
psychopathy, and sadism. People with such traits tend to act in ways that are pointlessly harmful to
others.
The skills and methods of influencing others can be quite different. They can be used both for
constructive purposes and for various frauds. The characteristics of those who manage to influence
people, no matter what is the “dark” in the dark psychology name. 
People who successfully use dark psychology have understood fully all aspects of normal
psychology. Thus, they understand themselves as well as others around them. They easily analyze
others with this skill. They perceive the views, opinions and other information from those whom they
wish to influence. Such a skill can be developed independently, and you will learn all about this in
subsequent chapters. 
Certain stories of deception of citizens with the help of dark psychology, like those that were told at
the beginning of the book, were perceived as exotic, and the victims of this deception were
considered unlimited simpletons. The bulk of fraudulent “exploits” using dark psychology as a
special state of the psyche was not associated at all: the victim of dark psychological influence
simply could not find an explanation for what happened.
As has been noted more than once, the specifics of dark psychology makes the active user “process”
the client in a roundabout way. He does not give direct commands to do this or that but encourages a
person to do it as if he is acting on his own initiative. The person comments, asks, consults and - gets
his way. 
Behind his behavior is a certain strategy. One of them is speculation. The phrase stands in such a way
that some phenomenon, action or object is presented in it as if it was actually accepted. For example,
they ask you: “Will you pay in dollars or bitcoins?” The question is innocent, but you have not yet
said that you intend to purchase this thing at all. The question assumes that you have already made
such a decision and it remains to solve the trifle - to pay in bitcoins or dollars, about which you begin
to reflect.
I suppose that what was read caused the reader an ironic smile: a primitive ploy, visible, as they say,
with the naked eye. Do not rush to conclusions. Let me remind you that the "seller" has already
adjusted to you and leads you, your consciousness is no longer as critical as when reading these lines.
This is the basis of analyzing people first, then thinking steps ahead of them, even about their own
actions and reactions.
The essence of this technique is as follows: the dark psychologist makes up the text of the suggestion,
and then “dissolves” it in a story of neutral content. During the conversation, the “user” in some way
selects the words of suggestion and they turn out to be a brilliant trap for consciousness. He (or she)
will change the volume of speech, pause in characteristic places, speed up or slow down the story.
 

There are other tools for highlighting words and phrases in order to consolidate them in the
subconscious. The “user” can emphasize the right places in the story with gestures, facial
expressions, touching your arm, shoulder, back. He can approach you sharply, turn around, turn
away, etc. All these manipulations, if you follow them, are the basis of dark psychology. Now let's
think about how often this is done to us against our will. And how this new knowledge is about to
turn your life around. But first, it is worth considering the various personality types you should get
ready to come across…
Understanding the Dark Triad and What It Means
This is a very important concept because it is going to help tie together some of the other aspects that
we have discussed Dark Psychology. The name “dark triad” may sound like something that comes
from a horror movie, but it is actually a legitimate psychological concept that is well recognized.
The dark triad is nothing more than an identification system for the three most destructive and
harmful psychological personality traits a person can have. This chapter will take some time to detail
each of the traits, including narcissism, psychopathy, and Machiavellianism. Let’s take a look at each
part and see what it means when it comes to dark psychology
.
What Is Machiavellianism?
The first aspect of the Dark Triad that we will discuss is known as Machiavellianism. This aspect
gets its name from the political philosopher known as Machiavelli. In his classical work “The
Prince,” the ideas, principles, and tactics that are used by those who seek to influence others are
outlined. But how exactly does a Machiavellian person come across?
The hallmarks of this trait include a willingness to focus on your self-interest all the time, an
understanding of the importance of your image, the perception of appearance, and even the ruthless
exercise of power and cruelty rather than using mercy or compassion.
To keep it simple, people who have this trait are ones who always have a strategy when they
approach life. The consequences and any ramifications about any action are going to be thought out
and then assessed in terms of how they are going to impact the one who is carrying them out. The
Machiavellian approach to the world is summed up with a simple question: “How will this action
benefit me, and how will my public perception be impacted as a result?”
Machiavellian people are going to be masters of doing what is going to personally serve them well,
while still being able to maintain the good public image that they want. This allows the manipulator
to do what they want, while still getting people around them to still like them.
What Is Psychopathy?
The net aspect that we can discuss is psychopathy. This is going to refer to a psychological condition
that involves a superficial charm, impulsivity, and a lack of commonly held human emotions, such as
remorse and empathy. Someone who exhibits enough of these traits can be known as a psychopath.
These individuals are seen as some of the most dangerous people because they are able to hide their
true intentions, while still causing a lot of trouble.
People often associate the word “psychopath” with an image of someone who is mad and wields a
machete. The reality is different, and this can make it more deadly. A true psychopath is more likely
to be that charming and handsome stranger who is able to win over their victim before they ruin those
victims’ lives in the process.

Interestingly, some of the top people in business score high on psychopathy personality tests. But as
time goes on, it is becoming more common to see psychopathy as more of a problem to the victim
and to society rather than an issue in the psychopath’s own life. Psychopaths are able to get to the top
of anything that they choose because they don’t have to worry about some of the compassionate
indecision that other humans are going to experience.
What Is Narcissism?
The third aspect of the Dark Triad that we need to explore is narcissism. This is often thought of as
the idea that a person loves themselves too much. This is close but quite the right definition for
someone who is a narcissist. You can have self-love without being considered a narcissist.
Someone who is considered a narcissist is likely to have a range of traits that are there. They will
have an excessively inflated self-worth, such as seeing that their life is extra special and one of the
most important lives in all of history. If this has been inflated enough, they may see that they are the
very most important in the whole world.
In the mind of a narcissist, they are not only special, but they are superior to everyone else. They
consider themselves to be a better species of person, higher than what normal people would be. And
because a narcissist believes this way, their behaviors are going to change. The behavior that you see
in a narcissist is going to reflect the self-worth that the person has.
Some of the outward signs or manifestations of this aspect would include the inability of the person
to accept any dissent or criticism of any kind. Even if they feel that someone is trying to criticize
them, they are going to have a hard time dealing with this. This kind of person also feels the need to
have others agree with them all the time and they like to be flattered. If you are around someone who
seems to always have a need for constant praise, recognition, and approval, and if they seem to
organize their lives in order to give them constant access to those who will fill this need, then it is
likely that you are dealing with someone who is a narcissist.
These three aspects are going to come together to form the Dark Triad. When one person has all of
these three traits in them, it can be a hard task to stay away and not get pulled into whatever plan they
have. Being on the lookout for these can make a big difference in how much control you have in your
own personal life. 

Chapter 2: How to Use Dark Psychology to Manipulate Others
 
People around us may use dark psychology tactics every day to manipulate, influence, persuade and
intimidate us to take advantage and get what they want. As you get to know that dark psychology
includes the science and art of mind control and manipulation. Whereas psychology is different from
dark psychology as it is the study of human behavior and our actions, interactions and thoughts are
centered with them. Some people get confused and don't know the difference between psychology
and dark psychology. However, if you want to manipulate others, you need to know how to use dark
psychology. 
Here are a different kind of people who know the tactics of manipulating others- 
a) Manipulation is an art and you need to know the tactics to meet your needs first, even at someone
else's expense. Though these kinds of people are known to be self-centered, and they are good when
it comes to manipulating and intimidating others. These people are not bothered with the outcomes
but they have an agenda of self before others, no matter what.  
b) People who are good public speakers use dark psychological and persuasion tactics to maximize
the emotional state of the listeners which leads to increase in the sale of their product (whatever they
were selling to the audience). These people also know the moment and time of taking advantage of
the emotional turmoil’s of other people.  
c) Some people meet clinical diagnosis, as they are true sociopaths. However, these people usually
are intellectual, alluring but alongside they are impulsive. Just because these people do not have
much ability to feel remorse and lack of emotionality, they build a superficial relationship and take
advantage of innocent people by using dark tactics. They are not concerned about anyone's feelings
and are least bothered with what others might do once the innocents know about their true face.
 
d) People in politics (usual politicians) use dark tactics to persuade people that they will do the
needful and perform the activities in favor of the common people just to get a vote and to become the
ruling party. 
e) Some lawyers or attorneys focus solely on winning their case regardless of knowing the truth and
even after knowing the truth, using dark manipulating tactics to get the outcome of what they want to
win the case. They are not bothered about justice but are only concerned about their reputation and
self-esteem.  
f) People in corporate offices who are in a higher position and deployed as the companies regional
head use dark psychological tactics to get compliance, higher performance, or greater efforts from
their subordinates. They are not cared about 'what their subordinates deserve' or 'is their salary
justified as per the work they are performing within the organization'.  
g) People who are involved in the sales department are usually well aware of many of these dark
influencing tactics to persuade and convince other people to buy whatever they are selling. They
could even disguise the customers, as they are only concerned with selling their product and earning
a profit.  
Now that you got to know about different types of people who may deceit you by using these dark
tricks, here are the different dark psychological tactics to manipulate the people and make them do
what you want them to do- 
1) If you want to sell your product and wish to manipulate your customers to make them surely buy
your product, you can use a decoy option. You can use it as the third option. For example, if you are

facing a troublesome situation to sell the more expensive of two products, by adding the third option
you can make the expensive product more captivating and appealing. You just need to make sure that
decoy option should be the same price for the more expensive option but assuring that it is less
effective. It is a good strategy to increase the sale and enticing more customers towards your
expensive product.
 
2) To win an argument, speak quickly so that the opponent has no other option left but to agree with
you. If you speak faster, it will give the other person the less time to process what you are saying and
they will agree with you. While you should do the opposite in case when the other person agrees with
you, speaking slowly is better as it will give them the time to evaluate and analyze what you are
saying. 
3) You can copy the body language of people whom you want to manipulate. Imitating their body
actions shall impress them and will make you closer to them and they may start liking you. If you
subtly imitate the way the other person is talking, sitting, and walking, they would probably not
notice that you are copying them and it may get them to do as per your wants. 
4) Scaring the other people to make them give you what you want and need is one of the dark
psychological tactics to manipulate people. Anxious people often respond positively to requests
afterward as they may be occupied thinking about the danger they are surrounded with. It would
make them feel scared and would do as your saying. In addition, sometimes, even if you will not say
anything they will understand what you need and do what you would have spoken them to do for
you. 
5) To get people to behave ethically with you, you need to display an image of eyes. It means you
should create your image as a person who watches, notice and observe the other person by posting a
picture of eyes nearby. The other people could never take you like a side option and will return all
borrowed items on time. 
6) Tweak such an environment for the people so that they would act less selfish. For example, if you
were bargaining in a coffee shop, needless to say, you would be less aggressive as compared to what
you would be in a conference room. Usually, people tend to act less selfish when neutral items
surround them, whereas if work-related objects occupy them, they incline towards more aggression
and selfishness. 
7) Try to keep your point complicated and do not make it very easy for the people to understand in a
first move. To comply with people with your request, confuse them. For example- instead of keeping
a price tag of your product for 4 dollars, make it 400 pennies, so that people would first analyze how
much dollars would 400 pennies make and if they bargain they will do that in pennies rather than in
dollars. Or they may just think that the price given is a deal to go for. 
8) If you help someone to achieve their goals or sort their problems out, the other person tends to
return your favor, as they would feel obliged by what you have done for them. This way when the
time comes, you may manipulate the other person and is one of the tactics. 
9) Try to ask a question or request a person at a time when they are mentally drained and exhausted.
They would never question the request or the chances of denial for your request are very less. 
10) Always make the other person focus on their gaining not losing. Moreover, declare the price of
your product at last after telling all the features and benefits of your product. For instance, if you are
selling your car in 1000 dollars, always let the other person know about its features, specifications,
and benefits first. Then declare its price. The benefits will entice the customer towards the car, and
then the price shall not be a constraint. 

11) Do not use verbs; try to use more nouns to change the behavior of the other person towards you.
If you use nouns, it will reinforce the identity of the person for whom you may be using it. It will also
indicate a specific group which shall be eloquent.  

Chapter 3: Analyzing People through Body Language
Body Language Clues: The Basics
When you try to know more about your goal and how they view the world, body language is going to
be so crucial. Too many times we get caught in the words that someone else tells us and we won't
concentrate on the other indications they also give us. There is so much that can be disclosed by these
body language clues, and it makes a large difference how effective you are in understanding and
working with your goals. 
Body language will refer to some of the nonverbal signals we use to interact with others. These
nonverbal signals will take up much of the interaction we communicate every day. From the
movement of our body to our facial expressions and everything in between, things we don't say can
still share a ton of information during the process. Indeed, 60 to 65% of our interaction could be
accounted for by body language and other nonverbal communications. So how do we learn to read
this language to our own advantage? Let's begin by learning more about the various indications of
body language, and how we can read this for our benefit. First off we have the facial expressions.
Think of a time, by the expression on your face, about how much data someone can convey. A smile
is a nice way to show happiness or consent. A frown can imply the other way around. In some
instances, facial expressions can show our real emotions about a scenario. While an individual may
say he's okay, he looks like he's talking when he says this might talk otherwise. There are many
feelings on our facial expressions, including: 
1. Contempt
2. Desire
3. Excitement
4. Confusion
5. Fea
r
The expression that appears on the person's face helps us to determine if we trust and think anything
the person says. In reality, one research discovered that the most credible of all facial expressions will
be a small eyebrow raise and a slight smile. This is an expression that in many instances shows us to
trust and friendliness.
The other type of body language cue will have to be the mouth. Mouth expressions and motions can
be another vital component of body language reading. For instance, if you notice someone else
chewing on his bottom lip, it may show that there are feelings of insecurity, fear, and worry. The
individual can cover his mouth to be polite when he coughs, but sometimes the other person's
disapproval. And smiling will be one of the best signals of corporeal language, but the smile and
what it says about a person can be evaluated differently. Some of the stuff you can care about when
reading someone else's mouth movements include;
Pursed lips: If you see your goal tightened up, it's a sign of distrust,
disagreement, and disgust. 
Lip biting: This is when you bite your lower lip, usually when you are
stressed, anxious, or distressed. 

Mouth cover: Any moment someone wishes to conceal one of their emotional
responses, they can cover their mouths in order to assist. 
Turned up or down: Even a slight shift in your mouth can be a subtle
indication of how you feel right now. When your mouth turns up, it's a sign
that you are hopeful or glad. It could be a grimace, disagreement, and even
sorrow when the mouth turns down.
Another area to observe as body language cue is gestures. Gestures can be a very evident, direct sign
of body language to be careful about. Waiving, pointing and fingering can be common and easy to
understand gestures. Some may even be cultural. Some of the most popular gestures and the
significances that come with them include: 
A clung fist: In most cases, this will show anger, but sometimes it can also
imply solidarity. 
Up or down thumbs: This is used as a sign of approval and disapproval. 
The "all correct" gesture: This one will assist others to say you're fine in the
United States. But it is seen in some other cultures as a vulgar gesture.
The next thing we have to do is look at the arms and legs of the individual you talk to. These can be
useful if a lot of information is to be transmitted nonverbally. Crossing the weapons will often be a
defensive maneuver. Crossing the legs away from another individual will also show a person's
discomfort or a dislike. 
Other subtle signals, including the large expansion of the arm, can sometimes help us to seem bigger
and more comfortable while maintaining the arms close to the body. When you try to measure your
body language a little, be careful about some of the following signals that your legs and arms will
transmit to you from the target:
Crossed arms: This will give you a signal that you're closed, safe and
defensive. As a manipulator, you need to uncross the arms of the goal to
make you feel comfortable. 
Standing on hips with your hands: This can be a good sign that the person is
ready and controlled. This will sometimes be a sign of aggression. 
Clamp the hands so that they're behind the back: This will be a sign that
your goal is angry, anxious or boring. You have to look at some of the other
signals that come first. 
Tap fingers or fidgeting quickly: The other person is frustrated, impatient
and even bored. 
Crossed legs: This is a good indication that someone feels closed or needs
some privacy.
Posture is another thing you should look at. The way we hold our bodies will also be a significant
component of body language. Posture refers to the way we hold our bodies and to a person's general

physical shape. Posture can give a wealth of data on how someone feels and also suggests that a
person's features are submissive, open or confident. 
For instance, if you sit directly, it can show that an individual is concentrated and is attempting to
look after what is going on. Sitting down with the body, on the other side, will show that someone is
most of the time indifferent or bored. Looking at your goal will assist you to understand whether you
are interested in what you do or say, or if you need to move on to find a different destination. 
Whenever you attempt to read some of the languages of your body, attempt and find out some signals
that your goal's position is attempting to tell you. Some of them are: 
Open posture. Open posture. This includes keeping the body's trunk exposed
and open.
Closed position: this one will require hiding the body's trunk and hitting the
legs and arms. This posture will be more indicative of anxiety, discomfort,
and depression in the objective.

Chapter 4: Emotional Intelligence
Emotional intelligence also referred to as emotional leadership or emotional quotient, is the ability of
certain people to realize their emotions, as well as those of others, differentiate them, label, and
readily manage or adjust depending on the situation or environment. These people typically remain
calm despite the changes in the surrounding or negative impacts associated with a given case.
Besides, they may apply the capability to help those affected by awkward feelings, therefore, making
them feel at peace. Emotional intelligence is psychological, where one understands and handles any
kind of emotion with ease while remaining calm.
Over the years, the definition of emotional intelligence was broken down into four sections:
perceiving, utilizing, learning, and managing. The four abilities were all attributed to emotional
intelligence with relative meanings behind them. Different models were created using these abilities,
therefore, facilitating how thoughts and understanding of emotions interact. Studies show that people
with more emotional intelligence tend to succeed more in various areas, including academics,
careers, and talents. The ability has also been associated with providing great leadership and higher
performance at work. More so, researchers agree that these people are healthy mentally as well as on
their standard personality traits. 
Since the introduction of emotional intelligence, different studies have been conducted with the
objective of determining the actual factors driving an individual to manage emotions. Most of us
react to varying feelings to some extent, depending on the severity or fun in it. However, higher
emotional intelligence people have the ability to manage these emotions and have a minimal impact
on their lives, even on extensive influences of a situation. With different groups of people, emotional
intelligence has been seen to have different implications on the thoughts of these individuals. For
instance, children and teens with high emotional intelligence tend to have good social interaction
while those having lower abilities have the opposite. Adults with high emotional intelligence
accompany an excellent self-perception socially while those with low emotional intelligence tend to
become aggressive.
 
Features of Emotional Intelligence 
Show of Authenticity
High emotional intelligence people, especially those who are more social, tend to stick to their
principles and values. When sharing about themselves to others, they usually stand by their
boundaries rather than sharing everything about themselves to others. As such, authenticity does not
imply that you have to share all about yourself. However, you share about yourself to people who
matter and those who understand you and appreciate your thoughts and feelings. 
Demonstration of Empathy
These individuals tend to demonstrate empathy to people as they readily understand other people’s
feelings and thoughts. They, therefore, readily connect to others and agree on what is essential.
Emotional intelligence enables them to develop more profound and more productive relationships
with others. Instead of becoming judgmental and avoiding those who feel different, they comfort and
make them feel important to society. Despite being empathetic, these people are cautious when it
comes to decision making, therefore avoiding agreeing to every person's motive.  
Apologetic and Forgiving
Another feature of emotional intelligence people is that they quickly understand their mistakes. They
usually have the courage and strength to apologize even without errors, therefore, indicating value to

a relationship. The same applies to forgive and forget, even in the most resentful situations. As such,
having emotional intelligence provides a mind that readily forgives and free from your emotions
from those who hurt you. 
Being Helpful
As emotional intelligence entails understanding and managing your emotions and that of others, then
helping them becomes part of what the ability accompanies. As one of the most significant rewards
to others, helping becomes a habit to these people, and they never tire or discriminate against others.
However, they help each person in need without asking too many questions. As such, it helps those
who follow similar footsteps as well as building trust among people to help others.
Always Thinking About Feelings
Emotional intelligence primarily dwells on one's feelings which often change suddenly or slowly
depending on the situation or environment. When an individual has a higher emotional intelligence
capability, then he or she frequently thinks about different feelings and how it may impact others.
They usually ask about common questions regarding their self-awareness, reflecting on everyday
activities, and people who may be influenced by their emotions. As such, systematic thinking and
learning about emotions provide insights used to their advantage in managing their feelings and that
of others.
Benefit from Criticism
Nobody experiences fun when it comes to negative feedback, especially from people you trust and
those close to you. However, these types of reputation are quite effective in life as they teach you a
few lessons about a particular aspect. Besides, it enables you to learn more about how others think
mainly about you and things to change and become better in what you do. Receiving these negative
feedbacks may become a challenge to others, but those with the ability to check their emotions
benefit a lot. With the use of emotional intelligence, these people can learn to manage their emotions
and move around calmly without focusing on the thoughts of others.
Managing Emotions
People with Low Emotional Intelligence 
When low emotional intelligence people are faced with any negative emotion, they tend to become
violent or rather more reactive when compared to those with high emotional intelligence. For
instance, when an individual with low emotional intelligence faces negative criticism, they may
initially go into denial and withdraw from a given group to avoid shame. They become lonely and
prevent any form of help offered towards them. In some cases, others may opt to use substances to
keep their minds active and evade others and what they are feeling. Others may harm themselves by
cutting, starving, purging, or engaging in dangerous behaviors. The primary drive to these activities
is influenced by a lack of control of emotions which are usually hurting, such as criticism
.
People with High Emotional Intelligence
High emotional intelligence people have all it takes to absorb and express reasonably about how they
feel about a particular sensation. For instance, when these group people are offended, they would
initially pause before acting and think what their next word or rather the best harmless action to take.
They would also acknowledge what the next person is feeling or have in mind before deciding on
providing their contribution or conclusion of what will become. Thinking first is usually their first
step to prevent escalating the problem or causing more harm to themselves and others. Another
critical aspect of high emotional intelligence people is helping themselves and people affected by a

given emotion. In this case, high emotional intelligence people act entirely different when compared
to low emotional intelligence individuals.

Emotional Quotient (EQ) Vs. Intelligence Quotient (IQ)
Emotional Quotient, EQ, is the ability of
an individual to readily learn, understand, handle, and control his or her emotions even in the most
resentful situations. On the other hand, Intelligence Quotient, IQ, is the measure of one's intelligence
usually expressed in a number. EQ enables an individual to focus on emotions which, in turn, acts as
a management system to different emotions which may become harmful to others. More so, it
involves other people's emotions, and an individual can readily manage these emotions without the
need to sympathize. IQ measures the degree of intelligence calculated from standardized tests created
to analyze human intelligence.
Components of Emotional Intelligence
Emotional intelligence is linked to different internal components of a person usually within the brain,
which determines how one understands and controls emotions. In most cases, people who lack
control of their emotions have been associated with mental problems. While others stating that lack
of emotional control is attributed to the extent of the immediate feeling at hand. However, emotional
intelligence has been proven to exist among different individuals and comprises the following
components
.
Self-Awareness
This is the ability to recognize and learn about your emotions as well as understanding the effects
accompanied by your feelings. Becoming self-aware is determined by being able to monitor
emotions, realizing emotional reactions, and identifying each emotion independently. Besides, you
readily understand and figure out the interaction between your emotions and how you behave when
that feeling occurs. That is, when you are an emotionally intelligent individual, you become aware of
several aspects about yourself and others while keeping in mind about what is wrong and right. You
can readily make a choice to do wrong or wicked despite how sad, angry, or hopeless you become. 
Self-awareness also builds the ability to determine the strengths and limitations for quick
development of measures to avoid negative impacts to an individual and to others. As a person, you
can get access to new information and personal skills; therefore, you learn from others. People with a
sense of self-awareness are usually humorous, confident, and aware of the perception of others. More
so, they understand what it means to be emotional despite being an everyday behavior. As among the
primary components of emotional intelligence, self-awareness provides a complete guide to an
individual to quickly learn what to do when facing a given emotion, which may harm both them and
another person when mishandled.  
Self-Regulation
Another significant component of emotional intelligence is self-regulation, which entails the
regulation and management of emotions. After becoming self-aware of your feelings and the
accompanying impacts to others and yourself, you are required to have a governing force that
enhances how you react during these situations. However, it does not imply that an individual has to
lock away his or her real emotions and hide how they feel about others, but they should express them
in an organized manner. That is, regulating how you express your feelings in an appropriate time and
place.
People skilled in self-regulation are mostly flexible and quickly adapt to change as well as excellent
in settling disagreements among people and diffusion of tension. More so, they are high in
conscientiousness, thoughtful, and take responsibility for their doings. As a component of emotional
intelligence, self-regulation plays a significant role in enabling an individual to quickly manage and
handle all types of feelings, either positive or negative, without influencing others negatively.

Social Skills
Emotional intelligence also comprises of social skills which are the ability to interact with others
correctly. Learning about your feelings and that of others, and being able to control is not enough to
develop your emotional intelligence. Then, there is a need to implement these abilities into actions
when interacting with others daily. When you indulge in daily communication with others and put
into action this information, then you are at the forefront in managing your feelings and that of
others. For example, managers in businesses have utilized the knowledge of social skills to interact
with workers and clients, thus benefiting significantly in their careers. 
Empathy
Empathy is the capability of comprehending other individual’s feelings. It is also vital to emotional
intelligence but provides more insight to an individual rather than recognizing the emotions of others.
Empathy involves realizing emotions as well as reactions to these emotions, which primarily
encompasses the help needed. For example, if someone is hopeless, sad, or emotional dependent, you
are likely to sense these emotions and respond accordingly as if they are yours. You tend to provide
extra care and concern, allowing other people to recognize power dynamics that influence
relationships. Therefore, emotional intelligence enables you to become empathetic to others and give
the needed support.
Intrinsic Motivation
Unlike others, people with emotional intelligence abilities are rarely motivated by external rewards,
for example, richness, fame, or acclaim. These people usually work to meet their personal needs and
objectives. They seek to ensure their internal satisfaction which, in turn, leads to rewarding their
inner needs. Such individuals remain action-oriented by creating goals that are of higher standards
and work to achieve. Also, they remain committed to performing their duties entirely when needed
without failure. As such, the motivation allows for the achievement of essential goals in nearly
everything they engage in no matter the complexity of the situation. 
More Emotional People
More emotional people tend to have low emotional intelligence and therefore, become very reactive,
especially on negative emotions. In this case, these people usually lack self-awareness, self-
regulation, and other components of emotional intelligence. When someone is regarded as a more
sensitive person, the chances are that they may become very reactive on occasions such as anger and
become violent. When sad, they may end up becoming stressed, lonely, and eventually, being
depressed. This group of people may, however, have some ability to control some of their emotions
but limited knowledge about how they react to a given situation. 
More emotional people may, at times, face difficulties on how they interact publicly, henceforth,
cannot sustain relationships. Some of the characteristic features of more emotional people include the
inability to understand other people’s emotions, getting into arguments quickly, blaming others for
their mistakes, and lack of empathy. Other features include difficulty sustaining friends, sudden
outbursts of emotions, refusal to listen to other's views, and thinking people are usually oversensitive.
More emotional people typically have no control over how they express their feelings or emotions.
Therefore, they become too dependent on themselves without minding others.
Less Emotional People
Less emotional people are those individuals with the ability to control their emotions or feelings even
when they are profound or negative. These individuals usually have a much higher emotional

intelligence when compared to more emotional people. As highlighted above, less emotional people
have the ability to suppress their emotions even in the states where these emotions seem unbearable.
They may look calm and in peace even after a hurtful event. More so, they are relaxed and
understanding and interact well with the general public, mainly with friends, family, and those close
to them, such as coworkers
.
When in an emotional state, for instance, these individuals typically respond to issues rather than
react and understand the matter at hand. They are equipped with the five components of emotional
intelligence as well as self-control and handle situations with their related selves. When faced with a
more challenging situation, less emotional people rarely complain but work to find ways of solving
the problem, which, in most cases, succeed with limited failure possibilities. As typical human
beings, however, less emotional people also undergo similar impacts of negative emotions, but due to
their emotional intelligence abilities, they readily get in control of their feelings and find ways to
handle these situations without causing scenes. 
Emotional Intelligence History
Emotional intelligence, the ability to control emotions, originally began in 1964, where Michael
Beldoch wrote the term ‘Emotional Intelligence' in the paper. In 1966, another article by B. Leuner,
Emotional Intelligence and Emancipation
also featured the term ‘Emotional Intelligence.' Howard
Gardner again mentioned the term in 1983 with an effort to describe IQ and other related types of
intelligence. In this case, Gardner stated that various kinds of human IQ at the time failed to detail
cognitive ability which, henceforth, introduced emotional intelligence in his study. Subsequently, the
term began being used in multiple papers, journals, and thesis such as A Study of Emotions:
Developing Emotional Intelligence
written by Wayne Payne in 1985. 
The term ‘Emotional Quotient, EQ' surfaced in 1987 in an article written by Keith Beasley, which
introduced a similar meaning to emotional intelligence. In the late 1980s, different models emerged
to prove emotional intelligence in the context of controlling human feelings. Among them include the
one created by Stanley Greenspan in 1989, another by Peter Salovey, and John Mayer in 1990. The
term began becoming among the most commonly used. In 1995, the book, Emotional Intelligence-
Why It Can Matter More Than IQ
by Goleman, was published. 
As such, the term became more popular in the 1990s with several models being developed by
different scientists. However, emotional intelligence, like most findings, has received several critics,
especially on its role in the business sector and the development of leadership skills. More advanced
research in emotional intelligence entails the trait and ability of emotional intelligence. Trait
emotional intelligence remains considered as a generic behavior passed from parents to offspring.
Ability emotional intelligence is the practice learned by an individual, henceforth, gaining the

technique of controlling their own emotions.  

Chapter 5: Importance of Emotional Intelligence
Emotional Intelligence is linked to various aspects in one’s life if not all. It can, therefore, be said that
it can be linked to our careers, job performance, and even our success. The following are, therefore,
the various ways which have depicted the importance of emotional intelligence:
Emotional Intelligence and Job Performance
Recently, there has been a rise in emotional intelligence awareness in management-focused literature
together with leadership training summits. This gives us an indication that there exists a very strong
relationship between job performance and emotional intelligence. It not only proves to exist but also
has depicted an array of value in different areas. One’s workplace is a representation of a social
community that is very separate from their personal lives. This is also a place where increased
appreciation of emotional intelligence has been on the rise allowing people to have an understanding
of themselves and even others, be conversant with hard situations and communicating in a more
effective manner. This, therefore, means that employing emotional intelligence at your workplace
might greatly improve your personal and even other individuals’ social capabilities. 
Emotional Intelligence entails management of emotions which improves job performance, which in
turn helps people to stay calm and think logically thus establishing good working relationships and
achievement of goals. Apart from that, there is an evident relationship between emotional
intelligence and how senior employees manage their juniors. A manager who has got a high
emotional intelligence is well conversant with the stress management skills and also how recognize
and manage the stress in other people. Therefore, if we put emotional intelligence in the stress
management perspective, then the relationship between job performance and emotional intelligence
is crystal clear. This is because one’s commitment to their job is highly and positively impacted by
stress management. 
In many instances, emotional intelligence usually applies to all kinds of employees and not only
those at the management level. The employees that are at the lower rank in the hierarchy of an 
organization and have a high emotional intelligence usually have got desires and abilities to establish
and maintain good relationships at the workplace. Apart from that, these individuals are good in
management and resolution of conflicts. This, therefore, means that they have the capability of
sustaining relationships that exists in the workplace as compared to those with either low or moderate
emotional intelligence. In the current job market, many organizations are undergoing revolution and
changes in different sectors. This has made organizations to have the need of employees who can
easily cope up with these changes and respond to them easily. This indicates that emotional
intelligence is an important factor in job performance in both group and individual levels. This thus
clearly describes the way in which emotional intelligence is of value.
Emotional Intelligence and Resilience
Emotional intelligence has proved to be a valuable tool in adversity as it has the potential of
enhancing not only teamwork effectiveness and leadership abilities but it is also an important tool in
enhancing personal resilience. The impact of emotional intelligence on the resilience of a person is
the ability of that person to cope up with situations that are stressful. It has been clearly demonstrated
by research that a person who has got high emotional intelligence usually easily overcome stressors
and their negative impacts. 
Focusing on leadership, a leader is usually expected to have increased responsibilities which usually
are accompanied by potential stressors. In such a case, it is important for the person to have strong
emotional intelligence in order to be resilient and battle with these stressful conditions. From

research where investigations were done into the link existing between emotional intelligence and
stress, it was found out that people who showed high emotional intelligence levels were not
negatively affected by stressors. These participants did an emotional intelligence ability-based test
before the threat level that was posed by the two stressors was rated. After that, they reported their
emotional reactions the stressors before being subjected to physiological stress to also assess their
responses. The findings of this research showed that emotional intelligence has a relationship with
lower threats. This study, therefore, provides us with a valid prediction that stress resilience is
facilitated by emotional intelligence.
 
From further research done, the relationship between high levels of emotional intelligence, the
tendency to depressive behaviors and resilience was drawn. It was established that there was a
positive correlation that exists between mindfulness, self-compassion, and resilience with the rate of
burnout. In conclusion, individuals who have got high emotional intelligence levels were more
resilient and could not easily fall into depression or burnout. Emotional intelligence has a strong link
to the individual’s advancement and also their performance. Evidence also suggests that there is a
significant link between their resilience and their motivation to achieve. Apart from that, it also made
a suggestion that resilience acts as a mediator between self-motivated achievement and resilience.
Resilience, in this case, has got a perseverance component that acts as a motivation to motivation
when facing obstacles. From the various research findings and theories, we have seen a strong
relationship between emotional intelligence and resilience. We have clearly seen how one’s
emotional intelligence levels affect their resilience. This, therefore, has proved emotional intelligence
to be very important.
Emotional Intelligence and Motivation
Emotional intelligence is a key component for motivation which in turn is very vital in the
achievement of success. An emotionally intelligent person will always have an understanding of what
they aspire and the necessary motivation skills that they would need to achieve these aspirations.
There are four elements that are said to make up motivation; how we commit ourselves to the goals
we set, how ready we are to utilize opportunities, self-drive to improve and how resilient we are.
Motivation is said to be a psychological process that which we use to psyche ourselves into action in
order to realize a desirable outcome. It doesn’t matter the action we are doing, whether dedication of
much time to work on a project or just changing the TV channel using a remote, without being
motivated we cannot act. 
This is because motivation energizes, arouses, sustains and directs performance and behavior. The
motivation that usually comes from within, also known as intrinsic motivation usually drives us to
the achievement of our full capability. A person who is emotionally intelligent has got both skills
required to motivate themselves and those needed to motivate other people too. This is a very useful
skill to possess especially if you are in a management position in your job. Self-motivation is the key
to the achievement of one’s goals. With self-motivation, emotionally intelligent people will always be
capable of impacting the motivation of employees. The ability to determine the emotions and needs
or concerns of others is a great skill to possess in relation to the determination of perfect methods of
motivating individuals and teams. 
From a study and research did, it was found out that the emotional intelligence of a first-year
graduate was positively linked to their self-motivation to studying the respective course and choosing
that course. Another study of senior employees with very high emotional intelligence found out that
they are good in arguments, have good behavior and great work outcomes. It, therefore, means that a
happy employee is a motivated employee. The capability to be conversant with anxiety and stress is a

very useful emotional intelligence tool when it comes to motivation. From the above studies and
research findings, it is clear that emotional intelligence plays a major role in one’s motivation. Since
motivation is a very vital tool in our actions, then emotional intelligence is also very important.
Emotional Intelligence and Decision-Making
Emotional intelligence plays a key role in both professional and personal development. It not only
has an impact on the way in which we handle our behaviors and control our social complexities but
also the approaches we take in decision-making. Having an in-depth understanding of the emotions
you feel and the reason as to why you are feeling them can heavily impact your decision-making
capabilities. This, therefore, means that if we carefully look into our emotions, then we can avoid
making misleading and misguided decisions. Emotional intelligence is a very vital tool required in
the prevention of making poor decisions based on our emotions whereby lower emotional
intelligence can make you anxious and result in you making a poor misguided decision. This does not
imply that we should keep emotions aside when making decisions but discovering these emotions
which might not have any relationship with the problem and ensuring that they do not influence the
decision that you are going to make. Negative emotions can be a stumbling block to decision making
and problem-solving in either your workplace or even personal circumstances. Being able to
recognize emotions that are becoming a stumbling block to making rational decisions and being able
to effectively ignore the emotions will prevent their negative influence on your decision. This,
therefore, means that decision making at this stage will be much favored as it will not be negatively
influenced in any way. 
From research done through observations and administering a series of questions, it was discovered
that people and organizations reaped big benefits from a practical application of emotional
intelligence in making decisions. This study had the aim of improving emotional intelligence
awareness and how emotional intelligence skills can be employed in decision making. From the
observations, it was discovered that having training sessions on emotional intelligence is one of the
most effective ways to incorporate decision-making skills and also helps you to understand the
possible consequences of poor decision-making. 
Having an understanding of the causes and possible consequences of emotions gives you the freedom
to manage and make a decision about the feeling. For instance, if you have an argument with your
spouse the go to work without resolving it you will probably stay angry the whole day. Being angry
at work, your colleague might make an offer to you but you dismiss it without even paying attention
to it. This is a kind of emotional interference that can be very dangerous to your decision-making. If
you have high emotional intelligence, then you can be able to identify this form of emotional
interference and manage it thus avoiding making decisions that are emotionally driven. This,
therefore, means that emotional intelligence is vital when making decisions.
Emotional Intelligence and Success
There are things which mean different to different people. As happiness is so is a success which
everyone has a different version of defining it. But no matter how success is defined, it is clear that
emotional intelligence plays an important part in its achievement. From history, most intelligent
individuals are usually not attributed to greatest successes. This is because IQ is not sufficient on its
own to enable one to succeed in life. In regards to this, you can be the most intelligent person but if
you lack emotional quotient, you may fail to turn down people with negative thoughts about you and
even manage stress. This shows that emotional intelligence is sometimes even more powerful as
compared to IQ in life success. Your emotional intelligence is the actual thing that helps you to
achieve your life objectives and realize great successes. Therefore, developing emotional intelligence

would influence your achievements through contribution to your morale, cooperation and most
importantly motivation by a great margin. In a workplace, the managers and employees who perform
well as compared to others usually employ strategies that are associated with emotional intelligence
in the management of conflicts, reduction of stress and thus achieving their goals. In the recent past,
there has been blooming evidence of a range of activities said to constitute emotional intelligence are
now vital in determining success.
This refers to success both in the workplace and also one’s personal life. It incorporates applications
that we associate with in our daily lives in relationships, businesses, and even parenting. Emotional
intelligence guides one to easily manage their emotions in situations that are likely to provoke
anxiety. These situations include when taking examinations at the university. It is also positively
associated with success in social functioning and personal relationships. 
In social relationships, success achievable with the employment of emotional intelligence skills to
determine other people’s emotions, then adopt their emotional states and thus regulate the way they
behave. This briefly shows how important emotional intelligence is in achieving success in the
different spheres of life.
Emotional Intelligence and Communication
One’s ability to have the knowledge and understanding of their emotions might aid them to be aware
and understand the feelings that other people are experiencing. This has got an impact on the way in
which we communicate in our daily lives. 
Considering communication in conflict resolution in the workplace, people with great emotional
intelligence levels would most probably approach the conflict in the most reasonable way possible
and negotiate together with others to finally come up with a reasonable outcome. On the contrary, a
person with lower levels of emotional intelligence will not be able to solve the conflict in a
reasonable calm manner thus might even end up without a solution at the end.
In the workplace, relationships are usually affected by the manner in which we can manage our
emotions and also understanding the emotions of those around us. The capability to do this helps us
in communicating without necessarily resorting to confrontation. If you have high emotional
intelligence, then it is beyond doubt that you are equipped with conflict management skills and thus
you will be able to put up a meaningful relationship guaranteed capacity to understand and address
needs of those they engage with.
In recent years, emotional intelligence has been able to receive much attention that drives effective
communication within individuals and even teams. On close examination of emotional intelligence as
a reason for team success, you will find that it does not only do it drives the viability of a team but
also affects communication quality in a positive way. 
Achievement of successful communication in relation to successful negotiation and conflict has a
very close relationship with high emotional intelligence levels. In this case, individuals with lower
emotional intelligence would be so defensive in such stressful situations. This will instead escalate
the conflict instead of managing it. If you have high emotional intelligence, then this means that you
have got the necessary skills to ensure effective communication without resulting in a confrontation.
From this, we can easily derive the importance and great contribution that high levels of emotional
intelligence add to the achievement of effective communication.
Emotional Intelligence and Happiness

Just like any other word or feeling, happiness seems something easy but actually getting to
understand it is when you will realize that it is a hard nut to crack. This is because different people
have got different instances and experiences that they describe them to mean happiness to them.
Truly, happiness means different to different people but undoubtedly, emotional intelligence is a great
requirement to have despite the kind of interpretation you prefer. Happiness is an emotional
intelligence facilitator that contributes to each and everyone’s self-actualization which positively
impacts our happiness. 
From a study where the relationship between different interpersonal relations and emotional
intelligence was examined, it was discovered that individuals with high emotional intelligence scored
highly in self-monitoring, social skills and taking empathic perspective. Apart from that, they also
scored highly in affectionate relationships, satisfaction in relationships, and cooperation with their
partners. 
Emotional intelligence skills are very important when it comes to reducing stress, thus, in turn, will
positively impact on one’s happiness and wellbeing in general. Apart from the motivational value
that it possesses, happiness acts as a monitor to the wellbeing of an individual. It is also a source of a
positive mood to the manner in which the person copes up and meets daily needs, pressures and
challenges. 
Positivity is what actually encourages the emotional energy required in the increment of an
individual’s motivational levels which is responsible for getting things done. It actually helps one to
be successful in what they are doing and even gets to the extent of telling them the extent of success
they are actually achieving. From a study done by Furnham, it was realized that a large section of
variance that is evident in the wellbeing and happiness of a person is determined by their emotional
intelligence levels. This refers to their ability to stabilize their emotions, social competence, and even
relationship skills. Although these emotional intelligence skills are not the only source of one’s
happiness, it is very vital to realize that they contribute and impacts our happiness up to 50%. This,
therefore, prove it to be a very vital thing which should always be put into consideration. 
Happiness has, therefore, proven to be closely linked to emotional intelligence if the research and
studies detailed above are to go by. A person with high emotional intelligence will have the necessary
skills to dodge any obstructions that might act as a hindrance to happiness. On the other hand, an
individual who has low levels of emotional intelligence will not be able to cope up with these
obstructions and end up always sad and stressed up. This thus proves emotional intelligence to be
vital.
Emotional Intelligence and Goals
In life, each and every person has got goals and achievements that they hope to achieve someday in
life. In order to achieve these goals, there are various conditions that usually impact it either
positively or negatively. In this case, emotional intelligence also plays a key role in the achievement
of these goals. Emotional intelligence will drive you to realize self-actualization which requires you
to first get motivated. In order to have the motivation, you will need to be happy with whatever you
do. This is because lack of happiness will challenge you in pursuit of the motivational levels that are
required to achieve your goals. 
In order to realize success and eventually achieve your dreams and goals, there is a need to employ
emotional intelligence skills. If you have high emotional intelligence levels, you will definitely
perform excellently in what you are doing in all aspects. The effectiveness of a person or a team in a
certain process directly reflects their emotional intelligence skill level. Those with high emotional

intelligence levels will perform well while those with lower intelligence levels would perform
dismally and might never achieve their goals.
If we want to produce best results in what we do and achieve the goals we might have set, then all we
need is a positive self-regard, effective skills to solve problems, skills to make informed decisions
and informed self-awareness. All these are directly attributed to one’s emotional intelligence. This,
therefore, means that our levels of emotional intelligence dictate if we will achieve our goals or not.
Low emotional intelligence will see you fail and never achieve the set goals. On the other hand, high
emotional intelligence levels with required emotional skills are very important and they will
positively contribute to the achievement of your goals in life.

Chapter 6: Mind Control 
Mind control sounds like a devious plot in a movie, but you have most likely experienced it many
times a day for many years and never noticed it.  Mind control, or the idea of thought-reform, is a
controversial theory and practice, but one that does not necessarily mean tricking and scheming.  As
a matter of fact, mind control can be as simple as subliminal suggestion used to steer one in the
direction you want rather than the direction they were going autonomously. 
There are many schools of thought in regards to mind control, but for this book, let’s look at a
common example of mind control to start.  Color, smell, sight, sound, and taste are used on the
consumer by every company selling a product to advance their customers and sales.  When you enter
your local grocery store, often there are fresh cut flowers at the entrance.  Now, how often have you
bought those flowers? Chances are, never, if maybe a time or two because you forgot a special
occasion.  Grocers use the presence of these flowers as a means of manipulating the subconscious of
their customers.  Fresh cut flowers are, well, fresh.  Ripe.  Pleasant.  They subliminally convey they
thought of freshness, and your local grocery store wants you to be thinking about all the fresh
produce they have waiting for you.  More often, these grocers make more on the sale of their fresh
produce over name brand canned and frozen produce, and if you buy the produce they have available,
more of your dollars go in their pocket as opposed to mass production companies. 
Every day, you are exposed to one form of mind control or another.  Product placement on television
and in movies.  The music you hear in a store or even an elevator.  Friends that are so convincing,
you can’t help but agree, or you find yourself always saying yes to them. 
Re-education is a very optimal, but controversial tool in mind control.  The ability to re-educate
another person’s previous thought process or beliefs is possible, but can take time.  At the heart of re-
education sits repetition.  I repeat, repetition.  By repeating the same belief, idea, or thought to
another person, repeatedly, you are impressing upon them the change from their own ideas towards
your own.  And this repetition leads to immersion in the idea or action you want them to follow. 
Being immersed in an idea, the idea in question always being repeated, the idea or goal always being
spoken of, leads to the individual re-examining their previous feelings about the issue.  Re-examining
one’s feelings often leads to them coming to a new conclusion. Your conclusion.  You have just
exerted a form of mind control on another individual, and now they agree with you. 
Priming an individual is another effective way to get what you want.  Some who see this activity
negatively may refer to in as indoctrination, but the goal is not to necessarily start a cult.  You are just
trying to get others to agree with you, and are trying to use all the available tools you possess to your
advantage.  Priming involves softening a person towards you and your ideas, easing them into the
thought that you know what is best.  Softening can include hours of conversation, empathizing with
them and showing them that you care or love them.  You care about what happens, you understand
them.  Once you have a foundation of trust through understanding and priming, soft persuasion
towards the new idea, belief, or action can be introduced.  It is imperative that you have formed a
mutual bond or respect with the person who you want to influence.  And it is a given that change
takes time.   
A few techniques to help you on your path to persuasion using coercion may involve thinking for
others, being specific in your logic and requests, creating a real sense of urgency, and stressing the
importance of your goal or idea.  When presenting someone with a change in long held ideas or
requests, thinking for them takes the pressure of deciding off them.  People often have enough on
their mental plates as it is, you shouldn’t be asking them to take on more, especially when you can do
the heavy lifting for them.  Explain exactly why they should see things your way, offering as many

examples as possible as to the correctness to your idea, proof that what you want is not only right, but
it is proven to be effective or accurate.  Once you have specifically lined out why they should agree
with you, tell them what is next and why things need to be done your way.  Be friendly but as firm
and confident in your pitch to them as you need be, and often discouraging questions until you are
finished explaining your stance helps steer others in your direction.  They often forget their questions
or objections as they listen to you explain what you want, why, and what you think needs to happen
next to achieve the goal.  It is all about the goal.
 
While on the topic of your goals and what you want to achieve, it is imperative to stress the
importance of what you want to achieve.  If others are consistently being spoken with on how
important the idea or goal is, and specifics on why it is so important, eventually they start to see your
idea as more than just something you want, but an issue of utmost importance.  Your thought or goal
becomes something more, and it should be more to you too.  It should be a movement.  A goal
doesn’t have to be a social ideal to be a movement, you just need others to feel its importance as
much as you do.  Everybody wishes to be on the right side of history, no matter how big or small the
issue is.  And all it takes is someone to see your want as a matter that needs to be addressed or
adjusted, and where there is one person who agrees with you, there are two, and more soon to
follow.   
So, your idea, goal, or thought is now more than just something you want.  Other people want it too. 
And it is not just important, it is imperative.  And it needs to happen now.  Creating a sense of
urgency is another effective form of utilizing mind control techniques to your benefit.  Making urgent
statements, or claiming that this situation is time sensitive will create an emotional response in those
you wish to influence or persuade.  A specific deadline needs to be in place, but the idea that this
can’t wait long needs to be an underlying sentiment.  The quicker you get other people on board, the
more important you convince them your want is, the more urgent they believe things are, the less
resistance you will run into.  Repeating equals results.  The more information backing your idea or
goal people are given, the more likely they will let you think for them and just go with the flow.  The
more urgent the matter is, the less time people have to ask discouraging questions or second guess
their shift in ideas. 
Being consistent is the core aspect of implementing mind control techniques to get what you want. 
Consistently repeating what you want, and be consistent when rejecting old ideas or goals.  Be
consistent when speaking about what needs to happen, when and why.  These factors should be
underlined, in bold print, repeated regularly, and the time sensitivity need to be stressed.   
There is nothing wrong with being a little pushy to get what you want out of your life.  Another great
technique when using mind control is to ask small things of others, or asking for small changes in
another’s ideas, and then expanding from there.  Let’s use a raise from your employer as an example. 
If you want a decent increase in pay, don’t ask for your top dollar pay increase.  Ask for a small
increase in pay based on your performance and loyalty.  Your boss will agree (considering you are
worthy of the raise to begin with) and think that they got off cheap keeping you happy.  After you
have reached the first step in reaching your ultimate pay goal, ask for more work.  Let your employer
know you are more than happy taking on more responsibility.  You can possibly save them money if
you are doing more work than before, they may not have to hire another employee to work weekends
if you are willing to come in for a few hours on a Saturday.  Now, you have a pay increase, but you
have more responsibility.  It only seems fair that you are paid a little more now that you are a more
valuable resource for your employer to utilize.  It’s better they give you another slight pay increase to
cover your knowledge and expertise in the workplace than bother trying to hire another employee to
replace you.  You see how simple it can be? Now, that isn’t saying that you have a boss or employer

this would work on, but if you are implementing the other tools you have in your fast-growing
arsenal, you are now a very well-liked employee and co-worker who knows how to influence and
persuade others to see things the way you do.  Your employer may dislike the idea of paying you
even more than before, but sometimes it’s not just your work ethic that matters, sometimes it’s what
you bring to the table for everyone you encounter. 
It is not easy to say no to someone who you feel a debt to.  The final technique of mood control we
should consider is generosity.  You should always strive to give more than you take from others. 
When you give more of your time, your effort, your attention, to others, they appreciate it.  They
remember it.  And, when the moment comes that you want something in return, it is much harder to
say no, or disagree, or refuse to cooperate with another who has freely offered up so much to them. 
Even in circumstances or changes others may not want to agree or get on board with, if they know
that you have been offered the same courtesy by you previously, they find it hard to go against you. 
It falls back to persuasion, influence, and reciprocation.  Most often, those that you have committed
your time and attention to will return the favor.  Even if you are met with resistance by someone who 
you have given to, a gentle reminder of what you have done for them is often all that is needed to get
them on board with what you want.  Sometimes it isn’t the loudest voice in the room that matters, but
the most consistent and softest from the individual who has done the most to help others.  That soft
but firm voice can be yours, you only need to take your opportunities as they present themselves.
 
Who uses mind control?
Media Producers
Just as our five senses are our guides in life, they can also be our enemies and traitors. Our sense of
sight and the visual processing areas of the brain are very powerful. We almost always dream
visually, even if another sense is missing, and we usually picture someone we are remembering rather
than associating some other sensory input with them. This makes imagery and visual manipulation a
particularly powerful technique of media mind control.
Traditionally, media production was in the hands of companies and institutions. These manipulative
entities were able to pioneer the use of visual, subliminal mind control. Examples include split-
second pictures of a product or person inserted into a seemingly innocent movie. Such split-second
images, which the person perceives as nothing more than a flash of light, are able to take powerful
control of a person's emotions. They have been used as recently as 21st century Presidential
elections.
Sound is another way in which a person is vulnerable to undetected mind control. Both experiments
and personal experience will confirm this to you. Have you ever loved a song until it stuck in your
head? How easy was it to get rid of? The sound had a powerful influence over you, even though you
knew it was present. The power of audio manipulation is even greater when it is undetected.
Experiments have shown that if restaurant customers are exposed to music from a particular region,
they are more likely to order wine from that country. When questioned, they had no idea that
something as simple as sound had steered their decision.
Lovers
People are always a product of the environment they are in, whether they want to be or not. The way
people are raised directly affects the way they act in later life. Someone who is raised by alcoholics
has a greater chance of becoming alcoholics in adult life, or they may choose never to drink at all.
People who are raised in a house where everything is forbidden may cut loose and go a bit crazy

when they are finally out on their own. People who are raised in total disorganization may grow up to
be totally obsessive about household cleanliness.
Nurture affects people in other, less severe ways, too. Many people believe that Mom’s meatloaf is
the absolute best and no other recipe exists. People come from different religious and economic
backgrounds. People have different beliefs about what is good and bad, what is acceptable and
unacceptable. The problem comes when two people are trying to have a relationship, but neither
wants to change their way of thinking. When that happens there is no relationship. There are just two
people living together under the same roof.
Achieving success in love is just like achieving success in anything else. It is mostly a function of
developing good relationships with other people in order to be better able to influence them. Those
people who are successful in creating and keeping good, mutually satisfactory relationships with
others usually enjoy much more success than people who do not do this. The ability to grow and
maintain satisfactory relationships is a trait that is easier for some people. But even if the ability does
not come naturally it is easy enough to learn. And Neuro-Linguistic Programming (NLP) makes this
skill easier to learn by offering tools and ideas to enable almost anyone to learn the ability to develop
great relationships.
Sales people
If a salesperson asks a regular customer to write a brief endorsement of the product they buy,
hopefully, they will say yes. If someone asks their significant other to take some of the business cards
to pass out at work, hopefully, they will say yes. If you write any kind of blog and ask another
blogger to provide a link to yours on their blog, hopefully, they will say yes. When enough people
say yes, the business or blog will begin to grow. With even more yesses, it will continue to grow and
thrive. This is the very simple basis of marketing. Marketing is nothing more than using mind control
to get other people to buy something or to do something beneficial for someone else. And the
techniques can easily be learned
.
Writers
Think of writing a guest spot for someone else who has their own blog. By sending in the entire
manuscript first, there is a greater risk of rejection. Begin small. Send them a paragraph or two
discussing them the idea. Then make an outline of the idea and send that in an email. Then write the
complete draft you would like them too use and send it along. When asking a customer for a
testimonial, start by asking for a few lines in an email. Then ask the customer to expand those few
lines into a testimonial that covers at least half a typed page. Soon the customer will be ready for an
hour-long webcast extolling the virtues of the product and your great customer service skills.
Everything must have a deadline that really exists. The important word here is the word ‘real’.
Everyone has heard the salesperson who said to decide quickly because the deal might not be
available later or another customer was coming in and they might get it. That is a total fabrication
and everyone knows it to be true. There are no impending other customers and the deal is not going
to disappear. There is no real sense of urgency involved. But everyone does it. There are too many
situations where people are given a totally fake deadline by someone who thinks it will instill a great
sense of urgency for completion of the task. It is not only totally not effective but completely
unneeded. It is a simple matter to create true urgency. Only leave free things available for a finite
amount of time. When asking customers for testimonials be certain to mention the last possible day
for it to be received to be able to be used. Some people will be unable to assist, but having people
unable to participate is better than never being able to begin.

In Education
By educating impressionable children, society essentially teaches them to become “ideal” members
of society. They are taught and trained in certain ways that fulfil the desires of the government and
authorities, and most people don’t even think twice about it. 
Advertising and Propaganda
By putting advertising and propaganda everywhere, those in control are capable of eliminating
people’s feeling of self-worth and encourage them to need
what is being sold, as opposed to just
wanting it. This is essentially a subliminal strategy to make people feel poorly about themselves so
that they will purchase whatever is being advertised to increase their feelings of self-worth. 
Sports, Politics, Religion
The idea of these strategies is to “divide and conquer”. Ultimately, each one has people placed into
various categories, where they feel very strongly. As a result, they don’t come together and support
one another, but rather they are against each other. This means that they are divided, and so the
authority can conquer.

Chapter 7: Mind Control Techniques
It’s interesting to see that manipulation has been around for a long time, and that is not a new or
imaginary concept. Understanding what the art of persuasion is really all about is vital, to help you to
deal with it. 
Here, we briefly look at the psychology of manipulation. This allows us to see where it might occur
in our lives. It will also help you in identifying those who might attempt to manipulate you. It is not
only about people who like to dominate. If we don't know it is happening to us, might be encouraged
to act in ways that are incongruous to our normal personality and behavior. Learn how commerce can
persuade customers into buying their goods and services. Recognizing such methods will help in
dealing with the power of persuasion. 
We like to believe that we are individuals who make sensible choices. In our personal journey of life,
we do not always have full control, and we don't always realize this. As children, we are influenced
by our parents and have little control over how we are raised. Once in the education system, we are
further manipulated. The teachers will tell us all about the social norms and what is expected of us in
society. As adults, we are lured in by politicians trying to get their share of votes. Many are
persuaded to vote for a party because of what they promise for the future, even if they don’t
necessarily believe in their policies. This gives such politicians power, and their decisions will affect
our lives. Are we in full control of our lives, or are we merely influenced by those who know all the
tricks of persuasion?
Later on, we will look at how to deal with various manipulative methods, even sometimes covert.
First, you need to learn to recognize when you are being manipulated so you can counteract it. 
Recognizing the Art of Manipulation 
What then, in our everyday lives, do we need to be wary of?
 
Persuasive Language
The idiom that every picture tells a story is very true. Words can be so much more powerful as they
inspire and encourage us, even to the point of manipulation. How many are the times you have been
inspired by a good orator, whose daring speech motives you into action? Words even influence when
we are lost completely in a great book. The art of words can be so influential in coercing us to
believe something, even when our eyes tell us differently. Communication is a powerful tool,
especially when it comes to making people do things. 
Advertisers and salespeople use language to convince their goods are just
what we are looking for. Using words, such as: 
Affordable; Easy to use; Safe; Enjoyable; Time Saving; Guaranteed to last. 
Note how all these words make us believe they are confident in their own products. 
Politicians will use language, such as: 
“We” - to encompass you in their world. 
“Us” to make you feel a part of a team. 
These are all communication tactics to make us feel included, so therefore important. 

Bullies use language along with aggressive behavior, to achieve their own
selfish goals. 
Criminal predators, such as psychopaths, sociopaths and narcissists, are all
people who learn the use of persuasive language. This is a means to get their
own way and gain control over another person. 
Techniques Used in Mind Control
Present day mind control is both innovative and mental. Tests demonstrate that basically by
uncovering the techniques for mind control, the impacts can be diminished or disposed of, at any rate
for mind control publicizing and promulgation. Increasingly hard to counter are the physical
interruptions, which the military-mechanical complex keeps on creating and enhance. 
1. Education — This is the most self-evident, yet still remains the most treacherous.
It has consistently been an eventual tyrant's definitive dream to "teach" normally
receptive youngsters, subsequently it has been a focal segment to Communist and
Fascist oppressive regimes from the beginning of time. Nobody has been
increasingly instrumental in uncovering the motivation of present day instruction
than Charlotte Iserbyt — one can start investigation into this region by
downloading a her book as a free PDF, The Deliberate Dumbing Down of
America, revealing the job of Globalist establishments in forming a future
planned to deliver servile automatons reigned over by a completely taught,
mindful exclusive class.
2. Promotions and Propaganda – Edward Bernays has been referred to as the creator
of the consumerist culture that was planned principally to focus on individuals'
mental self-portrait (or scarcity in that department) so as to transform a need into
a need. This was at first imagined for items, for example, cigarettes, for instance.
Nonetheless, Bernays additionally noted in his 1928 book, Propaganda, that
"purposeful publicity is the official arm of the imperceptible government." This
can be seen most unmistakably in the advanced police state and the developing
native nark culture, enveloped with the pseudo-enthusiastic War on Terror. The
expanding union of media has empowered the whole corporate structure to
converge with government, which currently uses the idea of promulgation
arrangement. Media; print, motion pictures, TV, and link news would now be able
to work flawlessly to incorporate a general message which appears to have the
ring of truth since it originates from such a significant number of sources, at the
same time. When one moves toward becoming sensitive to recognizing the
fundamental "message," one will see this engraving all over. What's more, this
isn't even to specify subliminal informing.
3. Prescient Programming – Many still deny that prescient writing computer
programs is genuine. Prescient programming has its causes in predominately
elitist Hollywood, where the big screen can offer a major vision of where society
is going. Simply glance back at the books and motion pictures which you thought
were implausible, or "sci-fi" and investigate society today. For a nitty gritty

breakdown of explicit models, Vigilant Citizen is an incredible asset that will
most likely make you take a gander at "amusement" in a totally unique light.
4. Sports, Politics, Religion – Some may resent seeing religion, or even legislative
issues, put together with sports as a technique for mind control. The focal topic is
the equivalent all through: isolate and prevail. The systems are very
straightforward: impede common propensity of individuals to participate for their
endurance, and train them to frame groups bowed on control and winning. Sports
has consistently had a job as a key diversion that corrals innate propensities into a
non-significant occasion, which in present day America has arrived at silly
extents where challenges will break out over a game VIP leaving their city, yet
basic human issues, for example, freedom are chuckled away as immaterial.
5. Food, Water, and Air – Additives, poisons, and other nourishment harms actually
modify mind science to make mildness and indifference. Fluoride in drinking
water has been demonstrated to bring down IQ; Aspartame and MSG are
excitotoxins which energize synapses until they kick the bucket; and simple
access to the inexpensive food that contains these toxins by and large has made a
populace that needs center and inspiration for a functioning way of life. The vast
majority of the cutting edge world is flawlessly prepped for uninvolved
responsiveness — and acknowledgment — of the authoritarian tip top.
6. Medications — we can equate this to any addictive substance, however the
mission of mind controllers is to be certain you are dependent on something. One
noteworthy arm of the cutting edge mind control motivation is psychiatry, which
expects to characterize all individuals by their issue, instead of their human
potential. This was foreshadowed in books, for example, Brave New World.
Today, it has been taken to considerably assist limits as a medicinal oppression
has grabbed hold where about everybody has a type of confusion — especially
the individuals who question authority. The utilization of nerve tranquilizes in the
military has prompted record quantities of suicides. To top it all off, the cutting
edge medication state currently has over 25% of U.S. youngsters on mind-
desensitizing drugs.
7. Military testing — There is a long history associated to the military as the proving
ground for mind control. The military personality is maybe the most pliable, as
the individuals who seek after life in the military by and large resound to the
structures of progression, control, and the requirement for unchallenged
submission to a mission. For the expanding number of military individual
scrutinizing their influence, an ongoing story featured DARPA's arrangements for
trans cranial mind control head protectors that will keep them centered.
8. Electromagnetic range — An electromagnetic soup encompasses all of us,
charged by present day gadgets of comfort which have been appeared to directly
affect mind work. In an implicit affirmation of what is conceivable, one scientist
has been working with a "divine being head protector" to instigate dreams by
adjusting the electromagnetic field of the mind. Our advanced soup has us latently

washed by conceivably mind-changing waves, while a wide scope of potential
outcomes, for example, phone towers is currently accessible to the eventual
personality controller for more straightforward mediation.
Mind control is more common than most people think. It is not easy to detect because of its subtle
nature. In many instances, it happens under what is perceived as normal circumstances like through
education, religion, TV programs, advertisements and so much more. Cults and their leadership use
mind control to influence their members and control whatever they do. It is not easy to detect mind
control. However, when one realizes it, they can get out and start afresh.

Chapter 8: The Secrets of Neuro Linguistic Programming
Neuro-Linguistic Programming or NLP, as it is commonly referred to, is one of the most prevalent
systems of mind control in the entire universe. It is applied by nearly everyone from politicians to
marketers to media personalities, and it is very nasty to its main cores. John Grinder and Richard
Bandler invented this famous method of mind control in the 1970s. It would later gain much
popularity in the new age, occult, and psychoanalytic spaces back in the 1980s. Later on, in the 1990s
and 2000s, NLP started to make inroads in the political, marketing, as the advertising markets. Over
time, it has become so interwoven with the manner at which people are communicated to and even
marketed. It is also very crucial to note that NLP has, to some extent, become a type of devilish and
pernicious force in the entire global space, which has been studied by nearly everybody in the
business spheres. Those who have mastered the techniques of this great dark psychology trait are
known for owning a Rasputin-like capability of tricking persons into some incredible ways, nearly at
all times. 
Neuro-Linguistic Programming is used today for a variety of different things. It can be helpful in
helping people overcome issues like anxiety, PTSD, and fears. These are only a very few issues that
Neuro-Linguistic Programming can help with. While some people use it for good, others use it for
darker desires.
We would love to say that the only place you will find NLP is in your therapist’s office, however, we
actually see it in everyday life. From your workplace to the ads on your social media accounts, you
can actually see it everywhere. NLP does not only focus on what people say but more importantly
focus on what people are doing. Our body language says more than our mouths ever could.
NLP has been under the debate of whether it is an actual science or if it is considered a
pseudoscience. The debate still exists today, and it is hard to pinpoint this science due to the fact that
it has not gone through the same rigorous testing as therapies such as CBT, Cognitive Behavioral
Therapy
.
There is a pretty broad range of techniques used within NLP and this also makes it difficult to lock
down which pieces actually work. There have been some studies performed and oftentimes the
results were inconclusive. In some it appears as if NLP had made a true improvement in subjects with
psychosis, instability, and other unwanted traits. Others worked on looking at its effectiveness to help
issues like PTSD and anxiety. The results came back exceptionally varied.
Neuro-Linguistic Programming has been around for more than forty years. For something to be
around this long and continue to be used throughout many people’s daily lives means there has got to
be some validity to it, right? We see it used so widely on a commercial level and it certainly does
have an impact.
It also has its place in the world of Psychology and Dark Psychology. Due to the fact that it is quite
unstructured it is difficult to show true proof of its success. There are also a plethora of different idea
and ways of executing NLP. For some, it is a very effective form of therapy that truly helps them lead
better lives. For others, it may not benefit them at all. These people will need to look at more
traditional therapies to work through their issues and lead a happier and mentally healthier life.
NLP History
NLP is, in a way, a method of mind control. It was developed by a team of people. However, the
majority of the credit is given to, two California boys, John Grinder and Richard Bandler. In the
1970’s, they decided to combine the works of Virginia Satir, a therapist for families, Friedrich Perls, a

psychotherapist, and a hypnotherapist by the name of Milton Erickson. They wanted to take the heart
of linguistic therapy and improve it. Find the pieces that truly worked and make something better.
The three people that they studied were chosen due to the fact that they had better results with their
clients than most others in their field. In fact, people found their success to be odd and uncommon.
Naturally, inquisitive minds wanted to know what these people had in common and why their
methods worked so well. They studied them in live sessions and via video tape
.
NLP is subtle. When we think about normal hypnotherapy, we think about people falling asleep and
acting out strange and silly acts. Realistically, it is used for much more meaningful purposes. For
example, people use hypnotherapy to help them stop smoking or to deal with traumas of the past that
may have not been coped with. NLP does things a bit differently. It is much more suggestive and not
so in your face.
In the beginning, Neuro-Linguistic Programming was thought to be as helpful as products like “snake
juice” from the days of the old west. However, as the seventies turned into the eighties it became
more and more accepted. Businesses were jumping on the bandwagon to learn about it so they could,
in turn, use it to help them gain profits from consumers. In addition, everyone from therapists to
political figures started to want the information on this type of “programming”. It seriously started to
blow up in terms of popularity.
Companies became interested in NLP because it can help them communicate more clearly. This helps
to improve the performance of employees and the overall performance of the business. Businesses
that use NLP have experienced better growth in their companies as a whole.
Not only can it help people become better negotiators it can also help them stay motivated. When you
feel comfortable at work and you feel like everyone is giving it their all, it’s easy to build a solid
team. Being a confident leader that pays attention to tone, body language, and verbiage will help lead
to better success. Implementing the practices of NLP can promote growth for companies.
As people started to employ these tactics, they started to notice changes in their teams. Boosts in
morale and productivity. Now we see NLP happening around us every day. This is not necessarily a
bad thing as people that practice NLP tend to be more self-aware. In turn, they tend to make better
choices that are made from rationality rather than emotions
.
Pillars of NLP
There are four main points to NLP, they are referred to as the Pillars of NLP. They are Behavioral
Flexibility, Rapport, Outcome Thinking, and Sensory Awareness. Each one is of equal importance as
the others. Taking the time to look briefly at each one of these points gives a better understanding of
NPL as a whole and how it can help you weed out the fakers in your life.
The first pillar is Behavioral Flexibility. Basically, this means to go with the flow. When people can
see that the tactic they are currently using isn’t working and adapt their behavior it can have great
results. Being able to quickly change your perspective will allow more people to understand you.
The next aspect we are going to look at is Rapport. Creating a good rapport with someone is simply
getting them to trust you quickly. In addition, it is the ability to form quick relationships with people.
It is easy to build rapport by using common language, being polite, and showing empathy. There are
many ways to build a good rapport with a person, these are only a few.
Then we move on to Outcome Thinking. It is exactly what it states, spending the time to think about
the end result of what you want. Oftentimes, people get stuck on a certain point that is commonly
negative. It consumes the thought pattern and can make choosing the correct route to where you

actually want to go difficult. With outcome thinking you are always working toward an end goal.
This can promote better decision making along the way.
Lastly, we have Sensory Awareness. Being aware of the surroundings contributes to knowing what is
actually going on. When you walk into a public place and you take notice of the tone of the room, the
colors surrounding you, the groups of people, it can be very enlightening. It can also help you easily
understand how you need to behave in that situation.
The more you learn about these four pillars the more success you will have with NLP. They are the
foundation and anyone who wants to learn NLP will spend a lot of time on each one. Gaining more
knowledgeable helps you apply what you have learned to your daily life and the more protected you
will be from the ones that want to manipulate you, control you, or cause other burdens in your life.
NLP has grown and changed over the years. What started out as focusing on what people’s eyes were
doing, the words they choose to use, and building quick rapport, turned into something much, much
more. All sciences grow and change over the course of time and we imagine that this one will also
continue to evolve.
After focusing on what the yes were doing, word choice, and rapport this therapy started to grow and
focus on other aspects. In the 80’s, the people using NLP were focusing on what it is that causes
feelings inside of us. This helped therapists to figure out how to help someone deal with their
individual problems.
More and more people started using the techniques found with NLP but they wanted to put different
names to it. To say they had come up with it all on their own. When it comes down to it, no matter
what you call it, NLP is the same across the globe. Today, it is used not only to help you have control
and choices in how you react, but it can also help you figure out what other people are up to.
The people in the here and now that are using NLP have a variety of different reasons for doing it.
Some of it is to help themselves become better people while for others it is about weeding out the rats
in their lives. Businesses use it in team building and marketing techniques. Here again, we can see
how vast the world of Neuro-Linguistic Programming really is.
It has been said that people who study Neuro-Linguistic Programming live freely. They have the
ability to access all different types of situations and make choices in how they choose to proceed
instead of being led by instinct and emotion. How you think, feel, behave, and speak can all be
choices you make that can help you lead the best life possible.
NLP can be used throughout your daily life in a huge variety of ways. Some common reasons that
people start using this are that they want to motivate other people, have control over their emotions,
conquer their fears, communicate more effectively, and find success in life. There are many other
reasons a person would take an interest in NLP
.
If you are unsure of who you can trust in your crowd NLP can seriously help. Understanding
behaviors and actions of people can help to clue you in on what’s really going on around you. This
falls into Sensory Awareness. It is startling what you can learn from looking at someone’s body
position and paying attention to things like their tone of voice. People really do tell you everything
you need to know with very little conversation.
Whether you are at your job or heading for a late-night party downtown honing these skills can keep
you mentally and physically protected against predators. Knowing NLP techniques can also inform
you when other people are using it for darker desires. Many people use these practices to become
their best selves, however, others have more nefarious intent.

Obviously, when you can adapt in a situation and make well-thought out choices you are going to be
more successful. There is less of a chance that people will be able to take advantage of you. In
addition, you will be able to better understand the people in your life. Weeding out the keepers from
the trash is simpler when you can read the situation accurately and adjust so that you are working
toward your desired outcome.
How Does it Work?
NLP may seem like enchantment or spellbinding. During treatment the subject dives deep into their
oblivious personality and filters through layers and layers of convictions and discernments to wind up
mindful of an involvement in early youth that is in charge of a standard of conduct. NLP takes a shot
at the rule that everybody has every one of the assets they have to roll out positive improvements in
their very own life. NLP strategies are utilized as a device to encourage these changes. 
NLP Therapy can be sans substance. That implies the specialist can be viable without thinking about
the issue in incredible detail. Consequently the specialist need not be told about the occasion or even
the issue, in this manner guaranteeing protection for the customer. Other than this we likewise have a
non-exposure understanding in which the communication between the customer and the advisor is
kept secret.
 
NLP puts stock in flawlessness of nature in human creation. Henceforth NLP urges the customer to
perceive their tangible sensitivities and use them to react to a specific issue. Indeed, NLP additionally
accepts that the brain is fit for finding even fixes to illnesses and infections. 
NLP procedures include noninvasive, medication free treatment that enables the customer to find
better approaches for managing enthusiastic issues, for example, low confidence, uneasiness, absence
of certainty, ruinous relationship designs (adapting to separation), and are fruitful inadequate
mourning guiding. 
NLP has its underlying foundations in the field of social science, created by Pavlov, Skinner and
Thorndike. It utilizes physiology and the oblivious personality to change points of view and
consequently conduct.
NLP is simply the investigation of astounding correspondence both with yourself, and with others. It
was created by demonstrating astounding communicators and advisors who got results with their
customers. NLP is a lot of instruments and methods, yet it is far beyond that. It is a demeanor and an
approach of realizing how to accomplish your objectives and get results.
Dark Traits of Manipulative People
Among the groups of the Dark Triad there is a conglomeration of personality traits that are
oftentimes, seen in criminals. It is not a surprise to realize that most criminals have quite a bit in
common. Taking notice to these dark traits is a great way of figuring out if someone has malicious
intent toward you or not.
There are a variety of different dark traits that we see on an everyday basis. You may know someone
who is very spiteful. Anyone that does something they don’t like will pay for it. Sometimes it will be
petty retaliation, but it can explode into something much more dangerous, depending on who you are
dealing with. Criminals tend to be spiteful, as they have malicious intent with their transgressions.
Another dark trait that you want to watch out for is egoism. When someone is so self-absorbed and
focused on their own achievements that they will run everyone else around them into the ground, it is
a major problem. Some criminals scramble their way to the top because of their giant egos and their

ability to only care about themselves. Keeping an eye on a big ego can save you a lot of trouble,
especially in relationships and business.
Have you ever met someone that had loose morals? You know that person that really doesn’t have
much regard for if what they are doing is right or wrong. Someone that even when they know what
they are doing is wrong, does it anyway, and then just laugh it off. This is a personality trait referred
to as moral disengagement. Obviously, the ability to commit a crime and not feel terrible about it is
something common among criminals a pretty dark trait.
Earlier we discussed Machiavellianism. That person that will go to any means to get what they want.
They are the ones that are the masters of manipulation. The justification for what they are doing is
always solid. When trying to track down criminals these are some of the hardest to catch as they tend
to also be some of the smartest out there. Even experts of NLP can have a hard time locking this trait
down.
Entitlement or Psychological Entitlement are also dark traits that we commonly see in criminals and
everyday adversaries. Unfortunately, the world's sense of entitlement has gone off the rails.
Nowadays, it is natural to meet people that have a sense of entitlement and this can make it difficult
to use this trait in determining somebody's true intent.
Self-interest is another trait that you need to watch out for. We all have tendencies to be selfish,
however, for some people it is to an extreme. They simply do not care what other people feel or want.
This is commonly seen by people boasting about how much money they have or their status. In
addition, their self-interest could be used to motivate them in gaining betterment in finances or
society. Those that are self-interested also tend to be extremely manipulative.
Then we have the narcissist. We spoke of the narcissist earlier, but their traits are very common
among criminals. They have a need for attention and commonly and inflated sense of self. They will
go to great extremes to prove that they are better than those that are around them. This could be in
how they look, how they think, or how they act. The narcissist thinks that their ideas are the best and
therefore criminal intent goes hand-in-hand with the narcissist.
Psychopathy means that you are lacking in the ability to empathize with people. They have an
extreme lack of concern where others are involved. This dark trait can also lead to a lack of self-
control and extremely impulsive behaviors. Obviously, when thinking about criminals, this trait rings
true for many of the extreme horrors we have witnessed in the past.
The last dark trait that we think needs to be discussed is sadism. A sadist is a person that likes to
inflict pain. In fact, they take pleasure in causing other people pain. This does not necessarily have to
be physical pain. In fact, many sadists find joy and completely tearing you down mentally. A wide
variety of criminal classes fall into this category and it is a common trait that we see in many of the
people that are committing heinous crimes.
Behavior Imitation
Behavior imitation is something that can be used for good and for bad. Oftentimes, as children, we
mimic the behavior of the people around us. It helps us to learn social norms. In addition, it helps us
feel like we fit in to the crowd. Many traditions have been built off of people mimicking other
people's behavior.
As we continue to grow up, we continue to imitate people around us. Here again, it makes us feel as
if we belong. Additionally, it can help us build relationships and understand the people around us

more easily. While, many people use behavior imitation for the right reasons there are many others
who don't.
Criminals who are socially awkward have a tendency of acting like the people around them. It can
make it harder to discern the good guys from the bad guys. It is a manipulation tactic that works quite
well when people don't exactly know how to behave appropriately. While some people are very good
at mimicking those around them it will be quite obvious when others are trying to do this. Cases of
extreme social awkwardness will not allow the person to genuinely behave like those that are around
them. This can be a tip to seeing what they may have planned next.
Another way that behavior imitation is prevalent with criminals is when they idolize someone or
something. They will change their very persona to reflect that of which they have admiration for. A
good example of this are people that still follow the ideals of Adolf Hitler. The new generation of
Nazis mimic the ways of old because they still believe his blasphemous thoughts to be true. This is
truly scary behavior imitation
.
Body Language
A person’s body language is one of the biggest tells in how they are feeling and what they may be
planning. The way a person moves and behaves while in a conversation, out in public, and at home
gives great insight to what’s happening with them at that particular moment. Those who work on
learning NLP techniques spend a ton of time studying about body language.
Body language is how we speak without using words. It can suggest that you are happy, sad, open to
conversation, or completely closed off from everyone. Not only is it shown through your actual body
but also through your eyes. Paying attention to the eyes is also an important part of NLP. There are
some truths to be found in body language that may not be what the words coming out of someone’s
mouth are actually stating.
It has been found that we gather more information from a person’s facial expressions, eyes, and body
language than we ever could from their spoken words. So, learning how to read body language can
help you in just about every situation you find yourself in. Learning how shady people act can help
you in avoiding unwanted issues.
When you first start learning about body language, you will be able to easily identify some emotions.
Obviously, we all know what it looks like when a person is happy or sad. The signs of this can be
seen easily but finding out when someone is anxious or uncomfortable can be a bit more difficult.
Studying non-verbal cues will take you to every area of the body. For example, slightly dilated pupils
may not be from a bright light but may in fact be due to arousal. If someone is constantly biting at
their lip it could be a sign of stalling or higher levels of anxiety in the current situation.
How a person is standing or sitting also gives us some clues as to how they are feeling. A person with
their arms folded around them is less likely to want to be approached. Whereas, an open stance with
your hands on your hips means you are likely in control of the situation or you may be aggressive.
Learning these types of things can seriously help improve your ability to pick out a troublemaker in a
crowd
.
Ever been in an area and realized someone was acting kind of shifty? You know, like moving around
the room frequently and during conversations they are unable to hold eye-contact. Your ability to
notice these this is because most people have at least some basic knowledge on how to read a
person’s body language.

Your posture also plays a key role in what your body is saying to other people. People who slouch
and tend to wrap their arms around themselves are typical closed off. They may be feeling
unwelcome or anxious. On the other hand, an open posture with your chin up and shoulders back is
very welcoming. It shows that you are open to conversation, friendly, and approachable.
Not only does your body language help people decide how to approach you, theirs helps you decide
about them. There is a plethora of different aspects to be considered with body language. The more
you delve into NLP, the more pieces of body language you will pick up. It can seriously help when
trying to identify those that are threatening and may have mal intent.
Language Imitation
Language imitation is another piece of NLP that should be taken into consideration. When we talk to
someone, even if we speak the same language, it can be difficult for us to understand each other.
Each individual has what is referred to as common language. Common language is simply the words
a person uses frequently and understand better than others.
When you are in a therapy session or at work and you are listening to someone talk, understanding
what they are saying can be hard. It can feel as if they are speaking in a different language. This
doesn’t work well for anyone as the person listening is actually learning anything. This is a major
issue and can cause massive detriment to a company or a person’s mental status.
Working to hear how someone talks, the phrases they use, and the tone that they have can help you
succeed in language imitation. When you can speak in common language to the person or people you
are addressing, you will be much more successful. Understanding will be promoted and what
everyone gets out of what you have to say will be more beneficial.
Mimicking someone’s language is more difficult than mimicking their body language. The more time
you spend talking with a person, the easier it will be to pick up on their vocal habits. Someone that is
very good at picking up other people’s common language can be a danger if they have intentions of
doing harm.
When we speak in a common language it promotes trust. Putting trust into someone that wants to use
your language against you is obviously something you want to avoid. So, be careful when dealing
with people that quickly change their voice to match those that are around them. The ones that pick
up on little pieces of context and repeat them to gain sympathy, trust, or control. It may be hard to
recognize, at first, but the more aware you become of your surrounding the easier this will be to spot.
Criminals tend to be good at this parrot like behavior. They understand that to get people to like you
they absolutely need to understand you. If control is what someone is looking for this is a good place
to start and get their hooks in. So, while language imitation can help you and your therapist or
employees relate, it can also be used to manipulate situations in favor of the person using this tactic.

Chapter 9: Manipulation and Persuasion
What is Manipulation?
For many people, manipulation is a faraway phenomenon that happens to other people, and not to
themselves. It is unlikely that you will be going about your day thinking about manipulation or
worrying that others are manipulating you. Yet the truth of the matter is, manipulation is everywhere
around us. It is in sales adverts that try to entice you to buy something that you do not need by
convincing you that you do need it. It is in the puppy eyes of a lover or child trying to get something
out of you. Manipulation is also at play when a passenger is trying to charm a flight attendant into
getting a first-class upgrade. In short, manipulation is everywhere in your daily life. The only reason
it goes unnoticed is because high chances are that you are not looking out for it. In many cases, it is
often so subtle that even if you were looking for it, you would not notice it.
First things first, what is the textbook definition of manipulation? Merriam-Webster dictionary has
various definitions for manipulation, among them: to manage or utilize skillfully; to control by unfair
means in order to gain advantage
and; to change by unfair means in order to serve one’s purpose.
Well, if you are reading this book, high chances are that you’re likely tired of having lost control and
wish to have it back. Or maybe you’re tired of hearing no and want to hear yes more regularly. This
book will not be a manual on how to use manipulation to hurt or lie to others. It is more of a
handbook on how to make the most out of your social interactions for your own benefit and possibly
for the benefit of the people around you. It is not an encouragement to be deceiving to others, but
rather a tell-all on the manipulation signs you have been missing and how you can take back your
own power in your life
.
How Psychology Correlate with Manipulation
Three psychological conditions that are associated with manipulation are narcissism, psychosis, and
sociopathy. Before talking about how the different ways manipulators might attempt to influence
others, we’ll give some background on these underlying psychological conditions. 
A narcissist suffers from narcissistic personality disorder, or NPD. As is true of many psychological
measures, NPD can be seen as existing on a spectrum; people might have it to differing degrees.  
The overarching characteristics of NPD include the following: 
• A grandiose self-image that might exaggerate the sufferer’s importance, talent, or
achievements. 
• A lack of empathy for other people. 
• A strong need for admiration from others. 
• Unrealistic fantasies of power, achievement, success, or idealized love. 
• A belief in a unique or special status that can only be understood by an elite few. 
• An expectation of special or deferential treatment. 
• A general attitude of arrogance. 
• An envy of others or delusional belief that he or she is subject to the envy of others. 
• A willingness to exploit or manipulate others. 

Obviously, this last characteristic is the most relevant to our purposes, but most of the others point
towards the basic psychology of narcissism that so enables manipulation. The strong egocentric
framing, the delusions of grandeur and the lack of empathy lead to a personality perfectly willing to
pursue self-interested behavior at the expense of others.
 
Within the broader category of narcissists there is a spectrum of subtypes that ranges from
exhibitionist narcissists to closeted ones. There are some who are unapologetically abusive and
vindictive and others that are thoughtful and capable of remorse. The more fully a narcissist
conforms to the above list of characteristics, the more likely they are to be considered a malignant
narcissist; one capable of inflicting harm. 
Antisocial Personality Disorder, or APD, is the clinical diagnosis for sociopathy. Like narcissism,
sociopathy tends to be a long-lived condition, often permanent, and has extensive effects. To meet the
clinical definition, an APD sufferer must demonstrate a conduct disorder by the age of fifteen which
includes at least four of the following characteristics. 
• Inability to maintain consistency in work or schoolwork. 
• Ignored social norms. May engage in illegal behavior. 
• A casual disregard for safety concerns, either concerning the self or others. 
• Irresponsibility, as seen on the job or in a failure to honor obligations of a financial nature. 
• Difficulty in maintaining monogamous relationships for over a year. 
• Impulsive and lacking in ambition or planning, tending to proceed without clear goals. 
• Easily irritated and aggressive or violent. 
• A lack of concern with honesty. This might be demonstrated by continuous lying, conning
people, reneging on debts, or using aliases.  
These first two categories are similar in both their positive and negative characteristics. Either can be
intelligent, charismatic or successful. At the same time, narcissists and sociopaths can both be
controlling, irresponsible, and proceed with an exaggerated sense of entitlement. Both can be abusive
and both tend to refuse to take responsibility for this behavior. They tend to produce justifications for
their worst behaviors. On a core level, both tend to lack empathy, although they may be able to fake
empathetic reactions when it benefits them. 
Although they do have similarities, there are important distinctions between the two categories. In the
Venn diagram of disorders, all sociopaths are narcissists, but not all narcissists qualify as sociopaths.
They differ in motivations. Sociopaths tend to be more cunningly manipulative, because everything
isn’t personal for them. Narcissists are ego-driven, but for sociopaths, the ego isn’t a factor. They can,
in fact, be viewed as lacking a real personality. They can inhabit any persona that is convenient to a
given situation. This makes sociopaths harder to identify. Their tactics shift relative to a situation.
They may try to win the approval of others, but only if it acts in service of their goals. They can
perform humility, seeming to show remorse, but again, this is strategic and based on an agenda.
Sociopaths act with a higher level of planning and calculation. Even aggression might be
premeditated.   
Narcissists are more reactive. They may employ lies and attempt to intimidate, but are more likely to
do it without a game plan, simply reacting to a situation driven by their overactive egos. A narcissist
will work towards their own success or goal of achieving some measure of perfection. They are

perfectly willing to exploit others as they pursue these goals, but the manipulation is secondary and
directed towards personal interests and a self-centered worldview.  
Both personality types are motivated by their own interests, but only narcissists truly care what others
think of them. The admiration of others is gratifying. This introduces a codependent aspect to their
personalities, making them capable of being manipulated themselves.  
A third category of manipulative personality type worth discussing includes psychopaths. Psychosis
is distinguished by a difficulty in distinguishing fantasy and reality. Sufferers may be delusional or
hallucinatory. The following list contains common traits of psychopaths. While many of these are
shared in our previous two categories, remember the important distinguishing factors defining
psychosis. 
• Exaggerated sense of self worth
 
• Fleeting or shallow emotions 
• A lack of empathy 
• Unwillingness to accept responsibility for actions 
• Inability to form realistic long-term goals 
• Impulsive behavior
• A lack of responsibility 
• Inability to control behavior 
• Superficially charming and glib 
• Being conning and manipulative 
Psychopaths tend to mislead and manipulate others through dishonestly and a superficial charm that
can come off as glib. Psychopaths may mislead in order to gain advantage or they might be motivated
to deceive and abuse merely for their own amusement. Some simply cannot resist these negative
impulses. Typically, psychopaths have developed these characteristics over the course of their entire
lives. They have incorporated them into an often basically functional routine. Sometimes the traits
are even externally reinforced to an extent. As a result, they don’t see these characteristics as
problematic. In fact, people with high levels of psychopathy often are largely unconcerned with how
they are perceived, exhibiting a willingness to demonstrate their fearlessness even if it means they
will be overtly perceived as dominating. They also tend not to worry about the consequences of their
actions on others. As they tend to have very little empathy, impacts such as these seem irrelevant.
They do, in fact, feel that their motivations are of innately greater concerns than those of others. This
contributes to a delusional regard of their own motives and actions, as if they served some higher
purpose. The delusional nature of psychosis also contributes to the fact that psychotics often believe
their own lies. Lying is natural to highly psychotic people, but that does not mean they are always
conscious that they are lying. Their detachment from reality can lead them to feel and believe what
they are saying even when it is motivated by conscious deception. All of these characteristics
naturally contribute to a high correlation of manipulative behavior and diagnoses of psychosis. 
People with other psychological conditions or those who are in perfect mental health are perfectly
capable of engaging in manipulative behavior under the right circumstances
.
Persuasion vs. Manipulation

The line between persuasion and manipulation is so thin that it often gets blurry. Distinguishing these
two concepts can often be difficult, especially depending on the circumstances and your own
perspective as an individual. Persuasion and manipulation are alike in that in both cases there is
someone trying to influence the decisions and behaviors of another. The key distinction between the
two is that manipulation is seen to be highly driven by self-interest where one party is willing to go
through any length to benefit themselves, including putting others in harm’s way. Persuasion on the
other is the nicer cousin of manipulation--there is a desire to influence for self-interest but there is
often a line drawn to mark boundaries. Persuasion is the more ethical way to go about it, many will
argue. When all's said and done, however, the two concepts seem to intertwine especially depending
on the techniques used to achieve either of them.
People always have different ideas of what words mean, but to be successful in manipulation and
persuasion, you need to know the different ways these terms are understood as well as what we mean
when using them in this book. In common speech, persuasion is considered a neutral word; of course,
someone can be persuaded to do something that helps the persuader and not themselves, but the word
itself does not imply that. Manipulation, on the other hand, tends to mean ill intention of the
manipulator. 
The ethics of manipulation and persuasion are a topic we have explored throughout these pages, but
know that for our purposes, persuasion is changing someone’s beliefs, while manipulation is
changing someone’s actions. This is easy to remember, because NLP involves the neural pathways
for both language (belief) and programming (action).
If you want your subject to change their behavior, you have to get them to change their thinking
about their behavior. They are a thinking person just like you are, and while they have mental
shortcuts that can get in the way (just like they can for you), your subject is entirely capable of
talking through their judgment calls with you. In a conversation with you, they can come to re-
evaluate their actions, and if you go through the conversation the right way, you will have the
opportunity to convince them to change.
When it comes to manipulation, there is a slight difference from persuasion. The difference is that at
some points, it is, in fact, the right thing to ask them to change their behavior directly. Now, you don't
want to pull this out as your first move. This is something you build up to after a long conversation
— after you accomplish steps zero and one, just as you do for persuasion. But the big difference
between changing someone's ideas and changing their behaviors is here in step two: more often than
not, you should directly tell them what you think they should do differently.
When NLP newcomers learn this at first, they are totally taken aback. They think, how could I
possibly be told to tell them directly to change their behavior? But if you think through it a little
longer, it makes sense. What is the difference between belief and behavior? Persuasion changes belief
by getting close to someone's mind and changing what is in there, and manipulation is getting closer
to their mind and changing what is in there, too.
But with manipulation, there is the added hurdle of getting them to follow up on the change in
thought. While it is absolutely true that all of our behavior ultimately comes from our mind, our
brains are still not simple masters of our actions. Rather, our actions are determined by multiple
factors other than simply what our brain tells us to do. The reason you eventually have to ask your
subject to change their actions directly is that for new behaviors, a change in thought is just not
enough.

Your subject needs voices other than the one in their head, telling them what to do. They have the
thought you got into their head through NLP; you are telling them directly, too. But there is still more
you have to do.
Social bonds are incredibly important to human beings. If you want to manipulate someone's
behavior, unlike when you persuade them into having new thoughts, these thoughts alone are not
enough. You telling them what to do is not enough, even once they have recognized you as like them.
If you want to change their behavior, next, you have to change the social environment of the person
with the undesired behavior.
This is not a catch-all for manipulation, because nothing is. After all, not in every situation will you
be able to change the social environment of your subject. If they are not friends or family, but rather a
co-worker, this could prove much more challenging. It is only fitting since manipulation is a more
difficult and complicated task than persuasion.
But if this is a person whose social environment you have some control over, you have to determine
what social factors are leading to undesired behaviors. Is there another family member enabling their
drinking or drug use? This is the most prominent example, but all of it is emblematic of the NLP
manipulation framework in general.
All of this is to say that when you are not in control of a person's social environment, directly telling
them what action they should take is a necessary and challenging part of the process. It is so
challenging because there is no way around it, and it is also very easy to do the wrong way.
You have to work hard not to work too hard for them. If they can see how badly you want them to
change their behavior, they will want to continue acting the way they do out of spite. Don't give them
this opportunity.
Recall how with persuasion, we said never to address objections to your frame. In fact, if at all
possible, you don't want to address the frame itself. That's because if you address the frame itself,
you are acknowledging the fact that it is not the naturally-occurring reality that you want your subject
to see it as. However, with manipulation, the situation is different than it is for persuasion. 
With manipulation, you have to respond to objections directly, because you have to tug harder than
you do with persuasion. You see, persuasion is a subtler, quieter art than manipulation. This is a
direct way of saying that manipulation is loud and aggressive, because it is not.
 
But you can't be quite as gentle with manipulation. You want them to change their habits, so in order
to get your subject to understand the gravity of the situation enough to trigger the behavior change, it
is necessary that you are slightly pushier than you are with persuasion. Again: don't be pushy, but you
can't be as subtle as you are with persuasion.
Even when you deal with their objections, you are better off preparing for them before they come up.
When you are ready for any question or complaint your subject can haul at you, it is a signal to them
that you are like them, you see things from their side, and perhaps, you know better. This is Step One
yet again. If you demonstrate that you are like them and can reason things out better, they will listen.
You are almost ready to get into the techniques of manipulation, but before then, you need to get into
the personality of the NLP manipulator. 
You might think that you are born with a certain personality, and you can't do anything to change it,
but this couldn't be further from the truth. In fact, the kind of personality you should adopt to get
people to do what you want is one that anyone can learn.

Why is learning this personality so important? Well, it's important because you need to seem like you
are positive about what you are saying. If you seem even a teensy bit unsure in any of your speech or
your body language, nobody is going to buy what you are selling. That's why in your body language,
dress, facial expression, tone of voice, and words, you need to pull off the personality of someone
who knows what they are talking about. 
They have the answer to your question; they know what's what. If you can pull off that personality,
you basically don't have to do anything else. Personality is everything — don't forget that.
Personality is so important because no matter how unlikely something seems on the surface, if it
comes out of the mouth of the right personality, people will believe in it. You have to believe in what
you are saying to some extent if you expect to pull this off, so don't think you can playact your way
through the whole thing — after all, you are not doing the personality right if you are unsure about
the merits of what you are saying. But more important than anything you say is the personality you
are displaying while you say it
.
Not everyone has this naturally, but it is not nearly as hard to learn as you might think. The right
place to start is always your breathing and your posture. You already know what the right posture to
take is — stand up straight and without shaking. Now, take deep breaths like for your state control
exercises. Just like before, don't breathe loudly. Breathe deeply but not in a way that anyone can tell
is unusual.
The third and final thing you have to do is enter the headspace of this unshakeable personality.
Everyone has experienced a moment where everything was going right for them, and that is exactly
the place you need to go. Revisit that memory as though you were there again right now, and come
back as the person you were in that memory. 
The world is at your fingertips just like it was back then, especially if you carry this person inside of
you. That person is necessary to succeed in manipulating people's behavior in the techniques coming
up, so be sure you have your personality ready before reading. You won't be able to pull these off
otherwise.

Chapter 10: Characteristics of Manipulators 
Use of Language
We have shown how powerful language can be, as a prime tool of persuasion. There is more to the
manipulative controller though than mere words. They will use tactics that mislead and unbalance
their target’s inner thoughts. We now understand that through language, they will:  
• Use mistruths to mislead and confuse their target's normal thinking pattern.  
• Force their target to make a decision at speed, so they don’t have time to analyze and think. 
• Talk to their target in an overwhelming manner, making them feel small. 
• Criticize their target's judgment so they begin to lose their own self-esteem. 
• Raise the tone of their voice and not be afraid to use aggressive body language. 
• Ignore their target's needs, they are only interested in getting what they want and at any
cost.  
Invasion of Personal Space
Most of us set boundaries around ourselves without realizing we are doing so. It is a kind of
unspoken rule to protect our own private space, such as not sitting so close that you are touching
another person, especially a stranger. A manipulative character cares nothing about overstepping such
boundaries. Whether this is because they do not understand, or they do not care is unclear. Initially,
they are unlikely to invade their target's personal space. They will seek to build up a good rapport
first. This shows that they do understand boundaries because once they gain the confidence of their
target, they will then ignore them.
 
Fodder for Thought
Manipulators tend to be very ego-centric, with limited social skills. Their only concern is for
themselves. Everything they do in life will be in relation to how it affects them, not how their actions
affect others. Does this mean that they have a psychopathic disorder? 
Take empathy for instance. Controlling manipulators are unlikely to ever show empathy. Empathy is
a natural human emotion that aids in our survival techniques. A study by Meffert et al. indicates that
those with a psychopathic disorder are able to control empathetic emotions (4c). They lack sympathy
of any kind because another weakness is simply another tool for them. When they detect any
weakness in their target's resolve or personality, they will exploit it. The consequences to their victim
are of little importance. The targets weakness's feed the manipulator's strength, making them bolder
and often crueler in their actions.  
Creating Rivalry
Another tactic of the controlling manipulator is backstabbing. They may tell you how great a person
you are to your face, making themselves look good.  Behind your back, they are busy spreading
malicious gossip and untruths about you. This is a classic trait of a controlling manipulator as it
creates a rivalry between people. Then, they can pick sides that will make them look favorable,
particularly to their target. It can act as the first stage to getting close to their target. Once bonded,
they can start to build up trust, making it easier to manipulate the target in the future. If you
recognize a backstabber, keep them at a distance. Their agenda is selfish so it is better not let them
into your personal life. There is no point treating them as they treat you, in revenge. It will turn out to

be exhausting playing them at their own game. If they know that you are on to them, they may
attempt to lure you back with praise, remember that it is false. 
 
Domineering Personality  
It is unlikely that a manipulative person will outwardly show any form of weakness. An important
part of their facade is to show conviction about their views. They seek to impress, believing they are
right about everything. Almost to the point that if they realize they are wrong, they will still argue
that they are right.  On a one-to-one level, that invariably means that your position is always wrong.
As they will chip away at your beliefs, they seek to undermine your sense of self-esteem. Once they
have achieved this, then there is no holding them back. They seek to domineer others, often speaking
with a condescending tone to belittle their victims. Using ridicule is yet another tool against their
target, merely because it will make themselves look better. If you ridicule them back, they will seek
to turn the tables, accusing you of being oversensitive to their “joke.” The type of joke that the teller
is the only one seeing the funny side.  
Passive Aggressive Behavior
A common trait of many hard-core manipulators is passive aggressive behavior. Because they prefer
to be popular, they do not wish to be seen as doing anything wrong. Not that a manipulator would
ever admit to doing anything wrong. They are experts with facial expressions that are meant to
dominate and intimidate. This may include; knitting eyebrows, grinding teeth and rolling eyes. It may
also include noises such as tutting and grunting sounds. It is a very common behavior for such a
character, as there is little anyone else has to say that they will agree upon. For most manipulators, it
is their life’s ambition to show people up by proving them wrong. This can range from the
confrontational look, where they seek to stare their target down. Or, it could be in response to their
disagreement on something their target said. They may smirk and shake their head, turn their back,
anything to show their strong disapproval. It is all a ploy to make themselves look superior and put
others down.
 
Moody Blues
What of emotional stability of the manipulator? Is it that which makes them behave the way they do?
Do they even know what happiness is? The answer to that is a most definite yes, at least to the latter.  
Happiness is a tool used initially to help them manipulate, a happy target is more likely to comply.
This, in itself, makes the manipulator happy, or at least in a sense of what they consider happiness.
But their joyfulness is a perverted model of what most others consider happiness to be. Their
happiness is often built on the foundations of another’s misery. A misery that they have caused with
their cruel manipulations. Equally though, a manipulator is prone to mood swings. Most likely to
happen when things are not going to plan. One minute they are euphoric at their latest conquest. Then
next they could be completely deflated at their failure to succeed. One thing is certain for those who
live with or become a target of this type of domineering character, they will be unhappy all the time. 
Intimidation
One aspect of manipulation, often used as a last resort, is intimidation and bullying. When everything
else has failed, they begin to use threats to get their own way. Some though may use intimidation
from the onset. It may in a source of authority. For example, let's take the role of a manipulative boss.
You have requested a day off. They don't want to allow you your request but have no choice, it is
your right. This type of person would want their pound of flesh first. They will set goals for you to

reach so it will delay or cancel your request, such as moving project deadlines forward. This way
they have their little victory over you.  
Alternatively, such a manipulator may use the tactic of the silent treatment. Ignoring someone to the
point that it becomes obvious you have displeased them. They seek to make you feel the guilty
party.  
Other more direct intimidating actions may include stance. Using their height or build to tower over
you, or standing uncomfortably close. Be careful as they will seek revenge for wrongdoings they
perceive done to them. Nothing will go unnoticed under their watchful eye. Everyone is a potential
target. But, the weak are more likely to walk into their traps, because they are the ones who are easier
to dominate. The vulnerable will have little resistance and are easier to bully and coerce. Many of
these traits seem more fitting to men, but women can be cruelly manipulative too.   
This is a person who will never back down in an argument. Never admit they are wrong. Never
apologize for anything. A manipulator will never show respect but will expect everyone else to show
them respect. They love nothing more than to embarrass others. Playing the dumb one is common
practice, just to force another person to explain themselves further. At every opportunity, the
manipulator will jump in with some sarcastic remark, “hurry up, we’re all waiting for your
intellectual explanation,” or “why has no one else ever heard of this?” Their sole aim is to make the
other person look a fool, but without seeming to be the one who made it happen. Oh no, the victim
did that to themselves because they are stupid.
Techniques of Manipulation
The approaches we can use to manipulate someone’s behaviors are so numerous that they themselves
could fill an entire book. Thankfully, this chapter explains the most valuable approaches with more
than enough detail for you to start employing them yourself. 
Take note of how each method depends on your knowledge of dark psychology and NLP — without
them, you can’t begin to use them reliably, and that’s why this is just one part of manipulation and
persuasion. Our first method has been coined as “fear and relief” — in this method, you evoke
someone else’s fear, and then relieve them by telling them there is still something they can do.
As usual, we want to remind you of the importance of considering ethics with manipulation. If you
aren't comfortable doing it, you should consider whether you should be doing it in the first place. Just
because something is going to benefit you, doesn't mean it's something you should do.
That said, using fear and relief is not an unethical thing to do in every situation, even though it is not
everyone's cup of tea.
 
The technique of manipulation works just as you think it would — first, you talk with your subject
like you always would. You start out with your state control; that way, you are ready for whatever
reaction they give to this tactic. Next, you get closer to them. Despite the name, as you can see, fear
is not the very first thing you start with. If you literally started with fear, they wouldn't trust you in
the first place, and the relief would mean nothing to them. Perhaps the better name for this method
would be the peace, fear, and relief method.
Peace is where Step 1 takes place. Match up with their unconscious brain language just like you
always do for NLP. After that, you bring in the step of fear. You don't jump scare them, but rather you
give them the impression that something bad is going to happen. What you say for this depends on
what you are trying to get them to do. Whatever it is, it has to be bad enough that they will be

convinced to change what they were already going to do. The key is they have to think it is important
enough for them to change their actions.
There is another key part of it too, however. Your subject needs to be relieved very soon after they
were made to be scared, because otherwise, they will just associate the fear with you. Your subject
associating you with fear will make Step 1 much harder in the future, so it's very important that you
don't let this happen. Relieve them as soon as you can, and don't let them think you scared them on
purpose. This will preserve their positively-valenced idea of you, but still, put that fear into their head
to get them to change their behavior.
You cannot neglect the thinking side of manipulation. It is still very much necessary, because without
it you wouldn't be changing their minds in the first place. To begin with, we have to go back to
frames and their structures.
We already talked about the importance of adaptability with frames with persuasion. That is still
completely true with manipulation, so keep that in mind. We just don't want to repeat all of it when
you just read it, so go back over it again if you need to. But with manipulation, you need to take the
structure of framing into greater consideration than you did before. 
That's because if you want someone to change their action, rather than thought, it takes much more
drastic measures. You need to directly ask them to change their behavior, but you also need to more
directly get them to confront their ideas.
What is the structure of a frame? On a basic level, the structure is that of cause and effect. The cause
is what is happening in the outside world, and the effect is how it affects the subject. Before you get
your subject to change their behavior, they have a certain idea about how their actions affect them
and other people.
Your job as an NLP manipulator is to show them how their current framing of cause of effect is
wrong. When you change someone's framing, this is called Deframing. Deframing is a crucial part of
manipulation, because remember, you need to take drastic measures by getting someone to change
their behaviors. 
If they are thinking the same way they were before when you are done with them, they aren't going to
change their behavior — just like there is no chance they are changing their behavior unless someone
tells them they should directly. If no one does, they will never even stop to consider the idea that this
is something they should do.
Don't forget that manipulation is a matter of both thought and action. While persuasion was all about
getting into someone's mind, manipulation is still about that, but it now has an added element of
action. And if you want to get someone to change their action, there is a new idea you will have to
learn. It is called behavioral tone.
Behavioral tone is a lot like one's emotional intensity, but it is the intensity of one's actions. Don't get
the wrong idea, here, because you don't want to scare anyone. But you don't have to scare anyone to
come off as a strong person.
Being a strong person is what becoming a confident personality was all about. If you have this kind
of personality, everyone will listen to you. But more importantly, for the matter of manipulation,
people will do what you say, as well.
If you want people to do what you tell them to do, as the saying goes, actions speak louder than
words. People don't think logically in the way that everyone acts as they do. Instead, they are driven

by a number of factors. And one thing that will get them to change their ways every time is a strong
personality shaking things up in their life.
These chapters are rife with information, and it can probably be overwhelming if you consume them
all at once. For this reason, we absolutely recommend coming back to them. But even though it
wouldn't cover everything we have been through, we will summarize the basics of manipulation
before we move on to mind reading.
Manipulation requires more overt means than persuasion because getting someone to change their
behavior is no subtle matter. People's minds are easy to change without their ever knowing, but
changing their actions requires changes on multiple fronts, and the mind is only one.
If people, you should try to change their social environment to stop their undesirable behavior. But if
that is not possible, you need to emphasize how it is all on them to change their behavior; you need to
tell them directly what you think they need to change; finally, you need to use the fear and relief
method to make them see what bad things could happen if they do not change.
Now that you are clear on the landscapes and techniques of persuasion and manipulation, it is time to
dive into the world of mind reading, psychic resistance, and more.
Signs of Manipulation As It Is Used In Today in the World
(Practical Examples)
Manipulation happens in all kinds of relationships in our society. It happens between lovers, between
pastors and their following, and politicians manipulate us as well, among many other relationships. In
this section, we review the signs of manipulation in different relationships.
Churches
Manipulation in the church can occur in both ways. The people in the church leadership can
manipulate their followers and vice versa. It is sad since most of us look at the church as the source
of your peace. Most of us go for spiritual nourishment when we feel down from the church. How sad
can it be if the church can be the source of your pain? Let us look at how the pastors can manipulate
their followers.
1. Lack of open and honest conversations
In some churches, you are not allowed to ask questions. If you find yourself in such a situation, you
are met with excuses or dismissal on not getting the information. It is okay when there are concerns
not to divulge information that will interfere with the privacy of other members. The leaders should
take responsibility for their actions and always be ready to explain to the members why there are
certain rules. Church information should be open to its members, and there should be transparency
.
2. Leaders never admit their mistakes
We can forgive our pastors for making mistakes. After all, they are human beings, but it is difficult to
forgive them when they fail to communicate. Yes, I know what the Bible says about forgiveness, but
remember, I am a human being too. When leaders refuse to admit to their mistakes and are always
spinning their actions to fit those of a perfect Lamb of God, they create a difficult situation. You
should watch out for some recurring defensiveness in your church's leadership. You should also
watch out if the church is masking some of its mistakes.
3. They use shame as an influence mechanism

Some churches in our community use shame to influence their members. They will shame their
members for giving little money, shame them for missing the service and shame them for their
actions. Even with no knowledge of the world, the Bible is clear that to those who belong to Christ,
there is no condemnation.  Remember, none of those in the church leadership will sit on the judgment
seat at the end of the world. Some act as if they have the final say on who will enter the gates of
heaven. They will use the carrot and stick theory to manipulate you.
4. They are selective
First of all, you should understand that God created us all equally, and He accepts us the way we are.
In some churches, they will restrict you to dress in a certain manner, they will choose people of a
certain color, and they will force their members to follow some stipulated rules for them to
fellowship in that church. The church should not have superficial lines but should be an all-inclusive
place. The church should emulate Christ, who embraced all the rich such as Lazarus and the
prostitutes, such as Mary Magdalene. Do not get me wrong; rules and regulations are important to
run any organization but rules created to exclude a certain group of people in the wrong. Church
leaders should know that they are servants.
Now I do not want you to think that pastors are evil for such actions above. You might find that some
are not even aware of these manipulative actions, but others do it intentionally. Flipping the coin,
pastors are also prone to manipulation. The church members can do it without the pastors realizing it.
All the same, neither of the manipulations is acceptable. Let us look at the other side of the coin and
find out how the church members can manipulate their pastors.
Compliments
Compliments are good as they encourage us and make us feel good. Now some members may use
compliments to manipulate you. They will seek to influence your decisions in the church’s agenda
through flattery. You should watch out for such signs, as they are as bad as using criticism to bully
another. 
Criticisms
Well, you can never avoid criticism, especially if you have a leadership role. During conversations,
some members will criticize your actions using their tone and sometimes body language. Always
follow the church’s rules and regulations and the teachings of the Bible. Be gentle when responding
to such scenarios, and you will settle the manner amicably.
Silence
They tell us that silence is the best tool to silence manipulation, but it can also be a sign of
manipulation. You find members giving you the silent treatment to control you. The pastor should be
aware of this and should not carry the burden but instead should pray for the members.
Prayers
Pastors should take caution with the people they share with their burdens. They should protect
themselves and their families from over-exposure. They should find trusted friends to share with their
challenges, and even then, they should choose what is important to share and what is not
.
Families
Manipulation happens in all kinds of relationships. It can be intentionally used or unintentionally, but
in the end, the other party ends up doing something they did not want to do in the first place. In our
homes, parents can manipulate their children, and the children can manipulate their parents as well.

Children have an early exposure at an early age that they can get what they want through tantrums
and when you give in, they get control. Away from the children. Now, what are the signs that teens
are manipulating their caregivers?
1. Steamrolling
Teenagers make endless and repetitive requests that are meant to wear out the caregivers to get their
way. They will use the ‘can I’ ‘how about now’ language all the time. The act like a broken record
that keeps playing the same song repeatedly. 
2. Lying
Teenagers love to tell little white lies or omitting some parts of the truth to get what they want. They
leave out some details if given, would change your affirmation to their request. Most of them also
collaborate on the small lies in case the parents communicate; they will have the same information
and allow them their request.
3. Retaliation
Most teenagers do some hurtful things to retaliate for not getting their way. They will not clean their
room; they will dress inappropriately, they will put on loud music; all these as an attempt to get even
with you. It is difficult because you cannot yell at them to stop since they are no longer children, and
most caregivers end up giving in to their demands to avoid these hurtful actions.
Caregivers can as well manipulate their children, and it is bad since the children are in their
developing age, and it makes their life difficult. Briefly, let us look at the signs that a caregiver is
manipulating the child.
They do not give the child security and affirmation
They are always critical.
The caregiver always demands the attention of the child.
The caregiver makes toxic jokes about the child.
The caregiver does not allow the child to express their negative emotions
The caregiver scares the child.
Politics
Politicians engage the emotional system of your brains to get political mileage. They use fear,
disgust, and anger and never compassion or hope. Politicians never inspire us to work together for the
common good of us all. They use anger, fear, and disgust to manipulate how we vote. They influence
how we feel about other candidates and their policies. Most of us are never aware that we are being
manipulated.
1. Informing you that the turn-out will be high
Politicians will tell you that they turn out will be high to motivate you to go to the polls. If they told
you that the turnout would be low, most would not turn out since it depresses the efforts to go out and
vote.

2. Public shaming
The politicians will never shame you publicly to safeguard their reputation and their votes, but they
can use other means to make you feel bad for not voting. You would get ads and letters asking you
what your relatives and friends would think of you if you did not vote. It will push you to vote.
3. Making promises or threats to follow up with you
It is natural for human beings to do things in the right way when their actions are under observation.
In the 2010 US election, some people received a letter to encourage them to vote. Others received the
same letter, but with an addition that they will be called to share their voting experience. It brought
more voter turnout than the previous general election.

Chapter 11: Hypnosis
Hypnosis can occur with or without the person’s knowledge. If a person knows they are being
hypnotized, they may be more aware of what is going on, but they are still susceptive to
manipulation. 
Hypnosis is a technique which alters a person’s state of consciousness in order to make them highly
suggestible to behaviors which they would not normally exhibit. It has been used historically in
everything from parlor shows to intense psychotherapy and is subject to a great deal of skepticism. In
the realm of dark psychology, hypnosis could be used to cause the subject to act on another’s behalf
or otherwise behave in a way abhorrent to their normal state of being. Because people in a state of
hypnosis are often hyper-focused on the task they’ve been given, they are driven to complete that
task no matter the consequence.
Hypnosis is used for many different reasons, and it can be used for positive change as well as
negative change. Hypnosis has several elements, and they may or may not be present in different
iterations of the hypnosis process. It starts with an induction. Remember in cartoons, when they have
the illustration of the swirling visual effect, and some head-wrapped mystic is holding a watch with
the swirl in front of a person’s face? This cartoon depiction is what is known formally as the
induction process. 
The induction process is when a person is actually trying to change another person’s state of
consciousness. In order to make the person more suggestible and influence-able, hypnosis uses an
actual transformation of the state of consciousness. In order to think about this, you can think about a
person who is typical and awake, a person who is paralyzed but otherwise capable, and a person who
is in a coma. There are many gradations to the state of consciousness that a person is in. The person
who is being hypnotized is not paralyzed, but they are closer to that than normal consciousness.
Normal consciousness allows the person to have too much stability and defenses. The state that is
induced in hypnosis is one where a person does not have all their defenses in play. 
After the induction process has been successfully implemented, then the person can be told what to
do or what to think. Since the person who is being hypnotized has their defenses uncovered and
weakened, they are able to take instructions without question. 
One method that works in NLP as a tool for hypnosis is anchoring. Anchoring is when a hypnotist
uses something very familiar to you to bring you to that induction space where you are very
suggestible. It might be a nursery rhyme, it might be a name you were called when you were
younger, or it might be a song. This works to engage your subconscious, and it tricks you into
thinking you are safe and allowed to be engaged in the suggestions. 
Another NLP –based method for hypnosis is the NLP Flash. The flash works by switching the reward
to punishment, or the punishment to a reward. So, if there is something that you like to do which you
are trying to stop doing, like smoking cigarettes, the hypnotist will make you think about a cigarette,
and then they will make you experience something very uncomfortable, like an electric shock or
some other kind of physical or emotional pain. This is a very dark method and can have very deep
implications. 
Hypnotism can be a very strong way to persuade someone against their will. It may not be as
secretive as the other methods of persuasion, but it can be used without your knowledge. 
The next major method of Dark Persuasion is manipulation. Manipulation comes in many forms;
what we will talk about here the most is manipulation in interpersonal relationships. Manipulators

have many methods, but some of the major ones will be discussed in the following paragraphs. 
The first is putting down the other person. The manipulator often will have to be very sneaky about
this technique. Obviously, if there is someone who puts you down, you will not like them, and you
will start to avoid them. So, the manipulator often starts out as a close friend or a confidant. They
build trust in the relationship before diving in. Then, at some point, they will start to disparage the
other person in what they do, how they look, or other parts of their personality. The manipulator often
knows exactly how much they can push buttons, and they know how far they can go before being
recognized as a manipulator. Along with their technique also comes the making the other person feel
guilty. The manipulator makes the other person feel like they have wronged them, rather than the
truth, which is that they are being tricked. The manipulator will make the person feel like they have
some sort of debt to the other so that they enter into a sort of pact where there is inequality.
Ultimately, what happens is that the manipulator puts the person down, which makes them feel bad
about themselves, and it makes them feel like they don’t deserve to stand up for themselves. 
Another technique of manipulation is lying. Lying may be one of the more straightforward
techniques of the manipulator. They will use excuses and complete fabrications to get other people to
behave the way they want to. Lying is something that can start small and morph into a larger
problem. The manipulator knows how to keep a person stuck in their web of illusions. Overall, they
create a larger illusion of what the “truth” is. They try to create something that appears true to the
manipulated person. The lies might have to do with any number of subjects. If the manipulator wants
money, they might lie about how poor they are, and make themselves seem broke and desperate. If
they want loyalty, they might make up lies about how important the other person is to them. If they
want a job, they might lie about their experience in that field and make it sound like they are very
successful. If they want sex, they might lie about a whole host of subjects. 

Chapter 12: Brain washing 
Now that we know where brainwashing started, let’s look at the definition of the term. Brainwashing
can simply be defined as a process where a person or a group of people make use of some underhand
methods to talk someone into changing their will to that of the manipulator. When discussing this
topic, it is important to delineate between honest persuasion and brainwashing, as there are several
ways that people persuade one another these days, especially in the field of politics.  
A very easy way that people persuade others to conform to their will is by stating a few things that
could typically induce a yes response from the target. They then use some statement of facts as the
icing on the cake. At the end, they state what it is that they want people to do. For example, consider
the speech below: “Are you tired of paying exorbitant fares for your child's schooling? What about
the rising prices of gas and power supply? Are you concerned about the constant riots and strikes?
Well, a good point to recall that the government has mentioned the country is gradually drawing close
to recession and that the prices of fuel will continue to rise as they are seeing the greatest drop in the
economy since the end of the civil war. If you want the country to change for the better, vote
democrats." The truth is that you may not want to agree with the fact that these are brainwashing
techniques which may come off as subtle persuasion and that they are techniques in the hands of
manipulators.  
Some of the common manipulation techniques that you should watch out for include: 
Isolation:  
 
When trying to brainwash a person, one of the first things usually done is the isolation of the victim
from their family, friends and loved ones. This is to ensure that the victim will not have any other
person to talk to besides the manipulator. So, the victim will get all their ideas and information from
the manipulator while avoiding any likelihood of a third party stepping in to ask what is going on.
 
Attack on the victim’s self-esteem: 
 
Since the manipulator has successfully isolated the victim, he must look for a way to break his will
and self-esteem. They will then use the process to begin to rebuild the victim in whatever image they
wish to.  The only way a person can be brainwashed is if the person manipulating them is superior to
them. This attack on the person’s self-esteem would manifest in the form of intimidation, ridicule or
mocking the victim. 
Mental abuse:  
 
The manipulator will try to brainwash their victim by putting them through a phase of mental torture.
They will do this by telling lies to the victim and making them feel embarrassed by telling them the
truth in front of other people. They can also bully these victims by badgering them and not leaving
room for them to have any form of personal space. 
Physical abuse:
Manipulators understand there are many physical techniques that can be used to brainwash the
victim. These techniques include depriving the victim of sleep and making sure that they stay cold,
hungry or causing bodily harm by exhibiting violent behavior towards them. The manipulator can
also make use of some much more subtle ways like increasing the noise levels, making sure that there
is a light that is always flickering on and off or raising or lowering the room's temperature. 
Playing repetitive music:  
 

According to a study, if a person plays a beat repeatedly, especially a beat that has a range of about
45 to 72 beats each minute, it is possible to introduce an extremely hypnotic state. This is because
repetition is much closer to the rhythm that comes from the beat of the heart of a human being. This
rhythm, however, can cause an alteration to the consciousness of the person until they reach what is
known as the Alpha state, which is where the person becomes 25 times more suggestible than he
would ordinarily be when they are in a Beta state.
 
Allowing the victim to only have contact with other brainwashed people: When the manipulator is
brainwashing a person, they ensure that the victim does not encounter any other person/people
besides those that are already brainwashed. This is to create room for peer pressure. The truth is that
everyone desires to be liked and accepted. This is more prevalent when a person is a new member of
a group. In such a case, the person will typically adhere to and promote things that the other members
are saying which will secure them a space with their new company. 
Us vs. them:  
 
This also has to do with the possibility of being accepted by a group. The manipulator makes the
victim feel like there is an “us” and a “them.” So, they are offering the victim a chance to choose the
group they wish to belong to. This is done to gain absolute loyalty and obedience from the victim. 
Love bombing:  
 
This technique has to do with attracting the victim to the group through physical touch and by
sharing some intimate thoughts with the victim. Emotional bonding is also used in this technique
through a show of excessive affection as well as constant validation. 
All the above mentioned are a few ways to brainwash a person. Once a person is brainwashed it is
usually very difficult to get them back to normal. They develop more rigid neural pathways than
other people and this could be an indication of why it is always very hard for a brainwashed person to
double check their situation by rethinking it once they have been brainwashed.

Chapter 13: Preventing Manipulation
Manipulation normally occurs when an individual is used for the benefit of others. It is a situation
where the manipulator comes up with an imbalance of power and goes ahead to exploit his victim
just to serve their main agendas. Those who are manipulative are the kind of people who will
disguise their own desires and interests as yours. They will undertake all they can to make you
believe that their own opinions are the objective facts. They will then act as if they are cornered.
Manipulators will pretend to offer assistance so that you can improve your attitude, performance, and
promise that they will assist you in improving your life in general. That is all that they want you to
believe. The hidden truth is that the main aim of these people is to control you, and not control you,
as they want you to believe. They are not interested in making your life better, but just to change you.
They also want to validate their lives and make sure that you don’t outgrow them.
Once you have given these characters back to your life, getting rid of them will not be easy. They
will appear to flip flop on issues and act so slippery when you want to hold them accountable. They
also tend to promise you help that doesn’t seem to be near.
People can be easily manipulated when they opt to put up with behaviors that are passive-aggressive.
According to a recent study that was published in the Journal of Social & Personal Relationships,
offensive people tend to interfere with the general performance of an individual. The study also noted
that ignoring those who are negative could do you more harm than good. When these people are
ignored, the research states that their productivity and intelligence is increased. More than 100
participants were examined for this study. The participants were asked to ignore or talk with random
people who had been earlier asked to either be offensive or friendly.
The participants were not aware of the kind of people they were going to meet. After interacting for
about four minutes, each of the participants was offered a thought exercise that needed them to have
a better concentration. The study later noted that those who ignored the negative individuals
performed way much better than those who engaged the negative individuals
.
The researchers then summarized that ignoring some people in a serious social interaction is one
better way of conserving the mental resources of a person. The best strategy is to avoid those who are
negative in their speeches and actions. But at times, that can’t be enough. A negative person can also
be manipulative and sneaky at times. In such situations, you will be forced to apply other strategies.
The truth is that being manipulated is not a good thing. The only possible worse thing than
manipulation could just be admitting our dirty little secrets. Each time we realize that we have been
manipulated, we not only feel stupid but also ashamed and weak. And all that doesn’t stop there. If
we continue to fall for the tricks that these people lay on us, they will leave us with an awful feeling
about everything around us. Instead of being hurt for another time, the best thing to do could just be
not to trust anybody.
Manipulation can only be successful if the target fails to recognize it or just decide to allow it. But
regardless of all that, there exists certain things that you can do to recognize that you are under
manipulative powers. They can also help you to prevent or stop a possible case of manipulation.
Some of the ideas may not be desirable or possible for your situation, but that’s just fine because
every situation and every person is totally different.
Know all your fundamental rights
One of the single most imperative guidelines, when you are in this similar situation, is to know all
your fundamental rights. But that’s not all, you should also recognize when any of those rights are

being violated. Remember that you are at liberty to stand up for yourself and make sure no single
fundamental right is being violated. You should, however, do this carefully and make sure that you do
not harm others. Again, you should not forget that you might forfeit these rights if you cause harm to
other people. Ensure you are conversant with some of the basic human rights such as:
The right to be treated with dignity and respect.
The right to express one’s wants, opinions, and feelings.
The right to give no as an answer and maintain that without any guilty
feelings.
The right to set up one’s own standards and priorities.
The right to take care and safeguard yourself from being emotionally,
mentally, or physically threatened.
The mentioned basic rights show the extent to which your boundaries are supposed to reach. We are
living in a society where people don’t represent any of these rights. The mental manipulators are
particularly interested in depriving you of your rights so that they can fully control you and take
advantage of you. However, you still have the moral authority and power to state that you are fully in
charge of your life and not the manipulator.
Maintain a distance with these people
As noted, one of the surest ways of detecting a manipulator is to check if the individual acts with
different faces when in front of various people and situations. Whereas all of us have mastered this
art of social differentiation, the mental manipulators are masters when it comes to dwelling in
extremes – where they show great humility to one person and rude to the other. They can also feel so
aggressive at one point, and totally helpless the next minute. When you see this kind of behavior in
people whom you are close to, the best thing to do is to keep a healthy distance. You should also try
to avoid engaging with these people until you are really forced to do that. Remember that some of the
top causes of chronic psychological manipulation are deep-seated and complex; therefore, saving or
changing these people cannot be your job.
Stop Self-Blaming & Personalization
Given that the manipulator’s agenda is to know where your weakness is and exploit it, you may even
throw the blame game on yourself for not doing your best. In such situations, it is very imperative to
reassure yourself that you are not part of the problem. Remember that you are just being manipulated
to feel bad about your actions and surrender your rights and power in the end. It is vital to consider
the kind of relationship you have with the manipulator as well. These are some of the questions that
you should ask yourself:
Am I getting a respectful treatment?
Is this relationship 1-way or 2-way?
Am I satisfied being in this relationship?
The answers to these issues will offer you the most important clues about whether the problem is
with the manipulator or with you.
Probe the Manipulators

Mental manipulators will always make demands or requests from you. They do this to make you go
the extra mile so that you can meet their needs. At times, it can be very important to put the focus
back on the manipulator each time you hear certain solicitations. Ask them some analytical questions
to check if they are fully aware of their scheme’s inequity. Ask them if their actions appear
reasonable to them or if what they want from you is all fair.
When you step out to ask some of these questions, you are simply placing a mirror so the
manipulator will be able to view the real nature of his/her ploy. If the manipulator happens to be a
master of self-awareness, then he/she will definitely withdraw and back down. Real pathological
manipulators, on the other hand, will dismiss the question and insist on having things done their own
way. When this takes place, ensure you stand up for your fundamental rights and the manipulators
will definitely flee.
Say No in a Firm and Diplomatic Way
Saying no in a firm and diplomatic way is what can be defined as real communication. When it has
been articulated in an effective manner, it will give you an opportunity to stand your ground and
maintain the best working relationship. It is important to remember that one of your basic human
rights is to set your own standards and priorities. It is also within your rights to say no without
feeling the guilt, as well as the right to pick your own healthy and happy life
.
Set the Consequences
When a mental manipulator persists on violating the boundaries that you have made and is not
hearing your “no,” you will be forced to deploy the consequences. The ability to be able to point out
and assert the consequences is one of the most important skills that you can deploy to resist the
efforts of a manipulative person. When they are articulated in an effective manner, consequences will
stop the actions of the manipulative person and even compel them to stop the violations and respect
instead.
Confront the Bullies in a Safe Way
One fact that is not known to many is that a mental manipulator can turn into a bully when they
intimidate and harm others. It is important to note that bullies only prey on those they regard as the
weakest, and you can make yourself a target when you remain compliant and passive. However, the
fact is that a number of bullies are cowards on the inside. They will often back up when their target
starts to stand up for their rights. This is a common practice in office and surroundings, as well as in
schoolyards.
Think about the long-term consequences of the actions you undertake
As opposed to just doing what is easiest and fastest, do not forget about the consequences that your
actions can have. Remember that psychological manipulators are the best when it comes to making
their option the easiest, fastest, and also the least hurtful. They are also best at keeping the people
focused on their current feelings. That explains why people do things they later regret. Instead of
dealing with a consequence, later on, make sure you choose to do things that you won’t be forced to
rethink.

Conclusion
Dark psychology is at work in the whole world. You might not like this truth, but you can’t modify it.
I hope the knowledge you’ve gained by reading this will lead you forward, and that your journey will
be peopled with the kind of intelligent and lively folks that will make it a thrilling tapestry of
experience.  Sometimes the destination is fun to think about, but if we miss the journey on the way
there, we miss out on the best part.  Look up from the path, see who’s walking with you and then ask
yourself – what did they mean by that hand movement?  What does that facial expression mean? 
How do my own mannerisms mirror theirs?  You’ll figure out what it all means while you’re on your
way.  Just don’t forget to enjoy the journey.  It really is the very best part.
I wish you all the best!
--
Caroline Empathy & Power Laws

Dark Psychology and Manipulation
Improve your Life: The Ultimate Guide to Learning the Art of
Persuasion, Emotional Influence, NLP Secrets, Hypnosis, Body
Language, and Mind Control Techniques.
© Written by:
JOSEPH GRIFFITH

Text Copyright © [Joseph Griffith] All rights reserved. No part of this guide may be reproduced in
any form without permission in writing from the publisher except in the case of brief quotations
embodied in critical articles or reviews. Legal & Disclaimer The information contained in this book
and its contents is not designed to replace or take the place of any form of medical or professional
advice; and is not meant to replace the need for independent medical, financial, legal or other
professional advice or services, as may be required. The content and information in this book has
been provided for educational and entertainment purposes only. The content and information
contained in this book has been compiled from sources deemed reliable, and it is accurate to the best
of the Author's knowledge, information and belief. However, the Author cannot guarantee its
accuracy and validity and cannot be held liable for any errors and/or omissions. Further, changes are
periodically made to this book as and when needed. Where appropriate and/or necessary, you must
consult a professional (including but not limited to your doctor, attorney, financial advisor or such
other professional advisor) before using any of the suggested remedies, techniques, or information in
this book. Upon using the contents and information contained in this book, you agree to hold
harmless the Author from and against any damages, costs, and expenses, including any legal fees
potentially resulting from the application of any of the information provided by this book. This
disclaimer applies to any loss, damages or injury caused by the use and application, whether directly
or indirectly, of any advice or information presented, whether for breach of contract, tort, negligence,
personal injury, criminal intent, or under any other cause of action. You agree to accept all risks of
using the information presented inside this book. You agree that by continuing to read this book,
where appropriate and/or necessary, you shall consult a professional (including but not limited to
your doctor, attorney, or financial advisor or such other advisor as needed) before using any of the
suggested remedies, techniques, or information in this book.

Book Description
Have you been thinking of dark psychology and manipulation? Are you fed up people manipulating
you to get what they want? Do you use people? Would you like to master secret techniques to
influence people positively? 
Well, if this is you, then you have come to the right place. 
One thing that is important to bear in mind is that dark psychology refers to the art of manipulating
and controlling people’s minds. Yes, psychology focuses on how we behave and is central to our
thoughts, interactions, and actions. However, dark psychology, on the other hand, is about people
using tactics of persuasion, motivation, coercion, and manipulation to get what they want. 
Here, you will learn;
−
       
The tenets of dark psychology
−
       
Dark psychology Triad
−
       
Tactics used by everyday people to manipulate others
−
       
Secret techniques of dark persuasion
−
       
How you can positively influence people
−
       
Mind games, hypnotism, and brainwashing
There is so much to learn about the psychological nature of people to prey on others. The truth is that
all of humanity has the potential to victimize others. Yes, some try to sublimate this tendency while
others choose to act upon their impulses. However, the most important thing for you is to understand
your thoughts, perceptions, and feelings that lead to predatory behavior so that you can learn to
control yourself and use it for good.
So, what are you still waiting for?
Come with me and let’s discover more
!
Introduction
You may be wondering what dark psychology is all about and where mind control comes from. In
this book, we will discuss what it is and why people can be manipulated and controlled mentally by
psychopaths and narcissists. We will also shed some light on what you can do when that happens to
you. 
One thing that is important to note is that manipulation often happens in families with parents who
have narcissistic tendencies. In the case where there is parental alienation, a parent may use their
child as a psychological weapon to abuse the other parent. The truth is that mind control, a form of
dark psychology, happens in a system where people are – such as churches, families, and
workplaces. 
The key ingredients of dark psychology are people, narcissistic leaders, lieutenants, scapegoats, and
keeping secrets. What is not allowed in this kind of system is having a free spirit or free-thinking
mentality. It is such kind of people who are banished from the community of manipulators. 

Think about someone that joins a cult, what happens to them? The truth is that cult leaders coerce
intelligent people from loving their friends and families in exchange for false promises. People who
are manipulated tend to think that the decisions they made belong to them when, in the real sense,
they belong to the manipulators. 
It is important to note that human social interaction dynamics are powerful. Since time immemorial,
people have been manipulated with false doctrines, propaganda, and social pressure. Have you read
about Hitler? How did he manage to manipulate an entire country into hating specific groups of
people? 
It the works of dark psychology!
If you are fighting to rescue yourself from mind control by another person, then read on because you
will learn how they do it and how you can rescue yourself from their mind games and undetected
mind control.
 
But how can another manipulate you?
Well, the first thing is that your manipulator will keep you in the dark so that you stay unaware that
you are being changed. In other words, they try as much as they can to psychologically lead you to a
change of behavior just so that they can satisfy their selfish agendas. Their end goal is to have you do
the bidding for them. Think about parental alienation, for instance – the end goal is to hurt the other
targeted parent. In other instances, leaders manipulate the masses to satisfy their personal need for
control and power – and even fulfillment of their fantasies. 
The second trick is that dark psychology purposes to control one’s physical and social surroundings.
In other words, leaders of mind control offer others ample structure, assignments, and rules to keep
others continually on task. The main aim is to ensure that they create a sense of powerlessness in the
victims. 
How do they achieve this?
They will ensure you are away from your social support network, and with people who are already
entrenched in the group. This way, they can easily control your mind so that you lose personal
autonomy, confidence, and power. They erode your intuitions, and as your powerlessness increases,
your sense of understanding of the world and good judgment diminishes. They attack your
worldview, and the outcome of which is cognitive dissonance, and you are not allowed to talk about
it whatsoever. 
Dark psychology attempts to incorporate a reward system and punishment in the victim’s life. In
other words, they aim at promoting the manipulator’s agenda to undermine the autonomy and
individuality of the target. The only time you get positive feedback is when you conform to the
beliefs and behaviors of its leaders. Otherwise, you get negative feedback for choosing to hold on to
your old beliefs and ways of life. 
It aims at creating punishments, rewards, and experiences to promote learning the ideologies of the
group and their approved behaviors. In other words, this kind of leadership has a top-down pyramid
structure where the leader never loses. What you must bear in mind is that people who are
manipulated by users of dark psychological techniques are not valued because of their individuality.
Instead, they are used as objects of manipulator’s productions, where the leader in the story is the
author, director, producer, and playwright of their story. 

Read on to learn what dark psychology is and its benefits!

Chapter 1 What is Dark psychology?
“Dark Psychology is the study of the chasm within us all, which only a few enter, and even fewer ever
exit. Without a natural predator to cause humans to rally, we prey upon one another.”
– Michael Nuccitelli Psy.D.
Several people don’t understand what dark psychology is all about. Well, the first thing you must
note is that this is a field of study of the human condition about the psychological nature of people to
prey on others to manipulate them. The manipulators possess certain deviant drives that are
characterized by a lack of purpose. That said, one thing you need to understand is that all of the
human race has the potential to manipulate others into doing what they want. Some try to restrain
themselves from manipulating others while most act on their impulses. 
The main aim of dark psychology is to understand others’ feelings, thoughts, and perceptions as well
as the subjective systems that contribute to their predatory behaviors. According to dark psychology,
the manipulator has a deviant and abusive behavior that causes them to purposively take advantage of
others to fulfill their rational and goal-oriented motivation at least 99.9 % of the time. The remainder
0.1% derives its argument from the Adlerian theory and Teleology. 
In other words, dark psychology assumes that there is a region within the human mind that allows
them to commit atrocious acts without reason. This theory has coined dark singularity. 
What is interesting about dark psychology is that it postulates that the entire human race has a
reservoir of harm intent towards others. This desire to harm others ranges from minimally obtrusive
to pure thoughts of psychopathic behavior characterized by a lack of cohesive rationality – otherwise
called the dark continuum. 
The mitigating factors that serve as catalysts to dark singularity and where one’s actions are said to
be heinous and fall under the dark continuum is referred to as dark factor. According to Michael 
Nuccitelli, “Dark Psychology is not just the dark side of our moon, but the dark side of all moons
combined.
”
In other words, everything that makes us who we are is related to our dark side. Unfortunately, all
cultures, humanity, and faith have this proverbial cancer. From birth to the time you depart – death –
there is some side that lurks within each one of us – the evil side. This is the side that is deviant,
criminal, and pathological. 
“It is the individual who is not interested in his fellow men who has the greatest difficulties in life and
provides the greatest injury to others. It is from among such individuals that all human failures
spring.“
– Alfred Adler
According to dark psychology, some people commit evil acts, not because of money, power, sex,
retribution, or other known factors. Instead, they choose to do it because they are horrid – without a
goal. In other words, for them, ends do not justify the means. These are the kind of people who injure
others for the sake of doing it.
Within each one of us lies this potential!

You and I have the potential to harm others without cause, purpose, or explanation. This potential is
considered complex – one that is even hard to define. 
According to dark psychology, each human being has a potential of predatory behavior deep within
them, a potential that has access to emotional feelings, thoughts, and perceptions. But the most
important question is, do you act upon them? Think of a time when you felt like hurting someone not
because they wronged you but because you just wanted to. Did you act upon those feelings and
thoughts? 
If you are honest enough with yourself, then you will realize that you have had such thoughts and
feelings of wanting to commit atrocious acts. The only difference is whether or not you acted upon
them.
 
Considering that each one of us considers themselves benevolent, there is a belief that our thoughts
and feelings would be non-existent. The truth is that we all have these thoughts but luckily never
have a chance to act upon them. That said, others have similar thoughts and feelings and choose to
act out of impulse or premeditated. The point is that human behavior related to their evil actions is
goal-oriented and purposive. 
In short, dark psychology concerns itself with the human part that permits and impels predatory
behaviors. Some of the features of this behavioral tendency include; lack of obvious rational
motivation, lack of predictability, and universality. It is an extension of evolution. Well, let’s look at
this tenet of evolution. First, humans evolved from animals and are currently the paradigm of all
animal life. The frontal lobe of the brain allows us to become the apex of all creatures. However,
being apex creatures does not necessarily mean that our primal instincts to be predators. 
“The greater the feeling of inferiority that has been experienced, the more powerful is the urge to
conquest and the more violent the emotional agitation.”
– Alfred Adler
If you subscribe to this kind of thinking, then you believe that all your behaviors are based on three
key instincts – aggression, sex, and instinctual drive to self-sustain. One thing you must bear in mind
is that evolution follows the tenets of survival of the fittest and reproduction. In other words, we live
in a way to ensure our survival and to procreate. The reason we become aggressive is that we wish to
mark our territories and ultimately win the right to reproduce.
It is our power of perception and thought that has contributed to us being apex creatures of practicing
brutality. Think of a nature documentary you have recently watched; you will realize that as the lion
runs after the antelope, the author ensures that you feel sorrow for the antelope as they are ripped into
shreds. While this may be brutal and unfortunate, this model fits the idea of self-preservation. In
other words, the lion kills the antelope for food – something they required for survival. 
“Defiant individuals will always persecute others, yet will always consider themselves persecuted.”
– Alfred Adler
When animals are hunting, they will tend to stalk and kill their prey – mostly young, weak, and
female groups. While this kind of behavior is psychopathic, the main reason why they choose this
prey is to lower their chances of injury and death. All creatures act in this manner – brutal, violent,
and bloody. 

However, when we look at human conditions, this tends to change, but a little. Where are often the
only creatures on earth who prey upon each other without reason for survival or procreation? They do
it for their inexplicable motivations. It is this part of the human psyche that dark psychology
addresses as predatory behaviors. The assumption is that there is something intrapsychic that
influences human actions – one that is anti-evolutionary. We are the only species that will kill each
other for reasons other than food, survival, reproduction, or territory. In other words, we will harm
one another with a complete lack of rational reason because there is a part of us that fuels vicious and
dark behaviors. 
It is this dark side of humanity that is unpredictable in the understanding of who acts on these evil
impulses, and even on the lengths, certain people will go with their sense of mercy negated. This
includes people who murder, rape, torture, or violate others without cause. It is these actions that dark
psychology speaks to as predators seeking out their human prey without a clearly defined purpose.
Humans are incredibly dangerous to each other and themselves. 
To fully grasp what dark psychology is all about, you must understand the following tenets;
Well, dark psychology is a  universal part of our human condition
 . It is this construct that has
exerted influence throughout history. Every creature, society, and person that resides in them
maintain this human condition. Even the most benevolent of people know that they have an evil side
of them, but the good thing is that they never act upon it – hence lower rates of violent emotional
feelings, thoughts, and perceptions. 
Dark psychology is a study of  the human condition about their thoughts, perceptions, and
emotional feelings.
  All these are related to the innate human potential to inflict harm on others
without cause. Given the fact that all behaviors are goal-oriented, the truth is that as one draws nearer
to a black hole of evil, the higher the chances of them having a purpose in motivation. 
The severity of dark psychology is not deemed less or more heinous through manipulation but
plots a wide range of inhumanity
. Let us consider Ted Bundy and Jeffrey Dahmer – they both were
severe psychopaths with heinous actions. However, the major difference between the two was that
Dahmer committed his atrocious murders for the need for companionship while Ted sadistically
caused others pain because of his psychopathic evil. On the rank of the dark continuum, they both
rank high, but his desperate need for love can understand Dahmer. 
There is a belief that every one of us has the potential for violence. This potential is innate, and a
wide range of internal and external factors increase the chance for this to manifest into volatile
behaviors. The truth is that these behaviors are predatory, and sometimes, they can function devoid of
reason. It is humans who are responsible for the distortion in the predator-prey dynamic. While
violence and mayhem may exist in other creatures, humanity is the only species with the potential to
harm without purpose. 
With a better understanding of causes and triggers of dark psychology, we are in a better position to
recognize, diagnose, and lower the risk of dangers inherent in our influence. When we all accept that
the potential for evil exists in us, we are better served to lower its chances of erupting. Additionally,
when we understand the tenets of dark psychology, we will see how it fits our original evolutionary
purpose for the struggle for survival.
 
Benefits of knowing your dark side
“I guess we’re all two people. One daylight, and the one we keep in shadow.”

— Bruce Wayne
If you are honest about growth, change, and living your life to the fullest, then you will come across
parts of yourself that you will find rather disturbing – and yet you will have to accept. Aside from the
bright nature, we know of ourselves, there lies a darker side of our nature – the ugly and frightening
part. This is what we refer to in dark psychology as shadow-self. 
One thing you must note is that your shadow self is always standing right behind you – just outside
your view. When you stand in direct light, you cast a shadow, right. The shadow is the part of
yourself that you can’t really see. Think about it for a moment, what lengths do you go to just to
protect your self-image from unfamiliarity and flattery? 
Why is it easier to see another person’s shadow but not see your own? 
The truth is, when you see another person’s shadow, you realize that one can show gifts in one area
of life and remain unaware of their evil behaviors in certain areas. Everyone is susceptible to this.
Over the years, I have learned that working with my shadow has not only been a challenging but
rewarding process too. It is by looking at your darker side that you gain greater creativity,
authenticity, personal awakening, and energy. It is this reflective process that contributes to your
maturity. 
You might be thinking, what is a shadow?
Well, this refers to the dark side of our personality. It is this side that consists of negative emotions
and impulses such as greed, rage, desire, selfishness, envy, and striving for power. Your dark side is
primarily primitive.
 
What is it that you deny in yourself? Everything you perceive as evil, inferior, and unacceptable is
what forms your shadow. If something is not compatible with your conscious attitude about yourself,
this is your dark side. It is your disowned self – parts of yourself you no longer claim to be yours.
These parts of ourselves do not go anywhere. Even though we try as much as we can to cast them
out, the truth is that we cannot get rid of them. They remain as part of our unconscious.
Realize that you cannot eliminate your darker side. Instead, it stays with you as your darker brother
or sister. When we fail to see our darker self, that is when trouble ensues.  
So, how is it born?
I want you to imagine a child – it could be yours or someone you know. Each time you look at the
child play with others, you see love, kindness, and generosity. But is that all you can see? Well, the
truth is, you will also see greed, anger, and selfishness. 
Just like them, we possess the light and dark side of ourselves. It is through these emotions that we
all are shared humanity. However, as we grow, something else happens – traits linked with goodness
are accepted, and those associated with bad are rejected. 
Each one of us has basic needs – security, desire to belong, physiological, among others. These needs
are either biological or instinctual. Like children, when we express one part of ourselves, you receive
negative cues from your surroundings – anger and tantrums. Each time our parents reprimanded us of
our outbursts, they sent us to our rooms, right? Our teachers might have shamed us for our lack of
dignity in class. Whenever anything like this happened, it threatened one of your basic needs.

The truth is that when this happened, we changed our habits to gratify our needs and learned to adapt
to the world around us. In other words, when we are still children, the shadow self is bundled
together and swept out of view.
 
But what happens when you grow up? When you finally know your evil self? 
Well, the truth is that when we ignore our shadow self, what we are simply doing is turning it against
us. It is this shadow self that represents all the parts of yourself you have disowned. While our
shadow self can operate on its own without our awareness – more like it is on autopilot – it causes us
to do things we would not do voluntarily, and that is the reason behind regret. You find yourself
saying things you wouldn’t normally say. Your body language expresses emotions you would
consciously not feel. In short, when you ignore your dark side, you end up hurting your relationships
– with friends, spouse, or family, among others. 
If there is anything I have learned over the years is that whatever qualities you deny in yourself, you
will see it in others – a phenomenon referred to as projection. In other words, anything we deny in
ourselves, we project it in others. For instance, when someone is rude to you, you get irritated. This is
a good bet that you have not owned your rudeness. Well, this does not necessarily mean that the other
person is not rude to you. However, if the rudeness was not on your dark side, someone being rude to
you would not bother you one bit! 
This is a process that does not happen consciously because we are not fully aware of our projections.
Instead, our ego uses this mechanism for self-defense – defend its perception of self. Our false
identities of “good” stand in the way of us connecting with our dark side. In other words, through
projections, we distort reality and create a thick boundary between our perception of self and our
behavior in reality. Just as Robert Johnson said,  if we don’t work on ourselves, the shadow will
always be projected. In other words, it is laid on another just so that we don’t take responsibility for
it
. 
So, what are the benefits of our dark side/shadow?
While our dark side is not something enjoyable to talk about, exploring it offers us an opportunity for
growth and development because let’s face it – no one likes talking about their flaws, weaknesses,
nastiness, selfishness, and hate, among others. Some of the benefits of knowing our dark side
include;
Improved relationship
As you gain insight into your darker side and come to terms with the fact that you have this dark half
of you, you begin to see things with more clarity. It helps you remain grounded, whole, and human. 
The truth is, when you accept the darker side of you, you make it easier for you to accept the darker
sides of the people around you. This way, others’ behaviors, and actions will not trigger you easily.
Instead, it will make it easier for you to communicate with others effectively. As a result, you enjoy
improved relationships – with friends, spouse, business partners, and family, among others. 
Clearer perception
When you see others and yourself exactly as you are, you view the world around you with a clearer
lens. Integrating your shadow self into everyday activities helps you approach your true self, hence

offering you a realistic evaluation of who you are. In other words, you will not perceive yourself as
being too small; neither will you feel as though you have a high moral ground than others. 
Your self-awareness of the dark side goes a long way in helping one assess their surroundings with
more accuracy. This will allow you to see others and assess situations with more clarity,
understanding, and an expression of compassion. 
Enhanced energy and physical health
One thing that is important to bear in mind is that dragging around the baggage of your darker side
can be draining and exhausting. It is draining to constantly be working to repress some part of
yourself that you don’t wish to face in your adult life. When you are fatigued and lethargic, you risk
poisoning your unexamined life. Mental suppression has also been shown to contribute to both
disease and physical pain.
 
Knowing and acknowledging your dark side helps liberate the huge amount of energy you were
unconsciously investing in protecting yourself. As a result, you experience improved mental,
physical, and emotional health. In other words, knowing and accepting your dark side offers one
inner strength and a sense of balance so that you are better placed to take on life’s challenges. 
Psychological integration and maturity
As long as you try to deny your dark shadow or repress certain parts of yourself, unity, and a sense of
wholeness becomes elusive. There is no way you can feel whole and balanced when you have a
divided mind. However, when you choose to integrate your shadow into what you do, you come one
step closer to finding wholeness – and that is what helps you achieve maturity. 
Greater creativity
Knowing your dark side helps unlock your untapped creative potential. As Abraham Maslow and
Carl Rogers once said, creativeness is a spontaneous occurrence that only people who are mentally
healthy have. 
So, how then can you engage your dark side so that you have the upper hand at approaching your
shadows with ease?
Center yourself
Perhaps this is the most important thing to do before you get into your dark side and yet is seldom
mentioned in literature. You might be thinking, “what will happen to me if I discover my dark side
when I am not centered?”
Well, it’s simple – you will not get a constructive outcome. 
One thing you must note is that your shadow self represents various clusters of hidden parts within
your psyche. It is only when you are at the center that you will get to know these parts. If one of the
parts is blended with you, the process is hijacked, leaving you confused, judgmental, and critical. It
will inhibit your ability to integrate your dark self. Before you get to work with your dark side,
ensure that you are clear, calm, and neutral. That is what it means to be centered. 
Cultivate self-compassion

Before you get to know your dark side, you must cultivate a sense of friendship – unconditional one
– with yourself, what is referred to as Maitri in Buddhism. Without friendship and compassion, it will
be hard to look at your darkness. 
Are you hard on yourself when making decisions? 
If so, then realize that it will be challenging to confront your darkness. If you are someone that easily
feels guilty and ashamed, you must transmute these emotional feelings into self-acceptance,
friendliness, and self-compassion. Start by acknowledging the fact that you are human. Understand
that we all have a shadow.
The best way you can cultivate compassion is to start with connecting your heart. Place all your focus
on your heart. Take in a deep breath and acknowledge your heart. As you breathe out, simply tell
your heart, “Thank you
.” 
Cultivate self-awareness
To see your darkness, you must have a self-reflective mindset. In other words, you must have the
ability to reflect on your thoughts, actions, and emotions. By practicing mindfulness, you help foster
non-judgmental awareness. You center your thoughts and actions in the present moment without
necessarily opening the door to the inner critic. 
When you have self-awareness and -reflection, you can observe and assess your emotional feelings
and choices without criticism.
 
Be courageously honest
The prerequisites to shadow work are integrity and honesty to yourself. It is easy to think
superficially of these qualities, but what you must understand is that true honesty simply refers to the
willingness to see unpleasant attributes in your behavior and personality. 
Coming to terms with parts of yourself you would rather bury deep inside can be uncomfortable and
is probably the reason ego invests lots of energy in repressing them. The ability to see all that and
accept them just the way they are can be challenging. If you want to be honest with yourself, look at
your behaviors, attitudes, emotions, and dark thoughts – and that requires courage. 
The reward of doing this plays a significant role in healing splits in your mind. It also helps unlock
untapped potential and a world of new possibilities for your growth and development. 
Record your discoveries
It is quite fascinating to see that most of our disowned parts wish to remain out of our view. Just the
same way a dream slips out of our mind soon after awakening, the darkness in us can be elusive. 
You must keep a journal where you record every discovery about yourself. When you put down your
insights and then take time to review them later, you help encode those discovering into awareness. 

Chapter 2 Dark psychology Triad
So many people argue that the dark triad people are so seductive. Thus, the most critical question we
need to ask is why. 
The truth is, the Dark triad has three personality traits; narcissism, Machiavellianism, and
psychopathy. The term Narcissism
 is derived from the Greek myth of Narcissus - a hunter who fell
in love with his reflections when swimming in a pool. In other words, narcissists are people who are
not only selfish but also boastful, arrogant, hypersensitive to criticism, and lacks empathy. 
Machiavellianism is a word that was coined from the Italian politician and diplomat Niccolo
Machiavelli, 16th century. This man earned notoriety when his book “The Prince
” was interpreted as
an endorsement to dark arts – cunning and deceit in diplomacy. Some of the traits associated with this
kind of personality include manipulation, duplicity, a lack of morality and emotion, and self-interest.
Psychopathy, on the other hand, includes a lack of remorse and empathy, being volatile and
manipulative or others, and showing antisocial behavior. One thing you must note is that there is a
difference between psychopathic qualities and being a psychopath, and this lies in the commonly
held link with criminal violence. 
This indeed is one of the most researched areas in psychology. While this has contributed a great deal
to the deeper understanding of the darker side of humanity, how far we differ from each other in the

extent to which we constantly exhibit darkness - the darkness in thoughts, emotions, and behaviors in
our everyday life, and the question we fail to ask is what lies on the light side of humanity. 
The truth is, socially aversive people exist. But what of everyday saints? Don’t get me wrong – I am
not talking about the person that gives a lot and receives public applauds and awards for their giving
just so that they can gain personal success. I am referring to that one person who just by being
, they
shine their light so bright that it radiates in all directions. The one person that is not strategic about
their generosity but that one who emits unconditional love – both spontaneously and naturally –
because it is who they truly
 are. 
According to the study, three distinct features characterize the light triad; Kantianism, humanism, and
faith in humanity. Kantianism simply refers to using people as ends to themselves and not just as
mere means. Humanism, on the other hand, is valuing the worth and dignity of everyone. Faith in
humanity is about believing in the fundamental goodness of human beings. 
One thing you need to understand is that the light and dark triads are not opposites of each other. Yes,
they are negatively related to each other, but the truth is that the relationship is only moderate, which
supports the idea that each person has a little bit of light and darkness in them. While some score
high in the dark triad, it is best not to look at them as lesser beings – after all, to have the dark side is
to be human. Instead, it is important to look at them as magnified and unleashed versions of the
potential that lies within them. 
According to a research study, the dark triad is associated with being younger, male, who is
motivated by power, achievement, affiliation, and instrumental sex. They are the kind of people who
have self-enhancement values, conspicuous consumption, immature defense styles, selfishness, and
perceive creative work and immortality as a path to death transcendence. The dark triad has a
negative correlation to such traits as agreeableness, life satisfaction, compassion, a quiet ego,
empathy, conscientiousness, and a strong belief that humans are good. 
Let us bring this closer home – think of an employee at your workplace who seems to derive pleasure
from bothering others or even sabotaging the company. This kind of person does not have a sense of
remorse. They tell blatant lies when they are caught doing something unacceptable. These are the
kind of people who can be termed as the “Dark Triad.” When someone shows evil behavior, it is
highly likely that you will see these three traits – narcissism, Machiavellianism, and psychopathy. 
Let us dig deeper into each of these features. When do you say that someone is narcissistic,
Machiavellianism, or psychopathic? 
Well, Narcissism is about having a complete focus on self. It is about believing that you are special
and should follow a different set of societal rules than the ones others follow. You are also known for
your inability to show empathy. While these kinds of people may show cognitive empathy – empathy
only through words – the truth is that empathy lacks in their actions and emotional feelings. When
they tell you, “I am sorry ABC happened,” what they mean to say is that they don’t feel any sadness,
remorse, or real feelings to show of it. They tend to do things just so that they can look good and not
because they feel like it is the right thing to do. 
Machiavellianism is about someone using exploitation and manipulations of others to gain control or
to maintain power over others. The thing with Machiavellian people is that they possess a rather
cynical perception of what morality is. They think that the reason people follow morals is that they

are not smart enough to figure out how to circumvent them. They are so focused on what is in it for
them and how to con others just so that they can get the most out of the situation. 
When you think of a psychopath, the first thing that comes to mind is selfishness, impulsive behavior,
lack of remorse, and breaking the law. While there are people who can’t seem to decipher social
norms, rules, and regulations, a psychopath knows the difference between right and wrong but does
not seem to care at all. 
Interestingly, all these three dark triad qualities are genetic. Yes, the surrounding plays a significant
role in the development of these personality traits, but the truth is that they are more likely that one
inherited them from their genes, making them more predisposed. That said, this does not mean that
genetics is destiny. The truth is you can have a genotype for a certain trait, but that does not translate
into a phenotype. For instance, you may have a gene for blue and brown eyes, but the phenotype is
brown eyes. 
Additionally, everyone has certain features of Machiavellianism, narcissism, and psychopathy at
some point in their lives. The good thing is that most people can recognize these behaviors and
realize that they do not work well in their professional and personal lives. 
When you don’t have the awareness that these traits are negatively impacting your life and that they
are pervasive, only then can it be ruled as a disorder!
It is important to note that these three factors of the Dark Triad produce different outcomes at the
workplace and in personal life – depending on how low or high you are in each feature. High
Machiavellianism and psychopathy indicate a high likelihood of low performance at the workplace.
Yes, a lack of quality in work performance means that you are not achieving a certain baseline, being
counterproductive might mean that you are overachieving but in the wrong way. 
The truth is, you are using hard tactics, one way or the other when manipulating others – common
among Machiavellians and psychopaths. Narcissists, on the other hand, tend to employ soft tactics to
exploit others so that they can eventually get what they want. The difference between hard tactics and
soft tactics is that hard tactics include threatening others or sabotaging work. Soft tactics, on the
contrary, is about giving compliments and gifts to influence people into giving you what you want. 
Take a step back into your life and think about these three factors of the Dark triad – are you possibly
encouraging one or more of these traits without realizing it? Or are you doing them knowingly just so
that you can get what you want? 
What can you do to ensure that your dark side does not take control of your light side? 

Chapter 3 Manipulation
The art of manipulation is not really about influencing people into doing what you want them to.
Instead, it is about getting them to want to do what you want them to do. The most important
question here is, “how do you get people to want to do what you want them to do?”
Well, the first trick is to learn their true desires and then reverse engineer it towards the goal you so
wish to accomplish. One thing you must bear in mind is that the closer you are to a person, the easier
it is for you to manipulate them. If you want to test your manipulation skills, the first person to do
this with is your romantic partner.
Think of manipulation as persuasion.
The truth is, you must be willing to persuade people and make them feel like it was their choice all
this while. Generally, men seek perfectionism while women see wholeness. You may be thinking,
“what does this even mean?” the truth is that men are easily persuaded by mastery and an ego linked
to improvement. When you display uncertainty on whether or not he can improve, you are simply
taunting his ego in such a gentle way that contributes to progress.
On the other hand, women seek balance in various areas of life – especially relationships with family
and friends. Therefore, when you suffocate time, you stir up a burning desire to bring balance. The
truth is, we all need balance, sacrifice, and focus in life. According to statistics, women tend to lean
more towards balance, while men lead more towards perfectionism.
Amid persuasion tactics, you must not disobey the law of cognitive bias – otherwise referred to as
liking and loving tendency. For instance, if Adolf Hitler says that 1+1=2 and Steve Harvey says
1+1=3, even though we hate Hitler so much, we have to accept that he is right and Harvey – loved by
many – is wrong. That said, most people will tend to believe Steve Harvey because of association
bias. In other words, most people associate him with positive things
.
You must care about what others feel and how you make them feel because remember Maya
Angelou’s saying, “I've learned that people will forget what you said, people will forget what you
did, but people will never forget how you made them feel.
”
Interestingly, most people wish to manipulate others over a short duration. What they fail to realize is
that the true art of manipulation is in the long game. Realize that patience is a virtue you must
exercise when persuading others so that it feels and flows effortlessly. The truth is that this takes time
to specifically overcome your mental barriers and get into the right mindset.
Over the years, I have learned that one thing that mentally hurt manipulators is a failure to understand
the process and then going with nature. Think about a boulder rolling down the hill – is there
someone forcing it down? No! Because it is the force of gravity that is pulling it down. Instead of
force against the force of nature, allow it to pull you.
When it rains, the only way we adapt is by putting on a jacket and getting an umbrella. When it is
hot, you wear light clothing and shield your eyes with glasses. The point is - try as much as you can
not to be delusional and allow yourself to adjust to what is. There are two major ways you can test
delusion – doing things in the wrong order still means the wrong thing (also referred to as mis-
prioritization.) or setting expectations of the outcome by putting in the wrong input. With people, you
must learn their personality type, how they react to different surroundings, and their boundaries.

Here’s the point – the mental frameworks are out of the way. One way you are going to get them to
do the thing is to lead with a reward. People love it when they feel like it’s their choice, and that
triggers the release of dopamine – otherwise known as the reward. They want to know how the thing
you are telling them to do is going to benefit them.
The trick is not to tell them to do it directly. According to research, at least 90% of the time, people
hate being told what to do. The best thing to do is to help them to the same conclusion following their
path. The most rewarding thing is them knowing that it was their idea – when, in fact, it was yours.
Therefore, you must let them own it. The toughest part is attaching that reward to the thing because if
they don’t understand how something is of benefit to them, there is a high likelihood that they will
never do it.
Once you manage to successfully manipulate others, you must not expose yourself because this goes
against the liking and loving tendency, causing people to cut you off – and that is the last thing you
want. You must maintain consciousness of how you make them feel and try to persuade for the best
and not for evil.
Techniques used by manipulators to gain control
Psychopaths are not villains we watch in movies or read in morality takes – they are real and walk
amongst us at home and in offices appearing to us as normal colleagues. According to one study, at
least 3-4% of business leaders are psychopaths. The same thing applies to narcissists. Science has
shown some evidence that a little bit of narcissism goes a long way in aiding business success.
As you go about your business each day, there is a chance that you will meet a few truly toxic
narcissists and psychopaths who will try to manipulate you in one way of the other. You must
understand how such people can manipulate others. Here are a few techniques;
Gaslighting
This is a manipulative technique that can be described in various ways. These include three key
phrases;
●
      
That did not just happen
●
      
You imagined it
●
      
Are you insane?
Well, gaslighting is one of the most common and insidious manipulative tactics because it aims at
distorting and eroding people’s sense of reality. In other words, it eats away your ability to trust
yourself, inevitably disabling you from seeing the justification in calling out your abuser
.
How then can you fight back?
The best thing is for you to ground yourself in your reality. One of the ways you can do this is to take
time and write down exactly what happened, talk to a friend, or reiterate your experience to a support
system that can help you counter the effects of gas lighters.
Projection
Think about it – have you ever met someone so toxic that claims all the mess that surrounds them is
your fault and not theirs?

Well, that tactic is referred to as projection.
Well, the truth is that we all have done this at some point in our lives. But the difference between us
and narcissists or psychopaths is that they do it a lot. They simply use projection as a defense
mechanism to displace the responsibility of their negative behaviors and qualities by ensuring that
they attribute all of it to another person.
What is the solution then?
Well, it’s simple – try as much as you can not to project your empathy or sense of compassion onto a
toxic individual. Also, you mustn’t own any of the toxic person’s projections. When you project your
conscience and value system onto others, this has a potential outcome of being met with more
exploitation.
Generalizations
Let us consider an instance where you tell a coworker that they sometimes fail to consider long-term
ramifications of their financial decisions. Then they go ahead and tell everyone that you called them
“a loose cannon.” You realize that this might blow up on you if several conditions come in to play.
Your psychopath of a colleague goes to the boss and tells them that you said the deal is a “wreck.”
What is going on
?
Well, the truth is that your nemesis did not only understand you, but they also had no interest in
understanding you.
One thing you must note is that malignant narcissists are not intellectual masterminds. Most of them
are intellectually lazy. Instead of taking the time to consider another person’s perspective, they
simply choose to generalize everything you say by making a blanket statement that does not consider
the nuances of your argument. They choose not to consider the different perspectives you paid
homage to.
To counter this, you must hold onto your truth and resist the urge to generalize things. Instead, they
realize that they are, in fact, a form of black and white illogical thinking.
Moving goalposts
This is a logical fallacy that abusive psychopaths and narcissists use to ensure that they have every
reason to be perpetually dissatisfied with you. Even though you offer them all the evidence you need
to validate your argument or meet their requests, they will set up another expectation and demand
proof.
You must avoid playing such a game. You are the only one that needs to validate and approve
yourself. You are enough, and the last thing you want is to let someone make you constantly feel
small, deficient, and unworthy.
Changing the subject
When you are discussing something, and someone keeps changing the topic, it sounds innocent
enough. However, in the hands of a manipulator, changing the subject is one way to keep off
responsibility. A narcissist will not want you to stay on the topic because the last thing they want is
you holding them accountable for something. In that case, they will find ways to reroute the
discussion to benefit them.

If you are not careful, this sort of thing can go on forever. It can make it impossible to engage in a
relevant issue. The best way to counter this is to the user the “broken record technique” when
fighting back. In other words, you must keep stating the facts without allowing yourself to yield to
distractions.
Each time they redirect the conversation, you must redirect their redirection by saying something
along the lines of “That is not what I am talking about – and you know it. Let is stay focused on the
real issue here. If you lack interest in this, then you can choose to disengage and spend your time and
energy on something a little more constructive.”
Name-calling
Each one of us has been called names at some point in our lives. We have been dealing with this long
enough, but that does not make it any less destructive. Trust me, this thing might have started from
the time you were in kindergarten, but it goes all the way to the presidential politics!
Even if you have encountered bullies since childhood, you mustn’t tolerate it. End any interaction
that entails name-calling and tell your manipulator that you will not tolerate it. Don’t even try to take
it all in – as most people do. Realize that the reason they resort to name-calling is that they are
deficient and are trying to distract you from what matters.
Smear campaigns
When a toxic person cannot control the way you perceive yourself, they choose to control how others
see you. In other words, they resort to playing the Martyr while everyone around you labels you the
toxic one. This is a smear campaign that is only preemptive to ensuring that they tarnish your
reputation and slander your name.
Realize that at times, true evil geniuses will choose to divide and conquer – by pitting two or more
people against one another.
The last thing you want is to allow them to succeed. You must record all forms of harassment and
ensure that you don’t rise to the bait. Do not allow their evilness to provoke you into stooping to their
level and behaving just like them
.
Devaluation
Let us consider an instance where you have been newly appointed the unit manager in your
organization. Suddenly, one of your colleagues starts aggressively denigrating the former manager
who held your position. Have you experienced this kind of manipulation?
If not, then you know the kind of person you need to beware of. Narcissists do this kind of thing all
the time. They will devalue your former boss to you (the new boss). They will devalue their ex to
their new partner. Eventually, you start to get the same kind of mistreatment as the narcissist's ex-
partner or boss. This is not just for those in the professional fields; it also applies to our personal
lives.
The very first step to countering this is by raising your awareness of this phenomenon. Realize that
the way someone treats or speaks of another is potentially the same way they treat or speak about you
in private or in the future. Be cautious!
Aggressive jokers

The issue is not your sense of humor but the hidden intention of that joke. You will hear a covert
narcissist make malicious remarks at your expense. These remarks come in the form of jokes so that
they get away with saying appalling things to you, maintain their innocent and cool demeanor. When
you raise eyebrows at the kind of insensitivity they have, they accuse you of having no sense of
humor.
They will try to convince everyone around that they were just making innocent jokes – even when
they know damn straight, they were not!
Triangulation
One smart way toxic people manipulate you and distract you from their nastiness is focusing your
attention on the supposed threat of another. This is what we refer to as triangulation. In other words,
they report back false information about what another person said. To resist this kind of tactic, you
must realize that the third-party in all this drama is being manipulated
.
The best trick is to reverse that triangulation or gain support from the other person who is not under
the influence of the narcissist.
But does manipulation all have to be negative?
Of course not!
The truth is that manipulation can also be used in a good sense. For instance, you can persuade
someone to take a vacation or do something that will help them get that promotion they have always
worked hard for. These are some of the manipulation techniques you can use to benefit you more;
Using body language to your advantage
It is important to note that how the brain uses physical movements and reactions each day is almost
uncontrollable. It is this kind of movement that ca single several people around you to think about
what it means. In other words, people can read your body language to try and understand things you
couldn’t possibly say with words. It is the best way to influence people with more than just words.
According to research, 90% of communication is nonverbal. This simply means that this much of our
interactions can just be lost because we sought for promotion with our arms crossed and looking at
the floor.
Mastering the art of body language goes a long way in helping one convey the intended message
properly. If you take time to read another’s body language, you will be in a better position to tell
whether they genuinely agree with you, actively engaged in the conversation, or are just taking you
for a complete idiot.
When you persistently pick up on the body language of those around you, you stand a chance of
improving your abilities as well as identifying opportunities and dead ends in every interaction.
Doing things such as gestures, mimicking postures, and movements can help get someone to like you
or agree with what you have to say
.
Often, we see people nod their heads not because they agree with what is being said, but when they
do not agree and can’t understand why the person is speaking is even thinking this way. That said,
when you nod your head when what you mean to say is you disagree, then you are setting yourself

up. When someone is interrogating you, they will pay attention to your body language to determine
culpability regularly.
The truth is that we are all animals, and we all behave this way when we are completely stripped of
our sophisticated means of communication. The trick is when someone is trying to manipulate you,
you can use this subconscious interaction to your gain. For instance, you can speak with your arms
open to create a sense of trust. You can also shake hands with your palm facing downwards to
communicate dominance and upwards when you want to communicate submissiveness. If you are
laughing in a group of people, the very first person you make eye contact with is the person you trust
most – use that to your advantage.
Change your perspective
You must cloak the reality of your manipulators with the kind of reality you have created. In other
words, to change their points of view, go matrix on their minds. It is all about tact, cunning abilities,
and, importantly, being rhetorical.
For instance, you can say something like, “this home is a real fixer-upper – imagine the potential!”
The point is for you to turn half-empty glass on your manipulator’s side. The truth is, perspective can
make a whole difference in how someone looks at something. Your description can influence the
perspective itself. Being rhetoric, in a way, underlies this notion because it encompasses several
aspects beyond what was said and how it was said in the first place. It is the content, tone, and appeal
to emotion, character, and reason. You can be rhetoric when you want to persuade. You can also use
exaggeration when trying to be practical, or a shift of focus where you deem necessary
.
The point is for you to put thought into every argument you make – its structure and delivery. It does
not matter whether it appeals to the other person’s emotion or reason; the point is that you think twice
about it. Ask yourself whether you sound like you know what you are talking about – even when you
don’t have an idea. If you cannot convince someone to stop cutting down trees for environmental
reasons, can you do it with a logical argument on how more trees mean more life?
Think outside the box and use that to reframe your perspective on a given situation. This will serve
you better and build efficacy of how your argument comes forward. Think about it, when you
convince yourself that you had a good night's sleep, you trick the mind into thinking it too. Use the
Dunning Kruger effect where smart people underestimate themselves while ignorant people think
that they are brilliant.
Leverage your knowledge of others
One thing you must note is that you can depend on others psychological needs and use them as your
pressure points. It might come as a need for conformity, acceptance, or inclusion – or it might just be
the complete opposite – to stand out and swim against the currents. If you are a risky decision maker,
then you might end up making a poor choice. If you are a quiet crowd dweller, there is a chance that
you will be discouraged from going after anything that might lead you astray.
What you must bear in mind is that other people’s weaknesses are your strengths. All you need is to
figure out how you can harness all that to your advantage. Look at these people carefully, study them.
Are they overconfident? Can that cause them to stumble? Do you think that they are insecure about
something? Can you use that to make a convincing point?
The truth is, each one of us has kryptonite!

The more you study about others’ psychological tendencies, way of thinking, and traits, the more you
are at an advantage of gaining control over their thoughts. The key here is knowledge. Just like any
other point we have made, it is also important that you gain an in-depth understanding and mastery of
your pressure points. Your solid defense comes from acknowledging your insecurities and
vulnerabilities.
Always bear in mind that their vision is the product of an emotional foundation. That no matter how
they try to justify their position, they hold to it for emotional reasons. If you want people to move in
your direction, you must discover the emotional value driving their vision – their G-spot. Once you
know this sweet spot, only then can you craft an approach that blends their needs with yours so that
you all feel successful at the end of the day.
Beware of good timing and opportunity
Think of the jaguar – effective and calculate, right? The biological ability of great timing gives Their
ancestral legacy of success and failure. The jaguar knows precisely when to strike, pounce or abort its
chase altogether.
My point is, you need to know when to make your moves. From a young age, we have learned that
timing is everything – you know when to ask your dad and mom for a gift they should get you on
your birthday or Christmas. The most important thing is for you to maintain an awareness of these
things and have your eyes out there seeking opportunities round the clock. When someone is
preoccupied and tired, that might just be the time to ask them for certain favors. This way, they will
put in the energy to refuse or disagree with you.
That said, try not to force opportunities. Instead, it is better if you welcome them with open arms and
eyes. If you have been laying low for the right time to throw a pitch at your boss, don’t force the
conversation too early. You may have to wait for several weeks before you have a good chance, and
once you do, don’t blow it. When you encounter someone with a proposal, their mood will determine
whether the battle has already been won or lost – at least by half.
The truth is, the wonders of psychology are quite endless. With manipulation, you are barely
scratching the service. If you don’t care to pick up on other people’s impulses, expose situations to
your advantage. The awareness of body language you exert and that which others send your way will
help open your eyes to maximize your exchanges in life.

Chapter 4 Undetected Mind Control
A lot of an individual's communication is not based solely on what they actively try to put out there.
A much larger, much more active chunk of our communication is based on what we don't realize that
we are putting out in the world. Our bodies can reveal our deepest emotions and feelings without us
realizing pretty much, twenty-four seven. This does not happen randomly, of course. The way that
our mind communicates without us realizing it is based on two main theories of thought – referred to
as the unconscious mind and the limbic brain.  
Unconscious Mind  
The unconscious mind originates from Freud’s Psychoanalytic Theory of Personality. They tend to
include feelings of pain, anxiety, or conflict. It is because of these negative feelings and emotions that
our unconscious mind stays outside of our conscious awareness. Since, on a subconscious level, we
do not want to remember or feel those feelings, we then try to ignore them and push them into our
unconscious mind.  
Despite this attempt at ignoring and hiding these feelings, our unconscious mind still influences our
behavior even though we do not know that it is there. Many individuals compare the unconscious
mind to that of an iceberg. The part of the iceberg above the water represents our conscious brain and
all of the communication of ideas and feelings that we actively put out into the world. 
Our unconscious mind is represented by every part of the iceberg that is below the water and unseen.
Within this iceberg analogy, it is important to remember how large an iceberg below the water truly
is. This represents just how deep our unconscious mind goes and just how much tends to be hidden
below the surface. The amount of information that is hidden just below the surface - within our
unconscious mind - is massive. It is like the hidden part of the iceberg in the sense that we have to
consider the parts of our body language that connect to our unconscious mind as a huge part of
nonverbal communication. 
 
Freud also believed and asserted that our basic instincts and animal urges are contained within the
unconscious mind. This includes instincts under actions of life and death as well as sexual instincts.
He believed urges such as these were hidden from or kicked out of our present consciousness because
our minds view them as unacceptable, irrational, or uncivilized. Freud suggested that individuals
often use several different defense mechanisms to stop these hidden urges from rising above the
waters into our conscious mind.  
Freud also goes on to explain the different ways that the information from the unconscious mind
might be brought into conscious awareness. One of the techniques that Freud explained can be used
to bring these feelings into awareness is known as free association. Free association is a rather simple
and seemingly silly form of psychotherapy. In free association, Freud asked patients to lay back and
relax and say to him whatever came to their minds without any sort of filter on it. He wanted them to
say anything that they could think of without stopping to think of it is trivial, irrelevant, or
embarrassing. Freud then traced the streams of thoughts until he believed that he could uncover the
contents of the unconscious mind. He often used this method to try to find repressed childhood
traumas or hidden desires.  
Freud also believes that dream interpretation could be used to understand the unconscious mind
further. Many people think of dreams as a route to the unconscious mind and believe that the
information from the unconscious mind could appear randomly in dreams but typically in a disguised

format. Because of this, he would often ask patients to keep dream journals and would try to go
through and interpret these dreams to try and understand their hidden meanings.  
Freud also believes that dreams tended to serve as a form of secret fulfillment of long-coddled
wishes. He believes that the fact that these unconscious urges were not expressed in real life means
that they could be expressed in the individual’s dreams. 
The Freudian theory of the unconscious mind did not come across as without controversy. A
multitude of researchers have criticized the idea of the unconscious mind and firmly dispute that
there isn’t an unconscious mind at all. Recently, in the field of cognitive psychology, researchers and
psychologists have begun to focus on the automatic and intuitive functions that describe things that
were previously being attributed to the unconscious mind. The idea behind this approach is a belief
that a series of cognitive functions happen outside of our conscious awareness.  
Meanwhile, they do not entirely support the voice conceptualization of the unconscious mind.
However, it does offer some evidence that actions that we are not aware of still influence our
automatic behaviors. Unlike Freud’s psychoanalytic approaches to the unconscious mind, research
within the modern field of cognitive psychology is almost exclusively driven by scientific
investigation and quantitative data. This idea of the unconscious mind continues to have a great effect
on modern psychology and is still used in some modern practices today.  
Limbic Brain System  
The limbic system within an individual's brain is responsible for a variety of very important brain
functions. The biggest responsibility of the limbic system is our instincts for survival and memory
access and storage. The limbic system is made up of many different brain structures—two of the
biggest and most important parts of the limbic system are the amygdala and the hippocampus.
Amygdala is the deciding structure that chooses where each memory should be placed in the brain,
while the hippocampus transports that memory to its final location. It is often believed that the
amount of emotional response determines the placement that it receives from the person.  
The limbic system is also very responsible for hormone levels, body temperature, and motor
functions. The limbic brain system is composed of the amygdala, cingulate gyrus, hippocampus, and
hypothalamus. These individual structures are very important parts of a person's brain. The limbic
system, as a whole, is located on top of the brainstem and underneath the frontal cortex. The limbic
system is often connected to survival-based emotions such as fear, anger, and pleasure. The limbic
system is also known to influence both the peripheral nervous system and the endocrine system.
 
The part of the limbic system that is important to this text, in particular, is its connection with
memory. Because of the limbic system’s perceived importance in the decisions of where memories
go and how they are remembered, it is often connected with Freud’s ideas of the unconscious mind.
Freud’s ideas of the unconscious mind are based on the theory that certain memories and feelings are
hidden far away from our conscious awareness. It is easy to understand how the limbic system can
play a huge part in that, considering that it is the deciding factor of where memories get stored. 
You might think, “What does any of this have to do with our body language and understanding the
body language of those around us?” 
The answer lies in the fact that the unconscious mind is very powerful and controls a huge portion of
our true feelings and emotions. By reading body language, we can often unlock these feelings of the
unconscious mind without even realizing that they are hidden from the person we are reading. This is

a very powerful skill, and it is important to understand the basis behind it. The limbic system and the
unconscious mind create this basis for the deeper readings of people.  
The Process of Mind Control 
A mind controller approaches the victim with the sole intent of cloning themselves, which is making
the other person think like them. This is a complicated thing to do, so, to achieve it, one has to
possess an inflated ego, lack doubts about themselves, and have a high sense of entitlement. All of us
are susceptible to manipulation, and what matters is how much effect the mind control will have on
us.
Psychologists studying mind control have found out that the entire process seems to adhere to a
common structure. This conclusion was made after a study was conducted on multiple marketing and
networking companies which used mind control to persuade clients to purchase their products.
One of the outstanding similarities is that all new members joining the companies underwent a pre-
planned training on how to recruit more people and convince potential customers to buy their
products. The training sessions are meant to make the employees think like the company wants and
use a form of mind twist to convince people.
Let us now look at the mind control process in detail.
Step 1 – Understanding the target 
Before anything else, the manipulator will seek to establish a bond or connection with their potential
victim. Good intent, or friendship, will be the first step because it makes the victim lower all their
social and psychological defenses. Once the controller gains the trust of the target, they now start
reading them to devise the most effective method to invade them. The reading aims to tell whether
their victim is susceptible to their manipulation. Just like any project manager, they do not like
wasting time on a subject they suspect might outsmart them and lead to failure.
Multiple clues are used to scan the victim. They include verbal style, body language, social status,
gender, emotional stability, and so on. A person’s traits can be used to decode the strength of their
defenses.
All this time, the manipulator will be asking themselves questions like, “Are you introvert or
extrovert?” “Are you weakly?” “Are you emotional?” “Are you self-confident?”
Humans give a lot of information about themselves when interacting with each other, and this is
something that the controller knows all too well. From these signs, they can easily tell if the person is
cooperating. They will look at body posture and immediately analyze the victim. Excess blinking
might mention that a person is lying. Arms folded across the chest might show a lack of interest or
insecurity. Taking large strides while walking might portray fear. As you can see, the body releases so
much data at any given time that it is important to be aware of the signs that you are giving out (this
will be covered in detail later in this book).
When the attacker has collected enough data from the target, they now understand their interests,
strengths, weaknesses, routines, and so on. Using this information, they can decide on an entry point,
which will allow for easy and accurate manipulation. They also decide whether the target is worth the
effort. If they see one as a favorable target, they move to the next step in the mind control process-
unfreezing solid beliefs and values.

Step 2- Unfreezing Solid Beliefs and Values 
Each one of us has some beliefs and values engraved deep within. Most of them are the principles
that were instilled in us since childhood, and others have been acquired from experiences are we
grow older. We rarely let go of them but revise them as we proceed. Most of them are what make up
our identities, so we do not like them being interfered with. If, at any point in time, these principles
are threatened, contradicted, or questioned, our natural reaction is to defend them through all means
possible. However, if a good-enough reason is given to us,
We voluntarily question them ourselves; we undergo a process known as “unfreezing.” 
Tons of reasons can lead us to unfreeze: a breakup, the death of a loved one, religious interference,
getting evicted from our houses, to mention but a few. These situations force us to start seeking
answers to complex situations, and this goes as deep as questioning our sole beliefs and values. Take
this, for example:
When I was a teenager, we had some family friends who were solid Christians. It so happened that
my best friend, who was my exact age, came from this family. His name was Matthew. Matthew used
to tell me about the Bible and its teachings, trying to convince me to accept salvation and live
according to its teachings.
I remember asking him why he was so insistent on this issue, and he would respond that with
salvation, all problems were solvable and that life was much easier and happier. Fast-forward about
fifteen years, Matthew’s mother was diagnosed with breast cancer. They tried all forms of treatment
available at the time, but cancer would grow back. One day, while talking to him about the issue, he
looked at me with a pale face and said, “I think what they say about Christianity is not real!” Unsure
about what he had just said, I asked him why he thought so. He responded that they had met tens of
spiritual leaders for prayers, but his mother’s cancer was only getting worse. What’s worse, she
would not live for more than a year.  
Sad as this story is, it makes us realize that some situations in life might force us to question the
strong principles that we grow up with. In this case, my best friend had come to doubt the very same
religion that he once felt had automatic solutions to all of life’s problems. In the very same manner, a
manipulator will dig deep into their victim’s life to understand their vulnerabilities and exploit them
fully. These people will say anything they think their targets would love to hear. Once the victim
swallows the manipulator’s comfort, there is a shift in power dynamics, and the target is now ready
for the manipulation.  
Step 3 – Reprogramming the Mind 
The mind control process seeks to separate the target from their initial beliefs and begin
reprogramming their mind. The reprogramming is meant to install the manipulator’s beliefs and
values into the victim’s mind. Apart from distancing the initial principles, the controller also tries
their best to make them look wrong or bad, or the cause of past mishaps in the victim’s life. If the
victim absorbs this reprogramming, their defense is lowered to zero. They end up as a robot that is
ready to accept any operating system that is offered.  
During the reprogramming phase, the attacker will try to ensure the victim has minimal contact with
the outside world. They make everyone else to appear insignificant to the victim because this raises
their opportunity to deposit their malicious principles into them. This behavior is common in cults,
which are mostly crafted to sway their followers from mainstream human life.

Some cults go as far as controlling the food intake of their followers as a way of weakening them.
The psychology behind this idea is that a weak person will always turn to the person they feel has the
power to protect them or alleviate their suffering. The same happens in relationships, where one
partner plays the controlling role, and the victimized one has no choice but to adhere to the other
.
You might wonder why some people put up with violent partners, but so far, from reading this book,
you must already understand that the problem is deeper than it appears. If you control a person’s
mind, you can control their lives.  
Once the victim has been re-programmed, the manipulator moves into the final phase of the mind
control process known as “freezing.”
Step 4 – Freezing the New Beliefs and Values 
Do you remember the “unfreezing” process we discussed earlier? So, once the victim has been fed
with contrasting principles by the offender, the offender applies tactics aimed at cementing the new
beliefs into their brains. This is what psychologists call “freezing.” The freezing bit is necessary
because the controller is aware of the person’s new beliefs that might clash with their initial ones. As
such, they need to force the victim to choose their malicious principles over their old ones. To do
this, they might apply any of the following methods.
One of the methods is using the reward/punishment approach. When the victim acts according to the
manipulator’s demands, they are rewarded. Hopefully, you see the similarity between the freezing
process and dog training. The dog is given treats when it follows the trainer’s instructions.
The trainer aims at solidifying the new skill in the dog by rewarding it. In the future, if the dog is
instructed to do the same thing, it will not hesitate since it has been made to think that obeying the
command is good and attracts a reward. The same applies to mind control; when the victim obeys,
they are made to feel that what they did was right and deserves a reward.
Punishments are the second most-applied approach in the freezing process. If the victim deviates
from the controller’s commands, they are punished. If we go back to the scenario of a cult, they
usually have defined punishments for violations of terms.
During the Holocaust, for instance, any Germans who failed to hail Hitler were punished through
imprisonment or death. In the same way, any German who was suspected of protecting the Jews was
shot. Hitler understood that by punishing anyone who went against his rules, he would force every
German to help him attain his objective of ethnic cleansing. The psychological trick used in these
situations is that the victim is made to see punishment as justice being served for breaking the rules.  
The final method used by mind controllers to solidify their manipulation is to transform their victims
into their agents. Better put, once the controller feels that the victim’s pseudo personality has
materialized, they use them to distribute their worldviews. 
Once the controlling process is complete, the victim starts living like the attacker without realizing it.
Depending on the nature of the manipulation, the victim might also be used to recruit more victims
into the oppressor’s way of thinking and living. This is especially true in the context of marketing
and networking, which we shall discuss under the topic of deception.

All this explains why a wife is likely to be violent towards the kids if the husband is violent. The kids
are also likely to be violent towards each other or their friends. The process of mind control is slow,
but once it solidifies, it can result in devastating effects.  
The relationship between mind control and emotional influence  
The interplay between mind control and emotional influence is clear. Mind control is general in that
the oppressor controls the victim’s freedom of choice and actions. When it comes to emotional
influence, the attack is more specific as it focuses on the feelings. All the same, the consequences of
both interferences are that they eventually snatch independence from the victim and place them at the
oppressor’s mercy. Therefore, we can conclude that emotional influence and mind controls are the
same; only that one is specific while the other is broader
.
Types of Mind Control 
Just to reiterate, mind control is an umbrella term that houses different forms of control. In short,
different types of controls might be cast at the victim. The oppressor determines the choice of
control. In the definitions of the types of mind control, you will see clear pillars, as we have
discussed in this chapter. There are five major forms of mind control studied under dark psychology.
They include:
Hypnosis: The process of malicious interaction where the controller used mind tricks to make the
victim accept their recommendations or change the way they react to their surroundings.  
Manipulation: A type of social influence through which a person can influence another’s perception
or behavior using underhanded tactics.
Deception: The Process of propagating beliefs in things and events using partial or complete lies.
Persuasion: A form of control that aims at influencing the beliefs, attitudes, motivations, and
behaviors of the victim.
Brainwashing: The process of wittingly convincing a person to abandon beliefs they have held for a
long time and to manipulate them to take up new ones.
Since this is a vast topic that we cannot cover in a single book, we shall focus on only two of these
types of mind control: manipulation and deception. In the following chapters, you will get to
understand what is deception and manipulation as well as the techniques used in furthering them. As
you get insight into the way these forms of mind control work, you will also learn how to spot
manipulators and overcome their endeavors.  
One of the driving forces is that out of the five types of mind control, deception, and manipulation
are the ones that can be applied in everyday scenarios. These scenarios can range from relationships
to normal conversations, advertisements, and religious beliefs. You need to acknowledge that mind
control does not have to force a person to change major aspects of their lives, such as personality.
Control can be used in minimal scenarios, such as being persuaded to buy a pair of shoes at the local
store or to vote for someone who would ideally not be your favorite candidate.  
Also, these two forms of mind control can be applied by the people that are closest to you. Therefore,
it is important to understand the most basic level where you can get manipulated and keep yourself

safe. If this has convinced you, though I promise it is not mind control, let us move ahead and discuss
deception.

Chapter 5 Hypnotism
"Brains aren’t designed to get results; they go in directions. If you know how the brain works, you
can set your directions. If you don’t, then someone else will."
-Richard Bandler  
Hypnosis is pretty easy to understand if you know how it works. Of course, it takes practice to master
hypnotizing others; however, simply understanding how it works is very useful in being able to
observe dark psychology and manipulation in practice.  
Hypnosis tends to be misunderstood as a parlor trick that requires someone to be asleep or in a nearly
asleep state to become hypnotized. Then, when they are under the spell of hypnosis, they can be
made to cluck like a chicken or bark like a dog or repeat any number of embarrassing phrases for a
cheap laugh. Hypnosis happens every day because all hypnosis means is that someone has entered
into an altered state or a trance state.  
We enter trance states every day. All it takes to enter a trance state is to affix your attention on one
thing so intently that some or all of your peripheral awareness can be shut out. Most people, for
instance, enter a hypnotic state every day at work or zoning out while on the subway. 
Hypnosis can be a potent tool for getting people to compromise their critical faculties, and it ties into
what we have been talking about so far in terms of polarization and eliciting the desired response
from someone. 
Stages of Hypnosis
Stage 1: Absorb Attention
The first step into altering someone’s conscious state (hypnosis) is grabbing hold of their full
attention. Believe it or not, there are verbal and non-verbal forms of this first stage of hypnosis. Take,
for example, the situation mentioned above in which a person can be so zoned in at work that
everything around them sort of just fades away.  
This is a prime example of the way that our psychological states are changed when we are intently
focused on something and of non-verbal hypnosis.  
Of course, gaining someone’s complete attention can be a bit easier if you are using words. People
tend to cling more completely to someone’s words when they are describing images or telling a story.
It is a lot like how some people prefer visual learning over textual learning. The human mind can
follow along better when pictures and mental images are involved because their visual sense is
engaged.   
You can practice this first stage of attention absorption in everyday speech. Go out with a friend or
coworker and see how much more they pay attention to you when you say you have a story for them.
Tell them a story, either true or made up, and be sure to include a lot of details. Paint the picture with
your words, use a lot of adjectives to describe the scene. The more senses you can engage, the better.
Give their mind and imagination something to engage with. 
When you have them wrapped up in your story, you have successfully absorbed their attention which
will lead you into the 2nd stage of hypnosis: 

Stage 2: Bypass the Critical Faculty
The conscious mind is a rather limited entity. It takes in the data that is thrown at you every day, and
it processes it rationally. The unconscious mind, on the other hand, is a lot more whimsical. It does
not get bogged down with matters of reality. Consider, for example, that your unconscious mind is
active when you dream. You may have never seen a purple, flying turtle in real life, but your
unconscious mind is free to consider such things as completely real and viable. 
The conscious mind deals with what is feasible. In hypnosis, this is what is known as the critical
faculty. Think of the critical faculty as a guardian at the gate to the subconscious mind. The critical
faculty is what alerts your mind to things that are impossible, unreasonable, and unlikely. If you are
attempting to hypnotize someone, the critical faculty is the enemy of hypnosis. The point of hypnosis
is transferring a person’s mind from a fully conscious state to an unconscious or at least an altered
state, and the critical faculties make it impossible for this switch to occur, so it must be bypassed. 
Bypassing the critical faculties can be achieved by first absorbing the full attention of a person using
simple techniques such as maintaining intent eye-contact with the subject and speaking a little slower
and in a low tone than you normal.  
Speaking in a hypnotic tone can go a long way in inciting a trance state and bypassing the critical
faculty. If you are hypnotizing someone, you want to watch out for signs that your subject is in a
trance state. Most importantly, do not give any hypnotic suggestions until you are certain you are past
the critical faculty, and your subject is in a trance state. Otherwise, your suggestion will be rejected
by the critical faculty.  
Step 3: Activate an Unconscious Response
Activating an unconscious response does not have to be as extreme as getting a person to cluck like a
chicken. It can be as subtle as evoking a laugh or making someone clap their hands to their mouth in
shock. An unconscious response is an action carried out that a person is not aware of or is only aware
of after the action has been made. In other words, it is a response that has not been regulated by the
conscious mind.  
Eliciting an unconscious response is very easy when a person has entered a hypnotic state. Look for
dilation of the pupils, a change in breathing rate, or flushing of the skin. These are all signs that your
subject has let their critical faculty guard down and have been ushered into a hypnotic state. 
Once you observe this, try eliciting an unconscious response; maybe describe in vivid detail a
delectable steak dinner so that their stomachs growl in hunger or a swarm of bugs overtaking
someone’s body so that their skin crawls with goosebumps. 
 
Stage 4: Lead to Your Desired Outcome
This is the point where you, the hypnotist, can lead the subject towards the desired outcome through
hypnotic suggestion or associated metaphors. This stage of hypnotism is all about speaking directly
to the unconscious mind and taking advantage of the altered state to either help the person or to lead
them to a conclusion, outcome, or decision that is favorable for you. 
One example of this stage is called priming. Say, for example, that you want to go swimming and
you want the subject to go swimming with you. Try telling them a story involving cool, cascading,
and refreshing water overcoming oppressive heat. This could lead to a post-hypnotic reaction that has
been geared towards your desired outcome. 

Pattern Interrupts & Rapid Induction Techniques
The concept of pattern interrupts very simply. Consider each word individually: the first word in the
phrase being “pattern.” A pattern can be anything you do mindlessly or habitually. Getting up in the
morning, brushing your teeth and taking a shower is likely something you do every day that you
don’t even really think about. This is an example of a pattern. A pattern can also be called a routine.
Getting in your car and driving to work can be considered a routine.  
Now consider the second word in the phrase: “interrupt.” An interrupt in this context is anything that
breaks your normal routines or patterns. Interrupts are conscious efforts to change the way you do
things, the way you think or the way you act.  
The major difference between the two words – the two concepts of “pattern” and “interrupt” – is that
one involves an unconscious or passive state of mind, and the other involves a very conscious and
active state of mind. 
Pattern interrupts are often used in behavioral psychology and NLP to help people break harmful
habits and routines in their lives. Routines often give us a sense of drive and purpose. Still, they can
be detrimental when we get so used to them that we switch off our brains while doing them, thereby
becoming vulnerable to hypnotic suggestion and manipulation. 
The average human has about 50,000 thoughts per day, but the majority of these are repeat thoughts.
Pattern interrupts are very effective ways to induce new thoughts, which helps the brain develop their
ability to think critically. It is the difference between letting your brain atrophy and exercising it. 
To get back to basics, consider pattern interrupts a way to alter yours or someone else’s mental state
from a conscious to an unconscious mode. This is precisely why patterns can be used for hypnosis
and NLP. 
In particular, the pattern can be very useful for rapid hypnotic induction or getting someone into a
hypnotic state very quickly. This may be because of a slight disconnect in a person’s mind when a
pattern interrupt is used on them. The switch from passive to active brain function isn’t seamless.
There is a lapse in which the unconscious and conscious mind meld for a brief time, and it is in this
time that a person enters a hypnotic state and is susceptible to suggestion. 
Consider it a state of confusion that a person enters for a brief time when one of their patterns or
thought processes is abruptly interrupted. Confusion tactics are very common and potent methods of
rapid hypnotic induction.  
Remember the example of polarization we went over in the first chapter? Pattern interrupts and
confusion are akin to polarization in the sense that both are used to get someone into a frame of mind
where their reactions can be predicted and manipulated. 
 
Getting someone riled up about a certain subject is similar to putting someone into a confused state
where their routine has been suddenly broken. It is in this state that a skilled hypnotist can implant
unconscious suggestions and therefore predict a certain outcome. 
Pattern interrupt techniques have become very popular in hypnosis and manipulation because they
are fairly simple to carry out, and they can be done in virtually any setting and sometimes without the
person even realizing it. It happens in an instant and garners the desired results in an instant, which is
why it has become such an oft used tool to hypnotize and manipulate people. 

The most popular method of pattern interrupts hypnotic induction is the handshake technique. In this
technique, the hypnotist will go in for the very mundane act of shaking someone’s hand. At the last
second, before the hand's touch, one person abruptly disengages from the handshake and grabs the
other person by the wrist.  
Getting up and getting ready for work is a routine that could take hours, and shaking someone’s hand
only takes a few seconds, but they are both patterns and they can both be broken, and when they are,
the mind enters an altered state. 
This altered state is the goal of pattern interrupts and why they are such a powerful tool for inducing
hypnotic trances. 
Using Pattern Interrupt to Induce Hypnosis
Going back again to a concept discussed in the previous chapter, attention absorbing is akin to pattern
interrupts for inducing hypnosis. Pattern interrupts are just another means of grabbing someone’s full
attention, and it can be argued that hypnosis is nothing but getting someone to be fully present in the
moment. 
The goal of the hypnotist is not to knock someone out or make someone unconscious. It is to
heighten their sense of consciousness through full attention absorption. The reason that pattern
interrupts are so useful for commanding the entirety of an individual’s attention (therefore leaving
them vulnerable to hypnotic suggestion) is that when someone's train of thought is instantly broken,
the mind is frantically looking for a logical explanation for the interrupt. 
It can be as easy as interrupting someone mid-sentence. Let’s say you get your friend telling you a
story about a run-in they had at a grocery store or a confrontation they had with someone that
bumped into them on the street. Try interrupting them in the middle of the story with an unrelated
phrase, “I have always wondered what makes the moon so silvery.” 
Your friend was fully engaged in his or her story, and they may have even been in auto-pilot if it was
a story they have told multiple times before. When you interrupted them with your statement about
the moon, you broke their thought process. Now, you have their undivided attention.
This leaves them in a vulnerable state of hypnotic suggestion because they are now hanging on your
every word in a desperate attempt to get answers. And where will these answers come from? You, of
course. It is at this very moment that hypnotists can implant their hypnotic suggestions that can have
nothing to do with what the person was talking or thinking about. 
This works because when the brain is engaged in a pattern, it is fully engaged in carrying out the
pattern to its logical conclusion. When the pattern is skillfully broken, the brain immediately recoils
and either is looking for a new pattern or trying to fulfill the old pattern.  
Imagine a person walking through a winding corridor and imagine that you can turn the lights out in
the corridor and make it completely dark. When you turn the lights out, the person can’t see a thing
and has no reliable way to navigate this winding corridor. They are looking to turn the lights back on
and be on their way again. Then, you turn the lights back on, and they can see. 
The vulnerable state of a person is when they are in the dark in search of light. They are similar to
what the brain experiences when its thought process is disrupted. It is looking to turn the lights back
on so that it can get back on track with the pattern.
 

Now let’s say you don’t turn the lights on until you have noticed that the person traversing this
corridor has completely turned themselves around in a frantic search for a light switch. They do not
notice that they are now facing the opposite direction that they were walking in and start walking in
the wrong direction. 
This is essentially the concept of implanting a hypnotic suggestion when you have successfully
broken the mental pattern of an individual. You get their minds going in a different direction than it
was before, just like you confused the person in the corridor with darkness to the point that they start
walking the wrong way. The path the person was walking was the pattern, and the darkness in this
example is representative of the pattern interrupt. 
This is how a skilled hypnotist can control the way a person speaks after they have been inducted
with a pattern interrupt.  
Hypnotists use pattern interruption to get the mind going in a certain direction. Let’s say, for
example, your spouse asks you, “Can you hand me the frying pan?” and you answer “Yes” but don’t
hand it to them. You have simply broken the path their mind was headed, and they are wondering
about the unusual response to a mundane question. 
You have your spouse’s undivided attention now and suppose you continue by saying, “Settle. You
don’t have to fry anything for what we are eating tonight.” 
The first word in that phrase, “settle,” was a hypnotic command similar to the cliché “sleep” or
“relax,” and it set the tone for the rest of the hypnotic suggestion. This is just one of the hundreds of
ways that a hypnotist can induce a hypnotic state through pattern interrupts. 
Not only can pattern interrupts be deployed virtually anywhere and in any situation, but they can be
used for psychological manipulation. You have probably been the subject or at least seen a
psychological manipulation in action using pattern interrupts. They occur all the time without anyone
realizing it.
 
There is an extremely simple way to manipulate people that pretty much anyone can do, but even this
base tactic is an example of successful psychological manipulation through pattern interruption.
Picture if you will, a situation in which your spouse is deep in thought about what to make for dinner.
You want chicken, but you have no idea what your spouse is imagining making. Suddenly showing
her a coupon in the paper or a particularly enticing video online for the chicken recipe can break their
concentration on whatever type of food they were thinking of cooking and gets a new train of thought
going on chicken. You have successfully used a pattern interrupt to manipulate the situation and
heightened your chances of having chicken for dinner. 
The other technique here is overload, which aims at manipulating a person’s thought process or
emotions pushing them past a threshold of tolerance. The way you can push a person past this
threshold is by feeding them images or vivid explanation of something and going way over the top
with it. Once the imagery becomes too much, the person cannot complete whatever pattern they were
on. 
Let us consider an instance where you have a friend who doesn’t like Asparagus. Imagine telling
your friend about this awesome dinner you had – which had featured Asparagus. You give details of
smell, texture, taste, and the feel of the Asparagus in your mouth as your teeth shredded through the
thick greenery and the roughage of the vegetable. Your friend will be trying to block the imagery, but
once it gets to be too much for them, they will be pushed beyond their tolerance threshold and be

unable to ignore this new path that their thoughts are taking. Imagine that you were so descriptive of
the Asparagus that your friend has lost their appetite or even become queasy. This is yet another
example of psychological manipulation through pattern interruption. 
Another very simple method for psychological manipulation through pattern interrupt is confusion.
Confusion is a tactic that is commonly used in hypnotherapy because it has a way of disarming an
individual. It is used to help people overcome irrational fears or to allow them to alter things about
their character, like becoming more assertive or more vocal. 
 
Confusion can be used to get the person’s mind off the anxiety, anger, fear, or whatever emotion they
have associated with a certain concept. Fear of flying is commonly mentioned in hypnotherapist
offices. One tactic that is commonly used to help clients get over their fears is by getting them to
think intently about the act of flying. What is it about flying that makes them fearful? What makes
them have a vision in their minds of the worst possible scenario?. Maybe a fiery plane crash. When
they start to envision these things, their mind gets going on a pattern of fear and anxiety as they
imagine their worst nightmares coming true. 
The hypnotist will interrupt their thought process with a very confusing string of words like, “If a
person answers a question with a question, wouldn’t that be an answer to the initial question or would
the question be a question unto itself and therefore need to answer to the question?” 
This confusing diction will completely break the distressing thoughts of plane crashes in the client’s
mind and replace it with a puzzle that is light and, at the very least, not life-endangering. 
This sows a seed in the client’s mind and, when done successfully, realigns the association that the
client makes when they think about flying. Instead of fear and anxiety, the thought of flying is
associated with a sense of ease coming from the pattern interrupt - a confusing question that broke
the pattern of fearful thoughts.  
Not only is the client disarmed, and some of the stings of the concept of flying has been taken away,
but a good hypnotist will have completely replaced what the client associates with flying from fear to
ease. 
Hypnotherapists can also use the overload tactic of pattern interrupt for the benefit of their clients.
For example, weight loss is another common problem that patients come to hypnotherapists with.
The therapist will then use an image or sensory overload to turn the client off of a certain fatty food
that they have a hard time resisting. They can use an abundance of imagery related to potato chips,
for example, to push the client past their threshold of tolerance so that they associate potato chips
with an unpleasant experience and therefore become more and more opposed to them.
 
How to Use Pattern Interrupts for Influence 
Pattern interrupts are powerful tools for influence as well because they can send a person’s mind into
a malleable state that you can use to your advantage or for the benefit of the individual. For instance,
let’s say that you want to get a dog, but your spouse or roommate is afraid of dogs and don’t want to
have one in the house. 
By trivializing the logic by which a person associates a certain fear or emotion, you force the person
to question the validity of the association. This is called the spin-out technique of pattern interrupt
because it sends the person's way of thinking about a certain association into a spin. The person will

then realize regarding their fear of dogs or abandon their line of reasoning altogether as you have set
them on a new pattern through the spin-out interrupt. 
Everything we have discussed in this chapter can be used to get a person into a hypnotic trance. The
pattern interrupt method for inducing trance is an easy way to achieve a mild hypnotic state, but even
these mild states can be a fertile field for hypnotic suggestion. 
Make no mistake about it: getting a person off of their initial train of thought and onto another is a
form of hypnosis and psychological manipulation. It may seem simple, but just like an instrument, it
is easy to pick up but very difficult to master. 
Once you have practiced and become adept at using the pattern interrupt method for inducing
hypnotic trances, you are going to need to know what to do once you have a person in a trance, which
is what we will be going over in the following chapters.  
 

Chapter 6 Dark Persuasion
Persuasion is used around us all of the time. If you have ever watched an advertisement on TV or
online, or seen a billboard, you are used to a form of persuasion. But here, we are going to look at
persuasion on a more local level rather than looking at the ways that big businesses are going to try
and persuade you to look at their products and make a purchase. This is something that we all
recognize, so it isn’t a trick or dark manipulation. We are going to take a look at some of the ways
that a manipulator and others close to us can use the power of persuasion to get what they want,
without us even realizing it. 
Elements of persuasion
Like other types of control, some components are to be observed when it comes to persuasion. These
components assist to precisely identify which persuasion makes it clearer. The ability to convince
others is one salient feature that distinguishes persuasion from all other themes of dark psychology.
In most cases, the victim is allowed to make choices at will. Eventually, the persuasion tactics lead
them to change their will to that of the persuader. The topic can choose the manner they want to
believe, whether or not they want to buy a product, or whether they believe the proof behind the
persuasion is powerful enough to alter their minds. There are a few components in the persuasion that
assist to further describe what is while giving us a deeper understanding of this enigmatic theme.  
The first element of this theme is that persuasion is often symbolic. This means persuasion utilizes
words, sounds, and images to get the message across to the target victim. The logic behind this is
quite simple. For one individual to be able to persuade another into acting in a particular way, they
will need to show them why they should act in a said way and not vice versa. This is best achieved by
using word sounds or various images you can use sentences to start a debate or argument to prove
your point. Pictures are a great way to show the evidence needed to persuade someone to go one way
or the other. Some nonverbal signs are possible, but they are not as effective as using words and
images
 
The second key is that persuasion will be used deliberately to affect how others act or think. This one
is quite obvious; you don't use persuasion to get them to change if you don't deliberately try to affect
others. To get the topic to believe the same way they do, the persuader will attempt distinct strategies.
This could be as easy as having a discussion with them or presenting proof supporting their point of
perspective. On the other hand, to change the mind of the subject, it could involve much more and
include more deceptive forms.   
The distinctive thing about persuasion is that it enables some type of free will for the topic. In this
way, the topic is permitted to create its own decision. For the most part, they don't have to go for it,
no matter how hard somebody tries to persuade them of something. The subject might hear about the
best car to buy a thousand commercials, but if they don't like that brand or don't need a new vehicle
at that time, they won't go out and buy it. 
Think about it for a moment - if the subject is against abortion, how many people will come out and
say how great abortion is, it's not likely that the subject will change their minds. This enables much
more freedom of choice than is found in the other types of mind control, which could explain why,
when questioned, many individuals do not see this as a kind of mind control. Persuasion is a type of
mind control that can take place in many respects. While brainwashing, hypnosis and manipulation
must happen face-to-face, and in some instances in full isolation, persuasion may happen otherwise.  

Subliminal persuasion  
The word "subliminal" means underneath our consciousness. Subliminal persuasion means an
advertising message that is displayed below the threshold of awareness or consumer awareness to
persuade, persuade, or help people change their minds without making them aware of what is going
on. This is about affecting individuals with more than words. Some of the subliminal methods of
persuasion impact our stimuli with smell, eyesight, sound, touch, and taste. There are mainly three
subliminal methods of persuasion to affect anyone. 
They include;  
●
     
Building a relationship-building relationship makes the other person feel comfortable. This
will open up the other individual more. This can be accomplished through a healthy
observation strength that matches their mood or state. This helps create confidence  
●
     
Power of discussion–the power of a powerful, convincing person is much connected to an
advertiser's conversion. The correct words and inflections help you to be openly
straightforward.  
●
           
 Suggestive power-Associating useful and desirable stuff in discussion or interaction
enables an individual to become more open to fresh thoughts.  
Basic Persuasion techniques  
Some techniques can be utilized to make persuasion more successful. All victims are usually
presented with different forms of persuasion daily. A food manufacturing plant will work on getting
their victims to purchase a new product. At the same time, a movie company will focus on
persuading their victims to watch their latest movie projects. Three main techniques of persuasion
have been prevalent since the birth of this theme.  
Create a need  
This is one of the techniques that are often deployed by the manipulator to be able to get the victim to
change their way of thinking. This creates a need or rather appeals to a need that is already pre-
existing within the victim. If it is executed in a skilled way, the victim will be eating out of the
persuaders palm in no time. This means the manipulator will need to tap into the fundamental needs
of its victims, like the need for self-actualization. 
Food, for example, is usually something that we as humans need to survive, and prolonged lack will
pause as a big problem. 
If the agent can convince the subject that their store is the best, or if they can get more food or shelter
by switching their beliefs, there is a higher chance of success. 
 
Utilizing illustrative and words  
The choice of words one chooses to use comes a long way in the success of using persuasion. There
are many ways in which you can phrase sentences when talking about one thing. Saying the right
words in the right way is what will make all the difference when attempting to use persuasion.  
Tricks used by mass media and advertising  
The media use two main methods which they use to persuade the masses. First is through the use of
images, as well as the use of sounds.  

Images  
Our sighs and visual processing areas of the brain are very powerful. Just think about it for a minute,
have you ever thought of a person without ending up picturing how they look? It is because of this
that makes imagery and visual manipulation a preferred method by the media. Companies will often
include split-second images of their product or individual inserted into an advertisement that seems
quite innocent on the face value. This usually a form of subliminal persuasion. These split-second
images that are usually assumed for the most part usually end up taking some form of control of the
victim, which persuades them to purchase that particular service.  
Sound  
Sound is yet another trick that is used by media in the persuasion of unsuspecting victims. Some
people usually underestimate the powers that exist within the sound. But answer me this, how many
times have you heard a song somewhere only to have it loops through your mind continuously?
Songs usually influence us even though we are not aware of it despite knowing you are listening to it.
This is what the media tend to exploit in their quest for persuasion of the masses. 
There will often be several phrases skillfully hidden, and repeated in an advertisement song that will
most likely convince you to be inclined to prefer one company over the other. An example of this is
seen at McDonald's. The melody ‘I love it ‘is often repeated in a manner that persuades the victims to
constantly purchase their meals.  
Dark Persuasion Techniques to Be on the Lookout For  
After taking a look at the different types of persuasion and what they all mean, you may be able to
see why dark persuasion is such a bad thing and can be harmful to the victim. Being able to recognize
the different techniques that the manipulator may use can make it easier to understand when it is
being used on you.  
So, how exactly is a dark persuader able to use this idea to carry out their wishes? There are a few
different types of tactics that a dark manipulator is going to use, but some of the most common
options include:  
The Long Con  
The first method that we are going to look at is the Long Con. This method is kind of slow and drawn
out, but it can be effective because it takes so long, and it is hard to recognize or even pinpoint when
something went wrong. One of the main reasons that some people can resist persuasion is because
they feel that the other person is pressuring them, and this can make them back off. If they feel that
there is a lack of rapport or trust with the person who is trying to persuade them, they will steer clear
as well. The Long Con is so effective because they can overcome these main problems and give the
persuader exactly what they want.  
The Long Con is going to involve the dark persuader to take their time, working to earn the trust of
their victim. They are going to take some time to befriend the victim and make sure that their victim
trusts and likes them. This is going to be achieved by the persuader with artificial rapport building,
which sometimes seems excessive, and other techniques that will help to increase the comfort levels
between the persuader and their victim.  
As soon as the persuader sees the victim is psychologically prepared, then they start their attempts. It
starts in slow successions of convincing the individual; then, the victim manages to do as the

persuader wants. This is going to serve the persuader in two ways. First, the victim starts to become
used to persuasion by that persuader. The second is that the victim is going to start making that
mental association between a positive outcome and the persuasion. 
The Long Con is going to take a long period to complete because the persuader doesn’t want to make
it too obvious what they are doing. For instance, a recently widowed lady is deemed vulnerable
because of her age and from grief. After her loss, a man starts to befriend her. This man maybe
someone she knows from church or even a relative. He starts to spend more time with her, showing
immense kindness and patience, and it doesn’t take too long for her guard to drop when he comes
around.  
Then this man starts to carry out some smaller acts of positive persuasion that we talked about before.
He may advise her of a better bank account to use or a better way to reduce any monthly bills. The
victim appreciates these efforts and helps them get from their persuader and takes their advice. 
Over some time, the man then tries to use some dark persuasion. He may try to persuade her to let
him invest some of her money. She obliges because of the positive persuasion that was used in the
past. Of course, the man is going to work to take everything he can get from her. If the manipulator is
skilled enough, she may feel that he tried to help her, but the money is lost because he just ran into
some bad luck with the investment. This is how far dark persuasion can go.  
Graduality  
Often when we hear about acts of dark persuasion, it seems impossible and unbelievable. What they
fail to realize is that this dark persuasion isn’t ever going to be a big or a sudden request that comes
out of nowhere. Dark persuasion is more like a staircase. The dark persuader is never going to ask the
victim to do something big and dramatic the first time they meet. Instead, they will have the victim
take one step at a time. 
 
When the manipulator has the target only go one step at a time, the whole process seems like less of a
big deal. Before the victim knows it, they have already gone a long way down, and the persuader
isn’t likely to let them leave or come back up again.  
Let’s take an example of how this process is going to look in real life. Let’s say that there is a
criminal who wanted to make it so that someone else committed the crimes for them. Gang bosses,
cult leaders, and even Charles Manson did this same thing. 
This criminal wouldn’t dream of beginning the process by asking their victim to murder for them.
This would send out a red flag, and no one in their right minds would willingly go out and kill for
someone they barely know. Instead, the criminal would start by having the victim do something
small, like a petty crime, or simply hiding a weapon for them. Something that isn’t that big of a deal
for the victim, at least in comparison.  
Over time, the acts that the manipulator can persuade their victim to do will become more severe.
And since they did the smaller crimes, the persuader passes such actions to the victim (blackmailing).
Before the victim knows it, they are going to feel like they are in too deep. They will then be
persuaded to carry out some of the most shocking crimes. And often, by this point, they will do it
because they feel like they have no other choice.  
Dark persuaders are going to be experts at using this graduality to help increase the severity of their
persuasion over time. They know that no victim would be willing to jump the canyon or do the big

crime or misdeed right away. So, the persuader works to build a bridge to get there. By the time the
victim sees how far in they are, it is too late to turn back.  
Masking the True Intentions  
There are different methods that a persuader can use dark psychology to get the things that they want.
Disguising their true desires is very important for them to be successful. The best persuaders can use
this approach in a variety of ways, but the method they choose is often going to depend on the victim
and the situation.  
One principle that is used by a persuader is the idea that many people are going to have a difficult
time refusing two requests when they happen in a row. Let’s say that the persuader wants to get $200
from the victim, but they do not intend to repay the money. To start, the persuader may begin by
saying that they need a loan for the amount of $1000. They may go into some details about the
consequences to themselves if the persuader doesn’t come up with that kind of money sometime
soon. 
The victim may feel some kind of guilt or compassion to the persuader, and they want to help. But
$1000 is a lot of money, more than the victim can lend. From here, the persuader lowers their request
from $1000 to $200. Of course, there is some kind of emotional reason for needing the money, and
the victim feels like it is impossible to refuse this second request. They want to help out the
persuader, and they feel bad for not giving in to the initial request when they were asked. In the end,
the persuader gets the $200 they originally wanted, and the victim is not going to know what has
taken place.  
Another type of technique that the persuader can use is known as reverse psychology. This can also
help to mask true intentions during the persuasion. Some people have a personality that is known as a
boomerang. This means that they will refuse to go in the direction that they are thrown and instead
will veer off into different directions.  
If the persuader knows someone more of a boomerang type, then they can identify a key weakness of
that person. For example, let’s say that a persuader has a friend who is attempting to win over some
girl they like. The persuader knows that the friend will use and then hurt that girl. The girl is
currently torn between a malicious friend and an innocent third party. The persuader may try to steer
the girl in the direction of the guy who is a good choice, knowing that she is going to go against this
and end up going with the harmful friend. 
 
Leading Questions  
Another method of dark persuasion that can be used is known as leading questions. If you have ever
had an encounter with a skilled salesman, verbal persuasion can be impactful when it is deployed in
careful and calibrated ways. One of the most powerful techniques that can be used verbally is leading
questions.  
These leading questions are intended to trigger a specific response out of the victim. The persuader
may ask the target something like, “how bad do you think those people are?” This question is going
to imply that the people the persuader is asking about are bad to some extent. They could have
chosen to ask a non-leading question, such as “how do you feel about those people?”  
Dark persuaders are masters at using leading questions in a way that is hard to catch. If the victim
ever begins to feel that they are being led, then they are going to resist, and it is hard to lead them or

persuade them. If a persuader ever senses that their victim starts to catch what is happening, they will
quit using that one and switch over to another one. They may come back to that tactic, but only when
the victim has quieted down a bit and is more influenceable again. 
The Law of State Transference  
The state is a concept that is going to take a look at the general mood someone is in. If someone is
aligned with their deeds, words, and thoughts, then this is an example of a strong and harmonious
state. The law of state transference is going to involve the concept of someone who holds the balance
of power in a situation and can then transfer their emotional state onto the other person they are
interacting with. This can be a very powerful tool for the dark persuader to use against their victim.  
Initially, the influencer is going to force their state to match the state that their target naturally has. If
the target is sad, and they talk slowly, the influencer is going to make their state follow this format.
The point of this is to create a deep rapport with the target. 
 
After we get to this state match, the influencer is then going to alter their state subtly and see if they
have some compliance for the victim. Perhaps they will choose to speed up their voice to see if the
victim will speed up as well. Once the victim starts to show these signs of compliance, then this is an
indication that the influencer is at the hook point.  
When this hook point is reached - however long it takes - the influencer will change their state to that
of their victim. This could be an emotional state that the influencer wants. It could be positive, angry,
happy, or indignant. It often depends on what the persuader wants to help reach their goals. This
technique is an important one for a dark persuader because it is going to show the impact of
subconscious cues on the failure or the success of any type of persuasion.  

Chapter 7 Tips to read and Analyze people
Take a moment to imagine a time when the sight of someone sent a chill down your spine. You may
not have known why, but you were simply uncomfortable around the person that you were facing.
Despite your best attempts to identify the reasoning behind your problem, you found that there was
no particular reason that you could discern. The only thing you knew was that you were the only
thing afraid of the person in front of you and had no idea how to overcome them.  
There was a very good reason for this guttural reaction—your instincts were telling you that
something about the other person was not right. You didn’t need to know specifics, and all that
mattered to you was that your reactions were accurate. This is because all these guttural reactions
must do keep you alive. So long as that is managed, your instincts did their job.   
When you first look at someone, your unconscious mind goes through all sorts of information to
come up with what it assumes is a valid reading of the person. Of course, this all happens beneath
your conscious awareness. This means that you are entirely unaware of it as it happens, and yet, you
can respond to it without effort. Of course, reacting without second thoughts is a useful trait in a
survival setting. You are not trying to rationalize what and why when in a survival setting. You
simply react on impulse without wasting valuable time that could be the difference between life and
death.  
However, if you are not in a life-and-death situation, do you want to be acting on impulse? Will your
impulses help you discern whether the person at the interview is lying or simply uncomfortable about
something? Or to determine how your partner is feeling during an argument? 
There are limitless reasons that being able to rationally understand what is going on in someone
else’s mind is critical, even if you already have a decent gut reaction. Ultimately, when you can
analyze someone calmly and consciously be aware of why you are uncomfortable or what is putting
you on-edge, you are better prepared to cope with the problem at hand. This is because you can act
rationally. You can strategize on how to better react in the most conducive manner that will allow you
to succeed in the situation.  
This means that in the modern world, when things are very rarely life or death situations, making an
effort to switch to responding rationally and consciously is almost always the best bet. You will be
able to tell when someone is setting off your alarm bells because they seem threatening, or because
they seem deceptive. You will be able to find out what the problem is to respond appropriately.   
Why Analyze People
Analyzing people is something that is utilized by several people in different capacities. The most
basic reason you may decide that you wish to analyze someone is to simply understand them. When
you have an in-built technique of understanding others, you will discover that having a cognitive
instead of an emotional connection is critical to establishing a true connection with someone else’s
mind.  
Consider for a moment that you are trying to land a deal with a very important client. You know that
the deal is critical if you hope to keep your job and possibly even get a promotion, but you also know
that it is going to be a difficult task to manage. If you can read someone else, you can effectively
allow yourself the ability to truly know what is going on in their mind. 

Think about it—you will be able to tell if the client is uncomfortable and respond accordingly. You
will be able to tell if the client is being deceptive or withholding something—and respond
accordingly. You can tell if the client is uninterested, feeling threatened, or even just annoyed with
your attempts to sway him or her, and you can then find out how to reply.  
When you can understand the mindset of someone else, you can self-regulate. You can fine-tune your
behaviors to guarantee that you will be persuasive. You can make sure that your client feels
comfortable by being able to adjust your behavior to find out what was causing the discomfort in the
first place.
 
Beyond just being able to self-regulate, being able to read other people is critical in several other
situations as well. If you can read someone else, you can protect yourself from any threats that may
arise. If you can read someone else, you can simply understand their position better. You can find out
how to persuade or manipulate the other person. You can get people to do things that they would
otherwise avoid.  
Ultimately, being able to analyze other people has so many critical benefits that it is worthwhile to be
able to do so. Developing this skill set means that you will be more in touch with the feelings of
those around you, allowing you to assert that you have a higher emotional intelligence simply
because you come to understand what emotions look like. You will be able to identify your own
emotions through self-reflection and to learn to pay attention to your body movements. The ability to
analyze people can be invaluable in almost any setting.  
How to Analyze People  
Though it may sound intimidating, learning to analyze other people is not nearly as difficult as it may
initially seem. There are no complicated rules that you need to memorize or any skills that you need
to learn—all you have to do is learn the pattern of behaviors and what they mean. This is because
once you know the behaviors, you can usually start to piece together the intent behind the behaviors. 
You can begin to find out exactly what it is that someone’s eyes narrowing means and then begin to
identify it with the context of several other actions or behaviors as well. You can find out what is
intended when someone’s speech and their body language do not match up. Body language rarely lies
when people are unaware of how it works, so you can often turn to it for crucial information if you
are interacting with other people.   
The reason this works to understand people is because it is commonly accepted that there is a cycle
between thoughts, feelings, and behaviors. Your thoughts create feelings, and the feelings you have
automatically influence your behaviors, as you can see through body language.
 
Most of the time, this is an entirely unconscious cycle. You are unaware of it happening. However,
several schools of therapy have chosen to identify and utilize this cycle, such as cognitive-behavioral
psychology. When you can recognize that this cycle exists, you can take advantage of it—you can
begin to utilize your understanding of the cycle to follow it in reverse.   
Effectively, you will be looking at behaviors that people display and then tracing them back to the
feelings behind them. This is why body language is so important to understand. When you can
understand what is going on with someone’s behavior, you can understand their feelings. When you
understand their feelings, you can begin to find out the underlying thoughts that they have. This is
about the closest thing to mind reading that you can ever truly attain.  

To analyze other people, you have a simple process to get through—you must first find out the
neutral baseline of behavior. This is the default behavior of the person. You must then begin to look
for deviations in that neutral behavior. From there, you try to put together clusters of behaviors to
find out what is going on in the mid of someone else, and then you analyze. This process is not
difficult, and if you can learn how to do so, while also learning how to interpret the various types of
body language, you will find that understanding other people could never be easier.   
Establish a neutral baseline behavior set  
The most important aspect of being able to analyze someone else is through learning how to identify
their baseline behavior. If you can do this, you can effectively allow yourself to identify how that
person behaves in a neutral setting. Effectively, you will learn what that person’s quirks may be. 
For example, someone who happens to be reserved or particularly timid is likely to show several
common signs of discomfort, even by default. They may cross their arms to shield their body, or
stand defensively and refuse to make eye contact. As you will learn later through reading, this is a
common body language that is regularly exhibited by those who are lying and do not know how to
cover their tracks. However, the timid person is probably not lying if their behavior by default
involves crossing arms and refusing to make eye contact.   
Because people’s baseline personality types and quirks vary so drastically from person to person, this
becomes a critical first step, and you must make it a point to never skip it. Otherwise, you would
assume that any shy person must be trying to deceive you. Getting that picture of baseline personality
and nonverbal communication quirks are crucial. 
Identify deviations from neutral behaviors   
Once your baseline has been established, you can begin to identify any deviations from it. This
means that you can find out which of the behaviors that you are seeing do not match up with what
you have come to expect via your initial observations. This stage can occur during all sorts of
interactions. You may ask a question and then observe to see what the response will be to determine
whether that person is answering truthfully. You can probe and look for signs of discomfort. You can
effectively test to see how convincing you are being when you are trying to persuade someone to do
something.   
Identify clusters of deviations  
Of course, just identifying those individual deviations is not always enough. You must also make it a
point to recognize clusters of the deviations to get the true picture. When you master the art of
reading body language, you will see that much of human body language can be interpreted in
different ways depending on the context. Often, you need to get that context from looking at other
behaviors that are occurring in conjunction with the behaviors you are analyzing. For example, there
are several behaviors in deception that could have several meanings. Still, as soon as they occur
together, you can usually infer that there is some level of deception occurring, which means that you
need to proceed with caution. 
 
Analyze  
Finally, as you identify those clusters of deviations from the original, neutral behavioral baseline, you
can start to find out what they mean. You can start to trace it back to find out whether or not the
person is honest or how they are feeling. When you begin to analyze, that is when you truly get the

real snapshot of the thoughts inside the person’s mind. You will be able to piece together whether the
person has a problem in certain settings based upon seeing general repeated responses. You will be
able to tell what is intimidating to them, or what seems to consistently motivate them to keep
working toward their goals. In going through this stage, you can start to find out exactly what is
needed to influence or manipulate them, if you should choose to do so.  
When to Analyze People  
Analyzing people is one of those skills that can be used in almost any context. You can use it at work,
in personal relationships, in politics, religion, and even just in day-to-day life. Because of this
versatility, you may find that you are constantly analyzing people, and that is okay. Remember, your
unconscious mind already makes snapshot judgments about other people and their intentions, so you
were already analyzing people, to begin with. Now, you are simply making an effort to ensure that
those analyses are made in your conscious mind so you can be aware of them.   
Now, let’s take a look at several different compelling situations in which being able to consciously
analyze someone is a critical skill to know:  
In parenting: When you can analyze other people, you can begin to use those skills toward your
children. Now, you may be thinking that a child’s mind is not sophisticated enough to get a reliable
read on, but remember, the child’s feelings are usually entirely genuine. In essence, they have their
feelings that they have, and though the reason behind those feelings may be less than compelling to
you as a parent, that does not in any way dismiss the feelings. By being able to recognize the child’s
emotions, you can begin to understand what is going on in your child’s mind, and that will allow you
to parent calmly and more effectively.  
In relationships: When you live with someone else, it can be incredibly easy to step on someone
else’s toes without realizing it. Of course, constantly stepping on the toes of someone else is likely to
lead to some degree of resentment if it is never addressed. Yet, some people have a hard time
discussing when they are uncomfortable or miserable. This is where being able to analyze someone
else comes in—you will be able to tell what your partner’s base emotions are when you interact,
allowing you to play the role of support.  
In the workplace: Especially if you interact with other people, you need to be able to analyze other
people. You will be able to see how your coworkers view you, allowing you to change your
behaviors to get the company image that you desire. Beyond just that, you may also work in a field
that requires you to be able to get goodreads on someone in the first place. 
Perhaps you are a doctor—you may need to be able to tell how someone is feeling and whether they
are honest with you, to begin with. Maybe you are a lawyer, and you need to be able to analyze the
integrity of your client and of those that you are cross-examining. Maybe you are a salesperson who
needs to be able to tell if you are compelling in your attempt to close.  
In public: When you are interacting with people in public, you need to be able to protect yourself.
When you can read other people, you can find out whether you are safe or whether someone is
threatening or suspicious. This means that you can prepare yourself no matter what the situation is to
ensure that you are always ready to respond.  
In an interview, you may find that read an interviewer’s body language can give you a clue on when
to change tactics or move on to something else. You will be able to tell how you are being taken
simply by watching for body language and other nonverbal cues.  

When watching presentations: When you are watching a presentation, speech, or address, you may
fall into the habit of simply taking everything at face value. After all, why would anyone ever make it
a point to tell you something that is not true? This is because you are falling for one of the principles
of persuasion—an appeal to authority. 
In other words, you deem the person speaking authority and therefore deem them to be trustworthy.
Instead, make an effort to see the other party as what they truly are by learning to read their body
language. You can tell if the politician on television is uncomfortable or lying simply by learning to
analyze their behaviors.  
In arguments: When you are arguing with someone else, usually, emotions are running high on both
ends. No one is thinking clearly, and things that were not meant can be said. However, when you can
analyze people, you can start to find out when someone else is getting emotional to disengage
altogether. You will be able to identify the signs that you should disengage and try again later to
ensure that you are not stepping on toes or making things worse. 
In self-reflection: When you can analyze other people, you can start to analyze yourself as well. This
means that you can stop and look at your body language to sort of check-in with yourself and find out
what is going on in your mind. Sometimes, it can be difficult to identify exactly how you are feeling,
but this is the perfect way to do so in a pinch. If you can stop and self-reflect, you can identify your
emotions.  
In self-regulation: Identifying your emotions then lends itself to the ability to self-regulate. When you
are, for example, in a heated argument and feel yourself tensing up and getting annoyed, you may be
able to key into the fact that you are getting annoyed and respond accordingly. Conversely, when you
can analyze other people, you can look at them and see how they are feeling. This means that if you
can see that you are intimidating or making someone uncomfortable, you can make the necessary
changes to your actions.    
How to defend from manipulators 
We are true, human. It's precise because of this that we get to dwell on the view of others in
everything we do. We always want and love validation from others so we can subconsciously decide
whether or not we will be depressed. In this millennial age, the norm has been just bragging about
their wealth in social media. 
Many of these braggings are often the reality. In the end, this leads to a loose connection with reality.
This kind of self-deception can dig deep into the human spicy, and one day a victim of this may wake
up and realize that only in her servants does her perfect world exist. Depression will follow suit
tightly. 
The first step towards protecting yourself against persuasion and manipulation is to confront the
scenario and to take the position of disrupting any illusions. You won't be able to go through your
lives usually. You must be careful that you regulate your own decisions. Then choose consciously to
see stuff for what they are. This agreement, which seems too good to be true, could be. The other
thing you should do is trust your instincts certainly. 
Sometimes you have been told a lie most competently that you can believe. But at a specific
instinctive rate, you can feel an imbalance between what should, what is, and then what is projected
on you. There might be no physical sign that something is wrong, but you think that something is
wrong. 

The next significant thing when you ask questions is to hear the answers. This can sound
unbelievable because you're going to listen to the responses. The reality is that we can deceive
ourselves by choosing the responses we receive. We say that we look, but we only care about the
reactions that we want to hear and not the answers that we receive. 
You may have broken your illusions, but some of you still hold on to the comfort of those illusions.
You would not hear the real answers to your questions because of the pain of dealing with the
scenario. Actual hearing needs a certain feeling of detachment, but not reality this time
around.                
You must get rid of your feelings. Your detachment from our emotions would lead you to the next
step in processing the new data logically. It can make situations more complicated than they have to
behave irrationally. It makes it so hard for your exit strategy to allow all feelings to cool down and
spring. 
The irrational part of you may want to let everything go hell when you face reality. Your justified
anger can encourage you to take short-term measures to calm your feelings. But you may come to
regret these actions in the long term. I’m not saying that you should deny your emotions; I'm not
saying that you do not act on these emotions. First, deal with the situations and later deal with your
emotions. 
Act Fast   
It's lovely that you have got to grips with the truth of things. But it is so much more to defend
ourselves against these dark, manipulative strategies. While you try to protect yourself against the
claws of these manipulators, it is often intense and exciting at first. This intensity of these feelings
can slowly lead to negation. 
The longer you take any action, the quicker the denial will begin, and if it occurs, there is a strong
likelihood that you may fall back and end up being trapped on the same internet. You can avoid this
by taking action as soon as you know someone is attempting to manipulate you. This can be done in
the most natural way possible, as when informing a close friend about some facts of the specific
scenario, all the events that will eventually lead you to liberty can be so started. 
You should understand that after choosing to behave, the fabric is made of sturdier material than
glass. The illusion can work its way back to your core by using fragmented parts of your feelings to
solve it. When a liar is caught in a lie, it may try to hire others to implement that lying if they think
they no longer hold you.
A disappointing partner with whom you broke stuff lately would attempt to use the other shared
links in your lives to change your mind. You are going to need both your logic and instincts if you
want to get out of this unscathed. While the reality is that when you find that you have always been
lied to, you get emotionally scarred, so you are still left untouched by the scenario.
 
However, priority should be provided to follow the path that enables you to go to this toxic condition
without further harm. You're mentally all over the location. Rage, rage, hurt, and disappointment are
the tip of the iceberg. But you must logically believe. Keep your head above the water and warn
yourself.  
Get Assistance Quickly  

When you are trapped in the manipulations of others, confusion is one of the feelings you would
encounter. This enables you to obscure your rational thinking and makes you feel helpless. You could
even question the truth of what you're currently facing. If you continue to have those doubts, it will
lead to denial. 
You will likely want to say that you have the whole scenario wrong. You misunderstood specific stuff
and came to the incorrect conclusion. Such thinking would lead back to the weapons of the
manipulator. Resist the desire to accept a second opinion. In a health crisis, people go to another
physician to get a second view. This clears any doubts concerning your diagnosis and a confirmation
of what the best course of therapy is for you.  
Similarly, receiving an opinion from another person can assist you in discerning reality and your next
steps. Just remember, it's better to go to someone who's proven to be interested in your best many
times. The next step is to confront the perpetrator if you have the assistance that you need. I
recommend you choose the scene or place for this. 
Select a location that provides you the upper hand. That would involve some cautious planning on
your part. If the offender exists in the cyber world, especially if the person has victimized you, you
must engage the police and the authorities concerned. Do some of your research to find out the truth.
After you face the offender and take the measures you need to get out of the scenario, the healing
method must begin rapidly. The extent and severity you have been harmed, manipulated or abused do
not matter. You must go through it and wait for your wounds to heal instead of ruminating about the
past.               
 
Time would offer you sufficient distance from your experience, but it would seldom be healing for
emotional scars if you learned something about this book. If you don't do anything, an unhealthy scab
might form over the wound that makes you vulnerable, if not more than you have experienced. Speak
to a consultant, take part in the treatment, and actively facilitate the healing process, regardless of
what you choose. It will not occur overnight, but you are sure you get nearer each day and every
phase of your treatment.  
Have Confidence in Your Instincts  
While your brain interprets signals based on facts, logic, and experience, it operates in the opposite
direction by filtering data through an emotional filter. The only thing that takes vibrations is your
intestine that cannot pick up either the heart or the brain. If you can groom up to the stage where you
acknowledge your inner voice and are trained to do so, you will reduce your likelihood of becoming
seduced by individuals who try to manipulate you. It's difficult to acknowledge this voice at first. 
The reason this happens is that we have allowed doubt, self-discrimination, and our inner critic to
take over. This voice or instinct relies on your survival. So, trust that your brain cells will still be able
to process stuff in your immediate area when it starts. 
Some individuals call it intuition, some call it instinct, and they do the same, particularly when it
comes to relationships. You must acknowledge that starting to trust your instincts may not always
make logical sense. If you've ever been doing something and felt like you were suddenly watched,
then you understand what I mean.              
You have no eyes at the rear of your head, nobody else in the space, but you have the small shiver
running down the back of your neck, and you're looking at the "sudden understanding." That is what
I am talking about. I am talking about that. 

The first step in connecting with your instinct is to decode your mind with your voices. You can do
this with meditation. Forget about chatting, she said. Concentrate on your middle. You’re the voice
that you understand. Next, be attentive to your ideas. Don’t just throw away your head's eclectic
monologue. Instead, go with the stream of thoughts.  
Why do you believe in somebody somehow? How do you feel so deeply, even though you knew each
other for only a few days? What’s your nagging feeling about this other individual? You become
more sensitive to your intuition as you explore your ideas and know when your instincts start and
respond to them. 
You might have to learn to stop and believe if you are the individual who, at present, wants to make
stimulating choices. This break provides you the chance to reflect and assess your options. The next
part is hard, and many people couldn't follow it. You can't sail or navigate this step, unfortunately.
You need to be open to the concept of self-confidence and of trusting others to believe in your
instinct. 
Your lack of confidence would only make you paranoid, and when you're paranoid, it's not your
instincts that kick. It's your fear. Every molehill tends to transform fear into a mountain. You have to
let go of your concern, embrace trust, and make your fresh relationships lead. You can hear the voice
better without the roadblocks of fear in your mind. Finally, your priorities must be
reassessed.               
You may not see the past if your mind is at the forefront of money and material property. Any contact
you have with individuals would be viewed as individuals who try to use you, and it will quickly
become truth if you live so often. You understand how you draw what you believe into your lives. If
you always think about material wealth, you will only attract individuals like yourself. 
Look at your interactions with this new view with this guide; the old, the new, and the outlook. Don’t
enter into a partnership you expect to play. Be accessible to them, whether it is a company
relationship, a romantic relationship, or even a regular knowledge. You can receive the correct
feedback from your intuition. Do not think this, too, that if you encounter suspects, your gut will tell
you to go in the opposite direction.  

Chapter 8 One last word
There is so much to learn about the psychological nature of people to prey on others. The truth is that
all of humanity has the potential to victimize others. Yes, some try to sublimate this tendency while
others choose to act upon their impulses. However, the most important thing for you is to understand
your thoughts, perceptions, and feelings that lead to predatory behavior so that you can learn to
control yourself and use it for good.
One thing that is important to note is that manipulation often happens in families with parents who
have narcissistic tendencies. In the case where there is parental alienation, a parent may use their
child as a psychological weapon to abuse the other parent. The truth is that mind control, a form of
dark psychology, happens in a system where people are – such as churches, families, and
workplaces. 
The key ingredients of dark psychology are people, narcissistic leaders, lieutenants, scapegoats, and
keeping secrets. What is not allowed in this kind of system is having a free spirit or free-thinking
mentality. It is such kind of people who are banished from the community of manipulators. 
According to dark psychology, some people commit evil acts, not because of money, power, sex,
retribution, or other known factors. Instead, they choose to do it because they are horrid – without a
goal. In other words, for them, ends do not justify the means. These are the kind of people who injure
others for the sake of doing it.
Within each one of us lies this potential!
You and I have the potential to harm others without cause, purpose, or explanation. This potential is
considered complex – one that is even hard to define. 
One thing you must note is that your shadow self is always standing right behind you – just outside
your view. When you stand indirect light, you cast a shadow, right. The shadow is the part of yourself
that you can’t really see. Think about it for a moment, what lengths do you go to just to protect your
self-image from unfamiliarity and flattery?
 
The truth is, when you see another person’s shadow, you realize that one can show gifts in one area
of life and remain unaware of their evil behaviors in certain areas. Everyone is susceptible to this.
Over the years, I have learned that working with my shadow has not only been a challenging but
rewarding process too. It is by looking at your darker side that you gain greater creativity,
authenticity, personal awakening, and energy. It is this subjective process that contributes to your
maturity. 
Realize that you cannot eliminate your darker side. Instead, it stays with you as your darker brother
or sister. When we fail to see our darker self, that is when trouble ensues.  
While our shadow self can operate on its own without our awareness – more like it is on autopilot – it
causes us to do things we would not do voluntarily, and that is the reason behind regret. You find
yourself saying things you wouldn’t normally say. Your body language expresses emotions you
would consciously not feel. In short, when you ignore your dark side, you end up hurting your
relationships – with friends, spouse, or family, among others. 
When you see others and yourself exactly as you are, you view the world around you with a clearer
lens. Integrating your shadow self into everyday activities helps you approach your true self, hence

offering you a realistic evaluation of who you are. In other words, you will not perceive yourself as
being too small; neither will you feel as though you have a high moral ground than others. 
The reward of doing this plays a significant role in healing splits in your mind. It also helps unlock
untapped potential and a world of new possibilities for your growth and development. 
So, what are you still waiting for?
It is time to embrace your dark side so that you allow the light inside you to radiate without fear of
hurting others of being all that you are meant to be.  Your dark side will help you overcome
manipulation so that you can shine brighter!
Good Luck!                    
© Written by:
JOSEPH GRIFFITH

HOW TO INFLUENCE PEOPLE
Use the Laws of Power:
Analyze and Win Friends Using Subliminal Manipulation, Persuasion, Dark
Psychology, Hypnosis, NLP secrets, Body Language, and Mind Control Techniques
Robert Dale Goleman - Daniel Brandon Bradberry - Travis Greene Carnegie

Introduction
Human behavior has to do with the way humans act and interrelate
with each other. It is based on the influence of many factors, like
genetic makeup, civilization, and individual principles and
attitudes. Human attitude is the answer of people or groups
of humans to inner and outer stimuli. It has to do with the selection
of each physical act and obvious feeling connected with people, but
also with the entire human race. While detailed features of
one's character and nature could be way more reliable, further
behaviors are bound to change themselves as one age and develop
their personality.  
Behavior is not only influenced by factors like age, feelings,
perceptions, and attitudes, but they also have to do with our inner
world, principles, worldviews, and characteristics. Behavior in
social circumstances, another part of human attitude, investigates
the paramount importance of social communication and cultural
grounds. Other powers contain morals, social
setting, authority, influence, and compulsion. 
A survey has shown that about 90 percent of the entire human
population can be classified into four basic personalities:
optimistic, pessimistic, trusting, and envious. Envious people make
for 30 percent compared to 20 percent each for the other
personalities. Influencing human attitude has been something
coveted even in ancient times. Even in ancient societies, it is
considered important that someone had the ability to influence
others and persuade them about their views and ideas.  
The Ancient Greeks and Romans after their thought that it was very
important to be able to speak to the public and make them see your
point or agree with you. In Athens of the classical years, there were

many orators who would teach younger men better public
speaking.  
Times have changed, but it is always desirable to be an influential
person.  
A leader, someone who can influence others, change their views on
things, and in general, inspire and be more likable. And while most
people like the idea of being this person, talking with many of them
have let me know that they have no idea how to do it. Some are not
even confident about their abilities, while others think that the
change they want will never happen.  
But the only way for a change to happen is that we actually want
and welcome it. And by purchasing this book, you have proven to
yourself that you really want it.  
Factors Influencing Human Behavior
 
Before we venture into your new influential skills, let’s take a look
at the factors which regulate human reaction and behavior.  
While every one of us is different, there are a few factors which, in
general, are the most important ones for the way things influence
us.  
The key factors affecting an individual’s manner in personal as well
as social life are: 
Skills
Gender
 
Racial and cultural background
Acknowledgment
Perception
Behavior

Abilities 
 
Abilities are the qualities either a person is born with or learns from
the outer environment.  
These can be very important for the life of a said person. These
traits are widely classified as: 
 
Intellectual 
 
 
 
Physical 
 
 
Self-awareness 
 
 
So, these abilities and skills do influence our behavior, but if we
want to see how, we have to know what these skills are. 
Intellectual abilities - Having an intellectual capacity is being
smart, capable of reason, and being good at verbal
communication.  
Physical skills − Motor skills, stamina, body goals.   
Self-awareness abilities - How a person perceives themselves, their
abilities, the things they can do, what they want, and what they
stand for in life.  
It goes without saying that the traits of each person are very
important for how they fare later in life and how they influence
those around them.  
Gender 
 
Past examination shows that men and women are pretty much
equal in their work performance and in daily life in general.  
Nevertheless, the differences between genders are still underlined
by many people in society.  

This creates a predicament for women, who are considered prime
child caregivers and try to comply with society’s view of their
role.  
Racial and Cultural Background
 
As a race, we define people who share similar physical traits.  
It influences people based on those external features.  
Culture, however, has to do with the values, morals, customs, arts,
and tastes of people who either share a racial background or belong
in the same group, party, organization, or institution.  
Race & culture have always influenced society to a great extent. 
 
The ordinary errors such as attributing attitude and stereotyping in
accordance with an individual’s race & culture fundamentally
influence an individual’s behavior. 
Perception 
 
Perception is how we take in the stimuli from our environment.  
We all look in the same way, but we don’t see it in the same way.  
The same stimuli can produce many reactions to different people.  
Perception can take these forms: 
Of sound − Decoding the sound signals we get.  
Of speech − How do we perceive the sounds and words heard and
change them in our head to mean something as far as language is
concerned.  
Taste 
− Telling between the different tastes with the signals
coming from the taste buds. 
Touch − Telling things by feeling them.  
Other senses − Balance, pain, sense of time, and many more!  

Social − How people perceive the world based on social norms and
groups.   
Attribution 
 
Attribution is, in other words, how we connect someone’s
personality, culture, race, gender, and so on and so forth with the
actions they do and the way we perceive those. 
This framework is based on three criteria: 
Agreement − When people would react in a similar way.  
Distinctiveness − How easy is this behavior to be correlated with
personality traits?  
Constancy − How often does the behavior happen? Is it always the
same person doing the same things or it’s a one-time thing?  
Attitude 
 
Attitude is the learned response that guides one’s reactions in some
situations with similar characteristics. 
Now, you have a small idea of what influences you and others
when you react to things around you.  

Chapter 1 Understanding influence
What is influence?
Influence – a definition: The potential to have an impact on the life,
growth or actions of somebody or something or the result itself.
"Effective autism interventions in institutions and APS have a more
general role to be played in promoting an effective and successful
public sector. When they work, these techniques allow
organizations more effective, more responsive to the needs and
interests of the people and more productive, creative and scalable.
However, it is often regarded as the task of professionals of human
resources to solve the problem of jobs and maintenance with
disabilities. Nevertheless, they do not have key decision-making
positions in many situations. Human resources professionals who
actively facilitate jobs of disabilities in their organizations typically
do so by using a range of influential skills and strategies, partnering
with business sectors and creating corporate support.
Every influence includes an agreement. For influence, we must be
able to give meaning to what the person is dedicated to and pursue
opportunities to show that importance.
● Influence also includes the resolution of issues, breaking around
potential obstacles to successful and lasting outcomes.
●The role of groups of people and teams in an APS (approved
practice settings) setting generally involves manipulating them.
This is especially the case with teams which can hire persons with
disabilities. The higher the importance of hiring disabled persons in
your departments, the more the problem becomes standard
management rather than an add-on.

●Influence in disability employment invariably involves us in
changing perceptions, attitudes and working environments.
●Finally, encouraging people with disabilities to boost their job
success is leadership and role modelling–demonstrate how people
with disabilities are supported at work to create a positive team that
will support you, your own company and eventually the APS.  
Influencing is a skill that we all have, and like any skill, it can be
developed. Effective development occurs through understanding
and appreciating:
●The components of effective influence.
●The context in which you influence.
●The need for you to apply and practise your skill for it to further
develop.
In the APS context, effective influencing is supported by three
capabilities:
●An ability to respond to and target particular forms of
communication.
●An understanding of the psychology of persuasion that sits behind
our willingness to be influenced.
●An ability to develop simple influencing strategies and carry them
out.
Types of influence
Each experience, communication, emotion, disposition and
behavior that you have is able to influence others. Four main types
of control occur. There are harmful, optimistic, constructive and
life-changing factors. You want to stay away from the first two

styles when moving to the second factors. Let's talk about each of
them
.
Negative influence
The first form is destructive and the most dangerous. Many with
this kind of control tend to concentrate on their position, strength or
title. They are often self-centered and confident. These are the
representatives who have difficulty in getting people to follow
them, support them or listen to them. We affect the team or
organization poorly or badly; the team produces a negative
influence primarily because of the poor results. Do everything you
can to stop this kind of effect.
Neutral influence
The actions and attitudes of this kind of influence seem neither to
contribute nor to take away what they do. If an individual with such
authority were in a group of people, they would not have to do
anything to differentiate or be known as a member. They don't lead,
help or take over proactively. These are those who have the role or
title but do not optimize it so that the company or the organization
succeeds. Individuals (employees) often have to guide and inspire
themselves to produce results because the boss will not control
them.
Note, you will want these first two causes to be minimized. Let's
see the kind of influence that you should aspire for.
Positive influence
A person with this sort of influence adds value and allows the
individuals with whom you interact happier through the actions and

attitudes of that leader. We constantly guide, build and maintain ties
with others; all of them are involved in trying to encourage,
educate and lead people to better results. We want to make a
positive impact on the lives of the people we serve to help them
succeed in all areas of their lives. Positive influence requires a high
degree of purpose, energy and effort, but all will be and will do
better when you lead
.
Life-changing influence
This is the pinnacle and most precious kind of influence. Few
individuals have this level of influence or touch it. This needs years
or decades to live well and confidently so that life improves. Any
highlights include Mother Teresa, Oprah Winfrey, John C.
Maxwell, and Abraham Lincoln.
The life-changing effect is about influencing someone in a manner
where their lives are affected forever because of what you did and
said. The positivity of those you impact stays influenced even after
you quit the team or organization. It needs to invest your entire life
and energy in supporting and encouraging others to achieve and
succeed in life and job. It involves establishing your own wishes
and needs to add value to others. It's worth the effort because you'll
have loyal and dedicated people who are willing to do anything for
you.

Chapter 2 Reading Body Language
From our outward appearances to our body developments, the
things we don't state will in any case pass on volumes of
information. It has been immediate that visual correspondence may
account 60% to sixty five percent of all correspondences.
Understanding visual correspondence is imperative, anyway it's
furthermore fundamental to think to elective prompts like setting.
In a few cases, you should investigate the flag as a gaggle rather
than have practical experience in one activity. 
Non-verbal communication is the implicit segment of
correspondence. Our signals, outward appearances and stance, for
instance. When we are prepared to "read" these signs, we can
utilize it to further our potential benefit for instance. It will
encourage you to know the whole message of what someone is
making an endeavor to make reference to, and to fortify our
consciousness of individuals' responses to what we are stating and
do. 
We can moreover utilize it to direct our visual correspondence, so
we will in general appear to be a great deal of positive, sharing, and
congenial. 
Being able to communicate well is extremely important when
wanting to succeed in the personal and professional world, but it
isn’t the words you say that scream. It is your body language that
does the screaming. Your gestures, posture, eye contact, facial
expressions, and tone of voice are your best communication tools.
These have the ability to confuse, undermine, offend, build trust,
draw others in, or put someone at ease. 

There are many times when what someone says and what their
body language says is totally different. Non-verbal communication
could do five things: 
●Substitute – It could be used in place of a verbal message. 
●
 
Accent – It could underline or accent your verbal message. 
●Complement – It could complement or add to what you are saying
verbally. 
●Repeat – It could strengthen and repeat your verbal message. 
●Contradict – It could go against what you are trying to say
verbally to make your listener think that you are lying. 
Some regular non-verbal communication signs.
 
The following are important hints to enable you to figure out how
to read non-verbal communication and better understanding the
individuals you connect with. 
Concentrate the Eyes
 
When human activity is towards someone, concentrate as to check
whether the person in question looks or appearance away. Failure
to make direct eye-to-eye connections will demonstrate boredom,
impartiality, or maybe misleading – especially once someone
appearance away and to the viewpoint. If an individual shows up
down, on the contrary hand, it as a rule demonstrates anxiety or
acquiescence. Additionally, check for extended students to check
whether someone is reacting positively toward you. Understudies
stretch as mental element exertion will in general increment, in this
manner if someone is focused on someone or one thing they like,
their students can precisely expand. Understudy widening will be

hard to discover, anyway underneath the right conditions you
should be prepared to spot it. An individual's squinting rate can
even say a lot concerning what's going on inside. Squinting rate
will increment once people are thinking a ton or are pushed. Now
and again, swelled flickering rate shows lying – especially once
over the span of contacting the face (especially the mouth and
eyes). Looking at issue will guide a need for that thing. For
instance, if someone looks at the entryway this could demonstrate
they need to leave. Looking at an individual will demonstrate a
need to address that person. When it includes eye conduct, it
furthermore briefs that trying upwards and to the right
communicated in language that demonstrates an untruth has been
told, while attempting upwards and to one side shows the
individual is telling the truth. The clarification for this can be that
people search, and to the right ones exploitation, their creative
mind to come up with a story, and appearance up and to one side
once they are reviewing a genuine memory. 
Look at the Face – Body Language Touching Mouth or Smiling
 
In spite of the fact that people are a ton certainly to deal with their
outward appearance, regardless you'll have crucial nonverbal
signals if you focus. Give explicit consideration to the mouth once
making an endeavor to disentangle nonverbal conduct. A direct
grin visual correspondence fascination procedure will be a hearty
signal. Grinning is a critical nonverbal prompt to take a gander at
for. There are various sorts of grins, together with genuine grins
and affectation grins. A genuine grin draws in the whole face,
while an imagining grin exclusively utilizes the mouth. A genuine
grin proposes that the individual is upbeat and getting a charge out

of the corporate of the people around the person in question.
Covering the mouth or contacting the lips with the hands or fingers
once talking is additionally a marker of lying. 
Focus on nearness
 
Concentrate to let someone stand or sit by you to check whether
they read you positively. Standing or sitting in nearness to someone
is perhaps one in all the best pointers of affinity. On the contrary
hand, if someone backs up or moves away once you move in
closer, this may be a proof that the alliance isn't common
.
Check whether the other individual is reflecting you
 
Reflecting includes emulating the contrary individual's visual
correspondence. Once interfacing with someone, check to analyze
if the individual mirrors your conduct. For instance, in case you're
sitting at a table with someone and lay an elbow on the table, hold
up ten seconds to analyze if the contrary individual will be
proportional. Another regular reflecting motion includes taking a
taste of a beverage at a comparable time. If someone imitates your
visual correspondence, this can be a terribly reasonable sign that
the person is making an endeavor to decide an affinity with you.
Endeavor dynamical your body stance and check whether the
contrary individual changes theirs similarly. 
Watch the head development
 
The speed at that an individual gestures their head once you are
talking demonstrates their understanding – or absence of. Slow

hanging shows that the individual is entranced by what you're
discourse correspondence and requirements you to keep talking.
Fast hanging shows the individual has identified enough and
necessities you to end talking or give that person a location to talk.
Tilting the zenith sideways all through a communicated in language
will be a proof of enthusiasm for what the contrary individual is
discourse correspondence. Tilting the apex in reverse will be a
proof of doubt or vulnerability. People also brings up with the face
at others significance they're captivated by proclivity with the
individual.
Take a gander at the other individual's feet
 
A piece of the body any place people more often than not "release"
fundamental nonverbal prompts is the feet. The clarification that
individuals coincidentally impart nonverbal messages through their
feet is therefore that occasionally they focus on their outward
appearances and higher body situating which imperative pieces of
information are unveiled by means of the feet.
Watch for hand signals
 
Like the feet, the hands release fundamental nonverbal prompts
once attempting a visual correspondence. This can be a critical tip
once reading visual correspondence along these lines focus on the
current next half. Watch visual correspondence turns in pockets
once standing. Quest for explicit hand signals, similar to the
contrary individual placing their hands in their pockets or hand on
head. This may show something from apprehension to out and out
trickiness. Oblivious educate demonstrated by hand motions can

even say a lot. Once making hand signals, an individual can with
reason inside the general course of the individual offer a partiality
(this nonverbal prompts is indispensable to take a gander at for all
through gatherings and once connecting in gatherings). Supporting
the apex with the hand by laying an elbow on the table will
demonstrate that the individual is tuning in and is keeping the
zenith still to center. Supporting the zenith with every elbow on the
table. When an individual holds an item between the people in
question and along these lines the individual they're collaborating
with, this is a boundary that is intended to dam out of the contrary
individual. For instance, if two people are talking and one
individual holds a stack of paper in front of that person, this can be
demonstration of check in nonverbal correspondence. 
Inspect the situation of the arms
 
Think about an individual's arms as the door to the body and in this
way oneself. If an individual folds their arms while interfacing with
you, it's occasionally observed as a guarded, impediment signal.
Crossed arms can even demonstrate nervousness, weakness, or a
shut personality. Whenever crossed arms are throughout a genuine
grin and generally speaking loosened up stance, at that point it will
demonstrate all is guaranteed, loosened up edge. When someone
puts their hands on their hips it's for the most part they need to
apply strength and is utilized by men a great deal than women.
 
Body parts
Lower Body
The arms share a lot of information. The hands share a lot more,
but legs give us the exclamation point and can tell us exactly what
someone is thinking. The legs could tell you if a person is open and

comfortable. They could also who dominance or where they want
to go. 
Legs Touching
When a person is standing, they will only be able to touch their
bottom or thighs. This can be done seductively, or they could slap
their legs as if they are saying “Let’s go.” It might also indicate
irritation. This is when you have to pay attention to the context of
the conversation. This is very important. 
Pointing Feet
Look at the direction of a person’s feet to see where their attention
is. Their feet will always point toward what is on their mind or
what they are concentrating on. Everyone has a lead foot and it all
depends on their dominant hand. If a person is talking that we are
interested in is talking, our lead foot will be pointing toward them.
But, if they want to leave the situation, you will notice their foot
pointing toward an exit or the way they want to go. If a person is
sitting during the conversation, look at where their feet are pointing
to see what they are truly interested in. 
Smarty Pants
This is a position where someone tries to make themselves look
bigger. They will usually be seated with their legs splayed open and
leaning back. They might even spread their arms out and lock them
behind their head. This is normally used by people who feel
dominant, superior, or confident. 
Shy Tangle
This is usually something that women do more than men. Anyone
who begins to feel shy or timid will sometimes entangle their legs
by crossing them under and over to try to block out bad emotions
and to make themselves look smaller. There is another shy leg twirl

that people will do when they are standing. The actual act of this
movement is crossing one leg over the other and hooking that foot
behind their knee as if they are trying to scratch an itch. 
Upper Body
Upper body language can show signs of defensiveness since the
arms could easily be used as a shield. Upper body language could
involve the chest. Let’s look at some upper body language. 
Leaning
If someone leans forward, it will move them closer to another
person. There are two possible meaning to this. First, it will tell you
that they are interested in something, which could just be what you
are talking about. But, this movement could also show romantic
interest. Second, leaning forward could invade a person’s personal
space; hence, this shows them as a threat. This is often an
aggressive display. This is done unconsciously by powerful
people. 
The Superman
This is commonly used by bodybuilders, models, and it was made
popular by Superman. This could have various, meanings
depending on how a person uses it. Within the animal world,
animals will try to make themselves look bigger when they feel
threatened. If you look at a house cat when they get spooked, they
will stretch their legs and their fur stands on end. Humans also have
this, even if it isn’t as noticeable. This is why we get goosebumps.
Because we can’t make ourselves look bigger, we have to come up
with arm gestures like putting our hands on our waist. This shows
us that a person is getting ready to act assertively. 
This is normal for athletes to do before a game or a wife who is
nagging their spouse. A guy who is flirting with a girl will use this

to look assertive. This is what we call a readiness gesture. 
The Chest in Profile
If a person stands sideways or at a 45-degree angle, they are trying
to accentuate their chest. They might also thrust out their chest,
more on this in a minute. Women do this posture to show off their
breasts and men will do this to show off their profile.
 
Outward Thrust Chest
If someone pushes their chest out, they are trying to draw attention
to this part of their body. This could also be used as a romantic
display. Women understand that men have been programmed to be
aroused by breasts. If you see a woman pushing her chest out, she
might be inviting intimate relations. Men will thrust out their chest
to show off their chest and possibly trying to hide their gut. The
difference is that men will do this to women and other men. 
Hands
Human hands have 27 bones, and they are a very expressive part of
the body. This gives us a lot of capabilities to handle our
environment. 
Reading palms isn’t about just looking at the lines on the hands.
After a person’s face, the hands are the best source for body
language. Hand gestures are different across cultures and one hand
gesture might be innocent in one, country, but very offensive in
another. 
Hand signals may be small, but they show what our subconscious
is thinking. A gesture might be exaggerated and done using both
hands to show a point 
Control
If a person is holding their hand with their palms facing down, they
might be figuratively holding onto or restraining another person.

This could be an authoritative action that is telling you to stop now.
It might be a request asking you to calm down. This will be
apparent if someone places their dominant hand on top of a
handshake. If they are leaning on their desk with their palms flat,
this shows dominance. 
If their palms face outward toward another person, they might be
trying to fend them off or push them away. They might be saying
“stop, don’t come closer.” 
If they are pointing their finger or their entire hand, they might be
telling someone to leave now.
 
Greeting
Our hands get used a lot to greet other people. The most common
way is with a handshake. Opening up the palm shows they don’t
have any weapons. These get used when saluting, waving, or
greeting others. 
During this time, we get to touch another person and it might send
various signals. 
Dominance can be shown by shaking hands and placing the other
hand on top. How long and how strong they shake the hand will tell
you that they are deciding on when to stop the handshake. 
Affection could be shown with the duration and speed of the
handshake, smiles, and touching with the other hand. The similarity
between this one and the dominant one could lead to a situation
when a dominant person will try to pretend they are just being
friendly. 
Submission gets shows by placing their palms up. Floppy
handshakes that are clammy along with a quick withdrawal also
show submission. 

Most handshakes use vertical palms that will show equality. They
will be firm but won’t crush and for the right amount of time so
both parties know when they should let go. 
Waving is a great way to greet people and could be performed from
a long distance. 
Salutes are normally done by the military, where a certain style is
prescribed. 
Holding
A person who has cupped hands shows they can hold something
gently. They show delicacy or holding something fragile. Hands
that grip will show desire, possessiveness, or ownership. The
tighter the fist, the stronger they are feeling a specific emotion. 
If someone is holding their hands, they are trying to comfort
themselves. They could be trying to restrain, themselves so they
will let somebody else talk. It could be used if they are angry and it
is stopping them from attacking. If they are wringing their hands,
they are feeling extremely nervous.
 
Holding their hands behind their back will show they are confident
because they are opening up their front. They may hide their hands
to conceal their tension. If one hand is gripping the other arm, the
tighter and higher the grip, the tenser they are. 
Two hands might show various desires. If one hand is forming a
fist but the other is holding it back, this might show that they would
like to punch somebody. 
If someone is lying, they will try to control their hands. If they are
holding them still, you might want to be a bit suspicious.
Remember that these are just indicators and you should look for
other signals. 

If someone looks like they are holding onto an object like a pen or
cup, this shows they are trying to comfort themselves. If a person is
holding a cup, but they are holding it very close and it looks like
they are “hugging” the cup, they are hugging themselves. Holding
onto any item with both hands shows they have closed themselves
off from others. 
Items might be used as a distraction to release nervous energy like
holding a pen but they are clicking it off and on, doodling, or
messing with it. If their hands are clenched together in front of
them but they are relaxed, and their thumbs are resting on each
other it might be showing pleasure. 
Shaping
Our hands are able to cut our words into the air to emphasize the
things we say and their meaning. We are trying to create
visualization. 
If a man is trying to describe the fish he caught during his fishing
trip, he might try to show the shape by indicating it with his hands.
He might also carve out a certain shape that he wants his ideal mate
to be. Other gestures might be cruder when they hold specific body
parts and move sexually.
 
Face
People’s facial expression could help us figure out if we trust or
believe what they are saying. The most trustworthy expression will
have a slight smile and a raised eyebrow. This expression will sow
friendliness and confidence. 
We make judgments about how intelligent somebody is by their
facial expressions. People who have narrow faces with a prominent
nose were thought to be extremely intelligent. People who smile

and have joyous expressions could be thought of as being
intelligent rather than someone who looks angry. 
Mouth
Mouth movements and expressions are needed when trying to read
body language. Chewing on their lower lip might indicate a person
who is feeling fearful, insecure, or worrying. 
If they cover their mouth, this might show that they are trying to be
polite if they are yawning or coughing. It might be an attempt to
cover up disapproval. Smiling is the best signal, but smiles can be
interpreted in many ways. Smiles can be genuine, or they might be
used to show cynicism, sarcasm, or false happiness. 
Watch out for the following: 
Their lips are pursed.
If a person tightens their lips might be a sign of distaste,
disapproval, or distrust. 
They bite their lip.
People will bite their kip if they are feeling anxious,
worried, or stressed. 
They cover their mouth.
If a person tries to hide a reaction, they might cover their
mouth to hide a smile or smirk. 
Their mouth is turned up or down.
Changes in the mouth that are subtle might be a sign of how the
person is feeling. If their mouth is turned up a little bit, they might
be feeling happy or optimistic. If their mouth is turned down, they
could be feeling sadness, disapproval, or grimacing. 

Negative Emotions
The silent signals that you show might harm your business without
you even knowing it. We have over 250,000 facial signals and
700,000 body signals. Having poor body language could damage
your relationships by sending other person signals that you can’t be
trusted. They might turn off, alienate, or offend other people. 
You have to keep your body language in check and this takes a lot
of effort. Most of the time, you may not know that you are doing it
and you might be hurting your business and yourself. 
To help you manage your signals, there are several body languages
and speech mistakes that you can learn to prevent. Here are some
mistakes you have to avoid: 
Not Enough Response
If you are talking with someone, you need to make sure you listen
to them. This means you have to smile, nod, and make eye contact.
Even if two people don’t agree with what each other are saying,
you need to let them know that you have heard what they said. This
is showing them respect. If you don’t do this, you will leave a bad
impression. 
Using the Word “But”
Constantly using the word “but” while you are talking can cause
many problems. Most of the time, this will sound like you are just
trying to make us some excuses or you don’t care about what they
are saying. You might say: “I am sorry that your product didn’t get
you on time, but you know how the weather is.” This statement
doesn’t show you are sorry. You are placing the blame on the
weather instead of addressing the real problem.
 
Personal Space

Invading another person’s personal space can have detrimental
results. One good example men always seem to invade a woman’s
personal space whether they know it or not. This could cause some
harassment lawsuits. The best space to keep between you and
others is about one and a half feet. Never treat another person’s
space as if it were your own. 
Talking Too Fast
Blinking fast or talking too quickly shows nervousness and distrust.
Try to pause between each sentence and let others finish their
sentence before your interrupt. Eye contact is very important. If
you have a hard time looking people in the eye, look in the center
of their forehead. It looks like eye contact without all those
uncomfortable feelings. 
Not Listening
It doesn’t matter what you do for a living, you are going to have to
talk with people some time or other. The main thing that will make
or break any relationship is not listening. Listening could impact
your relationship with employees, suppliers, performance, and
sales better than other forms of communications. 
Slumping
If a person slumps in their seat, they show that they don’t have any
energy or confidence. It is important to show passion and let others
know that you believe in yourself. If you are hunched over or
slumping, you are sending the wrong message. If your posture is
strong, you are going to feel energetic and it will be a win for all
people involved. 
Checking Your Phone
If you are in a public gathering, put away your phone. Everybody is
addicted to their phones now, and this is extremely rude. Try

engaging with others and stop checking your phone every few
minutes. If you have an emergency, that’s fine. It is easier to make
connections with others if you don’t have things distracting you.
 
Face is Scrunched-Up
You might not realize that your face is scrunched-up or that your
brow is furrowed. This can make others think you are intimidating
or hostile. You can discourage others from being open or it might
make them get defensive. You can verbally assure them that you
understand and support what they are saying. 
Not Making Eye Contact
I used to work with someone who would immediately stare into
space anytime somebody talked to them. They claimed it was
easier for them to focus on what others were saying if they didn’t
look at who was talking. People might use different communication
types but always make eye contact. Even if you can keep moderate
eye contact, it will communicate confidence, interest, and will put
everybody at ease. 
Not Smiling
Do you know that smiling can make you feel happy? People like to
believe the opposite. If you can keep a nice smile on your face, you
will feel more confident and people will want to work with you. If
you realize you want to make a face, turn that face into a smile. 
Glancing Around
Everybody has encountered someone who will constantly look
around while they are talking to you. It probably makes you think
that they are trying to find someone else to talk to. Don’t be this
person. Everyone you talk to needs to be treated with respect. 
Handshake Too Weak or Strong

Handshakes are normally the first impression that someone gets
from you. If your handshake is too weak, it will show you aren’t
professional and it might be new to them. If your handshake is too
strong, it might warn them that you are being too aggressive. Try to
find a happy medium so that you will make a good impression. 
When you observe other people carefully, you can pick up on their
emotion by their Non-verbal signals. These indicators are not a
guarantee. Contextual clues might be used, in addition to what they
are saying and what is happening around you at the time.

Chapter 3 How to Analyze Those around You
Your capacity to analyze people might determine whether you will
succeed or fail. Human beings are social animals. We almost
always need the input of other human beings to achieve our
important life goals.
Human conduct, the potential, and communicated limit in regard to
physical, mental, and social movements during the periods of
human life. 
People, as other creature’s species, have an average life course that
comprise of progressive periods of development, every one of
which is described by an unmistakable arrangement of physical,
physiological, and social highlights. These stages are pre-birth life,
outset, youth, youthfulness, and adulthood (counting seniority).
Human improvement, or formative brain science, is a field of
concentrate that endeavors to portray and clarify the adjustments in
human psychological, enthusiastic, and social abilities and working
over the whole life expectancy, from the hatchling to seniority.  
Most logical research on human advancement has focused on the
period from birth through early immaturity, attributable to both the
rate and greatness of the mental changes saw during those stages
and to the way that they come full circle in the ideal mental
working of early adulthood. An essential inspiration of numerous
specialists in the field has been to decide how the coming full circle
mental capacities of adulthood were come to during the former
stages.
But what happens if we take on people that are unfit for their roles?
We suffer defeat. Thus, it is of utmost importance to be able to
analyze people. The following are some benefits of analyzing
people.  

It helps you know your allies  
Whether you like it or not, the entire world will not take a liking to
you. Some people will be for you, and other people will be against
you. To maximize your chances of success, you must work with
people who like you while ignoring those who dislike you. Your
capability to analyze people will help you single out who are in
favor of you. Considering that people can be pretty complex, your
capability to understand their true persona cannot be overstated.
For instance, if you're pursuing a career that involves serving the
public, you will find yourself surrounded by all sorts of people.
Clearly, not all of those people wish you well. Nevertheless, in the
same breath, not all of them are against you. In such a situation,
you have to exercise a lot of care, lest you end up working with
your enemy who will eventually bring you down. If you tell your
secrets to the enemy, he will run out there and spill it all. If you get
close enough to the enemy, he might sow bad thoughts into your
mind, which will see you taking the wrong direction. All of these
can be avoided by sharpening your capability to tell good people
apart from bad people. Of course, this is not a skill you can develop
overnight. You have to practice repeatedly until you are good at
spotting the fake ones.  
It helps avoid conflict  
In most cases, conflict arises because of a disparity in expectations.
In a relationship, if the man expects one thing from his mate, and
his wish is never met, it can cause him grief. And the vice versa is
true. These are the kind of scenarios that cause conflict in a
relationship. If the man had taken the time to understand what their
partner is really like, they would not be shocked later time, when
their partner behaved a certain way. Thus, it is important to
understand the person that you're getting into a relationship with,
for this will minimize your fights. Analyzing a person helps you

understand their triggers. You get an opportunity to decide whether
you want to involve yourself with them. If you're looking for a life
partner, there are some things that you cannot compromise on, and
so, you must analyze potential candidates to find out whether they
possess these characteristics. If you ignore this step, you are at the
risk of having a tumultuous marriage. Understanding what other
people's personalities are like is a form of educating yourself on
how to act or not act in front of these people. When you learn that
someone is not into corny jokes, you will stop yourself from acting
in a corny way, and in the same breath, when you realize that
someone has a very fun attitude, you will try not to be a bore.  
It allows you to appreciate diversity  
Human beings are incredibly diverse. And this is a good thing. You
cannot really understand this diversity until you pay attention to
other people. Someone who comes from Asia might exhibit certain
personality traits that differ from the average American. This is not
a chance to bash the Asian for being different from you, but rather,
it is an opportunity to appreciate the uniqueness of the Asian.
People who bash others for being different from them are simply
narrow-minded. Analyzing people gives you the power to
recognize and accept our differences. It makes you a more cultured
person. If you travel to other parts of the world, you will easily fit
in because you have a mindset of adjusting. On the other hand,
someone who is opposed recognition and appreciation of diversity
will find himself at loggerheads with people who are unlike him.  
It helps you fine-tune your goals  
We don't live in a vacuum. The actions, words, and behaviors of
other people will affect us. Every person has an idol that they look
up to. Your idol is the person that you would want to trade lives
with. Apart from giving you hope; your role model gives you an

opportunity to study various qualities, you will require in that line
of work. For instance, if you want to become a journalist, you must
know that it is not just about having language skills, but you must
improve your personality, so that more people will not only be
comfortable around you, enough to open up and let out their
secrets. When you take on the practice of keenly observing other
people, you are in a position to determine which career path suits
your qualities.  
It helps you understand the motivations of people  
At the end of the day, there's a motive behind every action, but
these motives are not always obvious. Some people will instantly
reveal who they are, but there are people who will try to downplay
their real image. But if you're a good observer, you can always tell
what is going on. By taking your time to analyze people, you are in
a much better position to understand what their goals are. Having
this knowledge helps you take self-preserving decisions.
Manipulative people are known for acting or speaking in a way that
won’t betray their manipulative agenda. Unless you are extra
careful in your analysis of their persona, you might miss their
motive, and become another one of their victims. 
 
It helps you understand a person's strengths  
Every human being has both weaknesses and strengths. The reason
some of us become successful is that we capitalize on our
strengths. Failure to capitalize on our strengths can make us feel
disillusioned about life. The skill of identifying our strengths is
important in identifying other people's strengths. Thus, when you
are looking for someone to work with, you will be in a position to
identify their strengths and weaknesses, which will make your team
of high quality.  
It helps in predicting behavior  

Your capability to analyze personalities is vital in predicting how
various people will act under different circumstances. Life is not
one smooth ride. There are many challenges encountered on the
road. In addition, for the most part, success depends on how we
handle challenges. Being able to analyze various personalities
empowers you to understand how people will react to challenges.
For instance, if you notice that someone has the markings of a
violent personality, or has anger issues, you might want to skip on
that person because their violent nature will become soon apparent.
 
So why measure conduct specifically?
 
1. It can change.   
Character is fixed and far-fetched to change, so it endeavors sense
to center our endeavors at the point where changes can be made:
our conduct. Since conduct is inside our locus of control,
confirmed criticism on conduct offers a constructive lead for self-
improvement, indicating where and how we can adjust to address
the issues of a specific circumstance or occupation job. 
2. It tends to be watched.
Character is what's within; conduct is the thing that turns out, and it
influences – and is influenced by – everyone around us. Estimating
conduct enables us to concentrate on the words and activities which
shape our collaborations with others. Ostensibly, we aren't
specialists on another person's character – we don't have the
foggiest idea about what's happening "off camera" – yet we can
remark on what we can see before us. 

By giving and getting input on practices inside a group, we move to
a majority rule, evidential procedure. We can authenticate – or can't
help contradicting – each other, and give proof of the practices
being referred to from our understanding. This can depersonalize
troublesome discussions and remove the warmth from clashes
which may somehow or another drop into slanderous assaults. It
can likewise give a noteworthy learning opportunity – your
onlookers may reveal qualities you didn't have any acquaintance
with you had.
 
3. it’s situational.  
Our conduct propensities impact the sorts of work we may be the
most appropriate to, and whom we work best with. A few people
carry on diversely at work than they do at home, regardless of the
fundamental character is one and the equivalent. Estimating
conduct in a specific setting enables talk to concentrate on the
working environment, while all the more wide-extending
estimations may sloppy the waters. 
4. it’s down to earth.
Belbin isn't a mark to apply or a container to place somebody in,
it's a language intended to help individuals better see one another.
When individuals comprehend the Team Roles and the essential
idea driving them, this language can be utilized as a shorthand to
depict how various types of work may be drawn nearer or what
kind of commitments are required at a specific gathering. 
5. It makes people and groups tick.
Getting qualities and shortcomings makes individuals increasingly
drew in, more joyful and progressively gainful at work, advancing

a positive workplace and diminishing turnover costs. 
6. It tends to be anticipated.
Since we can watch conduct, we can anticipate it as well.
Individuals may not generally carry on as we expect in each and
every way – as people, we generally have the ability to amaze each
other – however extensively, we sink into methods for working,
conveying and identifying with others that can be required to
continue as before over some undefined time frame. This implies
we can utilize conduct styles for enrollment and teambuilding, to
recommend whether somebody may be a solid match for a specific
activity job or to join a current group.
 
7. It could easily compare to knowledge in foreseeing achievement.
The most ideal approach to manufacture an extraordinary group
isn't to choose people for their smarts or achievements. However, to
figure out how they convey and to shape and guide the group with
the goal that it pursues effective correspondence designs. 
8. It tends to be extrapolated.  
Character comes down to the individual – it's their point of view
toward the world. By its very nature, conduct is progressively
liquid and interconnected with others, so it loans itself normally to
assemblage. We can total key Team Role data to plan and assemble
groups, or guide the conduct inclinations of two people to look at
how well an association may function. 
How to Master the Art of the First Impression
 

Since it possibly takes seconds for somebody to choose in case
you're dependable and skillful, and research demonstrates that early
introductions are exceptionally hard to change, the weight that
accompanies meeting new individuals is reasonably extraordinary. 
If you try to extend certainty yet haven't first settled trust, your
endeavors would blowback. Nobody needs to wind up regarded
however loathed. If somebody you're attempting to impact doesn't
confide in you, you're not going to get much of anywhere; indeed,
you may even evoke doubt, since you seem to be manipulative. 
When you perceive the significance of reliability over capability,
you can assume responsibility for the early introductions you make.
Here are a few hints to enable you to get that going whenever you
meet another person: 
1. Let the individual you're meeting talk first.
Give them a chance to lead the pack in the discussion, and you can
generally pose great inquiries to help this along. Taking the floor
immediately indicates the strength, and that won't enable you to
assemble trust. Trust and warmth are made when individuals feel
comprehended, and they should do a ton of sharing for that to
occur. 
2. Utilize positive non-verbal communication.
Getting to be mindful of your motions, articulations, and manner of
speaking and making certain they're sure will attract individuals to
you like ants to an excursion. Utilizing an eager tone, uncrossing

your arms, keeping in touch, and inclining towards the speaker are
generally types of positive non-verbal communication, which can
have a significant effect. 
3. Set away your telephone.
It's difficult to assemble trust and screen your telephone
simultaneously. Nothing turns individuals off like a mid-discussion
instant message or even a snappy look at your telephone. When
you focus on a discussion, center all your vitality around the
discussion. You will find that discussions are progressively
pleasant and compelling when you submerge yourself in them.
 
4. Set aside a few minutes for casual banter.
It may sound minor, however research demonstrates that beginning
gatherings with only five minutes of casual chitchat improves
results. Many trust manufacturers, for example, casual chitchat, can
appear to be an exercise in futility to individuals who don't
comprehend their motivation. 
5. Practice undivided attention.
Undivided attention means focusing on what the other individual is
stating, instead of arranging what you're going to state
straightaway. Posing quick inquiries is an incredible method to
show that you're truly focusing. In case you're not checking for
comprehension or posing a testing inquiry, you shouldn't talk. Not
exclusively does pondering what you're going to state next remove
your consideration from the speaker, commandeering the

discussion demonstrates that you think you have something
increasingly essential to state. This implies you shouldn't bounce in
with answers for the speaker's issues. It's human instinct to need to
help individuals, yet what a great deal of us don't understand is that
when we hop in with counsel or an answer, we're closing the other
individual down and crushing trust
.
6. Get your work done.
Individuals adore it when you know things about them that they
didn't need to share. Not frightening stuff, however straightforward
certainties that you set aside the effort to gain from their LinkedIn
page or organization site. While this may not work for chance
experiences, it's vital when a first gathering is prepared of time, for
example, a prospective employee meet-up or a conference with a
potential customer. Discover as much as you can pretty much every
one of the individuals you're meeting, their organization, their
organization's essential difficulties, etc. This exhibits ability and
dependability by featuring your drive and duty.
The truth of the matter is, if you can identify with any of those,
however you don't reliably look to improve your kin reading
abilities, you're subverting your profession and your pay. It's that
basic. The abilities required to read individuals are extremely
straightforward and incredibly viable. In any case, there are
numerous misconceptions and misapplications of the aptitudes, the
two of which can bring you not exactly wanted outcomes. 

Chapter 4 Understanding the people and world around us
Sensation and Perception
Sensation and perception play an essential role in how we translate
and interpret what goes around our world. While they may look
similar, they have a different purpose. For sensation, it refers to the
process of sensing our environment via taste, touch, sound, and
smell. This information is then sent to our brains unprocessed, then
perception takes over, which is interpreting the sensations and then
bring meaning to everything we have around is. Describing the two
will allow us to see the role they play in psychology and how
senses work together with how they are being interpreted.  Let's
start with the sensation first. 
By definition, the sensation is identified as the process whereby our
senses compile information and transfer it to the brain. Sensing of
information includes room temperature, a distant train, the
brightness of the light, the smelling of perfume, and when we hear
the conversation. There are some other senses we aren't capable of.
For example, we aren't capable of noticing radio waves,
microscopic parasite walking in our body, x-rays, and radio waves.
And we are only being made to sense what we are capable of.
Why?
The answer is in the following threshold ;. 
1. Absolute Threshold. This is a point where our senses notice
something. That is the softest sound and the slightest touch.
Whatever goes below this, isn't notified. 
2. Difference Threshold. When we sense a stimulus, we have to
identify if the stimulus us changing, But how? The difference

threshold handles that. It is the amount of change that is needed to
determine that a change has occurred.
 
3. Signal Detection. This is an act to detect what we want to focus
on and ignore every other thing. For example, if you have to focus
on something in a crowded room with several people talking. 
4. Sensory Adaptation. This is concerned with a stimulus that has
remained unaltered for a time when this happens; we want to notice
it.  Take for instance, when you are you sense a perfume, but after a
while, you've stopped seeing, why? They remain unchanged, it has
become less sensitive, and you adapted to. 
That's for sensation, let's check into perception. 
Perception means the interpretation of what we take in via our
senses. This makes us unique from animals and even from other
persons. 
It was being figured out that to translate what the brain receives
through senses; the brain organizes the information gotten into the
specific group to disallow unwarranted repetition. 
Retaining Constant Perceptual Constancy 
It wouldn't make sense if each time an object is altered. We have to
process it completely, and fortunately, it doesn't happen that way
too. Humans can maintain constancy in the ability to perceive.
That, in turn, make perception constancy to be defined as the
ability to see things different yet we wouldn't have to reinterpret the
object's properties. 
Now we can sum it up that sensation is identified as the input about
the physical world that is established by our sensory receptors, and
perception is recognized as the process whereby mind organizes,

interprets, and selects sensation. So, if we sense something and
there is not interpretation, definitely, there is no point sensing it.
How is this applicable in real life? In life, there is both positive and
negative perceptions, which can influence one's success. And
what's the key? 
Always work on your mind as a garden, weeding out negative
perception every day and leaving the flower, the plant to stay. The
more you allow negative thoughts to retain, the more negative
perception you will have. Therefore, it is essential you change the
way you view your life. You have to work harder so you can
experience the change. Just keep staying grateful for what you
possess. What method, always list out five positive things that
work out in your favor every day. You will be expanding your
positive perception ability. Our understanding of the world around
involves learning. But what is learning and how does it connect
with conditioning. Read on to get the answers
.
Learning and Conditioning
Our nervous system is also involved in the learning process. But
how is it defined, and what are other concepts? Learning, by
definition, is an adaptive function by which our nervous system
alters concerning stimuli in the environment, thereby bringing a
change in our behavioral responses and allowing us to function in
our environment. 
Initially, the process is established in the nervous system in a bit to
respond to environmental stimuli. As a result, neural pathways can
be strengthened, activated, even pruned, and all these can bring
about a change in our behavioral responses. 

When it comes to reflexes and instincts, they are innate behaviors.
That is, they occur naturally and wouldn't demand to learn.
However, learning, in turn, is an alteration in behavior that results
from experience.  In the field of behavioral psychology, it involves
mainly on measurable behaviors that are learned; instead, if
working hard to understand internal states like emotions and
attitudes. 
But in learning, there are three fundamental aspects, they are
classical conditioning, operant conditioning, and observational
learning. The first two, classical and operant conditioning, forms if
associative learning, their associations are developed between
events that happen together. Whereas the third one, observational
learning, is learning by observing others. Let's get into details about
the three types of learning. 
Classical Conditioning.
Classical conditioning defined as the process whereby we learn to
relate stimuli and events that regularly happen together. As a result,
we then learn to anticipate what will happen next. Take, for
example; some experts have trained animals like to associate the
sound of an object to the presence of food. For instance, Ivan was
able to condition his dog to identify the relationship between the
sounds of a bell with the presence of the meal. This was achieved
because each time; the dog hears the sound of the bell, what comes
to mind is that it’s time for lunch. So in a sense, that scene makes
the dog anticipate the meal. 
Operant Conditioning.
This is defined as the learning process in which behaviors are
reinforced or punished, thereby strengthening a response. So, any
act that is backed up with pleasant consequences is more likely to

be repeated, whereas actions that are followed by unpleasant
experiences are less likely to be repeated. So it merely means that
either punishments or rewards can impact behavior. 
Observational Learning.
This type of learning occurs when a person observes the behavior
of others and imitate those behaviors. For example, it is common
for children to learn or imitate adults, so if there is a right attitude
that you needed to emulate, applying observational learning to be
the best way to achieve it. 
It is being used both in the therapeutic and advertising industry. In
the commercial industry, they often feature attractive models. Thus,
they apply the principles of associative learning.
Attention
In the world of cognitive psychology, attention is a concept that is
being studied, and it refers to how we actively process particular
information in our environment. Most times, many sensations are
going on around us; they demand attention. Unfortunately, our
attentional resources aren't limitless; it has boundaries. Therefore,
we need to find out how we can experience all these sensations and
still lay focus on just one particular thing, and how can we employ
the scarce resources at our disposal to make sense of the world
around us. 
As defined by psychologist experts, attention is defined as taking
possessing by the mind, in bright and vivid form out of what may
appear to be numerous simultaneously possible objects or lines of
thought. Or it could be defined as the withdrawal of some things to
deal or pay closer attention to others.
 
Attention isn't about focusing attention on one particular thing; it
also includes ignoring a great deal of fighting for information and

stimuli. Attention makes it possible to tune out information,
perception, sensation that aren't in correlation with the moment and
then focus energy in the information that is vital. 
Additionally, the attentional system offers the ability to focus on
something specific in our environment while we send our
incoherent details. In some situations, our attention might be
centered on a particular thing which will cause us to ignore other
things. That is, when we lay focus on something in the
environment, we at times miss the several things that are right in
front of us. And that is why most times in a room, you will be so
engrossed that you won't notice that someone is approaching you or
has walked inside the toilet. 
But to understand more in-depth how attention works, and how it
influences your perception, you have in mind these few points out
that are highlighted.
Attention is Limited.
Researchers have found that what influences our ability to stay on a
given task include how interested we are in the stimulus and the
number of distractions that surround us. Attention is limited when
it comes to capacity and duration.  So multitasking doesn't work
well, because our attention is limited.
Attention is Selective.
Since it is understood that attention is limited. We need to be
selective about what we decide to focus on. We need to be selective
in what we attend to. This stage is so fast that we hardly remember
that we've neglected what happens in our environment. 
Attention is a Fundamental Part of The Cognitive System.
Attention is even present at birth. This occurs when orienting
reflexes help to determine which events in our environment need to

be attended to. And right from that stage, the orienting reflex
continues to be of immeasurable benefits to us throughout our life
span
.
Understanding this fact about attention enrich our productivity, it
stops us from spending more energy on multitasking, instead of
focusing on one thing at a time, which will enhance positive
thinking and lead to success eventually. 
Intelligence
Intelligence is an aspect that is often talk about in psychology,
yet, there isn't one specific standard to define what intelligence is.
Some have maintained that intelligence is single, others say that it
is a general ability, while some still insist that intelligence covers a
wide range of aptitudes, talents, and skills. Regardless of the
opinions that are being held today, there is consensus agreement
about intelligence. They are:
1. Learning. The ability to acquire, retain, and apply
knowledge- these are vital parts of learning. 
2. Identify Problems. To put knowledge to use, the likely
problems have to be identified and be cared for. 
3. Solve Problem. The output of learning is taking the
knowledge and use it to solve the recognized problem. 
Intelligence includes various mental abilities like planning,
reasoning, logic, and problem-solving. 
Also, isn't something we can hear or see or even taste? But we can
peer into the result of intelligence. However, a big question cones
that are there a way to increase one's intelligence? Fortunately, the
answer is yes. Psychologists who figured cognitive training and

pharmacological intervention, so the approach to aid the
improvement of the brain. 
There are incredible ways to improve one's intelligence;
1. Exercise. Regular. If you want to improve your intelligence, you
have to exercise your brain and body. Like a muscle that requires
training, your brain does need too. When you use, you are
energizing your body, and this can lead to a wave of energy to your
brain. Exercise aids you in concentrating better and making
learning more accessible. Therefore, the more you use your brain
positively, the more skilled and a great thinker you become. Your
ability to focus will be enhanced when you exercise your brain. 
2. Meditation. What meditation accomplishes is neuroplasticity. As
soon as this I'd launched, the brain can make physiological changes
for the better. Additionally, meditation enhances gray and white
brain matter. Their functions differ. For example, gray matter is
responsible for processing information, while white matter
enhances communication skills. 
3. Watch Less of no Television. I know this might be a sad fact, but
more relaxed you admit, the better.  When you watch television,
you think less, and thus you aren't putting your mental power into
use. So, if you crave for relaxation, read a book or play a crossword
puzzle game. 
4. Reading Challenging Selections. Reading improves one's ability
to understand and encourage critical thinking. Thus, select more
books among the ones that offer aptitude. 
Examples of these books include newspapers, classic novel, multi-
content periodicals and when you come in contact with new words,
check them up in your dictionary or ask an expert who knows and
can explain explicitly about the topic. 

5. Rest Well. Psychologists hold the widespread belief that
ensuring adequate sleep will enhance smartness. It helps one feel
revitalized if one gets to bed early and have quality 8 hours rest,
waking up will be immersed with productivity and use your brain
to the optimal level. 
6. Write. You need not be an expert, pick up something you have
either seen or read. Doing this will enhance visual simulation and
kinesthetic. Also, practice writing with your nondominant hand to
improve both side simulation. 
7. Play Video Games. Invest quality times to play new games. Seek
for Ines that gives you the ability that will enforce quick thinking
abilities. Just like scientists recommend, game Tetras
.
8. Invest in Cryptology. Logic puzzle enhances brain intelligence
and functioning. The puzzle entails a message written in codes for
solving. When continuously played, you will strengthen your
simulation ability and relaxing.
 
State of Consciousness
The separate awareness of your unique sensations, environment,
feelings, memories, and thoughts are what consciousness is all
about. Consciousness in an individual is always changing. Take, for
instance, it is very likely that when you were reading this book, you
were focused, but at a point, your consciousness shifted to
something you had earlier done with a coworker. It might not stop
there, but move to change dramatically from one moment to the
next one, but all in all, your experience of it seems effortless.
As you may have realized, it is not all forms of awareness that are
similar. Thus, there are several states of human consciousness as
well as a variety of things that are capable of impacting states of
awareness.

Has it ever occured to you that every morning, you always feel
energetic, question hypnosis, and even try explaining your dreams?
All these are several concepts of how consciousness works. All
these briefly mentioned are related to human consciousness, which
can be influenced in several ways. 
Body Clocks.
Many start their day with full energy, but by midday, it's down. For
some, they try to be energetic in the morning with no result, but
amazingly, they pick up in the evening. This daily fluctuation of
energy levels is identified as circadian rhythm or body's clock.
They have a significant impact on consciousness and other
psychological states. 
Sleep and Consciousness.
There are stages of sleep, namely NREM (non-rapid eye
movement)
Stage 1, which is the beginning of the sleep cycle, and it is a
relatively light stage of sleep. This stage is considered a transition
period that exists between wakefulness and sleep. 
In stage 2, when a person sleeps, people become less aware of their
surroundings, their body temperature drops, and breathing and
heart rate become more constant. This stage lasts for an
approximate period of 20 minutes. In the stage, folks spend 50% of
their total sleep in this stage.
In phase 3, the muscle relaxes, blood pressure, and breathing rate
drops and deepest sleep happen. In the stage, some experience
sleepwalking and tends to occur during sleep. REM(-rapid eye
movement) stage, which is the final part is the stage where the
brain becomes more active, the body becomes relaxed and
immobilized, dreams happen, and eyes move rapidly.

Dreams and Consciousness.
Dream entail any images, thoughts, and emotions that are
experienced during sleep.  It can be either vivid and be filled with
unclear and confusing imagery. In summary, you can see the dream
as the touchstones of your characters. 
Hypnosis and consciousness.
The study of hypnosis has been used in several fields, like pain
management and weight loss. Many have found hypnosis to be an
efficient therapeutic tool. For some, when hypnotized they record
that they feel a sense of detachment while for some, they attain a
high level of relaxation. And for some, they think that their action
occurs outside their conscious volition. And for some, they might
be fully aware of carrying out conversations while under hypnosis.
But still, hypnosis is used in reducing pain during childbirth,
control of pain during a dental procedure, treatment of rheumatoid
arthritis. 
Drugs, And Consciousness.
Psychoactive drugs are used in treating chronic medical
conditions.  They can pose serious problems and bring about an
effect on human consciousness. 
Someone who used a psychoactive plant would have his mental
state have a higher risk of poisoning. This is because the person
taking the substances has no control over the strength of the plant's
psychoactive substance.
 
Accessing these drugs can be detrimental to your health and affect
your general well-being. 

Chapter 5: Steps to Increase Your Influence
Influencing without authority for project managers is a critical task.
Maintaining the cats requires a combination of strong management
of projects and communication skills. You can master the most
complex projects by combining that with influencing levers. There
are five forms without authority to impact.
Expertise
​Expertise is an important element. Technical knowledge is
important as various roles function together in a project. When you
operate in a cross-industry unit, the business experience can be
crucial. Use your expertise to support your suggestions and
requests. One definition of a project manager would be the
constraints of a timetable to support a deadline.
Information
When exchanged, knowledge is the most effective. Influence others
by daily, clear and concise sharing of information that you learn.
As a project manager, you have priorities and plans. Roles and
responsibilities can be complicated in diverse working groups. The
news is a two-way street. Don't forget to collect it and express what
you learn now. Knowledge of stakeholders is key information that
project teams need to bear in mind about the main project sponsor.
Resources
The correct tools are a crucial factor for the success of the project.
The distinction between success and failure can be the imaginative
use of capital. Impact the program by providing examples.
Influence capabilities by identifying the main results expected and
recording the skills required to achieve results. Influence citizens
by managing the pressure of employment and goal problems
.

Relationships
Know regarding people and build deeper relationships. This helps
you to learn what you can do. Prepare responses and behaviors for
criticisms rather than shocks.You should apply for periodic rewards
across deep, long-standing partnerships. Finally, there is also a
sense of camaraderie that helps people to solve challenges together.
Attitude
The actions or how you perceive people is one of the most
significant influencing factors. Be honest and direct–you have long
been accepting a crack in your honesty. Don't waste people's time-
be prepared and organized. Knowledge and pressure interact, but
not pain. Your voice tone, your word selection, and your
recognition of difficult situations can be your strongest influence.
Authority
A statement on jurisdiction. Jurisdiction. Authority is definitely the
most obvious way of influencing people. You will set their course
and goals if you control capital directly. There are a time and a
place to use the influence of someone else. For instance, if you
cannot overcome major resource dependencies, call the bosses. Yet,
you did not try to fix it personally afterward.
Appreciate People  
Gratitude is another huge influencer/leader/role model quality.
Efficient leaders know the power of simple appreciation for
channelizing people in the right direction. A simple gesture like
thanking people, appreciating the effort they put into a project or
publically praising their skills goes a long way in inspiring their
loyalty towards you.  

Always choose to recognize the work or efforts of others and focus
on lifting them as glowing role models for others. Few things boost
a person’s morale than being presented as a sparkling example.
This does not just make the person feel wonderful but also helps
you reinforce what’s the right thing to do. Everyone wants to be
appreciated and valued, and will, therefore, be motivated to do
things as they should be done.  
Another tip that can make you an endearing leader is the ability to
help people save face in a potentially embarrassing or awkward
situation. The person will feel indebted to you for life. They will
feel a deep sense of gratitude that you helped them out of a tricky
situation which in turn inspires unwavering loyalty.  
You can help deflect focus from the person’s blunder. For instance,
if someone says something they shouldn’t have said erroneously or
accidentally, quickly change the topic before anyone notices or
pretend nothing huge happened.  
Show Abundant Passion And Enthusiasm  
Have the proverbial fire in your belly for whatever you do. This
makes you an irresistible influencer. People can tell the difference
when leaders/role models do something just for the heck of it and
when they are truly operating with endless reserves of passion.
Seeing you demonstrate the right amount of passion and
commitment towards a project/cause lights others up too. This, in
turn, grows your influence. It attracts others to work with you in
your undying quest.  
Stay Consistent  
Consistency and commitment is a huge influence catalyst. It
accelerates your influence in a positive direction by revealing how
dependable your actions. People who are reliable, steadfast and

dependable earn greater respect and obedience than those people
who constantly change their actions based on what suits them.  
Keep your actions and words consistent. Stay consistent with the
rules you make. Be consistent in your attitude, policies and
leadership pattern. Above everything, stay consistent with your
efforts for fulfilling your/the team’s goals. People who don’t give
up are able to attract plenty of followers. Consistent folks are seen
as reliable and are the preferred ones to be trusted with brand-new
projects, initiatives, and responsibilities. 
 
Find Solutions  
Solution providers are always more sought after than problem
diggers. Your influencer invariably increases if you possess a
solution-oriented mindset. People flock to leaders/role models who
have a more solution-focused mindset and are capable of coming
up with ingenious solutions to the most convoluted problems.  
Folks who use lateral thinking, constructively problem-solving
skills, and path-breaking solutions are often people magnets. They
become instantly dependable and likable for their innovative
thinking and positive approach.  

Chapter 6:  Sources of influence
1.  Personal Motivation
It can be difficult to change behavior, especially if the employees '
personal motivation is weak.  The nurses can see that the nursing
report takes too much time.  You may need to develop new
motivations to manipulate actions to alter this equation.  Most
infants are aware that highly coordinated discharge planning is a
new focus today.  How can this be if it does not include all workers
and is not up to date?  The bedside rounding can be refurbished as
both an opportunity to improve patient contact and to recognize
discharge preparation needs.  Missing these requirements can have
very great human implications and should be worried, as most
nurses are committed and compassionate practitioners.
2.  Personal Ability
Often we believe that when we are going to change our actions, it
is just a lack of motivation.  This may not be the case everywhere. 
In reality, successful influencers over-invest in encouraging others
to improve their ability and make the transition more possible.
While reporting to a new nurse may be comfortable, adding the
patient and family to the audience can alter this dynamic. 
Providing standardized reporting platforms in this new forum can
greatly enhance the feeling of competence of the nurse.  These
situations could include any kind of solutions and concerns that the
patient and family might have.
3.  Harness Peer Pressure
Peer pressure will provide tremendous influence on change
behavior.  There are opinion leaders in any specific nursing

environment.  It is important to include opinion leaders in the
change process.  Opinion leaders can be pioneers of progress or, if
disengaged, can sabotage creative attempts
.
4.  Find Strength in Numbers
Influence is available in quantities.  If you make a change such as a
bedside study, your workers do not automatically need to purchase
100% at the outset.  You need a critical mass of dedicated nurses,
but on every tour, you need enough social capital to influence
change.
5.  Design Rewards and Demand Accountability
What is measured is often said to be rewarded.  If the above critical
activity in the bedside report was included in the annual
performance review, the interest of the nursing staff would be
attracted easily.  The problem today, with much success evaluation
methods is that they are too common and do not include such
behavioral standards.
6.  Change the Environment
If we look at behavioral factors, we rarely think about
environmental control as a cause of impact.  Sometimes simple
changes may affect behavior in a unit setting.  In the example of the
bedside report, what if there was no place for staff to sit and report
in a nursing facility or unit?  What if the tape report had no tape
recorders?  What if we guarantee that a nurse only served in the
same geographical area where the patients were clustered?  What if
we allowed and encouraged our nurses to sit down and report in the
patient's room when they needed to?  What if we asked our workers

for suggestions on how we could adjust the layout of our space to
improve their ability to monitor the bedside?
It is not an easy process to promote change.  Effective influencers
realize that the more eager you are to set the stage for progress, the
more effective you become.  No one size fits for the shift.  This
requires multiple points of control and performance must be
reassessed over time.

Chapter 7: The Art of Influence and Persuasion?
 
Being influential and persuasive is a skill that you can actually
develop. With the right tips and knowledge, you can master the art
of influence and persuasion and apply it is in various aspects of
your life. If you are an entrepreneur or someone who’s daily
routine needs to convince others to see things based on your own
perspectives and get them to agree with you, then mastering
persuasion is an advantage. You need to hone this type of
personality from the time you have chosen your own career.
With excellent persuasion skills, it will be easier for you to present
your new ideas to the public. You can persuade the correct partners
to be part of your network, create and present solutions to the right
people, convince potential investors to fund your ideas, and
convince customers to buy from you.
The good news is that you can have this skill. Here are just some
ways for you to master the art of persuasion:
Practice repetition
Repetition is an effective way for you to get the attention of people.
A lot of people, especially entrepreneurs, make the wrong
assumption that their passion in their chosen field is enough to help
them clearly send their message to the right audience and stand out
from the crowd. This is a wrong assumption because with the
excessive amount of information that the public can access from
various sources, it would be difficult for you to stand out. In fact,
the majority of the public today already created filters as a means
of ignoring unsolicited inputs. 
You can combat this by ensuring that you practice repetition. Note
that you will most likely convince the public that your message is
worthy to be heard if they see and hear it many times – both in

verbal and written form. The good news is that with this repetition,
you can also imbibe the skill of persuasion into your own
personality, especially because it aids you in mastering it
.
Use imagination
Another way to master the art of persuasion is to use your own and
your target audience’s imagination. For instance, you can say
things like “can you imagine how happy you’ll feel by buying this
product?”. This will give your audience the opportunity to pain a
clear picture of what he/she can expect to receive if he agrees on
what you are saying or take what you are offering. Let him/her
imagine the pleasure of following what you are suggesting, and the
pain that he/she will most likely feel if he/she does not.
Try to obtain a yes early
If you are an entrepreneur, for instance, then try to persuade your
target audience to agree with you, even in just trivial matters. It
could be as simple as the weather, whether the color of an object is
blue, politics, etc. Keep in mind that getting someone to like you is
one of the most important aspects of persuasion. It would be
possible for you to reach that goal if the person you are dealing
with agrees with you.
If you are still a beginner in the art of persuasion, then try to let
your target audience clearly see the actual value of what you’re
offering. You should also clearly indicate what they will be missing
if they decide not to have it. Take advantage of the power of
leading questions, like “do you want to”, “have you been wanting
to”, etc. 
The questions should be leading enough that they will have a
difficult time saying no to. You need to customize the questions to
ensure that they suit the type of conversation you’re having with

your audience to persuade them to agree with you at the earliest
possible time.
Build your confidence
You can’t expect to master the art of persuasion if you’re not
confident. Your audience should see how confident you are with
what you’re saying. How can you expect someone to believe in
what you’re saying if you, yourself, have doubts about it? No
matter how competent you are, if your target audience does not
sense your confidence, then you’ll most likely lose the fight and be
left unable to convince them
.
When it comes to building your persuasion skills, note that you can
develop your confidence by fully understanding how important it is
to facilitate a need. Keep in mind that many people need your help
and you hold the answers to a certain problem they are facing.
Believe that what you’re offering or saying is important and can
provide a solution to a problem – that is regardless of the field
you’re in – whether you’re in web design, foods, etc. 
Keep in mind that someone will always find your products,
services and solutions helpful. Believing that you have something
that is of great value to someone can significantly increase your
confidence, thereby making it easier for you to convince/persuade
someone.
Improve your listening skills
The ability to listen to someone intently – whether it’s your
customers, friends, colleagues, starting entrepreneurs, small
business owners, or industry experts – contributes a lot to
successfully persuading someone. Through intent listening, you
will learn a lot more about the field you’re in. Try to listen more
than speak. Note that the time you spent not speaking are

frequently the most vital moments since the other party will most
likely feel that you are genuinely valuing his time. 
Listening is also known to be one of the keys to being persuasive.
In a study conducted in a business school in Columbia, for
instance, researchers discovered that a lot of workers value
listening skills too much that this lead to the successful
implementation of persuasion. With the set of experiments and tests
they conducted, they were able to find out that one’s ability to
persuade or influence has a huge relationship to the timing he
chooses to be verbal when doing the act. Remember that even if
you do not speak and just merely listen, you can still persuade
others using body language and cues.
Learn how to integrate connection in all your persuasion
endeavors
Regardless of whom you are trying to influence/persuade, forging a
connection is crucial. Keep in mind that as humans, there is a great
likelihood for them to respond positively if you use emotional
appeals by connecting to them. The great philosopher, Aristotle, for
instance, discovered that it is greatly possible for humans to be
influenced if one uses a mix of credible, logically argumentative
and emotional appeals. Using emotional appeals more also
increases the number of people who can be persuaded. 
If you are an entrepreneur who needs to persuade people most of
the time, then you can also use and mirror that concept to your
advantage. A wise tip is to connect to them in a more emotional
level by matching your voice inflections, physical cues and
charisma. This is a huge help in building an emotional connection,
thereby allowing the person you’re talking to realize that you also
have similarities. This will eventually forge a bond of trust.
Learn how to give praises

You also need to learn the art of giving praise when it comes to
developing your persuasion skills. If you just focus on shooting
people with your ideas without even listening to them or making
them feel that you also value them, they will feel like they are
insignificant. This will cause them to focus on mending their hurt
egos, instead of listening intently to what you have today. The good
news is that you can be more likable to them if you start to offer
them praise. Find something good about the person you’re talking
to and praise him. 
Once he finds you likable through the praises that you give, it will
be easier for you to persuade him to listen to you and agree with
your idea. Praising someone can make him feel like he is attaining
his personal achievement. He will then like you more and he will
start thinking that you will be of great help to him when it comes to
reaching his full potential.
Just make sure that you’re careful when offering praises, though.
Avoid resorting to using empty praises. Doing so will only damage
your efforts.
 

Chapter 8: Powerful Verbal and Nonverbal Cues
Verbal communication encompasses both spoken and written
words. Words are a form of communication that humans have used
to exchange their thoughts and messages, especially when they are
not in a face to face setting. This is the most frequent form of
communication used, and it is one that we have come to rely on the
most.  
One example of verbal communication involves public speaking,
where communication is conducted and carried out verbally to the
groups of audiences. Other examples of verbal communication
include your everyday conversations with your friends, family
members, co-workers, clients, even random strangers you happen
to meet as you go about your day. Verbal communication, in short,
happens every day and it has become so routine we do it almost
without actively thinking about it anymore. 
As opposed to nonverbal communication which requires active
thought. This form of communication has no words or sounds to
rely on. Nothing but what you see with your eyes and what you
make of it. When we use gestures, body movements, and facial
expressions to convey our intent that is a form of nonverbal
communication.  
What both forms of communication have is that they matter.
They’re equally important contributors to the overall
communication process. You might even say that nonverbal
communication is more important. The first impression you make
on anyone is nonverbal. Even before the first hello and handshake.
Take job interviews, for example. It cannot be stressed enough just
how important it is to make a good first impression. Making a good
first impression is absolutely critical is during a job interview.
From the minute you walk into the room, you are communicating

with your potential employer through your nonverbal mannerisms.
Your posture, facial expression, gestures that you make are going to
be the clues that your employer is looking for when they assess
you. 
This same approach applies to other situations too, like meeting
clients or conducting business meetings. The impression that you
leave people with can be a big deciding factor in determining the
outcome of your success. Saying all the right words, but with the
wrong body language, is not going to get you the desired results
that you seek. 
Analyzing People via Their Verbal Statements
 
Our analysis and observation skills would be incomplete and
inefficient if we ignore the significance of verbal statements. Verbal
statements hold a myriad of keys into the doorways of our
personalities, intentions, and emotions.  
You can glean a lot from the words that you hear. Analyzing people
through their verbal statements requires less effort and astuteness
than that of nonverbal behaviors. We will take an in-depth look at
how our words reveal our intentions, emotions, and personalities. I
will include common speech clues you will come across in your
daily interactions with those around you. Let’s delve into this
significant aspect of communication.  
Understanding the Relationship between Words, Behavior, and
Personality 
 
Everything you do (nonverbal) or say (verbal) speaks volumes
about your personality. When you become adept at analyzing
people, you will realize there’s a synergy between our actions,
thoughts, and beliefs, and that each aligns to provide a full picture
about whom we are. The words you use, even though it seems
insignificant when compared to body language, can actually tell a

great deal about your desires, strengths, insecurities, and
emotions.  
How Words Reveal Your Personality 
 
“Hey! Did you get taller overnight?” At first glance, this statement
looks like friendly banter, and it reveals no negative vibe. Now, if
you look at the statement from another perception, you will realize
that it gives us an opportunity to glimpse the mind of the speaker.
In this context, the speaker cares a lot about the height difference.
How did we know that?  
If you think about snakes all day because you are scared of them,
then you might easily confuse a skink for a snake. 
 
In other words, we notice the things we care about. When you
observe the friendly banter, you will realize that the person may be
concerned about his personal height. This concern helped him to
notice the height difference of his friend.  
This statement could also stem from the speaker’s insecurity about
his own height. Remember, when it comes to analyzing verbal
statements, you need to take into consideration various factors at
play, and this includes watching body language too. In totality, both
aspects of communication—verbal and nonverbal—are incomplete
without the other.  
Before we proceed, let’s have a quick look at how you can analyze
people through jokes.  
Learn to Unclothe the Veil around Jokes 
 
Two teenagers went to a restaurant. When the waiter came around
to take their orders, one of the kids jokingly replied, “I want
anything that costs a million dollars.” To a casual observer, it is a
normal and bland banter. To an astute observer, this kid is worried
about money. Perhaps his family might be passing through some

kind of financial crisis, or his parents and loved ones might have
taught him the importance of money.  
There’s always a hidden message in every joke. Therefore, learning
to analyze these jokes will give you a glimpse into the speaker’s
deepest desires and personality. You should know that the words
people use have a deep meaning, irrespective of how well-crafted
the words are. A person might tell a joke to you without realizing
he is revealing much more about his intentions. That is why it’s
easy to analyze those who make hurtful jokes to demean you.  
Stories Are Powerful  
 
It is easy to recognize a biased story, either verbally or in written
form. You can effectively glimpse into the storyteller’s psyche by
listening to him or by reading his work. Here’s an example for us to
dissect:  
From subject A’s point of view: Last night, I was walking down a
lonely street with my friends, and a large and muscular dark man
appeared out of the neighboring bush and seemed to come toward
us to attack. But he changed his mind in the last second and walked
past us.  
From subject B’s point of view: Late in the evening, I was taking a
stroll when I misplaced my keys in the nearby bush. It was already
getting dark when I noticed I didn’t have my keys on me. Time
wasn’t on my side since I needed to get home quickly to prepare
for my date, so I searched and searched through the shrubs until I
felt the keys. I jumped out onto the street in excitement and started
running home. In my excitement, I nearly bumped into a group of
frightened teenagers.  
Both stories gave us different perceptive about the incident. The
first point of view was from a teenager who didn’t see the look of

excitement on man’s face. Rather, he emphasized the words huge,
large, and dark. So why did he place emphasis on the physical
attributes of the man who jumped out of the bush? Well, it’s
because that’s the part that concerns him the most. He was scared
because of the man’s sudden appearance and physical size, and that
had a huge impact on the story. We have a full and clearer picture
when you take a look at the other man’s point of view, and that is
the power of perception in stories.  
So when someone tells you a story, I want you to dissect the story
and take note of the emphasized points of the story. By doing this,
you will know how to analyze people effectively.  
Common Word Clues You Need to Know 
 
Words are like doorways to the mind. Words are often used to
analyze people’s thought processes, and the closest you can get to
understanding someone’s thoughts depends on your ability to
decipher and listen to the words he speaks. Words that reveal a
person’s thoughts are referred to as word clues.  
These word clues increase your chances of analyzing and
predicting people’s behavioral patterns via the words they speak or
write. Word clues alone can’t determine a person’s personality, but
they do provide us with an insight into an individual’s behavioral
characteristics and thought process. You can draw your hypotheses
from the word clues and make a conclusion by taking notice of the
other aspect of communication.  
An Insight into How the Brain Process Words 
 
There’s something we have all come to agree on: the human brain
is very efficient. We only use verbs and nouns when we think.  
For instance, “I walked” or “I jumped.” Adjectives, adverbs, and
other parts of speech are added during the latter phase of

converting thoughts into written language or spoken words. The
words that we add at this stage provide an insight into who we are
and what we are thinking.  
The basic and simple sentence consists of only a subject and a verb.
For example, the verbal statement “I walked” consists of only the
pronoun I (subject) and the object that is the verb walked. Any
other word added to this basic sentence only modifies the action of
the verb or the quality of the noun. These deliberate additions or
modifications provide an insight into the behavioral characteristics
and personality of the writer or speaker.  
Word clues help us to make behavioral guesses or develop
hypotheses regarding the personality of others. Take a look at the
verbal statement “I quickly walked.” The word clue in this sentence
is quickly since it serves as a modification of the verb walked. This
word clue infused a sense of urgency in the statement, but it did not
give us a reason. An individual can “quickly walk” because of the
urgency of an appointment.  
People who utilize this phrase are regarded as meticulous.
Meticulous people are reliable and abhor being late for an
appointment since they respect societal norms and want to live up
to expectations. This set of individuals will also make good
employees since they don’t want to disappoint their employees.  
Conversely, you can also quickly walk when in a dark and lonely
area with a bad reputation. Bad weather could also be the reason
that you quickly walk. 
 
In summary, people might make use of the word clue quickly walk
for a variety of reasons. It’s important to always read verbal
statements in relation to the circumstances surrounding the speaker
or writer.  

Types of Nonverbal Communication  
1. Outward appearances  
 
Outward appearances are answerable for an immense extent of
nonverbal correspondence. Think about how much data can be
passed on with a grin or a scowl. The expression on an individual's
face is regularly the main thing we see, even before we hear what
they need to state.  
2. Motions  
 
Purposeful developments and sign is a significant method to impart
importance without words. Basic motions incorporate waving,
indicating, and utilizing fingers to show numeric sums. Different
motions are subjective and identified with culture.  
In court settings, legal advisors have been known to use diverse
nonverbal sign to endeavor to influence legal hearer sentiments. A
lawyer may look at his watch to propose that the contradicting
attorney's contention is monotonous or may even feign
exacerbation at the declaration offered by observers trying to
undermine their reliability. This nonverbal sign is viewed as being
so ground-breaking and powerful that a few judges’ even spot
restrains on what sort of nonverbal practices are permitted in the
court.  
3. Paralinguistic  
 
Paralinguistic alludes to vocal correspondence that is isolated from
the real language. This incorporates factors, for example, manner
of speaking, commotion, affectation, and pitch. Consider the
amazing impact that manner of speaking can have on the
importance of a sentence. When said in a solid manner of speaking,
audience members may translate endorsement and excitement.
Similar words said in a reluctant manner of speaking may pass on
the objection and an absence of intrigue.  

Consider all various ways that basically changing your manner of
speaking may change the significance of a sentence. A companion
may ask you how you are getting along, and you may react with the
standard "I'm fine," yet how you really state those words may
uncover a huge measure of how you are truly feeling. A virus
manner of speaking may propose that you are not fine, however
you don't wish to examine it. A brilliant, cheerful manner of
speaking will uncover that you are really doing very well. A grave,
sad tone would demonstrate that you are something contrary to fine
and that maybe your companion ought to ask further.  
4. Non-verbal communication and Posture 
 
Stance and development can likewise pass on a lot of data.
Research on non-verbal communication has developed essentially
since the 1970's, however well-known media have concentrated on
the over-translation of protective stances, arm-intersection, and leg-
crossing, particularly subsequent to distributing Julius Fast's book
Body Language.  
While these nonverbal practices can show emotions and demeanor,
look into proposes that non-verbal communication is
unquestionably more unobtrusive and less conclusive than recently
accepted.  
5. Proxemics  
 
Individuals frequently allude to their requirement for "individual
space," which is likewise a significant kind of nonverbal
correspondence. The measure of separation we need and the
measure of room we see as having a place with us is impacted by
various variables including social standards, social desires,
situational factors, character attributes, and level of nature. For
instance, the measure of individual space required when having an
easygoing discussion with someone else as a rule differs between

18 crawls to four feet. Then again, the individual separation
required when addressing a horde of individuals is around 10 to 12
feet.  
6. Eye Stare  
 
The eyes assume a significant job in the nonverbal correspondence
and such things as looking, gazing and flickering are significant
nonverbal practices. At the point when individuals experience
individuals or things that they like, the pace of flickering
increments and understudies expand. Taking a gander at someone
else can demonstrate a scope of feelings including threatening vibe,
intrigue, and fascination.  
Individuals likewise use eye stare as a way to decide whether
somebody is being straightforward. Typical, watchful gaze contact
is frequently taken as a sign that an individual is coming clean and
is dependable. Tricky eyes and a failure to keep in touch, then
again, is regularly observed as a marker that somebody is lying or
being tricky.  
7. Haptics  
 
Imparting through touch is another significant nonverbal conduct.
There has been a generous measure of research on the significance
of touch in the earliest stages and early youth.
Ladies will in general use contact to pass on care, concern, and
nurture. Men, then again, are bound to utilize the contact to declare
power or command over others.  
8. Appearance  
 
Our decision of shading, garments, hairdos, and different elements
influencing appearance are additionally viewed as a method for
nonverbal communication. Appearance can likewise change
physiological responses, decisions, and understandings. Simply

think about all the unpretentious decisions you rapidly make about
somebody dependent on their appearance. These initial
introductions are significant, which is the reason specialists
recommend that activity searchers dress suitably for interviews
with potential businesses.  
9. Relics  
 
Items and pictures are likewise apparatuses that can be utilized to
convey nonverbally. On an online gathering, for instance, you may
choose a symbol to speak to your character on the web and to
impart data about what your identity is and the things you like.
Individuals regularly invest a lot of energy building up a specific
picture and encircle themselves with articles intended to pass on
data about the things that are essential to them. Outfits, for
instance, can be utilized to transmit an enormous measure of data
about an individual. A fighter will wear exhausts, a police officer
will wear a uniform, and a specialist will wear a white sterile
jacket. At a simple look, these outfits tell individuals what an
individual accomplishes professionally. 

Chapter 9:  Facial Expressions
Emotions are caused by other factors beyond facial expressions.
For instance, emotions are largely a function of the human system
of beliefs and stored information. In other terms, you feel angry
when you score less than average marks because the current system
equates that to not being smart enough. And the stored information
reminds you that you risk repeating the test or not securing a plum
employment position, and this entire matter makes you feel
hopeless, upset, and stressed.  
There is a possibility that if the belief system did not deem less
than average as a failure and the stored information shows a
positive outlook for such a score that you will feel happy or excited
by the score. 
Additionally, twitching your mouth randomly; either way indicates
that one is deliberately not listening or degrading the importance of
the message. The facial gesture is realized by closing the lips and
randomly twitching the mouth to either the right or left akin to
swirling the mouth with mouthwash. The facial expression is also
to indicate outright disdain to the speaker or the message. The
facial expression is considered a rude way of expressing disgust
with the speaker or the message and should be avoided at all costs. 
Where one shuts their lips tightly, then it indicates the individual is
feeling angry but does not wish to show the anger. Shutting the lips
tightly may also indicate that the person is feeling unease but
struggling to concentrate at all costs. The source of the discomfort
could be the immediate neighbors, the message, or the speaker.
Through this gesture, the individual is indicating he or she simply
wants the speaker to conclude the speech because not all people are
enjoying the message. 

When one is angry or strongly disapproves of what the speaker is
saying, then the person will grimace. A grimace indicates that the
person is feeling disgusted by what is being said. In movies or
during live interviews, you probably so the interviewee grimaces
when an issue or a person that the person feels is disgusting is
mentioned. Showing a grimace indicates one harbors a strong
dislike for the message or the speaker. A person that is feeling
uncomfortable due to sitting on a hard chair, a poorly ventilated
room, or sitting next to a hostile neighbor may also show a
grimace, which is not necessarily related to the message. 
If one is happy, then one is likely to have a less tense face and a
smile. Positive news and positive emotions are manifested as a
smile or a less tense facial look. On the other hand, if one is
processing negative emotions, then the face of the person is likely
to be tensed up due to exerting pressure on the body muscles. A
genuine smile like when one is happy is wider than an average
curve and is temporary. A prolonged smile that is very wide
suggests the individual is smirking at the message or the speaker. A
prolonged smile may also suggest the individual is faking the
emotion. 
By the same measure, a frozen face may indicate intense fear. For
instance, you have seen terrified faces when attending a health
awareness forum on sexually transmitted diseases or some medical
condition that terrified the audience. In this setting, the face of the
audience will appear as if it has been paused. The eyes and the
mouth may remain stationary as the speaker presents the scary
aspects of the medical condition. It appears negative emotions may
slow down the normal conscious and unconscious movement of the
muscles of the face. 

If you are a teacher or trainer, then you encounter facial
expressions from your students frequently. Assuming that you are a
teacher, then you have noticed facial expressions indicating shock,
uneasiness, and disapproval when you announce tests or indicate
that the scores are out.  
From these facial expressions, you will concur that the students feel
uncomfortable, uncertain, and worried. The students will show
lines of wrinkles, look down, eyes wide open and mouths agape
when sudden and uncomfortable news is announced. Even though
the students may indicate they are prepared for the test, their facial
expressions suggest otherwise. 
Like all forms of communication, effective reading of facial
expressions will happen where the target person is unaware that
you are reading even though they understand that their facial
expressions are integral to the overall communication. In other
terms, when one becomes aware he or she is being studied, then the
person will act in an expected manner or simply freeze the
expected reaction. It is akin to realizing that someone is feeling
you. 
Since the underlying emotion affects the facial expression that one
shows. As indicated, the body language overrides verbal
communication, which helps reveal the true status of an individual.
One possible argument of the body language triumphing over
verbal communication could be because the body prioritizes its
physiological needs over other needs. The physiological needs are
critical to the survivability of an individual.  
Over centuries the human body could have been programmed to
increase survivability rate by prioritizing physiological needs.
Body language largely indicates the physiological state of an

individual, which is meant to help the individual and others respect
the true physiological status of the person. 

Chapter 10:  Distance in Communication
Focusing on the United States, there are four types of distances that
people use to communicate on a face-to-face basis. These distances
are intimate, personal distance, social distance, and public distance.
Starting with the intimate distance, it is used for highly confidential
exchanges as zero to two feet of space between two individuals
marks this zone. An example of intimate distance includes two
people hugging, standing side-by-side, or holding hands.
Individuals intimate distance share a unique level of comfort with
one another. If one is not comfortable with someone approaching
them in the intimate zone, he/she will experience a significant deal
of social discomfort. 
Firstly, personal distance is used for talking with family as well as
close acquaintances. The personal distance can range from two to
four feet. Akin to intimate distance, if a stranger walks into the
personal zone, the one is likely to feel uneasy being in such
proximity with the stranger. 
Secondly, there is the social distance used in business exchanges or
when meeting new people and interacting with groups of people.
Compared to the other distances, social distance has a larger range
in the range that it can incorporate. Its range is four to twelve feet,
and it depends on the context. It is used among students,
acquaintances, or co-workers. As expected, most participants in the
social distance do not show physical contact with one another.
Generally, people are likely to be very specific concerning the
degree of social distance that is preferred, as some require more
physical distance compared to others. In most cases, the individual
will adjust backward or forward to get the appropriate social
distance necessary for social interactions. 

Thirdly, we have public distance, which is twelve or more feet
between individuals. An example of public distance is where two
people sit on a bench in a public park. In most cases, the two
people on a bench in a public park will sit at the farthest ends of
each other to preserve the public space. Each of the earlier types of
proximity will significantly influence an individual's perception of
what is the appropriate type of distance in specific contexts. One of
the factors that contribute to individual perceptions of how
proxemics should be used is culture. Individuals from different
cultures show different viewpoints on what the appropriate
persona; space should be.
 
Fourthly, there is the concept of territoriality where individuals
tend to feel like they own and should control their personal areas.
We are inclined to defend our personal space. When someone
invades this personal space, then the individual will react
negatively as it is an invasion of territory without express
permission. At one point, you asked a stranger to keep some
distance from you because you felt uncomfortable with the person
standing close to you. Sometimes standing next to a person may
also denote that you are creepy and may be intending to harm the
person. 
If one is talking to someone, the person violates your personal
space, and you allow it, then it signals that you are okay to intimate
ideas. Intimate ideas in this context include highly personal issues
that one can talk with another person. For instance, if you walk and
sit close and in contact with a woman watching television and she
approves your behavior, then it is indicative that she is likely to
allow you to have a personal talk that may be intimate in nature.
Such discussion may include your health challenges or mental
health and not necessarily sexual issues. For this reason, one should
carefully weigh the need to invade the personal distance. 

Regarding children, violating personal distance will make them
freeze due to feeling uncomfortable. If a teacher sits next to a
student or stands next to a student, then the student is likely to feel
uneasy and nervous. However, they are instances where the
invasion of personal space is allowed and seen as necessary. For
instance, during interviews or when being examined by a doctor,
invasion of private space by the person with an advantage is
allowed. The panel during an interview may move or ask you to
move closer, which may violate your personal space. A doctor may
also stand closer to you, invading your personal space, but this is
necessary due to the professional demand for their service. 
As such, when one avoids personal distance, and the individual is
expected to be within this space, then the individual may be feeling
less confident or feeling ashamed. For instance, if a child has done
something embarrassing, he or she is likely to sit or stand far from
the parent during a conversation. For this reason, it appears that one
should feel confident, assured, and appreciated to approach and
remain in personal space when needed.
 
Additionally, staying in personal space during intense emotions
may portray one as resilient, understanding, and bold. Think of two
lovers or sibling quarreling, but each remains in the established
personal space. The message that is being communicated is that the
individual is confident that he or she can handle the intense
emotions from the other person. For most people, they only allow
their lover to stay in their personal distance when feeling upset
because they trust that the person can handle the known behavior of
the affected person. Since being in personal space places a person
within physical striking range, most people will only allow trusted
and familiar individuals into their personal space. 

Equally, important is that invasion of personal space is justified
because it is a part of professional demands. Think of a new teacher
that is trying to help a student solve a mathematical equation. In
this aspect, the teacher is a stranger because he or she is new to the
school. By sitting or standing close to, the student, the teacher is
invading the personal space, but the established norms in this
context allow the student not to feel unease. For emphasis, this case
is not unique as it aligns with stated expectations that people will
welcome known or unfamiliar people in their personal space only if
they trust them and, in this case, the student feels safe with any
teacher. For this reason, the operationalization of distance in
communication is mediated and moderated by established culture. 
In most cases, one can start with public distance before allowing
the interaction to happen in personal or social space. For instance,
as a student during tournaments, you could have initiated nonverbal
communication with the student from the other college before
suddenly feeling connected to the individual and allowing him or
her to move into personal space as a potential girlfriend or
boyfriend. At first, the target person saw you as a stranger but
allowed you to make nonverbal communication within the public
space. When the person felt the need to connect more with you and
have given you the benefit of the doubt, the person allowed you to
move through public distance and social distance to enter their
personal space. 
For instance, a lot can be learned from studying distance and space
in communication. Being allowed into the social and personal
distances implies that the person trusts that you will not harm them
emotionally and physically. For the intimate distance, being
allowed into this distance implies that the person trusts you so
much and is confident that you can never harm them and that you
share a lot. For instance, a mother holding her baby close enough to

her signals that the baby is feeling assured of security and
protection. When two lovers move, closer until their faces are
almost touching suggests trust and confidence that the other person
feels safe and protected. 
Relatedly, if arguing with your child or lover and the individual
moves farther from you physically, then it suggests that the person
no longer feels safe with you being within their personal distance.
Issues that can cause someone to expand the distance between you
and them include the risk of violence from you and emotional
issues. If you occasionally act violently, then chances are, your
lover or children will expand the personal distance to social
distance because this is where they feel safe due to your personality
and character. It then appears that your prior behavior will also
affect the distance during communication. 
Nevertheless, they are other issues that cause individuals to extend
the distance of interaction, and these include having a medical
condition or having hygiene issues. For instance, if you are sweaty,
then chances are that the other person may prefer to extend the
distance of communication between you and them. Having oral
hygiene issues may also make the other person move far away from
you because the smell turns them off. For this reason, interpreting
the distance between communicators should also include hygiene
and health-related issues that impact this distance. 
For instance, some medical conditions can make people maintain
some distance from you or be closer to you physically. For
instance, some conditions may attract uneasiness, and this includes
epilepsy. People with epilepsy get seizures, and this can make
people feel unease being closer to them because they inadvertently
fall. On the other hand, having hearing issues or sore throat may
make people move closer to you physically to facilitate effective

communication. However, these are exceptions when analyzing
space and distance as forms of nonverbal communication, but they
should be taken into account where necessary.
 
In some cases, it is welcome to invade personal distance merely by
the circumstances. For instance, when attending a match in a full
packed stadium or sitting to watch a movie in a movie theater, one
will have his personal invaded due to the sitting arrangements. In
this context, one may feel uneasy with this arrangement, but he or
she has little control over the situation. While we value and seek to
protect personal spaces, some situations make us allowing the
invasion of this space because it is beyond control. 

Chapter 11: Dark psychology and manipulation
Dark Manipulation, otherwise known as psychological
manipulation, is a form of social influence that aims to change how
someone behaves or perceives others through indirect, deceptive,
and/or underhanded tactics. The manipulator uses these tactics to
advance their interests at another’s expense. The methods that they
use can be viewed as devious and exploitative. 
Now, social influence is not always dark and negative. It depends
on the manipulator’s agenda and how they use their tactics. 
What kind of outcome do they want to have? For instance, people
have often used interventions, with emotional manipulation, to help
their loved ones change from their bad habits or behaviors. When
social influence is harmless, the person has a right to choose what
they are being offered or reject it. They are not forced into making
a certain decision. If this is not the case, then it is dark
manipulation, and the person is using their interests as an
advantage to gain something from the other person. 
Some things that motivate manipulators are: 
1. The need to feel in control due to a feeling of
powerlessness in their lives.
2. The need to feel a sense of power or authority over others
and to lift their self-esteem.
3. The need to fulfill a sense of boredom. Often
manipulators consider hurting others as a type of game.
4. Sometimes the manipulator is not consciously aware of
what they are doing. They often feel like their emotions
are invalid, and they forecast those emotions onto others,
i.e., trying to justify their fear of commitment.

5. Having a hidden agenda that can be criminal. This can
include financial manipulation that is often used on the
elderly or unprotected wealthy who have often been
targeted to obtain their financial assets.
There are three, things that the manipulator must be aware of and
know: 
How to conceal their aggressive intentions and behaviors
and how to be sweet and pleasant to get what you want,
i.e., buttering someone up.
Know their victims’ vulnerabilities. This will allow the
manipulator to know what tactics would be more
effective.
Having no moral qualms about being ruthless, as well as
not caring if you hurt the victim in some ways. The end is
justifying the means, as the saying goes.
The Dark Triad
Personality Vulnerabilities  
Manipulation predators or dark manipulators use many techniques
to control their victims. They look for certain types of people with
certain types of personalities. Those types of personalities that are
often prey to manipulators are those with low or no self-esteem,
those who are easy to please, those with low or no self-confidence,
who have no sense of assertiveness, and are very naïve. 
Let’s explain these personality traits in more detail:
Those who are naïve find it virtually impossible to accept
the fact that particular people in their lives can be

cunning, devious, and ruthless. They will constantly deny
that they are being victimized.
Those who are over-conscientious give the manipulator
the benefit of the doubt, even if they know in the back of
their mind, they are right. They are hoping they are not
and take the blame.
Those who have low self-confidence start to doubt
themselves and what they are experiencing, they are not
assertive, and they easily defensive because they don’t
want to make waves.
Those who are emotionally dependent have a submissive
and dependent personality. When the victim is more
emotionally dependent, the manipulator has an easier
time exploiting and manipulating them.
Those who over-intellectualize want to believe the
manipulator and try to understand their reason for
harming others, especially the victim themselves.
Those who tend to use others to their own advantage fall under the
“Dark Triad’. As defined earlier in this book, it is “a set of traits
that include the tendency to seek admiration and special treatment
(otherwise known as narcissism), to be callous and insensitive
(psychopathy) and to manipulate others .Studies have indicated that
the triad consists of a lot of undesirable behaviors, such as
aggressiveness, impulsivity, and sexual opportunism. 
When people show signs of these characteristics, they are trying to
get away with using others to get what they want. Each one of
these personality traits can make life difficult for people, but all of
these traits combined can be dangerous to anyone’s mental health.
Those who have any one of these personality traits show some of

these behaviors: seeking out multiple sex partners, acting out
aggressively to get what they want, having high or low self-esteem,
and not viewing themselves highly.  Most of these traits are shown
by men.
Knowing more about the dark triad will help you protect yourself
from those who wish to manipulate you and use you to their
advantage. Research has been done to analyze the differences
between all three personality traits within the triad. They have
found that all three malevolent personalities “act aggressively out
of self-interest and lack empathy and remorse. They’re skilled at
manipulation, exploit, and deceive others, though their motivations
and tactics vary. They violate social norms and moral values and
lie, deceive, cheat, steal, and bully.
However, psychopathy and Machiavellianism are more related
because of their malicious behavior. Those who fall under the
narcissist umbrella are very defensive and are surprisingly fragile.
Their arrogance and ego are just a cover for their feelings of
inadequacy. Men are prone to psychopathic traits and behavior due
to biological factors (testosterone), as well as social norms. 
It is important to note those people who have one of these three
personality disorders are not trustworthy, are selfish, are not
straightforward, are not kind, or modest, and they do not comply or
compromise; which are all qualities that are not good for any type
of relationship. If you know someone that enumerates any of the
dark triad traits, you might want to see if you are a victim of these
techniques. 
Manipulation Techniques
Lying is one of the very first techniques that manipulators use. It is
a technique that pathological liars or psychopaths use when they
want to confuse their victims. If they are constantly lying to them,

their victims will often be unaware of the truth. Those who use this
tactic have no moral or ethical apprehension about it. 
Telling half-truths or only telling part of a story is another tactic
that can be used to manipulate someone. People like this will often
keep things to themselves because it puts the victim at a
disadvantage. They can get what they want by waiting to tell them
the rest of the story until their needs are met. 
Being around someone who has frequent mood swings can often
make a person vulnerable to their manipulations. Not knowing
what mood that person will be in, whether they will be happy, sad,
or angry can be a very useful tactic for the manipulator. It keeps the
victim off balance and easy to manipulate because they will often
do what the manipulator wants to keep them in a good mood. 
Another tactic that is often used by narcissists is known as love
bombing. This doesn’t necessarily mean that you have to be in a
relationship but can be used in friendship, as well. Those that use
this tactic will charm the victim to death and have them believe that
this is the best relationship or friendship that has ever happened to
them. They will use the victim for what they want, and then when
they are done, they drop them and the victim has no idea what
happened.
 
A tactic that can be used in extreme cases by the manipulator is that
of punishment. This makes the victim feel guilty of something they
did wrong, even if they didn’t do anything at all. Some
punishments that they can inflict on their victims are consistent
nagging, shouting, mental abuse, giving them the silent treatment,
and even as bad as physical violence. 
Denial is often a tactic that is used when a manipulator feels
pushed in a corner, and they feel like they will be exposed for the
fake that they are. In this instance, they will manipulate the victim

into believing that they are doing the very thing the manipulator is
being accused of. 
Spinning the truth is a tactic often used by politicians. It is used to
twist the facts to suit their needs or wants. Sociopaths use this
technique to disguise their bad behavior and justify it to their
victims. 
Minimizing is when a manipulator will play down their behavior
and/or actions. They move the blame onto the victim for
overreacting when their actions are harmful, and the person has a
valid reason for feeling the way they do. 
It is often interesting when the manipulator pretends to become the
victim. They do this to gain sympathy or compassion from their
real victims. They do this so that their victims feel a sense of
responsibility to help and end their suffering, especially if they feel
that they are the cause of that person’s suffering. 
Another way that the manipulator can move the blame onto the
victim is by targeting the victim and accusing them of wrongdoing.
The victim will then start to defend themselves, while the
manipulator hides their manipulation away from the victim. This
can be dangerous because the victim is so focused on defending
themselves that they forget to notice what is right in front of them. 
Using the positive reinforcement tactic tricks the victim into
thinking that they are getting something for helping the
manipulator get what they want. This can be through purchasing
them expensive presents, praising them, giving them money,
constantly apologizing for their behavior, giving them lots of
attention and all-around buttering them up.
 
There are times when a person knows where they stand with
someone. However, in any type of relationship, the manipulator

might keep moving the goal just to confuse their victim because
they thought that everyone was still on the same page. 
Another manipulation tactic that manipulators like to use is known
as diversion. This tactic is commonly used to divert a certain
conversation away from what the manipulator is doing. The new
topic is created to get the victim to lose focus on what the
manipulator is doing or trying to do. 
Sarcasm is a tactic that can be used to lower the self-esteem and
confidence of a victim through embarrassment. The manipulator
will use sarcasm – usually saying something about the victim- in
front of other people. This gives the manipulator power over the
victim because they just made them feel very small. 
Guilt trips are another tactic that a manipulator will use against
their victim. In this instance, they will often tell their victims that
they don’t care about them or love them; they will indicate that
they are selfish and that their life is easy. It keeps the victim
confused and anxious because they want to please the manipulator
by letting them know that they care about them and will do
anything for them. 
Another way that a manipulator will move the blame is to play the
innocent card when the victim accuses them of their tactics. They
will act shocked or show confusion at the accusation. The act of
being surprised is convincing to the victim, and it makes them
question their judgment and if what they are feeling is wrong. 
A dangerous tactic that a manipulator can use is that of extreme
aggression. Rage and aggression are used to force the victim to
submit. The anger and rage are a tactic that scares the victim to
stop talking about the conversation. They pretty much want to help
keep the manipulator’s anger in check. 

Isolation is another dangerous tactic used by manipulators. It is a
control mechanism that is used by manipulators to keep their
victims from their family, friends, and loved ones who can expose
the manipulator for who they really are. The manipulator might
know that their victim can be manipulated, but their friends and
family can see right through them, and they are not done using their
victim yet. 
And, one of the last tactics that manipulators, such as psychopaths
and sociopaths use is that of fake love and empathy. These types of
people do not know how to love others besides themselves and
have a hard time loving others and showing empathy towards
others.
How to Use Dark Psychology to Manipulate Others
 
People around us may use dark psychology tactics every day to
manipulate, influence, persuade and intimidate us to take advantage
and get what they want. As you get to know that dark psychology
includes the science and art of mind control and manipulation.
Whereas psychology is different from dark psychology as it is the
study of human behavior and our actions, interactions and thoughts
are centered with them. Some people get confused and don't know
the difference between psychology and dark psychology. However,
if you want to manipulate others, you need to know how to use
dark psychology.  
Here are a different kind of people who know the tactics of
manipulating others-  
a) Manipulation is an art and you need to know the tactics to meet
your needs first, even at someone else's expense. Though these
kinds of people are known to be self-centered, and they are good
when it comes to manipulating and intimidating others. These

people are not bothered with the outcomes but they have an agenda
of self before others, no matter what.   
b) People who are good public speakers use dark psychological and
persuasion tactics to maximize the emotional state of the listeners
which leads to an increase in the sale of their product (whatever
they were selling to the audience). These people also know the
moment and time of taking advantage of the emotional turmoils of
other people.   
c) Some people meet clinical diagnosis, as they are true sociopaths.
However, these people usually are intellectual, alluring but
alongside they are impulsive. Just because these people do not have
much ability to feel remorse and lack of emotionality, they build a
superficial relationship and take advantage of innocent people by
using dark tactics. They are not concerned about anyone's feelings
and are least bothered with what others might do once the
innocents know about their true face.  
d) People in politics (usual politicians) use dark tactics to persuade
people that they will do the needful and perform the activities in
favor of the common people just to get a vote and to become the
ruling party.  
e) Some lawyers or attorneys focus solely on winning their case
regardless of knowing the truth and even after knowing the truth,
using dark manipulating tactics to get the outcome of what they
want to win the case. They are not bothered about justice but are
only concerned about their reputation and self-esteem.   
f) People in corporate offices who are in a higher position and
deployed as the companies regional head use dark psychological
tactics to get compliance, higher performance, or greater efforts
from their subordinates. They are not cared about 'what their

subordinates deserve' or 'is their salary justified as per the work
they are performing within the organization'.   
g) People who are involved in the sales department are usually well
aware of many of these dark influencing tactics to persuade and
convince other people to buy whatever they are selling. They could
even disguise the customers, as they are only concerned with
selling their product and earning a profit.   
Now that you got to know about different types of people who may
deceit you by using these dark tricks, here are the different dark
psychological tactics to manipulate the people and make them do
what you want them to do-  
1) If you want to sell your product and wish to manipulate your
customers to make them surely buy your product, you can use a
decoy option. You can use it as the third option. For example, if
you are facing a troublesome situation to sell the more expensive of
two products, by adding the third option you can make the
expensive product more captivating and appealing. You need to
make sure that decoy option should be the same price for the more
expensive option but assuring that it is less effective. It is a good
strategy to increase the sale and entice more customers towards
your expensive product.  
2) To win an argument, speak quickly so that the opponent has no
other option left but to agree with you. If you speak faster, it will
give the other person the less time to process what you are saying
and they will agree with you. While you should do the opposite in
case when the other person agrees with you, speaking slowly is
better as it will give them the time to evaluate and analyze what
you are saying.  
3) You can copy the body language of people whom you want to
manipulate. Imitating their body actions shall impress them and

will make you closer to them and they may start liking you. If you
subtly imitate the way the other person is talking, sitting, and
walking, they would probably not notice that you are copying them
and it may get them to do as per your wants.  
4) Scaring the other people to make them give you what you want
and need is one of the dark psychological tactics to manipulate
people. Anxious people often respond positively to requests
afterward as they may be occupied thinking about the danger they
are surrounded with. It would make them feel scared and would do
as your saying. Additionally, sometimes, even if you will not say
anything they will understand what you need and do what you
would have spoken them to do for you.  
5) To get people to behave ethically with you, you need to display
an image of the eyes. It means you should create your image as a
person who watches, notice and observe the other person by
posting a picture of eyes nearby. The other people could never take
you like a side option and will return all borrowed items on time.  
6) Tweak such an environment for the people, so that they would
act less selfishly. For example, if you were bargaining in a coffee
shop, needless to say, you would be less aggressive as compared to
what you would be in a conference room. Usually, people tend to
act less selfish when neutral items surround them, whereas if work-
related objects occupy them, they incline towards more aggression
and selfishness. 
 
7) Try to keep your point complicated and do not make it is
straightforward for the people to understand in a first move. To
comply with people with your request, confuse them. For example-
instead of keeping a price tag of your product for 4 dollars, make it
400 pennies, so that people would first analyze how much dollars
would 400 pennies make and if they bargain they will do that in

pennies rather than in dollars. Or they may just think that the price
given is a deal to go for.  
8) If you help someone to achieve their goals or sort their problems
out, the other person tends to return your favor, as they would feel
obliged by what you have done for them. This way when the time
comes, you may manipulate the other person and is one of the
tactics.  
9) Try to ask a question when  one is mentally drained and
exhausted.
10) Always make the other person focus on their gaining not
losing. Moreover, declare the price of your product at last after
telling all the features and benefits of your product. For instance, if
you are selling your car in 1000 dollars, always let the other person
know about its features, specifications, and benefits first. Then
declare its price. The benefits will entice the customer towards the
car, and then the price shall not be a constraint.  
11) Do not use verbs; try to use more nouns to change the behavior
of the other person towards you. If you use nouns, it will reinforce
the identity of the person for whom you may be using it. It will also
indicate a specific group which shall be eloquent.  
How to Deal with Manipulation
Though manipulation does not cause any harm or put the subject in
any immediate danger, it is designed to deceive and change the
attitude, reasoning, and understanding of the intended subject
regarding a particular situation or topic and is good to protect
yourself and your loved ones against it. 
Social influence, such as a teenager inducted into a culture or a
society to interact with different people either at home or at work,

is admirable. Any social influence that regards the privilege and
right of individuals to decide, without been intimidated, is usually
seen as something that is helpful. 
Then again, social influence is despised when people beguile others
to maneuver their way against other people’s will. The impact can
be very destructive and generally looked down upon as very weak
in nature. 
As soon as the victim of this seduction doesn’t provide the thing
that their seducer wants, the seducer is going to leave. So, if the
victim starts to feel that they are being used and withholds sex from
the seducer, the seducer will simply leave the relationship and
move on to their next victim. 
The seducer has no worries about the other partner in the
relationship. A true seducer is only going to see the other person as
a tool, something that helps the seducer get the pleasure that they
want. As soon as that tool stops doing the job that it’s supposed to,
the seducer will move on to find a new person to do the work for
them. 
A dark seducer may move quickly between one relationship to the
next, or they may even stay in a relationship for a long time. It all
depends on the situation and how long the seducer is able to keep
the victim under their control. Some victims stand up for
themselves pretty quickly. The longer the victim is under the
control of the dark seducer, the harder it is for them to leave. 
This doesn’t mean that the dark seducer has learned how to love
their victim. It simply means that the dark seducer has become used
to the way that things are, and they will use their powers and their
mind controls techniques to keep the victim right where they are. 

It is important for you to be aware of dark seduction. While some
men may choose to use some ideas of dark seduction to help them
gain some confidence, avoid some issues with their fear of
rejection, and make it easier for them to meet women, there are
many that will use these techniques because they don’t really care
about the other person at all. They have specific goals that they
want to reach in the relationship, and they will get there, no matter
who gets hurt in the process.
 
If you do end up getting into one of these relationships, it can be
devastating. The dark manipulator is really skilled at using dark
seduction techniques to get what they want. They will find a victim
who is vulnerable, and they will present the right solution that the
victim needs at that time. For example, they may find a victim who
just got out of a major relationship, and they will step in to feel the
need for that victim not to be lonely any longer. 
The seducer is going to be charming, fun, and the perfect person
for that victim. The victim may feel like they have found their soul
mate, but the seducer is just there to get what they want out of the
relationship. Sure it may last for some time, but as soon as the
victim is no longer meeting the needs of the seducer, the seducer
will be gone. 
This will leave the victim hurt and broken. They may have overly
trusted the seducer (because the seducer is skilled at reading the
victim and knew exactly what to do and say to gain that trust and
get what they want), and now they are broken. They may go
through depression and anxiety and even have trouble trusting
others in the future. 
Because of all these negatives that come with dark seduction, it is
important to watch out for the signs. If you run into dark seduction
with a narcissist or with a psychopath, it is even more important to

watch for the signs. These individuals are not there to care about
what the other person wants. They simply look out for themselves,
they feel that they deserve what they want, and they don’t have the
capacity to care about how it is going to harm the other person. 
Due to the way that the relationship was started, including the
romance, attraction, the mutual feeling that you found a soul mate
(all created by the seducer to get what they want) when things start
to take a lot of wrong turns, it is likely to be too late for you, the
victim, to walk away. This can be especially true if you went into
that particular picture without a good idea of what you wanted in
the relationship. Without this clear picture, you would not have the
determination to walk away from that relationship when it didn’t
meet your expectations.
 
This is why you must always make sure that you know what you
want to get out of the relationship before one begins. This will help
you be prepared if the relationship becomes something else because
you will be able to see when it is going away from your chosen
course. You will give yourself a chance to see it for what it is
before you damage your self-worth so much where you will stay in
that relationship and accept the bad treatment. 
This can be hard. Many times we feel that we need a relationship
like we are not worth anything unless we are in a relationship with
someone else. Then, when we are not in a relationship, we are
going to feel like something is missing, and we jump into the first
relationship that comes available. This is where the issues will
start. 
Before you jump into the next relationship, it is important to take
some time to soul search. Remember there is nothing wrong with
not being in a relationship all the time. Taking some time for
yourself and really exploring where you are at that time in your

life, and what you would like to happen in your next relationship
can make a difference. 
This gives you a good idea of what kind of relationship you want to
be in. You won’t just jump into the next relationship because you
are needy or because you worry about being alone. You will have
specific goals in mind, and if you feel the relationship isn’t going in
the right direction, you will be able to step out before the dark
seducer gets too deep and tries to take control over you. 
The first thing that you should do here is to start with some deep
thinking and even some soul-searching and decide on the details of
the relationship that you are looking to enjoy at that time in your
life. Describe what you want out of the other person in this
partnership. Describe how you want to feel in this relationship. Set
out some clear boundaries and then make sure that you understand
why you have these boundaries.

Chapter 12 Tips and Tricks for Reading and Analyzing People
Now that we have had a chance to look at speed reading, and what
it is all about, it is time to pay attention to some ways that we are
able to use speed reading to help us pick out of the right target,
work with the target in the proper manner, and ensure that we are
going to be able to pick the right technique to use on them.    
Speed reading isn’t necessarily as hard to do as it may seem. We
will often speed read those around us without even noticing. If you
have ever ignored or stayed away from someone because you felt
the anger and frustration from them, and you didn’t want to get into
it with them, then this is an example of how you used speed
reading to see how that person was doing, and then protect yourself
by avoiding them. 
As a manipulator though, you need to take this up a notch. Your
goal is to catch on to some things that may be hidden, the things
that the target and others around you don’t necessarily want to
share, but they end up doing so through their emotions, their
actions, and your own intuition. This is how you really start to
know your target and can make it easier to manipulate them. Some
tips, and techniques that you can focus on when it comes to speed
reading your target, as well as speed reading some other people
around you in all situations include:    
Listen to What your Intuition is Telling You   
Your intuition is going to be super important when it comes to
working with a target. Sometimes you will find someone who may
seem like the perfect target, but there is something about them that
sends your intuition through the roof and you don’t feel
comfortable with it. It is much better to wait for the right target and
listen to your intuition than to jump in and end up with too much
work and trouble in the process.    

Often our intuition is going to sense things and know things before
our conscious mind is able to catch up. And if we learn how to
follow it and listen to the warning that it is giving to us, we are
going to see that some action is not the best for us to take. It may
seem a bit silly and like we are missing out on a lot of opportunities
out there, but in reality, it could save us a lot of work and effort in
the process.    
Now, your intuition can also come into play to help you avoid
getting manipulated. Just because you are using dark manipulation
and dark psychology does not mean that someone else is not trying
to do the same thing to you or that you are immune to some effects.
Assuming this is going to land you in a lot of issues and can make
it difficult to get the results that you want with your own
manipulation. How are you supposed to manipulate someone else
and get them to do what you want if someone is already working
on and manipulating you at the same time?   
Listening to your intuition will not only help you to speed read
another person and pick out of the right target to use for your needs
but will ensure that no one else is going to take advantage of you.
You will be able to sense when someone else is trying to use these
tactics on you, especially when you are using them at the same
time. So, listen to that intuition so that you can keep yourself safe
in the process as well.    
The final thing that we are going to take a look at here is the idea of
the emotional energy from the target. This emotional energy is
going to tell you a lot about that person and can help you to
understand what they are feeling and how they are going to act.
When someone is happier and upbeat, this usually means they have
had a good day or some good news, and they are more likely to
want to help you out and do a favor. But when they are down and

not feeling the best it is likely that they will be more closed off and
harder to work with to get to do what you want.    
Now, someone in a different mood may not react in the same
manner. They may not want to open up, if they are in a bad mood,
they will think the world is out to get them and will be more
frustrated when you do ask for a favor. Or they will get sad and
want to close up to you. If you ask this kind of person for a favor or
try to manipulate them, it is going to end up badly for you. The
target is going to get upset, will refuse you, and it could end the
relationship and the bond that you are trying to create.   
 
This doesn’t mean that you have to give up hope. But it helps you
to stop and think about whether this is the right time to ask or favor
or try to manipulate your target. But that doesn’t mean that they
won’t be ready to manipulate later on. It simply means that you
need to do some work first. 
This may not open the door for your work right now, but it will
later. The target is going to be thankful that you took the time to
help them feel better about the situation, and they are going to
remember that you made them laugh, made their day better, and
helped them to get out of a sour mood. And later, when they are in
a better mood and you need some help, they will be more willing to
help you out without any issues along the way.    
Speed reading people is a unique thing that you can add into your
psychology plan and it could really take some of your
manipulations to the next level. This method is going to ensure that
you really know the person you want to target and will make it
easier for you to find the right target, figure out how to manipulate
them, and even learn when the right time to start some
manipulations is.  
Step by Step Tips for Reading Others 

1. Create a drawing board for your mind 
Human and behavior are so close like a living man is to his breath.
However, you should expect so many diverse ways of practices
from them. You could be on a public bus, and someone suddenly
clears his throat. This means so many things, depending on the
situation at the ground in the bus or an occurrence that just ending
in the van. When this happens, you give yourself a guessable
opinion of what that could mean, and that’s the origin of
understanding people.  
Another person might scratch his beards, which most times might
mean disapproval or a non-challenge attitude towards the
discussion at hand. So, taking proper notice at everything around us
goes a long way in understanding when people cross their legs, or
suddenly squints or strokes their necks. People do these things and
behave each time for different reasons, which indicate anger,
nervousness, deception, or disapproval at times. Funny enough, a
particular signal might mean a thousand things, so you would ask,
how do I get the exact meaning? It’s never far-fetched; all you need
do is get a mental picture of the situation at hand. This way, the
baseline or background check you’ve created between your opinion
and the signal would match. 
2. Check for consistencies 
Paying close attention to the mental picture you've created in your
mind and someone's words or gestures is a sure way to hit it right.
How do I mean? You should always endeavor to update you about
any sudden changes between the initial background check you’ve
created for that person in question and what he now does.
Inconsistency is the father for a foul play, so you should take note
of this. Let me explain for a while, the head producer of your

company has always been coming early to the workplace and
leaving immediately after the close of the day’s business.  
Suddenly, you noticed that he has started going late all of a sudden,
to you, what do you think is happening? This further takes you to
other questions that what might have happened? Studying
consistencies gives you a light to the status quo and when it finally
changes form. You would notice his recent change in behavior is
due to something you do not know, which you must confirm, and
that forms the basis of knowing more. It also creates the ground
onto which you question further, asking more questions into
knowing the exact cause of such inconsistency.  
3. Take note of gestures earlier 
Remember, actions don’t just occur, but with a corresponding
meaning it stands to hold. Of course, there are possibilities of
having a combination of gestures all at once, and you wonder what
that means again. No big deal just take notice earlier and refer back
to your background check and its relevance in the newly
discovered gestures that just joined the old one. Studying
someone’s personality critically is a clear indication to relate to
them without reservations, and it includes getting to know how the
person in question handles risks, ego, challenges, fatigue, etc.  
For example, if your head producer after leaving the workplace so
early still gives another particular strange signal, don’t you think
you should watch his back? You would discover that when you
probe people like that, he gives you another great message, and
that’s how the chain goes on and on. Just take note of precaution
and better caution to deal with the situation.  
4. Make a proper comparison 

Its fine to notice the change in people’s behaviors, but it’s more
beautiful to know what has changed and why it changed. You may
have been studying someone for a while now due to his different
way of acting than usual, but you need to get close. Make your
observations key to ensure how recurrent the action takes place, the
venue it takes place, and with whom it takes place. This art of
studying gives you a clearer picture of who the person is, who he
has been, and the thin line between the two.  
Inquiring is the firsthand theory in bringing assumptions into better
understanding, so it’s essential to make a proper comparison so,
you could act faster as you should. Does the person act differently
when money is involved? Does the person relate well after
confronting him with your observations? These, and many more
questions would come to fore, and you begin to have a direction. 
5. Identify the voice strength and walking posture 
Due to the pressure associated with guilt, the most influential
person isn’t the one with a faint voice. The power of a voice
determines if the person in question is at fault or not. However, you
should know a loud sound is different from a confident and a
strong one. So always take note of the sure voice in the crowd
when issues arise, or you need to read people’s minds through
verbal communication. For example: In the case of the head
producer, take note of his walking posture and how he does his
head. With this, there is a high possibility of analyzing people that
way successfully because his head down might mean he lacks the
confidence to face his guilt.  

Conclusion
The ability to influence others is a very helpful function.
Influencers share a common collection of behaviors that ensure
consistent performance. To influence their decisions, it is important
to build a strong relationship with your peers.
Influencers find out the advantages of an idea and place a scenario
or condition around it so that it has a considerable impact on the
person—brand influencers themselves. Influencers aren't just
advertisers, let's face the fact that they are one of the major
businessmen and don't just create forums, as they have their
websites. You don't just compete and sell because you could start
your own business. They're just selling their titles. When you
support another business or corporation, it's like you've watched the
brand or organization's name.
Influencers explore other means of manipulating other and high
levels of suppleness. For example, an influencer anticipates
achieving a certain number of followers by the end of September,
but the outcomes are far too far or have not reached the intended
goal so that the influencer searches for and seeks to maximize his
followers. Remember that a superbly agile influencer can always
manipulate a scenario.
Robert Dale Goleman - Daniel Brandon Bradberry - Travis Greene Carnegie

Emotional Intelligence
2.0
To live a better life, success at work and happier relationships.
Improve your social skills, emotional agility, manage and influence
people
© Written by:
JOSEPH GRIFFITH

Book Description
Do you feel like you have been stuck in the same place for so long without
making progress? Do you feel as though the decisions you have been
making lately are all over the place? Do you wish to build stronger
relationships, succeed at work and in school? Do you wish to achieve your
career and personal growth? 
Do you consider yourself emotional intelligence?
If not, then rest assured that you have come to the right place!
One thing that is important to bear in mind is that Emotional Intelligence
plays a significant role in helping you recognize, manage, and understand
your emotions and how they influence that of others. It is through emotional
intelligence that you can fuel your performance – whether in your personal
life, at home, or in the workplace. 
Think of a place where your confidence, optimism, empathy, self-control,
and social skills all work hand in hand to accelerate success in all areas of
your life. Don’t you want that?
In this book, you will learn;
●
      
What Emotional Intelligence is
●
      
The keys to Emotional intelligence
●
      
How you can identify your emotions and those of others
●
      
How to use your feelings to guide your thinking and reasoning
●
      
Understanding how feelings change and develop with the unfolding
of events
●
     
Managing to open your arms to the data of feelings and using that in
making informed choices for success
So, what are you still waiting for?
It is time to sharpen your intuitions and position yourself for success and a
better life.
Come with me!

Introduction
You probably have heard of Emotional intelligence at home, school, or in
the workplace. This concept continues to grow in popularity, especially in a
brain-dead world where people strive to achieve success but don’t know
how to tap into their emotional feelings to realize their goals. 
You may be thinking, “Why is emotional intelligence growing in
importance among peers in an evolving workplace or overall life?”
One thing that is important to bear in mind is that emotional intelligence is
not a trend! It is here to stay. According to reports and statistics compiled
by major companies across the world, it is evident that people with
emotional intelligence undoubtedly affect their bottom line. For instance, if
an employee has a high level of emotional intelligence, they will not only
be productive and generate revenue for the company, but also realize their
personal and career goals. 
Look around you – are there people you know – whether at home or the
workplace – with high emotional intelligence? Do you know people who
are really good listeners? Irrespective of the circumstances, they can
communicate well. It is almost like they know exactly what to say when to
say it and how to say it so that others are not offended. These people are
caring, considerate, and can find solutions for problems. When you
approach them for guidance, they leave you feeling optimistic and more
hopeful in life. 
You probably know other people who have mastered the art of managing
their emotions. Instead of getting angry when provoked by a stressful
situation, they choose to look at the problem from a different perspective to
find a solution calmly. These people are excellent decision-makers and have
mastered the art of listening to their gut feeling. Irrespective of their
strengths, they have the willingness to look at themselves with an honest
eye. They take criticism positively and use it to improve their performance. 
It is such kind of people that we wish that we can be like them.
 
What sets them apart is nothing other than a high degree of emotional
intelligence. You can have that too. You can learn how to manage your

emotions in every situation while ensuring that you take care of the
emotional needs of the people around you. 
You may be thinking, “I can never be like this. I don’t have what it takes to
be like these people.”
Well, I am here to tell you that you can be just like these people. As you
begin to accept emotional intelligence into every area of your life, you will
begin to see an improvement in your technical abilities, interrelationships,
and overall success. It is through emotional intelligence that you can fuel
your performance. It impacts your confidence, optimism, self-control,
empathy, and social skills so that you can understand and manage your
emotions and accelerate success in every area of your life. 
It does not matter what your profession is, whether you work for a small or
large organization, whether you are a senior or junior in your company.
What matters is that realizing how effective you are at controlling your
emotional energies is the beginning of a successful adventure. Yes,
emotional intelligence may not be something taught and tested in our
educational curriculum, but the truth is that it is really important. 
The good news is that it is something you and I can learn, hence the reason
why we have compiled a book with all the tips that will help you improve
your emotional intelligence skills and implement them in everyday life. Our
clients have given us positive feedback on how these skills have not only
helped them advance in life, but also helped them motivate and inspire
others to be better. 
In short, emotional intelligence is what helps you identify your emotions,
manage them effectively, and constructively react to others’ emotions.
When you understand how those emotions shape your thoughts and actions,
you gain better control of your behavior and establish a new skill set that
will help you to effectively manage your emotions. When you are
emotionally conscious, you position yourself for growth and a deeper
understanding of who you truly are. This way, you can communicate better
with the people around you and strengthen your relationships. 
To get you started, you must discover the foundation of your emotional
intelligence. The best way to do that is to;

Practice observing your feelings
Take a look at your life – the chances are that you will notice how hectic
and busy your lifestyle is. It is this kind of life that makes it easy for you to
lose touch with yourself and your emotional feelings. You must try to
reconnect with your feelings by setting a timer for various points
throughout the day. As soon as the timer goes off, you stop what you are
doing, stand on your two feet, and take in a deep breath. Then bring your
thoughts to what you are feeling in that moment, where the emotions are
coming from, and where you feel the sensation in your body and what it
feels like. Realize that the more you practice this, the more you make it
your second nature. 
Pay attention to how you act
As you practice self-awareness, you must pay attention to how you act and
carry yourself in different situations. When you experience a certain
emotion, observe what actions are like and how they affect your daily
activities. Soon, you will realize that managing your emotional feelings
comes easily, and your reactions become more conscious.
 
Question your opinion
We all live in a hyper-connected world that makes it easy to fall into a
“bubble of opinions.” In other words, you find yourself in a state of
existence where your opinions are reinforced by others all the time. The last
thing you want is for your voice to be completely lost because you are
always flowing with the whims of life and what others decide for you. 
You must take time to assess both sides of the story and bring your views
forward with confidence. It does not matter what people think of you and
your opinions. What matters the most is that you are willing to get your
opinions challenged even when you feel that you are right. This way, you
gain a better understanding of others and become more receptive to their
ideas. 
Be responsible for your emotional feelings
The first thing about responsibility is accepting the fact that your emotions
and actions come from you. It does not matter what the situation or

circumstances are like because no one tells you to react the way you do. No
one tells you to feel what you feel. When you accept the responsibility of
your feelings and actions, you begin to impact your life positively. 
Celebrate the positives in your life
The key to emotional intelligence is to celebrate and reflect on all the
positives in your life. No one has a perfect life – we all go through ups and
downs. It does not matter whether you have more positives or negatives in
your life. The trick to celebrate every win – whether small or big. When
you embrace the positives in your life, you allow yourself to develop more
resilience and increase your chances of enjoying fulfilling relationships so
that you can successfully move past adversity.
 
Don’t ignore the negatives
Just because you have chosen to embrace and celebrate the positives in your
life does not mean that you ignore the negatives. You must take time to
reflect on all the negative feelings you might have, just as you would the
positive feelings. This will help you understand the root cause of these
negative feelings so that you can master how to control them and become
an all-rounded individual. 
Breathe
No matter what life throws your way, you must not forget to take time to
just breathe. Taking time to take deep breaths will not only help you master
how to manage your emotions but also help you avoid outbursts. Just walk
out the door and wash your face with cold water, take a walk, or just take in
the fresh air – anything to calm your nerves. This goes a long way in
helping you get a hold of what is happening so that you can effectively
respond to the situation. 
That said, emotional intelligence is a lifetime process! It is not something
you develop overnight. The truth is that to grow your emotional
intelligence; you have to train your mind to accept continual improvements
along the way – so that you can be better with each passing day.

Chapter 1 What is emotional intelligence, and why
is it important?
Most people don’t know what emotional intelligence is, even if it is
something we should have in our lives. Well, emotional intelligence simply
refers to the ability to identify our emotional feelings and manage them, and
that of the people around us. 
Emotional intelligence generally involves three key skills; 
●
     
Emotional awareness – the ability to identify your emotional
feelings and name them
●
     
Ability to harness our emotional feelings and apply them into
problem-solving, thinking and reasoning
●
     
Ability to manage our emotional feelings, which includes regulating
them where necessary and helping the people around us to do the
same
Unlike the general intelligence that has a psychometric test or scale,
emotional intelligence does not have one. This is the reason several people
think of emotional intelligence not as an actual construct but instead as an
interpersonal skill. However, despite all the criticism, emotional intelligence
is sometimes referred to the as emotional quotient. 
Today, several companies have included emotional intelligence tests into
their application and interview processes mainly because they think a high
emotional intelligence makes one a good coworker or leader. 
While there are research studies that have demonstrated a link between
emotional intelligence and job performance, there are others that show no
correlation. The lack of a scientifically valid scale to measure emotional
intelligence makes is challenging for one to accurately measure or predict
one’s emotional intelligence, whether at home or in the workplace.
 
So, what does it mean to be emotionally intelligent?
Well, someone who is emotionally intelligent is one who is highly
conscious of their emotional states, whether negative – sad, frustrated – or
positive – happy and subtle. If you can identify your emotional feelings and

manage them effectively irrespective of the situation you are in, then the
chances are that you have emotional intelligence. For you to be termed
emotionally intelligent, you must demonstrate that you are tuned to the
emotions others are experiencing. When you can sense and understand what
other people are going through, you become a better friend, parent, partner,
or leader. And the good thing is that you can hone these skills easily with
the tips we will give you in this book. 
That said, when emotional intelligence was first introduced to the masses, it
played a role in uniquely filling the missing link: people with average IQ
outperform those with a high IQ. It is because of this anomaly that a
massive wrench was thrown into what most people assumed that IQ was the
only source of success. 
Now, lots of research studies point to emotional intelligence as a central
factor in differentiating between high performers and the rest of the pack.
This correlation is so strong that over 90% of the top performers are said to
have high emotional intelligence. 
In other words, emotional intelligence is the intangible thing each one of us
has and influences how we behave, handle social complexities, and make
decisions to achieve success. 
Despite the significance EQ has on our lives, the truth is that its intangible
nature makes it hard for us to know how much of it we have and what it is
that we can do to improve it if we lack it. 
So, how then can you tell when you have emotional intelligence?
Robust emotional vocabulary
We all experience emotional feelings of different kinds, but the truth is that
we don’t handle them the same way. There are only a few people who can
accurately identify their emotions as they happen. Research demonstrates
that at least 36% of people can identify their emotions as soon as they
occur. This is such a huge problem because it means a large number of
individuals are unable to label their emotional feelings – hence contributing
to misunderstanding. This explains why people end up making irrational
decisions and counterproductive behaviors.

When you have a high EQ, you will not only master your emotions but also
understand them and use a vast vocabulary of feelings to do that. While
there are times when someone says that they feel “bad,” the truth is that
emotional intelligence allows one to specifically pinpoint their emotions as
either irritable, downtrodden, frustrated, or anxious. In other words, when
your word choice is specific, you gain a deeper insight into precisely what
you are feeling, its origin, and what you must do to overcome them. 
Curiosity about people
It does not matter whether you are an introvert or an extrovert because if
you are emotionally intelligent, you will demonstrate curiosity about the
people around you. It is through this kind of curiosity that you can
demonstrate empathy – a significant gateway to a high EQ. The more you
show someone that you care about them and what they are experiencing, the
more you will be curious about them. 
You embrace change
If you are emotionally intelligent, then you have the flexibility and ability to
constantly adapt to change. You will know that fear of change is the reason
why you will remain paralyzed and is a major threat to your happiness and
success in life. You must look for the change that is lurking around you and
then form a plan of action in case these changes happen.
You know your strengths and weaknesses
When you are emotionally intelligent, you will not only understand
emotions but also know what you are good at and what you are terrible at.
You will know who and what pushes your buttons within your surroundings
so that you can position yourself better to achieve success. Having a high
emotional intelligence simply means that you can lean on your strengths
and leverage them to realize your potential while raising your awareness of
your weak points so that they don’t hold you back from reaching your
fullest potential. 
You are a good judge of character
Did you know that much of emotional intelligence build down to social
awareness? This is simply your ability to read people, know what they are

all about, and gain a deeper insight into what they are going through. With
time, this skill goes a long way in helping you become an exceptional judge
of character so that others don’t become a mystery to you. It allows you to
know what makes them tick, understand the things that motivate them, and
the things they try to hide beneath the surface. 
You are hard to offend
Having a strong grasp of who you make it hard for others to get under your
skin. If you are emotionally intelligent, you simply are self-confident and
have an open mind – the two factors that help you develop a pretty thick
skin. The truth is, you can even poke fun on yourself or let other people
make jokes about you because you can draw a mental line between humor
and degradation. 
Letting go of mistakes
If you are emotionally intelligent, then you know better than to ruminate on
your past mistakes. You can distance yourself from your undoing without
necessarily forgetting them. When you keep your mistakes at a safe distance
but handy enough to refer to them when the need arises, you position
yourself to future challenges and achieve success. 
Well, no one said that this was going to be a walk in the park. The truth is
that to walk this tightrope between remembering and ruminating, you must
have a refined self-awareness. When you ruminate on your past mistakes,
you set yourself up for anxiety and becoming gun shy. On the other hand,
forgetting all about your past mistakes makes it easy for you to repeat them
again in the future. 
The key to balancing these is to learn how to transform your failures into
nuggets of improvement. This way, you create a tendency to bounce back
up each time you fall. 
Don’t hold grudges
Did you know that when you hold on to grudges, you activate negative
emotions as a stress response? Well, each time you think about an
unpleasant past event, the body sets into a fight-or-flight mode as a way of

surviving. This forces you to get up to either fight or run away for the hills
whenever you are faced with a threat. 
The truth is, when the threat is imminent, this reaction is essential for your
survival. However, when the threat is something that lies in ancient history,
holding on to it will only wreak havoc on your body and negatively affect
your health with time. According to research studies at Emory University,
findings demonstrate that holding on to grudges tends to elevate our blood
pressure and heart disease. 
In short, when you hold onto a grudge, you are choosing to hold on to
stress. And if you are emotionally intelligent, then you know to keep off
this tendency at all costs. When you let go of a grudge, it is not a sign of
weakness. Instead, it makes you feel better and sets you up for improved
health and overall wellbeing. 
Neutralizes toxic people
Dealing with difficult people is not only frustrating but also energy
draining. With high emotional intelligence, you are in a better position to
control your interactions with toxic people by ensuring that you can keep
your emotions in check. When you must confront a toxic person, you know
the importance of approaching them rationally. 
In other words, you can identify your emotions and ensure that your anger
of frustrations does not get the best of you into fueling chaos. You also
know that the other person has a standpoint and that if you can listen to
where they are coming from, you all agree on it common ground and find a
lasting solution. Even when things are completely derailing, people with
high emotional intelligence can take toxic people with a grain of salt to
ensure that they don’t let themselves be brought down. 
Don’t seek perfection
Emotionally intelligent people don’t set perfection as a target because they
know well that perfection does not exist. The truth is, we are all human, and
that fact alone makes us fallible. When you make perfection a goal, then the
truth is that you are setting yourself up for a nagging feeling of failure that
only makes you want to give up or lower your efforts. 

In other words, you end up spending much of your time complaining about
your failures and what it is that you could have done differently instead of
moving forward. Emotional intelligence allows you to view failure as a
lesson to improve yourself without forgetting to celebrate every small
achievement you have accomplished so that you can stay motivated to
accomplish more in your future. 
You disconnect
When you can take regular breaks off the grid, this indicates high emotional
intelligence. This is mainly because taking time off to reflect on yourself is
one of the best ways to keep off stress and ensure that you have things
under control so that you can live in the moment. Making yourself available
24/7 sets you up for constant baggage of stressors. 
You must force yourself to go offline from time to time to just breathe and
do nothing! When you turn off your gadgets and just focus on yourself, you
allow your mind and body to take a break. According to research, taking a
break from technology – something as simple as reading emails – can lower
stress levels. Through technology, we can constantly communicate and
expect that you are available round the clock. This makes it difficult for you
to enjoy a stress-free moment away from the busyness in everyday life.
When you take breaks, you allow yourself to have a change in your train of
thought and relax without worrying about when you will have work drop
onto your phone. 
Limit caffeine intake
When you are constantly taking caffeine, you trigger the release of
adrenaline – a source of the fight-or-flight response. It is this mechanism
that makes it easy for on to sidestep rational thinking in favor of something
fast for their survival. 
Well, one thing you must understand is that this kind of survival mechanism
is brilliant if a bear is chasing you. However, this is not something you need
when responding to a court of emails. Taking too much caffeine throughout
the day keeps your body in a hyper-aroused state of stress constantly such
that your emotions begin to overrun your actions. With high emotional

intelligence, you know that caffeine is not good for you and avoid allowing
it to get the best of you. 
Get enough sleep
It is hard to overemphasize the importance of sleep to boosting your
emotional intelligence and helping you manage your stress levels. Getting
enough sleep every day plays a significant role in ensuring that you give the
brain the time it needs to recharge, shuffle through the day’s memories,
storing them, and discarding anything that is not good for you. This ensures
that once you get up, your brain is not only alert but ready to get set go! 
People with high emotional intelligence understand that their self-control,
memory, and attention are reduced when they are sleep-deprived. Therefore,
ensure that you make sleep your top priority, henceforth
!
Stop negative self-talk in its tracks
Are you allowing negative self-talk to hold you back from reaching your
fullest potential? One thing you must bear in mind is that when you
ruminate on negative thoughts, you give away your power to them. The
trick is whenever you have negative thoughts come to your mind, ask
yourself whether they are facts or not. 
When you feel as though something always happens or never happens,
realize that this is the brain's way of perceiving a threat. Emotionally
intelligent people can separate their thoughts from facts so that they can
escape the cycle of negativity, gain a new outlook of life, and push forward
with optimism and positivity. 
Won’t allow anyone limits your joy
Do you let other people’s opinions deprive your sense of pleasure and
satisfaction? If you do, then you must realize that you are no longer the
master of your happiness. Being emotionally intelligent means that
whenever you feel good about something you have done, you will not let
anyone’s opinions or remarks take that good feeling away from you. 
Yes, it may be hard to switch off your reactions to what they say or think of
you. However, you don’t have to compare yourself to them. The trick is to
take their opinion with a grain of salt. This way, no matter what others

think, do or say about you, you allow your self-worth to rise from within
you and take control of your thought process and actions. 
That said, unlike IQ, you must note that emotional intelligence is malleable.
As you train your mind to repeatedly practice new, emotionally intelligent
behaviors, this promotes the growth of new pathways that make them into
habits. Your brain will start reinforcing the use of these behaviors, their
connection to the old and destructive behaviors to die off. Before you know
it, you start responding to your environment with emotional intelligence
without thinking about it.
 
Importance of emotional intelligence
There are several benefits that emotional intelligence has to offer – most of
which we will discuss in detail in the coming chapters. That said, emotional
intelligence plays a key role in leading us on the path to a fulfilled and
happy life. This is mainly by offering us a framework through which we can
apply standards of intelligence to our emotional responses and
understanding these responses to ensure that they are logically consistent
with our belief systems. 
With the ever-changing workplaces and the body of research, we must
master the art of emotional intelligence so that we can work with others
cohesively as a team, respond and adapt to change effectively, and manage
stress so that we can pursue our business objectives successfully. When you
work on improving your emotional intelligence, you set yourself up for
personal happiness, professional success, and overall well being. 

Chapter 2 The Four Attributes of Emotional
Intelligence
Self-management
You may be wondering what self-management has to do with your
emotional intelligence. Well, one thing that is important to bear in mind is
that self-management involves using what you know about your feelings so
that you can manage them in such a way that they can generate positive
interactions with the people around you. You want your emotions to
motivate you in all situations. When you acknowledge that you have
negative emotions, you position yourself to be in control of your actions. 
Think about it for a moment – if you are a manager at your workplace, do
you think people would want to work with you if you don’t have control
over yourself and the way you react to situations? Trust me; no one wants to
work – much less interact – with someone whose actions are informed by
their prevailing mood. Achieving results by bullying and shouting at others
is something of the past. It is something that has no place in the modern
world where people are aware of their rights, and employment tribunals are
there to ensure that workers are treated ways inhumanely. 
I am not saying that self-management means that you can never be angry.
We all go through situations that get on our nerves sometimes, and it is
perfectly reasonable to be angry. However, the key to being emotionally
intelligent is ensuring that you are in control of your feelings and can
channel them into problem resolution. 
Some people have a strong tendency to overstate the negative aspects of a
given situation in their minds. If you are one of them, you must apply the
reflective cycle in such situations so that you can have a realistic view of
what is happening and what you can do to yield the desired outcome. 
To engage your emotional intelligence, you must use your feelings in such a
way that you can make constructive decisions about your actions. When
you get stressed, it is easy to lose control of your emotions. It is easy to lose
the ability to act appropriately and thoughtfully. To put this into perspective,
take a minute to think back to a time when you were stressed and

overwhelmed. Was it easy to think with clarity? Did you make rational
decisions at that moment? 
Probably, not!
When you are stressed out and overwhelmed, the ability to think clearly and
to assess your emotions accurately tends to be compromised. The truth is,
emotions are bits and pieces of information that tell you about yourself and
the people around you. However, in the face of stress and threat, they seem
to take us out of our comfort zones, and we easily lose control of our
abilities and ourselves. 
Self-management ensures that you not only manage stress but also stay
emotionally present in every situation so that your emotions don’t override
your thoughts and self-control. It allows you to make informed choices that
ensure that you stay on top of the situation, control impulsive emotions,
actions, and healthily manage them. It allows you to take the initiative,
commit to the things that matter most in your life, follow through on these
commitments, and adapt to changing circumstances. 
Three steps of self-management
Step 1 Identify what you are feeling
Most of the time, when you miss a meeting, missed a deliverable, have an
easiness about your spouse, or long-term sentiments that something is
wrong within your surroundings, it is important that you identify that
emotion. Is it anger, sadness, anxiety, or frustration? Whatever your starting
point is, you must learn how to exercise your self-awareness before you do
something about it. 
Step 2 Determine the underlying cause
This is often a very challenging step because you need to assess, reflect, and
honestly find out the root cause of your emotional feelings. Are you
resentful of your boss because they told you that you missed the targets? Is
it your spouse you suspect is having an affair and is making you feel sad,
disappointed, or frustrated? Find the root cause of your emotions. 
Step 3 Act

Once you know what emotions you are feeling and where they are coming
from, the next thing is for you to act. There is always something you can do
to break out of the cycle of negative emotions. It can be something as
simple as recognizing the emotions you have are unjustified or misplaced,
or that you are directing them at the wrong person. 
When you recognize the truth behind your emotional feelings, you gain
better control over them so that you can manage them even when you are
angry or stressed out. Don’t get me wrong – I am not saying that you should
pretend as if these emotions are non-existent and just dismiss them. No, you
must accept that they are there and be willing to manage them. 
When you master the art of self-management, you set yourself up to think
logically about every situation and determine various ways you can handle
them. This way, you diminish the anger and fear you have so that your level
of emotional intelligence rises above normal. 
One thing you must bear in mind is that your team will always be looking
up to you for cues on what the right behaviors are and what is and what is
not acceptable. If you demonstrate an inability to control your own
emotions, then you are simply telling them that there is no reason to control
theirs. It is this lack of self-discipline that encourages people to ape
undesirable habits – what Goleman refers to as “emotional hijacking.” In
other words, you allow your mind to be taken by your primitive emotions
hence standing in the way of you making a realistic and objective
assessment of the situation. 
The truth is that these emotional breakdowns are building up gradually and
involuntarily – the symptoms of which are often overlooked. When you are
frequently being bullied and feel unsupported, your behavior may
eventually result in negative consequences. However, when you make an
honest evaluation of your actions and that of the people around you, you
will not only identify what the problem is but also find possible solutions to
the problem before it gets out of hand. 
In other words, the key to developing your emotional intelligence self-
management is conducting an honest appraisal of your behaviors. Once you
identify a negative form of behavior, you can work on eradicating or
controlling it. 

Think about it, do you often allow others’ moods and attitudes to affect
you? Are there times when you or any other member of your family/team
has been influenced in this manner? 
If so, then it is high time you made a conscious effort of insulating yourself
so that you can be objective when assessing the situation. Only a handful of
people can have this kind of effect on you, and you must know who they
are. It could be because you have a personal relationship with that person
that, in a way, is more profound than a usual working relationship. It could
be someone you respect, closely identify with, or admire. 
The point is that you raise your awareness of the fact that they influence
your emotions. Knowing that they exist plays a significant role in
minimizing the negative influence their emotions might have on you,
embracing who you are so that you can learn why their moods and attitudes
affect you. When you have this knowledge, you can make a conscious effort
to neutralize these negative emotions. 
Tips to improve your self-management skills
●
      
Breathe
●
      
Differentiate between emotions and reason
●
     
Share your goals with someone important in your life – a mentor or
a spouse
●
      
Count from one to ten
●
      
Sleep on it
●
      
Talk to someone you trust
●
      
Laugh it out
●
     
 
Think about it
●
      
Talk to yourself better
●
      
Visualize it
●
      
Get enough sleep
●
      
Get your body language in check
●
      
Workout
●
      
Control what you can and relinquish control over what you can’t
What did Steve Jobs do when someone in the audience publicly attacked
him during the Apple Developer Conference? Well, returning to his

company after a decade of being away, Steve Jobs was publicly attacked by
someone, and do you know how he responded? He used some of the self-
management tactics we have discussed here. 
The first thing was that he paused for a couple of seconds before saying a
word. He may or may not have counted to 10, but he paused and took in a
deep breath. This allowed him time to compose himself, get a realistic
perspective of the situation before he could say anything. He then took a sip
of water and said: “You know, you can please some of the people some of
the time, but …
”
Just doing that allowed his mind to change to a positive mindset. He then
took another long pause – possibly to gather his thoughts on what to say
next. You can do the same – be aware of your emotions and adequately
manage your emotions. It is not about what other people say or think about
you that matters; it is how you respond to their thoughts, actions, and words
that count! 
Self-awareness
Emotional self-awareness is the second element of emotional intelligence. It
refers to one’s ability to understand their emotions and how they affect their
performances. Think about it what you are currently going through, what do
you feel about it, why are you feeling that way? How is it helping or hurting
what you are trying to achieve? 
Self-awareness is also about how others see you and how you can align
your self-image with the bigger picture. It is about having a clear sense of
your strengths and weaknesses, something that gives you a realistic sense of
self-confidence. It is also something that offers you clarity of what your
values and purpose so that you become more decisive when you set your
course of action. As a leader, you can get candid and authentic, speak with
conviction about your vision. 
Let us consider the following example where a chief tech officer at a
company is bullying their colleagues without knowing it. The thing is that
this officer is good at what they do, but they suck at managing others.
Often, they would play favorites, tell people what to do, and do not seem to

listen to what they have to say. Anyone he doesn’t like is shut out. When
confronted about their behavior, they quickly deny and blames other people
or turns back to you, saying that you are the problem. 
What do you think about this tech officer? 
Well, they lack emotional self-awareness. 
According to research, a boss who is arrogant, stubborn, and a bully is often
considered by their subordinates as being incompetent. These character
traits have been shown to have a strong correlation with poor financial
results, poor management of talent, and a lack of motivation/inspiration to
the junior colleagues. Generally, they are a poor team leader. 
One study conducted by Korn Ferry Han Group reported that among leaders
with several strengths in emotional self-awareness, at least 92% have teams
with high energy and performance. In other words, when you are a great
leader, you tend to create a positive emotional climate that stirs motivation
and extra effort among employees – and this is because of a good emotional
self-awareness. On the other hand, leaders with low self-awareness were
reported to create at least 78% of a negative work climate.
 
That said, what you must bear in mind is that emotional self-awareness is
not something that you can achieve at one go and be done with it. Instead, it
is a trait that you have to keep nurturing every opportunity you get. It is a
continual endeavor and a conscious choice you make to be self-aware. The
good thing is that the more you practice, the more it gets ingrained in you
and becomes natural. In short, being self-aware is simply checking in with
your sensory experience regularly to allow a positive shift in behavior. 
The very first step to building your emotional intelligence is to raise your
awareness about your emotions. What you are currently feeling is often a
mirror of what you experienced during your early life. The ability to
manage core emotions – such as anger, fear, joy, and sadness – all depend
on your consistency and quality of early life’s emotional experiences. If
your primary caretaker, as a little child, valued and understood your
feelings, there is a high likelihood that your emotions are a great asset in
your adult life. However, if the vice versa happened, there is a chance that
you will try to run away or hide from your emotions. 

Take a minute to reflect on the following questions;
●
     
Do you experience emotional feelings that flow and change from
one moment to the next?
●
     
Are your emotional feelings accompanied by strong physical
sensations – such as chest pains, stomach cramps, or throat
blockage? 
●
     
Do you experience individual feelings and emotions, and do they
show on your facial expressions? 
●
     
Can you experience intense feelings strong enough to capture your
attention and that of others?
●
     
Do you pay close attention to your emotional feelings, and do they
inform your decision-making? 
If any of these experiences don’t ring a bell, then the chances are that you
turned off or tuned down your emotions. If you are going to build your
emotional intelligence and become emotionally stable and healthy, it is
important that you connect with your core feelings, embrace them, and get
comfortable with them. The only way you are going to achieve this is by
practicing mindfulness. 
In other words, being mindful is choosing to purposely focus your attention
on the present moment without judging. When you are mindful of what you
are doing at that very moment, it helps you shift your attention and thoughts
towards what you are doing at that moment so that you can appreciate the
bigger picture. It can calm and focus your mind so that you are more self-
aware of your surroundings. 
Tips on how to improve your self-awareness
Get out of your comfort zone
You might have heard the saying, “magic happens outside the comfort
zone!” Well, that is also true for emotions. If you look around your life, you
will notice that there are several instances where you run away from your
emotional feelings – and you are not alone. However, one thing you must
realize is that this is not a long-term plan. You must allow your feelings to
surface and offer the information it carries. 

Instead of trying to shove you're emotional away or running from them, you
must learn how to guide yourself to it and through it. You cannot ignore
what you are feeling because if you do, you are not doing yourself any good
because they will only disappear at that moment and resurface later. 
Realize that getting out of your comfort zone is not all that bad. If you are
going to expand your frontiers, you have to develop the willingness to do
things that might make you uncomfortable. Trust me, with practice; you
will start enjoying all the fruits of your labor. 
Identify your triggers
Think of a trigger as anything – a substance, situation, person, or condition
– that makes you emotional and prompts you to act in a certain way. For
instance, you may have a manager that feeds on others’ energy like a
vampire, and that makes you angry. It could be a noisy surrounding with
your colleagues gossiping and laughing loudly over the phone when you
need to concentrate on some work. It could be a colleague that lacks
effective communication or people management skills
Whatever it is, most people typically respond by shutting down. If this is
something that happens to you in a place where emotional outbursts are
considered a taboo, realize that enclosing those emotional feelings inside
will do you no good. This is because your body language will be screaming,
and someone keen enough will notice that. 
When you learn to identify your triggers, you are setting yourself up for
improved emotional intelligence. This is because you begin to learn how to
develop the ability to control the outcome of your actions. You will learn
how to calm down, take charge of your actions, and keep your presence of
spirit. To do that, you must identify the specific cases and begin
generalizing from there. When you have a deeper understanding of what
pushes your buttons, the situations become more manageable because the
emotions you experience will not come as a surprise to you anymore. 
It is also important that you go all the way to identifying the root cause of
your triggers. In other words, you are finding out exactly why those people
or situations get on your nerves. Why do you think a noisy surrounding
triggers agitation or irritation? Is it because you are more skilled in reading

and writing than you are in listening and talking? Or maybe they hate you
have for your manager is because they remind you of a past manager who
bullied you at the workplace? When you identify that your reactions are
channeled to the wrong person, you might be able to get along with people
better. 
Don’t judge your feelings
Feelings are like waves of the ocean; they come and go. The truth is that
they are just what they are – feelings- nothing more nothing less! Trying to
label your feelings as either “good” or “bad” or as “positive” or “negative”
will only cause you to lose your ability to recognize them and raise your
awareness of them. It is human nature to want to judge everything that
comes their way and then separate them into two large boxes. The truth is
that doing this will only make things counterproductive. 
The thing is, everything that you regard as a “bad or negative” feeling will
automatically be something you want to avoid at all costs. The truth is that
there is some shame that comes with feeling bad or having negative
feelings. On the other hand, when you have positive or good feelings, you
want them to linger, and you may even see the need to reward yourself for
having them. The problem is that you let them run wild, which eventually
drains you of your energy. 
The thing is, whether the feeling is good or bad, or positive or negative,
they carry certain information. You either feel content because you have
achieved something, frustrated because the reality is different from what
you expected, or sad because you lost something. 
However, if you allow your emotions to come and go just as they are –
without judgment – then you might just have the opportunity to understand
what they are and what the mind is trying to communicate. In other words,
your emotions will just run their course and vanish without trying to control
you. 
Don’t make decisions in a bad mood
There are times in life when we feel as though everything else is moving in
the wrong direction. Whether you call this bad luck, feeling down, or

depression, the truth is that you cannot feel anything right because there is a
black veil that clouds your thoughts. 
The problem is that once the bad mood takes charge of your brain, it is easy
to lose sight of the good things happening in our lives. You start to feel like
you hate where you live, where you work, what you do, and the people
around you irritate you. Even though you know deep inside that what you
think and feel is not true, you can’t seem to get rid of these thoughts and
emotions.
One thing you must bear in mind is that emotional intelligence, through
self-awareness, helps us to take note of the situation and accept it just as it
is. And you need to be okay with that knowing that there is little to nothing
you can do to change it. The trick is to wait it out – with time; it will just
pass. In other words, try to postpone making any life-changing decisions at
this point, at least until you are out of this zone!
Don’t make decisions in a good mood either
This is the other side of the equilibrium where you don’t want to make
major decisions just because you are feeling good – happy, ecstatic, or
excited about something. Think about it, when you are walking down the
streets and meet a salesman, they try to get you excited about what they are
selling to the point that you lose control of your mind. This happens such
that when they offer you their merchandise, they get you to feel good about
having it that you end up paying more for something that is not even worth
it. 
Don’t get me wrong – I am not saying that feeling good is a bad thing. The
point is, you must beware of your good moods just as much as you are of
bad ones. 
Get to the birds-eye view
Have you ever heard someone tell you that you are “above things?” well,
this is something applicable to emotional intelligence as well. Take a minute
to imagine yourself rise above your personality such that you can watch
yourself from above. Think of yourself soaring high like an eagle and then
watching yourself from high up there – getting a bigger view of yourself

from an observer’s eye. How many things do you think you will see and
understand about yourself? 
While you may not look at yourself from above, the truth is that taking on
an observer’s view of yourself might just be what you need to understand
your behavior. It will allow you to be aware of your thoughts and emotions
in every situation you go through in life. You must try injecting yourself
with the trigger and reaction so that you can process the whole information
and get a new perspective of things. The aim here is to constantly remind
yourself of the real emotional feelings underneath all the layers.
 
Revisit your values and actions accordingly
From where I stand, life is pretty much dynamic. The kind of work we do
every day is hard, and our families are very much demanding. Even in the
midst of all that, it is important that you set aside time to learn something
new, have fun, and be at peace. Engage in activities that give you these
things – such as playing sports with your kids, watching your favorite TV
series, responding to emails, and making phone calls to friends and family.
All these activities are enough to fill your day. However, these things are
also the reason why your focus is on the outside when you should look at
what lies inside you. 
One thing that must bear in mind is that all these things on your to-do list
can be overwhelming and draining of all the energy you have left. The trick
is to stop and review your values and actions. 
Take time to ask yourself whether your career is moving in the right
direction if your job requires you to do things you are not comfortable with,
if your colleagues treat you right, whether you have enough time for the
things that matter most in your life, or if your current path leads you where
you would like to be in a couple of years. 
All these things are not there to scare you about the present and the future,
but instead to help you evaluate your values, trust, responsibilities, and
determine whether they are sustainable. The goal is how you wish to change
the world and make it a better place for you and your family. 
Check yourself

It is important to understand that self-awareness is mostly an internal
process and that there are external implications of what happens inside you.
This is why you must learn to get in the habit of examining yourself
regularly to ensure that everything is okay. 
Think about how your face looks like, whether your eyes look swollen, if
your makeup is done right, what about your clothes, do they fit well? Are
you beginning to wrinkle? Is your working space tidy? Do you assume the
right posture when working? Do you communicate with confidence? When
walking, do you take long steps? 
The trick is to ensure that you are aware of your normal self and alert to the
times when you feel stressed. Realize that everything changes, and when
you are aware of the things happening in and around you, it becomes easy
to pick out stress factors fast enough before they can reach your conscious
mind. 
Fill your blind spot with feedback
You must remember the windows of knowledge – which simply refers to
the intimate parts of you that no one else knows about. Each one of us has
three parts. What most of us are aware of are the private and the public
parts of ourselves. However, what we fail to recognize is that blind spot –
the part that we do not see. 
The truth is, your view of self cannot be impartial, but other people can see
what you truly are. The question is, are you willing to seek others’ help?
You must talk to someone you trust – spouse, partner, parent, or friend – to
give you feedback about yourself. Ensure that you observe the rule of
communication – when you ask for feedback, you should listen more than
you talk. You must open your heart to the truth, and instead of trying to get
defensive, let the people closest to you tell you their observations truthfully
without trying to hold them back. 
That said, one of the foundations of emotional intelligence is self-
awareness. It is through self-awareness that you can learn how to spot your
emotions, the root cause of these emotions, and your reaction to them. With

time, you will learn how to master the control of them so that you can use
them to serve your mind and its true purpose. 
The last thing you want is to go through the motions of life without really
paying attention to your emotional feelings. You don’t want to completely
ignore your feelings or allow them to control you and get the best of you.
Realize that emotions are powerful forces that do either work miracles in
your life or ruin your life completely. By mastering the art of self-
awareness, you can finally take back the control of your life into your hands
and steer it in the direction you desire to go. 
Social awareness
It is one thing to recognize and understand your emotional feelings. Still, it
is quite another to accurately pick up and understand others’ emotions and
what they are going through. If you are going to improve your emotional
intelligence, you must be willing to suspend what you like so that you can
practice social awareness. You have to stop talking, running monologues in
your head, anticipating another person’s answers before they can even utter
a word, and trying to create answers when someone is speaking. 
In other words, social awareness requires that you shift your focus from self
to look outwardly towards others, learn about them, and appreciate them.
Social awareness is all about being grounded on our ability to recognize not
only others’ emotions but also understand them. While we may be tempted
to focus only on our emotions, that luxury is not there if you are going to
work in an environment where you are not the only one that exists in it. 
Realize that when you tune your emotions to other people, you allow
yourself to pick up on vital cues to what is happening with them. This way,
you can read the room and measure your response to ensure that it is
connected to the person you are directing it to. 
How can you do that?
Ensure that the lens you are looking through is clear
This simply means that you must be present and willing to give others your
undivided attention. You must brace yourself to take up the role of an

observer by using your five basic senses and realize that your sixth sense is
your emotions. 
Note that your emotions are important lenses for the brain and are what
helps you interpret the cues from others. Ensure that you are mindful
enough not to over project your emotions on others. Instead, use them as
spider senses to stay alert and focus on what others are going through. 
Watch their body language
While someone may not always find the right words to express their
feelings, the truth is that body language says it all. It is constantly
communicating. According to research, it is not yet clear how much of the
message is interpreted through body language. However, one thing you
must understand is that even if there is a disparity between words and body
language, you believe the latter, right? 
This is why when you are evaluating a person’s body language; you must
do a head-to-toe assessment. Start with their eyes and let your eyes lock
with theirs – are they blinking, shifting, or trying to look away? That might
be indicative of deception, sadness, or depression. Look at their face, is
their smile forced or authentic? What about their posture – is it upright or
slouched? Are their hands fidgeting? All these cues help inform your social
awareness when interacting with others. 
Listen carefully
Listening is one way of communication. There is no way someone can talk
nonstop without really paying attention to what the other has to say – by
listening. It is not just about words but also the tone of their voice, the speed
at which these words are used, and the spacing between words. 
When you are interacting with others, you must learn how to make a
conscious effort to stop everything you are doing to just pay attention to
what they have to say, how they say, and why they are saying it in the first
place. When someone is speaking to you, don’t continue answering an
email, texting, or doing some other activity. Give them your undivided
attention, observe, and listen so that you can accurately pick up every piece
of information they are trying to deliver. 

That said, social awareness goes a long way in helping us recognize and
interpret non-verbal cues other people use when communicating a message
to us. It is these cues that help you know what others are feeling, how their
emotions are changing every moment, and what is truly important to them. 
Note that mindfulness is an ally of emotional and social awareness. To build
your social awareness, you must recognize the important role of
mindfulness in the social process. The truth is, you will not be able to pick
up nonverbal cues when you are trapped inside your head, thinking about
things that don’t even matter. If you are going to be socially aware, then you
must be present at the moment. 
While you may pride yourself in your ability to multitask, the truth is that it
will cause you to miss subtle emotional shifts happening in other people,
which eventually gets in the way of you understanding them. The trick is to
set your thoughts aside and then focus on the interaction itself. Follow the
flow of the other person’s emotional response by realizing that it is a give-
and-take process that calls for attention to changing emotional experiences. 
By focusing on others, your self-awareness does not have to diminish.
When you invest your time and efforts on others, you make it easy to gain a
deeper insight into your emotional state, values, and beliefs. If you are
uncomfortable hearing others express their views and opinions, you learn
something important about yourself. 
Relationship management
This is about making your relationships effective, fulfilling, and fruitful.
The trick to doing that is by becoming aware of how effectively you can use
nonverbal cues when communicating with others. The truth is, it is almost
impossible to avoid transmitting nonverbal messages to the people around
us concerning your feelings and thoughts. 
The muscles on your face – especially those around the eyes, forehead,
mouth, and nose – play a significant role in conveying emotions without
even using words. They also allow you to read other people’s emotions.
When you master how to use and interpret these cues, you can significantly
improve your relationships. 

The other way is by using humor and play to relieve stress. These are
natural antidotes to stress, and they can lower the burden so that you can
keep things in perspective. Laughter does not only relieve stress, but it also
brings the nervous system into balance, calms the body, sharpens the mind,
and makes you more empathetic. 
Finally, you must learn to see conflicts as opportunities to get closer to
others. In every human relationship, conflicts and disagreements are quite
inevitable. You cannot possibly have your needs, expectations, and opinions
met all the time – and that is not necessarily a bad thing. The truth is,
conflict is good, and resolving them healthily and constructively goes a
long way in strengthening trust between people. When conflict is not
perceived as threatening, it can foster creativity, freedom, and safety of
relationships.
 
Criteria for effective relationship management
Decision
You must make every decision regarding what the best course of action is in
a given situation. This is something that should be informed by prior
research you do to deepen your understanding of how others feel and why
they feel that way.
The truth is that you will have thoughts about varied ways of interacting
with others and the different reactions you are likely to get when you say or
do something. There is also a chance that you will be aware of the effect
this has on you and how to manage it appropriately. 
Interaction with others
The way you interact with others should be informed by the research you
conduct, and you could write it, or communicate with them face to face or
through group discussions. 
An outcome
You must realize that what you say or do and how you say it is informed by
certain outcomes you desire to achieve. This is what makes relationship
management an intentional activity.

Your needs
Your desired outcomes must be guided by particular needs you wish to
meet, one at a time. 

Chapter 3 Busting myths about Emotional
Intelligence
As a human being and a leader, it is kind of difficult to not see the
importance of emotional intelligence. It is because of emotional intelligence
that I have achieved success both in business and life in general. It is this
skill that has helped me see and understand my clients’ pain points,
stimulate a positive working environment, and improve my relationships
both at the workplace and outside. 
However, despite emotional intelligence’s popularity and usefulness,
several myths are surrounding it. It is a real shame having them because it
can be a powerful thing you can use to drive success and happiness into
your life. Here are some of the misconceptions about emotional intelligence
that you need to let go of so that you can make the most of it in your career
and life. 
Emotional intelligence does not exist
There are people – including psychologists – who believe that there is no
such thing as emotional intelligence. The truth is that emotional intelligence
is a relatively new concept, and different people have different ways of
defining what it is. One thing you must bear in mind is that testing for
emotional intelligence is not a scientific thing to do. 
Emotional intelligence is real, and it is something that dates back to the ’30s
and ’40s when people were trying to express their interest in this area.
Edward Thorndike came up with the term social intelligence and explained
how this was a component essential in our lives and in ensuring that we
succeed in what we do. Several other people contributed to emotional
intelligence until Goleman took it to the next level in 1995. 
Even though this took a journalist to spread the concept across to the
masses, the truth is that psychologists have been trying to understand this
concept for decades. While some believe that this is not something that
exists, there are several other experts who strongly believe and demonstrate
its existence.
 
It is all about empathy

Even after decades of writing and speaking to people about the science of
emotional intelligence, it is interesting that there are still people who
believe in one or more of emotional intelligence myths. What is shocking is
that most people think that emotional intelligence is all about empathy.
While empathy is a component of emotional intelligence, the truth is that it
is only a slice of the whole ability. It is much more complicated than just
being charmingly empathic. It is the capacity of one to recognize their
emotional feelings and those of the people around them, how to manage
these emotions, and interact effectively with others. It is through emotional
intelligence that one learns how to strike a healthy balance between social,
emotional, and intelligence competencies. 
It is not about awareness but behavioral change
According to researchers, raw knowledge in itself is not about a change in
behavior. For instance, we all know that smoking, eating fast foods every
day, and lack of physical exercise is bad for our health. Even with this
knowledge, people still need to be motivated to change their habits so that
they can make choices that support their overall wellbeing. It is about
calling people into the right kind of surroundings for the desired outcome to
happen. 
Just because you are aware of another person’s emotional feelings does not
mean that you have high emotional intelligence. It is about using the
knowledge you have and the motivation to do it and the right environment
that supports your actions. 
If you are a manager, you can use emotional intelligence to your advantage
during the hiring process. While it would not hurt to screen people’s levels
of emotional intelligence, what is good is to train them and equip them with
the right skills to improve their EQ. Henceforth, you can build a culture and
surrounding where these skills are put into good use.
 
Emotional intelligence is equated with other personality traits
There is no way you can equate emotional intelligence to such personality
traits as optimism, calmness, agreeableness, motivation, and happiness,
among others. Even though these personality traits are very important and
help one achieve success in their lives, the truth is that they have very little

to do with intelligence. They have very little to do with emotions and
absolutely nothing to do with actual emotional intelligence. 
Unfortunately, there are trained psychologists who tend to confuse
emotional intelligence with character traits. The truth is that these
personality traits should be called exactly what they are instead of mixing
them up in an assortment named emotional intelligence. 
Emotional intelligence predicts success
For decades, people think that those who are most successful in life are
emotionally intelligent. While it is easy to see how emotional intelligence
influences how a person communicates, leads and negotiates, research
demonstrates that we tend to conduct business with the people we choose
and like. 
Yes, emotional intelligence plays a significant role in one’s success, but it is
not the only indicator/predictor. Take a look at all the top successful people
across the world and assess them one by one – you will be surprised to find
that most of them lack even an ounce of emotional intelligence. 
What you must understand is that people are very diverse, and there are
equally diverse ways one can achieve success, become accomplished
leaders, enjoy a successful professional life, and build a brilliant company.
Unfortunately for some, emotional intelligence is not part of the equation.
According to research published in the journal of Applied Psychology, there
is no correlation between emotional intelligence and job performance.
 
You either have EI, or you don’t
Some people believe that emotional intelligence is innate. In other words,
they strongly think that it is something you are born with or without. The
truth is that emotional intelligence is something that anyone can learn and
develop. 
Yes, it may not happen overnight, but you can become emotionally
intelligent if you continually practice self-awareness, relationship
management, social awareness, and self-management. It is through these
skills that you can master how to channel your emotions in the right
direction and for the right reasons. The best way to start is to become

mindful of your words and know your triggers. Trust me; once you step up
your empathy skills, you are on your way to achieving emotional
intelligence. 
You have to give up emotional intelligence to be mentally tough
Over the last couple of years, several people have tried to discuss the
importance of mental toughness. This is something that is commonly
directed towards people who have served in the army – specifically the
Navy Seals and marines. 
I have found this advice to be more useful in helping one strengthen their
focus and resilience. However, when it comes to emotional intelligence,
mentally tough people tend to ignore their emotions and those of the people
around them. And this is something that clashes with misconceptions that
emotions are a sign of weakness. 
If you cannot raise your awareness of your emotional feelings and that of
the people around you, there is absolutely no way you can say that you are
emotionally intelligent. Rather than trying to be mentally tough, you
mustn’t allow other people to use your emotions against you. For instance,
if you see a high-performing athlete, they might seem that they are in the
“zone,” but the truth is that they have no idea what is happening around
them. They tend to keep a cool head just until the game is over.
 
Realize that mental toughness is not just about driving stricter timelines. It
is about taking a pause just to listen to what lies inside you so that you have
a better understanding of yourself and those around you and where they are
coming from. It is about having the discipline not to get too immersed in
emotions. 
There is no dark side to emotional intelligence
Whenever we talk about emotional intelligence, it is always about
something positive. However, just like any other force, there is always a
light and dark side to everything. A good example of this has a leader who
drums-up fear just so that they can satisfy their own selfish needs. In this
case, it would be to keep employees in check or just have people vote for
them. 

When people hone their emotional skills, they increase their likelihood of
manipulating others. This is mainly because when you can control your
emotional feelings, you tend to mask your true feelings. When you know
that other people are experiencing certain emotional feelings, the chances
are that you will tug at their heartstrings and motivate them to go against
their best interests. 
This does not mean that you should start being wary of emotional
intelligence. If you have bolstered your emotional intelligence, you will be
in a better position to identify when someone else is trying to cover your
eyes and cloud your judgment
.
It does not influence our decisions
In reality, it is not possible to decide without have an emotional bias. The
truth is that every feeling starts with an external stimulus irrespective of
what someone said or what the physical events are. From that point, the
brain generates an emotional feeling that causes the body to produce
responsive hormones. These hormones, in turn, get into the bloodstream to
create either a positive or negative feeling. 
There is no correlation between emotional intelligence and physical
wellbeing
According to research studies, having a higher emotional intelligence is
associated with the improved psychological and physical health of an
individual. This is something that you and I might consider obvious, right?
Having the ability to notice, understand, and repair our moods goes a long
way in ensuring that we make healthier decisions in life. For instance, if
you are stressed, you might feel the need to turn to comfort foods,
cigarettes, alcohol, or something else just to try and overcome that emotion.
Unfortunately, all these things you are turning to are unhealthy vices. The
worst thing is that when you ignore these emotional feelings, you start
experiencing such symptoms as fatigue, stomach pain, muscle tension, and
other potentially life-threatening ailments like heart disease. 

Chapter 4 Steps on how to grow Emotional
Intelligence
Step 1 Tapping into your emotions
Note your emotional reactions to events throughout the day
It is easy to place your emotional feelings on your experiences throughout
the day. One thing you must note is that taking the time to acknowledge
how you feel about your experiences is critical to improving your emotional
intelligence. Ignoring your feelings means that you are ignoring important
information that has a significant impact on your mindset and how you
carry yourself. You must choose to focus your attention on your emotional
feelings so that you can easily connect them to your experiences. 
For instance, if you are at the workplace in a meeting and suddenly a
colleague cuts you off when you are still presenting your point. What
emotions are you likely to experience? What are you are being praised for
the good work you have done, what would you feel? 
When you get into the habit of naming your emotions as they happen, you
raise your awareness of the surroundings and every experience you go
through along with the emotions those experiences stir up. This way, you
start to increase your emotional intelligence little by little. 
The trick is for you to get in the habit of tapping into your emotions
throughout the day. Think about what you are feeling as soon as you get up
and before you go to bed, and make it a habit. 
Pay attention to your body
Rather than trying to ignore the physical manifestations of your emotional
feelings, you must start listening to them. Realize that your mind and body
are interconnected with each other, and none can survive without the other.
In other words, the body and mind affect each other deeply
.
To raise your emotional intelligence, you must learn how to read physical
cues and use them as clues to finding out what emotions you are
experiencing. For instance, when you are stressed, you might feel like there
is a knot in your stomach, a tightening on your chest, or paced breathing.

When you are sad, it might feel like getting up with slow and heavy limbs.
When you are happy or anxious, you might feel butterflies in your stomach
or your heart racing fast. 
Observe how your emotions and behavior are connected
Take a minute to reflect on the last time you felt a strong emotion; how did
you react? 
Often, when we feel strong emotional feelings, we try to mask them so that
we don’t have to deal with them much less have people realize that we are
going through something. Well, emotional intelligence is about tuning into
your gut feeling in every situation you experience every other day instead
of choosing to react without really taking the time to reflect. 
Realize that the more you gain a deeper understanding of what spurs your
impulses, the more you increase your emotional intelligence so that you are
in a better position to use what you know to change your behavior in the
future. 
Here are a couple of examples of behaviors and what underlies them;
●
     
Feeling embarrassed or insecure has a likelihood of making you
withdraw from others and from engaging in conversation. 
●
     
When you are angry, you might realize your voice rise or stomp
away angrily
●
     
When you are overwhelmed, you might panic and lose track of what
matters the most in your life. 
Avoid judging your own emotions
Do you know that every emotional feeling you have is valid – even if it is
negative? One thing you must note is that even if your emotions are
negative, judging them will only inhibit your ability to feel them fully and
hence inability to use them positively. 
Think of it this way – every emotion you are feeling carries bits and pieces
of information connected to something that is happening around you.
Without this information, you will remain in the dark about what the right

way to react is. This explains the reason our ability to feel our emotions is a
form of intelligence. 
Yes, this is not something you will master overnight, but with the practice
of letting go of negative emotions, you can effectively connect them to what
is happening around you. For instance, if you are bitterly envious, the first
thing you need to ask yourself is what that emotion is telling you about the
whole situation. It is important that you fully experience every positive
emotion, as well. Try to connect your satisfaction or happiness to what is
happening in your life so that you can master how to feel them often. 
Notice patterns in your emotional history
It is one way to learn about recognizing your feelings, but it is quite the
other to connect them to your experiences. When you have a strong
emotion, it is important to try and reflect the time when you last felt that
way. Try to assess what happened before, during, and after the event. 
This will help you see a pattern so that you can exert more control over
your behavior. Take note of how you handled the situation before and what
the outcome was. This way, you can make a better decision this time to
handle the situation differently so that you can get the desired outcome. It is
also important that you keep a journal of emotional reactions and how you
feel with each passing day so that you can determine whether there is a
pattern in the manner in which you react to situations. 
Practice deciding how to behave
One thing you must bear in mind is that you can’t help what emotions you
feel. However, you can choose to stay connected to everything that is
happening around you. Without this set of information, you are likely to be
left out in the dark about how you can appropriately react. This is why
having the ability to feel your emotions is a form of intelligence. 
When something unpleasant happens in your life, you must take a moment
to feel your emotions. Allow that wave of sadness and anger wash over you.
Once that wave is gone, the next thing is for you to decide on what the
appropriate course of action should be. Instead of repressing your feelings,
you must communicate them or keep trying instead of throwing a towel. 

Don’t try to escape your emotions. Yes, letting your negative feelings rise to
the surface may not be the best thing to do, and you may be tempted to
tamp them down by drinking yourself silly, burying your head in movies, or
turning on habits that numb your pain. The truth is that when you do this,
your EQ will start going down.  
Step 2 Connecting with other people
Be open-minded and agreeable
When it comes to emotional intelligence, being open and agreeable go hand
in hand. When you have a narrow mind, you are generally saying that you
have a low EQ. however, when you allow your mind to be open, you not
only gain understanding and reflect on what is happening internally, but it
also gets easier to handle conflicts in a self-assured and calm manner. You
will simply become socially aware of what others are going through and see
possibilities begin to open to you. 
One of the best ways you can strengthen your EQ is to listen to debates on
radio or Television. Ensure that you consider both sides of the argument and
find out what subtleties require your close inspection. When someone fails
to react the same way you would, don’t try to be angry at them. Instead,
consider the reasons they reacted that way and try to see things from their
perspective.
 
Improve your empathy skills
Empathy simply refers to the ability to recognize how others are feeling so
that you can share emotions with them. When you are an active listener, you
can pay attention to what others are saying so that you get a better sense of
what they are feeling. In other words, you are using the situation to make
informed choices that will help improve your relationships – and that is a
sign of emotional intelligence. 
If you want to grow your empathy, you must be willing to put yourself in
the other person’s shoes. Try to think about how you would react if it were
you in the same situation. When you actively imagine what it must be like
to experience the same situation, you will not only identify with their
hardship but also see ways to help them through support and care.

Whenever you see someone experiencing strong emotions, the first thing
you need to ask yourself is how you would react in the same situation.
Being truly interested in what the other person is saying or experiencing
helps a great deal in ensuring that you react more sensitively. Rather than
allowing your thoughts drift from side to side, ask yourself questions and
put what they are saying in summary form so that they know that you are in
the conversation with them. 
Read people’s body language
You must read between the lines and pick up what the other persona is truly
feeling by focusing on their body language and facial expressions. There
are times when people say things when their body language and facial
expression is saying a different thing. You must practice being observant so
that you can pick up on what is less obvious – because that is where
people’s emotions lie. 
If you are not sure that you can accurately interpret another’s body language
and facial expressions, try taking a quiz. When they raise their voice, it
indicates that they are not only stressed but also angry about the whole
situation.
 
See the effect you have on others
When it comes to emotional intelligence, understanding others’ emotions is
only half the battle. It is important that you also understand what effect you
have on them. When you are around people, do you tend to make them
nervous, anxious, angry, or cheerful? When you walk into a room where
people are having a discussion, do they get enthusiastic and open up more,
or do they retract and end the conversation? 
When you put these things into perspective, you will not only identify the
patterns you need to change but also see how you can appropriately change
to improve the situation. If you are someone who tends to pick fights with
loved ones or cause people to close up when you are around them, you
might need to consider changing your attitude so that you improve the
emotional effect you have on others. 
Start by asking your loved ones what they think about your emotionality
and where you can improve so that you become a better person. It could be

your tone of voice, listening skills, or something else. Whatever it is, you
can ask the people you trust to help you recognize the effect you have on
others and how they can help you change for the better. 
Practice being emotionally honest
When someone tells you that they are “fine” with a scowl on their face, then
it means that they are not communicating honestly. The same thing
happens; you are the person on the other side of a conversation. One thing
you must realize is that for people to read you better. You have to be able to
physically open up about your emotions. When you get into an argument,
tell people that you are angry, upset, or disappointed in them. When
something is making you happy, share that happiness and joy with the
people around you. 
When you are yourself, you make it easy for other people to get to know
you better. People will tend to trust you more when you show them where
you are coming from. That said, one thing you must not forget is that there
is a line: learn to control your emotions so that you don’t hurt the people
around you. 
Step 3 Putting EQ to Practical Use
See where you have room for improvement
In life, being intellectually capable is very important. However, being
emotionally intelligent is an essential need. When you have high emotional
intelligence, you are in a better position to seize job opportunities as they
present themselves or lead a better relationship. The four core elements of
emotional intelligence we have discussed in the previous chapter will help
you figure out where in your life, you need improvement. Is it self-
awareness, self-management, social awareness, or relationship
management? Whatever it is, you can work on improving it and boost your
emotional intelligence.
Lower your stress level by raising your EQ
When you hear someone say that they are stressed, what they are simply
saying is that they are feeling overwhelmed by a wide range of emotions.
Life is filled with difficult situations ranging from relationship breakups to
job loss. In between these things are millions of stress triggers that have the

potential of making any daily issue a challenge. If you are stressed a lot, it
is hard to behave the way you want to. However, when you have a plan in
place to help you relieve stress, you stand a chance of improving your
emotional intelligence and all aspects surrounding it. 
What triggers your stress? What can you do to help alleviate your stress?
Create a list of all forms of stress relief from hanging out with friends to
taking a walk to enjoy nature – anything to put it into good use. That said, if
you feel that your stress levels are getting out of hand, you must consider
getting the help you need from a professional therapist. They can give you
the tools you need to cope with stress and raise your EQ in the process.
 
Be more light-hearted at home and work
When you have optimism, it becomes easier to see the beauty in life. It
becomes easy to turn your awareness into everyday objects so that you can
share your emotional feelings with the people in your life. Trust me; no one
wants to sit and spend time with someone who lacks optimism. 
When you are optimistic, you draw people to yourself and enjoy all the
possibilities these connections have to offer. If you are negative, on the
other hand, you will push people away instead of building your resilience.
Emotionally intelligent people know how to use their humor and fun to
make themselves and the people around them feel happier and safer – and
they can use laughter to get through tough situations. 

Chapter 5 Emotional Intelligence at
school/workplace
Each passing day, each one of us makes emotionally charged decisions.
Each time we are planning something, we feel as though our plan A is
better than plan B and end up making choices based on our gut instincts or
emotions. However, when we understand where these emotions are coming
from in the first place, only then will we become attuned to each other –
especially when working in a team. 
With the increase in globalization, emotional intelligence has found a
significant place in our lives because the places where we school or work
have become more cross-cultural and global. It is because of globalization
that our interactions have become complex along with how we express
these emotions. 
One thing you must remember is that emotional intelligence in school or at
the workplace all boils down to expressing, understanding, and managing
good relationships and addressing problems even when you are under
intense pressure from above. 
Today, the conventional measure of intelligence pays attention to logic and
reasoning in such areas as math and reading comprehension. The general
idea that this kind of reasoning is what determines our success and
productivity at the workplace is persuasive and intuitive as well. This is
mainly because it measures our ability to grasp and digest facts in our
surroundings. 
However, the idea that there is only one form of intelligence has recently
been subjected to intense scrutiny. In the classroom, many psychologists
have embraced the theory of multiple intelligences. The two major areas
that are measured in tests include verbal-linguistic intelligence and logical-
math intelligence. But these are only two areas out of nine different bits of
intelligence with varied features. 
That said, not all these intelligence have found their way into the world of
business. For instance, bodily-kinesthetic intelligence is what most dancers,
athletes, and other forms of physical labor use. It is through this form of

intelligence that minds have been opened to greater possibilities of thinking
and achieving success.
 
On the other hand, the ideas about rational intelligence took root from the
enlightenment that happened soon after scientific thoughts were codified for
the very first time. The very early facet used by natural philosophers was
the idea of rational objectivity, which required that individuals strive to
view the world around them not as they desire it to be but as it is. While this
idea may seem sound on the surface, the problem is that it often causes
people to move away from using their gut feelings and using their emotions
in finding solutions to real-life problems. It is important to note that rational
intelligence does not only focus on hard facts but also logical reasoning that
results from unproductive scenarios of win-lose cases. 
In the workplace, today, excelling means striking a balance between
interpersonal intelligence and intrapersonal intelligence. The former simply
refers to the ability to detect and respond to other people’s emotions,
moods, desires, and motivations. On the other hand, the latter simply refers
to the ability to raise our awareness of self so that we are more aligned with
our beliefs, values, and thought processes. 
When you combine these concepts, what you get is a good overview of
emotional intelligence and how they are related to business leadership.
When you don’t have the guiding influence of rational intelligence,
emotional intelligence ends up being subjective in such a way that it is no
longer conducive to business goals. However, if they are harnessed
appropriately, it serves as the key to driving internal collaborations and
external alliances. 
EI is the key to communication in the workplace and school
In its most refined form, emotional intelligence offers empathy, which is
important in helping us to fully understand others’ perspective even when it
contradicts our view of things. According to research, there is evidence that
shows women who have high emotional intelligence tend to act in
collaborative ways by embracing an inclusive leadership style as compared
to men. 

It does not matter whether you are a man or woman when you practice
emotional intelligence, there are so many more benefits it has to offer at the
workplace and to all stakeholders across the industry. This is by;
●
     
Helping leaders to motivate and inspire good works among its
employees by understanding others’ motivators. 
●
     
Bringing more people to the table and helping one avoid pitfalls of
group thinking.
●
     
Empowering leaders to not only recognize possibilities but act on
opportunities that other people may not be aware of in the first place
●
     
Assisting in conflict identification and resolution in such a fair and
even-handed manner
●
     
Producing higher morale and helping other people tap and leverage
their professional potential to the fullest. 
Just like rational intelligence, emotional intelligence is something you and I
can cultivate by exerting effort and willingly taking time to study more. The
very first step to developing emotional intelligence is by strengthening your
power of introspection. It is about recognizing your emotional feelings,
thought processes, and biases so that whenever you are making decisions,
they are not only informed but well-rounded. When you exercise emotional
intelligence, you must act in confidence, rise above your fears and worries,
and be able to question the status quo and bypass knee-jerk reactions. 
Emotional intelligence in hiring processes
Even though technical skills are things that can be imparted through
training, the truth is that it is more challenging to teach emotional
intelligence during the recruitment process at the workplace. While
companies can integrate theories of emotional intelligence in their hiring
processes and professional development in all spheres, the truth is that it is
not easy to achieve that with a 100% accuracy. 
For instance, when hiring entry-level employees, you may wish to test for
their EQ when you have a group of candidates competing for the same new
position or a promotion. Most managers, leaders, and stakeholders
identified as having high emotional intelligence and high leadership
potential tend to deliver better results as part of their development process. 

Even though most roles at the workplace could benefit from emotional
intelligence, the truth is that not all roles require highly developed
emotional intelligence. The higher one climbs in their career ladder, the
more valuable emotional intelligence becomes. 
This explains why professionals such as the Human Resource or Public
Relations departments benefit a lot from emotional intelligence because
they are mostly involved in the hiring process. This is mainly because their
emotional development plays a significant role in helping companies
maximize their contributions and optimize their investments for future
growths and developments. 
Emotional intelligence in the globalized economy
Just as the global economy has developed into a system of partnerships,
negotiations, and communications, emotional intelligence plays a bigger
role in the public sphere. This is why emotional intelligence is strongly
correlated to such traits as self-control, perseverance, and increased
performance and productivity even under pressure. It is what offers leaders
with the emotional fortitude to adjust and adapt to change, deal with
setbacks, and achieve goals no matter their skills. 
It does not matter how the economy transforms. What matters most is that
conventional intelligence will always be the center of success in the global
economy. That said, bear in mind that even the most technical of all roles
require one to greatly expand their networks with diversified stakeholder
portfolios, taking up roles in complex atmospheres, and investing both
emotional and mental capital to handle the most unexpected of situations.
Both rational and emotional intelligence are here to stay, and it takes
brilliant leaders, managers, and students to exhibit both

Chapter 6 Emotional Intelligence and health
Physical health
According to research, there is evidence that shows emotional intelligence
has a significant impact on our physical health directly. Instead of using a
traditional aspect of emotional intelligence, you had better use trait meta-
mood scale (TMMS), that speak to the core aspect of EQ;
Attention
This refers to the ability to take note and focus our attention on our moods. 
Clarity
This simply refers to the ability to clearly understand the nature of your
moods. 
Repair
This refers to one able to maintain a positive mood; repair negative
emotions were necessary to achieve their goals.
When you look at things from this perspective, what you will note is that
emotional intelligence can affect human physical health. For instance, you
have the power of attention, clarity, and repair; there is a high likelihood
that the following scenario holds to you. 
First, you might begin to feel easily irritable and cannot seem to put your
mind on one thing. After a couple of considerations, you realize that you
didn’t have your breakfast because you woke up late and had to prepare the
kids for school and get ready for work. You realize that all you have had are
two cups of coffee since you woke up. What you are feeling essential is
hunger pangs. You decide to take a break to go into the breakroom to fix
yourself a healthy snack because you can’t hold till lunch, which is still 2
hours away.
 
In the above rudimentary example, the truth is that you paid attention to
your mood, identified the reason that underlies it, and exerted your effort
into repairing the negative emotions you are feeling before they get out of

hand – by coming up with a solution that will address your needs and
contribute to your desired outcome. 
What do you notice about this example? Well, the truth is that emotional
intelligence positively affects one’s health. 
Several research studies that have been conducted match the elements of
emotional stress and behavioral response to heart, hormonal, and enzymatic
activity. Some involved research participants are writing about their
traumatic emotional events – including recall and assessment. During these
sessions, their blood pressure was under evaluation. 
Without offering an exhaustive account of the research studies, the results
demonstrated that people who accurately perceive their emotional feelings
could cope with stressful situations. They also demonstrated the ability to
overcome hesitance in seeking medical help, accepting changes in their
bodies, and proactively seeking a resolution to achieve better health. 
This is something that can be manifested in such habits as an improved diet,
overcoming alcohol addiction, and a regular workout regimen. All these
behavioral patterns are associated with strong emotional intelligence,
increased level of dynamism, accepting personal reality, and being
accountable to own wellbeing. 
In other words, self-awareness, motivation, and self-management increase
your likelihood of enjoying positive health irrespective of how and when
they manifest in your life. 
Mental health
According to research, mental health conditions are linked to lower levels
of emotional intelligence. For instance, someone with Borderline
personality disorder (BPD) has been shown to show heightened sensitivity
to the expression of emotional feelings. What is interesting is that people
with BPD often struggle to label their emotions and what they truly mean.
The downside to this is that they cannot seem to control their emotions. 
Someone with depression has been shown to have a lower EQ score. These
kinds of people tend to demonstrate less sensitivity to changing emotional
contexts, hence causing them to get stuck in negativity. 

Social anxiety, on the other hand, has been linked with a low EQ as well.
Such a person tends to fear what others will think or say about them. They
have a high likelihood of perceiving neutral expressions like hostility,
which causes them to misinterpret social cues. 
The other thing that is important to note is that substance abuse contributes
to severe deficits in aspects relating to emotional intelligence. As opposed
to the conditions we have already mentioned, drug abuse contributes to
impaired emotional perception and regulation. 
What is even interesting is that research studies have shown that there is a
link between low emotional intelligence and self-destructive habits. In other
words, some people use self-harm as a way of regulating their emotions. By
improving one’s emotional intelligence, you impact their mental health
significantly, such that people can have reduced tendencies of aggression
and quickly recover from trauma. 
This explains the reason why mental health awareness is on the rise and
risks reaching proportions that will stretch services. While there have been
more studies on mental health, the truth is that no one should doubt the fact
that we need more information in this area. Mental health is a condition that
can strike anyone at any age, gender, profession, or culture. There are
several reasons mental health issues occur, and yet there is no single case
that can be considered the same as the other. 
That is why we propose emotional intelligence in supporting strategies that
help people recover from mental health issues. Don’t get me wrong; I am
not saying that you should replace therapy and medical attention with
emotional intelligence. However, people who are suffering from mental
issues on the lower end of the spectrum could benefit a lot from EI. 
Through self-awareness, one can identify their strengths and weaknesses
and leverage them to their advantage. When you know your weak areas,
you can position yourself better to improve so that you can improve your
mental balance. Remember that self-awareness is a core component of
emotional intelligence and has been tested in a wide range of fields. When
someone has mental health issues, raising their awareness of their emotions
allows them to recognize their issues before they can get out of hand –
prevention is better than cure! 

That is why self-awareness is integral to our mental balance. For instance, if
you are aware of your emotions and actions and can recognize that there are
certain areas you need help in controlling your emotions, you can
effectively learn how to manage them. This is because your awareness will
shift to your emotional feelings and the strategies you can use to manage
them. Instead of taking on more tasks than you can handle, you take on
projects you can complete, lower stress levels, and achieve mental balance.
Doing this will not only help you get better but will also improve your self-
confidence, create positivity, enhance your mindset, facilitate balance and
happiness in your life. 
There are so many ways you can improve your mental state and boost your
emotional intelligence. One of the ways you can achieve this is through the
practice of mindfulness. Mindfulness plays a significant role in helping
people deal with their current situations. For instance, when you pause to
just take in a deep breath, you not only allow your mind to shift to the
present moment, but also allow your mind and body to regain balance and
more control. 
The other way you can achieve mental balance is through meditation. While
not everyone will feel comfortable with meditation, the truth is that it is
very effective. You don’t have to be religious to practice meditation. When
you meditate, you offer your mind focus and scope. It needs to deal with
emotional imbalance. One thing with mental health is that it is associated
with a lack of energy and motivation. However, when you meditate and
allow your mind to feed on positive self-talk and affirmations, you not only
release all negativity but also allow the mind to see possibilities where the
balance was lacking. 
Yes, someone with mental health issues might not feel positively changing
their thought process. However, small changes here and there go a long way
in bringing positivity into their lives. Instead of thinking that they can’t do
something, they can simply turn that into something positive like “I’ve got
what it takes to do this
.” 
The other trick is to use music, something that has been shown to boost
emotional intelligence. It does not only improve one’s mood and emotions
but also encourages one to use a reflective process, which offers them the
opportunity to assess themselves, their emotions, thoughts, and progress. 

For you to realize growth, you must learn to motivate yourself to meet both
your intrinsic and extrinsic needs – which can be physical, mental,
nutritional, physiological or a combination of all. The best way to use
motivation is to direct it through the use of process goals effectively. Within
mental health facet, one of the key drivers is the use of motivation in
creating energy. According to research, when one lacks motivation, they
risk having one aspect of mental health. Today, embrace the use of
motivation strategies – such as positive self-talk and goal setting – to
reverse this trend. 
Finally, how many friends do you have? Are these friendships quality?
Well, it is one thing to have many friends, but it is quite another to have
friends who look out for you and who build you into a better person each
day. This is what quality friendship is all about, and is the kind of support
mental health cases need. To improve your emotional intelligence, you must
look for opportunities to meet new people and build new relationships.
While this is something that can be challenging for people with mental
health issues, the truth is that positioning oneself within the right time and
space makes it possible, when your purpose of building new friendships and
growing the existing ones allows one to open up and achieve coherence of
trust

Chapter 7 Emotional Intelligence and
relationships
The secret to a lasting relationship is emotional intelligence. This is mainly
because emotional intelligence makes people extremely aware of changes
happening around them – whether the change is small or big. When you
build your emotional intelligence, you simply boost your sensitivity that we
all are seeking in our partners. Through active awareness and empathy, you
will gain the ability to sense when there is a slight shift in the dynamics of
your romance so that you can act accordingly. 
Realize that you have the potential to attain the kind of love you have
always dreamed of. A relationship where you enjoy deep intimacy, real
commitment, mutual kindness, and soulful caring. This is simply because of
empathy – out innate ability to share with others our emotional
experiences. 
However, for anyone to reach this height of intimacy and romance, you
need all the skills of high emotional intelligence – sharp emotional
awareness, acceptance, a vigilant active social awareness. Your emotional
awareness will help you avoid making mistakes by getting lustful or
intoxicated in love. Acceptance, on the other hand, goes a long way in
helping us experience emotions that have the potential of harming us if left
unattended. Finally, the active awareness vigilance is what helps us to
appraise our relationship so that we know what is working and what is not. 
So, how then can we build emotionally intelligent romantic relationships?
One thing you must realize is that you don’t have to choose the wrong
lovers and end up in a failed marriage, you don’t have to sit and watch
romance seep out of your long-term relationship. Look inside your
relationship and determine whether there are conflicting needs and wants
that might come between you and your partner. The truth is, you deserve a
loving and healthy relationship filled with romance. The last thing you want
is to resign yourself to boredom or bickering in your love life.
 
The truth is that you have the potential to attain the kind of love you have
always wanted. This does not mean that your emotional intelligence should
be at a peak before you can find love. Research shows that most people

falling in love helps them stay motivated to educate their hearts. This
explains why most of the deeply passionate lovers are in their eighties
because they find out that a high emotional intelligence in both partners
adds up to romance that never stops growing, does not lose its spark, and
always seeks to strengthen them – both individually and collectively. 
Here’s how you can boost the EQ in your relationship;
Actively seek change in your relationship
Look around you, and all the people you know are in relationships, what
you will realize is that none of them likes change. People fear change
because they think that it will destroy their romance and attraction to each
other. However, the opposite is true. Change helps you realize everything
you have been missing. 
One thing you must bear in mind is that change does not necessarily have to
mean worse. Research shows that things often come out better than ever on
the other side of change. Think of your romantic relationship as an
organism, that by nature, must change. It is through change that a
relationship gets to grow. Your ability to embrace change plays a significant
role in helping you gain courage and a sense of optimism.
Take a minute to think about your relationship – what is it that your partner
needs most from you? Is it something new? Do you need time to reassess
things together? Are there external influences in your life that are
demanding some change in your roles in the relationship? Do you consider
yourself happier than you used to be? 
Without emotional intelligence, these questions are very challenging and
scary to answer, and is the reason why several lovers ignore the signals of
change until it is out of control.
 
Look at challenges as opportunities instead of problems
Did you know that courage and optimism are what help people view
dilemmas as challenging opportunities rather than problems? 
Take a minute to think about how creative you and your partner can be.
This is the point where you don’t need to blame each other for emotions. In
other words, you are not controlled by negative emotional influences. You

are simply alert enough not to repeat the mistakes you have made in the
past. 
With high emotional intelligence, you are free from resignations and ruts so
that you start looking at problems as opportunities for growth. You are not
scared when the problem arises because you know that you can simply get
down and do some brainstorming to solve the problems. You view
differences as opportunities for you to meet with each other, get closer so
that you can both emerge on the other side of victory stronger together and
individually. 
Respect all the feelings you have for each other
The truth is that none of us is delighted by the discoveries we make about
our partners. However, one thing you must realize is that when it comes to
emotions, you must accept them all. Falling in love with someone does not
mean that you will never be angry, disappointed, jealous, or hurt. 
The truth is that the way you respond to these emotions is all up to you.
What matters the most is that you feel them. Several relationships have
been ruined by blame, and millions of couples have dismissed their need for
deep intimacy because of shame. The truth is that these things are cruel
reminders of fear, anxiety, and anger. If you have done what it takes to build
your emotional intelligence, you will choose to experience the emotions
together so that you can get on with your lives together.
 
Keep laughter in your love life
Several couples intellectualize their emotions without even realizing it. If
you are one of them, you need to realize that acceptance is what you need,
and a large part of that comes with lots of laughter. To be accepted in your
relationship, you must learn to laugh with each other. 
If you are not capable of laughing together, the chances are that you will not
be able to stand each other’s unique flaws and inevitable stumbles any more
than you can tolerate your own. You will not have the ability to embrace
surprises; however pleasant they might be. However, when you work on
growing your emotional intelligence, you will not only ensure that you
constantly improve your relationship but also ensure that you never get
trapped by expectations of perfection. 

Pay attention to how you feel when your spouse or partner is not
around
Fortunately, there are several ways you can use to monitor precisely how
your relationship is going. These are the three-gauge means of measuring
your wellbeing when trying to figure out how the rest of your life is
supposed to be. 
The first thing is to ask yourself whether you feel restless or irritable? Do
you find yourself dragging through the day after a night of marital bliss? Do
you find yourself resenting family and friends even though you are both
spending time alone together? 
One thing you must realize is that love never feeds from a tunnel vision.
Realize that where you coo like doves with your partner does not matter if
you lack energy, clarity of mind, and benevolence at all times. Yes, you may
enjoy all the sex you have together, but if you lack energy the morning or
day after, then something is amiss. 
So, how then can you know that the other person is “the one?”
 
Well, the truth is that when you are first falling in love, you must know that
the person you are about to settle down with is “the one.” The last thing you
want is to make a mistake, get in the wrong marriage and end up in a
lifeless union. Here are some of the tips that will help you know;
Listen to your body and not your mind
Unfortunately, most people choose their mate for reasons that have nothing
to do with what they feel and instead have to do with what they think. What
is more, is that we tend to drive our relationships based on how things
should be or have been.
This is where you go wrong!
The truth is that you don’t lose at love because you allowed your emotions
to run away from you, but because you let your mind run away from you. 
You may think that you are in love for so many reasons – such as
infatuation, lust, status, security, or social acceptance. You think that you
have found true love because your current partner meets your expectations

and some image you have created in your head of your dream partner. What
you must realize is that unless you know how you feel, your choice is only
destined to be wrong!
Whenever you imagine your dream partner, the best thing is to transport
that form of mental debate to justify your choice so that you can check it
with your body. Take in a deep breath, allow your mind and body to relax,
and focus by getting out of your head and into your body. What does your
gut feeling tell you? is there a persistent feeling that keeps growing inside,
telling that something is wrong? If so, then the chances are that your choice
is wrong! 
The truth is, if you allow your mental image versus physical sensation to
lead you, you will never know what you truly
 want.
 
Heed the messages from your whole body
When you are in a new relationship, it can be difficult to get clear signals
from the rest of your body because they are likely drowned out by all the
sexual desires running around. This explains why you need to pay attention
to other important and more subtle feelings – migraines, lack of energy,
muscle tension, and stomach pains. These feelings could simply mean that
your desires are not really what you need. 
However, if you find yourself glowing of love, have liveliness, and a spark
of energy, this could be the real deal. If it is only lust or infatuation, the
chances are that you will feel it in other parts of your life and relationships. 
Take a moment to ask yourself the following high emotional intelligence
questions;
●
     
Does this relationship energize me and the totality of my life? Has
my work life improved? Am I taking better care of myself? 
●
      
Is my head and focus straighter? Am I creative and more
responsible?
●
     
Does my “in love feelings” go beyond positive feelings of caring
about the other person in the relationship? Am I generous, more
giving, and empathic towards the people around me more than I was
before? 

The truth is, if the responses you get from your body are not exactly what
you wanted to hear, it is time to push beyond your fears of loss so that you
can look at things from a bigger picture perspective. Finding out at this
point that you have not found your true love will spare you of all the
heartache, pain, and a pile of negative emotional memories you risk
experiencing down the line. Consider this a legacy that can keep you from
making the same mistake again and ending up in sour love in the future.
 
Take a chance on reaching out
When you are in a new relationship, there is always that feeling to be on
your guard. We tend to automatically put up barriers and walls when it
comes to knowing each other deeply. When you leave yourself open and
vulnerable at this point in the relationship, you tend to feel scared, when in
the real sense, you are trying to find out if the love you feel for the other
person is real. 
You must become the first person to reach out. This is something that will
reveal an intimate secret, demonstrate affection, laugh at yourself when
everything seems scary. Think about it – do the other person’s reactions fill
you with vitality and warmth? If it does, then the chances are that you have
found a kindred soul. If not, then you have found someone with low
emotional intelligence, and it is time for you to decide how you wish to
respond. 
What you need to feel loved vs. what you want
If you are going to find someone you truly love, then you must know the
difference between what you would like from what you cannot live without.
These are some of the exercises that will help you get it right;
Start by selecting at least five features or traits you feel are most important
to you in the other partner. Order these character traits in descending order.
Some of the traits may be neatness, adventurous, humor, emotionally, open,
considerate, smart, affectionate, monetarily successful, well respected,
famous, charismatic, spiritual, empowering, nurturing, and conversational,
among others. 
As you consider each trait, ask yourself whether they make you energetic,
calm, and stirs you emotionally. Find out whether these traits make you feel

pleasant, unpleasant, or indifferent. 
Realize that a desire will be fleeting and superficial, while something you
consider a need will automatically register at a deeper level of feelings.
 
Repeat this exercise over and over again so that you gain a deeper insight
into the differences between what you need in love, and what you desire.
Ask yourself whether the other person in the relationship thinks that you are
in love with meeting these needs. 
How to respond to a low EQ partner
One thing you must realize is that we don’t all grow our emotional muscles
at the same rate. If you have a high emotional intelligence compared to your
lover, the most important thing is to learn how to respond to them. 
What words do you want your partner to hear? You must take the time to
reconsider what words to use. If you are not sure about what exactly you
need and the reason you need it, there is a high likelihood that your message
will be mixed up.
You must choose a time when you and your partner are not in a hurry to
take a walk together, go on a date, or brunch. While at it, ensure that you
are intimately into the conversation so that at the end of it, you both can
remember the discussion. During the day, send your partner “I feel” text
messages concerning your needs. This will help your partner see what is
wrong with them for a chance to improve. For instance, you can text them,
“I feel like making love every day, but I don’t like the smell of garlic and
onions. Would you be willing to brush your teeth before we go to bed?” 
There is a high likelihood that your partner will respond defensively. If they
do, you must repeat their concerns back to them. Repeat the message and
pay attention to what they have to say about it. If possible, keep repeating it
over and over again until you are satisfied that they heard what you
communicated to them. 

Chapter 8 The interaction between EQ and Social
Intelligence
It is important to note that social intelligence is about developing
experience with people and learning from our failures and successes in our
surroundings. In most cases, social intelligence is what people commonly
refer to as tact, street smart, or common sense. 
What you will note about people with high emotional intelligence is that
they carry on conversations with different kinds of people and can verbally
communicate with the right words – hence referred to as social
expressiveness. 
Additionally, such people are adept at learning how to conduct a wide range
of social roles and responsibilities. They are well versed with informal rules
of the game, are excellent listeners, and can thoroughly analyze what makes
the people around them tick. They know this by focusing their attention on
what the others have to say and their behaviors.
They not only know various ways of conducting a wide range of social
roles but also can put their skills into practice so that they are at ease with a
wide range of personalities. In other words, they are careful what
impression of themselves they create in other people. This is something that
not everyone can do because it needs a delicate balance between controlling
and managing your self-image before others and ensuring that you are
reasonably authentic in letting others see your true self. 
That said, one thing you must bear in mind is that social intelligence is
more about the future. It came about just so that people could strive to
survive and figure out the best way to get along with others, get out of
situations, and earn a favorable outcome. It does not matter whether you
have paper qualifications in social intelligence. What matters the most is
that if you don’t know how to apply it in life, you might end up straining or
ruining your relationships and lose opportunities. 
Yes, there are times when you want to give people feedback so bluntly, but
editing your words to convey the message constructively goes a long way in
ensuring that you don’t end up putting your foot in your mouth. Unlike
social intelligence, emotional intelligence is more about the present, hence

its close relationship to emotions and feelings. When you read someone’s
facial expressions, you can easily tell whether they are happy or not. You
can tell whether they are nervous, shy, or angry about the situation at hand. 
But, what are some of the social competencies of emotional intelligence?
Read on!
Social competencies of EQ
Empathy
When we want someone to see things from another’s perspective, the first
thing we tell them is “put yourself in their shoe
.” Well, that is what
empathy is all about. It is the ability to communicate and lead by
understanding another person’s views, thoughts, and feelings. 
When we improve our empathy, the truth is that we become better versions
of ourselves. We strengthen our relationships and make them more
meaningful. We strive for success in the workplace. We realize it improved
health and overall quality of life. 
If you look at the top performers in your company, what you will notice is
that 90% of them have high emotional intelligence. This is because the
more people understand their thoughts, emotions, and feelings, the better
they get at understanding someone else’s thoughts, emotions, and feelings.
When we become better at listening to others, we become better human
beings. 
But what happens when you lack empathy?
Well, according to research studies, scientists have linked a lack of empathy
to a wide range of societal vices – such as theft, murder, and drug dealing,
among others. Think about the prisoners, are they empathic people? Most
likely not. Most of these people lack empathy and didn’t care to think about
what their victims might have been feeling. If they had empathy, there is a
high chance that this might have prevented them from engaging in acts that
put them in prison in the first place. 
One thing you must note is that empathy is the ability to trust other people.
The truth is that when your friends feel that you care, you earn their trust. If

they trust you, that simply means that they will be willing to take risks with
you and become more open with you. The reason why your friends
communicate with openness with you is that they have built their trust in
you. 
In other words, as trust continues to grow, it promotes the sharing of
information, thoughts, and feelings. It is this form of sharing that expands
the foundation upon which you and the others relate with each other. Think
about it for a moment, when your friends talk about their interests and
ideas, what do you do as you listen to them? 
Simple – you stop what you are doing to give them your undivided
attention. With empathy, you can raise your awareness of other people’s
feelings during the conversation. When someone asks you for help, it is
important that you understand what they are not saying in their words but
are saying with their body language. 
You must bear in mind that a significant portion of communication is often
related in non-verbal cues. The truth is that we may not even realize it, but
when we communicate with our facial expressions, noise, gestures, among
others, empathy allows us to understand what these non-verbal cues mean.
When you master what non-verbal cues mean, you become better at
understanding how the other person truly feels. 
A solid foundation in emotional intelligence begins with a show of
empathy!
You can grow your empathy with practice and the use of the right process.
It is possible to take empathy to the next level, something that, in turn,
boosts our overall emotional intelligence. When you have the right tools,
the process of learning about empathy does not necessarily have to be
costly or complicated.
 
Types of Empathy
There are three types of empathy;
Cognitive Empathy
This simply refers to the kind of empathy that helps us know what the other
person is feeling and what they might be thinking. It is often referred to as

“perspective-taking.” This type of empathy is connected to the intellect,
thought, and understanding. It goes a long way in helping people negotiate,
stay motivated, and understand a wide range of perspectives. 
The only pitfall to this is not putting yourself in another person’s shoes to
feel what they are feeling. 
One thing you must bear in mind is that cognitive empathy is all about
thought as much as it is about emotions. The truth is that understanding
sadness is not the same as feeling sadness. 
If you came home upset about losing your job, your partner would respond
in this manner. It is the same way a doctor looks at their patients to try and
understand their illness. They don’t dive into the patient’s emotions. In
other words, cognitive empathy is about responding to problems with
brainpower.
This can be a great asset in situations where you are required to get into the
other person’s head so that you can interact with their circumstances with
tact and understanding. Think of cognitive empathy as mixing apples and
oranges. This implies that for you to truly understand what another person
is feeling, you have to feel them in some way. 
Emotional empathy
This simply refers to the ability to feel physically along with another person
as though your emotions are contagious. It is concerned with mirroring
neurons in the brain, physical sensations, and feelings. It plays a significant
role in helping people close their interpersonal relationships and careers. 
The pitfalls to this are the fact that emotional empathy can be
overwhelming and even inappropriate in some circumstances. 
It helps to think of emotional empathy as sound because it involves directly
feeling the other person’s emotions. Have you heard of the term empath?
Well, this means a person with the ability to take on the emotional and
mental state of another person, fully. Unfortunately, this form of response
can seem disconnected from the brain and thinking. However, emotional
empathy is deeply rooted in the human mirror neurons. 

Each one of us has neurons that fire in certain ways whenever we see
someone acting in animal-like behavior. It makes you relate to their actions
both in the brain and body. This is exactly what emotional empathy does –
feel someone else’s experiences in reaction to certain situations. 
Think about your loved one for a second – they come to you in tears. What
do you feel? Well, the truth is that you will tend to feel a pull on your
heartstrings. When you connect with someone in this way, you strengthen
your intimacy and promote a strong bond between the two of you. 
Just like cognitive empathy, emotional empathy has its flip-side, and this
happens when you cannot manage your distressing emotions. This often
leads to emotional burnout. In other words, when you feel too much of what
another person is experiencing, you risk making even very small
interactions overwhelming. 
Compassionate empathy
This is the kind of empathy in which you not only understand another
person’s predicament but also feel with them. You are spontaneously
touched to help. It is concerned with actions, emotions, and intellect. This
plays a significant role in helping you become considerate of the other
person fully.
 
The downside to this kind of empathy is that we are always striving to have
it, but we cannot fully have it. In most instances, compassion is necessary. It
may be fitting for monetary negotiations, political convincing, among
others. It is the first response we give our loved ones, and it strikes a
powerful balance between the two parties involved. 
It is important to note that the heart and thoughts are not opposing each
other. The truth is that they are intricately connected. It is through
compassionate empathy that we honor the natural connection we have with
others. When your child comes to you in tears, you are driven to understand
why they are crying and want to comfort them by sharing in their emotional
experiences and helping them heal. It is a lot to handle. 
There are times when we feel swayed to one side or the other with more
feelings, thoughts, fixing, and wallowing. The thing with compassionate
empathy is that it is about taking the middle ground and then using our

emotional intelligence to respond appropriately to the situation. It is about
thinking what the other person might want – to be held, action to fix their
situation or just a listening ear. You do this without necessarily feeling
overwhelmed by sadness or the need to fix things. 
In other words, compassion gives us that mindful touch to handle even the
toughest of situations. 
However, one thing you must remember is that empathy is a teeter-totter. In
other words, if you go too much into another person’s psyche, do you risk
losing yours? If you dive too deep in their world, are you risking missing
out on an integral part of the human experience? If you feel too much, is it
inappropriate? If you feel too little, if it hurtful? 
You must understand that not all situations are equivalent, just like not all
the types of empathy are the same. 
Take a minute to think about a real-life example in your own life where
each type of empathy is applicable. I believe that you must have
encountered compassionate empathy at some point in your life. Realize that
any type of empathy takes practice to gain emotional fitness – just like any
other balancing act. Finding a sweet spot where you can empathize
effectively is worth the work.
 
Do it today!
How to improve empathy for a successful life
●
      
Be quiet inside and out
●
      
Watch as well as listen
●
      
Ask yourself what you are feeling
●
      
Test your instincts
●
      
Challenge yourself
●
      
Get feedback
●
      
Explore the heart and not just your head
●
      
Walk-in other people’s shoes and examine your biases
●
      
Cultivate your sense of curiosity
Social skills

This is a broad term that refers to the skills we need to handle and influence
other people’s emotions in an effective manner – in the context of emotional
intelligence. While this may sound like manipulation, the truth is that this is
as simple as understanding that giving others your smile makes them smile
too. Because of your smile, you can make someone feel much better and
positive than they were before. 
Think of social skills as the last piece of the emotional intelligence puzzle.
Once you can understand and manage yourself, only then will you be able
to understand other people’s emotions and feelings, and influence them. 
Some of the most important social skills include;
Communication skills
This is a vital piece of emotional intelligence; you must pay attention to
what others have to say and also convey your thoughts and feelings to them
in an effective manner. 
You may be wondering what makes a good communicator. Well, if you can
listen well to the people around you, understand what they said, and seek
open and full information sharing, then you are a good communicator. If
you are prepared to hear others’ problems and not just ready to hear good
news alone, then you are a good communicator. 
Good communication means dealing with tough situations, setting them
straight, and not allowing problems to fester. You must ensure that you
register and act in emotional cues in communicating so that the message is
right. 
Leadership skills
This may sound strange, but one thing you must note is that leadership
skills are all part of social skills. Emotional intelligence is a huge part of
leadership and not vice versa. What you must note is that leadership skills
and emotional intelligence are inextricably linked to each other. As we have
mentioned earlier, only people who are tuned into their emotions and that of
the people around them have the hope of influence. 
One of the key aspects of good leadership is influence, and having the
ability to bring others along with you. You may refer to this as charisma,

but the truth is that leadership is much more profound than that. In short, it
is good emotional intelligence.
To be a good leader, you must have the ability to articulate a vision and
enthuse others with it. It does not matter whether you are formal or
informal; the trick is to ensure that you offer leadership, support, and guide
the performance of the people you work with, hold each person
accountable, and lead by example. 
Persuasion skills
Persuasion simply refers to the art of enthusing people, winning their hearts
to your ideas, and leading them on your proposed course of action. If you
look around at people you know are persuasive, you will realize that they
not only have to influence but also have the ability to read others’ emotional
currents in a given circumstance and fine-tune their words so that they
appeal to the people around them
.
Conflict-management skills
We all know that conflicts can arise at any given time. They seem to appear
out of thin air. However, the art of resolving conflicts as soon as they arise
is crucial both at home and in the workplace. It all begins by raising our
awareness of the importance of diplomacy and tact, and how these can be
used to address difficulties in various situations.
Being a good conflict manager means that you have to be willing to bring
disagreements out in the open when resolving them. You must ensure that
you use information sharing as a way to encourage debates and open
discussions, minimize hidden currents, help each party recognize the other’s
feelings and logical position so that you can obtain a win-win solution.  

Chapter 9 Understanding Emotional drain and
dealing with them
Life is not easy; we all know that. There are so many ups and downs,
mountains and valleys, highs and lows, and you never really know what to
expect. There are times when life is even a little tough for us to handle
anything at all. It does not matter what the reason might be, but the truth is
that it finds a way of kicking us when we are down. 
One thing we fail to realize is that when we suffer, we get emotionally and
mentally drained. The thing is that the effects of these manifests in ways we
can see. Our energy gets sapped to the point that we feel physically
exhausted, and what we can do at that point is break down. You must know
when life is too much so that you can position yourself to better control and
manage your emotions. Here are some of the signs to look out for;
Hopelessness
This is a sign that you are emotionally drained. When you have pushed,
fought, and clawed through the storms, all your energy gets sapped, and you
begin to ask yourself why you are even bothering when things don’t seem
to get better. This is the point of hopelessness and is very dangerous. When
you get to this point, you risk making your pain and suffering permanent
because you have accepted that this is your way of life. If you are at this
point, it is high time you seek help.
Crying often
For most people, crying is something they left behind during their teen
years. As we grow older, we get to manage and control our emotions better,
and we only cry when something big happens in our lives. However, some
have been pushed to the limits, and crying has quickly become their way of
life – a sad movie makes you cry, someone wrongs you, and that makes you
cry, or an old friend seeks forgiveness from you, and they make you cry.
 
When you are crying easily like this, it indicates that you are emotionally
exhausted. In other words, even the smallest emotional push brings you into
tears. 

Insomnia
Are you experiencing trouble getting sleep? This might have something to
do with your emotions. When you are emotionally drained, you risk
suffering from insomnia. You may think that just because you are stressed,
you will fall asleep easily. However, insomnia occurs often because you are
spending most of the time in deep thought, fighting with the demons in your
head, and have trouble getting a good night's sleep. 
Lack of motivation
When you are emotionally drained, you don’t seem to care about striving
for anything. You no longer have goals that wake you up in the morning.
You are just going through the waves of life, and you let it sway you in
whatever direction it likes. You find yourself neglecting your work, health,
hygiene, and family. 
Detachment
If you have been punched hard by life, it is easy to detach yourself from the
rest of the people around you. You have allowed the pain to become part of
your life such that you have become numb to it because you have gone
through way too much that the reality no longer exists for you. 
You must find out what is making you emotionally drained. Is it your
partner, family, friends, work, boss? How do you when someone is sucking
your energy reserved dry?
●
      
You think about them all the time
●
      
You are physically exhausted
●
      
You find happiness when they leave
●
      
They don’t lift you up
●
     
Once you have been together, you feel the need for some downtime
●
      
They demand too much of you
●
     
When they talk, they leave you feeling frustrated than you were
before
●
     
You can’t seem to say what you mean when you are around them
Things you can do if you are experiencing emotional exhaustion

Exercise
Whenever you are exhausted, exercise is usually the last thing you can think
of – after all, working out is a form of physical stress. However, research
shows that when we exercise, that can relieve mental stress. It will not only
help your mental balance, but also bring changes to the body, heart, spirit,
and metabolism. It offers stimulation and a calming effect against
depression and stress. 
Research has shown that working out can reduce the levels of body stress
hormones – like cortisol and adrenaline. Instead, it promotes the release of
feel-good hormones called endorphins – natural painkillers and mood
elevators – which tightens the muscle. 
Breathing exercises
Breathing has been shown to help relieve stress and increase relaxation.
When someone is panting fast and has a form of erratic breathing, this is an
indicator that they are under duress. However, when you take in slow and
deep breaths, it has a calming effect. You must learn how to control your
breathing to mimic relaxation. 
The best way to breathe is to do it slowly and deeply while focusing your
attention on the movement of your diaphragm – up and down. Then hold
your breath for at least seconds before you exhale thinking about relaxation
for another 5 seconds. Repeat this process for about 15-20 times while
ensuring that you do it slowly and deeply.
 
Meditation
This is a practice that has been shown to help relieve stress and calm the
mind. This is by lowering both the heart rate and the blood pressure –
physiological signs of stress. 
The first thing is for you to choose a place and time when there are no
distractions. Then get comfortable by finding the right posture that will
promote relaxation. Allow your mind to get into a passive mental state. You
must allow your mind to go blank so that thoughts and worries don’t get in
the way of your relaxation. Watch your thoughts come and go without
necessarily passing any judgment. 

The trick is to focus your attention on a mental device. You can use simple
words of affirmation or mantra so that you repeat them over and over.
Alternatively, you can choose to focus your attention on a fixed object
within your space. The goal is to ensure that you block out any form of
distraction as much as you can. Once you have mastered this, you can
dedicate at least 20-30 minutes to meditation every day. 
Journaling
If you thought this was just for professional writers, you had better think
again. If you ask anyone who has been journaling, they will tell you how
much it benefits their mental health by releasing emotional drains. 
This is mainly because journaling allows you to write down all your deepest
thoughts, emotions, and fears, which is a great way of understanding,
managing, and letting go or emotional drains. Research shows that
journaling plays a significant role in lowering anxiety, boosting better sleep
patterns, improving memory, minimizing depression, and making someone
kinder. 

One Last word
Indeed, emotional intelligence is one of the most important things one must
have in life to ensure success in every situation. 
One thing that is important to bear in mind is that emotional intelligence is
not a trend! It is here to stay. According to reports and statistics compiled
by major companies across the world, it is evident that people with
emotional intelligence undoubtedly affect their bottom line. For instance, if
an employee has a high level of emotional intelligence, they will not only
be productive and generate revenue for the company, but also realize their
personal and career goals. 
You probably know other people who have mastered the art of managing
their emotions. Instead of getting angry when provoked by a stressful
situation, they choose to look at the problem from a different perspective to
find a solution calmly. These people are excellent decision-makers and have
mastered the art of listening to their gut feeling. Irrespective of their
strengths, they have the willingness to look at themselves with an honest
eye. They take criticism positively and use it to improve their performance. 
Well, I am here to tell you that you can be just like these people. As you
begin to accept emotional intelligence into every area of your life, you will
begin to see an improvement in your technical abilities, interrelationships,
and overall success. It is through emotional intelligence that you can fuel
your performance. It impacts your confidence, optimism, self-control,
empathy, and social skills so that you can understand and manage your
emotions and accelerate success in every area of your life. 
It does not matter what your profession is, whether you work for a small or
large organization, whether you are a senior or junior in your company.
What matters is that realizing how effective you are at controlling your
emotional energies is the beginning of a successful adventure. Yes,
emotional intelligence may not be something taught and tested in our
educational curriculum, but the truth is that it is really important.
 
Take a look at your life – the chances are that you will notice how hectic
and busy your lifestyle is. It is this kind of life that makes it easy for you to
lose touch with yourself and your emotional feelings. You must try to

reconnect with your feelings by setting a timer for various points
throughout the day. As soon as the timer goes off, you stop what you are
doing, stand on your two feet, and take in a deep breath. Then bring your
thoughts to what you are feeling in that moment, where the emotions are
coming from, and where you feel the sensation in your body and what it
feels like. Realize that the more you practice this, the more you make it
your second nature. 
The key to emotional intelligence is to celebrate and reflect on all the
positives in your life. No one has a perfect life – we all go through ups and
downs. It does not matter whether you have more positives or negatives in
your life—the trick to celebrate every win – whether small or big. When
you embrace the positives in your life, you allow yourself to develop more
resilience and increase your chances of enjoying fulfilling relationships so
that you can successfully move past adversity. 
No matter what life throws your way, you must not forget to take time to
just breathe. Taking time to take deep breaths will not only help you master
how to manage your emotions but also help you avoid outbursts. Just walk
out the door and wash your face with cold water, take a walk, or just take in
the fresh air – anything to calm your nerves. This goes a long way in
helping you get a hold of what is happening so that you can effectively
respond to the situation. 
That said, emotional intelligence is a lifetime process! It is not something
you develop overnight. The truth is that to grow your emotional
intelligence; you have to train your mind to accept continual improvements
along the way – so that you can be better with each passing day. 
So, what are you still waiting for?
Start working on improving your emotional intelligence and watch how
your life changes for the better.
Best of Luck!

© Written by:
JOSEPH GRIFFITH

GASLIGHTING
Recognize Manipulative and how to avoid the Gaslight Effect.
Narcissistic Abuse Recovery, Aggressive Narcissist, Personality disorder,
Codependency, Empath, Covert Emotional Manipulation.
Written by
: Jack Mind

Introduction

 
Gaslighting occurs in personal relationships and professional relationships,
and in other cases, gaslighting is used by public figures to change the
perceptions of targeted members of the population. Gaslighting is a form of
psychological abuse. It can make you start to doubt your ability to perceive
reality correctly. It can make you think you didn't see what you thought you
saw or hear what you thought you heard; and you start to wonder if you can
trust the information you are getting from your five senses. Moreover, this,
in turn, will make you begin to think that there must be something wrong
with you, and you will begin to doubt your sanity.
It doesn't matter whether it is happening in a personal relationship (parent to
child, between romantic partners) or a professional relationship at work or
even between members of the same community. Gaslighting creates an
abusive situation which can cause serious health problems if the victim
continues to be in such a position for a long time.
And no matter whether it occurs in a personal relationship or a working
relationship, between a public figure and the members of the public or
somewhere else, it is essential to be aware of the signs that you or someone
you know might be a victim of gaslighting, as this awareness is the first step
to getting out of the damaging situation. The first step to take towards being
free from gaslighting is to recognize exactly what gaslighting is. It is often
very hard to recognize the signs of gaslighting, because they affect the mind
so much that, after a long period of time, the victim doesn’t trust their own
thoughts.
This book discusses in detail how to distinguish gaslighting behavior from
typical behavior by shedding light on the different kinds of gaslighting
techniques. It also aims to provide you with information about what to do if
you find yourself a victim of such a negative situation.
Gaslighting, which will be defined fully in the following chapters, is a
technique used by narcissists to manipulate people. Narcissists are self-

centered and arrogant people who lack empathy for others. They live in
their own world and believe they are unique and special. Hence, they
always seek attention and praise from others.
A narcissist will frequently use gaslighting, as a narcissist’s goal is to
disorient the victim to gain total control over them. A narcissist achieves
this aim by gradually sowing seeds of doubt in the victim’s mind, and in the
end, the narcissist controls the victim to do their bidding.
In addition to promoting awareness about gaslighting, this book is written
with the more precise aim of exposing the extent to which narcissists use
gaslighting as a means of manipulation to control and abuse their victims
both physically and mentally. They expose the words narcissists say and the
actions they take to abuse victims. It is one thing to recognize what
gaslighting is, and it is another to know how narcissists use it. It is also a
different thing entirely to uncover the effects of gaslighting and guard
against them - or better still, avoid the effects in the first place.
Most importantly, they show you how to protect yourself and even remove
yourself from the control of a gaslighting narcissist.

Chapter 1. Gaslighting
Gas-lighting is the endeavor of someone else to wind your reality.
Narcissists can't and don't assume liability for their conduct. Rather, they
look to disgrace and accuse others of evading the awful feelings. This is
once in a while referred to as projection. 
The problem is, gaslighting is slippery. It plays on our most exceedingly
awful feelings of dread, our most restless musings, and our most profound
wishes to be comprehended, acknowledged, and loved. At the point when
somebody we trust, regard, or love talks with incredible conviction—
especially if there's a trace of legitimacy in his words, or if he's hit on one
of our “red buttons”—it tends to be difficult not to trust him. Furthermore,
when we glorify the deceiver—when we need to consider him to be the love
of our life, a commendable boss, or a brilliant parent—then, we make it
more difficult to adhere to our sense of reality. Our deceiver should be
correct; we have to win his endorsement; thus, the gaslighting goes on.
Neither of you might know about what's truly occurring. The gaslighter
may truly accept each word he lets you know or genuinely feel that he's just
sparing you from yourself. Keep in mind: His own needs are driving him.
Your deceiver may appear to be a solid, influential man, or he may have all
the earmarks of being an unreliable, fit of rage tossing young man; in any
case, he feels frail and feeble. To feel ground-breaking and safe, he needs to
demonstrate that he is correct, and he needs to get you to concur with him.
Then, you have admired your deceiver and are edgy for his endorsement,
although you may not intentionally understand this. But if there's even a
little bit of you that believes you're bad enough without anyone else—if
even a little piece of you believes you need your gaslighter’s love or
endorsement to be fulfilled—at that point, you are powerless to gaslight.
What's more, a deceiver will exploit that helplessness to make you question
yourself, again and again. 
Gaslighting defies boundaries
When somebody is gaslighting you, they are trying to convince you that
your boundaries and perceptions are ridiculous and invalid
.

If something they say bothers you because it is abusive or untrue, they will
tell you that you are overreacting, or that what you are saying is stupid.
They will tell you that it doesn't bother anybody else except you and that
you're just being overly sensitive. Even spiritual people are not immune
from this, because you might be told that their behavior wouldn’t bother
you if you were more enlightened. So, in essence, gaslighting and
manipulation techniques make you doubt your boundaries or make you
drop your boundaries altogether by convincing you that your boundaries are
stupid and invalid.
The truth is that your boundaries aren’t anybody’s business but yours.
Nobody gets to determine what boundaries you will have. If something
bothers you, then nobody gets to tell you how you feel. When you enforce a
boundary, you are not only fighting for the boundary itself, but, more
importantly, for your right to set boundaries in the first place. Don't let
another person convince you that your boundary isn't big enough for you to
take a stand over. It is. Such a way of thinking is really disrespectful.
It’s very disrespectful and dishonoring to stand on somebody else's
boundary. There is a difference between controlling somebody else by
telling them how to behave, and setting a boundary by which you are telling
the person not to behave a certain way to you. Reinforcing a boundary
means that you are going to have to walk away from someone or from
something when they do something wrong to you. Now, realize that it's not
about stopping someone from living their life the way they want to live
their life, nor is it taking their freedom away from them. It’s simply about
choosing to engage with or not engage with people who behave in a certain
way or who don't respect your boundaries
.
Setting up an angry beast
The second form of manipulation is to become an angry beast. This is
where somebody tries to become angrier than you when you get angry with
them, in order to squash your challenge or rebellion. You might even be just
mildly annoyed about something and want to talk to your partner about it,
but they explode at you so that you find yourself backing down. You will be

so shocked because you were talking about something which was relatively
small, and they just turned it into something huge. You will want to back
down and not deal with that type of drama. Often, you will be trying to
defend your boundaries, and that is what causes the explosion.
This angry beast will come at you with an emotional response that is way
out of proportion to the situation or the position that you're trying to defend.
You will back down and, often times, you won’t even try to stand up for
yourself again because you are absolutely not willing to go up against that
angry beast. The deceiver is counting on that.
But when you are defending a proper boundary or setting a boundary, it
doesn't really matter what the boundary is all about nor does it really matter
whether that person sees it as valid or not. Once you have clearly
communicated a boundary and the other person says that he will not accept
it, you must follow through on the consequences or you will be intimidated
into silence and submission. That is what the angry beast wants.
Hijacking the issue
The next manipulative technique is hijacking the issue. This happens when
you raise a topic that challenges someone, and he takes it off on a tangent to
distract you so that you will not set that boundary or defend that boundary.
For example, let's say it’s late at night and your spouse hasn't come home
from work. They haven’t called and you are really worried because you
have no idea where they are or if something has happened to them. They
finally come home, and you confront them with how worried you were, and
ask them where they were and why they didn’t even call you to let you
know that they would be late.
Rather than answer your concern and questions, they go off on a tangent
about how stressed they are at work and how you're not just getting it. They
might start to get angry and accuse you of having no sympathy for them.
You then find yourself on the defensive side of the conversation, and even
apologize to them. Now you’re no longer talking about the original topic –

how late they were and why they didn’t call – but talking about them, and
what’s bothering them. In the end, they will avoid answering your question
altogether.
They have hijacked the conversation and turned it in a different direction.
You will often find yourself sitting them down and apologizing to them, and
feeling like you shouldn’t bother them with your little concerns.
People who use these manipulation tactics are not doing so in a conscious
way. They’re not doing this on purpose. So they are not hijacking a
conversation on purpose, but they are doing it none the less. They don’t
intend to work up to being an angry beast, or trample on your boundaries,
but they do. They do it to control and manipulate you into always putting
them first.

Chapter 2. Understanding the Ins and Outs

of Gaslighting
In 1944, a movie called Gaslight
was released that changed the way people
thought about manipulation and its immense power. This movie shows the
story of a husband character that manipulates his wife and her life to such
an extent that she begins to believe that she has become insane.
In this movie too, just like in my life, the wife, Paula, gets completely
caught up with the charms of Gregory, the man who woos and wins her.
After a whirlwind romance, they get married, and then the tragedy begins.
Gregory begins to show his true personality so subtly that Paula begins to
think that everything is alright with her husband and that she is going crazy.
The husband in the film dimmed the gas lights in the house and insisted that
the wife imagined that the light was dim. His insistence and manipulation
were so powerful that the poor, hapless woman begins to think that she is
going crazy. And so, the name gaslighting came to be used for such devious
and evil manipulative tactics to deliberately steer people away from their
real lives and life experiences.
The movie itself is based on a 1938 play of the same name. The ultimate
aim of the villainous husband was, of course, to drive his wife to insanity so
that he could put her away in a mental institution and claim her inheritance.
Gaslighting is the name used by psychologists to refer to the tactics used by
people with a personality disorder to control and manipulate the lives of
other people, either individuals or a group of people. These tactics are so
strong and go so deep that the manipulated people tend to doubt and
question everything in their own lives; their reality, perceptions, feelings,
experiences, and interpretations of these experiences. If someone can have
this kind of maniacal control over your life, then there is little doubt that
your life and sanity are in danger.
At this juncture, it is important to differentiate gaslighting from those tactics
that many people use to annoy and irritate the people around them.
Gaslighting tactics have a dark quality that annoying but innocuous
behavior of certain people doesn't have. It is imperative that you clearly
differentiate between the two so that you don't end up judging everyone you
come across wrongly.

But you must know for certain that gaslighting is a very serious problem,
and you must learn to discern such behavior and stay as far away from such
people as possible. After all, having your reality taken from you can be
quite dangerous, and if not managed sensibly can prove disastrous for you
and your loved ones.
The difficult thing about understanding gaslighting is that the behavioral
signs might start out as something very small and insignificant. For
example, the manipulator could correct a small detail in a story or life
experience you are narrating. Of course, then his or her correction makes
sense, and you accept it wholeheartedly. Slowly, that ‘past victory’ becomes
the focal point and keeps rearing its ugly head in all your interactions with
the concerned individual, and before you know it, you become his or her
slave completely losing touch with your reality and life.
Deliberately, you will be pushed to such an extent that taking simple daily
decisions might become difficult for you. Driven by the seeds of self-doubt
sowed by the deceiver, you could find yourself second-guessing every
decision you make.  Like I already told you in the introduction chapter,
even the clothes I wore became my husband’s decision. At some point, the
victim is likely to feel that he or she cannot take any decision whatsoever
and depends on every little thing on the manipulator. 
Furthermore, the aggressor will slowly convince you that his or her
behavior is also your fault. The more you apologize for your behavior, the
greedier the aggressor’s ego becomes, and the person demands an
increasing level of apology and supplicating behavior from you. 
The aggressor gets so deep into his or her gaslighting attitude that you will
find it exceedingly difficult to reach out and seek help from other people in
the fear that they will go against your aggressor. When you are completely
and irrevocably under the aggressor’s control, then the person dumps you
and seeks new ‘conquests.’
 
History of Gaslighting
While the term ‘gaslighting’ was introduced during the early 1940s, the
concept of manipulative behavior for controlling people and altering
people’s imagined realties has been part of human history for a long time.
The victims were simply ‘diagnosed’ with this condition. They simply

withered away in a lunatic asylum or some other institution, alone,
depressed, and completely neglected.
Can you recall the story of ‘The Emperor Clothes?’ What happened there?
Did the smart salesman drive every observer on the street to believe that the
emperor was clothed in the finest of garments when, in reality, he was stark
naked? A little, guileless child saved the day for the rest of the people who
believed that if they couldn’t see the clothes on their emperor, then it was
their fault.
In 1981, psychologist Edward Weinshel wrote an article entitled “Some
Clinical Consequences of Introjection: Gaslighting,” in which he explained
the concept in the following way. The manipulator ‘externalizes and
projects’ the image or thought, and the victim ‘internalizes and assimilates’
the information into his or her psyche unquestioningly. The ‘victim’ takes
in all the faults, mistakes, and irrationality in such relationships. 
Why Does Gaslighting Happen?
Simply put, gaslighting is all about having control. This need for control or
domination could stem from personality disorders like narcissism, antisocial
issues, unresolved childhood trauma, or any other reason. 
Gaslighting behavior is usually seen between people involved in power
dynamics where one person invariably wields more power than the other
person or people in the relationship equation. The victim of gaslighting
tactics is typically on a lower rung than the manipulator and is also terrified
of losing something in the relationship. The target of the manipulative
relationship is likely to be a codependent partner in the relationship.
For example, in a romantic relationship, the wife might feel the compulsion
to put up with manipulative behavior because she WANTS to be in the
relationship and/or desires the other things that it brings. Such people are
ready to change their perceptions to align with those of the manipulative
partner so as to avoid conflicts and to allow things to happen smoothly.
On the other hand, the manipulator continues to be one because he or she is
scared of being seen as something less important or significant than desired.
Another critical perspective of the deceiver is that the person may not
realize that he or she is behaving in ways that could harm or hurt the

‘target.’ They could be indulging in gaslighting tactics simply because they
were reared like that. 
For example, if a person was brought up by parents who believe in the
concept of absolute certainty, then this person may not know that other
perspectives can exist and that they can be right. Such people could be
primed to think that anyone who has a different approach or perspective is
wrong. Further, they could believe that people with these ‘wrong’ notions
should be corrected, and thus resort to gaslighting tactics; an approach
found commonly in a family and among loved ones.
And then, there are the ones who employ gaslighting to show off their
dominance and power with little or no care toward the pain and agony
inflicted on the target. Sometimes, the ‘dominance and power’ could also
be a facade for the manipulator’s insecurities and fears. Whatever it is,
gaslighting is employed to dominate unfairly over other people.
Where Does Gaslighting Happen?
Gaslighting can happen and be experienced by anyone and everyone. For
example, you could be a victim of such tactics from your spouse, partner,
colleague, or sometimes, even a parent. In fact, gaslighting tactics are not
restricted to the personal or professional realm. 
Gaslighting strategies are used even in public life, affecting an entire group
of people. There are multiple instances in which you can clearly see
gaslighting techniques by President Donald Trump and his administration.
Most experts agree that politics is a field where spreading lies is taken and
accepted to be a stereotypical attitude. However, President Trump seems to
have taken it a bit too far.
 
In the initial days of his office, President Trump - along with his
administration staff - are believed to have lied so blatantly that there was a
shade of arrogance and utter contempt for the intelligence of the American
people. It was like the concerned officials were baiting the common people,
telling them to rise up and revolt against the nastiness if you can; this was a
clear sign of narcissistic personality disorder. 
For instance, the administration lied about the crowd size at the Presidential
swearing-in. It was clear that photos from President Obama’s swearing-in
were manipulated to look like the current one. It was so easy to detect this

lie that for some people, it was like a war cry to the media, which was most
likely to be discredited by Americans for putting such lies on their websites
and publications.
At a personal level, gaslighting tactics are used by manipulative people who
want to control the lives of their family members. Think of a physically and
emotionally abusive spouse wreaking havoc on his or her partner or the
children in the family, and you can easily discern gaslighting behavior.
Where is Gaslighting Typically Seen?
Geographically speaking, gaslighting behavior is not exclusive to any part
of the world. Wherever power dynamics are in play and where the need and
desire for control over people and resources exist, gaslighting behavior can
be witnessed. Multiple studies reveal that this kind of unpleasant and
dangerous behavior is prevalent not only in personal relationships but also
at the workplace, and even in public life as in the way some politicians and
their coterie interact with the common man on the street. 
MHR, an HR services provider, conducted a survey in the UK which
revealed some shocking numbers. Over 3000 people undertook the survey,
and 58% of this group claimed that they had experienced what they
believed was gas-lighting behavior at their workplace. About 30% said they
did not experience such behavior while 12% said that they didn't know! The
disturbing results of this survey poll reveal how widespread gaslighting is in
the UK. Some examples of gaslighting behaviors at the workplace include:
●       
 
Taking credit for your work
●        
Mocking you, your behavior or dress style in front of other
colleagues
●        
Setting unreasonable and unrealistic deadlines
●        
Deliberately withholding information that is crucial for the success
of a project you are working on
Most of the elements mentioned above are seemingly insignificant but add
up to a lot in retrospect. And moreover, unlike bullying, which is easily
discernible, gaslighting behaviors are subtle and are meant to slowly but
surely put doubt on your capabilities and value to the organization. Such

attitudes cannot be caught until after the damage is done to the target’s
psyche. 
Another US-based report says that 3 out of 4 people in the country are not
aware of the term, and this state of ignorance is despite the widespread
prevalence of gaslighting behavior in the entertainment and media
industries where power-play dynamics are perhaps the strongest. 
Nearly 75% of the surveyed people said that they had heard of the term but
did not know its meaning. The study revealed that about a third of the
female population had termed their romantic partners as ‘crazy’ or ‘insane’
in a very serious way. About 25% of the male population had also used
these two words to describe their partners. 
Therefore, gaslighting behavior is not restricted to any particular geography
or industry, and can be witnessed in different countries, cultures, and
industries. 
Common Gaslighting Situations
Here are some common examples of gaslighting scenarios that could help
you understand if and when you are being gaslighted by various
perpetrators.
In a home environment
- Alice’s father, Andrew, is a bitter and angry man
who is carrying a lot of negativity right from his childhood. His power play
is most evident with Alice, thanks to her dependence on him for a lot of
things. Alice’s mother is the breadwinner in the family and is away most of
the time at work. 
Alice spent a lot more time with her father than her mother and had
unwittingly built herself into a codependency situation with Andrew. She
was highly sensitive to his mood swings and was always worried that some
action or behavior of hers would bring on a dark mood in her father. 
Whenever her father was in a dark mood, he would lash out at Alice by
saying that ‘You’re worthless,’ ‘I wonder why you were born,’ and quite
frequently using foul language too. If Alice tried to argue back with him, he
would laugh it off and say, ‘Why are you so unnecessarily sensitive?’
Alice had become so accustomed to this situation at home that she did not
even think it important enough to speak to her mother about it that was too

busy with her work to find time for her daughter. Alice was completely
under her father’s control and even accepted it as natural. She believed that
her father was only helping her toward self-improvement and that there was
nothing wrong with him.
Another common situation is when adult children manipulate their old
parents. Here is a sample case that you are likely to find in many homes.
In a romantic relationship
- In the eyes of most people, Julie’s life could be
seen as being as ideal. Married for over five years to her first love who is
now an adoring husband, financially secure (her husband, John, is an
investment banker who rakes in the moolah), and with two beautiful
children, Julie might look like there is no dearth of happiness in her life.
And yet, she knows what she is going through. Before her marriage, Julie
was an artist with some great skills. 
After she got married, John did his best to prevent his wife from trying to
advance her skills and make a name for herself in the art world. He always
found fault with her work and made her feel worthless. Every time she tried
to paint something, he would say, ‘A lousy artist like you is not going to
make it in the art world which is filled with brilliant artists. Your work will
never match up to theirs. Don't waste time and money on this. Instead, just
focus on looking after the family.’
Also, he would always bring up a bad experience that she had had during
her early artist days. She had created a painting and wanted feedback from a
famous artist who was a good friend of her husband’s. The man had said
that her skills were way below even an average artist and that she should
not even try moving forward. Julie’s husband never failed to bring up that
comment and used it to make her believe that she was fit for nothing more
than taking care of the family. 
Julie’s husband used that one bad experience and feedback to remind her of
her worthlessness continually, and repeated practice and such habitual
behavior enslaved her to her husband completely. Now, although she lives
comfortably, she realizes that her life is actually empty. She wants to break
free from her husband’s manipulative ways, but he uses their children to
strengthen his power over her. 

In a workplace scenario
- Jolly was a salesgirl in a large cosmetic
showroom. After working for five years, she was given a promotion to
work in, which not only gave her a higher salary but also opened up career
growth prospects. Jolly was very happy with the promotion and started
working with her new boss, Penny.
Initially, Jolly found Penny helpful and sweet. Slowly, Penny started
passing on insignificant tasks to Jolly, who did them uncomplainingly.
However, this did not stop at all and, in fact, increased so much that she had
no time and energy to learn anything new at the job. She was just about able
to finish all the work assigned by her boss, who kept her at arm’s length and
discouraged interactions of all kinds except with giving out tasks.
A department meeting was called one day, and Jolly was part of it. Penny
addressed the other people and said, ‘Meet Jolly, who has been with us for
nearly three months now, and she has yet to learn the ropes of the new
department. I hope she catches up soon or else we might have to send her
back after demoting her.’ Jolly turned red with embarrassment and shame at
this open and unexpected insult from her boss. And she realized that she
had unwittingly become a victim of gaslighting tactics!
 
Emotional Hot Spots that are targeted
Nearly anyone can be a target to gaslighting tactics considering the subtlety
involved in the process. Very few people can really discern the difference
between gaslighting and simple annoying behavior. Most often, people will
tend to categorize gaslighting behaviors as a mere annoyance and tend to
ignore it. Yet, there are certain types of people who become easy targets for
gaslighting. Some of them are:
Empaths
- Empaths are people who are extremely sensitive to everything
that is happening around them. They can quickly, and most often,
unwittingly absorb both positive and negative energies from their
environment. Such people can be easy targets for deceivers because it is
quite easy to influence them. Just sending negative vibes to empaths can
enhance their sensitivity to a deceiver’s needs.
Insecure people
- Deceivers typically target people with significant
inferiority complexes. Men and women who feel insecure about themselves
are easy targets considering that they are already in a vulnerable condition.

Moreover, insecure people are continuously looking for positive affirmation
from others, which is exactly what deceivers want in the initial stages of
any new relationship. Gaslighting tactics start with heaping praise, often
when it is not necessary and praises on the victims initially, and once they
are trapped, the true color of deceivers come to the fore.
And yet, it is time to reiterate that some deceivers are so good at what they
do that even the sanest and most sensible people can become their targets.
Therefore, it makes sense to be aware of the concept of gaslighting tactics
and their multiple negative effects and to be wary of such people.

Chapter 3. How to spot a gaslighter
If there is an attribute that deceivers appear to have in abundance, it is
charm. They are generally likable people that appear to overflow tons of
charm, and this may make it difficult to identify them on the surface. There
are, however, a few manners of behavior by which they can be identified,
and these include: 
Withholding: 
Here the deceiver retains information on what they know or
what is the fact by pretending not to understand their victims. They may
begin sentences with phrases like ''Are you trying to confound me by?'' or
''Please, don't accompany this again. Haven't I told you...?'' It is a tactic to
perplex the victim by making him/her vibe like they are off-base or
misconstrued a situation. 
Countering:
The victim's facts are made to be false as victims are blamed
for their 'carelessness' or 'jumbling things up' although the victim's memory
is great. 
Diverting
: In this case, the deceiver attempts to occupy the victim or make
them question themselves by changing the subject of discussion. An
example is ''I'm certain your crazy sister advised you to screen my calls.'' Or
''None of this is valid, you're making them up to hurt me.'' 
Downplaying facts:
When the victim complains about an unsavory situation
or communicates a fear, the deceiver laughs at the issue or downplays its
earnestness, making the victim feel like a youngster with a tantrum. You
hear phrases like ''You're angry because of that?'' 
Outright denial:
The deceiver will deny guarantees that they made, totally
telling the victim that they never said so and that the whole conversation
happened in the victim's mind. For example, ''I never advised you to keep
dinner waiting for me!'' 
Pathologizing:
Especially savage deceivers may choose to play specialist
with your mental health and 'diagnose' you of instability in an offer to
conceal their behavior. They can proceed to make claims that you are
'unstable,' 'not all there,' 'spacey,' or 'vengeful' in an offer to unhinge their
victims. They may even advise you to book an appointment with a
psychiatrist, all the while acting as if they are working for your wellbeing

and subsequently making you accept that something is genuinely amiss
with you. 
Discrediting:
A deceiver will, under the pretense of helping you, spread
falsehoods and bits of gossip about you to the people within your circle.
They would pretend to be stressed over you and utilize that chance to tell
others that you are unstable or have been acting bizarre. They may also turn
around to reveal to you that others think you are crazy as a way to drive a
wedge among you and the people you would normally go to for help. 
Put blames on you:
A deceiver will always find a way to  blame you for
whatever off-base they do. Attempt to have an important conversation about
how they hurt you, and they will turn the discussion upside down that you
will start believing that you are the reason for their bad behavior. 
Shaming:
Another tool the deceiver utilizes in keeping the victim calm is by
unobtrusively shaming them by making victims feel inept about the fact that
they have been victimised. You will, at that point, apologize to them for
speaking out about a bad behavior you called out when they have convinced
you it's all in your head. A husband that has been cheating may turn the
tables on you by saying: ''I can't trust you would think that I would cheapen
our relationship in that manner! If you trust I did this, it means you have
been unfaithful to me,'' he may say. 
Use kind words to keep you daydreaming:
When you call out a deceiver,
they may amaze you by using kind words that may make you assume that
maybe they are not all that bad after all. But if they utilize kind words when
faced without changing their behavior or stopping the things that hurt you,
they are just manipulative because, after some time, you will start thinking
that you are excessively emotional. 

Chapter 4.Cognitive Dissonance | How Manipulation Affects You
When a person is being manipulated, cognitive dissonance is a common
occurrence. You may be asking yourself what cognitive dissonance actually
is, and the thought behind it is actually quite simple. When you get a feeling
that is uncomfortable because it goes against your beliefs or your normal
way of thinking, it is referred to as cognitive dissonance.   
A good example of this would be if you are usually an honest person and
you tell a lie. Naturally, this is going to make you feel quite uncomfortable.
The contradiction of the behavior you expressed as compared to your
normal behaviors is quite different, and the person that does this will
experience cognitive dissonance. 
In general, people try to be consistent with their thoughts, ideas, attitudes,
and behaviors. When these items are challenged, or they go against your
level of normalcy, many people will try to change this lack of agreement by
doing things like overly explaining their behavior or action. This makes it
more comfortable and allows them to move past it.
The first theory behind cognitive dissonance came from a psychologist by
the name of Leon Festinger. It centered around the fact that most people
will do their best to find internal consistency. Festinger said that we all have
an internal need to make sure that our behaviors and our belief systems stay
consistent. When they are inconsistent, it leads to internal disharmony,
which is something everyone will try and avoid if they can. In fact, people
will go to great lengths to find internal balance after experiencing cognitive
dissonance.
There are a variety of different factors that will impact the amount of
dissonance that a person may experience. One of those factors is how
concrete they feel in certain beliefs that they hold. Another factor is how
consistent they are in their beliefs throughout the course of time. Thoughts
and mental actions that are very personal, such as your understanding and
belief in yourself can cause greater dissonance inside of you than other
beliefs.

The higher value something holds in you internally, the greater the
dissonance you will experience if you go against that belief. It is normal for
people to have thoughts that clash; however, this is something that tends to
come and go as most people strive to have consistent thought patterns,
behaviors, and beliefs. The more dissonance a person experiences, the more
pressure they will also experience to find balance and relieve themselves of
uncomfortable feelings. 
It’s actually pretty amazing how cognitive dissonance can influence a
person’s actions, thoughts, and behaviors. Cognitive dissonance can be seen
in just about every area of life. It is predominant in situations that behaviors
conflict with a person’s belief system. This is especially true when dealing
with the area of self-identity. Let’s look at an example of cognitive
dissonance so that you have a very clear understanding of what we are
talking about here.
We see cognitive dissonance occur frequently when people
are making purchasing decisions. Let’s say you are someone
that is very conscious of the environment, and you do your
very best to make green decisions. One day you go and buy a
new car to find out that it is not very eco-friendly. This will
cause cognitive dissonance because you care about being
friendly to the environment, yet you are driving a car that is
not very friendly to the environment. The dissonance can be
reduced the number of ways to make the belief and the
behavior go together better. You could choose to sell your
new vehicle and get one that is going to get better mileage
and be friendlier to the environment, or you could choose to
cut down on how much you are driving the new car. Some
may choose to utilize public transportation or even ride a
bike to work. Each one of these is a solution to help resolve
the dissonance that is being experienced. They all help bring
balance.
There are a variety of ways that people will try to find balance when
experiencing dissonance. Minimizing the drawbacks of a decision or action
is one way that people do this. A great example is to think about people

who smoke, and they may take the time to convince themselves that the
risks are being blown out of proportion. This helps their minds to accept the
bad habit of smoking and, in turn, alleviate the dissonance hey experience
when they smoke and think about it being bad for their health.
Another thing that people will do to get rid of the uncomfortable feelings
caused by cognitive dissonance is to look at the beliefs that outweigh the
action that was dissonant. This is done by looking for new information to
change their old patterns of thinking. 
This new information, even if it isn’t exactly correct, can allow the
uncomfortable feelings to dissipate, leaving the person feeling more
balanced and at ease.
People will also try to reduce the significance of the belief that conflicts
how they normally feel. An example of this is the person who works in an
office building and sits in front of a computer all day. They know that
sitting for long periods of time is unhealthy, but it is hard to change it since
it is there job to sit in front of that computer. Rather than change their
behavior, they will try and justify the action of sitting all day. They do this
by telling themselves that the fact that they eat healthily and exercise once
in a while will be enough to combat the negative effects of sitting all day.
This helps to reduce the uncomfortable dissonance they are experiencing.
The last way that people deal with cognitive dissonance is to change the
conflict that is occurring inside. By changing a belief so that it coincides
with other beliefs, the dissonance will be alleviated. This change of belief
systems is effective when trying to deal with dissonance, but it is also quite
difficult. Obviously, if you are trying to change your core values and beliefs
to deal with dissonance, it is going to be a challenge. 
More often than not, people will find other ways to deal with the cognitive
dissonance that does not require them to restructure their entire thought
process and beliefs on a particular subject.
It is important to remember that cognitive dissonance can be very
disconcerting. When your beliefs and your actions don’t match up, it can

take a toll on your ability to make decisions that will be beneficial to you.
When we notice cognitive dissonance, it should be looked at as an
opportunity to grow and learn. 
When you are dealing with a gaslighting narcissist, cognitive dissonance
can give you a great clue as to what is going on.  If you find yourself doing,
saying, or agreeing with things that go against your values and beliefs
because of what someone else is saying, it is a good sign that you are being
manipulated. Our bodies do a great job of helping us understand the
experiences that unfold in front of us on a daily basis. You can use cognitive
dissonance to your advantage so that you maintain the beliefs and values
that ring true to you rather than allow yourself to be influenced by a
nefarious manipulator.
Effects of Manipulation
Manipulation can come in a variety of different forms, and unfortunately,
there are a variety of different negative effects that come along with it.
Whether you are mentally or emotionally manipulated, the effects can be
devastating. Sometimes they are short term effects that can be moved
passed relatively easily while other times they are long-lasting and can
impact your life forever. When you know the effects of manipulation, you
are better equipped to handle them, and your life will be able to improve
more easily
.
Psychological and emotional abuse occurs when people are manipulated,
and unfortunately, they are not simple wounds that will heal. In fact, it is
likely if you have been abused with manipulation that you will carry the
scars for the rest of your life. Seeking help is sometimes the best course of
action, depending on the experience that you have had. When it comes to
mental manipulation, you may find that you have problems with trust,
security, respect, and intimacy, and these are only a few of the issues that
you may be facing.
We are going to take the time to look at the short- and long-term effects that
occur from mental and emotional manipulation. 

The gaslighting tactic, is both mental and emotional abuse. So, if you have
or you are dealing with a narcissist who uses gaslighting, it is very likely
that you are experiencing some of these effects. Recognizing them can be
the first step toward finding improved health and happiness.
The Short-Term Effects of Manipulation:
If you have been mentally or emotionally manipulated, it can be
very difficult to understand what is unfolding. You may feel
surprised or confused by events. The feelings of “this can’t be
so” are very common. You may question why the people closest
to you are acting so strange, even if they aren’t acting strange at
all.
It is also likely that you will question yourself if you have been
through or you are going through this type of abuse. You may
wonder if your memory is deceiving you, or you may feel like
there is something wrong with you, in general. When everything
you do is questioned, this is the result. Gaslighting will cause
this effect frequently as you will always be wrong or questioned
by the narcissistic party in the relationship.
If you have experienced mental or emotional manipulation,
another short-term effect could be anxiety and hypervigilance.
People become vigilant toward themselves and other people to
try and avoid further manipulation. They will avoid behaviors
that make things chaotic or ones that may end in outbursts.
Anxiety will rule them, and any extra chaos could lead to a break
down so, they will avoid any and everything that may cause that.
Passiveness is another effect that comes from being
psychologically and emotionally manipulated. Oftentimes, more
emotional pain comes when you take action in a mentally or
emotionally abusive relationship, so being passive becomes part
of everyday life. It is important to note that being passive can be
a hard thing to break, especially during times of emotional stress.
Being passive can become a default and a constant presence in
day to day life.

The feeling of guilt or shame is also a common effect of mental
and emotional manipulation. When you are constantly being
blamed for the negative actions taking place in your life, you
start to believe that you are the cause. This can lead to feelings
of guilt or shame as you take their bad behavior out on yourself.
Obviously, this is only going to make you feel worse, and it is an
unfortunate side effect of being with a narcissist or a
manipulator.
Avoiding making eye contact with others is another short-term
effect of mental and emotional manipulation. When we don’t
make eye contact with people, it allows us to feel smaller like
you can hide inside of yourself and that you will take up less
space. This is a common thing to do when someone is hard on
you all the time and makes you feel as if you are insane. We feel
that it helps to protect us in some sort of way. Fortunately, this is
a side effect that tends to go away rather quickly after we
remove the toxic manipulator from our lives and start being
around people that genuinely care for us in healthy ways.
The last short-term effect that we would like to mention is the
feeling that you need to walk on eggshells around people. When
you live your life with an emotional or mental manipulator
around, you will never be able to tell what will upset them next.
Due to this fact, you will start to obsess about everything that
you are doing. The obsession takes place because you are trying
to avoid causing any outbursts, and it can bleed over into other
relationships that you may have.
While there is nothing good to be said about being manipulated
psychologically or emotionally, we can take some solace in the fact that if
we can move away from these abusive relationships, the above issues will
likely resolve. There are side effects of these types of abuse that will not go
away so easily. 
In fact, there are side effects of emotional manipulation that could stick
around forever. Seeking professional help to figure out a course of action to
help you heal is oftentimes the best place to start. Let’s take a look at some

of the long-term effects that one may experience if they have suffered or are
suffering from mental or emotional manipulation.
The Long-Term Effects of Manipulation:
One of the 1st and most devastating long-term effects of mental
manipulation are the feelings of isolation or complete numbness.
Many find that they feel they are no longer a participant of the
world but that they have become observers. Things that used to
make them happy now don't make them feel anything at all.
When someone no longer recognizes their emotions, it leads to a
sense of hopelessness. Many fear that they will never be able to
accurately feel or experience their emotions again. This long-
term effect does not have to last forever. If you are able to get
out of the abusive relationship, you can find healing for your
damaged emotions. 
Another long-term effect is constantly seeking approval. People
that have been emotionally or mentally manipulated are likely
going to be exceptionally nice to every person they come into
contact with. Additionally, they will go to great lengths to please
others. They will likely be extremely focused on their
appearance, and they will constantly be striving to accomplish
more and more goals. They will do their best to be perfect in
every way so that others will approve of them. While some of
these things don't seem so bad, keep in mind that it will be to an
extreme which is not good. 
People that have suffered the abuse of manipulation are
oftentimes left with feelings of resentment. This resentment can
be seen in different ways like impatience, frustration, irritability,
and placing blame. When you have been treated poorly, it can be
extremely difficult to witness anything other than that negative
behavior. So, releasing feelings of resentment can be quite
difficult, especially if you are going at it on your own. 
Depression is another real threat to those that have experienced
or are experiencing manipulation. Depression is something that
may never be overcome once it has taken a hold on your life. It

takes a lot of work to dig your way out of the effects of
depression. When people are depressed, they start to lose faith in
those that they care about and that care about them. They feel
alone and sad without a sense of purpose within their world. It
becomes hard for them to believe in themselves or in anyone
else, and this takes a lot of time to heal from. 
Another long-term effect that may be experienced is the
excessive judgment of yourself and others. Due to the fact that a
narcissistic manipulator will constantly judge you, you will start
to judge yourself and others much more critically. Here will be
very high standards when it comes to things like appearance and
behavior. This can lead to problems within all of your
relationships, including your relationship with yourself. 
As noted, long term effects can be devastating an impact your life
negatively in just about every aspect. There is hope in coming back from
these negative effects after you have been able to remove yourself from a
manipulative situation. Keep in mind that there is nothing wrong with
admitting you need help and seeking it out. You really can find a lot of
healing through therapy or groups, which will help you become yourself
once again, allowing you to truly start enjoying life. 

Chapter 5. How Gaslighting Narcissists operate to make their Victim
Think that they are Crazy
So, we mentioned that narcissists have a hand in gaslighting, but what do
they do/ they actually are huge manipulators, and they play a major role in
changing the reality of others.  Here, we’ll discuss how they gaslight others,
and why narcissists are bad news for many people.
What Is A Narcissist?
A narcissist is, by definition, someone that suffers from narcissistic
personality disorder. Those who are narcissists tend to have an overly
inflated sense of importance, and a need for admiration and attention in
their relationships, and oftentimes don't have empathy for others.
Narcissists only care about themselves. They don’t worry about you, or the
guy next to you, but instead, they’re only in it for their own benefit. 
However, they actually have an incredibly fragile ego that will shatter and is
very vulnerable if they’re hit with the smallest amount of criticism.
Narcissists are textbook manipulators, and they’re not fun to deal with. This
type of personality causes many issues in different areas of life, and you
may run into one of these types without even realizing it.  Typically, though,
those who suffer from narcissistic personality disorder are unhappy in a
general sense if they’re not given the admiration they want.  They may find
all of their relationships unfulfilling, and others may not like being around
these types of people.
So how does a narcissist come into your life? Well, those that suffer from
this love to latch onto those that will hype them up, making them feel like
they’re special or unique, and in turn enhance their own self-esteem as a
result.  They may desire an immense amount of admiration and attention
and have difficulty taking criticism in the slightest.  They oftentimes see all
criticism as defeat.
They are incredibly envious of your accomplishments, to the point where
they will want to undermine them however, they can. This can be anything
from snarky accomplishments regarding your success to underhanded
comparing of others
.
Narcissists love to use gaslighting too, but we’ll get to that in a bit. For
now, let’s talk about how they will undermine you. If you do something

great, they’ll try to belittle it, saying that it’s not worth it, and you need to
do better. Sometimes, if the narcissist is a parent, they’ll compare you to
your sibling or someone else in the family.  They oftentimes will try to
belittle anything you do, turning you into a mess in response.
It’s not good, and narcissists in general only care about themselves. Of
course, many times only a small fraction of people are actual narcissists, but
in general, there are more male narcissists than female narcissists, and you
oftentimes will run into them when you’re dealing with bosses, coworkers,
or even people you may be friends with or date.
But, how can these people use gaslighting? Well, they do so in a very crafty
manner.
Narcissism and Gaslighting
Narcissists love to use gaslighting. In fact, it’s their favorite, most preferred
tool of gaslighting. Why is that? Well, it’s because it’s the perfect way to
make you think you’re crazy, to completely undermine what you think is
right, and to basically tell you that your way of thinking is wrong.
Remember, gaslighting is a very sneaky way of making you feel like your
reality is so distorted to the point where the person will question their own
sanity or even their memory.  Their goal is to make it so that they’re right,
you’re wrong, and that’s all they want from this.
The goal is to make you think you’re crazy, which we’ll get to in a bit. 
There are other tools narcissist will use, but gaslighting is their bread and
butter.
“Oh, I never said that.”
“Oh, you’re remembering it wrong, clearly you should get yourself checked
out.”
If you’ve ever heard those two things before from someone, you’re dealing
with a Grade A Narcissist
.
Gaslighting is used by narcissists because it’s how they love to hide the
abuse they're inflicting upon you.  In essence, gaslighting is lying straight to
your face, with one singular goal in mind, to be the ones in control, the
center of attention, and you’re nothing.

Basically, every time a narcissist gaslights you, they’re basically completely
ruining what sense of reality you have, making you realize that it’s nothing,
and they’re everything. 
They want to break you down slowly but surely. Memory is one of the
easiest ways to do this. Why is that? Well, it’s because they know that if
you can’t remember things right, you’re not going to be able to trust
yourself, distorting your own personal perception and reality that comes
with this.
So yes, it does happen like that, and the goal is for you to completely rely
on the abuser to tell you what’s real so that over time the abuser is the one
in control of your life, the one taking the reins here in the game.
The Art of Making Others Crazy
This is something that a lot of narcissists use gaslighting for. Remember,
gaslighting is basically refuting anyone’s reality, making it so that what they
think is right really isn’t.
When a narcissist gaslights, they will put down and refute anything that you
say.  They will do this to make it sound like they’re the ones who are right
when in reality, it’s their own mind games.
It's all a game for a narcissist. They want to make it so that your reality isn’t
correct. While you might believe that you’re right, the narcissist will tell
you right away that you aren’t. Over time as you continue to be refuted by
the narcissist, you start to doubt your own reality. You start to think that
you’re the bad guy when in reality, it’s just your narcissist playing games.
When a narcissist gaslights, they can change the view that you have of
people, in general, being good. You might think that people, in general, are
good, which they are, but oftentimes, if you have a narcissist in your life,
this person will not protect your feelings. Someone you may think is good
turns out to be bad, and someone that you thought was bad turns out to be
good since that’s how the narcissist wants you to think.
A narcissist will use gaslighting for the sole reason of, they know exactly
how to manipulate you. You start to doubt your own reality, and over time,
you start to wonder if maybe you are crazy. After all, after so often, you
may wonder if you’re not right in the head. But remember, more often than

not, narcissists were the cause of this, and they’re the reason why you think
this way.
Lots of times narcissists will start by buttering you up, making you feel
loved and appreciated since that’s what they want you to believe. After a
while, they will start to, over time, start to treat you like crap. When you
call them out on it, they’ll start to mask their true feelings, and you’ll be
seeing a totally different side.
But the reality is, that mask that they put on is, of course, their mask, and
the abusive nature that they’ve had till now is their true form.
They will tell you what you think is what happened isn’t what happened,
but that’s actually how it is. But of course, in the world of the narcissist,
they’ll only make you believe what they think is right.
Gaslighting basically takes away everything that you think is correct, which
then causes you to follow what they think is the way when in reality, they’re
manipulating you.
You’re basically forced to believe that you’re crazy, or if you don’t think
you’re crazy, that the abuser is wrong, but you can’t stand up for yourself. 
They will either manipulate you until you believe you’re wrong and they
are right or drive you to the point of insanity.
Deceivers and narcissists love this. Because they know that, once you
discount your own personal beliefs enough, you’ll start to really think that
you are crazy, and slowly start to believe them
.
Making People do What the Narcissist Wants 
This is done because most of the time, when you start to discount how a
narcissist acts, they will immediately gaslight you, saying that it didn’t
happen this way.
You notice your narcissist abuser is acting gross and mean, and you notice
that for example, they’re flirting with other girls.  They totally are, and you
call them out on it, but they will immediately say that isn’t the case, tell you
that you’re crazy, that you’re making stuff up, and basically tell you
whatever you saw was wrong.
Deep down, you know what the truth is. That the actions you saw were
valid, but over time, this person will continuously tell you that you’re crazy,

that you didn’t really hear or say what was said.
You start to doubt your own reality, and you begin to wonder if you
remembered everything right. Perhaps you didn’t catch the other person
flirting with girls. You start to go silent on it. When in reality, your
narcissist was totally doing that, didn’t come clean, and now this person is
seeing girls, and every time you call them out on that, and their own trust
and validity, basically tells you that you’re insane, and you’re wrong.
You stop fighting the narcissist after a while.  You notice that every time
you fight them there really is no end to it and the fact that you’re constantly
told that you’re crazy every time you do isn’t a good thing for you either.
So, what do you do from here?
The answer is most people tend to give in to their abusers.
Instead of doing what they feel is right, which is calling out the abuser and
recognizing the toxic traits, you start to do exactly what the abuser wants.
Because whenever you’re gaslight, you start to feel like you’re wrong, and
that the narcissist is right. You’re pretty much duped into believing that the
narcissist is the right person, and you’re wrong, making your reality
practically nothing.
If you let this continue, you’re basically feeding the supply of narcissism
that the other person craves. You may start to perceive things wrong, and
oftentimes, it gets to the point where you swore it was that way, but maybe
your stuff is gone, because the narcissist hides it, and then they claim that
you’re irresponsible, and not worthy of trust. They will then tell you that
you’re wrong and crazy, and they’ll start to make others think that you’re
crazy.
They will even pit others against you to isolate others.  Oftentimes, they’ll
try to put you against others, so you drop them, and the only person in your
life is the narcissist.  They’ll make up lies, and you can’t really trust anyone
but the person who is gaslighting you.
When in reality, the one who is gaslighting you is the last person that you
should be trusting!
Deceivers don’t really realize just how harmful they are, or maybe they do. 
They will start to make you question even the most random of strangers. 
You might start to brush off someone’s actions as being harmless, but the

gaslighted will call it flirting, and soon, you start to attack anyone who
comes at you.
Have you ever seen this? Maybe you’ve experienced it. Where you will
hear about how someone was looking at you the wrong way, you start to
grow weary and angry with the other person, and over time, those
relationships break down since you think they can’t be trusted. When in
reality, it’s the narcissist who can't be trusted, because they’re the one
putting you in this direction.
A narcissist will hurt literally everyone in your life, pit you against the
friends and family that you have so that you’re distracted from what the
narcissist is really doing, which is feeding you harmful lies.
It’s a messy situation and not something that most of us want to deal with.
So yes, a narcissist will use gaslighting. It’s the prime tool of narcissist
because they know that they can bend others to the will that they have,
making it very easy to manipulate them, and that’s why many narcissists
will smile at you with a warm, fake smile, and then stab you in the back
whenever you turn around, or put your family and friends against you, so
the only person you can really rely on, is the narcissist themselves

Chapter 6. The Effects of Gaslighting
Effects of Gaslighting
1. Gaslighting can have catastrophic effects on a person's
psychological health; the procedure is gradual, chipping away
the person's certainty and self-esteem. They may come to accept
they merit the abuse.
2. Gaslighting can also influence a person's social life. The abuser
may manipulate them into cutting ties with friends and relatives.
The individual might also isolate themselves, believing they are
unstable or unlovable.
3. Especially when the person escapes the abusive relationship, the
effects of gaslighting can persevere. The person may even now
question their discernments and have difficulty making
decisions. They are also more reluctant to voice their emotions
and feelings, knowing that they are probably going to be
invalidated.
4. Gaslighting may lead a person to create mental health concerns.
The constant self-uncertainty and disarray can contribute to
anxiety. A person's sadness and low self-esteem may lead to
despondency. Post-traumatic stress and codependency are
common developments.
5. Some survivors may battle to confide in others; they may be on
constant guard for additional manipulation. The individual may
criticize themselves for not catching the gaslighting earlier. Their
refusal to show vulnerability might prompt strain in future
relationships.
Recovering from Gaslighting
Gaslighting is a secret form of abuse that blossoms with uncertainty. A
person can grow to distrust everything they feel, hear, and recollect. One of
the most significant things a survivor can get is validation.
The individuals who have encountered gaslighting may also wish to look
for therapy. A therapist is a natural party who can aid in reinforcing one's
sense of reality. In therapy, an individual can modify their self-esteem and

recover command of their lives. A therapist might also treat any mental
health concerns caused by the abuse, for example, PTSD. With time and
backing, a person can recoup from gaslighting.
Are You Being Gas lighted? 
Gaslighting may not include these experience or feelings, but if you
recognize yourself in any of them, give it additional attention. 
1. You are constantly re-thinking yourself. 
2. You ask yourself, "Am I excessively sensitive?" twelve times
each day. 
3. You regularly feel confounded and even insane at work. 
4. You're continually saying 'sorry' to your mom, father, sweetheart,
boss. 
5. You wonder now and again if you are a "sufficient"
sweetheart/wife/representative/companion/little girl.
6. You can't get why, with so many beneficial things in your life,
you aren't more joyful. 
7. You purchase garments for yourself, goods for your apartment,
or other personal buys in light of your partner, considering what
he might want rather than what might cause you to feel
incredible. 
8. You often rationalize your partner's conduct to loved ones. 
9. You end up denying data of loved ones, so you don't need to
clarify or rationalize. 
10.                    
You realize something is off-base, but you can never
fully communicate what it is, even to yourself.
11.                    
You begin lying to maintain a strategic distance from
the put-downs and reality turns.  
12.                    
You experience difficulty settling on basic decisions.  
13.                   
 
You reconsider before raising blameless subjects of
discussion.  

14.                    
Before your partner gets back home, you go through
a list in your mind to foresee anything you may have fouled up
that day.  
15.                    
There is a sense that you used to be a different person
— increasingly sure, progressively carefree, progressively
relaxed.  
16.                    
You begin addressing your better half through his
secretary so you don't need to reveal to him things you're
apprehensive may agitate him.  
17.                    
You feel as if you can't do anything right.
18.                    
Your children start attempting to shield you from your
partner.  
19.                    
You get yourself angry with people you've generally
coexisted with previously.  
20.                    
You feel sad and dreary.  
Gaslighting tends to work in stages
From the start, it might be generally minor—in reality; you may not see it.
At the point when your partner blames you for intentionally attempting to
undermine you by appearing late to his office party, you attribute it to his
nerves or expect you didn't generally mean it or maybe even start to ponder
whether you were attempting to undermine him—but then you let it go.
Inevitably, however, gaslighting turns into a greater piece of your life,
distracting your musings and overpowering your feelings.
Eventually, you're buried in full-scale sorrow, miserable and dismal, unfit
even to recollect the person you used to be, with your perspective and your
sense of self. You may not continue through every one of the three phases.
But for many women, gaslighting goes from terrible to more awful.
 
Stage 1:
Disbelief Stage 1 is portrayed by disbelief; your deceiver says
something over the top—"That person who approached us for bearings was
extremely simply attempting to get you into bed!"— And you can't exactly
accept your ears. You think you've misjudged, or perhaps he has, or
possibly he was simply kidding. The comment appears to be so unusual;
you may ignore it. Or on the other hand, maybe you attempt to address the

blunder but without a ton of energy. Possibly you even get into since a long
time ago, included arguments, but you're still quite sure of your perspective.
Although you'd like your deceiver's endorsement, you don't yet feel frantic
for it. 
Stage 2:
Defense Stage 2 is set apart by the need to safeguard yourself. You
scan for proof to refute your deceiver and contend with him fanatically,
frequently in your mind, frantically attempting to win his endorsement. 
Stage 3
: Depression gaslighting is the most challenging of all: downturn.
Now, you are effectively attempting to demonstrate that your deceiver is
correct, because then perhaps you could do things his way and at long last
win his endorsement. 

Chapter 7. Signs you are Being Manipulated with Gaslighting
The signs of gaslighting can be hard to see, especially for the person that is
being manipulated by this tactic. Obviously, the effects of gaslighting are
extremely detrimental. So, if you can recognize the signs of it as it is
happening, it gives you an advantage and the possibility of getting out of
this toxic situation before it completely destroys you and your life. 
Oftentimes, people that care about you will recognize the signs before you
will be able to. They may try and talk to you about the issues that they are
seeing, but you may not be willing to hear them if the effects of gaslighting
have already taken hold. 
When someone you trust or once felt that you could trust comes to you and
expresses their concern over signs of gaslighting, you should spend time
reflecting on what they have to say to ensure that you are not a victim of
this horrific abuse. 
We are going to discuss a variety of different signs that you may witness if
you are being gaslighted. Becoming a victim of gaslighting can impact your
life negatively in every way. By looking over the following signs, it may
become easier to understand what is going on, which can, in turn, give you
the clarity and confidence to remove yourself from your current situation. 
If you find yourself doubting your own emotions, you may be experiencing
the repercussion of gaslighting. Oftentimes people will try to convince
themselves that things really aren't so bad. They will assume they are
simply too sensitive and that what they are seeing as reality is tragically
skewed from actual reality. If you have never had an issue with doubting
your feelings, it can be a very good sign of gaslighting tactics. 
Alongside doubting, your emotions will come doubting your perceptions of
the events that unfold in front of you, as well as doubting your own
personal judgment. 
Many people that are being manipulated by gaslighting will be afraid to
stand up for themselves and express their emotions. This is due to the fact
that when they do the gaslighting narcissist makes them feel bad or inferior
for doing so. If you find that you are choosing silence over communication,
it is a pretty good sign that gaslighting is present in your relationship. 

At one point or another, we will all feel vulnerable or insecure. These are
normal feelings; however, if you are in a situation of gaslighting, you will
feel this way consistently. You may always feel like you need to tiptoe
around your partner, family member, or friend to ensure that they don't have
a negative outburst. Additionally, you will start to believe that you are the
one causing problems for them instead of the reverse. 
The gaslighting narcissist will do their best to sever ties between you and
the people that you care about. This can leave the victim feeling powerless
and completely alone. The narcissist will convince their victim that the
people around them don't actually care. In fact, they will try to convince the
victim that everyone thinks that they are crazy, unstable, or flat out insane.
These kinds of comments make the victim feel trapped. It also causes them
to distance themselves from the people that do actually care, which, intern,
makes them in even less control than before. 
Another sign that you are in the grips of the abuse that comes from a
narcissistic deceiver is feeling that you are crazy or stupid. The narcissist
will use a variety of different words and phrases to make you question your
own value. This can become extreme to the point that the victim may start
repeating these derogatory comments. The sooner you can see the sign of
verbal abuse, the sooner you will be able to make the decision to not let it
deconstruct your sense of self-worth. 
The gaslighting narcissist will do their best to change your perception of
yourself. Let's say that you have always thought of yourself as a strong and
assertive person, yet all of a sudden, you realize that your behaviors are
passive and weak. This extreme change of behavior is a good sign that you
are succumbing to gaslighting tactics. When you are grounded in who you
really are and what your belief system stands for, it will be harder for the
narcissistic deceiver to get you to be disappointed in yourself. When you
can recognize that the viewpoint of your worth has changed, it can give you
the motivation to take back control of your own life. 
Confusion is one of the narcissistic deceiver’s favorite tools. They will say
one thing one day and then do something completely opposite the following
day. The result of these types of actions is extreme confusion. 
The behaviors of a narcissistic deceiver will never be consistent. They will
always try to keep you on your toes so that you are in a constant state of

anxious confusion. This gives them more control. Finding that your partner,
family member, or friend is exceptionally inconsistent with their behaviors
should clue you in to the fact that you are likely in a toxic relationship with
them. 
If your friend, partner, or family member teases you or puts you down in a
hurtful way too, then minimalize the fact that your feelings are hurt. It is a
surefire sign of gaslighting. By telling you that you are too sensitive or that
you need to learn how to take a joke, they are brushing your hurt feelings to
the side. Someone who truly cares about you, even if teasing, will take the
time to acknowledge the fact that they hurt your feelings. If you are
constantly being questioned about how sensitive you are, be aware you
could be succumbing to the abuse of gaslighting. 
Another sign that narcissistic gaslighting is occurring is when you
constantly feel that something awful is about to happen. This sense of
impending doom starts to manifest early on in gaslighting situations. Many
people don't understand why they feel threatened whenever they are around
a certain person, but after further investigation and getting away from the
narcissist, they understand it completely. 
Gut feelings should always be listened to, so if your body is telling you that
something is not right between you and another person, you should remove
yourself from the situation before things get terribly out of control. 
There are always times in our lives that we owe other people apologies;
however, when you are in a gaslighting situation, you will spend a plethora
of time apologizing to people. You will feel the need to say I'm sorry
regardless of if you have done anything wrong or not. You may really be
apologizing for simply being there. When we question who we are and our
value. It leads us to apologize profusely. If you notice how much you are
saying, I'm sorry is increasing, and the things you are saying sorry for are
minimal; you may be in a gaslighting situation. 
Second-guessing yourself or constant feelings of inadequacy when you are
with your narcissistic partner, family member, or a friend are excellent signs
that they are gaslighting you. If no matter what you do, it is never good
enough, you should be aware that you may be being manipulated. 

When it comes to 2nd guessing yourself, we're not just talking about
second-guessing your decisions but second-guessing things like your
memories. 
You may wonder if you are actually remembering things as they happened
because your narcissistic abuser constantly tells you differently. If you have
never had a problem recreating and discussing your memories and all of a
sudden you are trying to figure out whether or not what you are saying is
true you may want to take a closer look at the person you are dealing with
instead of looking at yourself. 
Another sign that you are succumbing to the powers of gaslighting is
functioning under the assumption that everyone you come into contact with
is disappointed in you in one way or another. Constant feelings that you are
messing things up are daunting and unrealistic; however, it is amazing how
many people don't recognize when this is happening. They simply start to
apologize for all of the time and assume that no matter what they do, they
will make a mess of things, which will lead to others being disappointed in
them. 
When someone that you are in close contact with makes you feel as if there
is something wrong with you, it could also be a sign of gaslighting. We
aren't talking about physical ailments; we are talking about feeling as if you
have fundamental issues. You may sit and contemplate your sanity and
reality. Unless these were problems for you prior to entering into a new
relationship, you should definitely pay attention to the sign.
 
Gaslighting can also make it extremely difficult for you to make decisions.
Where you once made solid choices for yourself, you now have a sense of
distrust in your judgment. This can make decision making extremely
difficult. Instead of making your own choices, many victims will allow their
narcissistic abusers to make their decisions for them. The other alternative
is not making any decisions at all. Obviously, this could have extremely
negative impacts on a person's life. 
One other great sign that you may be dealing with a gaslighting situation is
when someone you are close to constantly reminds you of your flaws. Sure,
a bit of constructive criticism is welcomed in most people's lives; however,
when your weaknesses or shortcomings are constantly being pointed out by
someone that is supposed to care about you, it is a clear sign that something

is wrong. You should never despise who you are because of heinous
comments made by a narcissist. So, if you take a step back and look at the
people in your life, it will be easy to figure out who genuinely cares about
you and who is trying to control you based on the way that they speak to
you. 
Along the same line, where a deceiver will tear you down, they will almost
never admit or recognize their own flaws. If their flaws are pointed out, it is
likely that they will become aggressive. 
The deceiver is almost always on the offensive and ready to attack. This
means that they will have an inability to recognize their own inadequacies
and they will quickly place the blame on you if you try and point them out.
They are excellent at playing the victim. Additionally, misdirection will be
used so that they can turn things around and continue to dote on your
shortcomings even if they are fictitious. 
Another sign that you are being manipulated by a deceiver is when you start
to make excuses for their bad behavior. People will go to great lengths to
cover up the abuse that they are facing and dealing with on a daily basis.
They tell themselves and everyone else that things are OK or even better
than OK. The victim will come up with a variety of excuses as to why their
narcissistic counterpart is acting the way that they are. These excuses are
not usually accepted by the people questioning the victim; however, the
victim will just continue to make excuses rather than admit there is an
actual problem. 
Recognizing these signs can be a bit difficult when you are involved in a
gaslighting situation. When these signs are being pointed out to you by
friends, relatives, or other people that care about you, take a moment to stop
and really think about what they are saying. Accepting the signs of
gaslighting abuse can be difficult, but it is also necessary for preserving
your happiness and sense of self-worth. 
It is important to note that the longer you are in a relationship with a
gaslighting narcissist, the harder it will be to recognize the signs. Spending
the time at the beginning of a friendship or a relationship to truly get to
know the person and decide whether or not continuing on with them will
lead to toxicity can save you from devastating abuse. Remember that people

are not always what they seem, so being mindful and present in each
moment as it occurs is imperative to keeping yourself safe.

Chapter 8. Things Narcissists Say During Gaslighting.
Stuff Your Gaslighting Abuser Says
If there's one thing I've learned from interacting with people who have had
to battle being with a manipulative deceiver, it's that without fail, the
abusers all seem to have certain choice phrases that they all use. It's almost
like they all graduated from Gaslight University or something. Here's what
your abuser will say:
1. You're only acting this way because you're so insecure.
2. You're too sensitive!
3. Stop being paranoid.
4. it’s really not a big deal.
5. I was only kidding!
6. You take things too seriously.
7. You're acting crazy right now
.
8. You know you are a little nuts, right?
9. You're just making all that up.
10. Stop being so hysterical!
11. Can you be any more dramatic?
12. You're so ungrateful!
13. That's all in your head.
14. No, that never happened.
15. You're lying. No one believes you. I'm not buying your nonsense.
16. If you had just paid attention.
17. We've already talked about this. Don't you remember?
18. Don't you think you're maybe overreacting?
19. If you had just listened.
20. You keep jumping to the wrong conclusions.

21. You're the only person I've ever had all these issues with.
22. I'm discussing, not arguing.
23. I know exactly what you're thinking.
24. What does it say about you that that's what you think?
25. The only reason I criticize you is that I'm looking out for you.
26. Don't take every single word I say so seriously.
27. You need to get better at communicating.
28. Calm down.
29. You're overthinking this. It's really not that deep
.
30. What if you're wrong again, just like the last time?
Think about the context in which you hear these phrases being said to you.
Were you talking about sex? Family? Money? Habits one or both of you
have? You'll notice that these phrases often pop up when the conversation is
centered upon that.
It's a sad truth that, for the most part, the victim is a woman, and a
gaslighting narcissist is a man. The reason for this polarization of genders in
narcissism is that, often, women have learned to doubt themselves and to
apologize whenever there's a problem or disagreement with their significant
others. Men, however, are not socialized this way. 

Chapter 9. Empowering Ways to Disarm a Narcissist and Take Control
Techniques to handle narcissists 
Now comes the difficult part. Deciding what to do with the narcissistic
person in your life, and what the best outcome is. This can depend greatly
on your individual circumstances as well as the person at hand.  
Get away  
Typically, extreme narcissists lack normal levels of empathy, don’t pull
their own weight, and tend to make the people close to them miserable
within the space of a few weeks or months. They are unlikely to have a
great deal of insight into their damaging behaviors and are unlikely to have
an epiphany compelling them to change.  
It may be tempting to try and open their eyes to the cause of their problems,
help or change them, but this is far more likely to misfire with
defensiveness or lead to resentment (depending on how extreme they are). 
Relationships you could potentially cut off include not only romantic
partners, friends and ex-colleagues, but also family. If you are not legally
bound to remain in contact with someone – such as engaged in a business,
joint ownership of property, administration of a will, or where a dependent
is involved, then you have the potential to cut away if you need to.  
Less drastic steps include taking a break or managing the situation. Breaks
can help to gain clarity, but it depends upon the relationship at hand, and
whether you deem it to be worth saving. If abuse is currently involved in
the relationship, an immediate cut-off should be instigated, rather than
attempting to make the best of it.
It’s important to choose the people you spend time with wisely, because
humans tend to adopt the characteristics of those around them. Professor
Nicholas Christakis of Yale University explains this in terms of the ripple
effect, whereby altruism and meanness ripple through the networks of
people, and become magnified. Whatever enters your system - including the
actions of your peers, colleagues and family - will affect your personality
development and outlook. Surrounding yourself with good people will
make you behave in more kind and empathic ways. 
Avoid the inner circle 

If you need or want to keep a narcissist in your life, it is much safer to do so
at a distance, rather than as part of their inner circle - who become privy to
their chaotic changes in temperament. Creating justifiable distance (but
remaining warm) allows you to be a welcome part of their life without
suffering so many falls from grace. They may well start to think of you
quite fondly. Get too close, however, and you may become an undervalued
part of the furniture, without your own identity or boundaries to respect. In
addition, you are giving more opportunities for your words and actions to
be misinterpreted as threats or competition, and you are far more likely to
have your fingers burned. 
Whilst you may have identified the narcissist as a damaging individual,
many people (particularly those under their control) will never be able to
see the situation clearly. This can feel extremely unfair and unjust to those
who can, particularly in family or romantic situations, if they are directly
affected by narcissistic control, abuse or manipulation. 
It is usually those people who “question” the status quo that the harmful
narcissist finds most threatening, and subsequently suffer most acutely at
their hands, as the narcissist feels compelled to bring them down to
maintain their position. If the narcissist is a family member, particularly a
parent, or a partner, this can be particularly damaging, with the victim often
trained to unquestioningly agree or go along with the narcissist’s opinions,
to maintain their love and their favor. Those that follow receive their
rewards, whilst those that question, are isolated, ridiculed and ousted, often
labelled as a “black sheep,” “troublesome” or “combative.”  
Avoid narcissistic injury
Sometimes, cutting the chord on a narcissistic relationship is not an option.
You may feel you should at least try and continue a non-
abusive
relationship, in which case avoiding “narcissistic injury” is key to avoiding
conflict.  
In the minds of narcissistic people - both healthy and extreme - they are
competent, have unique and special talents, and accomplished. In the case
of healthy narcissists, any reasonable threat or challenge to these self-
beliefs can be handled carefully, objectively, and in a proportionate way by
the individual.  

Threats to healthy narcissists don’t include other successful or
accomplished people - they may be positively competitive, but not
derogatory. If a healthy narcissist takes a blow to their self-esteem, negative
feelings may be processed without a melt-down or flying into a rage.
Extreme narcissists, on the other hand, tend to exist in a world of
hypervigilance. Any perceived threat or challenge is likely to be
aggressively countered. Failing to do so could result in painful crashes to
their self-esteem (narcissistic injury), as their opinion of themselves are
overinflated, delicate and variable. This hypervigilance includes people
they see as threatening, so it may be beneficial for you to lie low and
purposely reduce the traits of your own that may make them feel
competitive or badly about themselves.  
Avoid exposing them
Exposing the narcissist and getting the “truth” out for all to see can be
appealing and feel like the right thing to do. You may think this is the best
solution for them, you and anyone else involved - that they will suddenly
see clearly and take responsibility for changing their behavior. Forget about
being right for a moment and bringing the truth to light.  
Pointing out that the narcissist is not as wonderful as they think, can result
in a huge backlash, that you then must be around, and may not be able to
escape. They are not ever going to agree with you, as they are tied to their
elevated identity. Rather than changing their minds, they will be more likely
to simply despise you for your opinions.  
Admire and listen to them 
Being amenable is probably the most passive technique that you can take,
but so long as you are not already on the narcissist’s “naughty list” can be
really effective at pulling you through difficult times, until you reach calmer
waters or are able to end the relationship. Clinical psychologist Al
Bernstein suggests that remaining quiet and allowing the narcissist to come
up with reasons to congratulate themselves is easy, effortless and requires
nothing more than listening and looking interested.  
Admiring them, their achievements and qualities as much as they do can be
a fast route into their “good books.” So long as you avoid getting too close,
this position in their good books can allow you to maintain a happier status
quo with the narcissist still in your life. 

Don’t reject them  
Rejecting a narcissist, whether in reality or in their perception, is likely to
make them feel incredibly hurt or angry - as it causes a deep narcissistic
injury. A jilted lover may feel a great deal of pain when the source of their
affection no longer wants them. So, too, a narcissist feels deeply aggrieved
when a source of narcissistic supply - or anyone else for that matter -
decides that they are not “good enough.”  
Extreme narcissists – ever hypervigilant - may feel rejected for reasons that
more average people would not. Being too busy or not having a good
enough reason to deny their request for your company or collaboration can
easily be taken to heart and result in an unexpectedly intense response. It’s
best to give them a legitimate reason that is beyond your control than to
show that you’re choosing to reject them. Being too busy to meet or see
them is best if your reason is irrefutable, like having to work late to meet a
specific deadline, attend an important wedding, or are booked onto a
vacation or trip elsewhere.  
Avoid showing weakness
If you show a narcissist what it is that makes you vulnerable, or what it is
that you really want, they may at some point use it against you when they
want to manipulate you. Narcissists will frequently learn what it is that you
want most from them, and set about denying it so that you are in a constant
state of “need”. If a narcissistic mother does this, she may control her
children through their neediness for her love. The same goes for a romantic
partner. They’ll ration your supply of what you enjoy most from them to
keep you controllable and pliable. 
 
If they know your greatest concerns or fears they may leverage these to
manipulate you. They may even use you as a distraction from their own
inner turmoil when they are experiencing crashing self-esteem, by needling
you on your points of weakness, to make themselves feel strong again.  
For example, an NPD manager suffering a meltdown of anxiety after a
disastrous sales pitch may proceed to milk his staff for reassurance on his
performance, whilst then moving the conversation on to subjects that he
knows are extremely personal and emotional for them - transferring his
fears to them and feeling better himself.  

By not conceding any weaknesses to a narcissist and always taking a
diplomatic “I know I’ll be happy either way” approach, their power will
bring you down whilst raising themselves higher is lost. This may take on
the appearance of a game of cat and mouse, until eventually the narcissist
must concede that you are not “easily pinned” or risk exposing themselves
and being seen as a pessimistic and negative person.  
Give them an “out”  
You can give them the opportunity to stop playing manipulative games by
offering them an “out” such as: “You’re being uncharacteristically
pessimistic today. You’re usually such an optimist! Is there anything
wrong?” and in doing so call them to return to their “higher state of glory”
without continuing their attack. Subconsciously, they may even be aware
that you successfully navigated their manipulation and decide to give you a
wider berth in future, or that they need to keep you on the side. 
If the attack is particularly vicious or nasty, avoiding emotions but
maintaining a cool, calm and empathic approach can work well to bring
them back around. Whether you believe it or not, providing them with a
defense that effectively excuses their behavior will be much appreciated - as
it helps them to avoid a crushing sense of shame and subsequent denial
loops, and simply feel that they are understood and forgiven. You may even
be surprised to find that this approach results in a voluntary concession and
what may seem like the beginnings or a more responsible approach, but this
is not something that should be anticipated or expected. 
 
Don’t expect fairness
Extreme narcissists are likely to be far more concerned with getting what
they want, than ensuring that everyone is treated fairly. Reward their
behavior rather than their words so that they only get what they want, when
you get what you want too. 
Extending credit or accepting promises from an extreme narcissist is a
dangerous leap of faith that may not be rewarded. Lack of follow through is
just as likely to occur because the narcissist forgets their agreements - their
attention being consumed with themselves and their own concerns rather
than remembering their obligations. 
They want to look good 

Understanding what a narcissist wants means that so long as you avoid
triggering narcissistic injury, they may be able to be worked with. You may
even be able to maneuver them, if you start to think like them. 
Extreme narcissists really want to look good. If you can align what they
want with what you want, you may be able to achieve great successes
together. Alternatively, you may simply be able to manage and placate them
to make your life easier or until you are able to leave the relationship. 
Understand their narcissistic supply  
Narcissists need people to gain narcissistic supply. You might compare that
a healthier person needs others for mutual love and support, but as we
proceed higher up the extreme narcissism scale, the need becomes more
one-directional and desperate in nature, to prevent painful relapses to a
place of low self-esteem. So, what exactly do they want from you? 
Highly narcissistic people often prioritize relationships and career choices
based on how much praise or attention they can receive. Many narcissistic
people hamper their own development (or never develop a range of interests
in the first place), by making choices for praise and success over other
forms of enjoyment. If they have chosen you as a part of their life, it may be
that you provide a high level of narcissistic supply.
 
If you have not been chosen voluntarily, you may find that your relationship
quality depends on how readily you give narcissistic supply, or whether you
question or criticize them.  
Taking responsibility for not damaging their wellbeing - whilst protecting
your own - is as important for them as it is for anyone else. You would not
feel great about filling the liquor cabinet in the home of an alcoholic, nor
should you feel great about pedaling exorbitant approval and attention onto
this already dependent individual. Moderate and considerate amounts to
avoid attack or denigration is enough for you to get by. 
An audience
Narcissists often want an audience. They may spend a great deal of time
talking about themselves. This serves their need to feel special (since they
are always the subject of the discussion). They also get to let other people
know how much they have accomplished in life. And the result of this is
that they get lots of praise from other people.   

Status
Presuming they don’t feel threatened by people of high status, they may
want to associate with them in order to feel superior to others. If you think
you classify as “high status”, this may be what they are using you for. In
this case - check your own score for narcissism. It is not unknown for
narcissists to flock together and form superficial friendships and
relationships to “show off” to others and highlight how special they both
are, such as in a “trophy” partner / wealthy-partner relationship.
Alternatively, they may want company from someone who is lower than
they are to compare to themselves to, for a similar sense of superiority.  
Some may choose a mix of friends - a bunch of successful equals to go out
and “show off” with, and one or two best friends to feel superior to, to
impress and revel in their attention.  
Sex
It may be that the extreme narcissist does not engage in sexual relationships
for the emotional value it has; but for sex, and sex alone. They may revel in
their ability to seduce, in their sexual performance, or in a sense of higher
status or dominance within the sexual dynamic. 
Love
Narcissistic people like to feel that there is someone who loves them and
wants to be with them. Depending on how they view themselves, this may
result in higher levels of infidelity or cheating. If a narcissist defines
themselves as “good” or “moral” then cheating itself (or engaging in any
generally scorned upon activities) could result in crushing shame and self-
loathing, making it less likely to happen. On the other hand, if the narcissist
is reluctant to see their partner as an equal, the likelihood of cheating
increases.  
Avoid flooding them with supply  
If you are concerned about providing a narcissist with supply, keeping them
in line can be aligned more with what they don’t want. Being all about
appearances, narcissists feel more shame than guilt. They really don’t want
to look bad.  
Asking them to consider their reputation may make them think far more
carefully than asking them to consider other people’s feelings. If they think

their actions will be perceived badly by others, they are far less likely to act.
This can be achieved by asking them what people would think about what
they did or asking probing questions to trigger them into having an
alternative idea themselves.  

Chapter 10. Ways to Stop a Deceiver in Their Tracks
If you've read up to this point, then chances are you're probably thinking of
a long list of people that have just got to be narcissists or deceivers in your
life. However, as a caution: Not everyone is a narcissist just because you
have a little tiff here and there. Also, keep in mind that you might be
recollecting past events through the narcissistic glasses, and so everyone
might seem to be that way. 
With that said, if you've asked yourself the questions listed in this book, and
have observed for yourself that you really are dealing with a deceiver, how
do you deal with them? Let's get into that.
Putting an End to Gaslighting
Pay attention to the pattern.
One of the major reasons gaslighting is so
effective is that, for the most part, the target is completely ignorant of
what's happening. The minute you move from ignorance to complete
awareness, you will have successfully taken back some of your power. You
will find it easier to shrug off the narcissist when they start playing games
again.
Keep in mind that the deceiver might never change, no matter what you do.
Sometimes, the only way there can be any change is with the help of a
professional. Gaslighting is all that the manipulator knows how to do, so
you cannot expect them to give that up in favor of logic or reason. There is
no other better coping mechanism that they know. This is not to say that
they should not be held accountable for their actions. I'm just making sure
you now not to hold on to the hope that they will change. They could, but
don't hope for it. Accept that they're wired the way they are, and only
professional therapy can help them become better people. 
Remember that gaslighting behavior is not necessarily about you.
It all
really comes down to the fact that the deceiver needs to feel like they're in
charge. They need that rush of power. At their core, the deceiver is riddled
with insecurity. The only way they know how to get rid of that feeling is to
make others feel less than they are, or at least give themselves the illusion
that they are better than everyone else. Keep this in mind, and you will not
bother internalizing anything they say or do anymore. You will be in a
better position to manage the relationship you have with them or to end it
altogether.

Create a support system that you can rely on
. Dealing with a deceiver on
your own is no walk in the park. It helps to have other people that you can
talk to, who will validate your perception of reality as well as your sense of
self-worth. If you've noticed that ever since you got involved with the
narcissist, you've somehow been cut off from the people that matter to you,
then now is the time to reach out to them. Do not buy into the narcissist's
lies about how no one else can love you the waythey do. That is simply not
true! Commit to spending time with your friends and family. Make
appointments, if you must. Treat these appointments with as much
commitment as you would a business meeting. The less isolated you are,
the less of a hold the deceiver can have on you.
Spend a long time thinking about whether you want to keep investing in the
relationship.
This is crucial, especially since having to deal with the
deceiver's shenanigans eats away at your peace of mind, self-worth - and
even your health. Is the deceiver your manager, or your boss? Then take
proactive steps to find another job, making it a non-negotiable agreement
with yourself that you're moving to a different, better job. If the deceiver is
your lover and you'd like the relationship to continue, then keep in mind
that you'll both be needing some therapy, and you will have to make that a
non-negotiable aspect of your relationship if you decide to stay. 
Start to build your self-esteem back up.
Having been with a deceiver for too
long, it's easy to forget just how awesome you are!  You need to take some
time to remind yourself of everything about you that is amazing, no matter
what the deceiver has said to make you think otherwise. You might need to
begin journaling so that at times when you are low or starting to buy into
the insidious lies they have packed your head with, you can reopen that, and
remind yourself of your awesomeness. Don't just write about the great
things about you. Write about times when you felt the most alive, the most
joyful. As you do this, you will naturally find yourself craving those times
again, and taking action to liberate yourself and your mind
.
Be open to getting professional help.
It's difficult being the victim of
gaslighting. Your self-esteem, sense of self, and sanity will have taken a
beating. You might find that you're slow to make decisions, constantly
unsure of yourself, and always wondering if you're good enough. You might
even be suffering from depression or anxiety. If you find that you're
overwhelmed by feelings of helplessness, uncertainty, hopelessness, and

apathy, then chances are you need to seek the help of a professional
psychotherapist right away, so that you can rebuild yourself after the
devastating damage caused to you by the deceiver
Change Is Possible
There it is. The answer you've been hoping for, waiting for with bated
breath: it’s possible for people to change, no matter what personality
disorder they have been diagnosed with. Think of these diagnoses as a
shorthand way of describing certain people. You can never use one word to
totally encapsulate a person's life. When words like extrovert, introvert, or
narcissist get bandied about, they seem to imply a permanence to the
individual's personality. That's not always the case.
It helps to consider that these disorders are not necessarily descriptions of
who people are in summary. It would be more accurate to think of these
labels as the perfect descriptions for behavioral and/or inter-relational
patterns, and nothing more. The same applies to narcissistic personalities.
Born of Vulnerability
A lot of researchers are of the opinion that Narcissistic Personality Disorder
is a result of growing up in conditions where it's not safe to be vulnerable.
The narcissist as a child had to accept that it was a sign of imperfection to
be vulnerable, and that showing any vulnerability meant that they had no
worth at all. This theory is the reason there's often a connection made
between insecure attachment styles and narcissism, meaning the narcissist
is driven to control all their relationships because they are afraid to be in a
position where they need to depend on someone else. 
The narcissist is adept at keeping people from knowing who they really are.
They will refuse to acknowledge their vulnerabilities or opt to suppress
them or project them onto others so that they can keep crafting the person
they want to be in relation to others. For the narcissist to change, they must
be willing to be vulnerable. This means leaving themselves wide open to
emotions that they have suppressed and denied over the years. The trouble
with narcissists is not that they are unable to change, it’s that they are
unwilling to
because it would mean that the identity of the person they have
struggled to craft will be blown to bits. In a narcissist's mind, all the
relationships which they have failed at simply offer more reason why they
should remain the way they are.

Understand that the narcissist defines themselves by how others perceive
them.
A narcissist can't be a narcissist if they don't have anyone to put on a
show for. They need to be the center of attention, and so they love to have
the spotlight of attention from those who bother to stick around them. Over
time, of course, their performance starts to get old. The narcissist knows
this and is constantly running scared that others will realize there's really
nothing to them. This is one of the reasons the narcissist refuses to change,
as they are more certain than ever that the fix is not to come clean and be
vulnerable but to put on a more flamboyant show and pile on some more
makeup to conceal all their flaws.
When the Narcissist Finds True, Secure Love
When the narcissist happens to find someone who cares about them and is
not just sticking around for the flash, they're still deathly afraid that this
person will think they're not worth it. The fear they feel is a subconscious
one that they are not aware of, but it is very real. This is what fuels the
narcissist to do things like shift blame and guilt onto their partner or act all
grandiose.
When their antics are exposed to the light of day, and everyone sees them
for what they are, they get angry because they've slipped up and alienated
everyone who mattered to them. Rather than change their ways, this causes
them to double down on who they are. They become even more narcissistic
than ever before, ironically leading to the abandonment and rejection that
they're so afraid of
.
Breaking the Cycle
To help the narcissist, there's nothing else to do but break that vicious cycle.
As gently as you can, you need to throw a wrench in the works whenever
they try to control you, create distance between you, blame you, or defend
themselves. This means letting them know in no uncertain terms that you're
willing to have them in your life, but not on those terms. What terms, then?
You should show them that they can join you in the sort of intimacy where
they can be loved for who they really are, flaws and all. They only need to
be willing to let that happen.
The point to take away from all of this is that narcissism is simply one way
of relating to others, and you can always change the way you relate with

people. It's not going to be easy for narcissists to let themselves get so
vulnerable as to allow intimacy, but it is possible.
The Narcissist to who wants to Change
If you happen to know someone who's a narcissist but has expressed the
willingness to do better, then you can let them read the book. Here is a list
of things the narcissist will need to do to become a better person. This is
addressed to the narcissist, not the victim.
Learn to recognize and respect boundaries. When you do, you'll find that
you stop losing relationships, and improve them. You must understand
where you end, and another begins. You need to understand that other
people have their own beliefs, thoughts, and emotions, and they can be
completely different from yours while remaining valid. To help you
understand boundaries better:
● Listen twice as much as you speak.
● Use other people's names when you write to them, and when you speak to
them, too.
● Get curious about the people around you. Ask questions to learn what
matters to them and what's new in their lives. Don't be inappropriate in your
asking.
● Be mindful of encroaching into other people's personal space and time.
Always ask permission first before you do
.
● Rather than issue orders, ask open questions. Don't ask leading questions.
Don't assume you know better than others.
● When others make a choice that is different from yours, respect it. You
won't always get what you want, and that's okay.
Be genuine, always, in all ways. You will find it more refreshing than lying,
pretending, and manipulating others. How can you be more genuine?
● Keep your word. If you know you won't keep a promise, don't make it.
● Did you make a promise you can't follow through on? Then own it.
● Don't say or do things that will make others feel like they've been
cheated.

Observe yourself often so you can grow in mindfulness. The more you
observe, the better you can see how you cause problems in your
relationships and push people away. Assume that there's the usual you, and
then there's your higher self who observes you from a higher point of view.
Here's how to be more mindful:
● Ask your higher or observer self whether whatever you're about to say or
do will have good or bad consequences.
● Ask your observer self if your actions and words are all about you
showing off, or about you building a great relationship with others.
● Feel like you just did or said something off? Ask your observer self how
it would feel if someone said or did that to you. Then apologize and make
amends quickly.
Be willing to seek professional help. This will help you along your journey
to becoming a more rounded individual, faster. You don't have to struggle
with this on your own. You need the guidance of a psychotherapist. You
need to be willing to be honest if you're going to make permanent, lasting
change. It's going to be so worth it in the end because you will finally
discover your authentic self, and your relationships will be better for it
.
Do forgive yourself. This is the only way to get the healing you need. It's
also the only way that you can be more comfortable with being vulnerable.
An added plus is you'll finally be able to flex those empathy muscles. It
might be hard to forgive yourself, and you may find yourself crippled with
remorse sometimes. Just be kind to yourself in moments like this. You only
did the best you knew to do so that you could cope. It's not your fault that
you weren't allowed to be your true self when you were growing up. Focus
on the fact that now, you can do better. Now, you can rediscover yourself.
Be okay with being human. You won't be perfect. You never were. You
have flaws, but that's okay! Learn to be comfortable in your own skin. This
is the way to allow rich, beneficial, loving relationships in your life; this is
how you grow. You simply need to be fine with who you are. Be okay with
being true to yourself, even if it means being vulnerable.
It's going to take you some time. Be patient. You will find yourself. You
will also learn that the thing you feared the most is not real. The people who

love you don't up and leave just because of imperfection or five. After all,
we're all flawed in our own way. 
The Trouble with Emotional Abuse
The trouble with emotional abuse is that because it leaves no scars, you can
see, it often gets dismissed, or is almost impossible to spot when it happens.
Make no mistake: the damage from emotional abuse is very real, and it can
last a long, long time.
When you're psychologically abused, the other person is saying and doing
things to make you think whatever they want. Generally, the goal is to make
you confused, disillusioned, and totally dependent on them for your sense
of self-worth and identity. It is an incredibly hurtful, despicable thing to do
to another person, and can lead to very real mental health issues like
depression, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, and anxiety. 
Unmasking Emotional Abuse
There are a lot of myths about emotional abuse, which do a very good job
of camouflaging it so that it's hard to detect. Let's rip the mask off, so you
can have an easier time figuring out whether you or someone you care
about is being abused.
Myth #1: Emotional abuse is always accompanied by physical abuse.
It isn't. There can be emotional abuse with no physical abuse; this often
flies under the radar.
Myth #2: Emotional abuse is nowhere near as damaging as physical abuse.
This is just pure falsehood. If it hurts, then it hurts. It is not a productive
argument to say that one form of abuse hurts more than another. Abuse is
not okay. If you're being abused, then you deserve better, and you need all
the help you can get. 
Myth #3: Emotional abuse only affects women.
Abuse can happen to both
women and men. There is no exception. Also, it happens in other contexts
besides relationships, such as at work, and with friends as well.
What to Do If You're Being Abused
If you're emotionally abused, then you're constantly criticized for
everything you say and do. You're blamed all the time, even for things that
could never be your fault. You're made to feel ashamed. Your deceiver

constantly threatens to hurt you physically or to do something they know
you don't want them to. You feel like you have zero control over your life,
as the abuser takes all your power away, sometimes even going as far as
controlling your finances so that you have no choice but to stay with them
and do whatever they want. 
If you recognize yourself in the paragraph above, then you need to do
something. You need to reach out and ask for help. There is no shame in
that. As a matter of fact, asking for help is one of the bravest things you can
possibly do, especially when you're in a situation where you have been
completely worn down and out by the abuser.
Talk to anyone you can about what you're going through. Confide in them,
and not only will you have someone on your side, but you will also be able
to occupy your time by hanging out with others besides your abuser. Work
on getting more and more people you can talk to who will back you up
.
Have a safety plan in place. While there's not necessarily physical abuse
going on along with the emotional abuse, it's still important to be safe. This
means you need to think up plans for how you can escape from the
relationship whenever you are finally ready to up and leave the abuser.
Don't Make Excuses for the Abuse
A lot of the time, people will fall back on mental disorders in order to
justify when they do what they do. They don't talk about it like they want to
make genuine change. It's just a copout for them to keep treating you the
way that they always have.
It's not uncommon for the person abusing you to try to make light of the
situation or try to blame you for a reason they're acting the way they do. It
can seem like your significant other doesn't know when they do what they
do or are completely incapable of realizing the implications of their actions.
However, this is just more smoke and mirrors on their part. They know
what they're doing. The whole point behind being seemingly unaware is to
make you feel even less sure of yourself. Next thing you know, you start
wondering if you're not overly dramatic or delusional! I want you to know
that your abusive partner is very aware of how they're hurting you, and they
always are in control of how they act disorder or no. Want proof?

They will decide when to abuse you, and how far they will push it.
A perfect
example is when they threaten to hit you but don't. Or when they abuse you
in ways that you can never really tell others, because there's no proof, and it
can seem like you're making something out of nothing.
They only ever abuse you, not others
. If they truly had no control over their
actions, wouldn't they abuse everyone in their lives? But they don't, do
they? That's because they can control themselves. If it were that they
suffered from a disorder, then everyone in their life would get the same
treatment, and not just you.
They escalate their terrible behavior.
When it's a matter of having a
disorder, there can be changes in the person's state of mind. Even then,
though, there is a consistency in the way that they behave. However, you
may have noticed your abuser will sometimes choose not to abuse you for a
while. Other times, they will steadily ramp up the abuse as your relationship
goes on. This is more proof that they really can decide to be different or
better.
You need to keep in mind that regardless of whether the deceiver has an
actual mental health problem, you are not the one to be held accountable for
how they treat you! It's possible to be diagnosed with a disorder and still
choose not to act out in controlling, manipulative ways. They will simply
need to acknowledge their issues and be open and willing to seek the help
that they need. Please, always remember that you're not the reason they act
the way they do, and therefore you're not the cure they need. They must
own their actions, and they alone can take the first step they need, to change
themselves.

Chapter 11. A Match Made in Hell: Narcissists And Empaths
There is one specific union which is never going to end well. We are of
course talking about the match between a narcissist and an empath. The
reason is that both are at totally opposite ends of the empathy spectrum, and
as a result, they clash constantly.
This chapter is going to explore why narcissists and empaths are a terrible
match, but we’re also going to discuss the fact that this is a match which
happens more often than you would think.
First things first, we need to explore what an empath is, to really understand
why this union is one to avoid at all costs.
What is an Empath?
There is a difference between someone who is an empath and someone who
possesses empathy. A person who has empathy can understand the feelings
of others and put themselves in their shoes. This is most people, but
everyone varies with the degree of empathy they have. Someone can be a
highly sensitive person, e.g. have a high amount of empath, but that still
doesn’t make them an empath.
An empath is someone who is extremely sensitive to the emotions of others,
to the point where they take them on as their own. For example, an empath
may be standing next to someone in the line for the bus, and that person
may be feeling angry about something that has happened that morning. As a
result, the empath will begin to feel angry, but they have no reason to feel
angry themselves. They’re picking up on the vibrations and emotions of the
other person and exhibiting that emotion as their own.
Empaths are not rare, and many people have this tendency in their lives.
Whilst it is considered a gift, the person who has it may not consider it so!
Life can become very overwhelming for people who are so sensitive to
emotions around them, and many empaths find large groups to be very
draining. As a result, they will either avoid large gatherings or will leave
quite early.
An empath also has to find ways to manage their “gift” in order to stop it
taking over their lives
.
In addition to being sensitive to emotions, empaths are also drawn to people
who are in need. Empaths are very pure and positive people, and they like

to help others who may be going through a hard time or maybe suffering in
some way but not vocalizing it. The problem occurs when an empath cannot
draw a line between their own emotions and the emotions of another
person, and they find it extremely difficult to walk away from those in their
life, simply because they can feel their pain and their general emotions.
The main traits of an empath are:
●        
Usually introverted but can be extroverted too,
●        
Like their own space and time alone,
●        
Can become overwhelmed in large groups,
●        
Highly sensitive,
●        
Very intuitive,
●       
Can easily become overwhelmed when in a relationship and needs to
learn how to step back a little and take their own space whenever needed,
●        
Often give too much of themselves, as they normally have big
hearts,
●        
Their senses are highly attuned,
●        
They often need to be around nature to feel calm.
Aside from absorbing the emotions of others like a sponge, one of the
biggest risks of having this empathic gift is the fact that empaths are a huge
target for narcissists and other “energy vampires”. An energy vampire is
someone who is very negative or someone who is very manipulative and
finds it easy to literally suck the life out of an empath, who is willing to
give to the point of exhaustion. To protect themselves against such people,
empaths need to have plenty of time and space to themselves
.
Why Are Narcissists And Empaths Drawn to Each Other?
Now we know what an empath is, why are empaths and narcissists a
common coupling?
There is an attraction on both sides here. Firstly, the empaths recognize the
struggle of the narcissist, e.g. their lack of confidence and their underlying
struggles. The empath can feel this but they also have a nurturing side

which makes them want to make things better. Of course, we know that
nobody can make a narcissist better, but the empath wants to try.
In addition, narcissists are, as we know, extremely charming and can trick
people into thinking they’re a wonderful person, when underneath they may
have other intentions. Because an empath always wants to see the best in
people, they have a tendency for falling for the charm. You would think that
their intuition would allow them to see past this smokescreen, but the
narcissist is an expert at deception and often manages to slip beneath the
radar.
The reason a narcissist is attracted to an empath is because of their opposite
nature. Remember, narcissists, don’t have empathy like a non-narcissistic
person. An empath is totally the opposite and has empathy by the bucket-
load. This intrigues the narcissist, but they can also see that this may be a
person who can easily be manipulated. As a result, the narcissist makes a
bee-line for the empath, showing their full charm armory.
Whilst every relationship is different, the chances are that a union between
a narcissist and an empath will follow a very common path. The narcissist
will charm the empath completely, and the empath will fall completely
underneath their spell. The narcissist will then begin their gaslighting
techniques as the empath begins to show their confidence and tries to have
their own life outside of the relationship.
The empath struggles to understand why the narcissist is causing them
distress because they look for the best in everyone. As a result, the
narcissist uses tactics to make the empath question their own thoughts and
feelings, which is confusing because they’re already overwhelmed with
emotions, due to their empathic nature
.
Empaths feel everything very deeply, so when the narcissist hurts the
empath, they will feel it ten times amplified. This causes a rollercoaster
relationship to begin, with ups and downs, crazy highs and crashing lows.
The highs and lows are addictive, and the endless gaslighting and charm
offensive make them stay.
A relationship between a narcissist and empath is very similar to a
relationship between a narcissist and a regular person, however, the
difference is the depth of feelings that an empath experiences. As a result,

they will have highs and lows which exhaust them, and when this occurs in
conjunction with all the other emotions they’re picking up on a day to day
basis, the effect can be extremely damaging.
Is There a Future For This Relationship?
Put simply, no. There is less chance of this relationship surviving compared
to any other narcissistic-affected relationship. The emotional highs and
lows, along with the dependency which the empath will develop toward the
narcissist will make the relationship impossible to survive.
The empath will have a very hard time leaving the narcissist, and it will
probably take several attempts to actually go through with it. Despite that, it
is hoped that the empath eventually finds the strength to walk away.
This type of relationship has no future. The narcissist will drain every last
drop of positive out of the empath and leave them completely
overwhelmed, emotionally confused, and they will question their sanity to
the point of exhaustion.
Of course, the empath will desperately want to “fix” the narcissist and they
will try time and time again to do it. In the end, however, they will realize
that it’s just not possible and they will give up and move on - at least, that is
the hope.
How an Empath Can be Severely Emotionally Damaged by a Narcissist
A narcissist will use the empath’s emotional sensitivity against them. This
is a weak point in the eyes of the narcissist, and something they don’t really
understand themselves. Being able to feel everything so deeply is so
intoxicating to the narcissist, so exotic and different, that they want to
explore it and find out more about it. They then realize that this is an “in”,
something they can use alongside their gaslighting tactics, and it works very
successfully.
An empath is generally a very pure and good person. They try to help and
they try to see the good in others, but their emotional sensitivity is their
undoing in this situation. They also try time and time again to right the
situation, to make the narcissist see the error of their ways, to show them
that they understand and want to help, but remember, the narcissist sees no
error in their ways. In the eyes of the narcissist, they’re not the one to

blame, the empath is. By blaming the empath, they are damaging their self-
esteem and their self-worth to a very severe degree.
The constant bombardment of gaslighting, making the empath feel like
they’re literally going crazy, will work completely against the
overwhelming feeling of experiencing emotions outside of their own head.
As a result, the empath may suffer an emotional breakdown, due to
complete exhaustion.
An empath will struggle severely with a relationship touched by narcissism
because it is something they simply cannot understand themselves. Both
sides are totally at odds - the narcissist doesn’t understand the emotional
sensitivity of the empath and the empathy they show with almost everything
they do. The empath doesn’t understand the narcissist's total lack of
empathy and how they can be so cold and unforgiving, yet so charming and
giving when they want to turn on the act. The empath may know that
something isn’t right, they may want to walk away, but their need to see the
good in everyone keeps them where they shouldn’t be.
Put simply, an empath could suffer mental health damage by staying in a
relationship with a narcissist, and that will take professional help to right
and overcome. They will struggle with building lasting, trusting
relationships in the future, and they may also turn against their emotional
sensitivity and empathy, and see it as a hindrance, rather than a positive trait
or a gift.
A narcissist has the power to destroy an empath
.
Points to Take From This Chapter
In this chapter, we have explored the damaging relationship between a
narcissist and an empath. You might not have known much about empaths
before this chapter, but now the hope is that you understand much more.
Perhaps you're an empath, or you’re very emotionally sensitive yourself. In
that case, you need to be very wary of anyone in your life who might be
exploring your sensitivity. A narcissist will see an empath as easy pickings,
a real target, and someone who is easy to manipulate. To be able to turn the
tables, you need to identify the signs, and you also need to develop the
strength to walk away.
The main points to take from this chapter are:

●       
An empath is someone who is very emotionally sensitive and can
take on the emotions of others as their own;
●        
Empaths are usually introverted, quiet, kind people, who try to see
the best in everyone;
●        
Empaths can also become overwhelmed by emotions very easily,
and they feel everything very deeply;
●       
Narcissists are attracted to empaths because they are curious about
their empathy, but also because they may see them as an easy target;
●       
Empaths are attracted to narcissists because they want to help, but
also because they’re a target for the charm offensive which often comes at
the start of a relationship;
●       
A relationship with a narcissist may be enough to cause an empath to
have an emotional breakdown or burn out reaction if the manipulation is
severe enough;
●       
The empath will feel the hurt and pain of the treatment by a narcissist
very deeply, but will still want to do their best to help their partner;
●       
Empaths are likely to need a lot of help and support when walking
away from a narcissistic partner and may heed professional help in order to
allow them to develop loving and trusting relationships in the future.

Chapter 12 – How to stop being manipulated by a deceiver
Gaslighting has become a hot topic today because it is a harmful
manipulation tool either an emotional, psychological manipulation thing
that is happening to many people than we even realize. So before now, we
have really talked about what gas-lighting is and how do you know that you
have been a victim of gaslighting and the tactics that deceivers use.
As stated before, gaslighting is a subtle way of somebody avoiding
responsibility after that person has done something bad. In extreme cases, it
is a way to emotionally abused or gain power over somebody in harmful
ways. If you haven't read the chapter that talks about the signs of
gaslighting or how to know if you are being gaslighted, then go and do that
now because if you haven't done that, then you won't really understand
what this chapter is saying. It won't make sense if you don't recognize what
gaslighting is and if you don't realize that it is happening to you. So we are
going to talk about some ways to deal with gaslighting.
Clarify yourself
And the first thing is to clarify to yourself how you know you're being
gaslighted and then write it down. Write down the specific things that is
done or said to you that make you know that you are being gaslighted.
Write down specific examples as they come up and write down the things
that this person is making you feel crazy, question yourself on, make you
feel like you are losing it and making you question your own sanity. Those
people use certain tasks to Gaslight you. It is leaking and it's up to and if
you're not aware of what the person is doing, you might not even realize
that it is happening to you. 
Do some ground exercise
The next one it's for you to start doing some grounding exercises and just
take time to be quiet and be still with yourself so that you can start
connecting with yourself again. You might take some time to do some deep
breathing. Whatever those grounding and meditating exercise is do it to
start connecting with yourself again, because gaslighting makes you doubt
and question yourself. It makes you. Believing yourself.
 
It makes you feel like you can trust yourself again. So you need to start
taking time to connect with yourself, again, you need to take the time to
start tuning into your inner wisdom and tune to your ability to believe and

trust yourself. Because that has been taken away from you, if you haven't
gaslighted for a long time at some point in your life, you really need to
reconnect with yourself so that you can start to realize that you are being
manipulated. You need to be able to trust yourself and see that this person is
meant to mess with you and to throw you off. So, you need to get things
backgrounded by taking the time to connect with yourself in your thoughts,
your beliefs, your perceptions and really ground yourself in that stuff.
Decide whether you want to continue the relationship 
The next one is if it is someone that is currently in your life that is any
plating you this week, and if it is becoming a big issue, then you might need
to decide whether you want to continue the relationship. So you really need
to decide if you need to distance yourself from this person or discontinue
the relationship altogether. This is a very serious thing when you are being
made to feel small weak or made to feel insignificant, stupid, crazy, insane,
then you really need to take it seriously and decide if it is worth it to
continue in that relationship. Even though there are certain times that these
people will be caring, loving, and wonderful and allow you to have a great
moment with them.  But other times, they try to make you feel small, stupid
or crazy, so you really need to listen to yourself and really decide if it is
worth it. Decide if that person is worthy of staying in your life since that is
how they are treating you and making you feel low and taking away from
you your ability to feel confident in yourself. 
Reach out to a trusted loved one or friend
The next thing to do is to reach out to somebody like a friend or a trusted
loved one and tell that person because; chances are if you have been a
victim of gaslighting for a long period. And it has really ever affected your
sense of self-worth and ability to trust yourself; then you need to do some
healing that is not just going to go away. You really need to dig into it
because things like that will start to impact your core believes. It will start
to manipulate your self-worth, so you need that intervention to be able to
heal from it and be able to move forward from the wounds, the pains, the
hurt, and the damage that this might have caused you. So this is something
that you really need to take seriously. 
Take a Stand

The last one is to take a stand and not let yourself continue to be a victim.
Once you recognize that the gaslighting is happening, then you want to be
able to see what the person is doing. You need to stand up to them and say
something like I see what you doing and I'm not going to fall for it. No
matter how hard they try to convince you, and no matter which Tactics
they’re using, try to stand up to them and say that that’s not what happened,
you are lying, you are making this stuff up. Try to take a stand and take
your power back instead of being a victim or allowing yourself to get
manipulated or even abused in this harmful way. 
If you’re doing some of these things and implementing some of these
strategies, then it will help you to be able to regain your personal sense of
clarity, and then you will start to trust yourself again. You will be able to
connect with yourself and even to believe in yourself, and you will be able
to trust your senses, your memories, your perceptions, and your version and
your interpretation of reality, and you will be able to put a stop to people
that are playing the mind games with you. 
Having healthy boundaries is very good in any area of your life especially
when it comes to Gaslight. You need to put in those boundaries, say no way,
this is not going to happen to me, and no way am I going to fall for this. I'm
not going to let you treat me this way. Having healthy boundaries is
Crucial.  
Dealing with the Narcissist
 
Now that you’ve realized that there is a narcissist in your life, what should
you do? 
Take a step back and analyze the situation.
 
Determine how bad the situation is. Try to understand the narcissist’s
background and his degree of his narcissism. Note or recall what drives him
to narcissistic rage. Recall how he tries to punish you. Be aware of the
tactics that he uses. Do all these objectively. Being carried away by
emotions, shouting or crying will only feed the narcissist. The narcissist has
already painstakingly set up a strong image or reputation and you might not
come across as credible when you tell others, so you have to do your
homework. 
Accept that the narcissist will not change.
 

Hoping that you will be able to knock some sense into the narcissist or that
you could explain and things to enlighten him will not work. As far as the
narcissist is concerned, he has done no wrong.  
Seek help. 
 
Find people – friends, counselors, religious leaders, or parents- any one you
can confide in and who can give advice and emotional support. They can
also give feedback from a neutral viewpoint. 
Set boundaries. 
 
Write down which boundaries the narcissist cannot trespass and a
consequence if they do. Writing things down before talking to the narcissist
will help you speak without sounding emotional. 
Be realistic. 
 
Know the narcissist’s limitations and work within those limits. It will only
be emotionally draining and a waste of time to expect more from the
narcissist than he is capable. Do not expect him to learn to care because he
can’t. 
Remember that your value as a person does not depend on the
narcissist.   
Don’t punish yourself for getting into a relationship with him. Instead,
focus on rebuilding your self-esteem, meeting your own needs and pursuing
your interests.   
Speak to them in a way that will make them aware of how they will
benefit. 
Instead of voicing you needs, pleading, crying or yelling; learn to rephrase
your statements by emphasizing what the narcissist will gain from it. You
have learn to appeal to their selfishness. This is a good way to survive in
situations when you cannot leave.
 
Bring up your ideas to the narcissistic boss when there are witnesses. By
having others around to hear your idea, he will find it difficult to claim
credit for it. 
Find proof of or document any kind of abuse.
 
Make use of technology- CCTV or video recordings, for example- to
document instances of abuse. Find witnesses to back you up. 

Do not fall for the narcissist’s tactics again.
 
Refresh yourself on his tactics and be on your guard against falling for them
again. The narcissist may try to use pity, projection or hoovering. This time,
be wiser. It may take practice, as you may have become used to being the
“Echo” or codependent. Being aware will help you to resist. 
Leave.   
 
The best way to deal with the narcissist is not to. For the sake of you
emotional and physical well-being, not to mention your sanity, it would be
best to leave. If you do leave, expect various tactics from the narcissist to
either make your life miserable or to get you (actually his supply) back. You
will also undergo a period of distress, akin to mourning when you leave.
Seek help and support to get through this stage. Do not be hard on yourself
for having allowed yourself to be deceived by the narcissist. Your
experience will make you stronger, wiser and, in time, ready for a healthy
relationship. In the meantime, focus on your own interests and rebuilding
your self-esteem. 

Chapter 13- Narcissistic Personality Disorder
A narcissistic personality disorder is a disease that affects approximately
1% of the population with a higher incidence of males than females. It is
characterized by excessive arrogance, lack of empathy and a great need for
admiration. The main marker of a narcissistic personality is grandiosity.
They are interested in power, prestige, and vanity and believe that they
deserve special treatment.
Narcissistic personality disorder should not be confused with a person with
high self-esteem. A person with high self-esteem can be humble, while a
narcissist cannot. They are selfish, overconfident, and ignore the feelings
and needs of others. Also, the disorder has a negative impact on a person's
life. In general, one may be dissatisfied with one's life and be disappointed
when others do not admire it and are not given the special attitude or care it
needs. All vital areas are affected (work, personal, social ...), but one is not
able to realize that their behavior negatively affects their relationships.
People do not feel comfortable with a narcissistic person and they will feel
dissatisfied with their work, their social life, etc.
Symptoms and characteristics of narcissistic personality disorder
Some Of the Symptoms and Characteristics of a Narcissistic Personality
These are:
Concern for fantasies, successes ...
Faith, which is of great importance, only feels understood and
connected to people who believe they have high status.
They need and require continuous admiration.
Exaggeration of your achievements and abilities.
Feel for rights or privileges.
To envy others and have too much conviction that others envy.
Think and talk most of the time in yourself.
Suggest unrealistic goals.

The expectations of others to provide special services.
I believe that no one can question their motives and demands.
Take advantage of others to get what they want without the
hassle.
Arrogance, arrogance.
Easily rejected and injured.
Strong desire.
Responding to criticism with shame, indignation, and
humiliation.
Narcissistic personality disorder: causes
There is no definite cause for narcissistic personality disorder, but
researchers agree that there are environmental and genetic factors that play
a role in the development of the disease.
Some of the genetic factors show that people with a narcissistic personality
have less gray matter in the left insula, the part of the brain associated with
empathy, emotional regulation, compassion, and cognitive functioning.
The healthy development of man shapes many of the narcissistic
personality traits. Researchers believe that the onset of the disorder can
occur when there is a conflict in interpersonal development. Some examples
of contextual factors that may change the developmental stages of "normal"
include:
Learn manipulative behavior from parents or friends.
To be overly praised for appropriate behavior and overly
criticized for inappropriate behavior.
You suffer from childhood abuse.
Incompatible parental care.
Being very pampered by parents, friends, family ...
To be too delightful without realistic feedback.

Receive many compliments from parents or others about their
appearance or abilities.
Narcissistic personality disorder: treatment
Psychotherapy
Psychotherapy is one of the keys to approaching the treatment of
narcissistic personality. It is usually used to help a person connect with
other people more adaptively and gain a better understanding of their own
and others' emotions.
If a person has a narcissistic personality, you may not have heard of the
diagnosis. Studies show that they usually do not receive treatment, and if
they receive it, progress is slow because it is based on personality traits that
have formed over the years. Therefore, it takes years of psychotherapy to
make changes. The changes aim to take responsibility for their actions and
to learn ways to connect more appropriately. This includes:
You are accepting and maintaining relationships with classmates
and family.
They tolerate criticism and failure.
Understand and regulate feelings.
Minimize the desire to achieve unrealistic goals.
Initially, group therapy was thought to be inappropriate because group
therapy requires empathy, patience, and the ability to relate to and
“connect” with others, something in which a person with narcissistic
personality disorder presents with deficits. However, studies show that
long-term group therapy can benefit them by providing a safe context where
they can talk about their boundaries, receive and give feedback, and raise
awareness of themselves and their problems.
Of cognitive-behavioral therapy, in particular, the scheme-focused treatment
produces excellent results. It focuses on restoring narcissistic schemas and
strategies to deal with them while confronting narcissistic cognitive styles
(perfectionism ...). treatment

There is no specific treatment for this disease, but sometimes these people
may experience depression or anxiety, and psychotropic medications can be
helpful. People with a narcissistic personality can abuse drugs or alcohol, so
treating addictive problems can be something useful in this disorder.
Criteria for Narcissistic Personality Disorder
1. The exaggerated notion of personal importance not based on reality.
An inflated view of oneself is one of the main ways narcissists give
themselves permission to dominate and control others. Narcissists believe
that their priorities, interests, opinions, and beliefs have more value and are
more important than anyone else's. Not all narcissists show the world their
grandeur; some appear to be very humble or even shy to the outside world,
but when they are in intimacy, this will dominate their coexistence.
2. The concern with fantasies of success, wealth, power, beauty, and love
above normal.
Narcissists often have a fantasy-filled life and are rarely satisfied with the
ordinary, however satisfying or beautiful it may be. This preoccupation with
fantasy prevents the narcissistic personality from leading a real and stable
life. They feed desires for wealth, fame, power, or status obsessively.
3. The belief that you are a special and unique individual, and can only be
committed to or understood by special people
.
This idea is an integral part of a survival mechanism that helps them cope
with the world. They often define themselves by what they consider their
special qualities and inform us of those qualities as soon as we know them.
4. The intense need for admiration.
Love me, watch me, pay attention to me. Narcissists tend to magnify and be
their reference.

5. Feeling of worthiness.
Normal rules, regulations, and patterns of behavior infuriate narcissists,
who think they are so unique that they do not have to obey reasonable
expectations or respect appropriate limits. They may be equally plagued by
hard work, illness, or injury. On the other hand, the rules that are imposed
by them on others must always be respected.
6. The tendency to exploit others without feeling guilt or remorse.
Depending on the other characteristics of his personality, the narcissist may
induce us to do all his work for him or, for example, take our money, allow
us to pay his bills, receive gifts without ever giving, charge more for
services and pay less, leave waiting for hours around the corner in the rain,
without considering that this behavior is disrespectful. Your sense of
worthiness makes these behaviors normal, preventing them from feeling
guilty or remorseful.
7. Lack of significant empathy.
The narcissist has very little ability to put himself in someone else's shoes.
Your pain, your problems, and your point of view dominate the universe.
Perhaps nothing more reflects the narcissist's behavior than the inability to
understand and identify with the experience of others. This is particularly
true when the person who needs understanding is someone the narcissist is
exploring, that is, his current target (loving, working, family, or friend).
8. The tendency to be envious or to imagine oneself the envy of others
.
The narcissist has difficulty adjusting to a world in which other people seem
to have “more” or “better” things. Narcissists often fail to recognize that
they are envious and turn sentiment into contempt.
9. Arrogance.
Narcissists often have a snobby attitude toward people they think are not up
to their "high" standard of intelligence, competence, accomplishment,
values, morals, or lifestyle. Believing that the other is inferior helps them
reinforce and inflate their conviction of superiority. Criticizing and

diminishing others make them feel good about themselves. They are often
homophobic, racist, prejudiced of all kinds simply because they think they
are superior to a specific group.
Characteristics of narcissistic personality disorder
1. The excessive vision of the self, rather than a solid self-
confidence, reflects an excessive concern for supposed
excellence.
2. Active and competitive when looking for status, since their
personal value is measured according to the status they have
3. If others do not recognize that status, they think they deserve,
and they feel intolerable mistreated, get angry, become
defensive, or depressed. If they are not known as superiors, their
belief of inferiority and lack of importance is activated.
4. He is, therefore, hypersensitive and experiences very intense
feelings in response to the criticisms of others.
5. They need, at all costs, the recognition of people whom they
consider essential.
6. They do not tolerate discomfort or negative affection. They
reject the vital circumstances that require a certain sacrifice and
tolerance towards others such as marriage, and he thinks that he
does not have to make concessions and yield to the other.
7. If limits are placed or criticized they become very unpleasant and
defensive.
8. They show a very demanding and insensitive appearance, show
little interest in emotionally supporting the other. They are very
difficult to influence and are characterized by being great
exploiters.
9. When others react to their exploitation and get angry with him,
the narcissist thinks that what happens to him is that they are
jealous of him.
10.                   
Carefree of the feelings of others, very self-centered.
When they have a conversation with others, they can give the

feeling of unique personal interest. Although they can be warm
in a first interaction, they immediately show arrogance, hurtful
comments towards each other or insensitive actions.
11.                    
They often envy the successes of others and discredit
the people they see as competitors. Spend a lot of time
comparing yourself to others
12.                    
The worth of others lies in the ability of others to
admire him. The narcissist likes people who offer him devotion.
13.                    
He feels very comfortable giving orders because he
believes he is the only one who is in possession of the truth. The
others seem mediocre, compared to him; they are only mere
apprentices or aspirants to be like him.
14.                   
In the face of an argument, they can misrepresent the
conversations to make others feel guilty. In order to justify the
bad treatment that it gives to others, they look for more or less
solvent reasons that excuse their lack of consideration towards
others, placing themselves in the best possible situation.
15.                    
Their apparent loquacity facilitates access to others
but those friendships lack the intimacy component. Finally, they
are perceived as boring conversationalists.
16.                   
 
Behind its facade, there is a great feeling of
incapacity, incompetence, and lack of pleasure in any
achievement. Everything they do is aimed at sustaining their
fragile self-esteem.
17.                   
The difference between self-esteem and narcissism is
according to Bushman and Baumeister (1998): "High self-esteem
means thinking well of oneself, while narcissism implies
passionately wanting to think well of oneself." So for the
narcissist, self-esteem is the result of external success, what they
do not trust is their personal worth.
18.                   
They take great care of their image and their manners
since they continuously sit in a shop window. You can demand
the same from nearby people, influencing them to behave in a
model way and if you don't get it, criticize and ridicule them

thinking that it is "for your own good". But if the people around
them fulfill their wishes, the narcissist can feel their shadow, so
he criticizes them in the same way.
19.                    
Since the image is everything, the situations in which
it may be exposed to others or to the possible criticism of these
poses a great threat.
20.                    
For your person to look, they exaggerate their merits
and minimize those of others.
21.                   
They dismiss emotions such as sadness or anxiety
because they think that feeling something like this is "weak."
They do not like to talk about their problems or their negative
emotions for fear of being seen as a fragile person. They do not
like to feel vulnerable since it is a symptom of inferiority. He
prefers to offer an image of imperturbability.
22.                    
They have big unrealistic dreams of job success,
economic and looking for ideal romantic love. They also have
great fantasies of power.
23.                    
They give great importance to material possessions
and in general in everything that implies recognition by others.
24.                   
He presumes to lead a different type of life and this is
how he can be involved in insecure businesses, risky sports, lots
of sexual conquests, repeated plastic surgery. Whenever there is
the possibility of standing out from others, it will.
25.                    
You experience lasting feelings of boredom, of
meaninglessness in your lives, of worthlessness, of emptiness,
you feel impoverished from an emotional point of view and you
crave deeper emotional experiences.
26.                    
It has a sense of corruptible morals and ethics, has
changing values ​​and interests, and belittles unusual and
conventional values​and norms. You can show sexual behavior
that includes promiscuity, lack of inhibition and marital
infidelities.

Chapter 14- Toxic Relationships Recovery
How to Reduce Conflicts in Relationships
Being in touch with your feelings and emotions can be an important way to
protect yourself from future abuse. We are doomed to repeat history if we
choose not to learn from it. It can be necessary to take a long hard look at
your own needs to determine if you are capable of having these needs met
within your current relationship. Self-reflection requires honesty. Honesty
can be painful, but it is through this pain that we are able to complete a
metamorphosis.  
This tactic of manipulation can keep victims glued to an abuser’s side. Self-
love can be a powerful wedge, allowing the abused partner to become the
comfort that they’re so desperately seeking from the abuser. No matter the
outcome, staying or leaving, we must learn to care for ourselves. A person
who doesn’t value themselves will accept demeaning and degrading
behavior because they feel as though they deserve it.  
You deserve to be happy. Your situation may feel absolutely hopeless, but I
can promise you that you have it within yourself to make any decision you
need to in the interest of self-preservation. Admitting to yourself that you’re
in an abusive relationship can feel a bit like taking a step toward the edge of
a cliff that drops into oblivion, an unknown abyss. You know that you are
comfortable in this misery, but this isn’t happiness.  
Taking these next steps takes courage.
Forgiveness 
 
This isn’t forgiveness for abuse; that will come later. This is an honest look
at the relationship. It is imperative to understand that, as a victim of abuse,
you participated in this situation. There is something inside that has been
ashamed and afraid to take any ownership of this hardship. Listen, you have
wounds that you will need to heal.  
There are reasons that you gravitated toward an abusive partner, and that is
something that will need to be addressed one day. For now, forgiveness. 
 
You are worthy of attention, love, and kindness. Begin to manifest these
things by caring for yourself. Understand that you had a hand in this
dynamic and forgive yourself. This is the first step toward trusting yourself
again. There are so many ways to process the guilt that we feel in these

situations, and you can choose what works for you. Reflection is enough for
some, but others find it helpful to write yourself a letter.  
Invest in Yourself
 
Abusive relationships have the potential to rob us of our confidence.
Narcissistic partners want you to feel as though you are silly and irrelevant,
and your goals do not matter. It is much easier to lord over another person if
their spirit is broken. Loving one’s self can be the most difficult thing in the
world when it feels like everything is against you. Any normal human being
dropped in a situation such as this is miserable and dejected.  
Make a plan to begin gluing the shattered pieces of yourself back together.
This sounds like a huge and abstract undertaking, but it doesn’t have to be. 
Learning to love yourself again can be as familiar as coming home to an old
friend. We are going to take it step by step.  
Human beings are uniquely cognizant, which affords us a measure of
control over our own lives that the rest of the animal kingdom is missing.
Situations (like abusive relationships) can force us into a fishbowl and take
away this control. It can be so easy to overlook that we can be exactly what
we want to be. We can make it so easy to love ourselves by becoming our
own hero. Be the sort of person that you would love and admire.  
Make a list of the qualities and values that you want to embody. List goals
and milestones that you want to achieve. It can help if you close your eyes
and picture a person that you really admire; this person can be a role model
or someone that you have completely made up. What makes this person so
admirable to you? Independence? Bravery? Fashion sense? There is nothing
too silly. You are authoring the next changes that will occur in your own
life. This list may have as many entries as you need. The following is an
example to use as a template, should you become stumped: 
Who I want to Be:
Creative  
Funny  
Brave  

This list is a way for you to take back your self-image from your abusive
partner’s hands. It is your job to decide who you want to be. You decide
what you value, your hair color, your goals, and the way that you handle
conflict. You don’t have to see yourself through the eyes of someone who is
incentivized to keep you down.  
Now that you have created your list, break it down entry by entry. This is
going to be a map to achieving your goals. Working on your list will give
you a project to focus on when the days become dark, and it is a fast-track
way to relearn self-love. Creating these lists also inches us closer and closer
to self-reliance. Each individual goal from your list is now a new list, with
steps that you can take to achieve these things. Example:  
Creative:
Research different creative mediums.   
Buy the sketchbook or supplies needed to begin learning new
skills.  
Use art to express anger or sadness. 
Experiment with other methods. 
There is no goal or quality that cannot be broken down in this way. Take the
pen back from your partner and begin writing your own story again.
Stimulate these healthy conversations with yourself, because this
communication is going to be necessary moving forward. 
 
Find an Outlet
 
In order to protect yourself from bottling up the words of an abusive
partner, it can be important to find an outlet to use for self-expression.
Journaling could be a great way to document the abuse and rise above it.
There is a lot of unreleased tension in victims of abuse. Stress and anxiety
have become a staple of everyday life. Any moment might bring another
fight.  
Vent your anger or sadness through a journal or other artistic medium.
Allow your mind to rant and rave about the things that you are feeling.
Having a way to relieve some of the pressure can be vital in abuse cases. It

can also be helpful to find an interest to focus on and is a great way to learn
a new skill.  
Research
In the same way that you bought this book, begin obsessively consuming
material about narcissists, codependents, or abuse. There is a certain
mystery to the way that our brains work in these situations. Sometimes we
can be unsure of our own actions and motivations. In order to heal, it is
necessary to understand.  
Demystifying abuse will allow you to pull back the veil shrouding the
abuser. The only way that you are going to believe that your partner has
something wrong is if you are faced with the facts over and over again.
Learn the patterns of abuse and clinical definitions.  
Absorbing articles, videos, books, and other literature on the subject will
also allow you to predict your partner’s next moves. The abusive partner
may seem erratic and unpredictable, but there are reasons behind every
behavior. Every name that you have ever been called out of malice.  
Both narcissists and codependents require validation in the same way. This
validation is achieved through manipulation and sometimes name-calling
and random fights. A narcissist can seem loving one moment and vile the
next, but this is just another part of their process.  
Learn everything that you can while you are trapped in this situation.
Anticipate the attack and allow the words to roll right off of your skin.
When you understand the motivation, then the fights stop seeming so
personal.  
Exercise 
 
Eating and living in a sedentary way is often related to depression and
stress. Take back your wellbeing by taking care of your body. This will help
improve the way that you feel physically and your self-esteem. Exercise
will also help fight all the negative emotions with the brain chemicals that it
produces. Exercising for just thirty minutes a day can drastically allow you
to change the way that you see yourself. Abuse will slowly and deviously
steal away your confidence and happiness.  
Exercise is recommended by doctors to treat both anxiety and depression.
Endorphins are released that encourage an overall calm that can combat

feelings of negativity brought on by your surroundings. The movement can
also induce a meditative state that allows you to forget about the troubles
that await you when you return home.  
Challenge Your Comfort Zone
 
When your life feels stale, prison-like, and depressing, it can be difficult to
spring back to life. Challenging yourself to escape this comfort zone is
hard, but it can also be a very rewarding experience. There are so many
volunteer organizations that would love to have assistance. Social activities
of this nature may also allow you to find new friends and reestablish a
support system.  
Your partner will object to these ventures, especially if they are narcissistic.
It can be a good idea to shrug off their watchful eye and do some activities
that you are interested in. If you are concerned that they will be angry when
they find you, remember that they are angry (for sport) constantly anyway.
There is no winning, so you might as well take care of your own needs.  
Self-soothing  
 
Break free of the abusive trauma bond by becoming the person that you turn
to for your own comfort. Do not allow your partner to take away the pain of
a fresh fight by becoming a different person right in front of you. Learn
tactics to calm yourself down, as this talent has the potential to save you
from the bondage of an abusive relationship. 
When you need to calm yourself, use cozy blankets in a quiet room. Read a
book until your body feels less stressed. Listen to relaxing music or play a
podcast to drift along on the tone of a stranger’s voice. Sometimes it can
even be helpful to just allow yourself to feel the anger and sadness and then
go about your day.  
Baths are a wonderful way to calm down. Candles can also be helpful.
Learn about the things that work to relax you and reach for those the next
time you are upset. Abusive partners will dangle comfort over your head so
that you bend to their will. Behaviors like this make a narcissist feel
powerful. Learn to be your own hero and your own light in the dark.  
Praise Yourself 
 
If you are dating a narcissist, then your self-image has been ripped to
shreds. The narcissist is doing this for their own gain. Their view of you has

nothing to do with who you actually are. Begin to shake off all that negative
and toxic commentary and challenge yourself to replace it with words of
encouragement. There are so many areas where you excel. You have so
many brilliant ideas. You are so resilient.  
Next time your partner is calling you names or mocking you, pretend that
they are doing these things to a friend.  
You would tell that person that the abuser was all wrong and that they are
worthy of love. Treat yourself with the same respect.  
Stop the Comparison
 
Comparing yourself to others can add another layer of toxicity on an
already toxic sandwich. Your relationship isn’t good right now, and there is
no need to hold yourself up to someone who has it together at the moment.
You are learning some of the most important lessons of your life, and it is
already difficult.  
Spending too much time on social media can damage your confidence
further. Avoid the things that do not make you feel good. Your journey is
completely different from those around you. You are dealing with a
situation that many people would not be strong enough to make it through.  
Time for Yourself
 
In order to maintain your sanity in the chaos around you, it is necessary for
you to spend time doing the things that you love. Music, swimming, hiking,
or dancing would all be great examples of activities that allow for escape
and relaxation.  
It is imperative that you keep your relationship from defining your life
.  
Your partner may object to you spending time without them around because
they would rather you not have the chance to calm down. For your own
sanity, do whatever you need to do to go out on your own without your
partner. There need to be boundaries set that your partner will not cross.  
Activities that allow for reflection can also be a good idea. Meditation and
yoga will help to solidify your overall mental health. Learning to keep your
center in the face of chaos can be a useful skill to have in these situations.  
Therapy 
 

It is not always easy to get to a therapist when you are in an abusive
relationship. A professional is going to be the best way to seek help for
yourself. Therapy will also allow you to reclaim your sanity and stolen self-
esteem. A professional will be able to offer you guidance tailored to your
specific situation. 
Talking to a professional is the quickest and most effective way to address
your mental state and the condition of your relationship.  
The therapist will be able to help you see your situation in an objective way.
This can also help to restore your self-worth.   
Is There Anything to Save?
Use these same eyes to look at your partner. Make a list of qualities that you
require in a mate or in a relationship. Things that are important to your
overall happiness and wellbeing. Do you want independence within your
relationship? Do you want a partner who doesn’t lash out in anger?  
Objectively, if you are making no excuses for anyone else’s behavior, can
your partner be the person that you need them to be? Have you been
looking at this relationship in rose-colored glasses? Do not allow fleeting
moments of kindness to obscure mountains of bad behavior.  
Codependency is a deeply rooted behavior that can take lots of effort to
change. To save a relationship that is plagued with codependency, both
partners must be willing to take steps to change their behavior. Therapy is
likely going to be necessary because personal accountability is lacking from
the side of the controlling partner. You know your partner better than
anyone else, and it is going to take so much honesty to be able to move
forward in a way that benefits both parties.  
Empathy is the deciding factor. Has your partner ever done anything for you
without expecting repayment? Do you believe that your partner is attached
to you, or the things that you are able to do for them? These questions are
also dependent on the level of control that your partner is exerting upon,
because if abuse is involved beyond manipulation, then you need to leave.  
If you are involved with a partner that you suspect is a narcissist, things will
not change. Empathy is necessary for the relationship to evolve into
something that isn’t harmful toward both parties. There are extenuating
circumstances (such as shared children) that force some victims to continue

relationships with narcissist partners. Extensive therapy is needed to keep
the abusive partner in check, and these situations involve the victim
forgoing a healthy romantic relationship.  
Unless children are involved (and usually even if children are involved), the
most sensible course of action is to go. Narcissists panic when they have
been threatened with being alone. They will not move on until they have
found someone that they consider to better. These individuals will pretend
that they are going to change their behavior to save the relationship; they
may even believe this. 
 
The fact of the matter is that narcissism is a slow poison. Most
psychologists that this disorder is incurable and will be a detriment to
anyone close to the abuser. 
A narcissist will promise change. Their behavior will get better for a few
weeks or maybe even a month. They may even want to save the partnership.
It isn’t possible for these partners to act in opposition to their nature for
very long, and their nature is to serve themselves through the oppression of
those closest to them. If you are in the blast-zone, then you are always at
risk.  
How to Know When it’s Time to Go
 
For those in narcissistic relationships, this research is likely a sign that the
end is drawing near. You have probably made up your mind already when it
comes to the dissolution of your relationship. Most readers of this book are
either retroactively reading about their experience or are entering the
miserable stage of limbo right before the trigger is pulled. A stage of
stagnation where you are left wondering if you will ever find the courage to
say the words. 
If you are teetering on the edge of singledom, listening to your own body
can be a clue to your deeper desires.  
Do you still enjoy spending time with your partner? Do you dread being in
the same room with your significant other? What does your body tell you
about time spent together?  
If there is any physical violence in your relationship, the time to go is now
or the soonest that you can safely escape. When you are caught in a cycle of
abuse, it can be best to make up your mind and wait silently for an

opportunity to run. The best thing that you can do for your future is to guard
your safety now. Leaving is a provocation and should be done swiftly and
quietly. Have people in your life on standby, ready to assist you with your
escape when you give the word.  
Readers who are involved in codependent relationships must assure that
their partner is willing and capable of change. If the offending party is
comfortable with the dynamic of the partnership, this is a strong indication
that nothing will change. Never feel guilty for taking steps to ensure your
own happiness. You are not responsible for the feelings of others. Threats
and further attempts at manipulation are a good sign that you are making
the right choice.  
Those who leave partners who have controlled and belittled them
throughout the relationship have this deeply ingrained view that they are
unworthy of love. Victims believe that if they leave such a situation, no one
else would want them.  
Their hobbies, interests, values, and looks have been torn apart for so long
that it can be hard for them to see themselves as worthy.  
The fights are always manipulated to seem as though the victim is
deserving of the abuse. The victim made a tiny mistake, so the abuser is
justified in exploding. No matter what the victim does, it will never be
enough to stop the flood. If you have found yourself asking your partner to
stop criticizing your every move, you may be one of these victims. Do you
believe that you have been treated like a partner should be treated? If the
answer is no, then it is time to formulate a plan.  

Conclusion
Gaslighting is a kind of psychological mistreatment. Somebody who is
gaslighting will attempt to make a victim question their impression of the
real world. The deceiver may persuade the victim into believing that their
recollections aren't right or that they are blowing up over nothing. The
abuser may then present their own contemplations and emotions as "the
genuine truth." Deceivers/narcissists can cause a lot of injuries.
On the off chance that you are involved with a deceiver/narcissist, it might
have damaged you in ways that you aren't truly aware of yet. Contemplate
how the deceiver/narcissist might be affecting your perspective on yourself
and your general surroundings. Just as being able to speak your feelings
helps you connect with them—and with the energy to stand up for yourself
—so does expressing your feelings in a different way.
Gaslighting is the favorite tool of a narcissist, and a narcissist will seek to
keep you under control by gradually eroding every bit of your sanity.
Doubting your own senses is in no way healthy for you, and you have to be
aware of how narcissists operate to avoid the mess of dealing with them in
your future relationships.
Millions and millions of people around the world are finding their real
voice against gaslighting and are now enlightening more people about the
damaging effects of gaslighting. It is no understatement when I repeat that
countless people have fallen victim to this form of abuse at one point or the
other in their lives.
The good news is there are countless survivors who have fought their way
through depression and other devastating effects of gaslighting and are now
living healthy lives. I believe that with the proper management techniques,
any victim can get over the emotional abuse and mental manipulation to go
on and lead a productive and fulfilling life.
My thoughts are with you, and you can find strength in the fact that you can
make it through the trying times. Use that strength to carry yourself through
until you find your true self again
.
The next step is to get all the help you can, find a support group, and start
making plans for your own self.

So please, remember that Inner Strength + Emotional Support + Plan =
Independence and Freedom.
Jack Mind

Master Your Emotions
Success at Work, and Happier Relationships. Emotionally Destructive Marriage, and
Emotional Intelligence.
written by: © Caroline Empathy

Introduction
Congratulations for downloading this book.
This book is the result of years of providing therapy to couples, families,
and individuals in trouble with their relationships. When I began my
practice, I noticed that people who displayed good communication skills in
normal interactions with others could change drastically when they
interacted with family members or their spouses. There was a distinct
difference between how people acted when calm and how they acted when
upset.
People who become emotionally reactive, can’t access communication
skills. Emotional reactivity (ER) short-circuits a person’s capacity to think
clearly and act rationally. This is particularly true when a person is
interacting with a loved one and has a history of emotional reactivity with
that person. The main requirement in mastering one’s emotions is to
overcome emotional reactivity.
You should consider that this book is a guide and its major aim is to help
you get to know your emotions, help you master them so that they do not
become a hindrance but instead a fuel source that powers your creativity
and initiative.
Let’s get started!

Chapter 1: Emotions
In every moment of our lives, there is always a conversation that takes
place in our mind. It is usually one of the most integral conversations we
could ever see ourselves engaging in. this conversation is usually a silent,
mostly subconscious and limitless conversations based on emotional signals
between the brain and the heart. The motive behind this conversation is
usually quite imperative as the emotional signal sent from the heart to the
brain determines the type of chemicals that get released into our bodies. The
moment we feel emotions that we typically term as negative such as anger,
jealousy, rage and hate, the heart quickly sends to the brain a signal that
expresses our feelings. These types of emotions can be chaotic and irregular
and this is clearly shown in the signal patterns received by the brain from
the heart.
How emotions transform into stress
To break this concept down, let’s have a look at the stock market and liken
these emotions to it on a volatile and wild day. Imagine what the data charts
show with signals going up, down and haywire. This is the type of signals
we make in our hearts when we experience such emotions. What the body
does is to interpret such signals as stress and that certain mechanisms which
help us to appropriately respond are set into motion. The stress gotten from
negative emotions tends to have an adverse effect on the amounts of
adrenaline and cortisol present in our bloodstreams. These hormones,
typically referred to as stress hormones help prep us for a powerful and
quick reaction to the thing that is actually creating stress for us. This
reaction also consists of blood being redirected from our organs to the parts
of our bodies that require it more at that time. These parts are the limbs,
extremities and muscles which we are able to use to either confront our
stressor or to run away from the stressor as quickly as possible. This is our
instinctive fight or flight response to stimuli.
Fight or Flight
There are moments in our lives when we need to respond quickly to outside
stimuli without thinking. This is something innately in us and it stems from
a time where there were so many dangers to our existence. If you take our
prehistoric ancestors, for example, they used this response to deliver them
from any dangerous angry animal that stumbled upon their camp. When the

threat passed, their emotions transformed and the higher than normal levels
of stress hormones in their bodies reverted to the average levels associated
with everyday life. The major point here to note is that any stress response
you receive has been designed only to be brief and temporary. The moment
our stress hormones kick in, we provide our body with the required
chemistry to powerfully and quickly respond to whatever threat we face. A
great thing about having extraordinary amounts of stress hormones in our
systems is that we develop, albeit temporarily to do extraordinary feats. We
become superhuman, we gain extra strength and things that we ordinarily
wouldn’t have done become so easy for us to do. If you ask anyone running
away from danger if they thought they do what they did to escape on a
normal day, most people would say they couldn’t. They were able to do all
of this without considering it. It is in these sorts of cases that our innate
fight or flight response becomes activated. The feelings of do or die cause a
surge of stress hormones to pour into the body and cause you to run faster
than you have ever run. Another side of this superhuman gift, however, is
the fact that whilst the benefits are amazing and can prove to be of help
during a time of crisis, that stress triggered surge effectively clamps down
on the release of other essential chemicals which support integral bodily
functions. When these vital bodily chemicals are released growth function
and immunity are improved, it also helps to reduce the occurrence of anti-
aging. Every one of these positive properties are reduced when the stress
hormones are triggered due to a fight or flight response. What this is means
is that it is only possible for the body to simply be in on mode. It cannot be
in more than one at once. It could be said that our bodies and by extension
our minds were not meant to live with consistent stressors on a daily basis.
However, this happens to be the situation quite a lot of us find ourselves.
Living in a World of Stress
In our present time of data overload, speed qualitative analysis, multiple
consecutive double cappuccinos, and also the often-heard sense that life is
“speeding up,” it’s inevitable that our bodies will feel that we’re in an
exceedingly constant state of unending stress. folks that cannot notice a
unharness from this sort of stress notice themselves in sustained fight-or-
flight mode, with all of the implications that accompany the territory. a fast
shop around associate degree workplace or a room, or maybe a look at our
members of the family over Sunday dinner, confirms what the information
suggests. It’s not stunning to seek out that folks with the best levels of

sustained stress also are within the poorest health. The upsurge in rates for
stress linked conditions, such as stroke, heart disease, immune deficiencies,
certain forms of cancer and eating disorders in the Us, is no surprise given
the amount and likelihood of stress-related activities that numerous
individuals face over the course of their daily life. Thankfully, the exact
same system that makes and prolongs our stress response, usually on a
subconscious level is the same can be regulated in a bid to help relieve
stress from our bodies in a manner that is healthy. What is great about this
is that this is something we can do intentionally and quickly Just the way
our hearts send our brains the signals of chaos when we feel negative
emotions, positive emotions send another kind of signal to our brains that is
more regular, more rhythmic, and orderly. In the presence of positive
emotions, such as appreciation, gratitude, compassion, and caring, the brain
releases a very different kind of chemistry into the body.
The Key to Personal Resilience
When we feel a sense of well-being, the level of stress hormones in our
bodies decreases, while the life-affirming chemistry of a powerful immune
system with anti-ageing properties increases. The shift between the stress
response and a feeling of well-being can happen quickly. Our feelings or
emotions are a significant part of our inner lives. Our emotions are
generally speedy primitive reflexes freelance of our thoughts, however, at
different times, our feelings mirror our psychological feature assessment of
our current scenario. Our feelings involve each our emotions and our urges
to act bound ways that.
The intensity of associate degree feeling isn't such a lot determined by the
present scenario because it is by the number of actual or expected
amendment. Thus, the spider seen fifteen feet away isn't as scary as an
oversized one suddenly solely half dozen inches away. Since emotions
appear to be designed naturally to assist us to adapt --to solve a problem--
we tend to urge "used to" positive conditions (a romantic, giving spouse)
however our fears and hostilities continue on and on disconcerting and
urging us to "do one thing." As it has been observed that the human mind
was apparently not created for happiness, except for survival. Happiness is
feasible; however, it should take intentional thought associate degreed
effort; it's not forever an automatic method. But anger, grief, insecurity, and
jealousy are automatic, generally even unstoppable. The desire to get rid of

serious emotional hurts from our life will become thus primary that our
robust feelings over-ride reason, shut our minds to different viewpoints, and
dominate our actions. Suicide may be a way to escape pain and hurts.
Likewise, the angered ex-spouse will consider something else, never any
explanations for the previous spouse's wrongdoings. The badness of the
adult becomes associate degree obsession, associate degree unshakeable
conviction which is able to usually last forever, despite different peoples'
opinions. This resolved read may be a characteristic of emotions: the fearful
flyer can't take into account the high chance of his/her flight incoming
safely; the jealous person is totally bound the lover is fascinated by
somebody else; the insecure better half feels certain his/her partner does not
extremely take care of him/her. Yet, there generally looks to be thought of
as the probable consequences at some semi-conscious level as a result of
the fearful rider sometimes does not get off the plane and that we do not
forever now dump the "unfaithful" lover or "indifferent" better half. Indeed,
several "healthy" individuals tend to distort their read of a scenario in such
how that their negative feelings and dangers are reduced and/or their
positive feelings are maximized. As luck would have it, beneath favorable
conditions, there are reasons that will facilitate us to see different
possibilities, see the possible long-run consequences of associate degree
action, see the implications of a code of ethics, etc. Reason (cognition) will
modify the impulsive actions of the additional stiffly mechanistic emotions.
One among the important points is that emotions, still as behavior and
reason, are lawful and comprehendible (but not logical). The additional you
recognize regarding those laws, the higher your possibilities of dominant
your unwanted emotions.

Chapter 2: How to Handle Your Emotions In Relationships
You may be aware of certain situations that cause you to feel more negative
emotions than positive ones. You may be aware of a certain circumstance
under which it seems like, no matter how hard you try, you can’t keep
yourself from feeling negatively in it. Here are some steps you can utilize to
help you to take control.
Identify What Emotions are Unwanted
Think about the emotions you wish to avoid the most. Think about how it
makes you feel afterward, to know that you weren’t able to control that
impulse at that moment. 
Narrowing this down might take some time, but that’s okay. Putting a lot of
thought into this is a good way to make sure you’re on the right track and
pinpointing the right emotions to address. 
This could be done by taking a pen and paper and thinking about the
emotions that you experience the most loudly. Are there any emotions that
cause you to have outbursts? Have you had any outbursts of emotion that
you came to regret? What emotions were those? 
If you’re unable to pinpoint what emotion it was, think about the situation
and try to remember how it made you feel. Use the pen and paper and do
your best to put those feelings into words. 
If you’re having trouble putting those feelings into words, a good strategy is
to pretend like you’re telling a five-year-old about it. Break it down to its
most basic, simple terms, and move up from there. 
Pick the Changes
Now that you’ve pinpointed what emotional responses you would like to
change, it’s time to identify the situations that cause those emotional

responses. What was happening directly before the outburst occurred? 
Being able to see what stimuli brought on what emotional states and
responses are the keys to the steps below. The very basic principle behind
managing your emotions is “Cause & Effect.”
 
If you know that you’ve had an outburst or a period of negative emotion
every time you’re stuck in traffic, you have a living example of the
principle above. The cause: traffic. The effect: outburst or period of
negative emotion. 
Noting cause and effect is a very scientific approach to a problem that can
provide the path to figuring out what the deeper roots of the cause are, as
well as the key to neutralizing or lessening the effect that cause can have on
you and on your life. 
Now that you’ve been able to isolate the situations, stimuli, or “triggers,”
for these occurrences, what is the next step? 
Make Modifications
The next step is to make modifications to those situations so they have less
of an impact on you. By nature, when certain stimuli are recognized, their
power over us begins to shrink. 
So let’s run with the example presented above. You know that traffic causes
you to have unreasonable outbursts and you would like to change that. How
can you make changes to such a situation? Surely you can’t shift traffic
patterns so they aren’t an issue. What you can do is modify the way that
traffic affects your day. 
Listen to music that calms you down, take a less traffic-heavy route if at all
possible, leave about 15-20 minutes earlier each day so you have extra time
when traffic slows down your commute in the morning, see if there’s a

carpool you can join so you don’t need to navigate the traffic yourself or
take public transit, or have less caffeine before your commute so you’re not
as easily agitated.
 
Regardless of the situation, there are solutions available. It may take some
creativity, but in most cases, you will find that you’re able to make changes
that make all the difference in how you’re able to respond to situations. 
We may not be able to change the things that we’re dealing with in some
areas of our lives, but we have control over how we respond to it. That’s a
big responsibility in some cases. 
So how else can we make positive changes to situations with a negative
emotional impact? 
Shift Your Focus
Shifting your focus to be centered more on the things that you would like to
accomplish is a huge step in the right direction. 
Going back to our example of being in traffic, your focus is generally on
what is right in front of you. That wisenheimer in front of you who doesn’t
seem to think turn signals are a necessary part of the lane-changing process
and this other guy on your left seems to think the boundaries of each lane
are merely a suggestion. You need to have your wits about you when you’re
in traffic, or accidents can happen. 
This doesn’t mean, however, that your focus can’t be on your overall goal.
What are you usually trying to do when you get into traffic? You’re usually
trying to get where you’re going, which can cause stress in itself. So where
should you put your focus? Try to put your focus on something that doesn’t
inspire a sense of urgency, but a sense of positive determination.
 
What kinds of things does that leave you? Maybe there’s a goal you’re
trying to accomplish financially by going to work every day; that’s a great
place to focus. It’s a goal you’re trying to accomplish and actively working

toward since you’re on your way to work, but there’s no sense of urgency
about getting there right away. 
If you’ve got your calming music on the radio, you’re running early for
work, you’re not hopped up on caffeine, and you’re thinking about that goal
you’re working toward. Who could be mad while doing that!
There is an adage that comes to mind in this situation as well. “Energy
flows where attention goes.” If you’re paying attention to a goal and
working toward it with purpose, you’re more likely to achieve it and to
make steady progress over time. How is that for hitting two targets with one
arrow? 
Change Your Thought Process 
The next step is to change the way you think about the situations that cause
those recurrent negative emotions. This one is, like a lot of things in this
book, easier said than done. 
If you’re dreading getting into traffic every day, you are already entering
the situation with a negative mindset and emotion. Going into something in
that mindset is basically a guarantee that you will get “proven right,” for
being mad, as things to be mad about will inevitably cross your path. 
If you’re looking for a reason to be upset, you will always find one!
 
So how should we go about changing the mindset on our example? “How is
it even possible to feel positive about traffic?” Well, let’s take a look, shall
we? 
What is your new focus when we’re getting into traffic? Your new focus is
that financial goal and you’re working toward it with purpose. So when you
get into your car in the morning and your focus is on that goal, your
mindset should be one that’s positive. 

Now, to be clear, this doesn’t mean that it’s unnatural to be mad in traffic if
you get cut off or if someone pulls some maneuver out of an Evel Knievel
stunt. It just means that you shouldn’t take that one guy’s ridiculous driving
as a license to hop out of your car and start a fight or to even let it ruin your
morning. 
Take Action
When these situations that “set you off,” present themselves, it’s important
to make a conscious effort to chance those seemingly automatic responses.
The next time something makes you angry to that point, realize it is
happening, stop for a moment and think about whether it’s worth it to have
that outburst over this situation.

Chapter 3: Methods for Mastering Your Emotions
Understanding your emotions--behavior, feelings, physiology, and thoughts-
-will assist you set up ways that to vary them. First, do not forget that
strategies that specialize in the behavior of changing the surroundings can
even cut back on unpleasant emotion, e.g. cut back your worry by golf
stroke higher locks on the doors or by avoiding somebody you're mad at.
Fears can even be reduced by modeling somebody World Health
Organization is a smaller amount afraid than you are. You will develop
different behaviors which will counteract the unwanted emotions, e.g.
activity counteracts depression, assertion counteracts anger, facing the
worry counteracts it, relaxation counteracts the disorder of the compulsive,
etc. Contrary to the notion that "time heals," there's proof that fears, grief,
memory of a trauma, etc. do not simply dissolve. These feeling do decline if
we tend to repeatedly expose ourselves to the disconcerting situation or
memory over and all over again whereas relaxed or beneath less stressful
conditions (yet, changing into terribly agitated whereas reproof friends
regarding the "awful" scenario does not sometimes help). However,
changing the results of a behavior will alter emotions conjointly, e.g. ask
your friends to praise your healthy self-assertiveness and challenge your
mousy conformity. Second, do not forget that our thoughts powerfully
influence our emotions. And, since we are able to generally amendment our
thoughts and since scientific discipline is during a "cognitive" era, there's
nice stress on cognitive strategies at now. 
The strategies here alter basic raw emotions: anxiety or fears, anger, and
unhappiness. Of course, these same strategies are used on the emotional
half (level II) of the other drawback. Passive-dependent problems tend to be
handled with cognitive-behavioral strategies and new skills. Emotions are
an important part of our lives and that they are fascinating. Several recent
books can assist you to perceive. A case can be made for how emotions are
aroused and their effects, including the impact on our health. It can be
argued that we amplify educational ratio and neglect emotional ratio
(knowing and handling our gut feelings and impulses, self-motivation,
people skills). You would possibly gain more insight into your feelings
from many other books
Relaxation Training

Being able to relax whenever you want is a wonderful skill to have. 
Majority of people can learn to do so. There are many numerous methods
but they all have quite a lot in common. No one relaxation technique is best
for everyone. There are numerous bits of evidence that provide a reason to
believe that there are so many practical, detailed guidelines to many
relaxation exercises. Your first task, then, is to find a method that suitably
works well for you. Three methods will be described here: (1) deep muscle
relaxation, (2) recorded relaxation instructions, and (3).
After learning a good method for you, the major problem is taking the time
to relax when you need to. Be sure to see desensitization and meditation
later.
Purposes
•
​
To overcome feelings such as anxiety and reduce tension
•
​
To aid other purposes, such as concentrating and increasing
•
​
learning efficiency, overcoming insomnia and improving sleep, and
improving one's general health.
•
​
To counteract panic reactions and to counteract the constant activity
of a workaholic or social addict
•
​
To counter-condition fears and phobic reactions, as in desensitization
(method #6).
Steps
STEP ONE: Select a relaxation method to try; decide how to give you the
instructions. Consider these three ways of relaxing and pick one to try:
1.
​
Deep-muscle relaxation is easy to learn. It is a simple routine: first
tense the muscles, and then relax them. This procedure is used with many
small muscle groups all over the body. Most of the anxiety and tension you
feel is in your muscles. So, by focusing on relaxing your muscles, you can
calm and comfort your entire body (and mind) by excluding distressing
thoughts (since you are concentrating on groups of muscles). This method
is based on the simple principle that muscles relax after being tensed,
especially if suggestions to relax are also being given. So, the mind and
body can be calmed by starting with the muscles. The detailed steps are
given below.

2.
​
There are a large number of commercial cassettes that provide
relaxation instructions. Usually, it is better to make your own tape. In this
case, you start with the mind and send relaxing messages to the muscles.
3.
​
Meditation can be used as a relaxation procedure. The idea is to free
the mind from external stimulation, which slows physiological functions
and reduces muscle tension...and that reduces impulses to the brain...and so
on in a beneficial cycle. Like meditation, the calming effects of all these
methods last beyond the time doing relaxation.
STEP TWO: Learn how to do the relaxation method you have chosen.
Below are detailed instructions for the three relaxation methods:
1.
​
Deep-muscle relaxation involves focusing on a small group of
muscles at a time, e.g. "make a fist" or "make a muscle in both arms." With
each set of muscles, you go through the same three-step procedure:
a.
​
Tense the muscles. Notice each muscle. Tighten the muscles until
they strain but not hurt. The muscles may tremble which is okay but be
careful with your feet and other muscles that tend to cramp. It does not need
to be rigorous exercise. Hold the muscles tense for 5 to 10 seconds.
b.
​
Suddenly, say relax to you and let the muscles relax completely.
c.
​
Focus your attention on the marked change in the muscles from when
they are tense to when they are relaxed. Enjoy the pleasure and relief that
comes with relaxation. Give yourself instructions to relax more and more,
to feel more and more comfortable all over. In this way, you replace muscle
tension with soothing relaxation all over your body. At first, this three-step
procedure may need to be repeated two or three times for each set of
muscles. With practice, however, you can relax in a few minutes. Use
groups of muscles something like the following (don't get overly precise
about this, any group of muscles will do fine): Arms Hands and forearms--
"make a tight fist" and bend it down towards the elbow. Start with one arm,
move to both arms. Biceps--"make a muscle." Both arms. Triceps--stretch
the arm out straight, tensing the muscle in the back of the arm. Both arms.
Upper body Forehead--raise eyebrows and "wrinkle forehead Eyes--close
eyes tightly (careful if wearing contacts)
STEP THREE: Arrange a private place and schedule a specific time for
relaxing. A private place is crucial: a bedroom, a private office at work,

even a bathroom might be the best place. You should take 10-15 minutes
twice a day. Ideally, it should be a comfortable place with no interruptions.
A bed or a chair with arms and a high, soft back is good (as long as you
don't go to sleep). Many people get sleepy if they meditate after a meal.
Drown out distracting noise with a neutral sound: a fan, air conditioner, or
soft instrumental music. Turning off the lights helps. Perhaps you had better
tell your roommate, co-workers, family, etc., what you are doing, if there is
any chance, they will walk into the room.
STEP FOUR: Relaxing on command Most people can relax easily in
comfortable, familiar, quiet surroundings. But that isn't where we have the
stress. It is harder to relax when called on to speak to a group or when
taking a test. What can you do then? One possibility: pair a silently spoken
word, like "relax," with actually relaxing. Do this thousands of times, as in
the relaxation exercises above or by mentally thinking "relax" as you
exhale. In this way, the internal command--"relax"--becomes not only a
self-instruction but also a conditioned stimulus, an automatic prompter of a
relaxation response (like a cigarette,). So, when you get uptight, you can
silently say "relax" and feel better. It is no cure all but it helps.
STEP FIVE: Relaxation--a routine or as needed many people would say
that relaxation should be practiced faithfully twice a day, seven days a
week. That is certainly necessary if you hope to establish a more relaxed
level of physiological functioning on a continuous basis. Other people use a
relaxation technique anytime they have a few minutes to rest. Still, others
use relaxation only when tension is getting excessive and/or they need to
slow down, such as at bedtime. Any of these uses are fine; however, they all
require practice in advance, i.e. you can't wait until a crisis hits and then
decide you want instant relaxation. Time Required: It may take 4 or 5 hours
to learn the method, practice it, make the recording, or whatever is
involved. Thereafter, the technique may be used 15 to 30 minutes a day or
only occasionally. Common problems with the method many can't find the
time to relax twice a day, especially the people who need it the most.
Although 10 to 15% of students are reluctant to try a relaxation technique in
class, almost everyone can become deeply relaxed with practice. A few
people fall asleep while relaxing. If you do, you may need to set an alarm.
Effectiveness, advantages and dangers:

All the above methods, if used faithfully, seem to be effective during the
relaxation session. Some research has suggested that meditation works a
little better than the other methods, at least for reducing general anxiety.
How much the relaxation continues beyond the session is questionable,
however, regardless of the method used. Seeking calm in a storm is a
difficult task. In many of us, the stress reaction is just too strong to be easily
overridden; we may need to withdraw from the stressful situation for a
while. One would think that relaxing would be the safest thing in the world
for a self-helper to do. It probably is, but several therapists have reported
panic attacks in patients when relaxation is tried in therapy. This negative
reaction has been observed primarily in persons suffering from very high
anxiety. For most people, this shouldn't be a concern. In a class setting, I
have found that 5- 10% of the students do not fully participate in a relaxing
exercise in class. Some don't like closing their eyes; others are reluctant to
publicly "make a muscle," "suck in your stomach," "arch your back" (thus,
throwing out your chest), etc.
However, almost everyone can learn to relax. Imaging relaxing visual
scenes (a warm sunny day on the beach) works best for some people;
repeating calming sayings and self-instructions works better for others;
sitting in a warm bath reading a magazine works wonderfully for some.
Moods by suggestion: calm scene, relaxation, elation In the Western world
we are preoccupied with the external world-- the world of work or TV or
interpersonal relations. In Eastern cultures they are more concerned with the
inner world--fantasy and thoughts. They use meditation and seek an inner
serenity, partly as a way of coping with harsh external realities and partly
for the benefits an inner life offers. There is a stigma against daydreaming
in our culture. It can be a way of avoiding reality or a way of rehearsing for
the future. Fortunately, there is a connection between thoughts and feelings,
so emotions can be influenced via fantasies. Harry Truman said, "I have a
foxhole in my mind," meaning he had a place in his mind where he could
escape the explosive issues bombarding him from the external world.
Purpose to supply a desired feeling or mood: relaxation, elation, nostalgia,
larger awareness and concentration, and increased motivation.
STEP ONE: Prepare the directions for no matter feelings you want to
supply four ways of adjusting feelings are illustrated below: (1) a relaxed
scene, (2) self-monitoring for relaxation, (3) positive affirmation statements

for a positive noesis, and (4) elation and expanded consciousness. A calm
scene. All folks have recollections of being somewhere and feeling
carefree, calm and happy. Imagining such a relaxed or pleasant moment in
your life will arouse calm or happy feelings. For relaxation, it ought to be a
scene within which you're inactive (it's arduous to relax whereas thinking of
climb a mountain or swimming a river). Examples: lying in the heat sun on
a beach or a ship, resting ahead of a hearth and look the flames, walking
leisurely in a very wood on a stunning fall day, sitting on a mountain prime
and looking out at the luxurious, peaceful valley below, or sitting in your
space, looking the window and resting, simply look the planet fade. Choose
cosy, peaceful, pleasant scene that has special which means for you.
My calm scene is walking alone by a little stream that wind through a
hayfield ahead of my childhood home. I bear in mind minute details: the
clearness of the spring-fed water, the softness of the grass, the rolling hills,
the heat of the sun, the minnows and water spiders, the large sycamore
trees, building a dam with a crony, mud crawling, dreaming regarding the
long run, being alone however not lonely, perhaps as a result of the
beckoning heat of my house close. Self-monitoring. It’s straightforward.
Use the senses of the body as a biofeedback machine. Sit down or lie. Get
relaxed and shut your eyes. Concentrate to each sensation, everything that
goes on in your body. Don't try and perceive or make a case for what's
happening, just observe. categorical in words what's happening. Scan the
body and report everything you notice. associate degree example: Eye lids
grow heavier, shoulders slump and back bends, respiration deep, abdomen
growls, throat swallows, ringing in ears, muscles in face appear quiet and
heavy, etc. This is associate degree previous technique. it's sensible for
general nervousness. Somehow the nerve-wracking sensations decline and
peace follows. Positive affirmations. many folks believe that imagining
doing something well will increase actual ability and certainty. therefore,
athletes imagine touch a home run, different imagine an executive dive, a
speaker imagines a superb delivery.
Supposedly, the brain doesn't recognize the distinction between a true
expertise associate degreed an imagined one. So, your vanity grows.
Likewise, if you say, with feeling, positive things to yourself, a positive
noesis can develop. Image in your mind precisely what you wish to try to or
be. Feel positive and assured as you imagine the specified behavior. The

statements ought to be recurrent many times every session and during three
or four sessions every day. samples of positive affirmations (notice they
describe within the present what you may be doing -- "I am calm" or "slim,"
not "I need to be calm" nor "I am not tense" or "I am not fat"): For a much
better self-concept and positive mental attitude --  • daily in each manner,
I’m convalescing and better. • I succeed as a result of I feel I will. • I’m
stuffed with caring kindness. • I’m happy and content. To encourage some
achievement-- • I’m happy with my body (visualize however you may
check out your ideal weight). • I’m a superb student; I really like to find
out. • I will hoodwink and undo well. To relax and be healthy-- • I’m
healthy, happy and relaxed. • Pain free, happy me. To reduce worry-- •
forget the past and therefore the future-- I'm within the here and currently. •
I settle for any challenge; I will handle it. Expanded consciousness. This
fantasy methodology was meant to create increased awareness, larger
concentration, better problem-solving ability, and feelings of competency.
Have a retardant in mind to figure on before you begin the exercise.  It's not
a decent fantasy for folks with a worry of heights or of flying. you will have
the experience additional absolutely if all you have got to try to is listen,
therefore record these abbreviated instructions: "Get comfy and shut your
eyes. Imagine you're within the gondola of an outsized hot air balloon. You
resting and look what is happening with interest. Let your imagination go
free, have vivid images of the items I counsel to you. it's a stunning day.
The balloon is filling. See the hayfield around you. You have got nothing to
try to however relax and skill the fun of the ride. The balloon is sort of full.
Before long, you may start up and as you go higher, your awareness and
concentration and thinking also will become higher. I'm reaching to count
from one to ten. With every count the balloon can go higher and your mind
will expand larger till it's ready to bear in mind of everything. You may
become far more responsive to reality and have a larger appreciation of
truth and sweetness.
Now, the balloon gently and quietly takes to the air, I begin to count and
your consciousness starts to expand.
1. As you float higher, you may have a brand-new experience...pleasant,
exciting feelings of increased awareness and sensitivity.
2. a bit higher. You’re getting into a better level of consciousness. You’re
comfy. You’re feeling sensible regarding using your full brain.

3. You relish the quiet, swish ride, the superb read, the excitement.
4. You vary of awareness is regularly increasing. Your perception is keener.
Your attention and concentration are even more below your management.
5. Rising higher and better.
Your confidence will increase and you feel higher and better.
6. Your consciousness will increase however your awareness isn't
overloaded. You’re feeling joy as your senses reach their highest level.
7. Your expertise a unleash, a brand-new freedom as your intuitive and
intellectual potentials reach their peak. As you go still higher, your
heightened talents can change you to check causes and relationships you
never accomplished before.
8. You’re terribly high currently. Before long, you may enter a brand-new
dimension, wherever your insight is very keen and innovative.
9. All the far to the sting of house. You able to experience and concentrate
and reason higher than ever before. Ten currently you're at the highest. Your
talents, awareness and understanding are able to disclose new which means
and new solutions. You’re desperate to use these skills to unravel your
concerns. Take as long as you wish. As you specialize in real problems, take
time to grasp the causes. Don't skip or run off from any cause--consider it
rigorously. are you able to see things otherwise now? Are you able to
discover new feelings you had not been responsive to before? Are you able
to perceive the sentiments of others better? Next, take time to create new
and higher solutions to your problems.
Imagine however every course of action may compute. Consider
uncommon solutions and combos of solutions. Decide on the best approach.
If different insights return to you, settle for them however goes back to
determination the most downside. Now, close up the electronic equipment
till you're able to 'come down' and awaken. Start tape once more after you
are able to stop: "OK, we have a tendency to be able to descend. I will
count from ten to one. When I get to one you may be back in a very
traditional, everyday state of consciousness. You will feel sensible and
rested and grateful for the special time to think. You may bear in mind
everything that went on and every one your insights.

10. Getting down to drift downward and back to a standard state of
awareness.
Coming back down. You may bear in mind everything.
Gently floating down. You’re feeling terrific.
Enjoying the expertise. Continued down. Down. At the count of one your
eyes can open. You see the bottom slowly approaching. Before long, you
will be back relaxed and rested. Virtually down. A rush like hayfield below.
it will be a delicate landing. You’re feeling nice. You’re down. Open your
eyes. You’re feeling terrific."
STEP TWO: notice a quiet place and obtain ready Use a quiet, comfortable,
personal place, sort of a bedchamber. Make your recording if required.
Place the player close to your hand therefore you will simply turn it on and
off.
STEP THREE: Have the fantasy as vividly as potential Have the expertise.
Get into it as deeply as possible; have detailed and vivid imagination,
victimization all of your senses, and place your feelings into it. it's going to
be useful to record every expertise and compare your reactions over time.
Preparation time might take from quarter-hour to associate degree hour.
However, most of those mood-altering exercises should be recurrent for 10-
15 minutes, 2 or additional times each day to be effective. Common issues
with the ways in general, they promise an excessive amount of, particularly
distended consciousness. Take a "try-it-and-see" perspective. Another
downside is that some folks have poor visualization talents. If you don't
visualize well, strive another modality, i.e. have your fantasies additional in
words and feelings. Through follow you will develop an additional vivid
fantasy. Effectiveness, advantages and dangers:  Fantasies do generate
feelings. There are few experiments during this area however several
clinical reports of distress brought on by unpleasant memories and thoughts
concerning doable disasters. Some actors produce tears by thinking of a
tragic event. it's cheap that positive emotions are often created within the
same method. As mentioned earlier, some individuals are reluctant to relax
or shut their eyes in school. The advantage is that these ways are easy, easy,
and done on your own. There are not any known dangers. How to be happy
—determinism Many people would say, "I simply wish to be happy." it's a
worthy goal however few individuals who are shrewd enough to seek out

happiness do so. Some would say they want to own an honest education and
a remarkable career. Others would say they require a in love domestic
partner and a pleasant family. Others desire a career, a family, physiological
state, smart friends, a pleasant house, 2 sharp cars, good relationships with
each family, associated enough cash to require an extended vacation every
year and to be comfy. What would you say you wish to be happy? In our
culture, nearly everybody encompasses a list of wants or wants. We want
pleasures--good appearance, an honest relationship, friendships, fun
experiences, etc., etc. we wish possessions--a smart sound system, a jazzy
automobile, nice garments, etc., etc. we have a tendency to all would like
some pleasure in life. But the matter is after we begin to believe that
pleasures and possessions are the thanks to be happy. Once we start to think
that method, we have a tendency to begin to mention "if I simply had _ (an
education, a boyfriend, a good job, a contented wedding, enough cash to
retire, a good relationship with my family...) _, I'd be happy.
"
Our achievements and acquisitions became the supply of our happiness. we
have a tendency to are presently in trouble: we don't get all that we want;
we always wish a lot of; not matter what proportion we have got. Recent
pleasures lose their thrill; possessions quickly become associate recent
inferior model. There is always one thing excitingly newer, better, faster,
bigger, and more expensive. Once you say "I would like visited be happy,"
you have got created a self-destructive mind game. Happiness can't be
supported having possessions; cars break down, homes deteriorate,
garments quickly go out of fashion, etc.
Finding Happiness
Happiness can't be supported pleasures; marriages fall apart, friends
alienate, power fades, intake and drinking build us fat, etc. OK, what will
happiness are primarily based on? Associate acceptive frame of mind; a
tolerance of no matter is as a result of whatever is, is right.  Whatever
happens in life is lawful. It takes time to know this viewpoint. Consider it
fastidiously. A belief in philosophical theory isn't a helpless-hopeless
position; it's not being while not goals, preferences, opinions, or values. In
fact, it is important to own a revered mission in life and to have high values;
they are nice sources of enjoyment. It’s necessary that you just use the laws
of behavior to try to your best, that you just facilitate others, which you try
to build the planet higher.

However, when you have got done your best, you must settle for the result,
despite what it is. Do your best while at work or in a great relationship,
however settle for being fired or rejected, if that's what happens. settle for
reality. Unconditional positive regard of others and of yourself may be a
major consider finding happiness. Other factors contributory to happiness
embody learning to own some influence over your world, to be ready to
build your state of affairs better, and to own confidence in your self-control.
To become happy, it is necessary to be ready to handle sad feelings once
they return along. You can't be happy and sad (or angry) at the same time
concerning an equivalent specific issue. You can, of course, be happy
concerning bound aspects of a difficulty and sad about different aspects.
This section helps to build the purpose that the event of a particular
emotion, like happiness, is usually terribly complex and involves several
aid ways. Obviously, all the methods for reducing depression would
possibly apply to generating happiness, but happiness is far over the
absence of disappointment. You see the point. (If you're thinking that this
methodology is extremely psychological feature, I agree that it's closely
associated with the ways in.
Purposes• to know a way to accomplish happiness. • To avoid futile tries to
realize happiness via pleasures, possessions, or indifferent and freewheeling
behaviours.
Steps
STEP ONE:  learn to just accept reality and therefore the quality of life.
This is not a simple task. It takes time to shake off our consumption ("Give
me") orientation towards happiness. There is a special analogy: Suppose
you lived one thousand years past and were asked if you'd prefer to board
2020 with heat homes, cars, aeroplanes, TV, free education, smart medical
aid, etc. Of course, if you were living in one thousand A.D. in an
exceedingly dirt-floored hut, with very little education, with many kids
dying from diseases, with starvation all over, and with no amusement, etc.,
you'd suppose 2020 would be fantastic. You would assume that everybody
in 2020 would be joyfully happy! But all of our benefits, knowledge,
possessions and pleasures have not created the country happy. Hopefully, in
3000, we will grasp far more about being productive, moral, and happy.

You will be able to begin creating realistic plans for dynamical some things
you don't like, however, settle for and "understand" the method things are.
Most importantly, this acceptive, tolerant perspective reduces rancour and
frustration with others and together with yourself. This is known as its
"unconditional positive regard. “
STEP TWO: Learn to own some management over your life. Even if you're
well cared for at this point, nobody is often entirely comfortable realizing
that they're unable to support themselves, should the necessity arise. a
private or social downside is usually possible; the one who feels unable to
address freelance survival should feel uneasy. Learning a lot of concerning
handling normal problems for individuals such as you provide a basis for
bigger happiness. Self-help reading ought to facilitate
.
STEP THREE: Work on reducing the emotions, largely disappointment and
anger, that are incompatible jubilantly. Of the four major emotions,
depression and anger are the foremost inconsistent jubilantly. they need to
be unbroken at a reasonably low level.  the opposite emotions aren't as
crucial, i.e. we are able to be moderately stressed and still be happy; we
have a tendency to can be quite passive-dependent and be happy.
STEP FOUR: There must be some pleasures in each life. The pleasures
could also be few and straightforward, however, we'd like some. There are
actually an infinite range of linked choices. Develop some, if you don't have
any. But, keep it absolutely clear in your mind that these pleasures are not
the supply of happiness in your life. If a pleasure becomes unavailable, you
will be able to notice another.
STEP FIVE: Your life ought to have a purpose, it ought to have important
assuming to you. As chapter three within the starting of this book argues,
we have a tendency to all would like a philosophy of life that we have a
tendency to are pleased with and willing to follow day by day. Finding
happiness may be a major enterprise taking several, many hours, perhaps
years. the hassle is really never-ending, as a result of most lives experience
a series of nice losses that aren't simply accepted, e.g. death, failure, mental
disease, etc. Common issues My expertise is that folks resist the settled
notion.
The American belief that there's a fast answer to each downside is
extremely strong. It transforms into the concept that we have a tendency to

don't need to tolerate anything we have a tendency to don't like, we are able
to simply get eliminate the matter. Thus, the idea that we should always
settle for our circumstances-of-the-moment becomes viewed as a weak,
incompetent, fatalistic position. however, the reality is that many of life's
downers are unavoidable--and irreversible once they have happened.
unhappy events are inevitable. So, in these instances, we have solely 2
choices: settle for it as lawful or hate what went on. In no way, ought to
philosophical theory result in a fatalistic, hopeless read of tomorrow,
however. Effectiveness, benefits and dangers Seeking to be happy is such a
fancy method that science is decades aloof from objectively assessing the
effectiveness of all the steps concerned. Being happy may be a worthy goal
(if it involves facing life as it very is), however. Shared experiences and
science can help facilitate this. I don't grasp any dangers from attempting to
be happy, as long as we have a tendency to face reality and are accountable
.
Effectiveness, benefits and danger
The method is as recent as recorded history; thus, it's withstood the test of
your time. It conjointly illustrates the human tendency to avoid testing the
effectiveness of mystical processes. Recently, there are a lot of scientific
studies. In general, the mixture of meditation, the accompanying
philosophy, and therefore the suggestion-placebo effects look to yield these
results: relaxation, higher self-control and self-evaluation on, a lot of
confidence in self-control, reduction ("desensitization") of scary concepts
and issues, and bigger awareness of internal and external stimuli. However,
the effectiveness of meditation was compared with easy resting, there were
no important differences found. Subjects relaxed (as measured in many
ways) equally well mistreatment meditation or relaxation. what is more,
fully-fledged meditators became just as physiologically aroused in nerve-
racking events as did nonmeditators. that's not stunning, except that
meditators would love to believe their methodology is best. there's no magic
methodology.
Meditation’s long association and similarity with faith makes it just as
exhausting to gauge as faith. the assumption that meditation provides a
sense of identity and communion with everything within the universe is
based on the beliefs and testimony of legion Hindus and Buddhists and
different practitioners. however, does one challenge that? maybe, the inner

peace and tolerance of all things, claimed by such a large amount of from
meditation, can be scientifically incontestable eventually. (On the opposite
hand, the value of tolerance, once it's tolerance of mental object, injustice
and problems, must be questioned.) We, as a society, ought to demand more
exhausting proof from our soft sciences. Like faith, the promise of most is
each meditation's strength and its weakness. Simply don't expect it to cure
physical diseases or offer long-distance messages. These are often higher
accomplished by fashionable medication and a telephone.

Chapter 4: Embracing Our Feelings
Feeling an Emotion
In order to change the difficult behaviors that occur when we are
emotionally reactive it is necessary to replace them with new and more
functional behaviors. This may result in an increased awareness of our
feelings. Habitual behaviors serve to take our attention away from
underlying feelings that seem overwhelming.  When these behaviors stop,
the smoke clears and the underlying feelings become more apparent to us.
To handle the feeling component of an emotion, take the opposite approach.
Instead of stopping the feeling, allow it. Instead of changing the feeling to
something more positive, embrace it as it is.
The healthy response to feeling is to not change it, move away from it, or
distract attention from it. Instead, embrace the feeling with awareness.
Feeling is a natural response of our bodies to a situation, or at least to how
we perceive that situation. Problems that we have with our emotions lie in
distorted perceptions, not in feelings. Feelings demand to be fully felt.  If
we push the feeling away, we replace it with numbness and repression or
with self-destructive actions that distract from feelings. Avoidance of
feelings is the source of painful symptoms and defenses. This is why it is so
important to embrace feelings, even when we are being emotionally
reactive.
Many people run away when confronted with uncomfortable feelings. They
are unpleasant; they seem negative. To embrace them is like doing a 180-
degree turn. Why embrace unpleasant feelings--like the feelings that
accompany emotional reactivity? It is important to understand that they are
not destructive. Rather, the behaviors that are used to avoid these feelings
are the destructive element. For instance, a person may feel sadness over
the loss of a friend, and instead of feeling the sadness will drown his
sorrows in drink. In this scenario, drinking is destructive. Embracing the
feelings of grief, however, will eventually lead to their transformation.
Over the course of a lifetime we develop numerous, unconscious methods
to avoid painful feelings. By embracing our feelings, the compulsion to act
these strategies out is short-circuited, and we take the wind out of the sails
of defensiveness. If one’s tendency is to avoid feelings of hurt by becoming
angry, once that hurt is embraced and allowed, then the strategy of avoiding

hurt by getting angry has no more purpose.  The underlying pain and hurt is
faced and transformed.
Painful feelings often become associated with painful events. We believe
that if we allow the feelings to arise, we will be vulnerable and hurt again. 
But the feelings we experience now are not those of past experiences. They
are merely changes in our physiology and are not necessarily harmful. What
is harmful is running away from our feelings. By embracing painful
feelings instead of pushing them away, we can heal.
A feeling is made up of sensations in our bodies as nerve cells become
activated. Blood flow changes, adrenaline increases and other chemical
changes occur when we are emotional. Feeling is the awareness of these
many sensations being stimulated, along with an evaluation of pleasantness,
unpleasantness or neutrality. Negative feelings in themselves cannot be
horrible or overwhelming, only unpleasant. The true negativity resides in
our beliefs and thoughts about them. Understanding this can be a powerful
reminder that feelings are okay and are not monsters to be avoided.
Learning to Soothe Ourselves
One analogy we can use is to compare our emotions to the responses of an
infant, because infants are highly emotional and have not yet developed the
defenses or intellects of adults. They are very sensitive on a feeling level.
When an infant is upset and runs to her mother, the mother needs only to
hold the infant and attend to her to calm the high emotional arousal of the
infant. Being held by a loving caregiver creates a situation in which the
original emotion changes, sometimes to its opposite. The child may be
laughing and smiling within a few minutes. Feelings require similar
attention. We need to soothe ourselves by holding the feeling and staying
with it until it changes - until we feel soothed and calmed down.
The ability to soothe ourselves emotionally is a principal skill in mastering
emotions. We learn this from our caregivers when we are infants. Those
unable to soothe themselves may experience distressing emotions for longer
periods of time. Often dysfunctional behaviors serve as distractions from
these uncomfortable feeling states. By learning to embrace the feeling
component of our emotions and to soothe ourselves, the impetus for these
negative behaviors decreases dramatically. The troublesome behaviors may

remain as a habit, but the compulsion to act them out loses much of its
power.
It is of primary importance that we change our view of our emotions. We
need to stop trying to change them or avoid them, instead, let them come to
full awareness. If we can make this discovery — that feelings are our
friends and have important information for us — we can build the necessary
skills to master our emotions and our reactivity.
Steps for Embracing Our Feelings
1. Move your attention to the feeling rather than away from it.
2. Bring your awareness fully to the feeling without backing away
or getting distracted.  Stay with the feeling.
3. Explore the feeling. What does it feel like? Are there images that
occur to you as you explore the feeling? Note the images but
keep your attention on the feeling.
4. Notice the specific parts of your body that are affected by the
feeling. Where in your body are you feeling this? See if you can
break the feeling down into its component parts. Notice what
specific sensations are in your body.
5. Let your breathing relax. Take a deep breath. As you do this,
imagine that you are breathing directly into the area where you
are feeling the emotion.
6. Be aware if the feeling changes, and notice its energetic quality.
Whether the feeling is anger or sadness, it is just energy. Stay
with the feeling and see what changes take place.
7. This exercise should be soothing. If it is not, there may be some
fears or memories holding this feeling in place and not allowing
it to move.
By staying with the feeling and experiencing it in our bodies, we contain it
and own it. It does not own us. Knowing that feelings are sensations in our
bodies allows us to form a container around them. Awareness is the

container that surrounds the emotion and it is larger than the emotion.
Awareness contains everything that we are experiencing in the moment:
sights, sounds, thoughts, sensations in our bodies. We may be feeling
extreme anger in every cell of our bodies, yet our awareness is greater. We
can see the trees and the sky, and they have nothing to do with our anger.
Instead of seeing anger as a force that sweeps us away, reduce the anger to
its true size. Notice how the emotion appears in your body whenever a
strong emotion occurs.
As we learn to embrace and experience feeling, a significant transformation
takes place--the feelings change. Our feelings have one basic need — to be
felt. When we receive this message, it fulfills its task. The feeling may then
move to calmness or some other more positive emotion as long as there is
no distorted thinking to support its continuance.
Another thing that takes place as we embrace feeling is a change in our
deep belief structure. Negative beliefs about experiencing intense feelings
fade. We realize that we have embraced the most intense feelings, yet
nothing horrible has happened to us, and this helps us break the deep
associative ties between these feelings and previous experiences of abuse
and distress. We learn that by feeling the feelings, we may soothe ourselves
and calm ourselves down. Embracing our feelings now leads to a positive
and healing outcome. This is a key method of healing faulty emotional
learning that occurs during abusive situations and comes to the surface
when we are emotionally reactive.
Numbness and Embracing Feelings
As cited earlier, there are three basic ways of expressing emotional
reactivity--through conflict, caretaking and avoidance. All three of these
methods avoid feelings to some extent. Let’s explore how avoiders can
come into greater contact with their emotions.
The avoidant style can be so pervasive for some that it becomes part of their
personality style. Because it is difficult for them to experience strong
emotions, they avoid them altogether and rarely allow themselves to feel. It
may appear that they are not emotionally reactive because they seem calm
and peaceful, but this calmness is due to an avoidance of situations that
trigger their emotions rather than true peace of mind. They are engaged in a

pre-emptive strike; their avoidant behavior itself is their emotional
reactivity.
The avoidant person needs to learn to identify avoidant behaviors and to
stop them. Awareness of these behaviors is difficult because the
rationalizations behind them are so complete. The individual engages in
excuse making, judgments and other defense mechanisms not only to justify
avoidance, but to disguise it. A person may even get so far away from his
emotions that he no longer feels them, even in situations that would
typically trigger intense emotions. Some people talk about serious abuse in
their childhood as if they were reporting on someone else’s childhood.
Sometimes a person may express incongruous behaviors, such as laughing
when they describe how they were physically abused as children. This
dissociation from one’s feelings occurs in many people who have had
overwhelming trauma.
Facing Areas of Discomfort Gradually
To reclaim the emotional territory that he has lost, the avoidant person must
develop a risk-taking philosophy for his emotional life. Many people fit the
avoidant personality style--they are driven by fear and have high anxiety.
For example, Mary had a difficult time standing up for herself. She had a
series of bad relationships with men who did not treat her well. When
someone asked her out for a date, she was unable to say “no” even though
intuitively she knew the person was not good for her. So she always
accepted, fearing she would hurt someone’s feelings or cause conflict if she
didn’t. After getting involved with someone, she would make excuses to
avoid having to break up with him, telling herself that the man had
potential, that he would change, that she couldn’t find anyone better. All
these excuses occurred so that she did not have to experience conflict or
loneliness. 
For decades, behavioral therapists have used a technique called systematic
desensitization, or gradual exposure, to help people cope with anxiety and
phobias. This set of techniques has proven to be highly effective. Those
with anxiety are taught to gradually expose themselves to the situations that
cause them fear. Instead of being overwhelmed by facing their fears all at
once, they take on their fears a little bit at a time. By facing fears slowly,
they don’t become overwhelmed.

Discomfort and distress
An avoidant person lives within a circle of comfort. Everything outside this
circle is uncomfortable, and is avoided. Some of the situations outside of
the circle may indeed be overwhelming and beyond a person’s present
capabilities to handle. For instance, an agoraphobic person may be tired of
being limited by her problem, so she decides to go shopping at the mall
despite her agoraphobia. She takes this risk, but then has a panic attack and
runs back to her circle of comfort — her home — and vows never to do that
again. Taking risks that are overwhelming can easily backfire. However,
taking small risks works wonders. In the picture below, there is a circle of
low risk drawn around the circle of comfort. This outer circle allows
growth, but it is not so far outside of the comfort zone to be overwhelming.
By continuously taking small risks outside the circle of comfort, the
avoidant person can slowly face the fear and expand the circle of comfort.
After a period of time, the circle of comfort may expand to the outer edge
of what was the circle of small risks. They then must identify a new circle
of small risks to expand their lives and their capabilities even further.
Each time the avoidant person takes a risk, they are brought face-to-face
with an emotion they have been avoiding. This creates an opportunity to
uncover emotions that were buried. Taking risks creates opportunities to
bring up emotions that are difficult to contact any other way. By adopting
this strategic risk-taking philosophy, an avoidant person may transform his
life and expand its bounds appreciably. Consistent risk-taking can lead to
facing psychological fears that have no basis in reality. If these feelings are
embraced, then deep emotional healing can take place and can
therapeutically transform the person over time
.
For instance, Jerry had a difficult time admitting mistakes at work,
defending himself even when he was wrong. He decided to confront this
issue by taking small risks. He began by admitting mistakes to Al, his friend
at work, whom he trusted. He found this uncomfortable at first because he
felt shame about not being perfect. But he realized that although the
emotion was uncomfortable, it was not overwhelming. This started Jerry on
a journey of feeling more comfortable while admitting his mistakes, and led
to many positive consequences in his life.

Everyone uses the strategy of avoidance at times to deal with uncomfortable
emotions. It is not solely the province of the avoidant personality type.
Facing areas of our lives that we avoid by taking consistent small risks is a
tool we can all use. Those who are conflict-oriented may be avoiding
feelings of vulnerability. A risk for them would be to check their anger, and
allow their hidden, more vulnerable feelings to arise, thereby expanding
their emotional range.  Caretakers may need to face their fears of
abandonment and the fear that arises when they trust that their loved ones
can care for themselves. All of us need to take emotional risks; we can do
this if we identify our avoidant behaviors and stop avoiding. This will bring
us face to face with our unfelt emotions.
Using Fear as a Guide
Fear may be used as a guide to the areas of our lives in which we need to
take risks. There are two types of fears. One is physical. We are afraid of
heights for good reason--we could fall and hurt ourselves. The other type of
fear is psychological: We may be afraid to speak in front of a group, but we
are not in physical danger. Attuning ourselves to our psychological fears,
and noticing them as they arise, gives us a handy navigation tool that tells
us where we need to take risks in our lives. Learning to deal with our
emotions also means that we are no longer held hostage by fear and
avoidance.
Over the course of our lives we lose areas of feeling because of our
defenses and avoidances. As children, we were open and in contact with our
feelings and the world around us, but because of painful experiences we
shut down to avoid further pain. As we grow older, we lose touch with our
feeling nature, and whole areas of our lives suffer. Most notably, we lose
intimacy in our families and in our romantic relationships. If we embrace
our feelings, we may recover this lost territory of feeling. This will affect
our happiness in many unsuspected ways. We may respond more to the
world around us, because we can feel it more profoundly. Not only do our
relationships improve, but so does our sense of being in the world. We are
more connected to our bodies, our loved ones, other people and the culture
around us. This heightened awareness of our emotions and feelings has
political implications and is one of the main paths for humanity to heal as a
group. When we are more emotionally sensitive, we are less likely to act

out our aggression on other people. We also gain the capacity for more
compassion. If others in our world are being hurt, we can be more
responsive to them. We become more responsive to all human relationships
.
Mindfulness
A technique that is helpful in embracing emotions is mindfulness. This is a
Buddhist practice that is used to enhance and develop awareness. A
Buddhist monk may practice mindfulness while he is cooking dinner or
washing dishes. It is a helpful technique for spiritual development that is
well-suited to busy Western lifestyles. It is also a great practice for anyone
who would like to be able to handle their feelings more effectively. Our
point of attention is usually focused on the content of our thinking. We
think all day long and are absorbed in this thinking. Most of the time, we
are not even aware we are thinking. The problem is that the content of our
thinking is the source of our problems, at least psychologically. When we
examine our thinking, we find that we utilize different kinds of thinking
during the day. There is the practical, problem-solving kind that helps plan
our day, such as “I need to stop at the bakery to pick up some bread on the
way home,” and there is the creative kind that supports these practical ideas
and makes them happen. Neither of these is involved in psychological
problems.
Ego-centered thoughts are what create suffering for us. Worry, for instance,
is ego-centered thinking that has an adverse effect on our bodies because it
creates stress. Here are some examples of this type of thinking, “I wonder
how I’m doing compared to Joe.”  “I really need to have more money to be
happy.” “I can’t stand that guy at the gas station.” We may unfortunately
engage in this type of thinking all day long. Ego-centered thinking focuses
on protecting the concept of self or attacking others in order to feel better. If
we think we are perfect and someone criticizes us, then we become
indignant. We may also judge others to make ourselves feel better, or may
even attack ourselves and put ourselves down. This type of thinking causes
pain, creates stress in the body, and reinforces a separation between us and
the world.
Mindfulness is a method to diminish this thinking and to focus our attention
on something besides the stream of incessant thoughts that go through our
minds all day long, causing us stress. The technique teaches us to attend to

other areas of our experience. One of these areas is our sensations. While
you are reading this, many sensations are occurring in your body. If you are
sitting, you may feel the chair against your back and the lower part of your
body. The air in the room may be felt on your face and the exposed parts of
your body, and you may feel your feet on the floor. All these sensations are
occurring constantly, but because they are so constant we do not pay
attention to them. They become part of our background experience. We can
bring them to our awareness at any time, however. When we do this we take
some or all of our attention away from our thinking — the source of our
psychological woes — to a place inside of us that is neutral psychologically.
Focusing on our sensations allows us to experience peace and calm.
Another helpful area to become mindful of is our breath. Our breath is a
constant background sensation that we rarely pay attention to. While
breathing, many sensations are occurring — the rising and falling of our
chests, the cool air hitting our nostrils. Breathing can be useful to focus on
because it occurs in the part of the body where we feel the most intense
emotions--between our nostrils and our stomachs. We describe emotions
with such phrases as a “sinking in my stomach,” “a tightness in my chest,”
“a heaviness in my heart,” etc. In an effort to control our emotions, we may
constrict these areas of our body, and consequently restrict our breathing.
Deep breathing helps us to relax. By becoming more aware of our breath,
we can make these automatic defenses more conscious. Then we have
choice.
Mindfulness of sensations can be practiced anytime and anywhere —
whenever your mind is not engaged in activities that need all of your
attention. A good time to practice mindfulness is when there is nothing else
to do and you would like to do something productive. For instance, waiting
in line at a grocery store is a good place to practice, or while being stuck at
a stoplight while driving. While walking or jogging or during any exercise,
we can attend to the sensations in our bodies as we move.
By mindfulness of sensations, we become more aware of our bodies. This
awareness prepares us to be more in touch with our feelings when they
occur, since feelings are made up of sensations occurring in our bodies. If
we practice mindfulness at times of the day when we are calm, then we are
more prepared when a strong emotion does occur. Due to the deep
relaxation that accompanies mindfulness practice, our baseline

physiological state becomes less tense and more relaxed. We create the
habit of bringing awareness to our bodies. This greatly improves our
capacity to embrace our emotions and to contain them. We also experience
a greater sense of being centered, and of not losing control of our behavior.
We learn to soothe our own feelings by embracing them with our
mindfulness.
Awareness When We Are Emotionally Aroused
By becoming more aware of our bodies we may learn to recognize when we
are getting angry, fearful or distressed. Many people have a difficult time
identifying these feelings until it’s too late and the emotions have already
become extreme. Intense emotions are much more difficult to handle. By
having a greater sense of our bodies, we are more aware of the field in
which these emotions express themselves. This gives us an edge. We
experience these feelings arising in our bodies before they get unwieldy.
When we become aware of an emotion as it is arising, we are more capable
of soothing ourselves, and of acting more appropriately. It creates a space in
which we can see how we are thinking about the situation and to see if our
thinking is accurate.
Jeff and Sue have many petty arguments about how they plan to redecorate
their house. They each have strong ideas and squabble over their
differences. Jeff finds these arguments painful and a waste of time. He
decides to practice mindfulness to focus more attention on his body, and to
tune into his feelings. He begins to be more aware of when he is getting
angry.
When he does this, he notices changes in his level of arousal, and this helps
him to change his behavior when he and Sue disagree with each other. His
presence of mind helps him change his communication and calm the
situation rather than contribute to emotional reactivity. Sue was not able to
do this as easily as Jeff. She had a more difficult time, but she did
appreciate that Jeff was learning to do this, and she found herself less
reactive because Jeff was less reactive.

Awareness and Choice
By practicing mindfulness, we not only help transform our uncomfortable
feelings, we also increase our capacity to act more constructively. The
behavior that is expressed during emotional reactivity is pre-programmed
from the past, and is subconscious and automatic. But this automatic
expression may be modified if people are aware of their body. Awareness
gives them a choice--they can choose a behavior based on the current
situation, rather than one that was learned as a child.
If a friend walks into your room speaking in a loud voice with his fists
clenched, you assume he is angry or very excited. He may be so angry or
excited that he is not aware he appears threatening. If you ask him, “Are
you angry?” he may say “yes” or “no” depending on his level of awareness
of his emotions. If you ask him why his fists are clenched, he may stop to
realize that they are clenched. At this point, he has a choice to keep his fists
clenched or not. Before you pointed them out, he was unconscious of his
fists. We have more choice once we bring a behavior into our field of
awareness. When our attention is limited, partial, and focused on something
else, we have less awareness and therefore fewer choices. Strong emotions
can limit our awareness to a narrow field. Mindfulness and awareness of
our bodies will help keep the field of awareness open or even expand it.
People Vary in Their Capacity to Experience Their Feelings
For some people feelings are readily accessible. Others, however, have a
more difficult time getting in touch with their feelings, possibly due to
different family backgrounds and cultural experiences. Some people grow
up in families where both parents are mature in dealing with emotions.
They learn to be in touch with their feelings from their parents. Other
people grow up in families in which the parents are out of touch with their
feelings. These parents are unable to teach their children this awareness.
Others have traumatic things happen in their lives. This pain leads them to
shut down their feelings. This is unfortunate. People who bury their feelings
need to re-contact them to handle their emotions successfully. It is difficult
to have successful relationships without this skill.
The ability to feel our emotions is a skill that needs to be relearned. We
have it as a child. However, it is important to understand that people may

differ hugely in their emotional expression. Some people are very effusive
with their emotions and others are less expressive. Some of this is due to
inborn predisposition. However a person expresses them, it is important that
they can feel their emotions fully.
The Subtle World of Emotional Communication
As stated before there are two levels of communication — the rational
verbal level and the emotional level. Even though people have little
awareness of emotional communication, they end up responding to it much
more than they think.  Greater awareness of emotions helps you identify the
emotions of people around you, and the emotional influence others have on
you. When emotions become strong enough, rational thinking recedes into
the background of awareness, and our emotions move into the foreground
of consciousness.
We are influenced emotionally all the time by the environment and are
mostly oblivious to this influence. Experts in public relations and
propaganda understand the power of the emotional level of communication
and our susceptibility through our emotions. Advertising influences our
desires; political messages influence our fear and anger reactions. The most
potent emotional communications come from those that are closest to us,
however. They know us the best and we have history with them. The
challenge is to catch these emotional communications before they affect us
and make us act in ways that are counterproductive. Because people we are
closest to know us so well, they also have greater ability to manipulate our
emotions.
It is helpful to become aware of these influences before we get emotionally
reactive. This can be difficult for a number of reasons. A person’s words
and “rational” communication may be at odds with what they are
communicating to us emotionally. We get lost in the words and don’t sense
what is happening on the feeling level. It may be hard to identify when
people are manipulating us emotionally, because they have no conscious
desire to manipulate us; they are caught in their own emotional reactivity
and have no idea what affect they are having on us. We may also be so
wrapped up in our reasons for what we are saying or doing that we are not
paying attention to the emotional level of communication
.

Here are some questions we can ask ourselves to help discover this more
subtle, emotional level of communication. You may want to consider a
relationship that confuses you emotionally while you ask yourself these
questions:
--What emotional pattern are we enacting together right now?
--Has this pattern occurred before? Is it habitual and difficult for us to
extricate ourselves from?
--Am I feeling pressure emotionally from this other person to feel a
particular way or to do something?
--What is the major emotion that I am feeling with this person? Is it anger,
fear, guilt, shame, anxiety, hurt or another emotion? How does feeling this
emotion make me want to act? How would this action contribute to the
habitual pattern I have with this other person?
--How are we affecting each other with the emotions that we are
expressing? Are these emotions affecting me in a manner that diverts me
from what I really want?
--Can I remain aware of my feeling without acting or saying something
according to the old script?
Attending to this hidden emotional level of communication can be a
challenging task. However, becoming aware of this is one of the skills
necessary to be able to master emotional reactivity and to insure we are not
emotionally manipulated by others. Being mindful of our body not only
helps us with emotional reactivity but with many other problems, also.
Studies of mindfulness have shown it to help alleviate problems such as
anxiety, depression, and personality disorders, as well as providing a
general sense of well-being.

Chapter 5: The Benefits of Emotional Intelligence
Emotional intelligence is believed to be one of the fastest growing job
skills, and for a reason. Those with high emotional intelligence have an
advantage over others in the workplace mainly because they cope better
under pressure, find it easier to work in multicultural environments, and
being good listeners, make emphatic colleagues and potentially great
leaders.
Therefore, developing emotional intelligence makes it easier to cope with
the demands of a stressful and fast-paced life of the 21st century. This is
particularly important for those who see themselves in high-paid,
prestigious, or leadership positions.
Therefore, the main benefit of having high emotional intelligence is that
knowing how to effectively manage emotions, and being able to easily
understand and cooperate with others,  you stand to be an asset to
whomever you work for.
Besides, emotionally intelligent people process their emotions before
responding to them. In other words, they think before they speak. This may
not seem very important but chances are if you have a habit of making ill-
informed comments, you will sooner or later come to regret them.
This is perhaps particularly relevant for the Western culture where people
usually don't like silence and tend to answer questions or make comments
without thinking. Or even worse, believe that every silence has to be filled
with a witty comment or a remark.
Words can both help and hurt, and your choice of words says a lot about
you. So, one of the ways of rising your emotional intelligence is to become
more conscious of the implications of what you are saying.
What makes people talk without thinking?
On the one hand, information overload has made us overstimulated and we
find it more and more difficult to stop the inner chatter. On the other,
prolonged silence easily opens the door to feelings we may be trying to
keep buried, eg emptiness, hurt, frustration, etc
.
However, if on the other end of the scale you have an emotionally
intelligent person who can manage their emotions and use words

appropriately, it's no wonder they are so often headhunted by the most
reputable companies.
10 main benefits of having high emotional intelligence:
People enjoy working with/for you
Emotionally intelligent people don't harass their staff or bully their
colleagues. They know how to get others to do what they want without
resolving to arrogance or aggression. Being flexible and open to suggestion,
they make great colleagues or leaders.
People easily open up to you
Being empathic, emotionally intelligent people can tune in to others'
emotions, so they easily understand others' point of view or the
circumstances which may have led them to do certain things.
You are a master of your emotions in any situation
The ability to identify, understand, and manage your emotions means you'll
always be a step ahead over others when it comes to responding to
challenging situations. Besides, being in charge of your emotions helps you
manage stress better.
You easily resolve conflicts
The trick to successfully resolving conflicts is to deal with them before the
situation gets out of hand. Your ability to manage your emotions, and easily
understand those of others, as well as triggers that may have led to them,
makes it possible to respond to someone's behavior in a way that will
diffuse a potentially difficult situation.
Because your interpersonal skills are good, you feel relaxed around people
and are not easily thrown off balance in unpredictable and difficult
situations, or with unfriendly or openly hostile individuals.
You easily become a leade
r
Emotionally intelligent people have most of the traits of highly effective
leaders: they are empathic, confident, communicative, positive, and
supportive.
You can work anywhere, with anyone

Great people skills, empathy, and social awareness mean that you will be
able to work well and get most out of every situation even under
challenging circumstances or in a foreign culture.
You easily get a high-paid job
Being one of the most sought-after skills in the workplace, high emotional
intelligence can help you get the job of your dreams.
You don't do or say things you later regret
Knowing that you have to understand and process your emotions before
releasing them, means that you will only act once you've had a chance to
consider the situation. Sometimes, all it takes is having a few minutes to
think things over and give yourself a chance to calm down and assess the
situation, before making the final decision.
If there are occasions that you are too embarrassed to think about because
of what you said, or did, it's probably because at the time you didn't have or
didn't use your emotional intelligence, as a result of which you made
decisions you lived to regret.
You are a valued friend and confidant
Emotional intelligence skills are just as valuable outside work, as some of
your most important decisions and emotions take place outside the
workplace, eg with your family, in your romantic relationships, with your
friends, children, etc.
You are fulfilled
Having a successful career and being accomplished personally means you
will have lived your life to the fullest
.
So, through affecting your emotions, behavior, and interpersonal relations,
emotional intelligence has a major effect on the quality of your life.
To continually cultivate and enhance these skills, you should never stop
working on your:
Self-awareness
Be constantly in touch with your feelings and learn to tune in to them.

Social skills
Cultivate your communication skills and never underestimate the power of
words. Besides, to become highly empathic, you have to try and develop
humility. Although being humble is not easy in a society which encourages
competition and individuality, ability to openly admit your limitations and
mistakes, are traits of a true leader.
Emotional regulation
Learn to control your strong emotions, particularly negative ones, and never
act on impulse. Practice this by thinking of something that will make you
feel hurt, angry, or exploited. Sit with the feeling, feel the humiliation, or
anger, “digest” it, and only after you have calmed down “respond” to the
person or situation that made you feel that way.
How Emotional Intelligence Can Really Help Out In Relationships
Have you ever made a snarky comment to your boss in a moment of anger
during a heated discussion? Did you ever have a fiery argument with your
spouse about a small issue blew up into something huge? Have you ever
regretted making an important decision when you were upset? Don’t feel
bad if the answer is yes! All of us have gone through this. Why does this
happen? When you are unable to recognize and understand your emotions,
you are controlled by them and react hastily. These are all problems of poor
or low emotional intelligence.
People with high emotional intelligence are associated with the following:
•
​
Increased creativity
•
​
Change acceptance
•
​
Good team worker
•
​
Excellent work performance
•
​
Retention at work
All of these are linked to a professional career. The best part is, people who
do well in their career enjoy better interpersonal relationships at home. Dr.

Nicola Schutte conducted a study in the early 2000s with her team where
she was able to show that people who believed their partners to be
emotionally intelligent were highly satisfied with their marital relationship
and expected more satisfaction in the future. 
Emotionally intelligent people can understand four crucial, critical things:
•
​
They can understand other’s emotions, as they are smart in
recognizing them. This particular skill is extremely tough when you are
dealing with people who aren’t emotionally open. You can easily identify
that someone is sad when they are crying, but how do you understand the
grief in the person if he or she is trying to hide it? People with high EQ can
do it, and if you practice EQ, you can do it too.
•
​
They are aware of their own emotions and feelings. They are always
in touch with their emotions and know what they feel, how they feel and
why they feel. They don’t push away the emotions by brushing it aside or
giving it a wrong label. Regulating emotions is key, as there is a difference
between showing your frustration during an official meeting or waiting for
the meeting to finish to show your irritation. Consequences for the former
can be dangerous and even spoil your relationship with your boss, while the
latter gives you time to think over it so that you put it across in a much
better way.
•
​
Thoughts create emotions! Emotionally intelligent people understand
this and work towards clearing and controlling the thought. Doing this can
decrease the power of your emotions. Sometimes, your thinking process is
affected by your feelings and mood, i.e., over-thinking. For example, your
decision-making skills will begin to waver when you are upset, but when
you are calm, you make decisions that handle the conflict much better.
•
​
These people understand the correlation between their actions and the
emotional reactions it can cause in other people. For instance, an
emotionally intelligent man will know that breaking the promise he made to
his wife can result in her feeling hurt. 
Building emotional intelligence is a great way to improve your relationship
with others – it can be a tough task, but it is doable. How do you build your
emotional intelligence? There are many ways to do so, but we will look at
the easiest and practical way.

•
​
Observe your thought process.
•
​
Watch the way your thoughts connect with your emotions throughout
the day.
•
​
The chemicals released in your brain will change the way you feel
about things.
•
​
Thoughts release these chemicals.
•
​
Notice the connection between your thoughts and emotions.
•
​
Work on decreasing negative emotions by not giving the power to the
thoughts that create those emotions.
•
​
Focus on increasing your thoughts towards positive emotions.
You will need to find out ways to calm you down. Going for a run? Walking
around the block for few minutes? Making a call to a friend? Doing some
yoga postures? Closing your eyes and clearing your head for 5 minutes?
Hugging your pet? Watching funny videos of your kid? Find out what
works best for you and put it into practice.
If you are going to be in the vicinity of a negative person whom you are
trying to avoid, focus on the positives that might come out of the
conversation before you speak to him or her.
 
How To Determine Whether My Emotional Intelligence Needs
Improvement
The act of loving someone calls for emotional intelligence – yes, you read it
right! You require emotional intelligence to love, as you need to empathize,
recognize problems and should be able to connect with the person on a
much deeper level. The way you solve issues at home and your choice of
partner indicates a lot about the connection between emotional intelligence
and love. When you can harness the power of emotional intelligence
successfully, you tend to see an improvement in your relationships.
The conflicts that occur in your relationships mostly rely on your emotional
intelligence, which is the ability to observe, identify and respond
appropriately to the emotions. Individuals with high emotional intelligence
are better at processing their feelings and that of their partners healthily.
Emotional intelligence plays a major role in romantic relationships – your
EQ can influence whom you fall in love with and how the relationship will

play out over a period of time. A series of failed relationships or having a
hard time connecting with people (in general) will mean that your
emotional quotient needs improvement.
The following are some of the classic signs that will tell you that you need
to boost your emotional intelligence. 
•
​
Bursting into laughter or lashing out in anger in a moment signals
your lack of emotional quotient. This is because you are finding it difficult
to control your emotions.
•
​
Having a tough time in building and maintaining healthy
relationships with colleagues and friends may indicate your problems with
emotional intelligence. Lack of social skills.
•
​
Are you finding it difficult to sympathize or empathize? If you want
to have a lasting relationship, you should be able to empathize with the
feelings of others. It is an essential part of a healthy relationship.
•
​
You have an issue with your emotional quotient if you are unable to
connect with media, movies or books. Tragedy, comedy and horror – all
these genres are meant to stimulate your emotions, but if media, movies or
books don't move you, there is something wrong with your emotional
intelligence.
It is crucial to understand that emotional intelligence plays a major role in
every part of your life – it helps dictate a range of things, from a successful
career to a contented personal relationship. For some people, emotional
intelligence is naturally high while for some it is low. If you feel you have
low EQ, don’t hesitate to take steps to work on improving it. Self-
improvement is a necessity in everything! Mindfulness is the basis for
emotions – try meditating or getting into yoga sessions to improve your
mindfulness.
The following simple steps will help you work towards improving your
emotional quotient:
•
​
Practice self-control. Pause, breathe (deep breath), count (for few
seconds) and compose (think) a response. Don’t react immediately.

•
​
Abstain. If you are the one who responds indifferently to situations or
makes inept jokes, give yourself time to listen to the opposite person before
you frame a response. For example, making jokes at a funeral or other
tragedy to lighten the grief.
You have so many different ways to improve your emotional intelligence.
Choose the best and work on it!
Strategies to Improve Emotional Intelligence
How do I set things right with my partner? Why do I make a big issue of
small things that spoil my relationship with my husband? Why am I unable
to control my anger when she points out my negatives? Why do I get
frustrated with my kids when they go overboard - after all, they’re just
kids?
These are few of the many questions that keep popping up in your mind
whenever you’re upset about your strained relationship or your inability to
control your emotions. How do you work on it? We will look at a few
strategies to develop the emotional quotient for better and healthy
relationships.
•
​
Observe your reactions to people. Do you jump to conclusions? Are
you judgmental? Do you stereotype people? Look at yourself. Be honest
with yourself. Question how you think and interact with people. Be open-
minded. Accept their version. Look at their needs and perspectives.
•
​
Think about how you behave in your workplace. Are you an attention
seeker? Do you look for an opportunity to shine, and grab it the moment
you see it? Don't be bothered too much about praise. Shift your focus
towards others. Offer them a chance to shine.
•
​
Self-evaluate. Do you accept that you are not perfect? Will you
accept negative feedbacks on your behavior? What are your weaknesses?
Are you willing to work on certain areas to make yourself better?
•
​
Study the way you react to stress. How do you react during a stressful
situation? What are the series of emotions you go through? Do you easily
become upset when things don't turn out the way you want them to? Do you
look for a chance to blame others even when they are not at fault? Do you
always keep bubbling with anger? You will need to keep your emotions
under control when things don't work in your favor. Staying calm and

composed in a difficult situation is highly valued not just in the professional
world, but also in a personal life.
•
​
You are responsible for your actions. Take responsibility. If you hurt
someone’s feelings, don’t hesitate to apologize. Do it directly. Don’t avoid
the person or ignore what you did. When you make an honest attempt to set
things right, people will be more than willing to forgive and forget. They
feel happy when you apologize. They respect you when you accept your
mistake.
Emotional intelligence is necessary to turn your intentions into action. If
you want to make important decisions on things that matter to you the most,
you must do it with utmost care. Connect with people, nurture your
feelings, react after thinking and most important of all, empathize!

Chapter 6: Communications Skills in the Workplace
If there is one place that cohesive, clear and precise communication is
needed, it’s in the workplace. So many decisions hinge on what is
communicated within an organization – staff to team leader, team leaders to
upper management, management to owners or CEOs and communication to
a company’s client.
Communication is the core of any business. Deals can be made with clear,
concise and logical communication, or broken because of an unclear,
muddled miscommunication. And the manner of how something is
communicated is just as important. 
Communicating effectively with superiors, associates and staff is
indispensable no matter what type of industry someone is employed. People
who are working in the digital age must have the knowledge of how to
successfully send and receive messages via email, phone, social media and
in person. If you have good communication skills, they will benefit you
throughout your career, help you in getting hired for a position, and lead to
subsequent promotions.
Workplace communication is the method of information being exchanged in
verbal and non-verbal within an organization. There are many avenues of
communication in the workplace. In order to be a valuable and effective
member of your organization, it is critical that you are skilled in all the
various methods and means of communication that your organization uses
and deem appropriate.
The organizational objective needs to be achieved by effective
communication in the workplace. Communication is extremely important to
organizations because it boosts efficiency and productivity. When there is
communication that is ineffective between employees there, it causes
wasted time, confusion, and decreases the organization’s productivity.
Effective communication between staff members can prevent
misunderstandings that may cause friction. 

Communication needs to pass from sender to receiver. This has to happen
regardless of the method of communication. 
Communication can be effective if it is understood by the receiver and there
can be a response in return. All types of communication include listening,
speaking, reading, and skills involving reasoning.
When a communication passes from the originator to the receiver, the
opportunity for the original meaning of the message to change is quite
possible. Listening, reasoning and feedback is a critical part of the
procedure, as it is a chance for the sender to ensure the receiver understood
the message.
The Importance of Effective Communication - there are three important
points associated with effective workplace communication:
•
​
There is an improvement in productivity with workplace
communication
•
​
Employee job satisfaction increases with workplace communication
•
​
A positive effect on turnover rates and absenteeism is seen with
workplace communication
Communication in the Workplace – this should happen in a way that has a
positive response to individual differences. Think of the following:
•
​
Treat all individual with respect, sensitivity, and courtesy and value
them
•
​
Cultural differences should be recognized

•
​
Develop and support trust, confidence and positive relationships with
constructive communication
•
​
Use basic tactics to overcome any barriers in communication
How you communicate effects your ability to be compatible and work well
with people and get the tasks that you want or need to be done.
Communication can be conveyed in positive and negative ways regardless
of whether it's verbal, written or visual. People need to get feedback on how
others may perceive or decipher how they are communicating and find out
how they’re communicating and whether it needs improvement or is it
misunderstood. There are times our communication may be perceived as
dictatorial or aggressive although that was never the intention.
Verbal Communication
s
When we verbally communicate, we should speak clearly and listen
carefully making sure what was said is understood. If you need clarification
of the meaning of the information, confirm the meaning by asking questions
to avoid any miscommunication and misunderstanding. 
One of the best was to be a good communicator is to be a good listener.
There isn’t anyone who likes communicating with a person who only cares
about talking about her two cents and doesn’t extend the courtesy of
listening to the other person. 
Not being a good listener will make it hard to understand what you’re being
asked to do. It would be a good idea to practice active listening. How you
practice is to listen very carefully to what another person is saying, ask
questions to clarify the message and intent, rephrase what the person is
saying to make sure there is an understanding. Active listening allows you
to better comprehend what the other person is saying and can properly
respond. 

Allow for others to speak. Conversations are a two-way event. If there is a
difficult conversation, involve yourself in it when it’s necessary. Avoiding a
difficult conversation by not saying anything can usually make things
worse. And check the tone that you use is one that is open and non-
confrontational and encourages feedback
.
Clarity and Conciseness
Saying just what you want to say and being brief is another way to exhibit
good verbal communication. You’re not talking too much or too little. This
means to state your message in just a few words, clearly, precisely and
distinctly whether you’re on the phone, or in an email. If you speak in a
jumbled, rambling manner, you’ll possibly be tuned out by the listener, or
they will not be sure what you want. 
Sociability and Friendliness
It’s important to have a polite and nice demeanor with your coworkers in
the workplace. This is significant in both written as well as face-to-face
communication. When you exhibit a friendly tone, or simply smile, you can
persuade your coworkers to engage in honest and open communication with
you. Personalizing an email or a note at the beginning of an email to your
coworkers or staff can make the receiver of the email feel appreciated. 
Self-Confidence
When you’re interacting with others, it’s vital that you exhibit self-
confidence. Confidence lets your coworkers know that you have certainty in
what you’re saying. Displaying confidence can be done by making eye
contact or having a firm but friendly tone of voice. Don’t make your
statements sound like you’re asking a question. Don’t act or sound
aggressive or arrogant. These are two traits that are not welcomed in the
workplace. Always listen and empathize with the other person
.

Empathy
Being empathetic to others by saying “I understand how you feel” and
putting yourself in their position will exhibit that you are listening to the
other person and respecting their viewpoints. Important to note – even if
you may disagree with a team leader, manager, coworker or staff member, it
is critical to respect and understand their opinion and point of view.
Having an Open Mind
A good communicator is open to listening and comprehending the other
person’s viewpoint instead of getting your own message across. When
you’re willing to enter into a dialogue, and entering a conversation with
flexibility, even with someone with whom you disagree, you will have more
constructive and honest conversations. 
Nonverbal Communication
The message that you convey is colored by your eye contact, body
language, hand motion and voice tones. An open posture that is relaxed
(arms open, not crossed and legs relaxed) and a calm, friendly tone will
give you the appearance of being accessible and encourages others to speak
with you openly.
Your eye contact is important in communicating with others. When you
look at a person you are making eye contact with; you want to exhibit that
you’re focused on them and the conversation, you are engaged and
attentive. However, don’t stare at the person. This may make them feel
uncomfortable.
 
While you’re talking, notice the nonverbal signals that you’re receiving
from the other person. As an example, if the person is avoiding making
direct eye contact with you, they may be feeling uncomfortable or possibly
concealing the truth.

Communicating via Email and Other Written Communications
When reviewing an email, read and then re-read the email before sending it
out. Make sure the grammar, tone, and spelling are correct before it’s read
by others. Make sure the subject of the email is pertinent and has a subject
heading that corresponds with the content of the email. Contact information
should be clear and available for those who read the email can contact the
author if necessary. Write emails that are professional and polite, concise,
using well-founded points and doesn’t have lengthy unnecessary,
inconsequential ramblings. Avoid copying anyone on the email that has no
relevant connection to the topic or content. Also, an extremely important
point is not to discuss confidential information in an email. Ever.  
There is a professional environment in the workplace that means every kind
of communication that is written as a professional standard that is expected.
The expectation that all communication that is written
•
​
Is easy to understand
•
​
Avoids unnecessary repetition, gets to the point and isn’t written with
sentences that are long, jumbled or muddled and rambling
•
​
Do not use slang, sexist or racist language, or language that is
discriminatory or offensive. A sure way to be terminated
•
​
Don’t write in an onslaught of technical terminology. Unless it is
necessary for the purpose of the email specifically requiring technical
terms, plain, simple English will suffice.
Being Respectful
People will want to have open communications with you when you exhibit
that you have respect for them and their ideas. Remembering a person’s
name and greeting them personally, listening to them when they are
speaking, and making eye contact makes a person feel recognized,

respected and appreciated. When you’re speaking on the phone, remain
focused on the conversation and prevent distractions.
When you send an email, you can convey respect by reviewing and editing
your message. Sending an email that is written in a sloppy and jumbled
manner will confuse the recipient. They will probably feel that you don’t
respect them enough to process and think out your content and
communication to them. 
Giving Feedbac
k
You may be called upon to give and/or receive feedback. Being able to do
so is a skill that is very important in order to be viewed as a way of
bolstering morale or showing appreciation for someone’s performance in
the workplace. Supervisors and managers should always provide their staff
with feedback that is constructive and empowering. Whether it be by a
weekly status report, email or phone, if an employee is doing a good job, or
you thank them for the efforts they put into producing the final product of a
report or a presentation, praising them is a great motivator for them to
continue to thrive in their position.  
Conversely, be open and accepting of feedback from others. Listen to what,
if any, issues are being told to you, ask questions to clarify any portion of
the information you are unsure of and endeavor to implement the feedback
you receive. If it’s praise for your performance in the workplace, remember
to thank them and let them know their praise is appreciated.
Choosing the Right Form of Communication
Understanding what form of communication that you need to use and apply
to certain situations is an important communication skill. As an example,
there is going to be a review of the salaries of some staff members, or there
are going to be layoffs from one of the company’s departments. This type of
communication should be done one-on-one in person. 

There may be an issue you need to relay to a particular person in
management who is the only person that can address the issue and correct
it. However, they’re pretty busy, so an email will probably be the best way
to communicate with them. The person will appreciate that you recognize
their busy schedule and get back to you positively and in a timely manner
.
Ways of Communicating to Avoid
During the course of a busy workday, there may be ways of communicating
that are really not acceptable to use. 
•
​
Don’t talk about personal issues when communicating with others
who you have a friendship in the workplace. Save those conversations
and/or emails AND texting for your lunch break or after business hours.
The company computer shouldn’t be used for your personal email life.
Planning a camping trip with your work buddy? Save that communication
to do on your own time.
•
​
Don’t yell across an office floor. Politely walk over to the other
person’s office or cubicle to speak with them. It’s disturbing to others and
frankly, downright rude.
•
​
Don’t put your call on speaker unless you have your own office and
can close the door. It’s disturbing to others working around you who may be
trying to concentrate on writing a report or may be on the phone themselves
with a vendor or a client. Be considerate of your coworkers. 
•
​
Don’t gossip. This is a form of communication that is a time waster
and is counterproductive to maintaining a harmonious work environment.
This is not to say that a workplace should be perfect because it can never be
when inhabited by people. It is to say that gossiping, backbiting or being
uncooperative with other people is immature and doesn’t belong in the
workplace. The workplace is for professionals. Communicate and treat one
another accordingly.
 

Communicating with Customers and Clients
You provide a service, sell a product or finish a job for a customer or client
outside your company. Conveying a respectful and polite demeanor when
using both verbal and non-verbal communications to reply to a customer or
client request appropriately is extremely important. 
There are times that miscommunication can happen in numerous ways and
can develop problems in the workplace. What is heard by your customer or
client can be misinterpreted and miscommunication can occur. 
•
​
How you phrase what your saying can be misinterpreted
•
​
Body language that doesn’t line up with your words can be confusing
in communicating with a customer or client
•
​
The customer or client may not be focusing on what you’re saying, or
you are not listening to them properly
Here are ways to aid your communication skills effectively when
interacting with customers and clients:
Speak concisely and clearly. Don’t rush your words and speak at a rate that
can be understood to provide the correct information 
Acknowledge the customer by their name – this gives the customer the
feeling of being valued and specia
l
Acknowledge non-verbal messages. Display positive and fitting body
language at all times.
Don’t be judgmental. Don’t judge the way a customer presents themselves
or how they’re dressed. Be open and have an open stance and a congenial
tone.

Always be professional and respectful of a customer’s feelings. Be aware of
your words and tone.
Show interest in people and take a real interest in a customer’s needs. This
builds trust and a positive relationship with the customer.
Ask questions and be accepting of feedback. Ask your customers questions
that are open-ended to find out what they are exactly seeking.
The workplace is a professional environment that you spend quite a bit of
time in on a weekly basis. Communicating with your coworkers,
management, customers and clients is extremely important for you to learn
and understand. As you grow in your professional life, your mastery of
communicating in your profession will help you on both a personal and
business level. Implementing these communication guidelines correctly will
surely get you noticed.  

Chapter 7: Secrets of Building Healthy Social Relationships 
Yes, when you listen keenly to people, empathize with them, and try to
understand things from their perspective, it paves the way for healthier and
more rewarding relationships.  We must understand that emotional
intelligence is not a static skill that we acquire and will last a lifetime. It is a
lifelong process and skill that keeps evolving as we navigate various
relationships. However, there are a few established tips that will help you
sharpen your emotional skills and help you relate to other people more
effectively, thus helping you build strong relationships. Here are a few tips
for using the power of emotional intelligence to build healthy relationships:
Isolate One Skill
If you are looking to improve emotional intelligence and social skills, rather
than trying to be good at everything, isolate one skill that you want to
develop at a time. For instance, you may want to work on your listening
skills or develop greater empathy. Don't try to work on too many aspects at
a time. Identify one component of social-emotional intelligence and observe
someone who is particularly good at it. If you know a friend is really good
at listening to people and making them feel comfortable, try and observe
how they manage their emotions, react, and speak. How does their body
language reveal that they are keenly listening to the other person? How do
they acknowledge what the other person is saying? What are the usual
words they use to make the person feel comfortable? 
Day 16: Open Yourself Up to Establish a Connection 
One of the fastest and most surefire ways to build a connection with people
is to listen to their experiences with empathy and link it with a similar
experience you've undergone. This exchange of similar experiences strikes
the right chord in people and makes them open up to you. Don’t be afraid to
open up a bit and share a similar experience when the other person is
sharing theirs. For instance, someone may talk about how painful it has
been to grow up in a single parent home. You may be tempted not to share

that information about yourself too early on or open up before knowing the
person really well, but it can help establish a connection. You can add how
you completely understand how it feels because you had been living in a
single parent home all through your teens. This is a quick way to set the
foundation for a lasting relationship. 
Develop a sense of curiosity when it comes to strangers. Emotionally
intelligent folks are intrigued by strangers and always have an insatiable
hunger to know more about them and understand their lives and views.
They make an attempt to understand how the opinions and perspectives of
these people are different from theirs. You know what to do next time
you’re on the train or at the airport. Immerse yourself in a different culture
by traveling to various destinations whenever you can. It broadens your
understanding of people and cultures. Sometimes, the only way to have an
open mind is to go to a different destination and establish connections with
locals.
Spend Time Away from the Social Media 
Though this is the age of the social media, try and balance your online time
and connections with offline relationships too. It is important to maintain
face to face relationships with people since it paves the way for developing
better social skills. Don't go messaging people. Instead, meet them over
dinner or drinks and have a real, face to face conversation. Emotional
intelligence goes beyond social media confines and needs real-world
connections. Our ability to identify, process, and manage emotions is
impeded by instant messaging and social media. Emoticons don’t build
emotional intelligence. It expands when we actually get out there and
interact with people face to face. Staying in the constricted space of social
media doesn't allow you to experience real emotions that can increase your
emotional perception and intelligence.
Avoid Complaining
Complaining is a huge sign of low emotional intelligence. It happens when
a person believes he is victimized and that the situation is beyond his or her

control. They will pass on the blame to the next person or situation before
thinking it through. 
Emotionally intelligent people think in a constructive manner to resolve the
issue rather than blaming someone else or complaining. They operate from
a mindset that seeks to resolve the problem rather than working from the
perspective of just making complaints. 
Complaining is a huge sign that people believe they are mere victims of a
situation and that the solution is beyond their reach. We consider ourselves
victims of other people or circumstances and therefore are unable to find
solutions to pressing issues. We believe that the solutions to the
circumstances enveloping us are beyond our realm of control. An
emotionally intelligent person seldom believes himself or herself to be a
victim. They rarely feel that problem resolution is beyond their control.  In
place of blaming something or someone, they approach the matter in a more
constructive manner and look for a solution quietly. Emotionally intelligent
folks will peacefully contemplate an issue and look for a resolution through
reflection and consideration of all possibilities in lieu of the current
circumstances. There is a sense of maturity in their thinking and manner of
approach.
 
The next time you are tempted to blame your alarm clock for waking up
late and showing up late at work, resist the urge and focus on what you can
do to wake up on time each morning. Can you cut down on post work
partying? Can you watch less television and go to bed early instead? Can
you set the alarm on two clocks, so you have a back-up if one conks out?
There are many ways to resolve the issue if you get out of the victim zone
and start looking for proactive solutions that are within your control. 
Focus on How You Say it 
What you say is important, but how you convey it is even more vital. There
are multiple ways to say the same thing or handle a situation. Non-verbal

communication can have a massive impact on how you are perceived by
people.
Eye contact, voice, tone, expressions, and body language all contribute
towards creating an impression about you among other people. It conveys
to others how you are thinking and feeling emotionally. Think whether your
body language and emotions complement each other. Are you able to
articulate your emotions or feelings without offending the other person? 
Keep in mind that few things destroy an individual’s morale quicker than an
overly critical person. Think of different ways to say something without
affecting the other person negatively. I always recommend learning
something about the other person or understanding them before attempting
to communicate with them. For instance, if someone is particularly
sensitive, they may not appreciate a direct, straightforward approach. You
may have to get your point across in a more diplomatic and tactful manner.
Similarly, straightforward folks may not appreciate you beating around the
bush. You may also have to employ a more frank and forthright approach.
Thus, knowing an individual’s personality will help you communicate with
him or her in a more effective manner. 
How you say it makes all the difference while communicating, especially
on slightly tricky topics. For example, let’s take a scenario where you think
an employee is not suitable for a specific department and has consistently
underperformed there despite receiving the best training, development, and
mentoring. 
As a manager, it is your responsibility to inform him that he or she is going
to be shifted to another department. Now you are placed with the
conundrum of telling them the truth without affecting his or her morale.
What approach would you take as an emotionally intelligent person to
accomplish the same? 
Instead of telling the person that he or she isn't good in ‘XYZ' department
and that he or she is being shifted to another department, you can focus on

the positive of the situation and change the angle or approach to give it a
more positive twist. You can say something like, “We think you have the
ideal skills for (new department) and that your skills or qualities will be
utilized to the fullest there.” You are still telling the employee that he or she
will be transferred to another department, but you are putting across your
point in a manner that doesn’t offend them or lower their morale. You are
simply telling him or her that their skills aren’t being utilized to the fullest
in the current department instead of telling him or her that their skills are
not good enough for the current department. The words, body language, and
approach make all the difference.
Also, active listening is a huge component of emotional intelligence,
especially during conflicts. Often, while arguing with people, we have our
responses ready even before the other person finishes speaking. 
During heated discussions, arguments, and conflicts, we only listen to reply
but not to understand the other person. How many times have you heard the
other person out to truly understand them and not to prepare your response
to what he or she is saying? Resist the urge to come across as too
overpowering during a disagreement and try to understand where the other
person is coming from. Deal with issues in a respective, productive, and
assertive manner, without an element of defensiveness. When you actively
and empathetically listen to the other person, you are also creating a space
for your feelings and emotions to be heard. When you listen intently to the
other person’s views, you drain all the toxic energy from the situation and
instead focus on arriving at a beneficial solution.  
I always recommend practicing your non-verbal skills at home to make
yourself even more clear and transparent in social situations. Start at your
home because it is a space that doesn't make you feel overwhelmed, unlike
an alien setting. Make a video of yourself interacting with a friend or
relative. 
Watch it so you can know what areas you can improve in when it comes to
non-verbal signals. Another super way is to practice before a mirror.
Pretend that you are interacting with a person and watch yourself in the
mirror. Enlist the help of trusted folks when it comes to gaining valuable

feedback. They can offer helpful insights about your voice, posture,
expressions, and more. You'll be in a more private, low-stress setting, which
reduces your shyness and preps your confidence for more important
interactions. It's actually enjoyable to try out multiple gestures, expressions,
signs, and postures.
When you can read non-verbal signals passed by others, you can quickly
spot the disagreement in their feelings or emotions and words. Even a subtle
mismatch in verbal and non-verbal signals will help you understand the
Notice how sometimes you pick up some clue and call it a “hunch” that
something isn’t right about what the person is saying. What we like to call
or think of as a gut feeling, or hunch, is actually a subconscious notice of
the mismatch between the person’s body language and words. The person
didn't intend to communicate it, but we tuned in to their body language and
"listened" to it.
Practice Assertiveness and Expressing Challenging Emotions 
An essential part of being who you really are is asserting or being able to
speak frankly and openly about things that truly matter to you or are
important in your life. Practice taking a clear position on where you stand
when it comes to vital emotional issues. Draw clear lines about what is
acceptable and not acceptable in relationships. 
Setting boundaries in relationships is also a huge component of emotional
intelligence. It isn’t restricted to being empathetic and being nice to others.
Emotional intelligence is also about being fair to yourself. 
Set clear boundaries so others can know more about your position which
leads to lesser misunderstandings in relationships. This can include
anything from disagreeing with someone about establishing priorities, to
saying no, to protecting yourself from physical harm or mental duress. 

Use the “I feel…when you” technique to assert yourself in tricky
situations.  For instance, “I strongly feel that I deserve a promotion from the
organization based on my performance and contribution.” 
Similarly, when you are not comfortable doing something for someone over
your own priorities you can assert yourself saying something like, “I don’t
feel comfortable that you expect me to do everything for you over my tasks
and priorities.” When you feel disappointed that someone doesn’t follow
through or listen to your instructions, you can articulate it with something
like, “I feel really upset or disappointed that you didn’t update me about the
project despite being instructed to do so.” 
The trick is to say how you feel when something happens. Refrain from
beginning your sentence with “you.” It makes you sound accusatory and
judgment. The moment the other person hears “you,” he or she will
subconsciously slip into a defensive position. You are quickly allowing the
listener to assume a defensive position, followed by a bunch of excuses. If
you want people to listen to you, talk about how you feel when they do
something.
 
Reduce Stress and Practice Staying More Lighthearted
Stress rears its ugly head in all ways of life and completely consumes us
following a range of negative emotions. From relationship breakdowns to
being laid off from work, there are plenty of emotions that can overwhelm
us. When you are stressed, it is challenging to behave reasonably. It will be
tough to be emotionally intelligent when you are under tremendous stress.  
Find what your stress triggers are and make a list of everything you can do
to relieve yourself of that stress. What is it that helps decrease your stress?
A long lonesome walk in the midst of nature? Listening to soothing music?
Talking to a trusted friend? Having lunch at your favorite café? 
Enlist the help of a professional therapist if it feels too overpowering to
handle it by yourself. A psychologist, counselor, or therapist can help you
cope with the stress in an effective and professional manner, while also

helping you raise your emotional quotient. It is easier to establish rewarding
interpersonal relationships with people when you are not under stress. 
I personally love to combat stress by maintaining a lighthearted atmosphere
at work, home, and other social scenarios. It is simpler to appreciate the joy
and beauty of life when you take on a more humorous or lighthearted
approach. It makes others around you feel less stressed too. Optimism and
positivity not just lead to better emotional health (for yourself and others)
but also more opportunities. (Who doesn’t like being around a positive and
optimistic person?) People are naturally drawn to optimistic, lighthearted,
and positive people. Negativity, on the other hand, builds defenses. People
with high emotional quotient use lots of fun, jokes, and humor to make the
atmosphere for others (and themselves) safe, joyful, and happy. Laughter is
indeed the best medicine to get through challenging times in our life.
 
Chapter 8: Tricks & Techniques for Overcoming Negativity
Being overcome with negative thoughts can make it seem like success and
happiness are impossible. They can take over your entire mode of thinking
and give you a rather grim view of everything in your life. The key is that
you can turn it around by interjecting some positive decisions. Decide for
yourself that you will do something causative, in spite of not feeling like
doing it. 
When you make this positive decision, move forward with one or more of
the tips and techniques in this chapter. This will start you back onto the path
of positive thinking. The first step is to pull your thought process to a stop,
pull a U-turn, and head back in the right direction. 
One of the first things you will need to do is:
Recognize a Pattern of Negative Thought

Negative thought patterns are repetitive negative thoughts that recur over
time. Their nature is such that those thoughts aren’t comfortable or helpful.
These thoughts and the pattern of them will generally inspire a less positive
emotional response, which can manifest in a number of ways. You may feel
stressed, afraid, unworthy, ashamed, or even depressed. There are more
emotions you could feel as a result, but these are examples. 
Learning to recognize and identify a negative thought pattern as it is
unfolding is the key to being able to turn the process around and change it
for the better.  A lesser-known term for the process of pulling yourself from
an active thought process is cognitive defusion. Utilizing this process means
realizing that the thoughts in your head are not anything more than just that:
thoughts in your head. They aren’t the reality and, in many cases, they
aren’t even an accurate picture of what is the reality. 
We tend to grant our thoughts a lot more power and significance in our lives
than we may realize on a cognizant level. When we make use of cognitive
defusion, you won’t take those negative thoughts in your mind as seriously
as you might otherwise. When we’re stuck in our thoughts, we’ll obey
them, follow them, and take them as fact. 
Cognitive defusion helps us to take a step back, see those thoughts and what
they’re doing, and choose a better direction for ourselves. Remember that a
lot of negative thoughts are not cooked up on a cognitive or rational level.
This means that you, as a cognizant and rational person, can evaluate the
situation as it really is. You can do so alongside that thought and see if it’s
something that has any real merit or bearing in your life. 
Utilizing cognitive defusion to evaluate what thoughts to keep and what
thoughts are holding you back, gives you a lot of power. Because you’re
looking at them honestly, you can decide for yourself what the best course
of action is. You can decide if you need to do something about that thought
that is creating an emergency in your mind, or you can choose not to even
respond to it. The beauty of it is that the choice is yours. If you completely
disregard it and focus on something else, that negative thought is able to
fade into the background. 

If you’re looking for an example of how cognitive defusion could help you
to see a situation differently, think of the following. You walk into a room
and find that there are several empty bottles on the table. This may make
you think that the house is a huge mess and that everything is terrible
because no one ever helps you to clean. Now, if you take a step back, you’ll
see that all those additional conclusions simply came from within. The only
real fact in front of you is that there are several empty bottles on the table. 
Remove those bottles from the table and take a look around the room with a
clear head and what do you see? The same room you saw before, minus the
bottles that were there a moment ago. It is simple leaps that our
subconscious makes to form negative thoughts and conclusions. It may not
feel simple, as the conclusions may seem insurmountable and terrible. Just
realize that you can have a small bridge to a big mountain. 
Now, if you were to simply clean up the bottles in the living room without
addressing your thought process, you might be liable to stay in that bad
mood and stew in those conclusions. Erroneous they may have been, you
didn’t take that initial step of debunking them.
Below, we’ll go into how you can go about pulling yourself out of a
negative thought process. We’ll go into recognizing those processes as they
happen, evaluating how helpful those thought processes really are, and how
to move forward from there. 
It’s important to note that it’s completely normal to have negative thoughts,
as it would be inappropriate to think of everything in a positive light. There
are negative things around us, and we should react accordingly. It is also
perfectly natural to have a negative or adverse response to general
environmental stimuli. The important thing is to know how to pull yourself
out of that negative response once a reasonable amount of time has passed.
 
If you’re in the middle of a negative thought process and you’re coming up
with thoughts that aren’t true, it’s imperative that you be able to distinguish
which of these thoughts are untrue. Once you can identify those untrue
thoughts, you can take a look at the thought process and defuse from it, and

simply drop the thoughts that don’t warrant any further attention, is that
they’re based in misinformation or blatant falsehood. 
We’re going to go back to the example of the empty bottles in the living
room, we’ll take a look at that thought process one more time. When you
walk into that living room, you see those bottles and you have those
thoughts about the house being a complete mess and that you don’t have
any help in the house. Of course, with thoughts of that nature, you’re going
to be in a terrible mood. However, you’re not connected to that thought by
any physical means. That thought is not embedded in your mind and you’re
not stuck with it. 
Take a look at that thought and remove any connection you have to that
thought. It was fused in your mind, and now you’re defusing from it. This
makes it that much easier to kick that thought from your mind and move
forward, clean the living room, and move on with your day. This is what
makes cognitive defusion so liberating. 
There are some common patterns of negative thinking that may come up in
your mind. Below, we’ll lay out what types they are, and how they can
make you feel. Be sure to keep a close eye on your thought process, and
your history to see if any of these processes strike you as familiar. 
Anxiety or Worried Thoughts 
Being preoccupied with what could go wrong, or how badly things
probably went in our interactions with others, is such an exhausting waste
of our time and energy. 
This can come up while imagining or looking at hypothetical situations or
scenarios. We can sometimes give ourselves a sense of dread about those
situations, thinking that there’s some way in which those things will go
awry. In this pattern of thinking, you can find yourself biting your nails and
losing sleep over things like your health, credit, finances, job, and more in
spite of nothing negative actually having happened. 

When you’re in the middle of this pattern of thinking, it’s hard to shift your
focus to something more positive and it’s even harder for positive thoughts
to occur naturally. This is why it’s important to be able to spot a negative
line of thinking and stop it in its tracks. 
Harsh Criticism of Self
We are often told that we are our own toughest critics. In situations in
which we weren’t completely successful, this pattern of thinking can come
about. This is a pattern of thinking that leads us to hold ourselves
completely accountable to a point at which we’re somewhat cruel to
ourselves about it. 
It is possible to feel as though this level of criticism is actually coming from
others, whether or not it may be true. In those situations, you might find that
you have a good deal of turmoil in your personal relationships. Thinking
that others perceive us badly can lead to telling ourselves negative things
that lead to low self-esteem and low self-worth. 
Part of the harsh self-criticism line of thinking is that it can feed into a
vicious circle. In order to compensate for this feeling, we have on
inadequacy or low self-worth, we launch ourselves into these quests for
recognition or status. We figure—no matter how subconsciously—that if we
can get others to tell us that we are good, or that we are worth something,
we will feel better about ourselves. The high of that recognition from others
is usually short-lived, as the negative thought process continues on within
you. So, whether you get that recognition from others or not, you’re bound
to burn yourself out by trying constantly to get it.  
Of course, there is nothing wrong with being a perfectionist or someone
who strives for excellence. This differs from having a negative thought
process, which doesn’t allow you to see the successes that you do have, or
which is constantly berating you for every little thing that goes wrong. Such
a thought process that can lead to depression and some severe effects of
depression, which is why it’s important to stay vigilant. 

This negative line of thinking can make it harder to identify successes as
they occur, much less to validate yourself for them. It can seem like you’re
stuck with failure and like “you can never win.”
Chronic Regret or Guilt
This thought process is similar to the one above, but there are some key
differences. This type of thought process can come from becoming stuck
with thinking about failures or mistakes we’ve made in the past. From this
thought process, we can derive a lot of feelings that contribute to low self-
worth, low self-esteem, and even low expectations for our capabilities. In
extreme cases, this line of thinking can leave you feeling worthless or even
sinister. 
This line of thinking can convince us that we’re actually evil or bad for the
people around us, no matter how untrue that may be. This line of thinking
will leave you thinking on decisions that you’ve made, thinking they were
the wrong ones, or that you were wrong for having made your decision
based on certain factors. This line of thinking nitpicks at the choices you
make and why you made them. 
It is important to note that this thought process is distinctly different than
taking a look at past experiences, evaluating what you could have done
better, and learning from your mistakes. This is a thought process that mires
you down in the details of what occurred and can feel utterly unshakeable.
When you get stuck in one of these mental quagmires, it’s best to start
looking for ways and methods to change it. 
Problem-centric Thought Process
Have you ever been trying to work through something, only to be stopped
at every turn with a new problem that makes it impossible? This is an
example of a fixation on problems in your environment. Someone dealing
with a negative thought process that is stuck on problems will have

difficulty even finding a starting point in working through the things that
they’re up against in life. 
Let’s consider this example. Charlie is thinking of buying a house and
starting a family because it’s what she wants. However, when she thinks
about how to get started, she might think her credit isn’t good enough.
Someone might tell her that her credit combined with her significant other’s
would be sufficient. From there, she would think that maybe it’s not a
buyer’s market right now. From there, she might think of reasons why the
timing isn’t right, then why they can’t afford it, then why it’s not a good
decision in today’s economy. Before you know it, the whole idea has been
scrapped and now Charlie is left trying to push her life in a completely
different direction. 
It may be true that Charlie could do with a better credit score and that the
economy isn’t as healthy as it has previously been. These things, however,
are not impassable obstacles and can be navigated with positive efforts in
the right direction, a good strategy, and the advice of professionals in those
areas. This thought process of producing a new problem or a reason why
not at every turn, is keeping her from pursuing some of her largest goals in
her immediate future. 
Knowing the risks of a situation before committing to it is a smart thing to
do. Understanding what obstacles you’ll need to navigate is a prudent part
of planning. Getting stuck on every single aspect and seeing each one as a
massive brick wall will keep you from getting anything you want out of this
life. 
Know Thy Enemy
The first step toward resolution of these issues is to know what sort of
negative thought process you’re dealing with. When you can identify what
your mind is doing and how it’s getting you off track, you can more
effectively work to get it back to where it should be. 

Once you figure out what thought process you’re dealing with and how it’s
affecting your ability to get what you want out of life, take a look at what
that thought process is doing. Once you’ve isolated that thought process and
the things about it that are irrelevant or untrue for you, you can start to
initiate and interject a positive thought process. 
Treat yourself like a Friend
When you’re dealing with a lot of negative inner monologue, there’s a
rather poignant question you can ask yourself. If you ask yourself this
question, you may find that it will put a stop to, or at least slow down, the
harshly critical thoughts and jabs. 
Would you talk to a friend like this? If you wouldn’t say these things to
someone you know and love, who found themselves in the midst of this
same situation, don’t talk to yourself that way. You are important and you
are worthy of compassion, understanding, and a second chance here and
there. 
Conversely, if you would accept it if a friend told you that you are a good
person who deserves positive things in life, accept it when you say it to
yourself. You are your own friend and you are allowed to accept
reassurances and compliments from yourself. 
Take a moment to think about what your closest friend would say to you
about your current worry. Take a moment to think about how you would
advise a friend in this same scenario. Write it down somewhere and refer to
it regularly if that will help you to remember that you’re a good person.
Acknowledge Your Feelings
If you’re working on getting out of a mental jam, the first step to take is to
acknowledge how the situation is making you feel. Acknowledge how
you’re affected by the subject matter of those thoughts. Ironically, when
we’re trying to resist feeling a specific way about things, we end up backing
ourselves into a corner with those feelings. It causes more long-term stress
and issues. 

If you allow yourself to let those thoughts run their course for a few
moments and feel what your mind is telling you to feel, you have a better
chance of moving on from those thoughts and opening the door for new,
better feelings and thought processes. 
Ask the Hard Questions
When you ask yourself these questions and answer them honestly, it can
give you some pragmatic perspective on what’s really going on around you
in life. If can correct those thought processes or patterns that can lead to
further difficulty down the road. 
Using a journal to answer these questions is great because you’ll have
access to your answers as you continue to grow emotionally. Even if you
just write down your answers on an index card or type it in a notepad
document and save it for later reference, it could do you favors. 
Ask yourself:
-       Is this line of thinking helpful?
-       What do I stand to gain from thinking this way?
-       Does this line of thinking lead me to a resolution for this problem?
-       How can I change the negative statements in these thoughts into
positive ones?
-       What should my next step be?
Once you’ve asked these questions, you can start working toward a positive
resolution for the current problem. Additionally, it can lead you toward a
better pattern of thinking that will make things easier for you in future
situations of this sort.
 
Journaling

Journaling has come up in this book previously as a way to change your
emotional pattern. Journals or diaries are great because they can cover a
wide range of topics that you need to monitor or about which you have
thoughts. Going back through your journal from time to time is a great way
to gauge personal growth, progress toward goals, and the overall state of
mind. 
Writing in a journal gets thoughts out of your mental space so you have
room for other, more current thoughts. You would be amazed how much
clarity is possible simply after talking about or writing down what you’re
thinking. 
Using a journal for this purpose gives you the opportunity to puzzle out
which of the above patterns of thinking you’re experiencing, to answer the
hard questions above, to speak to yourself as you would to a friend, and to
give yourself a plan for the future you’re working toward building for
yourself.
 
Find Reasons to be Grateful
Gratefulness is, as mentioned previously, a great way to gain perspective on
the things that you have in your life. Thanks to a lot of devices in
mainstream media that we see daily, we are constantly being reminded of
the things we do not have. We’re being advertised to nearly constantly and
being told to buy new versions of the things we do have, to buy bigger and
better things than those around us have, and to generally make more
purchases. 
This can, after some time, begin to wear on a person. This can give you the
concept that you do not have enough, that you should be comparing
everything you have and have done to the possessions and feats of others.
Thanks to social media, we are constantly under barrages of posts about
amazing accomplishments made by those who are younger, smarter, or
more attractive than we’re willing to let ourselves believe we are. 

All this pressure coming at us from seemingly every direction, can start to
give us the sense that we just don’t have much of anything, we have
accomplished nothing, and that we will always want for more in life. This is
a terrible spot in which to find oneself because it will almost never lead
anywhere positive. It’s imperative to be grateful for the things that we have,
the things we’ve been able to accomplish, and for the people, we have in
our corner in life. 
Take a moment and think or write about the things for which you are
grateful in life. Coming up with even five things per day, to put on that list
will drastically change your outlook. It’s a great way to gain perspective on
how lost you could be, and it’s a great way to acknowledge and
congratulate yourself for the work you’ve done to get to this point. It’s no
small feat to be alive, in good health, with food in the cupboards.
 
Focus on Your Strengths
This exercise has a lot of similar properties to the previous item in this
chapter, with a little bit of a different focus. A lot of anguish can come from
being focused on the things that we lack, the areas in which we are weak,
and the troubles that we have. This is not to say that being aware of and
working on our weaknesses is a bad thing. 
Indeed, improving upon our weaknesses would only serve to give us the
upper hand on situations in the future. There is a large difference (mainly in
tone and focus) between recognizing and improving weaknesses, and
dwelling upon those weaknesses to a negative result. In the case of
recognizing and improving upon our weaknesses, there is a good deal of
effort being expended to actively improve the situation. Dwelling simply
means that we’re overtly aware of their presence and we feel overwhelming
like they will be our downfall. 
List out, either on paper or to yourself mentally, what your strengths are.
These don’t have to be Herculean strengths or talents that could land you a
spot on a daytime talk show. These are simply the things in which you

excel. For instance, some good strengths to have could be, “I am great at
communicating. I am very punctual. I’m good at creative problem-solving. I
am more organized than I used to be.” These are things you can use to your
advantage in a number of situations within your life. Those are also
strengths that aren’t overwhelmingly common, so don’t sell yourself short! 
If you find yourself having trouble getting started with this exercise, ask the
people who are closest to you for a little bit of help. Simply ask them,
“Have I ever impressed you? How did I do it?” This can be said in another
way would be, “What strengths do you think I have?” This is a good way to
start this exercise, and it’s also a good ego boost. 
Establish New Habits
Our patterns of thinking and the ways in which we approach situations can
become a habit. In fact, most of the time when we get into these thought
processes, we don’t even realize we’re doing it. Establishing new habits
begins with the personal decision and declaration of what habit you’re
changing, and what the new habit will be. 
Not to sound like a broken record, but it’s highly recommended that you
write this down. Being able to refer back to the habits we’re trying to adopt
can make it easier to keep them in mind and to bear them in mind.
Remember the phrase “out of sight, out of mind,” and put these things
insight if it’s possible to do so. 
If you are journaling on a regular basis, make a list of the habits you’d like
to adopt and consider implementing a “habit tracker” within your
journaling. These can be found on social media with a simple search and
you can pick a layout that works best for you and the routine you want to
set! 
The key to forming a new habit is repetition, so give yourself sample
scenarios to work through with the new habit you’re working into your life.
Take the time to think about how it could work in your life, take time to
think of any obstacles that might present themselves in your path to creating

it and come up with solutions to those obstacles. Being determined is
essential to creating a new habit, as it will require the purposeful opposition
against what is currently involuntary or reflexive.
 
Use Affirmations
You may be aware of some affirmations that people typically use in an
effort to self-help. If you have any reservations or objections to using
affirmations in your daily life, forget them. We are a species that thrives on
reassurance, hope, and security. Having daily affirmations that we are good,
we have the capabilities to achieve what we want in life, that we are on the
right track, and that we can make it through the rough patches, does a world
of good for keeping our chins up and our eyes on the prize. 
Affirmations, in short, are positive statements that help you to get over
those mechanisms of self-sabotage and negative thought patterns. They
thrust a positive line of thinking right into the center of all that and can be
helpful to derail that negative train of thought. It’s important to note that
“affirmation,” is a pretty wide umbrella term that can encompass a great
many statements. There aren’t any rules as to what they need to say, so long
as they are positive and challenge a negative line of thinking. 
Whatever speaks to you the most is the sort of affirmation you should be
looking for when doing this exercise. Some people may have found, “I’m
attractive, smart, and good enough,” to be the perfect phrase. Others may
have found, “I am the chief executive butt-kicker. I stop at nothing for
anything,” to be better suited to their needs. Everyone is different and a
large part of managing your emotions and your personal growth is being
absolutely true to yourself. 
Using these exercises and affirmations is never meant to change who you
are. Using these is about helping you to live a life that is perfectly true to
who you are, without all the anxieties and negative emotions that may be
keeping you from getting the most out of your experiences and your
relationships.
 

In some cases, drafting your own affirmations is the way to go, because you
know what you need to hear each day. If you’re feeling a little lost for what
to say in these affirmations, try searching for various affirmations around
specific topics, or just in general, that you can print out or write down to
keep your chin up in spite of the obstacles.   
Practice Mindfulness
This is a subject that has gotten a bit more attention lately, and you may
have heard of it before this book. What is it, though? To put it as simply as
possible, it’s a state of mind that’s achieved by shifting focus to the current
moment, and your awareness in it. Mindfulness is being able to do this,
while also calmly acknowledging and accepting the thoughts, physical
feelings, and emotional feelings that come along with it. It’s a therapeutic
technique and it’s been more or less utilized in some of the other items in
this list. 
It can mean taking a moment to see what’s going on, acknowledge it for
what it is, feel the way you feel about it, then putting yourself completely in
the here and now so you can evaluate how you feel right now. You may
have practiced this or something that is similar to it. You may also see some
similarities between this state of mind, and what meditation aims to
achieve. 
This is a benefit that many people get when meditating. They feel that it
helps to ground them, bring them back to the here and now, and put
everything they’ve been thinking and feeling into perspective. 
There are myriad questionnaires throughout the web and self-help materials
that specifically help you to be mindful. Bear in mind that not all the
questions you can find will inspire you, or even particularly help you to be
mindful. This exercise, like affirmations, requires that the questions be of a
personal significance to you. If you think of questions that would be more
relevant or poignant, go with those to start!
Channel Your Thoughts into Something Positive

In times when you find yourself to be in the middle of a negative thought
pattern or process, stop what you’re doing and take the time to focus on a
project that you’re really interested in, or which gets you excited. Imagine
if, every single time you started to beat yourself up, you stopped and
channeled it into productivity on a project that held personal significance
for you. How quickly do you think those projects would get done?
To start, it may not be possible for you to stop everything you’re doing and
move right onto a project. For instance, if you’re at work and this kind of
thought process hits you, it could be difficult. However, you can channel
that energy into something you’re doing at work, or take notes about how to
be productive on that personal project once you return home, or once you
have time to address it. Put it to the test
!
Consider Cognitive Behavioral Therapy
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy or CBT is a therapeutic technique that is
geared toward helping to change thought patterns. If you’re having
difficulty with utilizing any of the tips and techniques listed here, CBT
could be a good step for you to take. 
There are books on doing CBT, how it works, how it could affect you, and
how to do it. If you’re able to get the help of a professional who is skilled in
CBT, that would be the best course of action to take. However, if you don’t
have access to a professional, CBT is something that you can do on your
own with the help of materials on the subject. 
Keeping a journal throughout the processes is a great way to monitor your
progress and to ensure that you’re getting a good result from the therapy
that you’re doing.

Chapter 9: Unleash The Empath In You!
When you want someone to see things from the other person’s perspective,
the first thing you will tell him or her is – put yourself in his shoes before
you stand on him! This ability to look at something from the other person's
perspective and trying to understand what they go through is referred to as
empathy.
Empathy is the ability to interact with and lead by comprehending other
people's views, feelings and thoughts. When you work on improving your
empathy, you become a better human being. Empathy is strongly connected
to the emotional quotient in a person. It can lead to a series of advantages
such as:
•
​
Succeeding in a professional environment (workplace)
•
​
Stronger and more meaningful personal relationships
•
​
Better quality of life and good health
Around 90 percent of top-performing individuals in most workplaces are
said to come with a high emotional quotient. When people are self-aware of
their thoughts, emotions and feeling, they are better in understanding the
others' too. Listening plays an important role in this. When you listen better
with an open mind, you tend to become a better person!
Lack of Empathy and its Negative Effects
Lack of empathy has been linked to criminal behaviors such as murder,
robbery, drug dealing, etc. Multiple studies have proved this and claimed
that most people in prison lack empathy. These prisoners who have been
charged guilty never really cared about their victims. They didn't make any
attempt to understand the emotions and feelings their victims were going
through. If they had empathy, they wouldn't be in prison in the first place.
When a person can empathize with another person, it is quite impossible for
him to do anything rash or brutal.
Honesty and Trus
t
When you empathize with others, you are unconsciously placing your trust
in the person. It gives you the ability to trust. When the person feels that
you care for him or her, you are successful in earning his or her trust. Trust

is important to build a healthy relationship. If your friends trust you, they
will be more than willing to take risks for you and the most important of all
– they will be honest and open with you! Your friends will talk openly only
when they know they can trust you.
When trust builds, exchange of information increases and they will start
sharing their thoughts and feelings with you. The trust they have in you
might even make them open up the darkest secrets of their life. Gaining
such a trust is a blessing nowadays as you hardly see such people around.
This doesn't refer solely to friendship – it extends to personal relationships
and professional relationships too. If your colleague can trust you such that
she doesn't mind sharing her disturbing thoughts with you, you are working
pretty well on your emotional quotient. Empathy and trust go hand in hand.
Openness and honesty come only when the trust factor is strong.
Being Considerate and Understanding
You are busy playing a game on your mobile when a colleague of yours
comes over with a worried look on her face. You stop for a second, look at
her and ask her what is wrong. She tells you about a client call that went
bad and is worried about the issue escalating. Instead of actively listening to
her, you go back to your mobile game and respond to her with hmm’s, aha’s
and oh’s. How do you think she would feel? Will she come back to you ever
again when she needs a compassionate ear? No, absolutely not! You just
showed her that you are not interested in listening to what she has to say.
You lost her trust, and you were pathetically inconsiderate and thoughtless.
The basic and simple thing you have to do when someone approaches you
to talk about their worries, ideas or interests is to stop whatever you are
doing and listen to them. When you are empathetic, you are aware of the
feeling that is being shown. When you are approached for help, try to
comprehend and understand what is not being said (nonverbal cues) along
with what is being said (the verbal conversation)
.
Most important emotions in a conversation are conveyed through nonverbal
signals such as body language, gestures, facial expression, tone of the voice,
etc. You may not realize that every single movement in the body sends a
message. The most important part of empathy is to understand nonverbal
messages and show consideration for the feeling they are going through.
You become an effective communicator when you can empathize and

understand what the other person needs from you. Learn to comprehend
nonverbal messages to discover more about the other person’s thoughts and
emotions.
The most common examples of nonverbal communication are:
•
​
Facial expressions
•
​
Eye contact
•
​
Physical touch or contact
•
​
Bodily appearance (physical)
•
​
Hand gestures or physical actions
•
​
The different sounds a person usually makes (depending on the
emotions).
Empathy lays the rock-solid foundation for better emotional intelligence,
and it is possible to improve your empathy through regular practice. You
need to follow the right process and religiously practice them to take your
empathy to the next level, which will help increase your overall emotional
intelligence. You don’t have to go through an expensive course or a
complicated process to learn empathy. Choose the right resources and tools!
Why Practice Empathy?
Practicing empathy will help you with greater success professionally and
personally, as it is one of the fundamental factors that are required to
improve your emotional intelligence. The more empathetic you are, the
happier you become! Why is it necessary to specifically work toward
enhancing your ability to empathize with others?
•
​
You will begin to treat people the way you want to be treated and
more importantly, you would treat the people you care about exactly the
way they wish to be treated.
•
​
You will be smart enough to understand the wants and needs of the
people around you.
•
​
You can understand the perception others have about you based your
actions and words.

•
​
You can comprehend the unspoken words of people and respond
similarly.
•
​
You can successfully adhere to your customer’s needs, as you are
aware of what they are looking for.
•
​
Interpersonal conflicts – both at work and at home - will be fewer as
you can deal with them in a better manner.
•
​
Your accurate prediction of people’s actions and reactions will be
helpful to work on your next course of action/
•
​
You will be self-motivated and make extra efforts to motivate the
people around you.
•
​
Your convincing skills will improve, as you can influence your ideas
and suggestions effectively.
•
​
You will always allow two-way communication as you start looking
at the perspectives and perceptions of the people around you.
•
​
Handling negative people will no longer be an issue as you are better
at comprehending their fears and motivations. You begin to empathize by
putting yourself in their shoes and work towards a constructive solution.
•
​
You not only become a better leader or a better friend but on the
whole, you become a better person!
How to Practice Empathy
?
There are a few simple ideas you can follow to develop your empathy, and
they are,
•
​
Stop and listen
•
​
Observe and marvel
•
​
Recognize your enemies
•
​
Be the third person
Stop and Listen
Listen with rapt attention when people talk to you. Active listening is
important; stop whatever you are doing and get into listening mode. Most
often, conversations are often only talking with no listening – this happens

when there is a heated discussion or arguments on sensitive topics. Often,
people keep talking back and forth with each other, listening enough to
reply to the other person’s argument or statement. Sometimes, they don’t
even pause to listen; it is just back and forth talking at each other.
You will also be able to recognize such a pattern within yourself when you
think deeper. You will have the response formulated in your head waiting to
spit it out the moment the other person has finished with his or her sentence.
It will look like you are in for a war of words where each party wants to
make sure his or her word is the final. 
When you find yourself being part of such a conversation, don’t rush - slow
down. Push yourself hard to listen to the words the other person is speaking.
Gauge the motto (reason or objective) of the speaker behind what he or she
is saying and why he or she is saying so. Think what led to this thought
process in him – maybe his work experience and the way he was brought up
has led to his current viewpoint.
Don’t be a mute spectator; respond visually with body languages and
gestures such as making eye contact, nodding your head, etc. You can also
respond with sounds such as oh, aha, hmm, ok, etc. but let the second pass
before you respond verbally. Before you respond with your reply, ask
follow-up questions to make sure what the speaker intended and what you
understood are the same, which will also help you understand their current
emotional state.
Since you were completely focused on the speaker, you will need some to
time to speak or respond, as you are yet to prepare your response for the
same.
Observe and Marvel
Don't always stick your head into your mobile or iPad. Instead of checking
your Facebook or WhatsApp while waiting for your train or when you are
stuck in traffic, look around! Observe the people around you and imagine
who they might be, what they might be feeling, what might be running in
their head, where are they headed to now, etc. Is the person on that yellow
bike happy? Is he frustrated? Is he humming the song he is listening to
through his earphones? Does he have similar problems as me? Is that lady

worried about some meeting she is expecting this noon? Is that why there is
a worried look on her face? Just gaze around. Try to observe and marvel!
Recognize Your Enemies
Enemies might be an exaggerated word here, but think about an ongoing
dispute you are having with someone – maybe your team member who is
trying to disrupt your work routine to prove she is better. Or maybe a
particular family member who is constantly coming up with conflictive
arguments for whatever you do or say. You always have this thought in your
head that whatever they do or say is wrong and you are right – whoever it is
(maybe a colleague or family member). Because you are on the opposite
side of the war field, you tend to disagree with them on anything and
everything, irrespective of what they are arguing for!
Now, reverse the roles – imagine the entire scenario from the other person's
perspective. The person isn’t evil or a complete fool. Maybe they aren’t
wrong about whatever you disagree about. The problem here is more to do
with the basic philosophical (ideological) difference between you than
about the particular conflict that is taking place between both of you.
How does the other person feel when you disagree with them? Are they
affected emotionally by the way you respond? What is causing the fear in
the other person to accept or reason out with you? How do you worsen
those fears in them instead of calming them? Are there any valid
agreements for the person to make against your viewpoint? If so, what are
they? Does this person hold any good intentions for you? Do they have any
positive motivations behind what you think to be negative? If so, what are
they? Do you agree with them? Do think these motivations hold more
importance than the particular conflict between you two?
When you do this exercise a couple of times, you will feel your irritation
and anger reducing – especially with the interpersonal situations which is
stressing both of you. It may look clear, but it is different when you do it.
Be the Third Person
It can be difficult and tough to side with your enemy, so it is best to choose
the other side – the third side. Look at the entire scenario from a third
person’s perspective. This step will require a lot of discipline, as you will
already be stressed about your own emotions and thoughts. To make things
easy, try it with an actual third person.

All of us have loved ones and friends who come to us to complain about
that person who has been treating them badly. It is common for humans to
complain, as it is the basic nature of the species. It is also the duty of the
friend or loved one to listen to the complaints and be sympathetic or
compassionate toward the complainer. The general assumption is that the
listener will side with the complainer and support him or her. And
psychologically speaking, a person who is caring and supportive will side
with the complainer, but will also point out the arguments of the other
person!
Try practicing this – complain about your opponent to the third person. But
don’t go with your default reaction immediately. Vent your emotions and
then start reflecting. Once you finish with your side of the argument, you
become the opposite person and start complaining about yourself. State
points from the other person’s perspective. Work your way back. This way,
you force yourself to hear and speak for your opponent. 
All this finally comes down to one major factor – empathy. Though we read
a lot of articles and hear a lot of speeches about this, I wonder if people
practice empathy – including myself. But if you want to bring a positive
change to your emotional health, practicing empathy for even a short period
should do the magic.
Tips to Improve Empathy
Research and studies show that empathy is partly inherent and partly
learned. It is indeed possible to improve your empathy. There are eight
ways to strengthen it, and they are:
Get out of your comfort zone and challenge yourself
When you stick to your comfort zone, you find fewer opportunities to learn
and grow. Take up more challenges and experience the change you are
undergoing, especially when you are no more in your protective and
comfortable zone. Learn a new skill maybe – playing the piano or learning
a new language or developing a new competency. When you do such
things, you will become humble as you are pushed to stay grounded to learn
new things – things that you have no clue about! Modesty enables empathy!
Travel and change of place impart new vigor to the mind (Seneca)

Move away from your usual environment. Travel to new places and explore
their culture, since it will make you appreciate even the little things in
others.
Ask for Feedback
I know I’ve been repeating this for quite a while now, but it is important –
getting feedback is the only way for you to change and grow. Get feedback
on your relationship skills from colleagues, family and friends. Listen to
what they have to say and work on improving your lagging areas. Check
with them to see how you are doing on a periodic basis.
Explore not just the head, but the heart too
Read books that talk about emotions, read literature that explores romantic
relationships or personal connections. This is said to improve empathy – a
study conducted on young doctors proved that reading literature showed
improved empathy in them
.
Put yourself in other’s shoes
Initiate a conversation with people and find out what it’s like to walk in
their shoes. Talk about their concerns and ideas. Check how they handled
the situations. Sometimes you will feel like your problems are much better
compared to the others.
Inspect your partiality
Everyone has hidden biases within them and sometimes it is not so hidden.
When you are biased or partial toward a party, you will lose the ability to
decide rationally. It interferes with your ability to empathize, and most often
these biases are centered on evident factors such as race, age, gender. Are
you partial to a particular group? No? Think again – all of us are!
Be curious
What can I learn from a fresher? What can I learn from a client who is
always self-centered? Cultivate the habit of asking curious questions. The
right questions can lead you toward a stronger understanding of people.
Ask thoughtful questions
Don’t ask questions just for the sake of it. Even if your questions are
provocative, let them be thoughtful.

How to be Empathetic
A recent discovery by the neuroscientists has proved that the multiple
systems of mirror neurons in human brains are responsible for experiencing
empathy. These mirror neurons reflect the actions we examine in others,
causing us to imitate the same action in our brains. For instance, when you
see someone in pain, you experience the same emotion to an extent.
Similarly, when you are with a person who is in an extremely joyful mood,
you reflect the same emotion within you to a particular extent. The
fundamental physiological bases of empathy are the mirror neurons. They
produce a neural Wi-Fi that helps you to connect with people's feelings
around you
.
Though the majority of the people are naturally empathetic, there are the
others who are not. But fortunately, empathy can be learned – research
shows that this particular trait, even if not inborn, can be cultivated through
regular practice. But to achieve this trait and to practice, you will need to
overcome few potential blockades. They are:
Barricade 1 – Not focusing 
Your mirror neurons kick in strongest when you notice and examine a
person’s emotions – eye gestures, body position, facial expressions and
physical appearance. Most often people are distracted by their thoughts or
other stuff that they fail to pay attention to a person – especially when you
multitask.
Solution
Remind yourself of the importance of empathy and how it can lead to
success in your personal and professional life. Motivate yourself to
empathize with the scenario and people. Put away electronic gadgets and
get into active listening mode. Fine-tune your observation skills, especially
the nonverbal cues such as a quick change in facial expressions,
uncomfortable body postures, trying to read the eyes of the person, etc.
Try to improve your nonverbal understanding by watching subtle dramas or
movies with low volume. Make an effort to understand what each character
is saying and read what the character is emoting.
Barricade 2 – Communication Issue

Not knowing how to communicate empathetically even after feeling his or
her emotions.
Solution
Work on your nonverbal expressions; make a conscious effort to notice
what you do (nonverbally) while interacting with people. Check your
micro-expressions, hand movement, body postures, etc. Ask your friends to
give you honest feedback on your nonverbal communication, especially in
situations when you are overwhelmed by emotions.
Check if you have difficulty in being empathetic with specific people. If so,
observe and understand why it happens. Concentrate on your tones. When
people like teachers, friends, politicians, etc. are empathizing with others,
listen to their tone. 
I am sorry that you had to go through this. – Try saying this sentence in
various ways with different voice tones. See if you feel empathetic when
you hear yourself say it.
Be smart enough to leave people alone when they want to be left alone.
Don’t force your presence and empathetic words upon them. They might
not want it at that particular time. For instance, if your friend who is going
through a terrible phase because of her divorce proceedings is sending you
signals to say that she doesn’t want to talk now, respect her feelings and
leave her alone.
Barricade 3 – Not able to show empathy
There are times when you do not feel the same way another person is
feeling, but your brain is instructing you to be empathetic and hear the
person out. This is referred to as cognitive empathy.
Solution
You can always disagree with someone and yet understand the feeling they
are going through. Sometimes it is more important to listen to someone and
not judge them since this will help them realize that you are empathetic
towards them. Communicate honestly in a way that makes the other person
feel that you genuinely understand what he or she feels.
Articulating Your Emotions or Feelings 

Extroverts usually have the natural gift of being better at letting go of their
emotions and feelings, because they are good with words. But
concentration, practice and perseverance can help the others who come
without this natural gift. When you can express the emotions then and there
through body language or writing or by talking with other people, you are
giving no chances for your health to dysfunction.
Researchers have found that it is beneficial to release and let go of
emotions. Multiple studies have proved that repressed negative emotions or
bottled up emotions can lead to increased stress. These researches also
suggest that writing about feelings will give better health outcomes for
people who have experienced traumatic events, asthma patients and breast-
cancer patients. There was also a study conducted on people who lived for
100 years. The result of the study was their positive attitude towards life,
and healthy emotional expression has led them to live for many years. 
Therefore, it is better to articulate and express your feelings and emotions to
maintain physical and emotional health. If you are someone who often finds
it difficult to let go of these emotions, it is time you work on the emotional
quotient in you. That being said, the solution is not to pop the top off that
bottle of emotions and allowing it to spray all over the place. If you do that,
you can never identify the cause of a problem or situation!

Conclusion
Thank you for making it through to the end of Mastering Your Emotions.
We hope that this material has been informative on the topics within and
helpful to you in achieving your goals, whatever they may be. 
Your emotions are here to guide you. Learn as much as you can from them,
and then let them go. Don’t cling to them as if your existence depends on
them. It doesn’t. Don’t identify with them as though they define you. They
don’t. Instead, use your emotions to grow and remember, you are beyond
emotions. How could you not be? They come and go, but you stay.
Always. 

How to Deal with Difficult People
Smart Tips on How to Handle the People Problem and Get the
Best Out of Your life
© Written by:
Katerina Griffith

Book Description
Have you ever encountered someone who is frustrating to the point you feel
like pulling your hair? Has someone ever driven you so crazy that you feel
like screaming out loud?
Look around you – there are people in your life that are difficult to work or
deal with.
You are not alone!
One thing that I have encountered over the years is a fair share of difficult
people – friends, family, and coworkers alike. These are people who don’t
bother to turn in their work within the agreed timelines, people who hold on
tightly to their views that no one else’s matter at all. People who do not
want to collaborate with others in a team. Those who push back on work
they are supposed to do in the first place – so much more!
Here, we will discuss;
-
         
How to identify a difficult person: The big five
-
         
Types of difficult people
-
         
Common traits of difficult people
-
         
Why you must deal with a difficult person
At the workplace
Home
-
         
Identifying the issue
-
         
Three lenses to look at the world
-
         
How to manage your reactions
-
         
Leveraging self-control
-
         
Steps on how to deal with a difficult person
-
         
What do you do when all this does not work?
-
         
Expert techniques to handle difficult people
-
         
Actionable Tips and Trick
So, what are you still waiting for? It is time to handle those difficult people
in your life gracefully and survive the drama they attract.

Read on and find out more!

Introduction
Are there difficult people in your life? I guess that's why you are here. If
you have not encountered difficult people before, then it is high time you
start preparing for when that happens – because it will!
The thing with difficult people is that they often defy logic. Unfortunately,
some of them are blissfully unaware of the kind of damage their attitude has
on the people around them. Others are aware of the negative impact their
actions cause but yet choose to derive their satisfaction from stirring up
chaos and pushing people's buttons hard to know how far they can go.
Whichever the case, their actions create unnecessary complexity, stress, and
strife.
I run a business where we have over 200 employees. As we collaborate on
various projects from time to time, there are instances where we encounter
difficulties in getting a unanimous agreement on something because each
member of the team is strongly opinionated. When I just started the
company, I used to get bothered and so worked up in such situations. Each
time I'd think, "Why are these people too difficult to deal with? What an
irresponsible group…I don't even want to work with them anymore; I will
fire them all!"
After some time, I realized that difficult people are everywhere. Even at
home, I was dealing with a difficult teenage daughter who thought that she
knew everything, and nothing you told her made any sense at all! The truth
is, no matter where you are at or where you go, you will never be able to
hide from such people. While it might be possible to avoid the first 1 or 2 of
them, what of the 3rd
, 5th
, ….nth
ones out there that you have not met yet?
Avoiding these people is not a permanent solution unless you are willing to
quit your job or move away from your home and never have anyone around
you. 
I don’t know about you – but I think that this is not possible! Instead of
running each time and trying to find solace where you will never find it,
why not learn some incredible skills that will help you survive difficult
people with so much ease and grace
?

According to research, it is evident that difficult people can cause those
around them stress. What is even more disturbing is the fact that fear has
been shown to have a lasting negative impact on the human brain. When
you are exposed to stress even just for a few days, the effectiveness of the
neurons in your hippocampus – the part of the brain that is responsible for
memory and reason – becomes compromised. If the stress goes on for
several months, then the neurons are likely to get damaged. In other words,
anxiety is one of the formidable threats to achieving success. If it gets out of
control, then the chances are that your performance is affected.
The good news is that some of the common causes of stress are very easy to
identify. For instance, if your company is working towards getting a grant
for you to function, there is a high chance that you will feel stressed and
learn how to manage it. However, when the source of stress is unexpected,
then chances are that it will take you by surprise, and this is what causes the
most harm.
According to research from the Department of Clinical and Biological
Psychology, Friedrich Schiller University, and exposure to a stimulus that
causes a negative emotion is the same as when one is exposed to difficult
people. The two experiences cause one's brain to have a massive response
to stress. In other words, when one is negative, crueler lazy, that alone is
enough to drive the mind into a state of anxiety.
It is important to note that your ability to manage your emotional feelings
and stay calm even when you are under so much pressure has a direct
association with your performance. According to findings by TalentSmart,
over 90% of top performers in any organization are skilled at managing
their emotions during stress periods. What is interesting is that the reason
why they have control over these stressful situations is that they have
learned how to neutralize difficult people
.
While there are several strategies I have learned over the years from some
of the top performers – who are my role models – on how to effectively
deal with difficult people, I choose to share them here with you. If you are
going to deal with difficult people effectively, then you need an approach
that cuts across the board to the things you can eliminate. What you need to
understand henceforth is that you are in control of how you respond to
different situations more than you can imagine. Take charge today with the

following strategies, and your life and experiences with people will never
be the same again!
Keep reading!

Chapter 1 How to identify a difficult person: The big five
It is important to note that difficult people come in all forms and sizes.
There is a wide range of ways in which difficulty can manifest itself. This
can be someone spreading false rumors, seeing negativity in everything,
lack of cooperation, and those who don't see value in others' contributions
and views, among others. The thing with difficult people is that they see an
opportunity to create trouble. They tend to use passive resistance to bring
down your efforts to move your goals ahead.
Note that at the end of the day, the definition of 'difficult' is something
rather peculiar to every individual. In other words, what you consider
challenging to you may not be the same thing to someone else. Therefore,
you must understand your personality, triggers, and preferences so that you
are better placed to take note of situations and people that get on your
nerves.
Emotional Stability
This is also referred to as neuroticism. You may be wondering what this is.
Well, neuroticism is one of the factors that go a long way in determining
one’s level of emotional stability. How do you react or respond to a
stimulus? If your score is high, then this indicates that you are no stranger
to such emotional feelings as anger, anxiety, and depression. There is a high
chance that you experience these emotions on an ongoing basis. In other
words, if you score highly on neuroticism, this indicates that you are
emotionally reactive as opposed to those who score lower.
The thing with emotional stability is that it indicates how prone you are too
intense stimuli. However, what is important to note is that these emotional
outbursts often tend to erode one's ability to think logically, make complex
decisions, and cope with stress effectively. A high level of neuroticism
manifests with a high level of negativity – which exacerbates the slightest
setback resulting in one having a bad mood
.
On the other hand, a low neuroticism level is indicative that you are
emotionally stable. You are less prone to emotional outbursts and are calm.
However, what you need to note is that having a lower level of neuroticism
does not mean things will always be favorable on your part. Extroversion

has a direct correlation with positivity. If you are going to deal with difficult
people, then you have to learn how to break free from emotional setbacks.
Extraversion
The chances are that you are already aware of introvert-extrovert binary,
right? What part of the scale do you fall? Well, one thing you need to note
is that extraversion is a factor that determines how you interact with the
world around you.
If you rank highly on the Extraversion scale, you are an extravert. The good
thing with this trait is that you tend to possess a can-do it spirits. These are
the kind of people who are always beaming with so much energy. They do
well in social gatherings and when having physical experiences with the
outside world.
On the other hand, are introverts. These are the ones that rank low on the
Extraversion scale. An introvert is someone that is more laid back with a
very minimal need for social interactions. While they are not so positive
minded as the extraverts, the truth is that they are not depressed or shy,
universally. However, you must note the fact that they find physical and
social stimulations somewhat overwhelming. This explains the reason why
prefer solitude – to process their emotions – but also a little bit of social
intimacy.
Openness
Each one of us has a certain level of transparency. It is our level of openness
to experience that goes a long way in determining how one embraces new
ideas and experiences. When one is open to experience, they are said to be
artistically curious, intellectual, and with a very keen sense of beauty. The
good thing with openness to experience is the fact that people with this trait
excel in creative roles often seen in people in the upper echelons of designs
and academia. However, these kinds of people tend to stay away from tasks
that require adherence to a set of guidelines, rules, and regulations.
Well, this is not to say that there are closed-minded people. The truth is that
those who do not rank high on an openness to experience tests are often

termed as "closed." These are the people who often have very few common
interests to others. This explains why they tend to oppose ambiguity and
subtlety – mostly in conversations fiercely – and do not respond well to
change.
While people who are "Closed" don't often light the world with innovations,
the truth is that they have superior roles and performances in such areas as
police work and sales, among others – where protocols, rules, guidelines,
and regulations are what takes precedence over all else.
Agreeableness
This is a measure of one's willingness and ability to engage with others in
social events. While people tend to think that this trait is a universally
beneficial feature from the outset, this is not always the case. Several
people believe that agreeableness is something positive, but the truth is that
just like all other traits, this also has its downsides. For instance, agreeable
people are often racked with indecisiveness – especially when they are
trying to complete high-stress or complex tasks.
The good thing with people with this trait is that they understand the
importance of getting along with others. They hold a high consideration for
others' emotions and goals – even higher than their interests. They are very
friendly, relentless, helpful, and optimistic. To the onlookers, they are
trustworthy and honest.
On the other end of the spectrum lie the disagreeable people - known to
elevate their interests above anything else in this life. The thing with them
is that they do not concern themselves with the wellbeing of those around
them. Instead, they choose to pay attention to advancing their agendas and
goals. Disagreeable people are very unfriendly, uncooperative, and does not
give a rat's ass about anyone else. Such people are often found in science,
business, military, among other professions
.
Conscientiousness
This is a trait that measures the extent to which we can control our
emotions. The truth is, our conscientiousness determines the scope of our
success, possible experiences, and the best way to attain them.

According to research, there is evidence that shows that highly
conscientious people often have been shown to have better control over
their emotions. Even though such people tend to come off as dull and rigid,
the truth is that they do well in whatever they put their minds to – with
proper planning and motivation. The good thing is that they often try as
much as they can to stay away from trouble and making erratic decisions. 
However, the problem arises when plans don't fall into place as anticipated
or fail to meet their set high standards. 
On the contrary, those who have low conscientiousness can delay their
gratifications. This makes them more prone to adhering to their emotions.
While this is something so much fun during parties and is something that
people find valuable when situations arise, the problem is that they prove to
be complicated. This explains the reason why they often get in trouble with
people in authority.
That said, you may be wondering whether these big five traits are universal.
According to a research study that looked into different people from over 50
cultural backgrounds, there is evidence that shows at least five dimensions
can be used in accurately describing personality. This is the reason why
several psychologists believe that the five personality dimensions are not
just universal but also have a genetic link. According to David Buss, a
psychologist, personality traits are a representation of the key
characteristics that shape our social landscapes.
But what factors influence the big five personality traits?
According to research, it is evident that both environmental and biological
factors go a long way in influencing and shaping our personality traits. Two
studies suggest that both nurture and nature have a central role to play in
personality development. One of the studies examined 123 pairs of identical
twins and 127 of fraternal twins. What was interesting was that 53% of the
heritability pointed at extraversion, 44% conscientiousness, 41% each of
neuroticism and agreeableness, and finally 61% for openness.
On the other hand, longitudinal studies suggest that the five personality
traits tend to stabilize as one goes through from childhood to adulthood.

According to one study involving working-age adults, there is evidence that
personality traits stabilized over four years and very minimal change
brought about by adverse life events.
Studies also show that maturation dramatically impacts the personality
traits. As we progress in age, there is a tendency for one to become less
extraverted, open, and neurotic. However, features like conscientiousness
and agreeableness tend to increase with age.
That said, what is essential to bear in mind is that behavior is something
that comes as a result of interaction between one's personality and other
situational factors. The situation in which you find yourself in has a role to
play in how you respond. However, these kinds of responses are consistent
with one’s personality traits.
Wrapping it up
The five personality traits that we have just discussed – extraversion,
agreeableness, neuroticism, openness, and conscientiousness – account for
the difference between people.
For instance, when researchers have studied the personality traits of such
animals like chimpanzees and dogs, the same features are also observed,
plus more. Take a minute to think about dogs, you know – keep at home or
within your neighborhood. What you will notice is that they are different
from each other. Some are more friendly, active, and outgoing than others.
Some are emotionally stable, while others are not. Some are friendly and
agreeable, while some are vicious
.
The chances are that you already know dogs that are very conscientious
than others – in other words, they try too hard to do what is required of
them just so that their master is happy. On the other hand, you probably
know other dogs who don't even care what their master wants. Dogs also
vary in terms of how open they are to new experiences, while others are
more explorative and curious.
The sixth personality that we do not have but animals have is the ability to
be dominant while others are more submissive. While human beings differ
in terms of dominance, humans are more reflective of extraversion than
independent.

Several people wonder how possible it is just, to sum up, personality traits
in only five features. Well, if you think of all the people you already know,
you might realize that they differ much more than the five personality traits.
However, take a minute to think of this; if you take one character at a time
rather than a collective personality, you will start to appreciate how diverse
we all are.
People differ in personality ranging from low to very high on each trait.
Even though each of the personality traits involves a large number of
possible scores along the spectrum, you can choose to simplify this by
thinking of it on a scale of 5. Now, if someone scores from very low,
moderately low, average, moderately high, to very high, this means that we
can give each one a score between 1 and 5.
Now that we have five traits, each one of them has five possible score levels
starting from very low to very high. If you do that, then you can get at least
3,125 possible combinations on all five traits. That means 5 x 5 x 5 x 5 x 5.
This means that if you were to classify people into all possible unique
combinations of the five big traits, you would have to use all the five levels
of each trait.
Additionally, it is essential to note that based on one's standing, the traits
will manifest in quite diverse ways. A character like neuroticism appears to
be different based on where a person stands on that trait. Let us consider
another simple example. If one is high in neuroticism and agreeableness,
they will have more unpleasant emotions - even so, they are still pleasant to
be around. In other words, the fact that they are neurotic means that they
tend to be clingy, annoying but does not necessarily affect other people
much. If that very person is highly neurotic but has low agreeableness, then
you had better watch your back!
When someone is highly emotional and is disagreeable, the truth is that they
will tend to make their problems your problems too. They will be very
difficult to deal with. While neuroticism manifests itself in various ways
depending on their level of agreeableness, what you need to note is that
such combinations change how our behaviors manifest outwardly.

Chapter 2 Types of difficult people
Perfectionists
When I first started my company, it used to take me at least 12 hours to
produce an article that I thought was worthy of being published. My writers
would send in their work, and I spent sleepless nights trying to edit and
come up with the "perfect" piece. The thing with a perfectionist personality
is that nothing will ever be good enough. You will find ways to look for
mistakes, even where there aren't any.
One thing that is important to note is that being a perfectionist is something
that is crippling. There may be that person in the office that is so passionate
about their work is bursting with ideas but unfortunately cannot express
them with unbridled freedom. It is the same thing with perfectionism – it
holds you back because of anxiety, a sense of haunting unfulfillment, and
depression.
Well, so many people think that being a perfectionist is about harboring the
desire to be perfect alone. The truth is that it goes beyond that. You are
merely choosing to derive your self-worth from the world around you. That
explains why you end up being overly sensitive to criticism or rejection,
and you end up believing that you are a stupid worthless failure or bad.
If you are a people-pleaser, then that is a sign of being a perfectionist. The
thing is, seeking perfection often causes people anxiety because all they are
thinking of is how they can be the best. You desire to control the outcome
of your actions just so that you can gain approval, acceptance, praise, and
rewards.
But do you think that the perfectionist in your office knows that they are
obsessive and cynical in their behaviors? Certainly not! Just like I was, they
may not even know that they are perfectionists, let alone putting in efforts
to stop.
So, how do you deal with them
?
Well, the thing with a perfectionist is that they are often detail-oriented,
negative towards others, and sticklers for the rules. If your boss,
subordinate, or colleague is this kind of person, the ways to handle them
vary widely.

Dealing with a perfectionist subordinate
There are different types of perfectionists based on the personality types
that we have discussed in the previous chapter; neurotic perfectionist,
narcissistic perfectionist, hyperattentive perfectionist, and the principled
perfectionist. The thing that these people have in common is that they all
notice details and have very high standards that an average person cannot
even breath close. To deal with them, you must;
Avoid giving them large project scopes
One thing that is important to note is that most perfectionists have
admirable qualities that many people find worthy. However, there are quite
a few of them who choose to hone skills on a small component of a project
instead of paying attention to the bigger picture. If you work with these
kinds of people, it is helpful to assign them to select tasks based on their
skillset.
In other words, you can opt to give them projects that are limited in scope
but are detail-oriented. The truth is that most of them are not willing to
delegate tasks, and the best thing you can do is allow them to work on
projects independently – as long as the project requires a unified vision to
complete.
Appeal to their sense of vanity and empathy
What if your employee is a neurotic or narcissistic perfectionist? Well, these
kinds of people have a powerful desire to please others. The most effective
way to motivate them is to explain to them how their style of work affects
those in the team. Ensure that you phrase it in such a way that they realize
you already know they have high standards – and that you appreciate these
high standards they hold
.
You may say things like, "Mary, you have very high standards, just like me.
That is what this company is all about. However, remember that good
morale is essential for good productivity." What you are merely telling them
is that the best way forward is to give a compliment even where they feel
like there is something to criticize.
Appeal to their self-interest

What you will note is that several perfectionists want to be so perfect –
either because of internal or external motivation. If you find that a
subordinate is treating their colleagues poorly in the workplace just because
they are perfectionists, remind them that such kind of people struggles hard
to climb up the ladder. Remind them that the more they raise the ranks, the
more they have to learn how to compromise for the sake of the whole team.
Say something like, "I know you have been trying to ensure details of the
project have been attended to, and the book does everything. That is great
because if one is going to get the big things right, they will have to start by
getting the little ones right. You are on the right track to the big things.
However, what you need to remember as you progress is that the upper rank
is about looking at the bigger picture. This means that if you focus too hard
on getting 100% success, that will only bog you down. Have a vision for
the next phase and not just a tunnel vision that might cost you more than
you can pay for."
When you put it like that, they will start to realize that 100% is not all that
counts, but achieving the primary goal, however, the approach you take is
what counts at the end of the day.
Dealing with a perfectionist colleague
Choose your battles wisely
When you are dealing with a perfectionist colleague, it is paramount that
you know when to take a stand and when to let go. While this is something
difficult to attain, you must take time to think about how important the issue
at hand is so that you know when the time is right to take a stand
.
The first thing is for you to keep a perspective. Agreeing with what your
boss says does not mean that you have to follow their suggestions to the
letter. While this seems at first as being passive, simply say yes and move
on with your life. This will reduce the chances of stirring up conflict and
stress. Saying yes to what they say does not mean that you have given away
your power. It is quite the opposite because this will set you free from
paying attention to their demands.
Ask them what it is they would like to do differently

Did you know that criticism is one of the best ways perfectionists use to
hide their insecurities? While this is upsetting, it always helps to remember
that this is their defensive mechanism. They may just be lashing out
because they feel insecure about one thing or the other.
When you take time to ask them what their preferred methods of going
about something is, you are merely disarming those insecurities. Try telling
them that you care about their emotions. When they realize that you
understand their feelings, they will start to feel secure – and less critical in
the future. Say things like, "I see that you are upset about the outcome of
this project. Would you like a chance to talk about it?"
Stick to your guns
Think about it, is the issue you and your colleague have relevant? If so, then
you are right to stick to your guns. There is a chance that no one at the
office is aware that your colleague is a perfectionist. If there is something
you consider relevant to you and disagree on, then realize that it is your
right to spit it out.
Don't get me wrong- by disagreeing, I don't mean that you should argue
about it. Simply state what it is that you disagree with and then move on.
You don't have to let that disagreement to define the kind of relationship
you both have. Simply say things like, "I understand where you are coming
from. I just think that our perspectives are quite different on this one.
"
If they stir up an argument, simply walk away. No one will blame you for
walking away from a case.
Keep distance
One of the simplest ways you can stay away from conflict is keeping a safe
distance from it. If you have to work together on a project, simply remind
them that each one of you has their roles and responsibilities and that you
will do yours to your supervisor's satisfaction and not theirs.
You always have the choice of disengaging. If they keep going on and on
about inconsequential details, all you have to do is remain noncommittal.
Simply make your escape with such statements as “Huh, I didn’t know you
felt that way.”

Dealing with a perfectionist supervisor
Manage your manager
This is simply what I often refer to as ‘managing up.’ The main aim of
doing this is to help you identify the personality of your boss – their
strengths and weaknesses – so that you can effectively tailor your
conversation to match theirs.
The problem with a perfectionist boss is that they always desire to be in
charge. At first, this may be self-evident, but the truth is that it is not. Ask
them what their expectations are. When you do this, you are giving them an
enhanced feeling of being in control. This also protects you from providing
an arbitrary response. While perfectionism may be unreasonable –
inherently – you must try as much as possible not to be. The trick is for you
to pay attention to their start points, endpoints, or boundaries to lower the
chances of getting them angry.
Push information their way
Once you know what it is that your perfectionist boss is looking for, simply
give them – don't wait until they ask for it. The more you offer them a
wealth of information they are interested in, even before they can ask for it,
the less likely they will think of you as a flawed person. This way, you
escape conflict by being in the right place, at the right time doing the right
thing.Remember, out of sight, out of mind!
Be at peace with the fact that there is only so much you can do
The fact that you are a subordinate means that you have very little influence
on your superior's personality traits. There are times when they are critical
and others overly-critical. But the good news is that you can still earn their
trust and respect. The only downside to that is that you might have to
endure too many interactions that are draining. Just do what is right and let
the rest be decided by fate!
Seek mentorship and support elsewhere
Now, you have a perfectionist boss who is supposed to be your mentor, but
the truth is that they have set unreasonable standards you cannot attain. This

means that if you take them as mentors, you will strain yourself too much
just to earn their praise.
Perfectionists make very poor mentors!
While we all need support at one point or another, you cannot find it from
your perfectionist boss. The truth is that such people tend to hurt your self-
image even more. The last thing you want is having your self-worth
determined by people who already think that everyone but them is worthy.
Jump ship when you have to
Consider that dealing with such a boss is something that you have to adapt
to and not accept it indefinitely. You must know when to cut the cord. The
trick is for you to earn their recommendation and move on. This might
mean that you seek employment elsewhere.
Start planning your exit strategy as early as you can.
Control Freak
s
Let us consider the following situations;
You want to hang out with a friend you met recently, but then your long-
term friend insists that you should not because you have not known them
well enough to hang out with. This friend asks that if you are going to hang
out, you must tell them where exactly you will be meeting when - date and
time.
Does this sound familiar?
Well, the truth is that this has happened to us – whether by partners, friends,
or family members.
Such kind of people is referred to as control freaks. Dealing with such types
of people is not fun – no matter how much they mean to you. It could be
that they are doing it because their heart is in the right place, or they mean
you no harm, but this is entirely lethal force you don't want to mess with.
You may be thinking, but who exactly is a control freak? Well, a control
freak simply refers to perfectionists who feel vulnerable to anything that
seems to them as uncontrollable.

The term “control freak” is a psychology-related slang. It describes a person
who wants to dictate what everyone does and how everything is done
around them. People who have an extremely high need for control over
others are considered as control freaks.
Their main attempt is to hide their vulnerabilities by ensuring that
everything within their surroundings is under their control. They try hard to
manipulate people and put so much pressure on them just so that they don't
have to change themselves. Everywhere you go, you will spot a control
freak – whether at home, school, or workplace.
With the right strategies up your sleeve, you can deal with them and live a
happy life.
Get rid of turf wars
So many control freaks often feel the need to retain control of each aspect
of their work just because they do not want to lose their status. It could be
that there was a time when they were the only employee in the office and
were used to doing all things by themselves. The problem with these kinds
of people is the fact that they are very difficult to handle because of their
resistance to change – especially growth and expansion.
The real problem is that they feel that the person who has just joined the
workplace is out to get "their" job. At first, they did not need any help, and
now, they still think that they don't need any help whatsoever. It does not
matter how competent the other person is because the control freak will not
welcome any ideas or suggestions that are not theirs.
To deal with such a person; what you need to do is get rid of turf wars by
ensuring that you engage them fully during role allocation. Allow them to
create their projects so that they feel as though they have a sense of tenure.
If it is possible, you can separate their duties from those of other employees.
Once they see that their roles are highly valuable to the company, they will
ease off on their controlling attitude – giving the others ample space and
time to go about their duties with minimal interruptions.
Stroke their ego
According to research, there is evidence that shows control freaks are often
very insecure. The thing with such people is that they often fight just so that

they can retain control, considering that they are not sure of themselves.
Such people hate trying new things and desperately are afraid of new
situations and events. They feel that by retaining control over their work
surrounding – something familiar to them – they can keep their insecurities
in check.
Well, unfortunately, the approach they use in controlling things and people
around them depicts their domineering and overbearing attitudes. This is
precisely what stands to undermine their self-esteem and confidence further
– especially if they spent the time to evaluate their behaviors honestly.
To deal with such kind of people, you need to find a way to help them
regain their control so that they can feel secure. The best way to do this is
for you to appeal to their ego. While they may come off as confident
people, the truth is that inside, they are fragile. They are just hiding under
that assertive shell so that they can win others' approval. Before they can
offer you any help, go to them and ask them to help you with a difficult
task. Even when you feel as though things are not looking up, simply
compliment them on anything so that they can relax and make it easier for
them to relinquish control over small things.
Stand your ground
There are instances when you feel that there is nothing you can do to
appease someone who is controlling. This is because they firmly believe
that they know best. They will even go as far as throwing tantrums if they
don't get their way.
The best way to handle them is to try and assess what it is that you disagree
on. If it is something important, you should stand your ground. While this
may stir up conflict and friction at the workplace, it will help them know
that not everyone can toy around. The trick is that you choose your battles
with caution. If it is an issue of how the office should be cleaned, ask
yourself whether it is something you would want to die for.
Take note of the little things
Just like stroking their ego, taking note of small things is about paying
attention to what their needs are.  Whatever it is, ensure that you pay
attention to these tendencies. Reassure them that they are doing an

incredible job. Tell them that the place would not be as excellent as it is
without them. Praise them for their underlying qualities, and before long,
you will realize that their controlling attitude reduces significantly as they
soak in praise
!
Give a little
Is there someone in your office or home that thinks they know so much
more than anyone else? Does it even matter that they believe this? Well, the
truth is that in the grand scheme of things, the question that truly matters is
if this person is involved in all your daily activities and your ability to do
your job. If they don't stand in the way of you getting your job done, the
best way to tame them would be to give to her selfish and immature attitude
– and simply move on.
Ask questions
One thing you will note about a control freak is that they often are
obnoxious. Several people around them dismiss them because of their bossy
attitude and desire to control every little thing. Well, the truth is that in
reality, they just desire to be part of something – and can offer valuable
input – if only people would listen.
Therefore, the next time you encounter a control freak at home or in the
office, and they want to boss you around, ask them pointed questions about
how they want this or that to be done. If they insist on installing the lights in
a specific manner, ask them why they think it cannot be done differently. It
could be that they have a phobia for heights, and that is why they insist that
it be done a different way than that avoids falling. This allows you to realize
that these control issues do not hurt and have the potential of affecting their
security in the workplace or at home.
If they are adamant that stationeries go to the right side of their desk and
then picture frames on the left, demand for an explanation, there are times
when you will realize that they don't have a valid reason for that. If it is not
their desk, then that is unacceptable. However, if it is their desk, the best
thing is for you to oblige. The point is for you to help them confront their
obsessions so that you can know whether there is an actual control issue
going on or there is something else subtler that goes beyond stationeries
.

Spending time with them talking about these issues will help both of you
resolve the problems amicably so that you can both get back to what
matters and be productive at it.
If necessary, enlist the help
What if you are not able to reach a point of compromise with someone who
is a control freak? In such a case, you can seek advice from your superiors
or line manager. You must try to explain to them that your intention is not to
cause disharmony in the office. Instead, what you are interested in is
creating an atmosphere where each one of you can thrive.
This will also go a long way in helping the boss understand that you are not
there to complain but that you have the company's best interest at heart. You
must tell your manager that the other person's tendencies are getting in the
way of you working and reaching your goals. Ask them to clarify what your
roles and responsibilities are at the office. There is a chance that the
management has no idea of what the situation is like, and asking them to
step in will help a great deal to clear things up.
It is also essential that you are always ready to offer possible solutions to
the issue so that your bosses are aware that you are also a team player.
While working with someone who is controlling can be difficult, realize
that it does not have to be impossible! Just a little effort aimed at
understanding their motivations and alleviating their insecurities will go a
long way in helping you work together in harmony.
Narcissists
Narcissists are people who are ready challenging to work mainly because of
their big ego and vanity. The problem with them is that they pretend to
know it all. If you have such a person at home or the workplace, you must
determine where they are real experts and where they are pretentious
.
If they are real experts, then your research should prove that they are
knowledgeable in that area because of the validity of their ideas and
information. You must not subjugate their ideas or permit any
condescension. The trick is for you to be respectful when dealing with
them. Where you feel they are wrong, simply correct them without being
confrontational or overly aggressive.

Gossips
With the advent of technological devices, gossiping is no longer restricted
to the water cooler. Today, people gossip with ease of emails and social
media platforms. What is interesting is that in spite of all these
technological innovations, chatting today at the office or home can be
traced back to one single individual who always knows and shares
information – whether true or false.
If you have such a person in your life, the best way to deal with them is to
avoid sharing information with them or someone close to them. You must
practice remaining cordial when around them. Whenever they try to pry
into your life or that of others, gently pull away from the conversation and
change the subject into something more productive and useful
.
Bullies
These people are a fact of life, and the most unfortunate thing is that by the
time they are graduating high school, if they will not have changed, then
chances are that they will never change. These are the kind of people who
end up taking their insecurities to the workplace, marriages, and
friendships. The problem is thinking of others as weak and susceptible and
hence use that to be vindictive. They will always try to get other people to
gang up against one or more people around them.
When you are dealing with such a person, you must try as much as you can
to hide your weaknesses. Stand up to them, and don't tolerate them being
respectful to you. Don't get me wrong; I don't mean that you get aggressive
with them. However, you must not allow them to interfere with your life. If
they try to bring their attitude to your place of work or home, simply ask
them to leave.
Slackers
These are the kind of people who are not motivated and are unreliable.
They are the kind that cannot carry their weight. If you have never worked
with one of these, thank you, God! They are the kind of people who will
leave all the work to you. When you are asked to partner with them, ensure
that the job assigned to them is done to completion. If not, then you should
be prepared to take on their portion of work.

Trust me; they are out there to let people down – beware!
Pessimists
Some people view the world through shades of gray. They are the
pessimists whose primary agenda is to dismiss every idea someone comes
up with without necessarily offering an alternative. Much of their time is
spent complaining about this or that. If you have such a person in your
team, the trick is to remain positive. Remind them that you cannot just sit
and do nothing; instead, they should give their contributions as well. 
Oh, and be prepared to shoulder much of the work
!
The hostile or bossy
The one thing I have learned when dealing with these kinds of people is that
strength and tact goes a long way. People who feel as though they have
been wronged tend to be violent.
The other trick is for you to try as much as you can to help them meet their
needs without necessarily being aggressive or discriminatory about it. Try
to stay away from any interaction with them that stirs up intense emotions
like violence – as they say, don't hang out with the enemy when they are
carrying a weapon or drinking! Check your actions to ensure that they don't
stir up anger. In short, try not to be a pushover.
The worst thing you can do is strongly retaliate against an aggressive
person. Remember that hostility often begets hostility. The best thing you
can do is try to divert their attention to something more meaningful. This
way, their anger tends to go down. Try to explain to them more about the
situation pointing out common interests so that they are open to calm and
rational ways of resolving the issue at hand
.
The chronic complainer
These are the kind of people who will always find fault in everything you
do. They will go to the extent of blaming you. They pretend as though they

know all that should be done when, in fact, they are never open to
correcting the situation themselves in the first place.
If you want to cope with these kinds of people, the first thing is for you to
pay attention to all they have to say and then ask questions to seek
clarification – even though you have been falsely accused or are guilty. The
secret is for you not to complain, apologize, or be overly-defensive. If you
do, then you are causing them to restate their concerns in a more heated
manner. You must be severe and supportive of it. Accept the facts and get
all the complaints in writing. Involve them in the process so that you all
actively find the solution. Rather than dwelling too much on what is wrong,
try to get them to think of what should be done.
The Super-Agreeable
Has anyone ever agreed with everything and anything you say to the point
that they make you angry? Well, these are the super-agreeable people.
While it is a good thing to get along with people at home and the
workplace, some people agree with every idea you give, and then when
things suddenly go south; they back down.
What you need to note about these people is that they are after approval. We
all come from different family backgrounds with diverse upbringings. Some
learned that the best way to get love is through pretense. In the same way,
those people who are super-agreeable tend to promise heaven on earth but
cannot deliver that. They will tell you, "I will submit the report tomorrow,
or I will help you run errands." Don't be fooled; all they are doing is
buttering you up.
The best way to handle them is to assure them that it is okay to say "No"
when they feel like they will not be able to deliver. It is okay to speak the
truth even when it is hard to spit it out. You must take time to ask them to
try and be candid so that they can find it easy to come out and be frank
about anything. When you support them overcome this habit, they will stop
making promises they know they couldn't possibly keep. Show them that
you value the relationship you have, and the truth won't hurt. Ensure that
you let them know you are ready to compromise, considering that they will
be fair and just.

Critics
“It’s hard to kiss the lips at night that chew your butt all day long.”
-
         
Former Congressman Ed Foreman
Criticism is not all that bad, but the truth is that there are times and places
for it. Debates are where the most effective solutions are birth. This is
where some of the best minds challenge every point of view in the room.
But is that always the case with criticism? Are there demanding critics?
Indeed, there are so many demanding critics whose criticism is destructive.
They are not seeking answers. They are not even concerned with the give
and take that leads to a strong team and a consensus. They are the people
who behave like politicians. I like to think of critics as spectators and not
players.
Look around your office; is there is a critic there? Is your spouse or friend a
critic?
Often, you will notice that critics are the kind of people who will always be
quick to point a finger, and yet when their help is needed, they will not lift
one. They are the kind of people who will not cooperate within the project,
and it is their negative attitude that makes it hard to work and achieve the
set goals in a team
.
Liars
"Honesty pays, but it doesn't seem to pay enough for most people."
-
         
Kim Hubbard
This saying is sad, but it is probably right. Think about it, if you have a
project you are working on, and the members of your team don't want to
cooperate and are dishonest, will the project mandate be fulfilled?
The chances are that you will not even have a team to work in the first
place. Honesty goes a long way in fostering cooperation, teamwork, and
productive working relationships. If you lack trust, then you can't work
together peacefully. You cannot be productive.

If you think about lies, the truth is that they come in so many different
forms. It could be that little white lie you tell a client to impress them or
those you say your spouse so that they are not upset. They could be the lies
you show potential employers when you are trying to get them to hire you.
One recruiter once said, the closest anyone comes to perfection is when
they are trying to fill out a job application. There are three kinds of lies,
according to the former Prime Minister of Great Britain; statistics, lies, and
darned lies.
Whatever kind of lies you tell; the truth is that it is difficult to deal with a
liar. The thing with lying is that it is rarely necessary. It does not matter how
distasteful the truth is, the truth is more comfortable to accept than a lie.
Once you tell one lie, it spirals and continues for as long as you take it. By
the time you realize it, you have caused so much harm than good. The thing
with liars is that they will always tell a lie to cover up the first lie.
If there is someone that is always lying, simply talk to them about the value
of the truth. Don't try to look down on them. Help them always tell the truth
by holding them accountable for their word – bitter or sweet.

Chapter 3 Common traits of difficult people
Everything is about them
Have you ever noticed that there are people who are masters at spinning
things – conversations and situations – so that it is about them? Such people
often have a way of doing all it takes to bring the discussion back to them
when they realize that it has veered off, and the spotlight is no longer on
them.
The truth is, interacting with such people is boring. The reason is that
whenever you start discussions with them, you are almost sure that the story
will be tied to them – how they spent the weekend, what their thoughts are,
what ideas they have, or everything else going on in their lives.
Many people ask themselves why they even do it in the first place. Well, the
truth is that difficult people are not necessarily cruel. The thing is that they
are experiencing a slight immaturity in their personal growth.
They are so used to unabashed attention such that everything is about them
and have no time to think of what others think or have to offer too. In
worst-case scenarios, everyone that is around them is only there to boost
their ego and make them the center of the universe.
They are verbally toxic
Difficult people always have something nasty to say about almost
everything. If they are not gossiping, then they are blaming or whining or
busy shouldering off responsibilities to the next person they want to bully or
use.
In short, these people don't even know when the right time to shut up is.
They will always run their mouths about this or that – a typical master
storyteller. If someone at home or the workplace experience something even
in private, they want to be the first ones to break the news to the whole
world – especially those who might be interested
.
However, if the news does not seem so unusual, they choose to stand on it
on their own two feet. What is worst is that they try to add in salt and sugar
just so that the story is compelling – talk of fiction!

Just like the first trait, this reason why they choose to do this is so that they
can be the center of attention. What is funny is that instead of making the
whole story about them, they choose to be the traveling poet who is busy
distributing the news everywhere. They do this so that they can control
everything that people know.
They paint themselves as victims
The other trait you will notice with difficult people is that you cannot tell
them anything because they tend to portray themselves as less-than-
charming. For instance, if you call them out on something, they will
suddenly become emotional and start apologizing profusely. As they do
this, they give people a million and one reasons for their actions.
It could be that they are behaving in this manner because they were not
brought up in a loving family, or that they are insecure about something
from their childhood. It could also be that they have an incredibly rare
mental disorder that causes them to act this way.
Their behavior is a prime example of what deflection is all about. While
there are some of these people who are consciously unaware of what they
are doing, there are instances where some have adopted this kind of defense
mechanism from their childhood into adulthood, and everything seems
reasonable to them.
Often oblivious to the obvious
Whenever you meet someone trying, one thing you need to bear in mind is
that you are not the only one that feels that way. Someone difficult to you
will always be trying to everyone around them.
The lives of difficult people are filled with several people interested in
confronting their challenging behavior. You will find their families sighing
about it, people looking at them with sneering at them by the roads, or
coworkers having disgruntled faces whenever they meet by the corridors.
However, no matter what happens, these signs don't seem enough for them.
They choose to be oblivious about it all so that they can keep behaving in
the same way.

The main reason why they do this is that they have an abundance of pride or
are simply not aware of their behavior.
They count everything
The thing with difficult people is that they will never do anything and be
quiet about it. They have to go on and on about what they have done.
Whenever they are asked to do anything that goes beyond their usual roles
and responsibilities, they will ensure that you pay them for it. Even once
you have paid them, they will remind you over and over again that they did
you a favor and will use that to get what they want.
The main reason is that they are too self-absorbed – something that causes
them to be too self-serving. Each minute they use doing a task that is not
directly linked to their interests; they will live in anguish.
That said, a difficult person is one that will never exemplify all the typical
traits we have discussed in this chapter. Instead, they often tend to have a
different blend of problematic characteristics that cause them to be
complicated.
We all certainly have at least one or two of these traits that make as
demanding in one way or the other. By recognizing these features, we can
act on them, work on fixing them – whether in us on the people around us –
so that we can all live a happy and free life.

Chapter 4 Identifying the complicated issue
What will get you ready and self-aware whenever tough situations
involving difficult people arise is if you choose to turn the situation inward
and analyze each trigger and reaction. According to Elizabeth B. Brown,
there is a wide range of questions you need to reflect on for you to better
understand the root cause of issues and why the other person involved is
driving you crazy. These questions include;
-
         
What are the emotional tornadoes that the problematic person
brings to your life?
-
         
What is your reaction to the difficult person?
-
         
How do they respond to your reactions?
-
        
If the other person in your life is the cause of all problems, have
you found ways to grow unhealthy actions and responses towards
them?
-
         
Is it possible that you are a difficult person driving others crazy?
-
         
If that is the case, how do they choose to respond to your
actions and responses?
When you are trying to deal with a difficult person, the last thing you want
is to feed into your frustrations. The truth is that when you do this, you are
just continuing a vicious cycle that will not end. The problem with most
people is that they tend to see or to hear things the way they want to and
then interpret them based on assumptions rather than facts and actions.
Unfortunately, we often lack information on why one shows up the way
they are. This explains the reason why often, we fill in the blanks with our
theories and assumptions because we don't have the facts or do not want to
find them in the first place
.
Mitigating These Situations
If you are going to deal with the difficult people in your life objectively,
you have to be willing to separate facts from assumptions or theories. It is
often beneficial to try and separate ourselves from our negative emotional
feelings that we may be experiencing at that very moment. While this may
be easier said than done, those who can get to this point can arm themselves

with the power of friendly and productive interactions with people who
make them cringe.
To achieve this, you must use the three different lenses to have a general
outlook of the world. These lenses include;
Realistic optimism lens
To use this lens, you must start by asking yourself two simple questions
whenever you feel that someone has unfairly treated you. These questions
include;
What is the factual information in this case?
Is there a story I am telling myself about these facts? What is it that I
anticipate as an outcome?
The reverse lens
This kind of glass requires that you look at the world around you through a
glass of the person that triggered you. Well, don't get me wrong – I don't
mean that you should sacrifice your own opinion just so that you can make
others happy. Instead, you must widen your perspective. Using the reverse
lens, you need to ask yourself;
-
        
 
What is the other person feeling? How do their feelings make
sense?
-
         
What is my responsibility in all these?
You may see this as counterintuitive at first, but the truth is that this is
something compelling in helping you reclaim your value. Whenever you
feel threatened, you must find a way to appreciate yourself and the other
person, too – this is essentially what we refer to as empathy.
The long lens
Did you know that at times the worst fears you have about the other person
may turn out to be true? Most difficult people I know often derive
satisfaction from unreasonably bullying others. If you choose to see things
from their perspective, that might not make sense at all. These are the
people that will take credit for your work. When and if this happens to you,

the first question you need to ask yourself is, "irrespective of what I feel at
this moment, is there a way I can learn and grow from this experience?"
Realize that when you are dealing with difficult people – irrespective of
what their personality traits are – there are essential steps that you must take
to make the best of the whole situation. You can work hard towards finding
a more productive outcome. We will discuss this in detail in the next
chapter.
How to manage your reactions
Managing your reactions and emotional feelings are all about taking in deep
breathes. According to research, slow and deep breaths go a long way in
triggering something below the spine – referred to as the Vagus nerve –
which transmits neurotransmitters to the brain to calm down.
You must ensure that you take a moment to reflect on how you are feeling.
The most important thing is for you to ask yourself how you would like to
respond to those emotional feelings. Is it possible for you to create a good
outcome from the situation
?
Well, this may feel at first as though it is an overkill. However, realize that
this will get your brain out of its automatic response. You will not feel that
negativity, sharpness, and defensiveness anymore. When you force yourself
to think of ways that create positive outcomes, your brain automatically
assumes a positive mode of thinking.
Leveraging self-control
If you are going to handle every difficult situation with a difficult person in
an amicable manner, you must know yourself. When you have a clear sense
of who you indeed are, what it is that stirs up the tension, and where your
limits are, you will be better off socializing with people however difficult
they may prove to be. You must learn how to stay calm, develop your
awareness and skills in emotional intelligence so that you can effectively
manage your reactions to every frustrating situation.
Today, challenge yourself to always start by seeking to understand the
situation at hand better. When you have more clarity about the situation –
by asking questions – you will not only manage your reactions better but

also help you find a mutually satisfactory outcome. Reflect on what it is
that you consider a satisfactory result before you can interact with difficult
people so that you better place to keep your focus on what truly matters in
the first place.
The other trick is for you to ensure that you stick to the facts and
acknowledge your emotions. When you make use of examples rather than
interpretations, you will be able to keep your interactions with difficult
people in check. Before you can respond to what it is that they said, ensure
that you paraphrase and check the accuracy of their words so that you have
a good understanding of what they mean rather than choosing to make
assumptions by hearing what you want to hear. When you check for the
accuracy of the information first before responding, this is an indicator that
you want to work with others effectively.
When you respond by stating your emotions or what impact their words
have on you, this can be a great nudge that will help the other person realize
that what they are doing is wrong and hurtful. If there is something you
think is not right, it is better if you seek the help of others.
The truth is that you are not alone in this.
Some so many other people have been through what you are experiencing
at the moment. Their experiences may have been productive when dealing,
working, or interacting with someone difficult. When you seek their advice
or coaching from someone experienced, this can go a long way in helping
you overcome. Research shows that when you talk about your feelings, you
will be in a better position to reframe the whole situation to a place where
you can effectively facilitate a positive result.
Where necessary, ensure that you keep records. There are times when things
get a little bit more abrasive to the point where you run the risk of hitting an
end-state you never intended in the first place. If the interaction gets to the
point where it is toxic, you must start making intentional efforts to
document them. This means that when things begin to go south, you will
have an excellent map to lead you to a place of restoration and peace
.
Chapter 5 Developing Coping and Negotiation strategies

As you may already have learned, difficult people are everywhere. There is
a chance that you, too, are difficult. The truth is that several people struggle
to go through periods where they are not in their best behaviors. If you
desire to maintain a healthy working relationship with someone difficult,
then it is high time you learned some of the most practical and helpful
coping and negotiation strategies that will make your life easy.
Here are some;
Method 1 Approach the problematic person
Step 1 Choose your battles carefully
When you are butting heads with someone difficult, the most important
thing for you is to decide when you think your efforts will yield fruit – that
is when you go ahead to discuss the issue at hand. Realize that not every
fight that comes your way is worth fighting. The sooner you realize that
battles are to be chosen wisely, the better you will be.
In an ideal world, both you and the difficult person would simply set your
differences aside and make compromises. While this is often impossible,
what you need to ask yourself in such a situation is whether the issue is so
distressing that you must address it right there and then. Consider your
relationship with this person. If you are at loggerheads with your boss or
someone in authority, then the sooner you accept the things you cannot
change, the happier you will be. If the issue arises between you and a
member of your family, then you have to choose between saving your time,
efforts, and grief, or whether enabling a bad behavior is a preference.
Take a step back and think whether by fighting the battle, you stand to win.
You can only take on someone that irks you once you have assessed the
whole situation and consider whether there is a possible resolution to it. If
the timing is not right, then take time to formulate a plan, seek help, wait
for the right time or find another practical option
.
Step 2 Take a pause
Before you respond to any situation, the first thing is for you to take in a
deep breath. This will allow you to recollect all your thoughts, calm your
mind, and your emotional feelings. If you are dealing with a problematic
person via a mobile text message or email or other digital means, try as

much as you can not to send anything that might stir up the war further.
Allow your stress levels to come down first before you can approach the
other person and reason together.
Try also to have a neutral meeting place where you both can discuss the
issue. For instance, you could talk over the issue while taking a walk or
doing something else. The importance of this is to try and limit one-on-one
negative interaction.
Step 3 Clearly state your needs with assertive communications
The thing with difficult people is that when you try to communicate with
them and have a reasonable discussion, they will try to manipulate you or
twist your words around. The best way you can avoid that is by using the ‘I’
statement instead of ‘you’ that may sound accusative.
Let us consider an instance where someone has been consistently late to
work the whole week. Now, if their boss is the difficult one, simply say, "I
understand that you are mad at me for being late this week. That is precisely
how I would feel. Unfortunately, our subway line is under construction,
hence the constant delays at the station. My apologies for making you wait
every morning this week. "
This is different from saying something like: "You are such an unreasonable
person for expecting me to get to work on time when the subway is under
construction. You don't care about anything but your work. If you did, you
could have already paid attention to the news and known that the line had
issues."
The first response is the best one. It shows your remorse for being late, your
respect for the boss, and your plan to resume routine once the subway has
been completed. You must try as much as possible to sandwich your
response while talking to someone difficult. Always start with a positive
comment to show how much you value the relationship between the two of
you. Then head right into the tough part of the conversation. Finally,
complete it with a positive remark like thanking them for lending you a
listening ear.
Step 4 Keep being polite

My grandmother always said that being polite is something that will not
cost you anything but will earn you every good thing. The same applies
when dealing with someone difficult. It does not matter what the difficult
person's response is because what truly counts is how you respond to it. If
you keep your cool, things will always not escalate out of control.
Several people get in the trap of name-calling and abusive behaviors. The
trick is for you to take a step back, take in a deep breath, and then give your
response politely. Try as much as you can not allow yourself to sink into the
other person's level. The calmer you remain, the higher the likelihood of the
other person noticing and trying to mirror your behavior.
It all starts with how you respond!
Ensure that you do it right.
Step 5 Stick to the facts
Have you ever tried arguing with someone whose speech is all over the
place – throws around claims and accusations – without really taking the
time to substantiate their claims? This can be annoying!
When dealing with a difficult person, the trick is to keep your conversation
short, clear, and to the point. It does not add any value bogging it all down
with too many unnecessary details that will only stir up negative emotions.
The chances are that you will not successfully get to them enough for them
to see your point of view. There is no need to convince them. Simply state
what took place, and don't try to explain yourself
.
You must avoid all forms of triggers. If you always fight about holidays
with your brothers, stay away from the whole topic. Instead, allow someone
neutral to mediate. Don’t try to be defensive. Yes, you might want to argue
your point, but if it is with a difficult person, you had better skip the whole
argument. It does not add any value trying to prove you are right. Let the
situation stay as neutral as you possibly can.
Step 6 Minimize your interactions
It is one thing to be hopeful about dealing with the issues you have with the
difficult person and get the desired outcome. However, the best advice you
can give yourself is to try and avoid spending too much time with them. If

you must interact, then keep it short. You can excuse yourself from all
conversations or even bring on a third-party. Throughout the interview,
ensure that you stay positive and always try to calm down afterward. Just
accept that this problematic person might never be the colleague, neighbor,
friend, or sibling you ever wanted to have – and that is okay.
Step 7 Talk to allies
If you are not getting along with someone and you think that you should,
then it helps to find a potential mediator to help bring the two of you
together. If you are colleagues, then perhaps your boss can help make the
situation better. If the conflict is within your family, then you can reach out
to a mutual neutral party to help you negotiate. The point is for you always
to seek to share complaints with those you trust only.
Method 2 Change your mindset
Step 1 Realize that there will always be difficult people anyway
As we have already mentioned, you will ever encounter difficult people
everywhere you go. There will always be people out there who are looking
for someone to hurt. The key here is for you to learn how you can deal with
such people. While they may be impossible to avoid, you must take time to
study their personality traits so that you better place to deal with them.
For instance, if the person is a hostile type, you may notice that they are
cynical, think that they are always right, and are argumentative. These are
mostly people who do well in authority or power roles. If it is someone that
is emotionally sensitive, they will always look for insults – are easily
offended, hence choose to use textual approaches when expressing their
disappointments and anger. Egotists, on the other hand, are concerned with
their selfish interests without really caring much about what others want –
often loathe compromise, ungrateful and insensitive. Finally, Neurotic types
are those who are anxious, overly critical, and pessimistic.
Step 2 Increase of frustration tolerance
You can control a bird from building a nest on your head, but you cannot
prevent them from crossing over your head. In other words, the other
person's behavior is something that is beyond your control, but your
reaction to them is within your control. You are the one to choose whether

or not to engage them. To achieve this, you must be ready to build your
frustration tolerance – which involves you taking the lead at challenging
irrational beliefs that might contribute to stress, anger, and outbursts.
When you are interacting with a difficult person, you may think that you are
unable to deal with them. Those are just irrational thoughts trying to scare
you off. The best approach is for you to take in a deep breath and then
question the validity of that thought.
In reality, you can deal with anything you put your mind to. If your mother-
in-law is trying to micromanage you in your own house, you will not go
crazy because you can deal with that. You are stronger than you give
yourself credit. The trick is for you to fine-tune your mind to handle it.
Instead of stressing over it and causing yourself harm, take in a deep breath
and hand her some work to do so that she is occupied. Watch the words you
use and ensure that they are rational
.
Step 3 Examine your behavior
If you find that people continuously attack you, then the chances are that
you are attracting the wrong crowd. If you are overly negative, the chances
are that you will attract a group of pessimistic people who will flock around
you.
To deal with fire, you have to arm yourself with fire. To attract positivity,
you have to engage in positive behaviors. Think back to all the negative
experiences that you might have gone through and ask yourself what your
role was in them. How did you respond to the other person's behavior? At
the office, there may be someone that always picks on you – how you talk,
dress, work, or do things at work – how do you respond to them? Do you
have the power to stand up for yourself?  Take time to recognize all your
strengths and weaknesses so that you are better placed to confront the
difficult person in a way that puts them in their place.
Step 4 Beware of your perceptions of others
Have you ever thought that maybe the reason why your friend is acting up
is that they are going through a rough patch in their lives? While that is no
excuse for their behavior, you must not be quick to judge others behavior.
Take time to practice empathy. Simply take a step behind and reflect on

how you would respond if you were in a similar situation. Your sensitivity
to differences in personality might just be the reason why you hand a wide
range of conflicts.
The trick is for you to learn how to practice acceptance. Take in a deep
breath and look at them with such compassion. Talk to them with so much
calm and tell them that you see that they are suffering and in pain. Let them
know that you accept the fact that they are scared and anxious, even if you
don’t understand the reason behind their situation. Let them also know that
their situation is making you anxious.
The truth is, when you accept the situation just the way it is, you let go of so
much tension that might have stirred up resistance and conflict between the
two of you. Yes, you may not understand why your client blew up at you as
they did. Rather than becoming angry and snapping back at them, consider
the possibility that they may be hurting inside. Whether the reason is valid
or not, it will help you stay calm and not yield into the power of negativity
.
Chapter 6 Steps on how to deal with a difficult person
If you ask any manager or coach, they will tell you that there is always that
one employee that is not so great to work with. As it turns out, management
is still there to ensure that within the company's landscape, they are there to
oversee the performance of all other employees within their department.
This does not mean that being a manager or parent or in a leadership
position means that you are not a difficult person to work with. Even those
in authority can prove very difficult to deal with, whether at the workplace
or home.
The last thing you want is to be held hostage, spend lots of time and
emotional energy thinking of how you are going to get your work done
without someone standing in the way or trying to make your life a living
hell. There are times when you are left debating whether or not to let them
go, but you never get around to pulling the trigger.
So, if you are this kind of person that has been pulled by difficult people
into the endless vortex of frustration and ineffectiveness, these are the steps
you can deal with them gracefully;
Step 1: Listen

Often, when someone is difficult, the truth is that we stop paying attention
to what it is that is going on. We get irritated and lose hope in them. We
decide what we think of them just so that our focus shifts to something else
– because we want to avoid them and protect ourselves from them.
However, if you want to be effective at dealing with them, then you have to
be very attentive when they are not doing well or are being hard headed.
Your best shot at making things better is seeking to have a clear
understanding of the issue – including knowing the other person’s
viewpoint. In most cases, the first thing that you need to do is simply listen.
Listening alone can save the day.
When you listen, you set yourself up to hear what the real problem is, and
you may even note that it is not the other person's fault. The truth is that the
problematic person might just start acting differently once they know that
their concerns have been heard. Not everyone difficult becomes that way
just for fun – it could be that there are real issues they are airing, and they
need them to be addressed.
Step 2: Offer clear behavioral feedback
If you look around you, you will notice that most people spend weeks,
months, or even years complaining about someone in their lives, which is
trying. What they don't do is give actual feedback on what it is that they
need to change or do differently. You cannot keep doing the same things
over and over again, expecting a change each time.
While giving harsh feedback is something that can be uncomfortable for
many people, you can choose to do it responsibly. When you change your
ways, you will realize that the other person will also change. The approach
that you can use to give transparent and honest feedback is first to lower the
other person's defensiveness so that you can offer them with the information
they need to be better. Whatever approach you choose to use, they must do
these two things – and you will be on the right track.
But why do we hate giving feedback, and how can we make it easier?
Well, over the past three decades, my friends and I have worked to train and
coach thousands of people to become better managers and leaders, whether
at home or in the office. When we asked them what they consider is the

toughest part of their daily job, they said giving others corrective feedback
– almost without exception.
So many of them said that at work, they find it hard to fire someone –
painful or not. But then this is something that they still have to do, however
hard it may be. However, this is not to say that everyone is afraid of giving
feedback. There are a handful of other people I know who are not afraid to
give people harsh feedback.
But really, the question is, why is it hard for you to give your employees,
friends, or spouse difficult feedback to tell them that they are doing
something wrong and they need to change
?
Well, the truth is that we are often afraid of how these people will react. We
think to ourselves, they are already complicated, what if they explode in
anger? What if they break down? What if they respond by telling me that I
am an idiot? What if they become defensive and start blaming me. There
are times when we want to tell someone that their attitude is terrible, but we
stop and think of what it is that they might say; "you don't even have
respect for me. You don't care about what I am going through," - all of
which worsen the situation.
With all these myriads of thoughts racing through our minds, we convince
ourselves that it is not a big deal at all. We tell ourselves that it will all go
away soon. We tell ourselves that if they are the right person, they will
realize that what they are doing is wrong, and they will just let it all go
away. While this will make you feel justified and self-righteous, the truth is
that you are causing more harm than good. There are people I have seen
lose their jobs just because their bosses or the people in their lives
chickened out and did not tell them what they are doing is not alright. They
needed your corrective feedback, but you did not give them. Some people
cannot magically know that they are difficult and that they need to change.
They need you to be their eyes!
Here are the tips you can use;
Pay attention first
While this might seem counterintuitive at first when you know that you
have screwed your courage, you just need to stand up and get it over with.

The first thing is for you to listen to what the other person has to say. Walk
up to them and tell them that you would like to talk to them about
something. Invite them to share with you what their view is about the whole
situation.
For instance, you could say something like, "Hey Mary, I'd like to have a
word with you about the ABC project. What time are you available for a
chat?" Once you meet, you can ask them, "what do you think has been
working well, and what has not been working well on the ABC project?
"
When you do this, you are merely offering the other person a heads-up on
what you would like to discuss. You are telling them that you would love to
have a balanced picture of the whole project – not just focusing on the good
news but the bad news as well.
Then give them ample time to share with you their opinion. Try not to
interrupt – whether in agreement or disagreement - when they are talking to
you. This way, you will be able to gather what it is that the other person
thinks so that you have all the information you need to give a more
objective response. You may realize that the other person will say so much
of what you were going to say too. This way, the conversation turns into a
coaching session!
Often, you will notice that the other person will see part of the problem and
that allows you to pick it up from there and clarify what they have said.
Now, if the other person is entirely oblivious to the whole situation,
listening first to what they have to say makes the entire conversation less
adversarial. This allows them to listen to you better when you start giving
them your take on the issue.
Camera check
The other useful tip you must consider is what I refer to as the camera
check. This is mainly feedback on people's behaviors rather than on their
mental state. Let us go back to the example that we have already used in the
previous point where you think that the employee has a bad attitude.
Now, at this point, you know that if you just say it plainly, that will not help,
and the chances are that it will make the situation worse than it is. Such a
comment is guaranteed to make the other person feel defensive because it

mentions that they have a flawed character.  You also are giving the other
person no indication of what it is that you want them to do differently,
which they don't have an idea how. How does the right attitude look like?
Rather than jumping in and making these comments without basis, simply
do a camera check. In other words, what you need to do is take a mental
video of what you consider a bad attitude and the other person doing it.
What is it that you see in your mental tape? You might see them coming to
work late, turning in their assignments late, saying negative things about
their colleagues or the company, consistently not offering support to clients,
among others.
These are some of the things that you can tell them. "Hey Mary, I notice
that you have been turning in your assignments late, coming to work late
this month, and saying negative things about your colleagues – Mark and
Jane." When you frame it this way, you make it a hell LOT more
comfortable for the other person to hear, rather than just saying that they
have a bad attitude.
The point is, if someone is difficult, you can camera check what you
consider to be an evil character or attitude and frame it in that manner. This
is reasonably comfortable and skillful when trying to offer corrective
feedback. When you let them know what it is they need to do differently for
improvement and success, you are not only helping them be better but also
yourself and the organization as a whole.
Step 3: Document
I can't stress this enough, but whenever you have significant issues with
someone, you must jot down all the key points. There are several times
when I have had people in top management levels tell me that they couldn't
let go of a difficult employee because they did not have a record of them
having bad behavior. It is this lack of documentation that comes as a result
of misplaced hopelessness. The manager either thought that they did not
want to be too negative about the employee or believed that it would soon
go away.
If you are smart enough, then you know the value of documentation. You
are keeping a record of each employee or person in your life, and what good

and evil they do is nothing negative. If anything, it is something very
prudent. What you need to note is that you can solve problems. All you
need to do is take in a deep breath, follow it with a sigh of relief and write
down everything you like or do not like about the other person – everything
they are doing that qualifies as bad or good behavior
.
You will thank yourself for it when “enough is enough!”
Step 4: Maintain consistency
If there is a behavior that you consider not okay with, then there should not
be a time when you all of a sudden are okay with it. Remember that where
you are, people are watching you. The last thing you want has everyone
thinking that you are inconsistent or mistreating others. If it is at the
employee, what you must remember is that employees are always looking
to see what it is that you do more than you say.
For instance, if you tell everyone that they must turn in their end month
reports by Friday Midnight and then there are times when you are upset
about it, and in other times you are not, the truth is that they will not take
you seriously. Those employees that are difficult won't do it at all.
You must learn to pick your shots. Set standards that you are willing to hold
to – then hold tightly to them.
Step 5: Establish consequences for when things don’t chang
e
If, at this point, you still feel that there is no improvement, then it is high
time you start getting specific. There is a saying, "I believe you can still
turn this around," and this is where you apply that. Turning things around
simply means that if you don't see behavioral change by a specific date,
then something will happen – letting them go, initiate corrective actions,
disciplinary committee discussion, or lose their eligibility for promotion.
The consequences have to be substantively negative for them to see the
seriousness of the whole issue. If difficult people don’t believe that their
actions have serious consequences, then what makes you think that they
will even change in the first place?
Step 6: Work through the company’s processes

What you need to note is that when you are a good manager or leader, you
will hold out hope for improvement to the point where you can't see any
more hope and decide that you are letting go. You ensure that you have
dotted all the I's and crossed every T so that you have a clear conscience
when you finally make go of the other person. Maybe this is the point
where you are in your marriage, parenting, or at work. If this is the case,
then what I would advise you to do is to have a clear conversation with your
spouse, boss, or child on what exactly you need to do to clear the whole
path to termination – if necessary.
Step 7: Don’t poison the well
If there is something I have learned over the years I have worked for my
company is the value of not poisoning the well. There are times when junior
and senior managers alike come to the office and lousy mouth a problematic
employee in their department to all and sundry. This is not the right way to
address an issue like this. Instead, you must follow all the steps that we
have highlighted here
.
It does not matter how difficult the person is, how crazy they drive you, or
how hurtful their actions are. What matters the most is that you don't talk
trash about them – you will only be adding salt to injury. Remember that the
people you are telling are the same people that will go out there is talk –
with distorted information. This will only create an environment of distrust.
You will be choosing to back-stab them, something that pollutes the other
person's perception. You will also be opening yourself up for the rest of the
people to look at you as weak and unprofessional.
Trust me; this is no way to resolve an issue.
Just don’t do it – however tempting it may be!
Step 8: Manage your self-talk
There are instances when someone frustrates you to the point where you
end up having an inner conversation about the whole issue. While the
internal dialogue is calming, it never should be unhelpfully negative or
unhelpfully positive.

You may think to yourself, "what an idiot, Mary will never change" or "I
will not worry too much about this. I am certain that things will turn out to
be fine. Mary is such a great employee or wife or child, and there is nothing
to worry about." These two thoughts are not helpful at all.
You must be willing to take a fair witness stance so that everything you say
to yourself on the inside is not only accurate but also possible. You could
say something like, "Mary's behavior is stirring up problems for the entire
family. As I do everything I can to support them to change, I have to
monitor their behavior closely. If the change, that will be great. If not, then I
will have to do what I promised to do."
Now, that is helpful because you are taking the facts and using them to
make informed decisions that are not only going to make you look good but
are aimed at helping the other individual
.
Step 9: Have the courage
By this time, you know that firing someone is the hardest decision most
managers have to make. If the difficult person you are dealing with is your
spouse, then you know that the toughest decision you are going to make is
to seek marriage counseling or divorce.  Whatever your situation may be
like, the most important thing is that you do it right.
Instead of making excuses, putting things off, or making someone else do it,
just brace yourself, gather your courage, and do it yourself. Realize that you
are the manager of your life, and if you are as good as you think you are,
then you are going to make the tough decision impeccably well. If –
Hallelujah – things change against what you hoped for, dare to accept them.
Realize that sometimes being proved wrong when we have lost hope in
someone is as tough as being proved right.
If you learn to use these steps when dealing with a difficult spouse,
colleague, employee, or friend, then it does not matter how things turn out
because, in the end, you will know that you did the best you could to
salvage a tough situation. That alone is enough to reduce your stress levels
!
Chapter 7 What do you do when all these do not work?

This is one of the questions that so many people ask. There are times when
we feel that we have done all there was to be done, and we still cannot see
any improvement. While we may be tempted to think that there is nothing
more we could do, the truth is that there is always something new we can
do. If you have reached this point while dealing with someone challenging
in your life, here is a message for you – there is still more you can do!
Here are some of the things you can do;
Be calm
Sometimes, you may be tempted to lose your temper and snap at other
people. Well, I will tell you that this is not the best way to handle a difficult
person. If you go around snapping at other people, don't you think that you
are difficult for other innocent people yourself? What makes you think that
you are any different from a difficult person? You are not going to get the
other person to collaborate with you if this is the attitude you choose to
have.
One thing that is important to note is that you cannot trigger the other
person – unless you are silently using it as a strategy – it is best if you keep
your cool.
One thing you will note about someone calm is that they often appear as
though they are in control – even when that is not the case. Keeping your
cool tends to help you stay centered and respectable. If you are always on
edge, no one would be willing to reason with you. If you keep your cool,
you will start noticing that the other difficult person gets all your attention
.
Understand the other person’s intentions
I believe that no one chooses to be difficult just for the sake of being tough.
While there are times when the other person seems as though they intend to
get you, you have to realize that there are always underlying reasons why
they are acting up the way they do.
Well, this kind of motivation is not always something apparent. The most
important thing is for you to identify what triggered their actions. Is there
something that is making them act the way they are doing? Are they willing
to cooperate with you? If not, what is stopping them from working with

you? Is there something you can do to help them amicably resolve the
issue?
Get some perspective
There is a chance that the people around you have experienced exactly what
you are going through now. The truth is that while this may be happening to
you for the very first time, some can help you see things from a different
perspective and offer you a different take on the whole situation.
The challenge is for you to try and seek them out, share with them your
experience, and then pay attention to what they have to say to you. The
chances are that they will offer you valuable advice amid your conversation,
and you will have overcome what seemed impossible at first.
Let them know where you are coming from
If anything has worked perfectly for me, it is letting the other person know
what my intentions are. I always come clear on why I am doing what I do.
While there are times when my words face resistance for thinking that is
just being tough on them, the truth is that it works. When you let other
people in on the reason underlying your actions and what is happening on
the ground, they will not only empathize with the situation but will also
change their behaviors. This is how you can get difficult people on board
!
Do it today.
Establish a rapport
Today, the use of a computer system in messaging and communication has
simply turned work into a mechanical process. The best way you can re-
instill that human touch when interacting with others is always set aside
time to connect with them at a personal level. You can choose to go out
with your friends, family, or colleagues for drinks, lunches, or dinners.
When you do, don't just concentrate on what you are eating or drinking,
always spend time knowing each other – hobbies, families, life in general.
Fostering a valuable connection with others goes a long way in helping you
appreciate the beauty in diversity and know how best you can deal with
situations that might arise between the two of you.
So, how do you establish rapport?

One important thing that you must note is that building rapport is not just
about mirroring, matching, or leading the other person's behavior and
actions. When dealing with a difficult person, think of it as a therapy
session or sales. If you want your relationship to be productive, then you
want to pay attention to the building blocks of good rapport. The general
idea here is for you to mirror their posture – such that if they cross their
arms while talking to you, you do the same shortly after. You can also speak
in the same tone, pace, and language they speak in – adding in a couple of
unique phrases and words they use while communicating with you.
When the other person starts to notice these similarities in their unconscious
mind, the truth is that they will begin to feel that they are on the same level
as you are, like you, and tune in to what you have to say. Little by little, you
will start to lead them towards the direction you want them to go. You will
begin to make them feel relaxed. If the rapport you develop is sufficient
enough, then you will start noticing on your end that the other person is
slowing matching your behavior without even realizing it. They may lean
back, integrate your ideas, and echo their enthusiasm in all the skills you are
trying to bring to life
.
Does it all happen in one go? Not. Just like every other good thing,
establishing rapport with a difficult person is something that takes time and
effort. You have to be persistent and patient enough to see this through.
Remember, you are dealing with someone difficult, which means that they
are not just going to all of a sudden take up your ideas and support you. The
truth is that you will experience moments of resistance, reluctance, and lack
of focus on what you are saying. The sooner you make the other person feel
heard and understood, the sooner you will be able to connect and integrate
therapeutic interventions.
But how can you do that? How is it possible for you to instantly connect
with a difficult person, build rapport with them, and make them get where
you are coming from?
The power of utilization
Each time you want to have a connection with someone, you will need to
use the principle of utilization to build rapport. One of the most

straightforward approaches is for you to discuss your experiences and
interests as you talk to them, even though you don't share them.
My friend Lance serves in the military. He told me that their former
commando was such a difficult person to deal with. He wanted for them to
get along, and he just knew the right way how – going into a trance. He said
that hypnotic trance simply takes advantage of the narrow focus of attention
and the passing of time. He simply re-evoke part of his military exercise to
his commando and boom – it was all there in his mind. Now, it made it very
easy to lead him one step at a time to where he desired to go – leveraging
that alert and focused state of mind. This way, the commando started
becoming receptive – by integrating his perspective, ideas, and ability to
control pain. By the end of the session, they both were getting along like
never before.
Effective communication through the utilization
The other trick is for you to utilize the other person’s interests when talking
to them. This is one of the most straightforward and powerful tools you can
use to capture their attention and get them interested in what you have to
say. Once you have them hooked, you can then bring up topics that you find
interesting – but do it gradually just so that they don’t feel overwhelmed
and lose interest. While flirting is something that is not recommended in
professional settings, you can bring on the game instinctively!
Realize that even the stand-up comedians don't always bring their comedy
to people that love it but to those who think that they are not funny too.
How do they get them hooked? By employing the power of utilization. The
thing that seems to get people to laugh at their jokes if recognizing that
what they are saying is true, but the chances are that they have never tried
to put them in words. They also seem to exaggerate things to an entirely
absurd level. Why is that? They can utilize what the target audience already
understands.
Even though the examples I share here are from a therapeutic field of
hypnosis, the principle of utilization goes a long way in communications as
well as teaching. If you become too professional, you might just lose them.
Flirt instinctively
!

Stop the psych-jargon
Occasionally, meeting someone for the very first time, I can tell whether
they are difficult or not, and the ideology that is ingrained in them. While
there are people who speak like they have swallowed a self-improvement
book, every word they say is plainly but psych-jargon.
With the principle of utilization, all this goes out of the window. If you are
going to have any influence on them, you must learn to see things from
their perspective, learn their language, and understanding instead of
dragging them into your thinking.
If you talk to any hypnotherapist, they will simply hand you ready-made
scripts. This is not what you want to do. You cannot just dish out ways the
other person should get along with you as though to tell them you don’t
have the slightest regard for their uniqueness. When you understand and
practice the power of utilization, they will start to feel respected. You
cannot just force your interests or ideas on the other person.
Instead of trying to change the other person from the outside, why not try
changing them from the inside? This means that every action and the word
you use must appeal to their unique personality traits and interests. This
way, you offer them a chance to grow through progression quite naturally
while at the same time facilitating a deeper level of rapport with them.
Let us consider a smoker who is always prone to outbursts. Where do you
channel that anger? Well, you can make them direct that anger towards the
cigarettes. In doing so, they don't dismiss the reality of their passion but
then helps a long way in constructively managing their anger until they
know the best way how. You could also argue that when anger is directed
towards something potentially harmful, this is completely helpful
.
Utilizing the gaping problem
According to Milton Erickson, you can use the difficult person's issues as a
way of helping them make progress in life. He narrates a time when he
treated a suicidal patient that was convinced life had no meaning because
she believed that she was unattractive and could never find a partner. But
what did she think was making her unattractive? A gap between her teeth!

Now, you don't just tell that person that they are attractive and ignore all
their worries and concerns. What Erickson did was to utilize the very things
she worried about just so that she could change her thinking. The girl
squirted water through her supposedly "ugly" gap on her teeth during a
break at the office. The young man thought of this as a provocative act and
asked her out on a date! That completely changed her thought process.
In the same way, you can utilize the power of gaping problems when
dealing with a difficult person, and you will be amazed at how fast they
begin to change their minds and perspective.
It works!
Treat the other with respect
Do you like being treated as though you are incompetent, stupid, or
incapable? Well, no one does, and neither do you. The thing with treatment
is that it is two-way traffic. You have to do unto others exactly how you
would like them to do unto you. You cannot possibly expect others to
respect you when all the time you interact with them, you are disrespectful.
Today, ask yourself how you love others to treat you. Then use exactly
those requirements when interacting with others. Respect is earned – so
earn it!
So, how do you even treat a difficult person with respect, in the first place
?
Well, if you want to lay the groundwork for respect, here are some of the
things that you need to do;
Stop to see where they are coming from
As we have already established, people do not just choose to be difficult for
no reason at all. It is not like this is a default setting – even though there are
times when it seems like it when trying to manage and work with them.
Think about it, if you have a difficult coworker, do you think that they just
found themselves in that job? Someone somewhere must have selected
them as a candidate out of all others vying for the same position.
Why is that?

Because they brought onto the job skills and personality that would get
things done, if you think about it, they probably fit in well with the rest of
the team at the beginning. However, if they no longer embody these traits
and skills, the only honest thing to do is stop and find the reason why. Is
there something in the job description that has changed? Are they having
trouble finding the right balance with their work and private life? Is there
someone on the job that keeps irritating them every other day?
When you set aside time to have an honest and open discussion with them
concerning all the challenges they may be facing, this could help. While
this is a necessary step in addressing the problem, it is something tricky to
do. Therefore, rather than getting frustrated, open yourself up for a candid
conversation with them.
Trust them first
If you want to build respect with a difficult person, you have to start by
building trust. This is one of the most critical steps, especially in an instance
where the other person does not trust you. A difficult person that does not
trust you at all with always challenge you at every level. To give the benefit
of the doubt, choose to believe them first
.
While you may have the authority to manage their actions, the truth is that
you cannot change their attitude. It does not matter what position you hold
in the company; the truth is that the only way out is to try and influence
them. Whenever you make promises, ensure that you live up to them. Do
everything that you said you would do – and this will earn you trust. Soon
enough, everyone around you will take your word for it and know that you
expect nothing less from them. When you trust them to do the same, you
are opening doors for higher results and respect.
Pay attention to the positive
As you work hard to establish trust and respect with the difficult person in
your life, the one thing you must not forget is to offer positive feedback.
You can do this by way of appreciation. Are there areas that the difficult
person is trying hard to improve? If there are, recognize them in front of the
whole team. To make it even better, you can take a step further to ask them

what it is that they think is the best trait they possess at work and then
recognize it too.
In so doing, you are demonstrating to them that they truly matter, and their
contributions are much appreciated. You can understand them vocally
whenever they do something commendable. Soon enough, they will realize
that they are an essential part of the team. To earn your employees respect
or anyone for that matter, you have to show them that you value them.
It all starts with you!
Have a new perspective
What is the bottom line of respect? Well, the truth is that you have to earn
it. In other words, you have to give it for you to receive it – it is reciprocal.
When you treat someone with respect, however hard headed they were
when interacting with you, their opinion of you will begin to improve.
Rather than trying to label difficult people as being impossible, try to
change your perspective of them. Always perceive them as an essential
component of your team – one that the team cannot do without. It could be
that they like challenging every idea, protocol, or project you initiate. When
you make that shift in your mentality and perception of them, they will start
to change how they talk about you. The point is for you to listen keenly to
their feedback and then act accordingly.
Focus on what can be actioned
There are times when your awkward friends, colleagues, or family
colleagues put you into a hot soup. For instance, you may have some work
to be turned in, but then they fail to do it, or they may do something, and
then you are held responsible for it when you don't even deserve that kind
of unfair treatment. Whatever it is that the difficult people in your life do to
you, the first step towards resolving the matter is for you to accept that it
has already happened. Instead of crying over spilled milk, simply focus on
what the next steps should be like.
What are some of the necessary steps to take in resolving the situation?
Create the change you want to see.

Ignore
If you have already tried all you could and still thought that nothing works,
the other trick is for you to ignore everything. The best way you can treat
someone difficult is to ignore them. You cannot possibly argue with
yourself, right? They may try as much as they can to trigger you into being
angry or acting up. However, when you ignore them, you simply cause
them to stop because they are not getting the kind of reaction they are
looking for. When you act up, you are giving them the satisfaction that they
won, and they will keep on poking until you break.
Think about it, have you done everything you could within your means to
handle the situation responsibly? If so, then you have nothing else to give
them. Simply get on with your life and try as much as you can not to
interface with them unless necessary. If they play a central role in your daily
work and it is standing in the way of your productivity, then you can choose
to escalate this to the higher authorities to help you resolve the issue. This is
often referred to as a trump card. You should not use this unless you have
exhausted all other possible options.
In most cases, if you want to get to someone moving, you can do it by
employing the top-down approach. You must exercise caution when using
this option. Try not to use it every often lest your bosses begin to think that
you cannot handle small issues independently. While this works, it is only
to be used when all else is depleted. Trust me, I have used it, and it works
like magic.
Employ kindness
I get it, when you are dealing with a difficult person in your life, your gut
feeling is usually to be difficult as well. When someone is attacking you,
the first thought you have is often to try and defend yourself. I have been
there, done that. The problem is that when you do this, you get sucked up
into a vacuum such that you don't even take a moment to slow down and
just breath.
In almost every difficult situation, I have found myself in is that showing
kindness goes a long way in helping one calm the case down. When two

difficult people are hard on each other, the chances are that the whole
situation tends to escalate to the extent that nothing can be accomplished.
However, when you choose to be kind, you will diffuse the whole situation
so that you can get all that you want. This is one of the techniques that
should be at the top of your list whenever you encounter a difficult person
in your life.
Show compassion
If you have been in a problem before, then you know that you must deal
with your issues. The truth is, we all have issues, and we tend to think that
what we are going through is so harsh that no one can bear. However, if you
sat down to listen to what other people are going through, you will simply
take your baggage with you and shove it back into your backpack.
Well, I love that!
My point is, no one knows what it feels like to have another's problems.
When you are dealing with someone difficult, this should be your principle
– it could be that they are experiencing a very tough ordeal or an enormous
problem that you wouldn't even be able to bear in part.
Often, when you choose to show a problematic person a little bit of
compassion, they tend to respond positively. Several of us get stuck in our
heads and lives that we don't even open our eyes to what the people around
us might be experiencing. Your friend might just be looking for a little
kindness. The next time you encounter someone difficult – whether at work,
home, or elsewhere – show them some kindness, and you will be amazed at
how that works magic.
Find something in common
When you are talking to someone for the very first time, what you will note
is that sharing something in common with them often makes your
connection stronger. Each one of us has been made in such a way that we
desire to belong to a group. We are natural beings that want to have a strong
sense of belonging.
When you meet someone, it always feels nice to know that you both went to
the same college, even if during different years. Having something in

common creates a form of kinship. My children are in high school now, and
each time I met a parent that has children the age of mine or that our
children attend the same schools, I feel like we have a parental connection.
Today, if you have someone difficult in your office, at home or elsewhere,
try to establish something that you both share in common. This will go a
long way in helping you get along with each other afterward
.
Control what you can
There are things in life that we can control, and others out of our control.
One thing that is important to note is that we must focus our attention on the
things that we can control.
When you are trying to handle a difficult situation with a difficult person,
you must start by thinking about what it is in that situation that is within
your control. It could be that there is someone else you can deal with
instead of that difficult person. That is the person that might just pave the
way for you to do things right.
A few months ago, I was trying to work with the sales department on a
novel initiative I was trying to bring to life in our company. One of the team
members suggested that I should speak to a specific person to seek their
help because that has been the tradition. When I first contacted the person, I
did not get a response. I kept sending them emails after emails, left several
voicemails, but still did not get a response. I finally got frustrated and
resorted to speaking to other people in the department.
Several people in the sales department were willing to help with the project
with so much joy. That was a difficult person that I managed to
workaround. Today, you can do the same – control all that you can
!
Look at yourself
The scripture in James 1:23-24 states, "For anyone who hears the word but
does not carry it out is like a man who looks at his face in a mirror, 24 and
after observing himself goes away and immediately forgets what he looks
like.…"
If you are going to deal with a difficult person, then you will have to know
who you are first. Your focus should be on what you hold inside you. Is

there something that you are doing or not doing that is standing in your way
of dealing with a difficult person?
There are so many of us who know precisely what kind of people we are.
We know that we are always in a good mood and are sociable. Every single
day is a smooth one. There are instances where you may have lots of things
racing through your mind – solving one problem after the other.
Even when you are having a conversation with a friend, your mind is
probably elsewhere. You may come off as though you are condescending,
abrupt, and short. It is this kind of attitude that can make someone that is
already irritated to get upset quickly. How you choose to respond will
determine whether you are adding salt to injury or quenching the fire.
Therefore, spend some time to reflect on how you interact with other people
– especially the difficult ones – to ensure that you are not making the
situation worse than it already may be.
Overcome Your Fear of Conflict
If there is a technique that I like the most when dealing with someone
difficult is overcoming my fear of conflict. You cannot deal with a difficult
person if all you do is run away from them. So many people are scared of
stirring up strife and conflict with a difficult person, but what you need to
realize is that the more you try to run, the more you are giving that person
the power to walk all over you
.
While the process of dealing with someone difficult in itself is challenging
enough, the truth is that if you do not stand up to them and set boundaries,
the situation will only get worse than it already is. Each one of us deserves
to be treated with respect. Therefore, do not allow them to manage you less
than that.
Don't get me wrong; I am not saying that you should intentionally stir up
conflict. What is merely asking you to do is that in the event a difficult
person treats you less than you deserve to be treated, stand up to them and
confront them about the whole situation. Conflict does not mean that it has
to be something terrible. In so many cases, it is a good thing – especially
when it leads to a resolution of issues and brings to fruition what you desire
most.

The bottom line is, if you look around you, you will not miss at least one
difficult person. You cannot run away from them. The key is for you to
communicate with them gracefully and peacefully so that you can both
reach a consensus. It is better to "agree to disagree" so that you can both
move past your selfish interests and live a happier life.

Chapter 8 Expert techniques to handle difficult people
Practice reflective listening
Have you ever been upset, and then someone comes in and tells you, "I
understand," Did that ever make you feel better?
I didn’t think so!
Well, one thing that is important to note is that using such kind of
statements will not help you accomplish anything. Let us consider an
instance where you have a client in your company. They tell you that they
are frustrated because of the budget cuts and the fact that you are not
willing to offer them discounts even though they have been your loyal
clients for several years. How do you respond to that? Do you just tell them
that you understand what they are going through?
The truth is that if you did tell them you understand, that conversation is
probably never going to have a good ending.
If you are in such a tight spot with a difficult client, the first thing you
should tell yourself is to practice reflective listening. In other words, try to
put yourself in the other person's shoes. Understand what it is that they are
saying by simply interpreting their body language and words. This will help
you to respond by reflecting their thoughts and emotional feelings back to
them.
Instead of telling them plainly that you understand, try something like - "So,
if I get you correctly, you are saying that our pricing is too high that is
becoming a barrier to your business, right? – and because of the tight
budget you are working with and the fact that we are not offering discounts.
Is that right?"
If you have understood what they are telling you, simply move on with your
conversation. However, if you have not yet understood what they are going
through, ask them to give you more information so that you can understand
their situation better. The trick here is for you to make them feel that you
get where they are coming from and that you are concerned. They want to
feel your empathy
.

Try as much as you can to avoid making promises you know you might not
be able to meet. The goal is to make the difficult person feel that they have
been heard and that they are greatly valued.
Consider their affect heuristic
This simply refers to a mental shortcut. This plays a significant role in
helping you make a quick and efficient decision based on your emotional
feelings towards the other person, situation, and the place you are at. In
simple terms, our choices are greatly influenced by our experiences and
general outlook of the world around us. It is merely because of our bias.
The leading cause of the problem is that we are not objective in such
situations, and facts do not matter that much. We choose to run every
decision we make based on our mental software and then develop strong
opinions based on that.
If the difficult person keeps having a different opinion and keeps asking you
what you think is the catch, try not to respond rubbish them off by saying
that we have to move on because of ABCD's. There is a chance that this
person may be trapped in another information source, contract, or
agreement with the previous vendor who failed to deliver what they had
promised they would. Based on that very experience, they may be looking
at you through the same lenses.
What you need to do is ask questions so that you fully understand what the
root cause of the problem is. Some of the questions you can ask them so
that they can relax and offer you insight as to why they are resistant include;
-
        
I really would like to understand why you are a little skeptical about
this. Would you tell me more?
-
         
Is there anything we can do to relieve your fears?
-
         
What can we do to help you feel comfortable enough so that we
can all move forward?
When you ask such questions, you are allowing them to simply redirect
their thoughts from thinking that you are not trustworthy in considering
what is needed for the team to move forward and make progress.
Tap into the beginner's mind

The beginner's mind is often referred to like the Zen mind, and it serves as a
strategy of approaching each situation as though you have no prior
experience in it. Whenever you adopt this kind of thinking when dealing
with a difficult person, every conversation you engage in is made with the
"I don't know" mindset. This allows you to try as much as you cannot judge
the other person or the situation.
This also goes a long way in helping you not to live with the 'should' kind
of thinking. "You should have thought of the budget before the year started.
You should have read my email concerning the discount expirations. You
should have known that I am a busy person and available only once in a
week for consultations."
When you are addressing a difficult person, try not to use 'should'
statements. They only set your mind on the defensive and get in the way of
your productivity and conversation before it can even start.
The good thing with adopting the Zen mindset is that it allows you to let go
of an expert mindset. While you may be an expert in your field or in what
you do, you have to realize that you are not an expert when it comes to a
difficult person or situation.
For instance, instead of saying things like “You said that you wanted to
increase your sales by 30% by the end of the month and the kind of delays
am seeing will not make this possible,” choose to approach the conversation
in a beginner’s mindset. Try not to prejudge the other person. Forget what it
is that they should have done and perceive the conversation you are both
having as a puzzle that needs to be solved.
You can choose to say something like this instead “It seems to me like with
these delays, we will not be able to reach our sales goals. But, let’s explore
strategies that will help us achieve the results that we are aiming for.” If you
keenly study this statement, you will realize that you are acknowledging the
fact that there is a problem, but immediately starts moving in the direction
of a possible solution.
Let go of fear
Again, you cannot be afraid of negative results to the point that you allow
that to drive your reactions. It is because of doubt that we tend to feel the

need to control things and the people around us. If a colleague is difficult,
you may feel afraid of challenging them because that might just put your
relationship at risk. If a client expresses displeasure in your services,
timelines, or pricing structure, you may be afraid because you think that
you might not be able to fix the whole situation.
The first thing is to let go of the idea that there is something that needs
fixing. When you are having a conversation with a difficult person –
whether a friend, child, client, or coworker – remember that your role is to
listen, understand what they are saying and then discern what the next steps
forward should be. I don't mean that you start dishing out solutions
immediately. Take time to go over what they have told you and then think
through the possible solutions to find the best way forward.
For instance, rather than trying to validate emotional feelings, slap together
common fixes, or apologizing, what you can do is express how unfortunate
it is that the situation happened once again. Assure the other person that you
get how the whole situation is affecting the business or your relationship
and then appreciate them for being patient enough to allow you to work
towards resolving the issue.
"Chunk" the proble
m
You may be wondering what ‘chunking’ is all about. Well, this simply
refers to the process of taking a huge problem and then breaking it down
into smaller manageable portions that you can address one at a time. When
you break problems into smaller portions, this allows you to handle them.
They also make people more willing to start dealing with all the issues at
hand.
What I have learned from my mentor over the years is the importance of
chunking things and then organizing them into tasks that you can handle
every other day. This is the same way you can choose to deal with a tough
situation with a difficult person.
Does your employee always find a reason not to turn in their work on time
because they cannot get started using the new software?
What you can do is to ask them to help you break down each of the steps
into smaller bite-size pieces that you can work on to come up with an easy

to follow protocol. The point is for you not to apportion blame or say that
they are lazy, but to find the best way forward. When each task is chunked,
it becomes easier for the other person to digest what is left to be done.
Remember, anger is natural
We have all encountered difficult people – clients, friends, and colleagues
alike – that we get so furious. It could also be that you have been on the
other side of things. For instance, if you are a customer at a store and you
pay for a new product upgrade, and then you realize that it is shallow that it
makes you angry.
The recalibration theory of anger states that anger is a natural emotion that
is wired into human beings. In other words, you have to realize that anger is
the best way we have been made to get into the bargain. We press our lips
together, bite our tongue, furrow our brows, or flare our nostrils just so that
we can drive the other person to a place of higher value based on what we
have to give.
If you are dealing with a difficult person, the point is for you to try and
avoid justifying your actions or position. Realize that the reason why they
could be feeling that way is that they think that their opinion is being
undervalued or that they want to control the situation. It is advisable that
you take the other person's frustrations seriously and not personally. Once
you have understood the frustrations and arguments of the other person,
thank them for bringing that to your attention. Also, let them know that you
will think through everything and get back to them with a solution or a way
forward.
When the other person is already furious, the chances are that they will not
take any solution you offer at that time. However right the answer might be,
they will not feel like it is the best way to go about the whole situation.
Therefore, you must allow them some time to calm down before you can
pick up the discussions where you left them – this time, with practicality
and reason.
But what if the difficult person is already raging with anger, how can you
deal with the situation?
Well, there are so many ways you can try to calm the whole situation down;

Keep your calm
This is probably a point you will see everywhere in this book – because it is
essential and easy to get wrong. If someone sends you an angry text or
email or starts shouting at you on the phone, the truth is that it is hard not to
get personal. There is a chance that you will get a bristle of anger, and
defensive thoughts will begin to pop into your mind of how wrong you
think the other person is. You will start to think about how ungrateful they
are for all the hard work you give the company, and before you know it, you
are exploding with fury.
The best thing to do is to take in a deep breath. Try to take in what it is that
the other person is trying to say. In between those lines, you might note that
the other person is in a struggle or is frustrated with the whole process,
product or service to the point that they took it out on you or the team. We
are all human, and there are times when we are caught in our moments of
weakness. If you try to understand this fact, you will not see the reason why
you should take their difficulty, comments, or arguments personally or hold
it against them.
If the other person is being abusive, rude, or aggressive in their language or
intonation, don't tolerate their behavior. If, at some point during the
conversation, you feel like they are belittling you, simply feel free to
escalate the situation to a third-party that can help you resolve without
killing the other.
Let us consider an instance where a client calls the support team in your
company expressing how upset they are about the delay in the delivery of
their products. They may be agitated and are shouting at the top of their
lungs on the phone call. This is where your support team or you should
remain calm and try to ask the three what’s; what is the problem, what are
their goals, needs or desires, and what are the available options. If you are
the one on the other side of the phone, keep your cool and find out more
details about their issue. That alone will work to de-escalate an angry
person.
Practice active listening

Try as much as you can to focus on what they are saying - rather than the
anger behind their words and voice. When your attention is on what they
are really saying, you will be better placed to determine what it is that is
agitating them. This will also help you resolve the issue rather than trying
only to de-escalate it to comfort them. When you know what the problem is,
you can find a solution, and you will have a satisfied colleague, friend, or
client at the end of the day.
Let us consider an instance where a client walks into your store and tells
you that the product you sold them stopped working for them a few days
after they bought it. They continue to tell you how surprised and
disappointed that you could offer such a poorly designed product.
What will you do? What will your response be like?
Well, the simplest way to go is to pay attention to the words they use –
surprised, disappointed. Those are the words they used to express their
emotional feelings. The point is that they are not angry but surprised by
how your product behaved.
In such an instance, you may be tempted to respond with the words “I
understand that you are frustrated…” while that is a response, it is not only
going to escalate the other person’s feelings but will now make them angry.
By saying that, you are only giving them a reason to go from
disappointment and surprise to anger.
However, if you demonstrate that you are actively listening to what they
have to say, you will calm the situation down. You can say things like “that
is certainly surprising and disappointing. Let me take a look to know why
the product stopped working unexpectedly.” With this response, you are
acknowledging the client’s feelings without necessarily escalating them.
Repeat back what your customers say
One of the key components of active listening is ensuring that your client
and you are on the same page. Once you know the root cause of their anger,
you can simply repeat what you heard from them so that you are sure you
understand what is making them angry. In so doing, you are also letting the
other person know that you get hat their concerns are and are working on a
resolution or response.

Let us consider an instance where someone badges into your office ranting
about the product you sold them not working. You can simply start your
response with such words as “What am hearing you say is…” this will
simply get the ball rolling. Try to highlight how the issue is standing in the
way of them achieving their goals. This will show them that you did not just
listen but understood their needs and are going to help them.
Thank them for bringing the issue to your attention
When the other person you are conversing with is angry and is sending
negative vibes about the whole situation, you can thank them for speaking
out their concerns. This will go a long way in helping you establish a good
rapport with them. With just a simple ‘thank you,’ acknowledging their
time and contributions, you will sufficiently calm the situation down.
One of the best ways you can deal with someone who is continuously
difficult and angry is to ensure that you thank them each time. When a
difficult member of your team starts an inquiry, simply acknowledge their
efforts for reaching out. If you have held onto a case file for extended
durations of time, thank your team for being patient while you were
troubleshooting. When that difficult person shares their negative views
about the project, thank them for being bold enough to share their
perspective and making the whole team better.
Explain the steps you'll take to solve the problem
When that difficult person at your office raises an issue, you must make it
clear to them that you will get started on addressing their concerns. It does
not matter whether or not it is a simple issue that you can finish up over the
phone or something that requires a whole process that might take days,
weeks or even months – the trick is for you to plainly and spell out your
intentions and next moves to them so that they feel valued, heard and at
ease.
One of the best ways you can achieve this is if you set timelines for their
issue to be sorted out. Spell out every single step you intend to take, and
when each one of the steps is expected to be complete. This way, you are
communicating to the other person that you know exactly what it is that you
are doing and the time when you expect to have a resolution ready.

Set a time to follow-up with them, if needed
There are instances when a simple phone conversation cannot resolve the
problems that arise between you and another person. Some will require you
to sync up with the manager or fill up a request form for the resolution
process to be initiated. If that is the case in your instance, then you will
need to explain this to the other person. Try to give them timelines of when
you expect to have a response for them
.
The benefit of talking directly to the other person is so that your client,
coworker, or friend has ample time to calm down. At the same time, this
will give you sufficient time to seek guidance and feedback from your
superiors on how best to proceed. If at all, you will need to follow up with
the other person, explain clearly why that break would greatly benefit them.
For instance, it could be that you will need to speak to the product expert
for troubleshooting purposes. The point is that you are as transparent with
them as possible. Let them stay aware that they cannot take any further
action, at least until you can seek clarification with those concerned as well.
If they keep being uneasy about what you propose to them, you can also
choose to offer them a contingency plan. Tell them exactly when they
expect you to reach out to them and the kind of information you will have
for them. This will justify the follow up you will be taking up with them.
Be sincere
The same way remaining calm when dealing with a difficult person is
essential, so is sincerity. Trust me, people know when they are being spoken
to in a somewhat condescending way or even an angry manner. Choose the
right set of words to use and the intonation to employ when communicating
with a difficult person. Ensure that your tonal voice is not only intentional
but also respectful. No one likes being talked to with an angry tone. Simply
take the high road and make the other person feel like what they are saying
is being taken seriously.
There are times when that difficult person in your office will call you at
midnight with an "issue," but then after reading through or troubleshooting,
you realize that it was an error on their part. You may be tempted to poke

fun on the other person who did not pay attention enough to pick the error
out, costing you your good night's sleep
.
What you need to understand is that this other person could very well be
you. It is through them that you know whether the services you render are
quality enough or not. Even though they may be at fault, it is their
contribution that makes the whole product quality. Therefore, ensure that
you are politely explaining the reason why an issue arose in the first place
and the best ways to prevent them from happening in the future again.
Highlight the case's priority
One of the common frustrations for people who conflict is feeling like their
support case is not as crucial to the business as the other person's. This is
especially the case when dealing with a company or a situation that has a
broader client coverage. The other person might feel as though their case is
expendable while the rest of the team is busy providing poor experiences.
To get this feeling out of the way, you must highlight how critical the
situation is to everyone involved - whether directly or indirectly. Let the
other person know that you are putting in efforts to notify essential
stakeholders in the company so that the issue they are concerned about is
resolved as fast as possible. This way, they will feel as though the whole
company is on their case even if it's only one support team that is working
on it.

One last word
Indeed, dealing with difficult people is one of the toughest tasks in life.
They are the kind of people who will ruin your perfect day before it can
even begin. It could be a colleague, family member, partner, or friend. It
could also be anyone random you run into at the street. Whoever that may
be, the trick is to ensure that you have armed yourself with the above
methods, steps, and approaches to deal with them appropriately.
Realize that difficult people exist all around us, and if you don't do
something about them, then you risk letting them hurt others.
The truth is that there is no easy way to deal with these people – after all,
they are different combinations of personality traits. They all have different
ways to make others' life difficult.
As the saying goes, "It takes two to tango." Realize that these difficult
people may not even notice that they are difficult. To most of them, this is
their usual way of life. In fact, to a difficult person, everyone else around
them is difficult. They don't have your perspective of things.
So, have you been continually dealing with difficult people yourself? If so,
it might be time for you to take a look at your behavior. Ask yourself
whether you are the one being difficult. Look for such indicators as;
-
         
Lack of close connections at home, school or the workplace
-
         
You lack a sense of self-worth in what you do
-
         
You find yourself being misunderstood too often or
complaining about this or that
-
         
You always think that people are talking ill of you
-
         
You still are an emotional person
-
         
You feel like people don’t even care or remember you
You might just be the difficult person we have been discussing here. If that
is the case, then it is high time you use the strategies above to deal with
your behavior. If these traits are what you see in someone around you, then
you can also use the techniques we have discussed to help them become a
better person.

Remember, a little self-reflection goes a long way in helping us be a better
person to the people working and interacting with us daily.
You can help yourself and the difficult person around you to see what they
are doing so that they can change for the long-term.
It is a win for all of us!
So, what are you waiting for? Start identifying them around you and help
them BECOME!
© Written by:
Katerina Griffit
h

