
i

ii
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

iii

Publisher’s note
Every possible effort has been made to ensure that the information contained in this book 
is accurate at the time of going to press, and the publisher and author cannot accept  
responsibility for any errors or omissions, however caused. No responsibility for loss or 
damage occasioned to any person acting, or refraining from action, as a result of the ma­
terial in this publication can be accepted by the editor, the publisher or the author.
First published in Great Britain and the United States in 2015 by Kogan Page Limited
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or review,  
as permitted under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, this publication may only be  
reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any form or by any means, with the prior permission in  
writing of the publishers, or in the case of reprographic reproduction in accordance with the terms 
and licences issued by the CLA. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside these terms should  
be sent to the publishers at the undermentioned addresses:
2nd Floor, 45 Gee Street	
1518 Walnut Street, Suite 1100	
4737/23 Ansari Road
London EC1V 3RS	
Philadelphia PA 19102	
Daryaganj
United Kingdom	
USA	
New Delhi 110002
www.koganpage.com	
	
India
Writing and editing contribution throughout: Will Sheldon
© Rupert Morrison, 2015
The right of Rupert Morrison to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted by him 
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
ISBN	
978 0 7494 7441 6
E-ISBN	 978 0 7494 7442 3
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Morrison, Rupert, author.
  Data-driven organization design : sustaining the competitive edge through organizational analytics / 
Rupert Morrison.
    pages cm
  ISBN 978-0-7494-7441-6 (paperback) – ISBN 978-0-7494-7442-3 (ebk)  1.  Organizational effectiveness.  
2.  Organizational change.  3.  Performance.  4.  Management–Statistical methods.  I. Title. 
  HD58.9.M667 2015
  658.4’0301–dc23
	
2015031280
Typeset by Graphicraft Limited, Hong Kong
Print production managed by Jellyfish
Printed and bound by CPI Group (UK) Ltd, Croydon, CR0 4YY
iv

Contents
About the author  x
Foreword  xi
Acknowledgements  xiii
Part One  Introduction  1
1.1	
Data-driven organization design  3
Effective organization design and management  5
Why people are struggling with organization design  6
How this book will help you  8
Structure of the book  10
Final thoughts  10
Notes  11
1.2	
Challenges  13
Introduction  13
The reality of the challenge  14
Common challenges in organization design  17
Final thoughts  23
Notes  24
1.3	
Foundations and core concepts  25
Introduction  25
Foundation 1: The organization is a system  27
Foundation 2: Organizational data is hierarchical  31
Foundation 3: Organizational data is messy  33
Applying the foundations in practice  35
Method 1: Create hierarchical data structures  37
Method 2: Connect the system  40
Method 3: Visualize to analyse  46
Final thoughts: see it as a journey  56
Notes  57
v

Contents
vi
Part Two  Macro design  59
2.1	
Introduction  61
Macro design in practice  62
Structure and logic for Part Two  63
2.2	
Strategy articulation and design criteria  65
Introduction  65
Define where you are going and why  66
The case for change  71
Constraints and risks  75
Setting the design criteria  76
Final thoughts  77
Notes  79
2.3	
Structural options and business case  80
Introduction  80
Develop options  82
Analysing and deciding your best option  89
Develop and sign off the business case  97
Final thoughts: Have a strong case for change  99
Notes  100
Part Three  Micro design  101
3.1	
Introduction  103
Structure and logic for Part Three  105
3.2	
The data goldmine  108
Introduction  108
Data blockers and myths  109
Building the baseline – get ready to wrangle  113
Performing analysis: common statistical traps  122
Final thoughts  130
Notes  131

Contents
vii
3.3	
Objectives management  133
Introduction  133
Why organizations struggle with corporate-wide performance 
management  134
Process for setting and managing objectives  138
Maintaining and improving objectives management  148
Final thoughts  150
Notes  152
3.4	
Fixed process design  153
Introduction  153
Types of process map  154
Understanding the as-is  159
Analysing the as-is  163
Design the to-be process and structures  170
Link the to-be work to to-be positions and hierarchical 
structure  178
Final thoughts  183
Notes  184
3.5	
Dynamic process design  185
Introduction  185
Dynamic process design methodologies  186
Detailed example: project-driven organizations  188
Mini-examples  196
Final thoughts  200
Notes  202
3.6	
Competency management  203
Introduction  203
Objectives versus competency management  205
The business case for competency management  206
Developing and putting the framework to work  210
Final thoughts  218
Notes  219

Contents
viii
3.7	
Rightsizing  220
Introduction  220
Common currently used flawed methods  221
Four methods for rightsizing your organization  222
Method 1: Ratio analysis  223
Method 2: Activity analysis  230
Method 3: Driver analysis  236
Method 4: Mathematical modelling  243
Final thoughts  247
Notes  248
Part Four  Making it Real  249
4.1	
Introduction  251
What is Making it Real?  251
Realize the design is only a sketch  253
Structure and logic for Part Four  254
Notes  256
4.2	
Common traps  257
Introduction  257
Knowing when and what things are going wrong  257
Final thoughts  262
4.3	
HOWWIP  264
Introduction  264
HOWWIP outcomes  265
Exercises  268
Final thoughts  273
Note  274
4.4	
Implementation  275
Introduction  275
Impact assessment  276
Communication  281
Transition management and consultation  285

Contents
ix
Collateral  293
Final thoughts  294
Note  295
4.5	
Workforce planning  296
Introduction  296
What we really mean by workforce planning  297
How micro design helps to drive workforce planning  301
Workforce planning in practice  302
Final thoughts  307
Notes  309
4.6	
Talent management, succession development and 
succession planning  310
Introduction  310
Why all the hype?  311
Approaches to succession planning  313
Implementing talent and succession planning  319
Final thoughts  321
Notes  322
4.7	
Organizational getting things done  323
Introduction  323
The power of the list  324
Getting things done in a team  326
Using a data-driven approach to get things done  330
Final thoughts: Use the right management tools  333
Notes  334
4.8	
Sustaining the edge  335
Introduction  335
Tracking the system  336
Celebrating, reflecting and resting  340
Final thoughts  342
Notes  343
Appendix  345
Index  349

About the author
R
upert Morrison is the CEO of Concentra, one of the fastest-growing 
analytics firms in the UK and winner of the Technology Innovation 
Award 2011 in the Sunday Times Tech Track 100. He led the creation of its 
OrgVue product, an integrated software platform with solutions including: 
HR analytics, organization design, transition management and strategic 
workforce planning.  It was selected as one of four Gartner Cool Vendors in 
human capital management from an international field. Created based on 
experiences helping clients with business transformation, it is revolutioniz-
ing the way people design, transform and operate their organizations to 
sustain competitive advantage. 
Rupert’s approach combines his experiences of running a fast-growth tech 
firm alongside a wealth of experience in business transformation, supply chain 
optimization, and organization design projects. Having studied economics 
at Erasmus University Rotterdam, he has spent 18 years in consulting, help-
ing organizations around the world. While at Concentra, and before that with 
A T Kearney, Rupert has worked on projects in a broad range of industries 
including automotive, FMCG, mining, government agencies, pharmaceutical 
and private equity. 
Rupert grew up on a sheep station in the Wairarapa in New Zealand. He 
lives in London with his wife and three sons. He has a passion for rugby, 
which he coaches, and for completing IronMan distance triathlons.
x

Foreword
T
he economic environment is changing more rapidly than ever before. 
The practice of organization design is therefore a complex one, often 
subject to intense time pressure, full of traps and false turns and carrying the 
risk of substantial inefficiency and loss. You can either encourage people to 
align behind your strategic vision and hope human flexibility makes things 
work – or you can get to grips with the complexity. To handle complexity, 
you need tools that allow you to intervene and to understand your people, 
activities and products. Organizations are generating data on these things 
more and more quickly; this data is the lifeblood of the organization. But 
the traditional tools for harnessing and presenting this data – Excel, 
PowerPoint – are no longer enough. The revolution in data visualization is 
continuous; with the  way we consume, interact with and understand the 
data around us changing all the time, organizations have a real chance to do 
things better. The human eye and brain can cope with enormous amounts  
of data as long as it’s presented well. You can only bring about effective 
change in your organization if you can really see what is going on in it. This 
is where the insights provided in this book are brilliant. Because the com-
plex can be made simple if you visualize it in a sufficiently intuitive way, 
organizational design activities that were previously too difficult are now 
possible. 
What’s different about this book from other books on organization design 
is that it gives a structured approach, from the top level macro steps to the 
detailed micro steps, drawing on the author’s experience of what it takes to 
‘make it real’ when it comes to organizational change. The book documents 
an entire methodology, going further into the detail than other books. Some 
areas of the methodology presented will evolve over time as greater under-
standing of the problems and new possible solutions emerge. The value of 
the book is in setting the direction and providing the energy to start to define 
the problem space, and to give the best possible current answers. It sets a 
direction that others will follow.
In the chapters of this book are ideas that have gestated over Rupert 
Morrison’s 18-year career, informed by work with over 100 clients, and 
born out of his obsession with data, visualization and mapping the true 
complexity of organizations. They are ideas that have been discussed and 
refined around the camp fire, in the pub, over countless hours in front of the 
xi

xii
Foreword
white board and above all through application in practice. What is also in 
this book is a remarkably honest account of the pains of growing a successful 
and innovative analytics company – a backdrop which makes Rupert’s book 
all the more powerful for the insights he shares. This book is one of the results 
of his dogged determination, emotion, energy and unreasonable commitment. 
Rupert combines deep insight into the future direction of industries with the 
sheer nerve to seek to shape the future. The tenacity of his vision will prove 
invaluable for organizations wanting to make real long-term progress.
Chris Barrett and Giles Slinger

Acknowledgements
I 
owe so much to so many. 
To my many colleagues who have provided detailed comments, debates, 
ideas and encouragement. They have supported the refinement and imple-
mentation of much of the thinking, teaching me and detailing specific concepts 
and applying methods in practice. Andy Birtwistle, Ben Marshall, Chris 
Houghton, Darshan Baskaran, El No, James Don-Carolis, John Candeto, 
Katelyn Weber, Manish Chauhan, Mike Walker, Nikolay Vaklev, Patrick 
Gracey, Robert Campbell and Tom Simpkins all significantly contributed to 
this book. 
To the Concentra and OrgVue senior team of Peter Lanch, Adrian 
Downing, Nick Finch, Weelin Lin, Rodin van der Hart, Jamie Pullar, and 
William Ingram for their support. 
To Anna Triantafillou and Annie Cope for the graphic design. A key 
theme of the book is the power of visualization, and without their ability to 
turn my whiteboard and PowerPoint sketches into understandable images  
a core thrust of the book would have been lost. 
To Katy Hamilton, Lucy Carter, Katleen Richardson and Stefan Leszczuk 
at Kogan Page for their expertise and editing advice and being so flexible  
in the publishing process. 
To A T Kearney and my many mentors and colleagues there for being such 
a great firm and providing me with years of invaluable learning. Especially 
Earle Steinberg, Phil Dunne, Charles Davis, Anne Deering, Jonathan 
Anscombe, Yves Thill, Sean Ritchie, Antti Kautovaara, Judith Orzechowski, 
Jim Pearce, Matt James, Par Astrom, Steve Whitehead, Steve Fowles, Paul 
Collins, Chirag Shah and Gautam Singh. 
To those who have supported and made Concentra possible. In particular 
Ben Scott Knight, Richard Thompson and Angus Whiteley for going on the 
journey, investing and believing. Also to Tom Brown, Goetz Boue and Paul 
Graville for founding the original software development firm and helping  
to form Concentra 2.0. 
To all my clients who I am unable to mention by name. Thank you for 
placing your faith in me and for your continued trust and support. 
To Chris Barrett for his technical and data vision, ability to transform  
an idea into reality and his detailed comments and advice. Giles Slinger for 
his tireless work, edits on every chapter and helping to take the thinking to 
xiii

xiv
Acknowledgements
the next level. Julian Holmes for his detailed comments and in particular 
expertise on workforce planning and implementation. 
Without Will Sheldon I would never have been able to finish this book. 
Thank you for your editing, rewriting and ensuring every argument, detail 
and base was covered every time. 
To my family: my father who passed 25 years ago and my mother. To 
Henk and Alexandra, my four brothers and dear sister, my special Uncle 
Erik, Aunt Marg and dear Gran. To my three gorgeous boys, Hugh, Alec and 
Peter, who give me a reason to keep going every day. 
To my dear wife Vanessa. Everyone who knows me well knows that none 
of this would have been possible without you. To you, Vanessa, the biggest 
thanks of all.

Part One
Introduction
1

2
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

“
Data-driven 
organization  
design
War is ninety percent information.
Napoleon Bonaparte
T
oo many leaders treat organization design as an exercise in moving 
boxes around PowerPoint slides. Too many analysts spend their time in 
unwieldy Excel contraptions that fail to give an understanding of organ­
izational reality. Too many employees are unclear about what their role in 
their organization really is. Too much siloed thinking occurs because it is 
impossible to pull all the elements of the organization together. Too much 
time is wasted designing and changing organizations, with limited value.  
I believe the current methods of organization design are falling behind the 
needs of the modern-day organization. Organizations are struggling to under-
stand where they are, let alone realize their plans and aspirations for the 
future. I wrote this book because I believe there has to be a better way.
Organizations must adapt to survive. They are a constantly evolving system 
made up of objectives, processes designed to meet those objectives, people 
with skills and behaviours to do the work required, and all of this organized 
in a governance structure. That governance structure goes far beyond the 
reporting lines of an org chart. It is how people work together and agree  
on what needs to happen, from day-to-day to year-on-year. It is dynamic, 
constantly moving over time. The structure must be fluid but you have to 
maintain an understanding of it. To be understandable you have to make  
it visual, because if you can’t see it then how can you understand it? The 
organization must create an environment for people to perform, for only 
1.1
3

Part One: Introduction
4
when everyone performs to their potential do you have a hope of getting 
and then sustaining your competitive edge.
Even without the complexities of being part of an organization, people 
struggle to perform and meet even their most basic objectives. Every year on 
1 January millions of people resolve to lose weight and try to get fit. We all 
know it’s not rocket science: eat a balanced diet and exercise regularly. And 
yet 92 per cent of people who make these resolutions will fail to achieve 
their goals, with over 50 per cent giving them up after just six months.1 If we 
struggle as individuals how can we expect to fare when implementing change 
in organizations where we can be dealing with hundreds to many thousands 
of people? It’s like getting fit: the theory isn’t complicated, but putting it into 
practice is extremely difficult.
I believe that those responsible for ensuring their organizations remain 
competitive must stop relying on old-fashioned office tools and isolated org 
charts when defining how they need to organize themselves to meet their 
strategic ambitions. Not only are the techniques used to create and deliver 
organization designs outdated, they don’t go nearly deep enough for what 
businesses require. They are superficial and not geared towards execution. 
How many organization designs are effectively just redrawn org charts? My 
observation, based on looking at hundreds of designs and organizations, is 
the vast majority.
The history of change has always been driven by innovation and  
technology, an idea encapsulated in the term ‘creative destruction’ coined  
by Joseph Schumpeter, an Austrian-American economist, in Capitalism, 
Socialism and Democracy.2 He argued that the constant evolution of indus-
tries revolutionizes the very economic structure they are part of, continually 
destroying it and creating a new one. The advent of the information age we 
live in today represents this process in high definition. The rise of informa-
tion technology has a huge impact on industries, bringing with it greater 
opportunities and greater risks. Reflect on the downfall of big names such as 
Kodak, Blockbuster or Borders and the rise of Apple, Amazon, Google and 
Facebook. Those organizations finding new ways of creating and leveraging 
information are ruling our time. Those that can’t adapt suffer a Darwinian 
extinction. At the heart of this story is the emergence of data and analytics 
as the means to drive business.
Organizations are lagging behind when it comes to applying these prin­
ciples and methods of market success to their people. Organization design 
and workforce analytics represent a new and exciting area of innovation, 
and it is my hope that this book will disrupt how organization design is  

Data-driven Organization Design 
5
currently thought about and practised. The book will provide a toolkit to 
successfully design, change and manage organizations. An ambitious subject 
for one book to cover, but this is a book for ambitious people – for real-life 
practitioners seeking to challenge and improve organizations whether 
through large-scale transformations or gradual change. Most importantly, 
this book addresses how to make required organizational change real by 
using a data-driven approach; not just implementing change, but tackling 
the everyday problems we face as practitioners, which halt us from sustaining 
and achieving results and goals in the long term. This book is about getting 
things done and creating an organization that has the competitive edge.
Effective organization design and 
management
Organizations are by their nature extremely difficult to design and manage 
as they are affected by internal and external forces. They are constantly in 
flux; growing and shrinking, changing focus and direction, and developing 
both intentionally and unintentionally. The rise of technology, globalization 
and the knowledge economy means organizations are having to become  
increasingly complex in order to deal with new business demands. As Jay 
Galbraith has said,3 organizations that used to be relatively simple and 
stable in terms of their structure are having to become increasingly adapt­
able and multifaceted to survive in today’s complex world. Organizations 
have been evolving over time to deal with changes in markets, geography and 
technology, and with the information age upon us it is more important than 
ever for companies to be in control of, and effectively design and manage, 
their organizations. The consequence of the increasing rate of evolution is 
that organization design is moving away from being a one-off intervention 
to an ongoing, continuous project that can never be ‘finished’.
It is no surprise that organizations are struggling to cope with this pace of 
change. In my personal experience of working on numerous design projects 
and research across a range of organizations, few if any felt they have been 
on top of their organization design. Over and above this, organizations are 
struggling to understand themselves in a data-driven way:
●
●90 per cent of companies have chronic problems with their data,  
eg missing, outdated or inaccurate (as reported by Experian in their 
White Paper, ‘The state of data quality’ in 2013).

Part One: Introduction
6
●
●Very few companies are successfully implementing HR analytics and 
in two-thirds of organizations, the majority of time is wasted on 
consolidating, repairing and manipulating data instead of analysing it.4
●
●50 per cent of organizations are unable to track and monitor 
business performance as they would like.5
●
●Only 30 per cent of the 37 companies surveyed by the Corporate 
Research Forum in 2015 said it was ‘true’ or ‘mainly true’ that their 
workforce strategy/plan has adequate breadth and depth to provide 
the necessary workforce information for making good decisions.6
It is because of coming across these struggles time and time again that I have 
wanted to set out an approach that addresses these issues and helps tackle 
them. To do this we first need to understand why people are struggling.
Why people are struggling with 
organization design
While most companies recognize the need to develop ways of designing and 
managing their organizations, the processes by which they are doing so are 
flawed. The methods traditionally offered and followed are insufficient, 
with most people struggling to make headway. I believe there are five main 
reasons for this.
1 Organization design theory is incomplete
While there has been a proliferation of literature on organization design 
over the last decade or so, the focus has been on top-level processes such as 
strategy, organizational structure and company culture. By nature, theory is 
often quite high level, but when it comes to organizations the key is not just 
how to make plans, but how to implement them. How do you implement the 
detail? With no roadmap for the actual implementation of an organization 
design, it is not surprising practitioners struggle to put the board’s grand 
plans in place.
2 Organization design is never fully implemented
The lack of literature is reflected in the actual practice of organizational 
design and management. The focus is on the big picture, not the detail of the 

Data-driven Organization Design 
7
execution. Seeing structural org charts as the end game rather than defining 
all the elements of the design is the root cause of much of this. Once manage-
ment teams have defined the key areas of design or modes of management 
for the organization, their attention moves on to other things leaving those 
further down the organization confused as to what it means to them and 
how they fit into the plan. For example, individual objectives are not linked 
to high-level KPIs, and what competencies are needed for the organization 
to execute its strategy.
3 Organization design is seen as a one off intervention
After finishing many traditional consulting projects, I have always been left 
with the nagging question of what happened after I left a project. Support  
is often used in developing the summary design but the teams who do the 
design will typically move on prior to full implementation and without  
providing the tools to enable the ongoing need for refinement. As the world 
changes, so too should the evolution of the detailed design. But the cap­
abilities to evolve the design are not created. This is endemic to the very 
nature and cost profile of consultants; they have to move on and never truly 
own the problem from start to finish. And neither does the client organ­
ization. It reflects a wider approach to organization design (OD) as a one-off 
intervention. Projects are solved and designs are put in place but there is  
no guarantee that the value from that project will last. Given the evolving 
nature of most organ­izations, OD must become a core competency.
4 Organization design does not harness the potential 
of human capital
Too many employees are unable to fulfil their potential owing to siloed func-
tional, geographic, customer or product areas. They manage the indictors 
they are measured by regardless of whether that has a negative impact on 
the whole, often because they just don’t know better. Accountabilities are 
unclear, so hours are wasted trying to work out how to get things done 
rather than just getting them done. Conflicts are not designed out, so they 
fester and grow. The right resources are not allocated in the right propor-
tions to the priority areas because the priorities are not agreed nor the 
means for determining the ‘right proportions’ established. This is due to the 
fact the detailed holistic design is avoided because it is perceived as being 
too difficult and not sufficiently prioritized.

Part One: Introduction
8
5 Organization design has not been data-driven
Given reason number four, this is potentially the most crucial point of all  
of these failings. In the organization design and management process the 
person who traditionally has been the most powerful in the boardroom is 
the Finance Director. It is the Finance Director who is usually the gatekeeper 
to decisions because it is he or she who is perceived to own the most 
valuable and relevant business data. The Finance Director has the ability  
to communicate that data in a meaningful way – everyone understands the 
concept of a bottom line. Organization design practitioners have been 
unable to gather meaningful people data and link people performance data 
to business performance data in a significant way. Decisions have, therefore, 
been made on financial numbers rather than people and process numbers.  
In many ways, redesigns and change and transformations have actually  
neglected the people at the heart of them and have failed to centre that 
change on maximizing people performance.
This book addresses all of these areas by bringing organization design  
and management practice up to date. It provides a flexible toolkit and road-
map to address the everyday challenges thrown at us when designing an 
organization.
How this book will help you
This book is for practitioners and as such it deals with the detail: how to  
see processes through from the beginning to end from high-level thinking 
right down to the day-to-day questions such as:
●
●How do I ensure the optimal design for my organization so that it 
meets a clear business strategy?
●
●How do I decide between ranges of contradictory macro options?
●
●What is the best way to collect and sort data on my employees?  
And how do I make it practical and relevant to the organization?
●
●How do I align everyone so they are pulling in the same direction?
●
●What is the best way to rightsize the organization?
●
●How do I carry out an impact assessment?
●
●How do I manage change when implementing a redesign?
●
●Who is the best suited for a new position we created?

Data-driven Organization Design 
9
●
●How do I plan the workforce on an ongoing and long-term basis?
●
●How do I monitor progress?
In answering these questions this book has some simple philosophies:
1	 Organizations are systems. Just like the human body, each part of the 
organization is connected, and changes in one part of the system can 
have unintended and unforeseen consequences in another.
2	 An organization’s people are its greatest asset, and the right people 
are a rare currency. Anyone who works with people data, whether in 
HR, strategy, OD, or as a consultant, is in one of the best positions to 
give insight into organization design and organizational management. 
The goal is to ensure the organization has the right people in the 
right places doing the right things; to align the organization from top 
to bottom in order to achieve the best possible results.
3	 Organizations need to harness data and technology. The HR 
department in particular needs to become more data-driven. It needs 
to ask the right questions; collect the right data; present that data in 
a visual way; use the right tools for different functions; and gain 
maximum impact from that data it owns.
This book takes lessons from a broad spectrum of functions such as HR, 
finance and marketing, disciplines such as economics, psychology, sport, 
technology, and my experience in management consultancy and running a 
company.
When it comes to organization design you have to make it real. This book 
is about how to get things done, how to take plans from a whiteboard and 
put them into practice. Part of this journey is about getting things wrong. 
Things will always go wrong. It is how you deal with the unexpected chal-
lenges thrown up in achieving your goals and objectives that is the real 
yardstick of success.
This book is not a panacea. There are some things that can never be  
certain when it comes to organizations. Nor will this book change the fact 
that organization design is hard work. However, it will ensure the hard work 
is worthwhile and give you tools and processes to help you find your right 
path and get to the end of that path. It is not expected that practitioners  
will read this book cover to cover from beginning to end, but it has been 
written so each element of the book can be picked up for each challenge 
faced, piece of inspiration needed, or question needing to be answered.

Part One: Introduction
10
Structure of the book
This book outlines the frameworks, methods and tools for OD and ongoing 
organizational management. In Part One I lay out both the philosophical 
and the practical foundations. Part Two will explore the big picture intro-
ducing the concept of macro design and outlining the process of creating a 
clear organization design through three steps: defining strategy; iterating 
the design; and creating a business case. This sets up Part Three in which I 
focus on micro design, arguing that this is the real key to an OD. Starting 
with the barriers to micro design I then go through a step-by-step process 
addressing how to build a baseline, set objectives, map fixed-value chain 
processes as well as dynamic changing ones, map competencies, and right-
size your organization. Building on these methods, in Part Four I address how 
you turn theory into reality. I go through the challenges of moving something 
from paper into reality and address how in practice this is done by looking 
at impact analysis, selection processes, implementation and transition, work­
force planning, communications, succession planning and talent management. 
I conclude with a note on sustaining the organization and the necessity of 
celebrating success.
The result is a step-by-step guide to making change in your organization 
successful and long lasting. This is not an easy journey and it isn’t one  
you have to attempt in one go. It helps to break the journey into separate 
isolated chunks. Reflecting this, each chapter has been written to be useful 
in its own right. As long as you have read the Chapter 1.3 Foundations  
and core concepts, you should be able to pick up any of the chapters and  
get value.
Wherever there are challenges, there are opportunities. For practitioners 
working in organizational changes and transformation there is a real chance 
to take charge of the data and analytics now available within companies, 
and use them to impact business outcomes. Whether you are looking at  
implementing long-term change and a large redesign, or a one-off small-
scale project, I hope this book helps inspire you to make the most of your 
organizational data and analytics to drive effectiveness and efficiencies in 
your business.
Final thoughts
Nothing of real value can be done quickly and without significant effort. It 
has taken me a good five years to write this book. The concepts and principles 

Data-driven Organization Design 
11
within it have been tested and refined through reading the great work of 
others, attending dozens if not hundreds of seminars, surveying experts,  
refining the tools through to actually using them, debating the approaches, 
constant reflection, and learning from my mistakes. I have been blessed with 
the support of many remarkable people. To master the concepts within this 
book, therefore, will take effort and commitment. It is dense with content 
and aims to provide a holistic approach to give you the knowledge and 
tools to sustain the competitive edge through organizational analytics. The 
many illustrations are in full colour to make it easier to comprehend and to 
make the concepts more concrete. I use real-life examples and expose some 
of my failings. I can only hope you get as much value from reading it and 
applying the thinking as I have gained from actually writing it.
1	 Organizations are difficult to design and manage as they are affected by 
internal and external forces and are therefore in a constant state of flux.
2	 Current organization design theory is incomplete. A holistic end-to-end 
approach is needed: from your organization’s vision to tracking your 
actual results to defining the entire organizational system.
3	 The organizations finding new ways of creating and leveraging 
information are ruling our time. Leveraging organizational data will help 
you win in your chosen space.
4	 This book is written for ambitious people who are prepared to do the 
hard work required to achieve their edge.
Remember this
Notes
1	 Norcross, J, Mrykalo, M and Blagys, M (2002) Auld Lang Syne: Success 
predictors, change processes, and self-reported outcomes of New Year’s 
resolvers and nonresolvers, Journal of Clinical Psychology, 58 (4),  
pp 397–405
2	 Schumpeter, J (2008) Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy, third edition, 
Harper Perennial Modern Classics

Part One: Introduction
12
3	 Galbraith, J (2001) Designing Organizations: An executive guide to strategy, 
structure and process revised, Pfeiffer
4	 Bassi, L, Carpenter, R and McMurrer, D (2012) HR Analytics Handbook, 
McBassi & Company, New York
5	 Eddy, N [Accessed 28 March 2015], Eweek [Online] http://www.eweek.com/
small-business/business-intelligence-analytics-top-areas-of-investment-in-
2014-gartner
6	 Colin Beames, Workforce Strategy Audit Survey Report, Corporate Research 
Forum, March 2015. Question 11 of survey finding. https://www.kpmg.com/
UK/en/IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPublications/Documents/PDF/topics/ 
workforce-strategy-audit-survey-report.pdf

“
1.2
Challenges
Accept the challenges so that you can feel  
the exhilaration of victory.  George S Patton
Introduction
Redesigning an organization can often feel like preparing for battle. It  
takes courage, and the knowledge that along the way there are going to be 
casualties and a few scars to take away at the end of it. The first question 
you have to ask before any organization redesign is: ‘Is the potential upside 
of the redesign worth the cost and risk of doing so?’ And when I say cost 
and risk I don’t just mean for the organization, but its people. Redesigns can 
have personal implications across all levels of an organization. So, is your 
problem really an organizational structure problem?
I have seen too many executives embark on a reorganization believing  
it will be an all-embracing cure for their problems. If you have systematic 
issues in your organizational performance or behaviour, merely shifting  
responsibilities and role titles may not be the solution you are seeking. Often 
senior managers face an immediate need to reduce costs, integrate an acquisi­
tion or provide a platform for growth, and it is concluded that the current 
organizational structure is not fit for purpose. The experience of heads of 
department going on ‘magic weekends’ and coming in on a Monday morning 
having dreamt up a new organizational structure on paper is a common one 
when speaking to executives. However, this can be an entirely pointless 
exercise. Redesigns do not, or rather should not, start with the aesthetics of 
an organization. You have to fully understand the root causes of problems 
and performance. Only then will you find a solution. I would argue recogniz-
ing the problems is 50 per cent of the solution. Let’s go back to the original 
question: ‘Is the potential upside of the redesign worth the cost and risk of 
doing so?’ What this is getting at is, do you really need a major organizational 
shift in direction (as described in Part Two of this book) or can you focus 
on the detail, making tweaks and readjustments to particular aspects of  
13

Part One: Introduction
14
the organization (as outlined in Part Three)? As I emphasize in Chapter 2.2, 
if you are going to implement an organization redesign you need an over-
whelming case for change. Otherwise it just isn’t worth it.
Knowing when to carry out a large-scale intervention as opposed to  
simply tweaking the detail is the reason taking a data-driven approach is  
so valuable. Organizational analytics help to uncover root causes, illuminate 
the scale of problems and, through scenario modelling and testing, give 
some understanding as to the potential impacts and benefits of change. This 
is one of the reasons I place so much emphasis on building a baseline of data 
in Chapter 3.2. Having a data-driven approach creates a virtuous circle in 
which the better your data, the better you understand problems, and the 
more focused and appropriate your response can be. However, sometimes 
there is no choice but to embrace wholesale change. And even when everyone 
is trying their best to follow the right processes for the right reasons, this 
change represents a huge challenge.
In this chapter I outline the challenges in the actual process of doing an 
organization design. Although they are related, these are not the specific 
challenges of implementation (something I address in Chapter 4.2) but the 
challenges of the design phase as covered in the macro and micro sections of 
the book. These are challenges I have lived through and come up against 
time and time again with clients and through personal experience. I have 
discussed them endlessly and read as much as I can on the topic. But nothing 
can prepare you for actually experiencing them. Therefore, I begin this 
chapter with my own first-hand experience of doing an unsuccessful re­
design to highlight many of the traps and issues that are seemingly obvious but 
easy to fall into. I then explicitly draw out five types of challenges in doing 
organization design: the complexity of organizations, people and politics, 
data and analytics, personal limits and design processes.
These challenges represent both hard-edged data-driven issues and the 
soft people politics and change sides. They are intrinsically linked and both 
are fraught with traps, in particular the soft side. However, if knowing the 
root causes of a problem is 50 per cent of finding the solution, then address-
ing and thinking through the challenges of a redesign up front will at least 
give you a head start.
The reality of the challenge
In early 2008 a group of management consultants and I took on a London tech­
nology firm. We wanted to merge the business knowledge and method-driven 

Challenges
15
approaches you learn in MBAs and consulting firms with the engineering 
skills of hard-core software development. With these joint capabilities, we saw 
an opportunity in the market: to create solutions and products for business 
operations problems that were common, difficult to solve and high-impact. 
I became the CEO of this new company.
At the start, like many small, high-growth companies we had an extremely 
fluid and informal organizational structure. Between the members of the 
senior management team we covered sales, delivery, finance and a couple of 
the business lines. Everyone did a bit of everything. We maintained and 
aligned the direction of the business primarily through our close relation-
ships. However, after two years of strong growth, we needed to rethink our 
strategy if we wanted to continue expanding. To invest in the business we 
decided to raise venture capital funding. This required a rethinking of our 
ways of working as the old ways did not meet the more formal structures 
demanded by venture capital firms, nor was it sustainable. We needed to 
redesign the organization.
Hubristic management consultant that I was, I thought that my years of 
experience consulting and doing organization designs around the world 
meant I knew all I needed to about the transition that was to come. I was 
wrong. And I fell into two of the most basic of traps when redesigning the 
organization.
I designed around the people, not the needs of the 
business
There is a big difference between doing organization design as a consultant 
and doing organization design for a company you part own, know and love. 
For a start, you have long-term social relationships with those you have 
worked with for years, and any design that affects them is going to affect 
those relationships. The trouble started through the process of creating  
a business case in the pursuit of venture capital. Creating a business case and 
professionalizing the business meant clarifying every part of the business; 
formalizing the budget, setting out accountabilities, confirming roles and 
direct reports. In this instance, the result was a scenario in which each 
stakeholder wanted to assert his or her ownership over the management of 
the company more strongly. Everyone wanted a large, meaningful role with 
power that reflected his or her shareholding and status as a director.

Part One: Introduction
16
I compromised long-term goals for short-lived peace
As a consequence of the first trap, I began to move things away from the 
best design that would deliver the long-term goals of the business. New  
senior hires were brought into the business to professionalize many of the 
core functions and help drive the top line. As I brought in the talent to 
support the plan my number of direct reports grew. The need of many of 
the senior players to have strong roles resulted in a series of profit & loss 
accounts (P&Ls) being generated. The idea was that if everyone managed 
their P&L, then together we would meet our targets. But this wasn’t an org 
structure that was designed; it was one arrived at through negotiation and 
compromise. I knew it wasn’t right, but didn’t feel strong enough to stop it. 
Unfortunately, the business performance significantly declined due to lack  
of alignment, an internal rather than external focus and us simply not all 
pulling in the same direction.
How the reorganization affected the whole
●
●Trust was eroded between everyone in the company because 
everyone was treading on each other’s toes and putting him or herself 
first. There was a huge amount of duplication of documents and 
decision-making.
●
●It was impossible to achieve the marketing objectives. For instance, 
the new marketing director was overloaded with different messages 
and points of view from everyone who effectively felt they had a veto 
on every decision.
●
●Finance was submerged by a deluge of work that stemmed from the 
P&L structure. Revenue recognition became the largest bone of 
contention. This was paper money that had no impact on either 
clients or our bottom line.
What this looked like in practice
We had lost our competitive edge. Symptoms of the organization included:
●
●There were a huge number of meetings because there were so many 
people who felt they had a veto. So if you wanted to get something 
agreed, you had to lobby hard. I am a great believer in everyone 
having their say, but too many voices and vetoes just lead to nothing 
getting done.

Challenges
17
●
●External contractors were brought in to do training in areas that,  
if the business was running smoothly, would not have been needed, 
such as executive management and team building – a direct result of 
having a lack of alignment behind a collective vision (an area I come 
back to later in the chapter).
●
●As Managing Director I spent all my time looking internally rather 
than externally. Instead of chasing up prospects I was struggling just 
to keep the company running.
●
●Growth stopped and we fell well behind budget.
●
●Staff attrition increased. It was no longer a fun place to work – 
something we had previously taken great pride in.
●
●Things got so bad we had to implement a redundancy programme, 
resulting in the cutting of the whole marketing team together with 
various other roles.
In short, the business had begun to fail. Thankfully, we managed to address 
the problems in time. We changed the design, sorted many of the structural 
issues and got rid of those P&L structures. The toll, on an individual and 
organizational level, however, was massive. I think it is extremely common 
for highly successful firms to dance with near fatal situations as they grow. 
Ben Horowitz does a brilliant job of describing the pain and mistakes in 
building a business in his book The Hard Thing About Hard Things.1 Our 
particular story is being replicated thousands of times around the world 
every year. The key is to identify the challenges at the outset, and deal with 
the conflicts head on.
Common challenges in organization design
When a business goes through significant change, the design is just the begin-
ning. Organizations are complex and so are people. Bringing alignment 
through change as a whole and individually is a real challenge. The larger 
the organization and more embedded the status quo, the harder it is. People, 
as individuals, have their own personal goals, pride, weaknesses, prejudices 
and complexities. Bringing everyone onto the same journey creates natural 
tensions and represents an obvious communication problem. In this sense, 
the first two challenges in this chapter (‘Complexity’ and ‘People and politics’) 
represent why organization design is challenging, while the later three 
challenges (‘Data and analytics’, ‘Personal limits’ and ‘Design processes’) 
represent challenges in how to deliver the design.

Part One: Introduction
18
Complexity
Getting and keeping the competitive edge come in part from understanding 
the impact a change in one part of the organization will have on another.  
No easy task. A good way to appreciate the complexity of this is to think of 
the human body. As David Epstein writes in The Sports Gene: ‘The 23,000 
genes in a human body make up a 23,000-page recipe book, which in theory 
provides direction for the creation of the body... but if one page is moved, 
altered or torn out, then some of the other 22,999 pages may suddenly 
contain new instructions.’2
If we think of an organizational system, change can have serious un­
predictable consequences. It’s not just about the people; it’s their roles,  
objectives, processes, competencies and more. Change one tiny part of that 
system and that is going to have a knock-on effect on at least one, and prob-
ably more parts of that system. And that’s just what you can quantify.  
What about the effect change will have on ‘culture’ or company values?  
As I found out, your design can have all sorts of unanticipated results.
There is a lot to think about. And although you can never prepare for 
everything, you can plan and think through as many scenarios as possible  
to ensure that you’ve covered and thought of as much as possible. If the 
unpredictable happens you just have to be flexible enough and quick enough 
to deal with it. This represents a real cognitive challenge – to have all the 
elements of the system clearly defined and in your head.
Solution: break down the organizational system
This is a challenge that I address throughout the book and explicitly in 
Chapter 1.3. I have tried to simplify it by breaking down the organization 
into what I perceive to be its core component parts: objectives, fixed-value 
chain processes, dynamic process (eg projects, risks) and competencies. 
Everyone will have his or her own way of thinking through the organ­
izational system, but the most important thing is that you do think and  
are always thinking through it. Fortunately, technology is on our side.  
The historical tools of the organization design practitioner such as Excel, 
PowerPoint, Visio and org charting software are being overtaken by a new 
breed of technology that brings together data analysis, hierarchical model-
ling and reporting. This is making it easier to understand and appreciate  
the organizational system as well as to test hypotheses and organizational 
scenarios. The organizational system is no longer intangible, but something 
we can really get to grips with.

Challenges
19
People and politics
The biggest mistake you can make is to redesign an organization around 
people rather than its intrinsic needs. This sounds obvious but when you are 
emotionally invested – compromised by the existing design – it is extremely 
easy to forget. It is easy to do anything for the sake of peace. You keep indi-
viduals happy in the short term but to the detriment of everyone in the long 
term. The people factor of any redesign will probably be your greatest and 
most constant battle. The first reason relationships within an organization 
are so tricky is that people see different things and interpret the world in 
different ways. Examples where people may not be aligned include:
●
●the organization’s vision and mission;
●
●organizational goals;
●
●value propositions and articulations;
●
●interpretation of roles and job descriptions;
●
●attitudes towards ways of working, colleagues, clients or 
stakeholders;
●
●approaches towards reward, remuneration, peer recognition or career 
advancement.
This is just scraping the surface. It is made even more complex by the second 
issue: the natural tensions that occur within organizations. Targets may 
contradict each other. For example, some teams or individuals may be 
measured, rewarded and driven by sets of KPIs that may be in direct conflict 
with others elsewhere in the organization. For instance, goals about growing 
direct sales may contradict goals about profit margins or short-term quality. 
If I drop the price I may increase the sales but I will then reduce the percent-
age margin. Equally, in order to increase quality I may need to increase cost 
with a direct result on margin (assuming you can’t charge more).
The third reason is motivation. Some people will act for the good of the 
whole while others are more concerned about their next promotion, or  
having the largest department. It is almost never the case that a manager will 
say ‘My team is idle and I need to reduce its size.’ Just as wages are sticky  
(ie they only go up), so is the demand for resource. This results in a constant 
pressure for more and more of the same. The number of staff evolves upwards 
and managers who shout the loudest get more (a subject I tackle explicitly 
in Chapter 3.7).
This is compounded by the evolving demand for skills. If you take the 
Schumpeterian view that macroeconomic change is driven by the combination 

Part One: Introduction
20
of technical innovation with entrepreneurship, then you can see many 
industries struggling to adapt to requirements for totally new sets of cap­
abilities. A good example is the need for retail firms to hire digital teams and 
become competitive in the e-commerce world or the need for automotive 
firms to hire software developers. (In Chapter 3.6 I explore how to quantify 
the sorts of skills required for an organization and how to manage the 
strategic gaps in those skills.)
Solution: ensure clarity
In order to minimize the risk of people seeing the world differently, have 
them see the same things. Have single versions of truth for all the key design 
elements. Tease out the variations in interpretation through structured dis-
cussion. The entire data-driven organization design process will do just this.
In terms of targets being misaligned, Chapter 3.3 deals with this point 
explicitly. It is inevitable that objectives will often be contradictory. The 
need is to expose those conflicts and ensure the reward mechanisms don’t 
get in the way of doing what is right. Lastly, the third issue of motivation is 
harder to solve. This comes down to who is hired and retained. Do they 
sign up to the vision and values of the business or not? If not, tougher  
conversations need to take place. People who are ambitious and who want 
to be promoted should be welcomed, as long as they have the behaviours, 
competencies and performance to back up their ambition.
Data and analytics
The value that a data-driven approach can bring to organization design is 
undeniable, as I will demonstrate throughout this book. However, that 
doesn’t mean it’s easy in practice. The perception is that the main challenges 
with data and analytics are technical; for example: collecting, merging,  
storing, structuring, calculating, maintaining, visualising or cleaning. But in 
reality these are relatively simple to solve, and becoming far easier to solve 
in this age of rapid information innovation. Far more difficult to overcome 
are the social issues data brings. Data is emotive, and can be threatening. 
Sometimes this is unintentional, and other times data is used actively as 
another weapon in the war of office politics. After all, information is power. 
These social issues cause blockers, and overcoming them takes a lot of guile, 
focus and leadership. In my experience there are four types of blockers:
1	 The manager or employee who is apathetic. They think it’s not worth 
the effort to contribute their data or ensure it is correctly formatted.

Challenges
21
2	 The employee who is fearful to provide data because of how it may 
be interpreted, and the risk of being misrepresented. They fear those 
above them will judge too quickly, and make unjustified decisions 
without the ‘whole truth’.
3	 The manager or employee who uses data as a passive-aggressive 
weapon in the battle for office supremacy. They present charts and 
figures that implicate another department, or person, taking the 
scrutiny away from themselves.
4	 The manager or employee who hides information from others 
because information is power. If they hold the information they can 
hold the power and use that power over other people. Often done by 
refusing to give data or by presenting complex charts and numbers to 
ensure no one quite knows what is going on.
One thing is clear: transparency is rarely universally desired. And, obviously, 
unfettered transparency isn’t the goal here. The flow of information will  
always be managed, and often for very good reasons. However, my point is 
that even obtaining the basic information on your current organizational 
performance can be a real challenge.
Solution: be persistent
I believe if you want organizational transparency then you have to fight  
for it. The technical issues can be overcome. Whatever the reason, it is those 
secretive souls whom you need to take along the journey. First, it is not an 
overnight fix. It will take time and repeated effort. However, with each step 
it will become easier as data becomes a fundamental part of organization 
design and the execution of that design. Second, ensure that throughout the 
design process the value of the outputs significantly outweighs the cost of 
getting the inputs. People will embrace data if they get something from it 
and have ownership over it. Even playing back the insights will surprise 
many because they are so used to providing data into a black hole. Third,  
if they give data once and you will want them to do it regularly, find a way 
to automate the process as much as possible. No one likes reworking the 
same thing over and over again. Fourth, if it comes to it, you have to be 
tough. If the only way forwards is to enforce from above – and it is rare that 
such a heavy-handed approach is required – then sometimes you have to use 
authority to get things done. This book champions a data-driven approach. 
Although I have tried to structure every chapter in as informative and 
practical a way as possible, there will never be an out-of-the-box solution to 

Part One: Introduction
22
implementing and creating a data-driven culture, especially if it is at odds 
with the organization’s current way of doing things.
Personal limits
Work should be fun. Obviously it isn’t all of the time, but then you have to 
be engaged and know that the good times come along with the bad. During 
the dark days described in the above case study, I put on 10 kilos and had  
a limited social life and reduced sleep. Night after night, week after week,  
I would wake at 3 am or 4 am with my mind racing. This was pervasive. 
Change is emotional and taxing. The main reason for such stress comes 
down to lack of alignment and trust. So try (using the methods outlined 
above in ‘Solution: Ensure clarity’ under ‘People and politics’) to limit the 
risk of this happening.
Solution: manage your resources
First, manage your time. A large-scale organization design is time consum-
ing. This comes back to the first question we asked in the introduction:  
‘Is the potential upside of the redesign worth the cost and risk of doing so?’ 
For example, can you do more by clarifying objectives or responsibilities 
rather than by changing organizational structures? I believe that controlled 
organization development is often preferable to large-scale redesigns. Most 
of what I describe in Part Three and Part Four can happen without large-
scale macro redesign. However, if a major redesign is the only option then 
make sure you have the time and resources at your disposal. Creating a clear 
well-resourced plan is fully detailed in the project management section in 
Chapter 3.5. Given the complexity of the organizational system, each day  
of effort can feel like a drop in the ocean. Your mind can only deal with so 
much. So be fair to yourself: make sure the timelines and resource plans are 
realistic and make sure you have the proper support in place.
Design processes
Approaching an organization design with a comprehensive and consistent 
approach can be a challenge. You have to apply the same rigour across all 
areas of the design, and also bring everyone along the same journey. Organ­
ization design is more than just a structural issue. As I highlighted in the 
introduction, so often organization design is understood simply as org 
charts and who reports to whom. The org charts become the focus rather 

Challenges
23
than what work actually needs to be done by each person. Linked to the  
issues of people and politics, people care much more about their position on 
the chart than anything else. There is a real challenge in communicating and 
getting adoption of design methods which go beyond a simple restructure 
and fundamentally address the way an organization functions.
Solution: connect the organizational system
In many ways this challenge encompasses all the challenges above and the 
reason for this book. The solution begins with bringing clarity to the bigger 
picture, the purpose of the redesign. Not having an agreed method to follow 
or process for getting from A to B will result in chaos or, at best, time lost  
as everyone tries to muddle through. Throughout the process you have to  
be rigorous about definitions and phrases. Throughout this book, clarity  
of terminology, processes and documentation are common themes. Break 
down the organizational system and ensure everyone is clear that the issues 
go deeper than an org chart, and that there will be no quick fix. Finally, take 
a data-driven approach so that everyone starts from the same points and 
begin to connect the impacts on the organization as a whole. This book 
clarifies a process that is both holistic and truly end to end, to help design 
the organization, implement that design and sustain the design over time.
Final thoughts
Any person or organization can lose their edge. In my own experience,  
despite having undertaken consulting OD projects a vast number of times,  
I have made the most basic of mistakes. Just knowing the theory doesn’t 
mean you are always strong enough to practise it. These challenges hope-
fully throw sharp perspective on the journey to come. It may seem daunting, 
but as I stated, just identifying the challenges gets you halfway there. At 
times, it may appear to be so much that it just overwhelms. Don’t let it. 
Enjoy the journey of addressing these common issues. Organizations are 
organic, constantly moving and seeking direction. There are never any perfect 
answers when it comes to the design. There are just a trade-offs to be made. 
In order to achieve your strategy, you need to have the right people, doing 
the right things, at the right time, with the right competencies, in the right 
numbers. They all need to be clear about their roles, how they fit into a 
broader context and are aligned. Or as close as is practical given the realities 
of changing business life.

Part One: Introduction
24
Notes
1	 Horowitz, B (2014) The Hard Thing About Hard Things: Building a business 
when there are no easy answers, Harper Business
2	 Epstein, D (2014) The Sports Gene: Talent, Practice and the Truth About 
Success, Yellow Jersey
1	 Don’t fall into the trap of thinking that a change at the macro level is 
necessarily the solution.
2	 Designing to keep the political powerbrokers happy is likely to backfire 
and result in a high price being paid.
3	 An organization is a system and small changes to that system can have 
unpredictable impacts.
4	 You are going to need to ‘fight for transparency’.
5	 Manage your resources and be realistic about what can be achieved 
within a given time frame.
Remember this

“
1.3
Foundations and 
core concepts
There is magic in graphs. The profile of a curve reveals in  
a flash a whole situation – the life history of an epidemic,  
a panic, or an era of prosperity.  Henry D Hubbard 1939
Introduction
Organizations are complex, constantly moving and can often seem unpre-
dictable. Dealing with uncertainty is hard but it is a constant in business. 
The challenge is to get into the best position possible to make consistently 
good decisions in an ambiguous world. The only way to do this is to arm 
yourself with the right tools, both on a conceptual and a technological level. 
A great example of how to do this comes from the world of economics.
In 1959 natural gas was discovered in the Netherlands. Intuition would 
say that gas means money, better business and more jobs. Good for every-
one, right? Unfortunately not. After finding the gas, there were job losses 
and increased unemployment. On the face of it, a completely illogical and 
incomprehensible result. So what was really going on? The discovery of gas 
led to the appreciation of the Dutch currency, which in turn meant that the 
price of exports increased. Businesses lost trade as markets were unable  
to afford the increases in price and the knock-on effect meant cuts and job 
losses across organizations.
This example is a fantastic demonstration of systems thinking, a situation 
in which one part of a system (in this case the economic system – the oil and 
gas industry) has a hidden connection with another part of the system (the 
manufacturing industry). The real question is, can seemingly unconnected 
relationships and unlikely scenarios such as the example above be pre-
dicted? It could, and in fact in economic circles these interactions are now 
25

Part One: Introduction
26
modelled by economists, to run scenarios and predict the impact of the  
economic development of natural resources. The phenomenon even has its 
own name: Dutch Disease.
Why is this relevant to the organization? An organization has many  
similarities to an economy. For example, both have tangible and intangible 
drivers and both are extremely volatile. Both are extremely difficult to  
understand in full and to manage accordingly. Like an economy, the organ­
ization and organizational change can only be understood from a systems 
perspective.
In the same way in which economists model economies, can we begin 
modelling the organization in a way that connects the organizational system? 
Can we simplify the complexities of this system to understand it as a whole, 
see the ‘unseen’ connections and get a glimpse of seemingly unpredictable 
scenarios before they happen?
I believe we are part of an exciting time where the advances of technology 
are allowing us to gain a true competitive advantage by using data and ana-
lytics from across organizations to model and connect the organizational 
system. This type of insight doesn’t happen overnight. It requires a long 
journey, from collecting and analysing the data, to understanding how it 
impacts the business and then implementing the changes needed for business 
improvement.
This chapter lays many of the foundational building blocks for this book: 
a mental model for organizational analytics and design. Starting from a 
theoretical approach to the organization, I set out three foundations:
●
●Foundation 1: The organization is a system
●
●Foundation 2: Organizational data is hierarchical
●
●Foundation 3: Organizational data is messy
The chapter then lays out a three-step approach to deal with each one of 
these:
●
●Method 1: Create hierarchical data structures
●
●Method 2: Connect the system
●
●Method 3: Visualize to analyse
This chapter challenges some assumptions in current design work, and throws 
out some of the tools that have traditionally been used. I hope it provides 
you with a fresh perspective, and a new way of seeing and understanding the 
organization.

Foundations and Core Concepts
27
Foundation 1: The organization is a system
Understanding the organization as a system is at the heart of this book’s  
application of organization design. Organization design is not about who 
reports to whom; it is about what each role in the organization is required 
to do, what decisions need to be made, what activities need to be done, what 
competencies are required to do these things and which employees have the 
right set of competencies for each role. The connections are many and inter-
linked. Treating the organization as a system is about seeing and closing  
the gap between these areas. Answering the sorts of questions like: What are 
the optimum number of full-time employees (FTEs) for my organization? 
How are my customers going to be served? What are the value chains needed 
to serve those customers? How much of my workforce should be in house 
versus contracting?
The idea of treating the organization as a system is not new, but the 
thinking is rarely applied in practice. Taking a couple of examples from 
existing literature, the organization as a system has been defined in the 
following terms:
Designing organizations is the process of purposefully configuring the elements 
of an organization to effectively and efficiently achieve its strategy and deliver 
intended business, customer and employee outcomes.1
Driving business strategy and operating context requires holistic thinking 
(systems, structures, people, performance measures, processes, culture, skills...); 
design for the future; not to be undertaken likely; a fundamental process and 
not a repair job.2
These descriptions are all very well, but what do they really mean? How 
pragmatically can we make sense of the idea of the organization as a system 
in a value-adding way rather than an academic concept?
Let’s start at a high level. An organization has a vision, a reason for being. 
This is translated into goals, objectives and more broadly into a strategy in 
how to achieve these (see Chapter 2.2 for a detailed description of these 
terms). Objectives are then broken down and delivered by employees who 
fulfil roles within a reporting structure. Each role is associated with certain 
processes and competencies required to deliver the objectives and processes 
ascribed to that role. I could keep going round in circles, but the system can 
only start to be understood as a model. Figure 1.3.1 shows some of the ele-
ments of the organizational system and how they can start to be connected.
This model in Figure 1.3.1 falls short of covering all the aspects of the 
organization – models are never able to convey the whole truth. It only 

Part One: Introduction
28
shows particular elements and connections of the organization, but it is a 
useful way to begin to understand the complexities of the system. At first 
glance it may feel complex and overwhelming. I recommend you take your 
time, step through it slowly and focus on each of the various connections 
separately. The questions highlight the sorts of thought processes you should 
go through. For instance, how do you translate the strategy to specific goals 
and objectives as will be outlined in Chapter 3.3? Once the objectives are 
clear, you then need to define who is responsible for each one. That is repre-
sented by the links between the list of ‘Goals and Objectives’ and ‘Employees’. 
The datasets each have a wealth of information in them. For instance, the 
employee dataset will frequently have demographic, performance and reward 
data as outlined in Chapter 3.2. An example of a gap is the difference between 
required numbers of people and the actual supply of people (as explained  
in Chapter 4.5). There are feedback loops; for instance, I may have a target 
headcount in my desired org structures, but is that number right (as is ex-
plained in Chapter 3.7) and does the top-down financial implication of this 
headcount match my financial goals? The system starts at two ends: the 
strategy and what the system needs to deliver to the customer. The customer 
dataset is drawn at the top, to signify their primary importance, with the 
employees right in the middle as the connection point between all the ele-
ments. Not every connection or nuance from this figure will make sense at 
first glance. That is fine. After you read more and more of this book, each of 
the elements of the system will become understandable.
I will reference aspects of this model throughout the book, putting each 
part of the organizational system into the context of the interrelated whole. 
Part Two covers vision and strategy, high-level goals, structural options  
and summary processes, while Part Three details objectives, processes, non-
process, competencies and rightsizing. Part Four focuses on executing the 
plans developed in the macro and micro stages.
Exploring the organizational system in more detail, a good way to think 
through all its connections in practical terms is to think about a job descrip-
tion as shown in Figure 1.3.2. A job description systematically captures all 
the major elements of the organizational system. You have the person, the 
role, the salary and whom he or she reports to. You have a description of the 
objectives the person is expected to fulfil, the overall responsibilities, what 
he or she is supposed to do, and a list of projects that person will be focusing 
on and the competencies (ie skills and behaviours) required.
On this level, the organizational system conceptually is not that hard to 
grasp. However, in practical terms the issue is scale. Having one job descrip-
tion is quite simple but what about when we look at 10,000 or even just 

Foundations and Core Concepts
29
Figure 1.3.1 
The organizational system
Responsibilities
Employees 
fulfil roles
Employees’  
competencies
What are 
my key 
goals?
Which  
competencies 
are core?
Headcount
reports
Is right-
sized?
Required 
competencies
Responsibilities
Percent 
Time
GAP 
analysis
GAP 
analysis
PRocEssEs  
& AcTIvITIEs
sTRATEGy
GoAls &  
objEcTIvEs
comPETEncIEs
EmPloyEEs
oRG sTRucTuREs  
& PosITIons
How are  
customers 
served?
cusTomERs
The organizational 
system; ensuring 
your strategy meets 
customer demand
REPoRTs
dATA sETs
quEsTIons
lInks
kEy

Part One: Introduction
30
Figure 1.3.2 
The organizational system as a job description
structures
role
economics
Job title:  
Project manager
reports to: Mr XX
salary: $60,000
overview:  
eg  Accomplishes 
project objectives 
by planning 
project activities; 
evaluating 
implementation and 
progress  
of project
objectives: 
eg  Create and maintain 
strong, lasting 
relationships with  
up to 5 clients 
responsibilities:  
eg  Effectively manage 
and resolve issues 
and risks during  
the project life cycle
skills:
eg  Relationship  
building –  
exceptional at 
building rapport 
with clients and the 
delivery teams
process &  
activities
obJectives
competencies
100? It is impossible to know how each person relates to every other person, 
especially across all functions – the brain can only process so much.
Unfortunately, it isn’t always possible to keep organizations in small units. 
The complexity and size of organizations mean that often the basics are not 
understood, to the point where a large majority of firms I speak to don’t know 
their headcount and certainly not their headcount over time, by function, 
location, grade and employment type (eg permanent versus contractor).
For example, I once worked with a fast-moving consumer goods (FMCG) 
firm who had roughly 20 manufacturing plants around Europe. They all pro­
duced the same products and by and large had the same processes. Within 
those processes quality control was crucial and strictly regulated. However, 
there was no consistency across the plants. The numbers of people working 
across quality control varied between two and eight. When we performed 
analysis we found that despite the difference in numbers, they were all cover-
ing the same amount of work. So, why the variation in number? At best they 
were just being inefficient and at worst creating a massive corporate risk.
This type of obscurity not only hinders business performance but also 
halts individual development and performance. If managers do not know 
what their reports should be doing, how can they give effective feedback? 
How well do you know they are doing in achieving their objectives? Are they 

Foundations and Core Concepts
31
on target or not? Do they have too much to do, resulting in performance 
suffering across the board?
To understand the interplay between all these moving parts we need to 
understand and break down the structural nature of the organization.
Foundation 2: Organizational data is 
hierarchical
The basis of my working definition of ‘organizational data’ in the context of 
organization design is data that has the person as the central unit of analy-
sis. This is not the same as ‘people data’, which is a subset of organizational 
data and relates specifically to a person rather than their numerous connec-
tions and links across the organization. To put this in context, every part of 
the organizational system in Figure 1.3.1 can be understood as organizational 
data. Even if you approach a design from a specific process or competencies 
perspective, these areas of the organization always link back to a person. 
Understood in this way, organizational data has two far reaching conse-
quences for the organization design methodology in this book: first, organ­
izational data needs to be understood in the context of a hierarchy, and 
second, people data cannot be broken down into one unit of analysis.
The easiest way to understand the hierarchical nature of organizations is 
to begin from a simple people perspective. The natural structure of most 
organizations is one with a people hierarchy, built upon specific role levels 
and reporting lines connecting employees to specific managers. If we want 
to understand this simply, all we need to do is create a standard organization 
chart (Figure 1.3.3).
Figure 1.3.3 
Organization chart coloured by department
Reece Harris
CEO
Ava Wilkins
CFO
Josh Singh
Operations Director
Tyler Swift
HR Director
Charles Farias
Sales Director
James Porter
Head of Research
Molly White
Group Financial
Controller
Mia
Tomlinson
Secretary
Jonathan
Daniels
Programme Manager
Eva Hunter
Programme Manager
Jacob Khan
Programme
Manager
Joe Hall
Programme Manager
Rick Jones
HR Manager
Jessica Talbot
HR Manager
Thomas
Richard
HR Manager
Mohammed
Sanderson
Head of Admin
Bryan Korn
Secretary
Daniel McGee
Head of Recruitment
Libby Lucas
Secretary
Chelsea Walsh
Sales manager
Hannah Reid
Sales manager
Whitney
Kowalski
Sales manager
Deborah Evans
Sales manager
Isobel
Brennan
Programme Manager
Sean Ellis
Programme Manager
Kian Sanders
Programme
Manager
Naomi Adams
Programme Manager
Mary Mayor
Programme Manager
Department
Executive
Finance
HR
Operations
R&D
Sales

Part One: Introduction
32
Unfortunately, far too many organization designs stop at this perspective. 
Design work is seen as a simple exercise of moving boxes around a 
PowerPoint slide. However, it is too simple to look at the design of an  
organization simply from a people- or even role-based view. This brings us 
back to my second statement, that organizational data cannot be broken 
down into one unit of analysis. What I mean by this is that within a person 
as a unit you have clusters of information linked to the person; for instance, 
a set of objectives, a certain amount of experience, competencies, strengths 
and so on. It is impossible to break a person down into one skill, or a 
particular set of skills. The result of this complication is that when under-
standing how the organizational system is connected you have to go much 
deeper than a simple reporting line. In reality, what you are dealing with is 
a complex interconnected, overlapping web of objectives, processes, com-
petencies and so on. Because people do not change very fast, and are not 
infinitely divisible, when dealing with organization design you have to deal 
with ambiguity. Things never fit together perfectly.
This complexity doesn’t mean we should give up, but that we need to 
understand how to break down the organizational system and see the con-
nections. To do this we can apply the same hierarchical approach we took 
from a people perspective and apply it across the organizational system.  
In doing this, what you are actually doing is creating taxonomies for the 
various organization elements. Taxonomy is an area of science focused on 
classification or, put more simply, grouping things that are similar. It is a way 
of creating structures. A good example of taxonomy is the way Amazon 
organizes its products into different categories (eg books and audio versus 
sports and outdoors) and different subcategories (eg books, Kindle editions, 
children’s books) and so on. Taxonomies are a great way of categorizing and 
subcategorizing data into logical chunks of information.
If you take the organization you already have taxonomies in the defini-
tion of the system: roles, objectives, processes, competencies and so on. 
Within each one of these there will be further subcategories. For example, if 
you go back to your org chart, it is likely that attached to the role titles are 
certain categories such as function, location, salary band, organizational 
grade. Or think of objectives. These start as overarching goals and cascade 
into more and more specific objectives and key performance indicators or 
KPIs (see Chapter 3.3). If you build out all these hierarchies you can then 
start to see how they relate to each other. Unfortunately, each area of the 
organizational system will not fit neatly on top of another. However, it gives 
you the building blocks for drawing the connections and links between 
them.

Foundations and Core Concepts
33
Foundation 3: Organizational data is messy
The organizational system is naturally complicated. However, one of the 
reasons so many struggle to understand the as-is of their organization, let 
alone implement an organization design, is a misdirected approach to data. 
In the previous section I highlighted one of the unique features of people 
data; that as a unit of analysis they cannot be broken down into a single 
unit. This has consequences for how you approach people data in order to 
make sense of them. This section looks at what data you are really dealing 
with when doing an organization design before highlighting the challenges 
that come with this organizational data.
Let’s clarify immediately. Organizational data is not big data. At the time 
of writing this book there has been a huge buzz around big data and its 
potential business value. There is no doubt it is changing the way businesses 
are run. However, when it comes to people transformation and change, is 
big data really changing the way we design the organization?
There have been a lot of voices saying an emphatic Yes. For example, Jay 
Galbraith, building on his four structural principles separating an organ­
ization (business divisions, organizational functions, international units and 
customer segments), suggested that big data is a fifth structural principle when 
restructuring.3 New functions will be the big data operations distinguishing 
themselves from the previous four structural principles that separated the 
organization.
I am not as convinced. Because of the hype there has been a lot of misuse 
of the term ‘big data’. Big data is not the be-all and end-all, and thinking it is 
will mean you approach your organizational analytics and design in the wrong 
way. So what is the difference between organizational data and big data?
Big data
●
●What does it look like? Big data involves looking at upwards of tens  
if not thousands of millions of information points that are often 
extremely fast moving.
●
●The challenge? Their complexity, speed and volume. Big data can 
often be recorded in real time, involving millions of transactions over 
a short amount of time. For example, I once worked with a global 
FMCG firm that took out over $500 million of working capital 
across 180 markets through inventory optimization and better 
forecasting. This type of project represented a challenge in terms of 

Part One: Introduction
34
the complexity of storing and analysing such large amounts of data 
in a useful and efficient way.
●
●How to deal with big data. Often when storing, processing and 
querying big data, and in the case of the FMCG firm, you would  
use a data warehouse (see Chapter 3.2 for a definition).
●
●When do you use big data? Examples include: marketing where big 
data allows more accurate customer segmentation through real-time 
analysis; in healthcare big data supports more targeted treatment for 
patients; in recruitment big data allows employers to screen potential 
candidates more accurately through CV and social media analysis; 
and in the supply chain business, big data helps reduce inventory 
wastage.
My view is that big data will affect how organizations do their business, but 
will not have a massive impact on the process of designing organizations.  
In reality, it is only for the very largest organizations and for very specific 
data, such as social media data on candidates or recruitment where dataset 
sizes are larger than a million data points.
Organizational data
●
●What does it look like? Organizational datasets are relatively small 
and contain the many-to-many* links of the organizational system.
●
●The challenge? The complex nature of organizational data means it is 
often incomplete and subject to (relatively) slow but constant change. 
For example, organizational roles can have numerous different titles 
making standard analysis near impossible. Traditionally, 
organizational data is held in numerous systems and documents 
including human resource information systems (HRIS), payroll 
systems and disparate Excel spreadsheets. The messy nature of 
organizational data is one of the things that make it so challenging, 
not its size. Most organizational data will contain millions of data 
points and connections at most. This pales in comparison to the 
volume and velocity you are dealing with in big data. It is the fact 
that the data is usually incomplete, constantly changing, hard to 
*In a relational database, links (say, between cells or rows) can be one-to-one 
(eg: one person ↔ one National Insurance number), one-to-many (eg: one order 
↔ several items) or many-to-many (eg: products anyone can buy ↔ customers 
who can buy any product).

Foundations and Core Concepts
35
maintain and linked in complex ways that makes the organizational 
data so hard to manage.4
●
●How to deal with people data. Traditionally, there has been a lack of 
technical tools to help understand the complexities of people data.  
I have horrible memories of working on designs late into the night to 
deliver a project, only to get told at the eleventh hour that a certain 
figure or graph was wrong. Cue frantic changes in Excel and 
PowerPoint to get everything ready for the final presentation.
Traditional relational databases (for a definition of a relational database 
see Chapter 3.2) such as Excel are great for many things, but they are just 
not set up for design work. Simple rows and columns do not allow you to 
truly understand the many-to-many links of the organization. For example, 
when doing process design, tables do not allow you to see how a process 
links to a role, what competencies are required for that role, and who is the 
actual person fulfilling that role currently, because they are bound by a one-
to-one relationship. The only way forward is to stop thinking in tables 
and instead think in terms of graphs. Graphs have the ability to connect 
disparate aspects of the organization because they allow for the multiple 
connections contained in organizational data (for a more detailed descrip-
tion of a graph database see Chapter 3.2). The thinking behind this book and 
organizational visualizations used is underpinned by a graph-based approach 
to organizational data, to allow for the many-to-many links contained in 
organizational data.
Applying the foundations in practice
The way you see the world is the way you understand it. If you can’t see 
something it makes it much harder to understand. In the context of organ­
izational data and analytics, being unable to see the links and connections of 
the organizational system not only means it takes a lot longer to perform 
analysis, but also means a lot of detail is obscured and lost. What all organ­
izations need is a new way to see themselves. They need the ability to look 
round the corners; provide context; connect the system – people, activities, 
processes, costs and so on.
In 2014, I worked with one of the world’s largest fleet management 
companies who managed to do just that. Its business model is centred on 
optimizing the cost of serving customers while maintaining the highest 
standards of customer experience and satisfaction. However, the business 

Part One: Introduction
36
had no way of knowing what happened to its money, from overheads to 
specific customer allocation. It wanted to be able to improve its understand-
ing of its cost base, pricing and the services supplied to each customer. 
Where could it improve its processes? Where could it offer better prices? 
Which customer support activities added most value?
It all starts with the data, so the company held short interviews with  
70 key people in the process and gathered together all existing operations 
data. After 10 weeks, it had a clear view of work volumes and their causes. 
The organization could see its total cost base from three different points of 
view – from the perspective of project, process or customer relations. This 
set of relationships is shown in Figure 1.3.4.
There were many surprising large variations in costs. For example, the 
organization expected its specialist Customer Queries team to take up  
0.9 per cent of the cost-to-serve. But other teams from across the business 
were also responding to customer queries, which meant the actual costs were 
3.2 per cent. This represented a huge opportunity to significantly increase 
sales. Using this information the strategy team could have practical conver-
sations about how to re-engineer a more efficient cost-to-serve process: 
which activities it wanted to carry on, which activities it wanted to stop 
and whether any activities needed tweaking slightly.
Figure 1.3.4 
Cost-to-serve model
OVERHEADS
PROCESS
CUSTOMERS
MAPPING
LINKS
KEY
PEOPLE COST
% time 
dedicated 
to specific 
customers
% time 
spent on 
work
Services customers are using

Foundations and Core Concepts
37
This is a great example of the value in mapping and analysing the many- 
to-many connections of the organizational system in practice. It is the only 
way to truly understand what is going on, what has happened in the past 
and, based on this, make the most informed decisions possible for the future. 
When faced with change, this model is what helps you decide which aspects 
of the organization you should keep and which you should leave behind.
So, how do you get past the numbers? How do you connect the system 
practically in a way that is manageable and understandable? How can you 
create an accurate design and consistently make good decisions? How do  
you get to the point where analysing past and present data happens auto-
matically, and the focus is on predicting future trends, making proactive 
rather than reactive business decisions?
In the next section, I outline three methods that underpin my approach  
to data-driven organization design. These methods are not a linear process 
but a continuous and interlinked cycle of activities, which feed into each 
other to help understand and connect the organizational system.
Method 1: Create hierarchical data 
structures
As I outlined in Foundation 2, above, organizational data can be understood 
as a series of hierarchies. So, to understand and analyse the organization you 
need to build these hierarchies across the system. As is already probably  
apparent, hierarchical trees have quite specific terminology (see Figure 1.3.5 
for an outline of key terms). In the context of taking a graph-based approach 
to understand the many-to-many connections of the organization, each 
position on any organizational hierarchical tree can be defined as a node. 
That is a connection point between multiple links. For example, a node in 
an org chart could represent a position that is linked to a person and a role, 
which are then in turn linked to numerous other data such as objectives and 
competencies. Equally, a node could represent an objective in an objectives 
tree or a process in a process tree. The node is purely an intersection point 
of information.
When doing organization design, like it or not, the trusty org chart is 
where most design starts. The org chart shows the layout of an organization 
in such a simple way and helps communicate the shape and structure of the 
reporting lines, as illustrated in Figure 1.3.3.
There is a common trap of reading too much into an org chart. It isn’t 
where the box sits but what is in the box that counts. For example, when 

Part One: Introduction
38
Figure 1.3.5 
Hierarchical tree terminology
leaf
parent
root
descendants 
All nodes that are 
directly and indirectly 
related to a parent are 
descendants.
A node with no children 
or parents is an orphan.
depth 4
depth 3
depth 2
depth 1
siblings
outgoing 
count = 2
child
A node with 
children is  
the parent.
A node with  
no children  
is a leaf.
All nodes 
directly under 
a parent are 
children.
Children who 
share the  
same parent  
are siblings.
The top node  
of a tree is  
the root.
 Synonymous with ‘Span of 
Control’ 
 The number of directly 
connected nodes to a  
given parent
outgoing count
 The ‘level’ within a tree
 Eg generally:
CEO depth = 1, 
CFO depth = 2, etc
depth
orphan

Foundations and Core Concepts
39
doing org design, people often obsess with where their box sits relative to 
the CEO. It is as if the distance from the CEO is the sole definition of power, 
grade, or potential salary. So does that mean those at the bottom of the  
org chart are by definition unimportant, regardless of anything else? Clearly 
not. I have seen org charts where someone’s chauffeur is three from the top 
but where the lead technical director on a key future technological project is 
six away. There are times when the span of control or number of people 
below the position are assumed to be a proxy for importance instead. This 
type of thinking is flawed. Indeed, when I have experienced this first hand, 
one of the things that has always surprised me in allocating management 
was how we didn’t want some of the most important positions to have a 
team to manage at all (ie no direct reports and a span of control of zero). 
The amazing thing – but it’s logical in hindsight – is that (a) not everyone is 
good at managing, (b) many technical or sales roles suffer from the burden 
of management and (c) by not having a team, the influence of those indi-
viduals is not necessarily diminished in the slightest.
Doing org design is not about mapping and moving people and positions 
in org charts. You need to see beyond depth and layers, spans of control and 
size of control (the total number of positions below) and see what is in the 
box: the objectives; accountabilities; competencies; projects they are involved 
in; risk they manage; clients they serve. In other words, see the system. You 
need to understand the information flows and hierarchies across the organ­
ization to really understand how they fit together.
When building the hierarchies in practice across the organization, whether 
roles, objectives or processes and so on, a useful approach is the Mutually 
Exclusive and Collectively Exhaustible (MECE) methodology. This concept 
was developed by Barbara Minto while at McKinsey, a management con-
sultancy firm, and is at the heart of her ‘Pyramid Principle’.5 The idea is  
that you take a high-level idea or action and break it down in a logical and 
structured way. Just as repeating points or missing out points in a presenta-
tion would have a negative impact on its overall message, not adhering to 
the MECE framework does likewise. The table in Figure 1.3.6 summarizes 
the two aspects of the MECE approach and how you achieve each one.
Using this approach is extremely useful when trying to break down work 
(processes), objectives, competencies, risk, projects and many more of the 
elements within the detailed design. Theoretically, if all organizational  
objectives are MECE then the organization is running at the best possible 
efficiency; there are no duplicated objectives and, when added up, all the 
objectives and subobjectives cover all the strategic aims (see more in  

Part One: Introduction
40
Figure 1.3.6 
MECE methodology for building taxonomies
1.  Group information into separate 
categories.
2.  Break down into logical 
subcategories.
3. Continue until have enough detail.
4. Check for duplication and overlaps.
5. Ensure language is concise 
 and clear.
6. Test and review with stakeholders.
7. Update and maintain.
Ensure all elements 
are included without 
any gaps.
Mutually  
ExclusivE
collEctivEly 
ExhaustivE
Ensure subsets  
are distinct and do 
not overlap.
 MEcE ( pronounced: ‘mee-see’)
creating a MEcE taxonomy
Chapter 3.3). In reality this is near impossible, but thinking it through in  
this way helps you avoid unnecessary blockers and inefficiencies.
The most important thing when building these taxonomies is to get the  
level of detail right. It is easy to define too much detail. For example, in the 
context of a work canteen there could be a process of ‘Feed staff’. This can 
be broken down into five main areas: Manage the canteen; Buy the food, 
goods and services; Preparation; Service; Clean. From this, each element can 
be further analysed. For example, ‘Prepare’ could be broken into ‘Meat’, 
‘Vegetables’ and ‘Sauces’. These can be further broken down, and then again, 
and again, and again, as in Figure 1.3.7.
It is possible to break this down until you reach the point of absurdity. 
You could imagine that the process of ‘Slice potatoes’ could be further 
broken into sort potatoes; align them; cut them; and so on. Remember, 
though, all of these sets of information connect to one another so the more 
detail you create the more complexity you are going to have to manage.  
You have to balance detail against practicality.
Having created and visualized your taxonomies, the next step is to connect 
them to start defining them in the context of the organizational system.
Method 2: Connect the system
With your hierarchical information in place, the next step is to link these 
elements in what is a series of many-to-many relationships. At the end of the 

Foundations and Core Concepts
41
Figure 1.3.7 
Example process tree
BUY
PREPARE
SERVE
FEED 
STAFF
VEG
SLICE
FRIES
DEPTH 1
DEPTH 2
DEPTH 3
DEPTH 4
DEPTH 5
DEPTH 6
CLEAN
MEAT
SAUCES
RADISH
WASH
POTATO
CARROT
PEEL
MANAGE
day, when doing an organization design you are looking at what and how 
much work needs to be done, and how to divide that work between your 
workforce. From the moment a founder brings on another person, an organ­
ization is born. From this point tasks are divided up: you do X and I’ll do Y. 
As the volume of work, people and complexity increases, dividing the work 
and understanding who does what and for how long become harder and 
harder to manage. Taxonomies set the platform for bringing it all back  
together. For example, operations are split between functions and subfunc-
tions. Work is broken down into a geographical context of what is done 
centrally or locally. Job grades are created so that the right level of task is 
done by the right level of seniority. Linking is how you can connect all  
these elements together.
Linking helps with a number of things:
●
●It gives clarity to who is required to do what and for how long.
●
●It helps ensure everything that needs to be done is covered.
●
●It avoids duplications of effort or things falling between the cracks.
Figure 1.3.8 shows, in the top two tables, differing ways of linking the organ­
izational system through allocation of time and an accountability matrix, 

Part One: Introduction
42
Figure 1.3.8 
Connecting the organizational system
Managing Director
Executive
FTE
1
Role Cost
200K
A Decision of the investment committee
A Project report
S Feasibility study
S Rebalancing of portfolio when
necessary
S Environment assessment
Risk Manager
Risk
FTE
1
Role Cost
100K
A Term sheet and deposit agreement
A Discussion of commercial terms
A Preliminary legal assessment
A Decision of the investment committee
R Tracking impact of these on portfolio
S Loan to value
S Analyst views
S Feasibility study
S Rebalancing of portfolio when
necessary
Compliance Manager
Compliance
FTE
1
Role Cost
70K
A Preliminary legal assessment
R Legal and financial statement review
S Feasibility study
Legal Manager
Legal
FTE
1
Role Cost
80K
A Term sheet and deposit agreement
A Decision of the investment committee
A Discussion of commercial terms
R Preliminary legal assessment
R Legal and financial statement review
S Environment assessment
Financial Advisor
Finance
FTE
1
Role Cost
65K
R Prelimary financial and market
feasibility
R Independent appraisal
R Legal and financial statement review
R Borrower creditworthiness
R Feasibility study
S Property value
S Event based
S Market research
S Loan to value
Sales & Trading Manager
Sales & Trading
FTE
1
Role Cost
90K
A Rebalancing of portfolio when
necessary
A Discussion of commercial terms
R Decision of the investment committee
R Term sheet and deposit agreement
Research Manager
Research
FTE
1
Role Cost
110K
A Decision of the investment committee
A Rebalancing of portfolio when
necessary
A Preliminary legal assessment
R Environment assessment
R Project report
S Prelimary financial and market
feasibility
Risk Analyst
Risk
FTE
3
Role Cost
150K
R Tracking impact of these on portfolio
S Property value
S Prelimary financial and market
feasibility
S Decision of the investment committee
S Loan to value
S Independent appraisal
S Term sheet and deposit agreement
S Project report
Sales Person
Sales & Trading
FTE
4
Role Cost
200K
R Discussion of commercial terms
R Event based
R Deal sourcing
R Rebalancing of portfolio when
necessary
S Management calls
S Market research
S Analyst views
S Borrower creditworthiness
S Feasibility study
S Independent appraisal
S Project report
Resarch Analyst
Research
FTE
4
Role Cost
320K
R Property value
R Analyst views
R Management calls
R Loan to value
R Market research
R Feasibility study
R Environment assessment
R Rebalancing of portfolio when
necessary
R Project report
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
S
S
S
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
ment assessment
1
80K
nt
ttee
ew
Financial Advisor
Finance
FTE
1
Role Cost
65K
R Prelimary financial and market
feasibility
R Independent appraisal
R Legal and financial statement review
R Borrower creditworthiness
R Feasibility study
S Property value
S Event based
S Market research
S Loan to value
Sale
Sales
FTE
Role 
A R
n
A D
R D
R T
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
A
A
S
S
S
S
Investment Process
  Deal Generation
    Event based
    Market research
    Deal sourcing
  Analysis and Evaluation
    Analyst views
    Management calls
    Loan to value
    Property value
  Preliminary review
    Preliminary ﬁnancial a...
    Preliminary legal asse...
    Discussion of commer...
  Investment Committee
    Decision of the invest...
    Term sheet and depos...
  Due Dilligence Review
    Independent appraisal
    Borrower creditworthi...
    Legal and ﬁnancial sta...
    Feasibility study
    Environment assessm...
    Agreement
  Monitoring & Adjustm...
    Tracking impact of the...
    Rebalancing of portfol...
    Project report
  Managing Director
      Risk Manager
            Risk Analyst 
        Compliance Manager 
        Legal Manager
        Financial Advisor
      Sales & Trading Manager
            Sales Person
      Research Manager
            Research Analyst
People
Processes
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
R
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
S
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
A

  
  
  

  
R
S
S
A
A
A
A
A
A
A
Investment Process
  Deal Generation
    Event based
    Market research
    Deal sourcing
  Analysis and Evaluation
    Analyst views
    Management calls
    Loan to value
    Property value
  Preliminary review
    Preliminary ﬁnancial a...
    Preliminary legal asse...
    Discussion of commer...
  Investment Committee
    Decision of the invest...
    Term sheet and depos...
  Due Dilligence Review
    Independent appraisal
    Borrower creditworthi...
    Legal and ﬁnancial sta...
    Feasibility study
    Environment assessm...
    Agreement
  Monitoring & Adjustm...
    Tracking impact of the...
    Rebalancing of portfol...
    Project report
  Managing Director
      Risk Manager
            Risk Analyst 
        Compliance Manager 
        Legal Manager
        Financial Advisor
      Sales & Trading Manager
            Sales Person
      Research Manager
            Research Analyst
People
Processes
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
 
 

 
 
 
2
2
0 2
0 2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
0 2
0 2
0.2
0.2
Org chart of RAS allocations
RAS matrix
Linking table by allocation of time

Foundations and Core Concepts
43
and then how those allocations can be seen within the context of the org 
chart. They both have positions as rows and, in this example, activities as 
columns. You can then fill in the gaps to mark which roles are connected to 
which activities and to see how this affects each person within the organ­
izational hierarchy.
RACI, RASIC, RAPID – cut out the complexity
A tool often used for linking is the accountability matrix. I came across 
this method the first time I did an OD project for the sales and marketing 
function of an automotive company in South Africa in the 1990s. At 5.15 pm 
on a Friday in early summer, 15 minutes before I was due to join my col-
leagues for a well-earned beer, I got a call from the German office explaining 
they were urgently short of a consultant and off I went to the airport, files 
in hand and an angry girlfriend left behind for six weeks.
My experience of OD was limited, to say the least. I had just completed  
a restructuring of a UK automotive distributor, but it was obvious I was not 
the first choice. During the flight I had to prep for the 9 am kick-off meeting 
and, as part of that, for the first time I came across the RACI accountability 
framework. This framework helps determine who is Responsible (R), 
Accountable (A), Consulted (C) or Informed (I) for a set of fields such as 
objectives, risks, projects, processes, activities and so on.
A series of questions came to mind:
●
●What is the difference between being Accountable and Responsible?
●
●How important was it to really define who needed to be Consulted 
and Informed?
●
●What about other people who needed to be involved in actually 
doing the work?
●
●Making decisions is different from doing ‘stuff’ – what about all 
those who have a veto on a decision, or feel they do?
●
●The point of the A and R is that there should be only one person  
per role (ie single points of Accountability). But, what if there are  
two decision makers (ie two people have veto power)?
What I didn’t think of until much later, but having done this numerous 
times since, is once this has been defined, how do you sustain it? How do 
you communicate it? How do you make it live? Too often we define things 
like a RACI as a one-off. People make a big fuss about whether they are 
consulted before a decision is made or informed after it is made. But this 

Part One: Introduction
44
framework just creates an unnecessary amount of detail, and is completely 
unrealistic to maintain.
Whenever I did an org piece, whether using RACI, RASIC (the S stands 
for ‘Support’) or RAPID (a framework used by the consulting firm Bain with 
the specifications Recommend, Agree, Perform, Input and Decide), all those 
questions remained. In particular, I became tired of trying to explain the  
difference between R and A: ‘The R needs to make sure it happens; the  
A gets shot if it doesn’t and, yes, they are often the same person.’ Equally, 
having debates about who exactly needs to be informed or consulted is 
fairly painful. If you debate that one for hours you really know you are 
going to struggle. Shouldn’t the person responsible also be responsible for 
working that one out? Shouldn’t we just say that the R and A are the same 
person? If it is a decision, should we need to know who needs to approve it 
(ie who has a veto)? From a workforce planning and resourcing perspective, 
isn’t it important to know who needs to be involved? My conclusion was that 
you must be able to simplify the whole thing. In response to this I thought 
through an RAS method for the accountability matrix:
1	 Combine R and A – just have R and define it as Responsible and 
Accountable.
2	 Throw out I and C – leave it to the person Responsible to define who 
needs to be Informed and Consulted.
This just gives you the R – one letter for defining the one person who is 
responsible. Simple.
But equally there are scenarios where it is useful to:
1	 define who needs to approve a decision to help clarify the governance;
2	 think through who else needs to provide time to get the work or 
decision done.
This leads to a simple ‘RAS’ framework as shown in Figure 1.3.9. It is a simple 
way of making sure accountability settings for processes and activities 
are not held up by unnecessary conversations, meetings and complications.
Assigning accountabilities to each process and activity provides clarity to 
everyone, both the person responsible for any given activity and those around 
him or her. The example in Figure 1.3.8 has the Financial Adviser responsible 
for five activities and supporting a further four. Using this RAS framework 
you can allocate who is responsible for what and what is required from 
each role. It isn’t easy to build an accountability matrix. It requires you not 
only to define the processes and activities, but also to think through the  

Foundations and Core Concepts
45
Figure 1.3.9 
RAS methodology
Ensures output or  
end result
Veto power on a 
decision and signs  
off actions
Provides information, 
analysis and other 
support to person 
responsible
ACCOUNTABLE
INFORMED 
CONSULT
KEEP IT SIMPLE, 
CLEAR AND CLEAN
THROW OUT
THE COMPLEXITY
RESPONSIBLE
APPROVE
SUPPORT
roles and define that link. It can be highly political and can often uncover 
cracks where either no one is currently responsible or multiple people are. 
So why bother? Why not just let people sort it out and get on with it?
First, it is true you can waste too much time on the detail. Referring back 
to the process of building your organizational hierarchies, this is why  
you need to make sure you don’t overcomplicate things. If you have endless 
hierarchies and detail there is no point connecting everything in infinite  
detail. So, to make sure you don’t go too far, start at the top. Connect the 
highest levels and then cascade down. Make a judgement call when you 
think you are going into too much detail and prescribing too much. After  
all, people can build the matrix out at a team level if they feel the need to 
formalize roles and focus. Part Three of this book defines in far more detail 
how best to do this and provides far more context-specific examples.
Second, putting a framework in place is useful, but it is not simply a 
box-ticking exercise. So to make it useful, make sure you think through 
the framework in practice and the amount of ‘political noise’ that will be 
generated by the numbers involved in the governance elements of the process 
design, such as the decision-making processes. This is expanded further in 
Chapter 3.3.

Part One: Introduction
46
It is worth mentioning that I am not suggesting that the RAS method is 
the only way to build out these links. For example, instead of (or in addition 
to) the RAS matrix you could define the percentage of time that a person 
spends doing each activity, as with an Individual Activity Analysis (IAA –  
a method I outline in Chapter 3.4). Once this information is collected, you 
can define the cost of each activity and process that leads to a vast range of 
insights and improvement potentials.
The principle of creating an accountability matrix can be applied across 
all the areas of the organizational system. For example, you can link roles  
to process and objectives, process to competencies and, therefore, indirectly 
link roles and competencies together. Suddenly, the pieces of the jigsaw 
begin to fit together. You are starting to build out your graph. You can begin 
to analyse and get insight into which competencies are most in demand.  
If you then define which competencies each person has, then you know 
where the greatest gaps are and can prioritize your training and recruitment 
of specific skills. You can also begin scenario modelling. For example, what 
if you improved the efficiency of a given activity, then who would be 
impacted and what would the FTE reduction be? Part Three details how  
to do this and the ramifications of doing it in far more detail.
My final note on this section is that these connecting principles set the 
platform for high value-adding analysis by performing ‘data mashing’. This 
is the process of bringing disparate sets of data together to look for and 
uncover new areas of insight. For example, combining your people data with 
sales data or network data to see where the hidden connections are. The 
possibilities are endless. However, the key is to get the basics in place so you 
can really start to explore how your people both impact and are impacted 
by areas across the whole.
To fully understand these links you need a way of presenting and interpret-
ing that information. And here we come to the final and, in many ways, the 
most important method: visualize to analyse and understand.
Method 3: Visualize to analyse
The process of visualizing and analysing information is the foremost prin­
ciple in understanding the many-to-many links and connections of the  
organizational system. It is the very essence of this book. Having looked at 
a range of definitions, I understand analytics as the revelation, understand-
ing and communication of insights from data. In other words, analytics is 
more than just having and looking at data. Analytics if used in the right  

Foundations and Core Concepts
47
way helps to drive performance and better decision-making, uncover issues, 
solve them and see the results. As part of this analytical process, visualizing 
information can connect the seemingly unconnected, give deeper and better 
insights across the organization and improve the organization design process. 
For example:
●
●What sorts of recruitment channels provide the strongest 
performance with above-average loyalty? If you know that, you can 
concentrate the focus and recruit more high performers.
●
●Which managers have the most engaged, highest performing teams 
over a sustained period? If you know that, then getting to why this is 
the case is much easier.
●
●Which projects have inexperienced/low performing teams? Are they 
the most critical projects? Do you, therefore, know the balance of 
staff by experience, tenure and performance? This could mean the 
difference between the most critical projects failing or driving results 
beyond expectations.
●
●Which risks are being actively managed and, therefore, reducing the 
probability of them happening?
The list is almost endless.
One of the hardest parts of organization design is not actually working 
out where you are going but working out exactly where you are. You need 
to visualize data to analyse and understand the organizational system. 
Rows and tables of data tell you very little. Organizational data may not  
be big data, but that doesn’t mean that it isn’t still sizeable. Also, given you 
are bringing data from across the organizational system, no table is going  
to be able to show you the links which connect the system together.
The business case for visualizing information has been well made; using 
visuals over text can decrease learning time, improve understanding and 
increase the retention of information.6,7,8 This is not only useful from the 
point of view of your own understanding of the organization, but how you 
report and communicate messages to others. It’s about turning data into 
outcomes. Data tells a story, and you need to do that story justice. Know what 
messages you are trying to communicate and use your visualizations as 
illustrations. It’s all about choosing the right chart for the right data and 
putting it in a logical order.
The simple point is that colourful, interactive images are a lot more 
exciting and satisfying than a row of Excel tables. Figure 1.3.10 puts this  
in sharp perspective.

Part One: Introduction
48
Barbar...
Jayde...
Bill...
Archie
Norton
Spence...
Rebecc...
Millie Mann
Brent Kunze
Andrew
Singh
Barbar...
Ruby Joyce
Michael
Burnham
Spence...
Samua...
Ellen Ray
Charle...
Kennet...
Jacqueline
King
Hira...
Ryan
Emrich
Corin...
Lill...
Thomas
Cover
Toby Kirk
Matthew
Doyle
Joe Cooke
Archibald
Norton
Maria King
Norma...
Tega...
Willia...
Jame...
Michael
Campo
Joett...
Eleanor
Collins
Morris Clark
Mildre...
Anthony
Turnbull
Harve...
Logan
Warren
Roy Roberts
Willie Smith
Tyler
Fitzgerald
Lucas
Turnbull
Brian Penley
Sebastian
Swift
Leah Gilbert
Nichola...
Andre Crew
Nichola...
Rebecca
Stanley
Kenneth
Taylor
Elizabeth
Preston
Jake
Gallagher
Luca Reid
Willia...
Baile...
Deborah
Johnson
Domini...
Fran...
Elizabet...
Mohamma...
Ev...
Eve Sykes
Moniqu...
Constance
Kim
Jonathan
Daniels
Joh...
Hannah
Peters
Michea...
Jean Hubbs
John
Stillings
Kyle Palmer
Gabrie...
Yoland...
Zachar...
Joh...
John Jones
Ryan Page
Eva Hunter
David Coyle
Louis...
Darrel...
Leo Allen
Demi Kemp
Edna Howell
Lisa Berry
James Dean
Violet Croy
Joe Hall
Michell...
David Lipp
Ruby Stelly
Estell...
Isaac
Stanley
Margare...
Edwar...
Georgia
James
Nathan
Nolan
Ronal...
Natha...
Denis...
Maddison
Bennett
Harry Craig
Jacob Khan
Luk...
Christine
Jensen
Leo Moran
Greg Johns
Josh Singh
Thomas
Gurrola
Harve...
Ada...
Billy Scott
Rich
Wheaton
Gar...
Zoe Stevens
Paul Danner
Joe...
Isobel
Brennan
Kia...
James
Porter
Reece
Harris
VS
Figure 1.3.10 
Data table versus sunburst visualization coloured by  
engagement

Foundations and Core Concepts
49
The table of data and the visualization in Figure 1.3.10 hold the same 
information. The Excel file simply lists the reporting lines, engagement 
index, the depth and spans of control. The first row is the CEO, and each 
row is another position. The visualization is called the sunburst (you can  
see this type of image on the cover of this book). The circle in the middle is 
the CEO. Each position that reports to the CEO is shown on the next  
layer. The colour is the engagement based on an RAG status: Red for poorly 
engaged; Amber for just below average engagement; and Green for engaged. 
The number of layers can be differentiated by the distance from the centre. 
Early patterns in engagement can be picked up. This visual doesn’t convey 
all the relevant information but it is striking, easy to interpret and gives  
the person looking at it an immediate impression. By making your people 
data full of impact you will achieve more, and enjoy the process as you go.
There is a big debate in the world of data visualization. On one side is  
an emphasis on being scientific and precise, reducing subjective interpreta­
tion of the data. One of the leading voices from this school is Stephen Few, 
who in his fantastic book Now You See It9 emphasizes minimizing the 
number of pixels in visualizations to ensure clarity. For example, using clean 
line charts, box plots or scatter plots over pie charts or infographics.
The other approach is to tell an emotive story: to not only convey infor-
mation but also get a reaction from it. An example of this is the use of 
infographics to tell a story. This is an area explored by David McCandless 
in his book Knowledge is Beautiful,10 where the emphasis is as much on  
the power of the visual as the information it represents.
There is quite a clash between these two schools. The purist versus the 
poet, if you like. One blogger with a marketing background positions the 
debate strongly: ‘Do we seek to make art or is our primary goal to inform 
people about the state of the world around them?’11 The challenge is that 
while infographics are more engaging they can give a misleading view of  
the world. I believe you can actually get the best from both worlds, especi­
ally in an organizational context. Often when representing organizational 
data you need to convey clarity and understanding while also engaging 
and creating an urge for action. I would tentatively put forward an emergent 
third school: data visualization focused more specifically on hierarchical, 
organic and framework-driven information. This type of information natu-
rally fits closely with organizational data, and brings together the thought 
process behind representing frameworks, models and structures with added 
clarity and insight from high-impact and comprehensive data visualization. 
I would argue that a great deal of organizational analysis falls into this third 

Part One: Introduction
50
Figure 1.3.11 
Stacked bar graph versus sunflower visualization: 
performance ranking versus tenure coloured by location
Tenure Years
(513)
0–2
(504)
2–4
(461)
4–6
(27)
6 - 8
Performance Ranking
(181) 0–2
57
55
68
Hannah
(196) 2–4
69
72
50
James 
Karen G
Isabella
Joe Hal
Sue Re
(428) 4–6
Lisa Ha
Hermin
Charles
Michae
Jay Dav
Linda B
Dennis
Performance
Ranking
Tenure Years
0–2
0–2
2–4
4–6
2–4
4–6
2
0
50
100
150
Count of Records
0
50
100
150
Count of Records
0
50
100
150
Count of Records
VS

Foundations and Core Concepts
51
category. I leave it up to you to decide if this represents a new genre entirely 
or simply a practical application of data visualization taking the best fron 
the other two.
Figure 1.3.11 illustrates how the same data can be visualized in very dif-
ferent ways. The top figure shows a set of stacked bar graphs with the tenure 
ranges by performance scores. The sunflower figure below has the exact 
same information but shows each member of the various populations as  
a single coloured dot. I can see, for instance, that there are four people who 
have a tenure of 2–4 years with a 0–2 performance from the blue location. 
(The colour represents the locations of each employee.)
Hierarchical trees can be visualized in multiple ways and, in the context 
of organizational analytics and design work, they give the opportunity to 
see across the organization as a whole as you can visualize large amounts of 
information at once and present the organization for what it is: an organic, 
multifaceted system of people. Figure 1.3.12 shows several examples of  
hierarchical visualizations of organizational structures. Each one highlights 
a particular aspect of the organization. For example, Figure 1.3.12a allows 
you to see the organization as an organic whole. In contrast, the icicle chart 
(Figure 1.3.12c) helps to highlight the span of control and, when coloured 
by performance, whether there are any correlations between large spans  
of control and performance and any areas of the organization requiring 
particular focus.
If you are interested in reading more specifically on visualizing tree struc-
tures do read The Book of Trees: Visualizing Branches of Knowledge by 
Manuel Lima.12
I believe that data visualization and analytics are the key not just to 
understanding the organization, but having an impact, making things 
happen and driving change. It is a theme that runs throughout this book. 
The type of visual you should use depends on the questions. If you want to 
understand the layers and structural pyramid, then a box grid is an extremely 
effective way of understanding the ‘shape’ of an organization, as shown in 
Figure 1.3.13.
However, if you are also interested in the spans of control and the layers, 
Figure 1.3.14 brings that to life. The rows are the layers (the depth) and the 
columns are the spans of control (outgoing count). The numbers in each  
cell represent the number of employees with those spans for the given layer. 
This has been coloured according to a traditional blue-to-red heat map 
where blue is infrequent and red frequent.

Part One: Introduction
52
Figure 1.3.12 
Example organizational tree layouts
(a) Balloon tree layout

Foundations and Core Concepts
53
Figure 1.3.12 
Cont’d
100
CEO
25
CFO
25
COO
25
Executive
Assistant
25
HR
Director
25
Sales
Director
25
Head of
Research
25
Head of
Delivery
11.1
Group
Financial
Controller
11.1
Secretary
11.1
Head of
Distribution
Programme
Manager
Programme
Manager
Programme
Manager
Programme
Manager
11.1
HR
Manager
11.1
HR Manager
11.1
HR
Manager
11.1
Head of
Admin
11.1
Secretary
11.1
Head of
Recruitment
11.1
Secretary
11.1
Sales
manager
11.1
Sales
manager
11.1
Sales
manager
11.1
Sales
manager
11.1
Programme
Manager
11.1
Programme
Manager
11.1
Programme
Manager
11.1
Programme
Manager
11.1
Programme
Manager
11.1
Programme
Manager
11.1
Programme
Manager
11.1
Programme
Manager
11.1
Programme
Manager
11.1
Programme
Manager
11.1
Delivery
Grade 2
6.25
Recruitment
resource
6.25
Recruitment
resource
6.25
Recruitment
resource
6.25
Recruitment
resource
6.25
Secretary
(b) Scaled balloon layout
Barbar...
Molly White Ava Wilkins
Archie
Norton
Andrew
Singh
Ruby
Joyce
Michael Burnham
Jacqueline
King
Ryan
Emrich
Thoma...
Matthe...
Archibald
Norton
Maria King
Michael
Campo
Eleano...
Morris Clark
Anthony
Turnbull
Logan
Warren
Roy Roberts
Tyle...
Brian Penley
Sebastian
Swift
Rebecca
Stanley
Elizabeth
Preston
Jake Gallagher
Deborah
Johnson
Eve Sykes
Constanc...
Jonathan
Daniels
John
Stillings
Kyle
Palmer
Ryan
Page
Eva Hunter
Demi
Kemp
Edna
Howell
Violet
Croy
Joe Hall
Isaac
Stanley
Georgia
James
Nathan
Nolan
Maddison
Bennett
Harry
Craig
Jacob
Khan
Christine Jensen
Leo
Moran
Greg Johns
Josh Singh
Tyler Swift
Charles
Farias
Thomas
Gurrola
Rich
Wheaton
Paul Danner
Joe...
Isobel Brennan
Sean Ellis
Kia...
Naom...
James Porter
Reece Harris
(c) Icicle layout

Part One: Introduction
54
Figure 1.3.13 
Box grid visualization of organizational depth 
(layers pyramid)
Depth
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
774
1,505
49
774
264
168
143
82
19
5
1
1,505
Records
774
1
49
264
168
143
82
19
5
1
774
Count of Records by Records and Depth
Figure 1.3.14 
Box grid visualization: heat map of depth 
versus span of control (outgoing count)
Depth
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
28
33
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
49
862
290
71
3
1
1
1
1
1
7
1
4
1
1
15
2
9
1
22
6
4
1
17
12
1
2
1
14
2
2
1
10
2
1
1
13
7
2
1
17
5
3
1
10
3
1
7
3
1
1
1
1
1
3
2
1
1
1,275
4
14
27
34
32
19
14
23
26
15
7
5
2
1
3
2
1
1
49
870
427
122
29
7
1
1,505
Span of control
862
1
Count of Records by Outgoing Count and Depth

Foundations and Core Concepts
55
A cornerstone of my belief in the power of data visualization and how it 
supports organization design is that visuals should be interactive, providing 
a seamless interaction with data from collection, through cleansing and 
analysis to manipulation and modelling. (The idea of cleansing data visually 
is one I explore in more detail in Chapter 3.2.) By playing with data visually 
you will make your life so much more enjoyable. The future is one where you 
can work with data visually, manipulating and changing visualizations that 
automatically alter data at source.13 This is the Internet of Things applied  
to organization design and it is the logical next step from the touch-screen 
interactive technology we have come to expect in our everyday lives.
Model the to-be
There is so much value to be gained from visualizing and analysing the as-is 
of an organization. It is truly game changing to visualize and analyse future 
scenarios and decisions. This is the heart of good organization design, whether 
it is process design, objective setting, rightsizing or workforce planning.
However, at this point we are still in the world of moving boxes round  
a PowerPoint slide. We want to get to where, in the scenarios you plan, you 
can see all the elements of the organizational system shift with each change. 
Then you can see the gaps, the opportunities, the risks, and take action 
accordingly.
Tracking and sustaining performance
It is all very well getting the edge, but that in itself achieves little if you cannot 
sustain it. You have to find a way to track changes and performance over 
time. For example, take an objective. Can you set up a process so you can 
see the before and after effects of an organizational change?
Going through all these processes creates a virtuous circle. If you can see 
where you are you can plan for change; if you can plan for change you can 
make better decisions; if you track results you can maintain your understand-
ing of the as-is and look for improvements – and so on.
With this in mind I see organization design as an ongoing process rather 
than one of intervention. Designs should be being tweaked, honed and  
improved all the time. It is only through data visualization and analytics 
that this can be made possible.

Part One: Introduction
56
Final thoughts: see it as a journey
The concepts in this section and book are too penetrating to implement in 
one go as there is so much to define. In writing this book I have tried to 
break down each element of the system to make it easier to implement areas 
one at a time depending on your priorities.
By phasing the work, you should build institutional knowledge. The  
direction of analysis has to move from static snapshots to seeing change 
over time. Data is constantly changing and flow: both actuals and forecasts 
move. It is about seeing how these both change over time, their relationships 
with each other, what the gaps are, whether the gap is increasing or narrow-
ing and whether you can find any causal relationships (for example, number 
of objectives owned by each person and the success rates of achieving the 
objectives) so that you can improve performance.
By creating, linking and visualizing your organizational hierarchies, the 
depth of analysis you can achieve is remarkable. For example, you can see 
the links between individual and objective performance, and then dive into 
whether an individual who is underperforming has missing competencies 
that are trainable, is overloaded with too many new objectives, or is work-
ing for a new manager who has historically had significantly higher than 
reasonable team attrition. Once the data is in place, you can really start to 
have fun and see the value flow.
Building an understanding of any framework takes time and I’m sure 
many of you will be thinking that this interconnected vision is a fantasyland, 
given that many organizations struggle to understand their headcount alone. 
But organization design is a journey and you can never do all the work or 
change everything in one go. I hope the methods and ideas in this book help 
to facilitate change at all stages of organization design, whether in answer-
ing the most basic questions or performing complex advanced analytics. The 
ideas in this chapter will help to navigate the remainder of this book.

Foundations and Core Concepts
57
Notes
  1	 Mohrman, S (2007) Organization Design for Growth: the Human Resource 
Contribution, Centre for Effective Organizations, 07–10 (520), p 4
  2	 Stanford, N (2007) Guide to Organization Design, p 3, Profile Books Ltd, 
London
  3	 Galbraith, J (2012) The Evolution of Enterprise Organization Designs,  
Journal of Organization Design, 1 (2), pp 1–13
  4	 Slinger, G and Morrison, R (2014) Will Organization Design Be Affected By 
Big Data? Journal of Organization Design, 3 (3), pp 31–39
  5	 Minto, B (2008) The Pyramid Principle: Logic in thinking and writing,  
Prentice Hall
  6	 McDaniel, M and Einstein, G (1986) Bizarre imagery as an effective memory 
aid: The importance of distinctiveness, Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 12 (1), pp 54–65
  7	 Patton, W (1991) Opening students’ eyes: Visual learning theory in the Socratic 
classroom, Law and Psychology Review, 15, pp 1–18
  8	 Verdi, M P et al (1997) Organized spatial displays and texts: Effects of 
presentation order and display type on learning outcomes, Journal of 
Experimental Education, 65, pp 303–17
1	 See the organization as an interconnected system.
2	 Build organizational data through taxonomies across each area of the 
system.
3	 Organizational data is not big data, and contains many-to-many 
relationships.
4	 Connect the organizational system through hierarchy building and by 
using links through percentage of time, competencies scores or 
acronyms like RAS in the accountability matrix.
5	 Make it visual because the way you see the world defines how you 
understand it.
Remember this

Part One: Introduction
58
  9	 Few, S (2009) Now You See It, Analytics Press
10	 McCandless, D (2014) Knowledge is Beautiful, William Collins
11	 McDaniel, S [accessed 11 January 2015] Stephen Few versus David 
McCandless, Freakalytics [Online] https://www.freakalytics.com/
blog/2011/07/08/stephen-few-vs-david-mccandless-my-thoughts/
12	 Lima, M (2014) The Book of Trees, Princeton Architectural Press
13	 Kristi, M (2014) Support the Data Enthusiast: Challenges for Next-Generation 
Data-Analysis Systems, Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 7 (6),  
pp 453–56

Part Two
Macro design
59

60
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

“
Introduction
Industry executives and analysts often mistakenly talk about 
strategy as if it were some kind of chess match. But in chess, 
you have just two opponents, each with identical resources, 
and with luck playing a minimal role. The real world is much 
more like a poker game, with multiple players trying to make 
the best of whatever hand fortune has dealt them.
David Moschella
W
hen most people talk about organizational design they are referring to 
macro design. It is the sexy, fun part of design work. It’s what the 
MBA schools focus on and it’s all about the big picture. All too quickly, 
people think about the org chart and structure. People obsess about struc-
ture and jump in far too quickly. You have to step back and ask the really 
tough questions that are the fundamentals of the business. They include: 
Where do you want to go? Why do you want to get there? And, at a high 
level, how are you going to get there? The answers to these questions make 
up the backbone of your business, but they are often documented ineffec-
tively and miscommunicated. They are also some of the hardest questions  
to answer.
The most important thing to remember, and yet the easiest thing to forget 
when it comes to the macro design, is that there is never a right or perfect 
answer; there is just a minimization of maximum regret. At the end of the 
day, who knows what you might have achieved if you had gone down a  
different road? But if you fail, you need to be able to look back and know 
that in the situation you made the right choice. Otherwise you are going to 
be giving yourself a lot of frustrated, sleepless nights thinking What if...? 
You cannot predict the future, and at some point you are going to have to 
take risks. To use the analogy of poker, this is when you put your chips on 
the table. It is when you make the decision to join the high-stakes game. 
However, the great thing about business is that while you inevitably have to 
2.1
61

Part Two: Macro Design
62
take risks, it is you who decides what game you are going to play, who your 
competitors are and, to some extent, what rules you are going to follow.
At this stage of the design process you have to make trade-offs and only 
you (and your leadership team) can decide how to make those trade-offs. 
Once you have answered those where, why and how questions, you need to 
create a compelling case for change. There is no point trying to do some-
thing as invasive as change your organization unless there is an incredibly 
strong case for doing so. Once in place, you need to turn all of that into a 
distilled set of design criteria that can be used to support the decision-making 
process between the various options. As a recommendation on the path 
forwards emerges, so too does the need for a business case that will stand 
the test of time.
Macro design in practice
It is too easy to design the organization in a reactive and unstructured way. 
When I ran a workshop with a group of 12 senior HR leaders a few years 
ago on how they currently did OD, one of the participants talked about  
how two power brokers in her organization moved people around in a con-
stant horse-trading battle. Several others nodded their heads and commented 
how they frequently witnessed similar behaviour. The risk organizations 
face is that by never taking a step back they lose sight of the whole and find 
themselves in a negative spiral.
Organizational redesigns are costly, time consuming and rarely much fun. 
Therefore, the case for change has to be overwhelming in order for it to be 
considered worthwhile. The macro design is something that should con-
stantly be referenced, used and followed to direct your organization and the 
direction it is going in. This section, Part Two, sets out how to go about 
macro design from start to finish and assumes you are doing a wholesale 
change. However, many (if not most) redesigns don’t focus on the entire 
organization but sub-elements of it. For example, redesigning the sales force, 
marketing or supply chain. The more frequent these mini redesigns, the 
greater the dynamic nature of the underlying drivers. For instance, as pro­
ducts and customers dynamically change, so too will the sales force, as 
explained in Chapter 3.5. The concepts still apply, but the level of granular 
thinking won’t have to be as deep and frameworks such as multi-criteria 
decision analysis will rarely need to be used.
In many cases a redesign will not be necessary. The process of thinking 
about and answering fundamental questions about your organization helps 

Introduction
63
set the path for the future, and it is always crucial that you should be clear 
about it. But macro change may not be necessary. Even if it isn’t, the methods 
described in Part Three should still add significant value.
Structure and logic for Part Two
To start with you have to understand what you are talking about when 
defining macro design. Too often terms such as ‘vision’, ‘strategy’, ‘goals’ and 
‘objectives’ get confused. Chapter 2.2 defines how each term relates to each 
other term when building an outline for your future organization. Having 
defined the journey, you need to translate this into a case for change. The 
case for change answers why you should do the redesign. How will this help 
deliver business success? And if you do need to change, how do you need to 
change? What are the design criteria that will act as a framework when 
creating your design? Chapter 2.2 is the reflective bit. It will make you stay 
up late into the night to work out exactly what you and the business want 
to achieve. But if done well, it is also one of the most fun things to do. There 
is nothing better than daydreaming into the future and thinking about 
what you and your organization can achieve in five, 10, 20 years’ time.
Once you have the journey and the design criteria in place, Chapter 2.3 
defines how to map the high-level value chain processes and then how to 
map the key accountabilities to the range of design options. The options are 
developed to best meet your design criteria. Who will be accountable at  
a summary level for what in your new organization? At this stage it is all 
about answering the high-level questions: the top two levels of the org 
chart and the summary 30–60 process elements. You are answering the 
‘what if’ questions. You are making sure you don’t suddenly wake up in a 
few months’ time thinking: ‘If only we’d thought about it that way!’ This is 
partly about creating possible extreme options for the design so you can test 
boundaries. Being creative and running through all the options are absolute 
musts at this stage so that you can set up a review to determine which one 
is most suitable.
Finally, it’s crunch time. You need to decide. Outlining the steps to a 
thorough options analysis, how do you choose the right design? What can 
we learn about effective decision-making with so many complex contrac-
tionary criteria? It isn’t just about choosing the design, it is being able to 
communicate that design and persuade everyone to get behind it. Therefore, 
how do you create an effective business case that gives both a strong mandate 
and direction?

Part Two: Macro Design
64
Macro design is about thinking. This thinking needs to be documented 
and communicated. In reality, the whole process is about answering a range 
of fundamental questions and documenting the answers to the questions. 
Those answers are actually your business case. The business case is nothing 
more than the documentation of those answers in a structured way. Don’t 
wait until the end of your thinking to document your answers, but make the 
documentation a core part of the process. The macro design is going to be 
your compass over the whole of the detailed micro design and into making 
it real. It’s what you should turn to in times of trouble to remind you why 
you are doing what you are doing. It’s what you put in front of anyone who 
questions what you are doing so you can take them on the journey with you. 
The first step is working out what journey you want to go on.

“
2.2
Strategy 
articulation and 
design criteria
All men can see these tactics whereby I conquer, but what 
none can see is the strategy out of which victory is evolved.
Sun Tzu
Introduction
To have a chance of implementing a successful organization design you have 
to know what you are trying to achieve from the design. Unfortunately, 
business language is full of jargon and words that are overused and mis-
understood. Nowhere is that more true than with the term ‘strategy’. It has 
come to mean so many things it almost means nothing. I frequently hear 
people refer to their strategy when what they are really doing is listing a  
set of goals. This isn’t helped by the number of consultants who call them-
selves strategy consultants. What they are really trying to say is that they do 
important high-value work. Strategy is not the same as saying something  
is important. In the context of organization design, words matter. They set 
the tone and direction and they provide emphasis. It is crucial to be clear 
about what you mean by various business terms, and equally important to 
be extremely clear about what you mean when defining the key elements  
of your corporate and organizational plans.
This chapter gets back to the basics of strategic terminology and how  
to use specific terms in the context of defining your case for change and 
the type of organization you will need to execute your strategy, fulfil your 
vision and meet the ambitions of the organization. The chapter then investi-
gates some constraints you may face before looking at how, based on your 
strategy and vision, you can set your design criteria.
65

Part Two: Macro Design
66
Define where you are going and why
Before you even think about your organization design you need to start at 
the very beginning – ensure the vision, goals, strategy and mission are all 
crystal clear. These are the basis of everything the organization is and does. 
Many organizations think of themselves as being on a journey. If so, think 
of the tools you need to navigate that journey: a map and a compass. They 
tell you where you are going, the best route to get there, and that you are 
heading in the right direction. Your high-level organizational terms should 
perform the same roles as the map and compass.
In organizational terms, the vision sets the direction and goals – the where 
we want to get to; the strategy defines the plan and the how we should get 
there. We break the plan down into goals and objectives; into things that 
people need to do. The historian Alfred Chandler famously theorized that 
‘structure follows strategy’.1 What happens if the strategy isn’t clear? Simply, 
the design won’t be clear and it will be impossible to implement. Equally, 
having a clear strategy can be one of the greatest enablers of successful 
organization design.
Of 34 organization design practitioners surveyed in collaboration with 
the University of Westminster in 2012–13, not one (0 per cent) said they 
were ‘very successful’ in their organization design.2 This research included 
an in-depth survey that covered private, public and third sectors. Many 
other studies highlight that many change programmes fail, with Harvard 
Business School professor John Kotter famously claiming in 1996 that 
nearly 70 per cent of large-scale change programmes didn’t meet their goals.3 
Significant progress has not been made and while there is clearly a large range 
of reasons, our research highlighted that not having a clear vision and/or 
strategy is one of the most significant.
The research we did found that ‘people politics – protecting vested interest’ 
was the number one barrier to success (a subject addressed in Chapter 1.2) 
and ‘incomplete strategy’ and ‘lack of vision for the future organization’ were 
the second and third barriers, as shown in Figure 2.2.1. Interestingly, having 
a weak case for change was not regarded as an issue, suggesting that there  
is typically a significant case for organizational change. In following up 
many of those surveyed, speaking to other OD practitioners and reading  
the literature on the subject, it is obvious that having clear answers to the 
‘strategic questions’ is the single most important thing to get right. And you 
need to get it right from the beginning. It provides purpose for the new design 
and a way to make trade-offs about what you want from your design.

Strategy Articulation and Design Criteria
67
Figure 2.2.1 
Top organization design barriers
25%
20%
15%
10%
5%
0%
20%
18%
16%
11%
9%
9%
7%
7%
2%
2%
Politics – protecting 
vested interest
Incomplete 
strategy
Lack of vision 
of furture org
Org inertia
Costs – can’t 
afford proposals
Lack of consensus
on decision-making
Lack of knowledge and 
skill on how to do OD
Unclear top-level 
processes/activities
Other
Weak case 
for change
I am not a strategist nor have I done much real strategy consulting. I typi-
cally work on a broad range of operational and organizational improvement 
projects. However, given how important these terms are it is remarkable 
how many organizations I come across which seem to struggle with them. 
On the one hand, I find this pretty unacceptable given how fundamental it 
is. On the other hand, it is because it is fundamental that it is so hard. It is 
hard to define succinctly what we mean. We all know the adage ‘I didn’t 
have time to write a short letter, so I wrote a long one.’ Distilling things to 
their essence takes time and clarity of thought. So perhaps we should always 
do more to challenge the assumption that the basics have already been well 
defined.
When training many teams, I find that part of the issue is that people 
don’t fully understand what all the terminology means. So let’s start there. 
Words and phrases used when defining high-level vision and strategy need 
to be thought about in terms of their purpose and audience. These state-
ments are not just words on a page, but they are the inspiration for your 
employees and your customers. They should be the reason you get out of 
bed every day. They are the things that inspire you in your darkest moments 
and inspire those around you. You have to be utterly convinced by them.

Part Two: Macro Design
68
Get your terminology right
To help address this I have created a slightly tongue-in-cheek diagram to 
show how all the terminology fits together (Figure 2.2.2). The image takes 
inspiration from SpaceX, an advanced rocket and spacecraft manufacturer 
with an ambition to colonize space.
Vision
A vision statement is a single sentence that explains clearly and specifically 
where you are trying to get to over the long term. In the context of Figure 2.2.2, 
this is to colonize parts of the universe. The vision statement defines the  
organization’s purpose, but does so in terms of the organization’s values 
rather than bottom-line measures (values are guiding beliefs about how 
things should be done). The vision statement communicates both the pur-
pose and the values of the organization. For employees it gives direction 
about how they are expected to behave and inspires them to give their best. 
Shared with customers, it shapes customers’ understanding of why they 
should work with the organization. This is potentially the hardest sentence 
to come up with because it has to be concise, useful, stand the test of time 
and speak to both employees and customers in an inspiring way.
Strategy
The strategy defines how you are going to achieve your vision. It sets out the 
direction and scope of the organization over the long term. It defines how 
you achieve your advantage for the organization by configuring resources  
in a challenging environment to meet the needs of markets and to fulfil 
stakeholder expectations. It is all about trade-offs. For example, in order to 
colonize space, the first step might be to develop rockets to get to Mars 
using liquid fuel technology. However, an alternative might be to develop 
nuclear fusion technology first and then move to get to Mars. These are  
the types of choices you need to make when setting your strategy.
Goals
Goals are the intended results you want your organization to achieve based 
on your vision and strategy. You could think of them as stepping stones. 
They are broad and do not need to be specific or measurable. This is what 
differentiates them from objectives. One of the SpaceX goals in relation to 
colonizing the universe relates to ‘Structures Engineering’ and a goal to ‘have 
the most mass-efficient primary and secondary structures possible while  
exceeding all factors of safety’.4 Once again, the key should be simplicity. 

Strategy Articulation and Design Criteria
69
Figure 2.2.2 
Reach for the stars – an example of strategic terms
Strategy 
Build the space rocket technology and ecosystems 
to get a human first to the moon, then Mars, 
then to new solar systems. Use the technology 
and resources in space to pay for investments in 
engineering and the development of sustainable 
resources that can be leveraged commercially.
How will we get there?
It’s about trade-offs
VaLUe
‘Strive to improve.’
the Behaviour
gOaL
‘ Develop a sustainable 
energy source.’
Desired results
OBjectiVe
‘ Get a human on the moon 
before the decade is out.’

SMart and aligned  
to strategy

Part Two: Macro Design
70
Your goals should communicate clearly the ambition for your organization, 
speaking naturally to particular parts of the business. Taking your vision 
statement, breaking it down into chunks which facilitate its fulfilment.
Objectives
Having created your goals, these naturally convert into defined objectives. 
Objectives should be SMART (Specific, Measurable, Achievable, Relevant 
and Time-bound) as described in Chapter 3.3. However, at this top level do 
not get bogged down in the detail. The objectives you set here should be high-
level objectives that cascade down only to the top levels of the organization. 
The further detail of cascading objectives right down through the whole of 
your organization comes with micro design (Chapter 3.3). For example, an 
objective in the context of Figure 2.2.2 might be: ‘By September 2009 became 
the first privately funded liquid-fuelled vehicle to put a satellite into Earth 
orbit.’ Incidentally, this is something that SpaceX actually achieved.
Values and behaviours
Values and behaviours are what everyone needs in order to best ensure that 
the vision, goals and objectives are met. They form an important subset of 
the competencies described in Chapter 3.6. For example, a job advert on the 
SpaceX website stated: ‘We seek future colleagues with a rare mix of drive, 
passion, scrappiness, intelligence, and curiosity to seek what’s beyond the stars.’ 
SpaceX was a lead news item in June 2015 when a launch malfunctioned. 
It’s a feature of such ambitious projects that they will always encounter 
setbacks along the way. I hope SpaceX succeeds.
Mission
The mission statement is a summary, used for internal purposes (for example, 
‘To populate the universe to save humanity’s existence for eternity by popu-
lating other planets in a financially self-sustaining and eventually highly 
profitable way’.). It pulls together key elements of your vision, goals and 
strategy. It is essentially a summary of your top-level direction setting with 
an inward communication focus. In one sentence it should communicate 
your organization’s reason for being, and the end-to-end journey you are 
embarking on. It should be accessible so that new employees understand it, 
buy into it and come on the journey with you. It needs to talk about the high-
level ‘how’ and not just the ‘why’. In your mission statement, you mention 
what your organization currently does. Mission statements explain what the 
company is good at, who is the customer that they care about, and what 
the company does that might be really good compared with the competition.

Strategy Articulation and Design Criteria
71
However, it is not just about understanding the function of these terms 
and articulating their contents. You then have to communicate them effec-
tively. Whether it’s a video, presentation or booklet, make your story come 
alive and target that story to the intended audience. For example, implemen-
tations and transformations are increasingly using videos specifically targeted 
at employees to help communicate why a change was required, what is 
changing and what the benefits are. Whatever you do, be creative, inspiring 
and communicate the meaning behind the words.
At the end of this process you should have clear, succinct and engaging 
documentation of your vision, your goals and objectives, all summarized  
by your mission statement. I hope these definitions and the example help.  
I equally hope that when you do the design, you don’t skip over this crucial 
part of the process. There is no doubt these elements are extremely tough to 
define – and they are the subjects of numerous other pieces of literature. What 
I want to get across, though, is the need to think, challenge and test before you 
do a design. Do not go into a design with the assumption everyone is clear on 
the direction of travel. And, if you bring up issues of clarity at the beginning, 
it is going to make the chances of success for your design so much higher.
This high-level overview is the reference point for every single decision 
you take and is the very heart of your organization. Only if you understand 
all these things can you move along the design process: creating a case for 
change, evaluating your design criteria, defining your processes, listing your 
structural options, creating an accountability matrix and creating your  
business case. Defining the case for change and setting your design criteria 
are the subjects of the second half of this chapter.
The case for change
The case for change is what should drive alignment across all stakeholders. 
It is crucial that all decision makers fully support each point with both their 
heads and hearts. This case is what you will use when communicating to all 
employees during the implementation phase, as described in Chapter 4.4.
Your top-level strategic definitions are reasonably static. Your organiza-
tion is not. Whether you created them yesterday or two years ago, you have 
to work out where the organization sits in relation to achieving them. It is 
also worth stating that this is not a linear process. It is much easier to think 
of it that way, but all these elements are built simultaneously, are intrinsi-
cally linked and have consequences for each other. For example, goals 
should be built on current strengths, taking into account current challenges.

Part Two: Macro Design
72
Your case for change should detail the key improvements that will take 
you from where you are today to where you need to get to. Start with what 
is good. What are the things you most want to keep? What are your 
strengths? The next stage is to detail the improvements. You can think of 
these in two broad categories: things that you are doing that you should 
stop or improve and things you aren’t doing. A way to think of this is the 
analogy of moving house. Imagine you are moving: what do you want to 
take with you, leave behind or buy new? Undertaking this process is not 
simply about drawing up a list based on talking to senior-level individuals 
across the business. Equally, this represents the beginning of your communi-
cation process about the design. In Chapter 4.4, I devote many pages to the 
topic of communication. Recognize that going through the process of defin-
ing all the key points of change is the start of your change process: how you 
do it, whom you involve and what you say to set the scene not just for the 
answer but also for the buy-in and change programme. Take time to think 
about who needs to be involved at this very early stage.
In order to build the case for change, run an exercise that brings informa-
tion from across the business. It should cut across functions, organizational 
levels and geographies. Don’t just ask those at the top and don’t simply list 
a set of challenges and improvements. For example:
●
●Define what is the impact of the challenges. What would be the result 
of fixing it?
●
●Clarify the scope of the challenges; for example, if the issue is  
‘a suboptimal innovation process’ then what does that really mean? 
Is the scope of the issue:
–– all innovation processes across that value chain or specific elements?
–– all geographies and products or subgroups?
●
●Is the challenge a symptom or the root cause of an issue?
●
●Translate resolving the challenges, as far as possible, into numbers: 
numbers that are ideally broken into meaningful categories. For example:
–– top-line growth;
–– cost savings and efficiencies;
–– improved customer satisfaction;
–– great compliance and reduction in risk;
–– improvements in innovation;
–– improvements in talent and key competencies.

Strategy Articulation and Design Criteria
73
In going through this process, it is always worthwhile taking a look at your 
competitors and other benchmarks. What are your strengths relative to 
them, and their strengths relative do you? What inspiration and ideas can 
you take away? Equally, are there ways of working you want to avoid?
In getting and keeping the competitive edge, you need to know how you 
are going to win in your given market. A great way of thinking about this is 
to think of your nightmare competitor, even if such a competitor doesn’t 
exist today. How would such a competitor beat you in the marketplace? 
What kind of things would the competitor do? Describe your competitor. 
Give your competitor a name and personality. Have one of the team role-
play being the competitor and talk through how they could beat you.
The case for no change
I want to be clear from the start: unless the case for change is overwhelming, 
stop where you are in terms of a major organization transformation. 
Change is messy, hard and disruptive. You have to do it for the right reasons 
if you are going to make it worthwhile. You have to take the organization 
on the journey, so unless the change ticks all the right boxes, stop. That 
doesn’t mean you can’t drive significant improvements. Often, focusing on  
a particular area of the business will add significant value. Indeed, many of 
the methods and techniques described in Part Three and Part Four of this 
book can be undertaken in isolation and will deliver benefits, regardless of 
whether they are part of a wider programme or not.
From my experience, I think there are four broad change criteria that 
have to be met before you undertake major macro change:
1	 It has to be financially sound. The change will result in you being 
much more successful and profitable from a financial perspective.
2	 It has to be emotionally sound. Unless you are completely convinced 
in your heart that change is needed and is the right move, there is no 
point. Like the vision, the change has to be what gets you out of bed 
in the morning and what gives you strength to see the process 
through from end to end.
3	 It has to be succinct. The case for change needs to be unambiguous 
and memorable. This is where communication starts. If you can 
inspire people and bring them along with you on the journey,  
the ability to go through the process of change is much more 
achievable.

Part Two: Macro Design
74
4	 It has to stand the test of time. Given the upheaval that comes  
with change, it is only worthwhile if it is something that will last.  
If you can look forward three, five, or even 10 to 20 years and see the 
benefits change will bring then the effort in the short term becomes 
worth it.
None of these is a strong enough reason on its own. They rely on each other. 
For example, a change may be financially sound, but if people do not believe 
in it and cannot understand the change, that change is never going to happen 
or be a success.
Detailing the case for change
To develop an emphatic case for change it is useful to detail the challenges 
to your organization currently against your high-level ambitions. One of the 
ways of doing this is to take your goals and objectives, and translate them 
into actions. Next, translate those actions into the negative and positive 
impacts change will have on the organization. From this analysis you can 
assess whether a big change is the best path forward or whether you can 
make the desired improvements through small steps. Whatever you decide, 
I cannot emphasize enough how useful and important this exercise is. If you 
do it well just once, and really challenge yourself to think about all these 
areas, it will be your go-to guide for years to come. It creates consistency in 
the long term for your organization, whether you make a drastic change or 
not. At the end of the day, whether you decide to proceed with major change 
or not comes back to trade-offs. Only you and your leadership team can 
make the decision of whether the medium-term disruption caused by a large 
organizational change is more worthwhile than small tweaks to medium-
sized improvements in your organization. However, you cannot make this 
decision until you have understood the constraints facing you and whether 
your desired direction is feasible or not.
An example is one client company that was locally organized with strong 
country business units. It took the company far too long (it should have  
cut the time by half or one third) to bring new products to market. It was 
not benefiting from scale, which resulted in too much stock and suboptim­
ization of supply, and it was doing many of the basics things poorly because 
it could not pull its key capabilities together, like engineering or procure-
ment leverage.

Strategy Articulation and Design Criteria
75
Constraints and risks
We all live in a world of constraints and uncertainties. Organizational change 
is particularly risky with many constraints and hidden traps. Understanding 
and documenting them early on mean they can be best incorporated into  
the thinking. One example is thinking of constraints and risks to various 
design options. Examples of constraints include limited budget; strong 
personalities and egos; risk of too much disruption; lack of alignment; 
competitive reactions; risk of losing key talent; customer intimacy require-
ments. These types of constraint will come up again and again during the 
design, not simply at this stage.
The benefits of dealing with constraints and risks upfront are exemplified 
in software quality process. When a developer writing code finds a bug, if it 
is fixed immediately it can take minutes. But if the developer sees it as the 
job of the quality engineer to find bugs and ensure they are dealt with or  
if the developer simply misses a bug, then the quality engineer has to find  
the bug, verify it is a bug, record it in a system, potentially explain it to the 
developer; the developer has to go back to his code and understand the issue, 
and only then fix it. Then it all needs to be re-tested and often the project 
manager needs to ensure this has all happened. If the bug is not found and 
the customer finds it, then the amount of talking between various parties 
(verifying, testing, re-testing and planning) starts to spiral. It is similar with 
organizational design. Addressing a problem upfront is a tiny fraction of  
the cost of dealing with it later. The project impetus for speed can cause 
derailing down the line. One of the most important rules in negotiation is 
not to value time over the deal. Momentum, pace, cost control and hitting 
milestones are clearly important. But not if they drive issues which derail  
an entire organization.
Too often, constraints and risks are listed in Excel or PowerPoint in a 
fairly superficial way. They are not really dealt with, but the team members 
can say they are dealing with them because they have a list. When writing 
the constraints or risks down, ensure you have identified the root issues. 
This is half the battle in overcoming them. Like many things, you must 
provide structure to dealing with these issues. How severe are they, how 
controllable, when would they hit and what is the impact? If it happens, then 
what? What are the mitigating actions? A typical list that might be produced 
has the issue, a score on impact and on the owner. These sorts of list are  
a good place to start. But that is all they are, a starting point. Chapter 3.5 
elaborates further on how to ensure the organization is geared towards 
managing risks effectively.

Part Two: Macro Design
76
The next step is for those worthy of managerial effort to be given a little 
more attention. For example, on budget: this is all to do with the business 
case. What are the criteria? Is the cash physically available? Does the payback 
period and/or Return on Investment (ROI) meet your financial thresholds? 
In terms of impact: impact on what? Is the impact of going over budget a 
threat to the survival of the business or does it simply mean a reshuffle of 
budget priorities and allocation? Think through: if the risk or issue is not 
dealt with, then what? What would you have to do? What would the financial 
cost be of that? What are the mitigating actions? How are you going to track 
that they are done?
A commonly cited implicit constraint is the ego of some of the senior 
team members. It is probably worth thinking through what is behind the 
inflammatory word ‘ego’. We can rephrase this to mean: What is it that  
really motivates the individual? Why has the individual made the sacrifices 
he or she has to reach the position he or she is in? How critical are team 
members to the ongoing success and loyalty of the team? Often, it is auto­
nomy and control over one’s destiny that is the driving force, not the size of 
empire. Making assumptions can be dangerous. Equally, expecting someone 
to tell us straight what his or her issue is can be equally fraught. People  
don’t always reveal the truth, especially if they think they are talking to the 
enemy. Therefore, list the potential reasons for the issue, and find a way to 
get answers. It is worth investing the time upfront to get to the bottom of 
these sorts of issue.
The last thing to say on this: many of the issues and risks will be miti-
gated through the proper execution of the micro design. However, options 
analysis (the subject of Chapter 2.3) requires thinking about the possible 
constraints, as there is no point having the perfect organization design if  
it is impractical and unfeasible to put in place. The section on ‘Risk manage-
ment’ in Chapter 3.5 provides more insight into managing these points.
Setting the design criteria
If you decide that doing a full organization redesign is the way forward  
then the first step is to set out your design criteria. The design criteria are 
your guiding principles for any decisions regarding how to change your  
organization. They are entirely dependent on your vision, goals, strategy 
and the case for change. They bring these all together to provide a frame-
work and set of priorities for any design work. They are integral to ensuring 
you choose the right design for your organization – something I will come 

Strategy Articulation and Design Criteria
77
to in Chapter 2.3. With that in mind, to set the design criteria you need  
to have a firm grasp on where your organization is heading, what the chal-
lenges are, and what the ideal is, as set out earlier in this chapter. This is where 
many of the trade-offs are made, and you have to decide which criteria are 
the most important. You have to prioritize. These will be your reference 
points for any design.
Often, setting design criteria is regarded as an excuse to set down a long 
list of aspirations. But resist the temptation as it makes the exercise meaning-
less. The list needs to be short and you should really focus on what is impor-
tant. The criteria you select are dependent on what you are trying to do. To 
get to this point, take your vision, goals, strategy and the case for change. 
Use them to define the priorities for your design. For example, if your goal 
are top-line growth through production innovation, but you are slow at new 
product introductions because the organization is geographically controlled 
(for example, manufacturing, engineering, and marketing execution are all 
local), then a sensible design criterion might be ‘New product introduction 
efficiency’. Having set out all of your design criteria it is worth just cross 
referencing them at the end with all the major elements of your case for 
change, to ensure they all align and will prioritize the desired improvements 
in the right areas of the organization. Once you have done this, you will 
have created the framework for your design, and these criteria will be at the 
heart of every decision made and everything you do going forward in your 
design. An example of some common design criteria include:
●
●improve product innovation and time to market;
●
●improve customer relationships;
●
●improve functional excellence;
●
●support the acquisition agenda;
●
●increase supply responsiveness;
●
●minimize cost;
●
●reduce the number of management layers;
●
●optimize tax.
Final thoughts
A commonly used term to define how an organization will execute its strat-
egy is the Target Operating Model (TOM). The TOM defines how all the 
elements of the organizational system work. Unfortunately, the definition 

Part Two: Macro Design
78
that many give of the term varies. I regard it as the summary structural 
design together with the value chain required, detailed processes and com-
petencies. In other words, it is synonymous with the macro and micro design.
This chapter has looked at the big picture. All the elements defined in 
this chapter are critical to the success of not just the organization design,  
but of the business as a whole. In reality, I have only scraped the surface of 
these areas, but there are many other books out there that investigate big 
picture setting in detail. That is not the focus of this book. What I want to 
emphasize is that you have to ask the questions to get the answers. Never 
assume people have these answers when doing an organization design, so ask 
the questions. If there is confusion about the high-level business priorities 
then clarify them now, as otherwise implementing a successful design will 
be near impossible.
In light of this, having set out the elements in this chapter, I suggest a 
meeting of all the key decision makers to review the fundamentals. Does 
everyone agree and is everyone extremely motivated to take on his or her 
part of the task to make the change happen? If not, stop with the major 
transformation and move straight to the elements within the micro design.  
I believe a great deal can be solved through micro changes and doing the 
business basics well. However, sometimes surgery is needed. If that is the case, 
you need to define and choose specific design options and detail the design. 
This is the subject of the next chapter.
1	 Ensure the vision, strategy, goals, objectives and mission are all defined 
and understood.
2	 Set out the case for change and only move forward if the case is 
overwhelming.
3	 Detail the constraints and risks and think through them so that options 
moving forward are feasible.
4	 Set out clear and concise design criteria to provide a framework and  
a set of principles to follow throughout creating and implementing the 
organization design.
5	 Make sure all key stakeholders are aligned behind the direction of 
travel and are invested in the change.
Remember this

Strategy Articulation and Design Criteria
79
Notes
1	 Chandler, A (1962) Strategy and Structure: Chapters in the history of the 
American Industrial enterprise, MIT Press, Cambridge MA
2	 Research conducted by Concentra and the University of Westminster (2013)
3	 John, K (1996) Leading Change, Harvard Business School Press
4	 SpaceX website [accessed 23 February 2015] [Online]  
http://www.spacex.com/careers

“
2.3
Structural  
options and 
business case
Whenever you see a successful business, someone once made 
a courageous decision.  Peter Drucker
Introduction
The goal of organization design is to create an organization that is best 
placed and most likely to achieve the strategy developed in Chapter 2.2.  
In doing this, the first decision you have to make is what your high-level 
organization should look like. Once that decision is made, everything else 
follows. The crucial work here is in ensuring the option you choose gives 
you the best possible chance of fulfilling and delivering your design criteria. 
The rationale behind the decision will be documented in your business case, 
and is the logic that will drive the detailing when doing the micro design.  
It will also form most of the collateral for the communication that is re-
quired when implementing the design, covered in Part Four of this book.
The decision-making process throughout both the macro and micro 
phases of design is never simply about the structure of your organization. 
Hierarchical structures play a key part in the organization, ensuring  
accountabilities and responsibilities. However, you need to think about  
your decision in the context of the organization being a collection of people 
who have to get work done to deliver a particular strategy. One angle that 
is gaining increasing momentum is to view the organization as a network. 
Organizations are not simply units of command and control. They need to 
be enablers of efficient information flows. Peter Hinssen argues in his book 
The Network Always Wins1 that networks are far better at facilitating the 
flow of information than traditional hierarchical structures: ‘Networks  
naturally turn information from ponds into rivers. Today’s organizations 
80

Structural Options and Business Case
81
need these rivers of information to handle the speed needs of the network 
society.’2
This does not mean hierarchies and networks are mutually exclusive. 
There is a balance to be made between rigid hierarchical structures and  
allowing flex in the system to encourage networked ways of working. In 
many ways, mapping and connecting the organizational system are a way  
of understanding and dictating high-level aspects of formal organizational  
networks. The key is not to overprescribe the connections and stifle the  
informal networks and self-organizing nature of an organization. Much of 
this comes into your micro design, ensuring you are practical about setting 
out how people will work together and that you are not overly prescriptive. 
In deciding your options and high-level structural design, you are laying  
the platform to direct the micro design in a way that fulfils, as closely as 
possible, your design criteria.
There is no universal truth in macro design, just a range of trade-offs 
between a range of desirable but often mutually exclusive factors. A decision 
has to be made, and you need to reach a conclusion that you are confident, 
on balance, meets the largest number of your design criteria. A good rule  
of thumb to use in decision-making is to minimize your maximum regret. 
For each option, what would your maximum regret be and how do they 
compare? In deciding between your options it is easy to become deadlocked 
between different needs, that is your design criteria. Therefore, how do you 
know you are using those criteria in a meaningful way? And how can  
you make sure you are making a good decision? It is not easy. As Professor 
Paul Nutt famously concluded in his book Why Decisions Fail: decisions  
fail half the time.3 This is due to three blunders that essentially come down 
to bad practice when making decisions, rushing into decisions and poor  
resource allocation. With organization design, I see decisions reflect these 
three blunders all the time. Senior managers are keen to get to the answer 
straight away. Outcomes are mapped on a napkin, with boxes of the desired 
to-be structure, before anything else. As already stated in Chapter 1.2, people 
love the org chart because it is so tangible. And all too often, once one view 
is written down a psychological commitment is made to that answer.
This chapter will help you to navigate the decision-making process to 
ensure you are able to choose the best design possible. I start by outlining 
how to define your organization’s high-level value chains and processes, and 
how to structure them for different design options. Using the design criteria 
you created in Chapter 2.2, I then set out a data-driven approach to options 
analysis based on the science of multi-criteria decision-making (MCDM). 
Finally, having made your decision, you need to turn your attention to 
creating a compelling and clear business case. This is the focus for the last 

Part Two: Macro Design
82
section of this chapter. It is this document that, if agreed upon, will steer  
the remaining months of design and implementation work, and years of 
business performance.
Develop options
There are three steps in developing your options: first to define the value 
chain and summary processes; second to set out the best possible options; 
and third to map your summary processes to each option so you can clarify 
what they really mean. In the second step of developing potential options, 
ensure you give yourself the best possible chance of finding the route that 
will best help deliver your strategy and support your design criteria.
Define the value chain and summary processes
Understanding the organization as a system is one of the core principles  
of this book as outlined in Chapter 1.3. This is the first time you start map-
ping and designing that system, mapping your high-level processes to the 
high-level to-be organizational structure. I explore more detailed process 
design in Chapters 3.4 and 3.5. At this stage you only need to define your 
summary value chain and high-level processes. Once these are defined you 
can see the consequences of each design option by linking your roles to  
your processes. This does not necessarily mean your organization chart will 
look that different for different options. You might end up with two identical 
organizational charts for two options but fundamentally different organ­
izations depending on the responsibilities attached to each role. Remember, 
it’s what’s in the box that counts.
To begin with, simply list where each of the core processes sits. You can  
do this by taking the key 30–60 chunks of work that are required for your 
organization. Then build them in a simple taxonomy that is ideally two  
or three levels deep (no more). Figure 2.3.1 is a simplified example. These 
summary processes help to define the true scope of each of the structural 
options after you have defined where the responsibility for each of these 
processes resides using the ‘RAS’ linking method described in Chapter 1.3  
(I return to this later in this chapter).
Develop options and dimensions of design
Putting your value chain and supporting processes to one side for the  
moment, the next step is to develop different design options. Developing 

Structural Options and Business Case
83
these options can be challenging, either because you have a blank piece of 
paper or, more likely, there will be a tendency to jump to the ‘right’ answer. 
I have often seen people come up with three obvious options and then stop 
without thinking through other possibilities. Or even worse, just going with 
the first option that is suggested. A helpful way to develop design options is 
to define some different possible dimensions of design. Here are some generic 
dimensions you might use:
●
●functions
–– eg HR, finance, procurement, supply, R&D, sales, marketing
●
●geographic
–– eg Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
countries (OECD); Brazil, Russia, India, China (BRIC);  
Sub-Saharan Africa
–– or even smaller categories, eg regional, country, state
●
●products and competencies
–– categories, brands and products
–– manufacturing centres
Figure 2.3.1 
List of summary processes
Value Chain Processes
Ideation
Business case development 
and signoff
Research and development
Test and pilot
Roll-out
Industrialize and grow
Content creation
Public Relations
Social Media and Web
Events
Branding
Cold calling
Demo
Security reviews
Scoping
Commericals and contracting
Scope defintion and build solution
Test
Technical implementation
Train
Develop
Run 1st
Manage
Manage
Support Processes
HR Policies
Org design and workforce planning
Recruitment
Career management
Reward
Financial planning
Credit control
Payments and processing
Financial and commerical control
Define standards
Run audits
Define stanards
Source space
Manage office
Product and Offering
Development value chain
S
cu
People
Attract
Finance
Sell
Quality
Implement
Office Management
Le
m
Strategy
Perform
Resourc
Level 1
Support Processes
Value Chain Processes

Part Two: Macro Design
84
●
●market segments
–– customer segments, eg enterprise or SME
–– vertical industry, eg FMCG; government; life science; finance
–– channel, eg direct, value-added resellers, consulting firms
●
●process versus project based
–– Teams are bought together on a project-by-project basis.  
Each project may last several years.
●
●degree of centralization
–– Consider each element of the value chain and the degree to which 
it should be centralized between the centre, regions or local 
presence.
The best organization designs usually focus on a single primary dimension 
of design. So design options are typically formulated around a particular 
primary dimension with different secondary dimensions. For example, if you 
are considering options based upon products or geographies or functions, you 
might develop two product-based design options that treat the secondary 
dimensions of geographies and functions differently.
Not all the dimensions of an organization will be relevant to every organ­
ization and it is all right not to develop an option for every dimension. 
However, it may be helpful to develop some ‘controversial’ options that 
help test and enhance the final selected design and flesh out how secondary 
dimensions are incorporated. In any case, most organization design projects 
might consider three or four design options for evaluation. The ultimate 
design will often be a hybrid option of two or more of the design options.
For example, one of my colleagues was involved in the design of a UK 
central government department largely involved in designing and imple-
menting policy. Traditionally, these departments are organized by policy 
area. However, an option was developed around the department becoming 
a projects- and programmes-based organization. Although this was not 
selected as the primary option, there was a helpful debate about how the 
department should be organized to deliver projects and programmes, and 
separate to the organization design, that led to a significant change in the 
way that major programmes were governed within the department in the 
final design.
Figure 2.3.2 gives some generic examples of design options set against  
a common set of design criteria and their respective advantages and dis­
advantages. There will never be a perfect option. For example, if customer 
responsiveness is crucial, then all things being equal you will want to have  

Structural Options and Business Case
85
a more decentralized structure. However, if it is all about cost savings and 
efficiency then removing duplication and moving to a more centralized 
structure might be best.
In the example in Figure 2.3.2, the market segment approach is preferred 
if the design criteria for customer intimacy and industry focus were most 
important. This would be true in any service business where understanding 
the customer needs and being responsive are of paramount importance.  
The product dimension might be preferred if the keys to success are speed  
to market or cost effectiveness. This might be true where customer needs  
are generic but there are scale and efficiency in focusing on particular pro­
ducts or more likely product categories. This is often seen in consumer goods 
businesses. Finally, the functional view is preferred where the key to success 
is the different competencies required of the workforce. A functional option 
is often preferred for smaller businesses serving customers with similar 
needs across a narrow range of products.
In reality, it is rare that a selected model is based precisely on one dimen-
sion. It is often a hybrid depending on the function or value stream in ques-
tion within a business. For instance, the sales function might be structured 
along geographic and product lines whereas HR might be based on function 
work streams; for example, a centre of excellence, shared service functions 
and geographical with local HR business partners (HRBPs). Because most 
organizations end up with a mix of structures, coming up with your options 
Figure 2.3.2 
Scoring of common structural dimensions 
against common design criteria
Market  
segment
Product
Function
Customer  
intimacy 
Industry focus
Speed to market
Cost  
effectiveness
Workforce  
competence
 
StruCtural oPtIonS
deSIgn CrIterIa 

Part Two: Macro Design
86
and understanding how a combination of structures might work in a matrix 
are the most important parts of the macro process. Examples of hybrid 
options include:
●
●front and back, eg technology firms
–– front-end functions such as sales and customer services are 
organized based on how the target market is structured into 
geographic units and/or industry verticals
–– back-office functions, those that are not client facing, are 
functionalized and centralized
●
●decider-provider, eg supply-driven organization like FMCG
–– all decisions are made centrally, such as what gets made and 
delivered, investments and which new products, while locally  
the manufacture and delivery are sorted
–– the execution of the decisions is done based on a geographic 
model.
When creating hybrid options it will be tempting to map a matrix structure. 
The idea behind a matrix structure is to try to get the best of different 
structural options by splitting reporting lines. For example, combining a 
geographic and function-orientated structure you might have a role report-
ing two ways, both to their function manager and geographic manager. 
The reporting lines will represent a different managerial relationship. For 
example, the function manager might have veto power on objectives and 
target setting, prioritization of work and performance evaluation. However, 
the geographic manager may control the day-to-day management, task 
allocation and support.
This type of matrix, although it looks good on paper, can often fall down 
in the long run. It can make reporting lines unclear and lead to miscom­
munication between employees and their respective managers. Just because  
an organizational structure looks like it should work does not mean it will 
in practice. Structure only goes so far in facilitating work, as I mentioned 
in the introduction. I think it is important to have clear reporting lines to 
ensure accountability, but have good process design to facilitate ways of 
working laterally (process design is discussed in Chapter 3.3). For example, 
in marketing functions you often have to work with people across the 
organization to create campaigns. However, as long as you know who is the 
approver for each piece of work it doesn’t matter whom you report to in order 
to get things done. When building your options don’t mistake reporting lines 

Structural Options and Business Case
87
as a specified link dictating whom someone will work with. A matrix is often 
not the perfect solution, although it may look like it.
Avoid going with the obvious
A trick to avoid the trap of having limited options is, for every objective in 
your design criteria, to think through what would be the optimal solution 
for maximizing that single criterion, irrespective of all the others. So if you 
have seven criteria, then you might have a long list of at least seven options. 
From these, you could create alternative blends or scenarios. A generic 
framework I find particularly useful for ensuring you think through all the 
options is the ‘Disney Method’. Created by Robert Dilts, it is a great way  
of getting the balance of creativity, problem solving and evaluation needed 
when coming up with design options. It can be used for workshops in teams, 
as well as a useful internal checklist to make sure you approach any type  
of decision-making in a robust manner. It sets out four thinking styles to 
take in turn when thinking through the issues: outsiders; dreamers; realizers; 
and critics.
●
●Outsiders – First, think from the perspective of an outsider.  
In many ways, play the role of the consultant. What are the objective 
challenges or opportunities facing the organization? The book 
Designing Organizations by Jay Galbraith is an excellent resource  
for reviewing a broad range of options in addition to the above 
examples.4
●
●Dreamers – As a dreamer, ask yourself: ‘What do I really want my 
organization to achieve/look like in an ideal world?’ Let your mind 
wander freely and come up with a visionary big picture with no 
boundaries, limitations or constraints. At this stage, don’t let reality 
come into your thoughts. This is daydreaming and dream scenario 
time.
●
●Realizers – Having come up with all your options, ask: ‘Can they 
really work?’ This is about organizing ideas to put your plan into 
practice. How would each of those options work? What processes 
would map to what roles? What would need to happen to make it 
real? In part, this stage is simply about removing the options that are 
obviously impossible. This is the mode of thinking you should also  
be in when performing the options evaluation that I come to later in 
the chapter.

Part Two: Macro Design
88
●
●Critics – The final viewpoint is that of the critic. The critic searches 
and uncovers the flaws. Test the plans, look for problems, difficulties 
and unintended consequences. Evaluate them. Ask yourself: ‘What 
could go wrong?’ Think of what is missing. In terms of the brainstorm, 
this viewpoint should come at the end. This is a particularly useful 
perspective to have when writing the business case (the last section in 
this chapter). It will help you think through the most important 
justifications and supporting points for your chosen option.
Map processes to options
Having listed your viable options, you need to define what each one means 
in an organizational context. Take the high-level value chain and processes 
you mapped out at the beginning of this chapter and allocate responsibilities 
to your top-level organizational structure. This helps to bring each option  
to life, helping you think through what your organization would look like 
for each option. It ensures you are clear about the differences between the 
options. It provides an understanding of where the work gets done, how 
decisions will be made and how each option will function.
For instance, within Figure 2.3.1, in the set of ‘Support Processes’, ‘Office 
Management’ has three sub-processes: ‘Define standards’, ‘Source space’ 
and ‘Manage office’. In a functional organization structure with three local 
sales offices, the central HR function could be responsible for defining the 
standards for each office and sourcing the physical office space, including 
the contract management with the landlords. The local sales manager, for 
practical reasons, could be responsible for the day-to-day management of 
the office space. This is represented in Figure 2.3.2.
To finish defining each option continue mapping all your high-level pro-
cesses to your high-level to-be org structure. As Figure 2.3.3 demonstrates, 
the same process can be mapped to more than one part of the to-be structure; 
in this case, the mapping of ‘Manage office’. From a practical perspective, 
when building the options, try to keep the number of boxes per option to 
the bare minimum. For example, it would have sufficed to have only one 
box in the structure saying ‘Local sales office’ instead of listing each indi-
vidual office. In this example I have shown only the responsibilities and this 
should suffice for most things. However, there are times when mapping out 
the core decisions and showing where each one needs to be approved will 
help demonstrate how the governance in each option will operate. The crucial 
point is to define how each option would work and to bring them to life. 
Having mapped them out, ask one person to represent each option and  

Structural Options and Business Case
89
Figure 2.3.3 
Defining the responsibilities for  
the ‘Manage office’ example
CEO
Sales
HR
Define standards
Source space
Asia Pacific Sales
Manage office
American Sales
Manage office
Europe Sales
Manage office
Category
America
Asia Pacific
Central
Europe
present it. Talk through examples using case studies, and discuss the dif­
ferences and the strengths and weaknesses of each one.
In many cases it will be obvious which option is the best one. If that is the 
case, great! Move straight to developing and signing off the business case. 
Unfortunately, it isn’t always obvious. There may be material differences  
of opinion with major trade-offs to be made because each option optimizes 
only a few of the design criteria. In this case, you need to make a difficult 
decision based on a set of, at face value, incomparable multiple criteria.  
In this situation, there are some useful data-driven methods to support the 
decision-making process.
Analysing and deciding your best option
Having developed your options you should have a good sense for the big 
idea behind each one: how they will work; an initial sense of which design 
criteria they most support; and where you have compromised the most. In 
making your decision, whatever you do, do what is right for you. Don’t use 
an external benchmark as a default answer. I am not against using outside 
examples as inspiration for developing an options list, but when deciding 
what to do, you have to choose the option that is right for you, not for 

Part Two: Macro Design
90
someone else. Equally, be careful about extrapolating a chosen option from 
one situation to another. For instance, the model that works brilliantly for  
a sales force in the United States may be a disaster in other smaller, less  
mature, more relationship- and family-driven economies such as in Southern 
Europe. The rest of this section is given to outlining methods to help you if 
you find yourself in a scenario where you have to make a complex decision 
between options. In making that decision, there are good and bad decision-
making practices. I’ll start with the bad.
Qualitative weightings
Carrying out options analysis and making decisions based on qualitative 
weightings are a common practice, though limited in its usefulness. The first 
step involves listing your options, giving each of your design criteria a 
weighting (giving each criterion a specific weight based on its importance in 
relation to the other criteria so that some criteria are taken into account 
more than others) and scoring the options against those criteria. This was 
the same approach used earlier in this chapter and can give a sense of which 
design dimensions are most viable. However, the approach is limited owing 
to its arbitrary nature and lack of differentiation between options. The limit­
ations of this approach are illustrated in Figure 2.3.4, which shows each 
option ranked against design criteria by using a scoring method (1, 3, 6, 9) 
to create a larger range of weighted scores. Both examples have exactly the 
same scoring system but different weighting. In the top example the scores 
for Option 1 and Option 2 are very similar. Can you really decide to go with 
Option 1 just because it is 0.4 higher than Option 2? And yet, in the bottom 
example, just by using different weighting criteria the decision seems to 
suggest that Option 2 is the best option. Using this technique and the pro-
cess of scoring and weighting can be very useful as it helps us to think 
through what’s important. It also helps to highlight whether there is only 
one obviously viable option. But when there is no clear option, it does not 
really help to cut through the complexity.
Multi-criteria decision analysis
The challenge with the above type of options analysis is that you have to 
assess a large range of criteria against a range of options. It makes it difficult 
to really objectively quantify the viability of the options against each other 
at a holistic and granular level. It is well documented that people fail at 
making complicated decisions. Why? Simply, human beings have ‘limited 

Structural Options and Business Case
91
Figure 2.3.4 
Simple weighted average option appraisal 
examples
Rank 
Criteria 
Weighting 
Option 1 
Option 2 
Option 3
1 Drive the innovation agenda/speed to market 
89 
9 
9 
3
2
Improve customer relationships 
55 
6 
6 
9
3
Improve functional excellence 
34 
9 
3 
1
4 Support acquisition agenda 
21 
6 
6 
3
5 Ease of implementation 
13 
1 
6 
9
6 Minimize cost 
8 
1 
3 
9
7 Improve communication and collaboration 
5 
3 
3 
3
8 Reduce functional or product silos 
3 
1 
3 
9
9 Support tax optimization 
2 
1 
3 
3
10 Minimize the number of managerial layers 
1 
1 
3 
9
Total 
231 
6.9 
6.5 
4.8
Rank 
Criteria 
Weighting 
Option 1 
Option 2 
Option 3
1 
Drive the innovation agenda/speed to market 
5 
9 
9 
3
2 
Improve customer relationships 
5 
6 
6 
9
3 
Improve functional excellence 
4 
9 
3 
1
4 
Support acquisition agenda 
4 
6 
6 
3
5 
Ease of implementation 
4 
1 
6 
9
6 
Minimize cost 
3 
1 
3 
9
7 
Improve communication and collaboration 
3 
3 
3 
3
8 
Reduce functional or product silos 
3 
1 
3 
9
9 
Support tax optimization 
1 
1 
3 
3
10 
Minimize the number of managerial layers 
1 
1 
3 
9
Total 
33 
4.7 
5.1 
5.7
information-processing capacity’.5 Although the example above seemed 
structured, it still involved the decision maker to simultaneously compare  
all the options at once and define scores directly as an arbitrary number.  
To help people make great decisions, we need a method that breaks down 
the problem into smaller, more manageable chunks so that our brain can 
process it and understand all the trade-offs between the options. Although 
there are many approaches, I suggest using Simple Multi-Attribute Rating 
Technique (SMART) as outlined by Paul Goodwin and George Wright in 
Decision Analysis for Management Judgement.6 This technique is a great 
way of assessing options against one another in a situation where there is  
a lot of ambiguity. A simplification of their method is:
1	 Create a value tree of the key attributes with weightings.
2	 Define how each attribute will be measured through value curves and 
weightings.
3	 Score each option and compare.
4	 Run sensitivity analysis to see which scenarios would change your 
decision.

Part Two: Macro Design
92
1 Create a value tree
In order to make the analysis a data-driven process we need to create a set 
of attributes in which the options can be assessed against a scale. This is not 
as simple as taking your design criteria and applying them, because the  
criteria can be very vague. For example, a key design criterion may be to 
create a structure that improves customer relationships. But how can you 
quantify this so that you can compare alternatives? Instead of quantifying  
a criterion it is easier to ask the question: ‘How do we achieve this?’ For 
example: How do we improve customer relationships? Asking this question 
helps direct more specific and measurable attributes such as ‘average dis-
tance of staff from customers’ and/or ‘fewer managerial layers’. In coming 
up with these attributes you are actually creating a value tree as shown in 
Figure 2.3.5. The two main attributes you are assessing are cost versus  
benefit. You can then break these down into specific attributes to measure 
against. When creating your value tree, to ensure the attributes you measure 
against are as useful as possible, try to follow the principles of developing 
hierarchical trees discussed Chapter 1.3. The goal of this process is to learn 
about the values you are going to measure against in order to assess why  
one option may be better than another. If your tree is too large then any 
analysis would be too complex and would lose its benefit. The perfect value 
tree, like all trees, is more art than science and will require multiple itera-
tions. It is worth saying that creating the tree is beneficial in itself as it 
clarifies which metrics are important to use and assess against throughout 
the whole design process.
2 Define how each attribute will be measured through 
value curves and weightings
Having set out your attributes, you can begin to assess how well each option 
performs against them. I am going to explain the technique with a simplified 
example. Imagine you only had three attributes to compare:
1	 The first is how good each option will be at driving innovation.  
This is the key reason for the org change and is therefore given a 
weighting of 50 per cent.
2	 The second is the restructuring cost. You give this a weighting of 25 per 
cent, but if the cost is above your limit, then regard it as unfeasible 
and automatically remove it from consideration as a viable option.
3	 The third is the balance of customer-facing roles (local delivery, 
presales support) and central excellence (R&D, marketing).  
This is given a weighting of 25 per cent.

Structural Options and Business Case
93
Figure 2.3.5 
Multi-criteria decision tree example
Decision
Cost
Benefit
Restructuring
cost
Ongoing cost
Drive the
innovation
and speed to
market
Improve
customer
relationships
Improve
functional
excellence
Ease of
implementation
Redundancy
costs
Minimize the
number of
managerial
layers
Non-
management
FTEs
Reduce
functional or
product silos
Improve
communication
and collaboration 
3 Score each option and compare
The first step is to draw value curves in order to compare each option 
against particular criteria as highlighted in Figure 2.3.6. A value curve gives 
a maximum score of 100 and a minimum of 0 against each attribute. The 
top-left value curve in Figure 2.3.6 demonstrates how you might analyse  
a value curve of cost. It shows that any option below a cost of $10 million 
will receive a score of 100. This is because anything lower than this cost  
will not have an impact on how the option is rated. So whether the cost was 
$8 million or $5 million, it would be rated exactly the same. It also shows 
that anything above $31 million simply isn’t an option. It is beyond the 
budget so receives a zero, and that tells me the option is unfeasible and 
should be cut from the decision-making process.
Value curves can also reflect attributes that have an ideal in the middle.  
In the organizational context, this is often the case with ratios such as the 
size of one function to another or span of control. In Figure 2.3.6 the bottom-
left value curve shows a simplified example of this. The ideal ratio between 
customer-facing functions and central R&D and marketing is 5 (for every 
customer-facing FTE there is one central FTE) and 5 is worth 100. The scores 
don’t decrease too quickly if they are between 4 and 6, but anything below 
3 or above 7 is given a 0.

Part Two: Macro Design
94
Figure 2.3.6 
Example value curves and sensitivity layers
20
0
40
60
80
100
COST
0
5
10
15
25
20
30
35
20
0
40
60
80
100
0
1
2
3
5
4
6
7
8
20
0
40
60
80
100
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
20
0
40
60
80
100
RATIO
SWING RATING
How innovative
Restructuring cost
VALUE CURVE
VALUE CURVE
WEIGHT
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS 
Ratio customer 
facing: central R&D 
and marketing
Innovation weighting 
sensitivity analysis 
Of the three attributes, innovation, with a weighting of 50 per cent, is  
regarded as the most important. However, for this attribute there is no  
precise measure. The technique to use when there is no precise measure is  
a ‘swing rating’. The technique requires you to rank each option against  
the best one. The best option is given 100 and every other option is rated 
from 0 to 100 relative to that best option. This is called the ‘Swing Method’. 
Option C is rated the best, with Option A regarded to be only 10 per cent  
at good as Option C on this particular attribute. In terms of this innovation 
example, you could develop sub-attributes such as: speed to market; number 
of PhDs available; and cost. These can be combined with other swing 
ratings such as level of creativity or ability to pull knowledge.
Once I have all of these values, I combine them. So for Option A I get the 
following scores: Cost of 90 with 25% + Innovation of 10 with 50% + 
Ratio of 40 with 25% = 37.5. Option C gets the highest score (75) and, 
therefore, should be the option that is selected. But first, check you are truly 
happy with this selection and understand under what conditions you might 
change the recommendation.

Structural Options and Business Case
95
4 Conduct sensitivity analysis
A final step is to perform sensitivity analysis. A lot of the values you have 
assigned to options against attributes are estimated. Sensitivity analysis 
gives you the opportunity to assess how the options would perform under 
different weightings to make the decision-making more robust. Given the 
weightings and scoring, as already stated, Option C wins with 75 points 
while Option B follows closely behind with 68. But what if people didn’t 
agree with weightings? What if the importance of innovation was rated at 
far less than 50 per cent? At what point would Option C no longer be the 
best? The bottom-right graph in Figure 2.3.6 shows how the scores vary 
depending on the relative importance of the innovation weighting to cost 
and customer-facing ratio. For example, what would happen if innovation 
was only weighted at 20 per cent and the other two attributes weighted at 
40 per cent? Then Option B would beat Option C, but only just. Looking 
across all the options on the graph it shows that in no scenario is Option D 
the preferred option. Equally, Option A becomes the best choice only when 
innovation is weighted at 12.5 per cent. Depending on the weighting it is 
essentially a choice between options B and C. What is so useful about this 
method is that it helps quantify how options perform, depending on the 
importance given to particular criteria. It helps people think through what 
are the basis and justification for making their decision.
Cost–benefit analysis
Another extremely useful analysis to compare options is to carry out cost–
benefit analysis. However, giving a weighting to costs and benefits is tricky 
because they are so broad and cover such abstract elements of the design 
options. So to assess costs and benefits against each other, compare the 
options against them on a scatter plot. It is useful to plot out the options like 
this because it helps to stimulate trade-offs between costs versus benefits 
rather than trying to prioritize by weighting the number. To do this, aggre-
gate the overall costs and benefits from your value trees for each option.  
An example of what a scored value tree might look like for one option is 
shown on the left in Figure 2.3.7. Taking these aggregate scores, plot them 
against each other for each option. The graph on the right in Figure 2.3.7 
has the x-axis as the aggregate of cost scores while the y-axis is the aggregate 
of the benefits. I have illustrated this example with seven options. Once you 
have plotted the options, draw an imaginary line between each option, 
staying as close to the top-right-hand corner as possible (this is called  

Part Two: Macro Design
96
an efficiency frontier in economics). If an option is below the line, then it  
is always going to be inferior. Doing this highlights immediately which  
options are not worth considering as their benefits are not worth the cost  
or vice versa. In this case this accounts for options B and E. For the rest  
of the options (G, A, C, F, D) you can have an informed discussion between 
the cost–benefit trade-offs for each one. This technique is extremely useful 
in many contexts, not just organization design: for example, in making 
strategic supplier choices as part of a procurement process.
Further estimating benefits and costs
If you are looking for further differentiations between your options or you 
want to quantify the benefits or costs of a chosen option further to justify 
decision-making you can estimate benefits and costs in more detail. It is rare 
you will need to do this across all your options. If you do, to save time you 
could just quantify the key decision criteria drivers for all, rather than the 
detailed numbers.
In practice, the majority of the values will need to be calculated based  
on assumptions. For example, if you are further estimating benefits you are 
Figure 2.3.7 
Aggregating and comparing each option
52.9
43.3
Cost
62.5
55.5
41.5
33
50
33
67
100
Total Benefit
0
21.3
42.5
63.8
85
Total Cost
–3K
–2.25K
–1.5K
–750
0
Weighted average value scores
0–40
40–50
50–60
60–80
80–100
Book macro decision criteria
 
Coloured by improved functional excellence
Decision
Benefit
Restructuring
cost
Ongoing
cost
Support tax
optimization
Drive the
innovation
and speed
to market
Improve
customer
relationships
Improve
functional
excellence
Support
acquisition
agenda
b
i

Structural Options and Business Case
97
trying to demonstrate high-value benefits of a particular option based on 
firm numbers. With benefits there are tangible and intangible values. When 
it comes to those that are tangible, try to translate them into dollars. For 
instance, if you estimate a synergy of 20 per cent of teams X, then estimate 
the number of people in X together with their average cost. Don’t just say 
the benefit is 20 per cent.
The intangibles will be harder to quantify and in many cases more signi­
ficant. But again, try hard to translate these things into something you can 
quantify. For example, if the benefit is greater decision agility, then break 
down that into the value using the value tree. Greater decision agility might 
mean: getting to market faster; reduction in management burden; or an  
increase in staff engagement. So what? Taking an increase in staff engage-
ment as an example, if there is currently a high staff turnover, then you can 
calculate the cost of staff turnover by breaking it down to: recruitment costs; 
upskilling costs; and lost sales for those in a sales role. Recruitment costs 
might be 15 per cent of the first year’s salary, upskilling a further 20 per cent 
and lost sales 5 per cent of those in a sales position. From these sorts of  
assumptions, you can infer that a 30 per cent increase in engagement should 
result in attrition going from the current 20 per cent to between 12 per cent 
and 15 per cent. And, therefore, you can calculate an estimate for the actual 
benefit your option will provide. If the prize seems big, then spend more 
time on validating the assumptions and calculation logic. The more you can 
quantify the benefits case and tie it back to the design criteria, the stronger 
your case for change will be. The same approach is equally valid for quanti-
fying the costs.
Develop and sign off the business case
Having developed your options and performed your analysis, you should  
be in a position to pick an option and write your business case. The business 
case should serve two purposes: first, to present to and receive buy-in from 
decision makers; and second, to act as a reference guide for the detailed 
design and implementation. It will be the backbone of your organization  
for the future. If you have been thorough in many of the processes described 
in Part Two, then the business case will write itself. Be clear about your 
recommended course of action, and using the work and analysis you have 
done already, make the 5–10 key points which support your decision. 
Whether the audience is composed of decision makers or those carrying  
out the implementation, you need to make sure it will resonate with those 

Part Two: Macro Design
98
who engage with it throughout the design process. Think of it like a story, 
taking people along the journey of the decision-making process.
When you write the case think about what the key takeaways are, and 
make sure they are the points that come through. In writing this type of 
document a useful technique to think through is the Pyramid Principle (see 
page 39). For each section, start with the high-level points and break them 
down, documenting all the steps you have gone through in the macro design 
as you go. To help you think through how to write your business case, I have 
put together a simple generic structure and story as a ‘starter for 10’. The 
headings are:
  1	 Recommendation and summary rationale
  2	 The vision and strategy
  3	 Current must-keep strengths
  4	 Current issues and case for change
  5	 List of design criteria
  6	 Options
  7	 Summary of value streams
  8	 Summary of how each option would work
  9	 Recommended option with rationale
10	 Benefits
11	 Implementation plans and costs
Your business case could be documented in different ways, whether in 
presentation form or full prose. Taking the latter, the above structure could 
translate into:
We recommend implementing a [the recommendation, eg a functional 
organization] because we need to drive [the summary logic, eg efficiencies and 
functional expertise]. Given the strength of our current local sales and customer 
services, they will remain in their current country structures.
Our aim is to become the leading [the market sector you compete in]  
through [how you are going to win, eg cost competitiveness and product 
innovation]. Currently, our [state a data-driven case for change: eg our costs 
are 10 per cent margin points below target and our time to market for new 
products is 75 per cent too long, resulting in a declining market share of  
25 per cent in the past five years].
The criteria we used to design the to-be organization include [A, B, C] which 
we used in evaluating the x main options [list them: 1, 2, 3, 4 etc]. The way 
each option works is [show how options support the underlying value streams]. 

Structural Options and Business Case
99
Option 1 is [explain it with pros and cons: how it will work]. Given our criteria, 
Option [X, eg functional org] was selected because [list your logic in terms of 
how it scored and a simple summary of the method chosen to decide, and those 
involved in the process to recommend the option].
By implementing [the recommendation, eg a functionally driven org]  
we expect to achieve the following results: [list the expected business outcomes 
by delivery dates]. In order to implement this, we are going to need the 
following team [list team], for [x months; show the high-level plan] at a cost  
of [y: show the summary cost breakdown].
The above runs to approximately 250 words. Once you fill in all the details, 
you should be able to write it in 1,500–2,000 words or fewer than 20 pre­
sentation slides.
Final thoughts: Have a strong case for 
change
What seems easy is hard and what seems hard is easy. My view is that the 
micro design seems hard but is easy because it is so methodical and it just 
flows, but it seems hard because there is so much to it (as you will see by  
the length of the micro versus macro sections). The macro design probably 
seems easy but is actually hard. There is more ambiguity, there are no perfect 
answers and it is the most political of all the phases. It is about choices and 
trade-offs. It is about big change. It is about distilling big ideas into simple 
phases and pictures. The numbers are directional and can easily be ques-
tioned. The level of vested interest is high and there will be many who have 
a lot to lose.
If you don’t have the justification behind your decisions you can be 
knocked off course easily. Critics of the decisions taken will probe and  
question to find holes in the process and logic. So be prepared for this.  
The key step at this stage is defining how each option will work by linking 
the to-be structure to the high-level processes. By doing this, most of the 
time the best option will become obvious. If that is not the case, then tools 
like multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA) can really help drive rigorous 
thinking, and enable you to step through a process that is most likely to 
yield the right choice and justify your decision-making. Often in life it is  
the journey, not the destination, that matters. Doing MCDA is one of those 
instances. It is more about the thought process it forces you to work through: 
how you build your value trees, curves and weightings really helps you to 
define what matters most.

Part Two: Macro Design
100
Having said all this, no matter whether you are doing a complex redesign 
of an entire organization or a smaller project involving a function or geo-
graphic area, until you detail what it really means and how it will work in 
practice all you have is a range of good ideas. If you want your ideas and 
chosen option to work, don’t fall into the trap of just trying to implement 
the macro design without doing the detailed micro design work. The micro 
design is the heart of organization design, the heart of this book and the 
subject of Part Three.
1	 Develop a comprehensive list of options to give yourself the best 
possible chance of finding the right design.
2	 Be wary of overprescribing the design at this stage. The decision you 
are making is more about narrowing possibilities and setting direction 
rather than specifying the details.
3	 Map out your options so that you understand the look and feel of each one.
4	 If there are no clear options use techniques such as multi-criteria 
decision-making to bring rigour to the process of decision-making.
5	 Use your work throughout the macro design to tell an engaging story for 
change in your business case.
Remember this
Notes
1	 Hinssen, P (2014) The Network Always Wins: How to survive in the age of 
uncertainty, Mach Media, p 93
2	 Nutt, P (2002) Why Decisions Fail: Avoiding the blunders and traps that lead to 
debacles, Berrett-Koehler, San Francisco
3	 Galbraith, J R (2002) Designing Organizations: An executive guide to strategy, 
structure, and process, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco
4	 Wright, G (1984) Behavioral Decision Theory: An Introduction, Sage, Beverly 
Hills, California
5	 Goodwin, P and Wright, G (1991) Decision Analysis for Management 
Judgment, Wiley

Part Three
Micro design
101

102
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

“
Introduction
Fools ignore complexity... Geniuses remove it.
Alan Perlis
M
icro design is the real heart of the organization design process. It in-
volves defining all the elements of the design across the organizational 
system so that the macro vision is implementable. A useful metaphor is that 
of constructing a building. First, you have to decide what the purpose of the 
building is. What is it going to look and feel like? The architect sets out the 
broad plans and high-level blueprints and options. This is the macro design. 
Then you have to draw the floor plans, measure the site, plan how many 
materials you will need, and estimate the costs and resources. This is the 
micro design. If macro design is top-down, micro design is more bottom-up. 
It is about the work people really do, day to day. It is how decisions are and 
should be made. If macro design is done more in the ivory tower by a small 
elite team, micro is done in the mud with the troops. Micro is where you 
have to define how all the elements depicted in Figure 1.3.1 should work in 
the organizational system.
Changing an organization can be terribly slow. From the moment the 
macro design team has determined what it wants to the system actually 
working can take years. The trap is the mental state of believing that because 
something is clear in one’s mind it will just happen. My hypothesis for why 
so many people are confused in their roles, and why so many organizations 
struggle to make headway, is that the elements of the micro design are carried 
out infrequently. In our study of 34 organizational design practitioners with 
the University of Westminster in 2012–13, 87 per cent said they ‘mostly or 
always’ create the structures and 80 per cent of their designs were imple-
mented. However, only 40 per cent build a baseline, 47 per cent mapped 
objectives, 46 per cent defined the required processes, 54 per cent defined 
how decisions should be made, 20 per cent mapped competencies, and 
46 per cent went through a method-driven rightsizing exercise.
3.1
103

Part Three: Micro Design
104
The detail of what each role is responsible for, the competencies required 
or how many Full-Time Equivalents (FTEs) are required to fulfil each one 
needs to be properly specified. However, it is far too often left to the 
manager to muddle through long after implementation. A further common 
complication is the macro pendulum swings from one extreme to another. 
For example, from a geographical framework with a focus on local customer 
closeness to a functional, centralized framework that focuses on cost reduc-
tion. The vain hope in swinging between two or more extremes seems to be 
that it will ‘sort out the mess’ and drive the right behaviour. In that process 
employees just become more confused and continue to do whatever it is 
they have always done.
Part Three is far longer than Part Two, because micro design is far more 
labour intensive with longer elapsed times. It is the real application of the 
philosophies and methodologies discussed in Chapter 1.3. Without doing 
the micro design properly, it is impossible to effectively communicate any 
change in a way that employees will understand how it applies to them  
personally. At the same time, this also represents a challenge. In the macro 
design there are fewer people involved, but those who are involved are more 
political and have greater impact. The micro design requires specialist 
knowledge, and whom you decide to include in the design process will have 
a big impact on both the outcome and the perception of the outcome by 
those not involved. To continue the building metaphor, one of the challenges 
for architecture is the degree of specialization. Those who do the initial con-
cept drawings may well have nothing to do with structural engineering or 
the interior design finishing eye. The same is true in an organization. Often  
it will be your managers whom you rely on to implement your design lower 
down the organization and to oversee those elements of the work. They all 
have different expertise, drivers and ambitions. Their expertise needs to be 
leveraged and their biases managed. In order to do the macro design the 
numbers of people have to be carefully balanced. People typically find it 
hard to remove themselves from thinking about what it means to them and 
which box is theirs. Using independent external support is, therefore, a 
natural consequence for many programmes. The project management of  
the design process must be structured and tightly controlled.
If you let go of the overall design criteria and case for change, then you 
can be sure that the end result will not be what you expected. Someone needs 
to keep an eye on the entire end-to-end solution. That person is the architect. 
So make sure you give people time to step back to the macro design business 
case and to verify that detailed work is consistent with those recommenda-
tions and commitments.

Introduction
105
Structure and logic for Part Three
Before you start to detail the design, you need to know exactly what your 
starting situation is. How can I get somewhere if I don’t know where I’m 
starting from? Chapter 3.2 starts with the analytical building blocks you 
need to build your data baseline. Put another way, you need to know the 
detail before you can do the detailing! Creating a baseline is crucial because 
when creating and designing your future design, or what I call the to-be, you 
have to be able to compare it with your as-is to know where you are, where 
you need to go, where the gap is and what is going to change. This is crucial 
in developing an understanding of the impact assessment on your employees 
and determining the implementation plan that is outlined in Part Four. 
Unfortunately, it is almost always the case that the baseline data is structur-
ally flawed and riddled with errors. Bringing together and cleaning organ­
izational data can be a real challenge. It relies on Information Technology 
(IT). Much of the IT is owned by technical teams that are not involved. 
There is frequently a knowledge gap of practitioner core analytics skills. 
One of the goals is to provide an overview of the common IT terminology, 
how to do the data work and how to avoid silly statistical traps. It provides 
tips about many of the useful steps you can go through to get the organ­
ization to engage with data. It provides the analytical foundations to design 
the system and eventually quantify and manage the change over time.
Chapter 3.3 addresses how to make sure high-level goals and objectives 
are effectively cascaded through the organization and linked to the to-be 
positions. It puts the foundations in place so that they can be tracked over 
time to ensure they are delivered. The common traps and unintended bad 
behavioural consequences of poor objectives management are detailed 
too, as many SMART objectives actually drive silioed behaviour and task 
suboptimization.
Chapter 3.4 is the detailed process design combined with detailing of  
the final organizational structures. It answers the questions of what work is 
required and who is going to do what. To start, the key step is to get a good 
understanding of what people currently do, and then how that needs to 
change. A large part of this chapter, therefore, goes through the steps of 
performing an individual activity analysis and how to use the information 
to model the to-be process design. Process design isn’t just doing the work, 
it is also deciding what needs to happen. Decision-making is a core part of 
designing a process. It goes to the heart of accountabilities and the funda-
mental governance question. Too often, too many people are involved in 

Part Three: Micro Design
106
decision-making, the consequence of which can be crippling. The decision-
making part of the process chapter demonstrates how to quantify this issue 
and gives you a set of tools to balance individuals’ desire for autonomy, a 
corporate need for strong governance and ensuring the risk of a bad decision 
is traded off with the cost of the decision-making processes.
The last step in the process chapter is learning how to bundle activities and 
decisions into accountabilities through a matrix like the RAS framework 
outlined in Chapter 1.3. These bundles are done at the level of granularity 
of individual roles. Because of the need to have managerial control of indi-
viduals, roles are structured into boxes in a hierarchical organizational 
chart (org chart). Each of the boxes in the org chart is a position and eventu-
ally, as is outlined in the MiR section, you will need to fill those positions 
with people. The structure will be driven by the chosen macro design option 
and design criteria. I often say, it isn’t where the box sits but what is in the 
box. The org chart defines where the box sits. The rest of the micro section 
deals with what is in the box and how many boxes are required.
Much of the work in an organization isn’t captured by the fixed-value 
chain process design paradigm. For example, sales force optimization, pro-
ject portfolio design and risk management cut across traditional functional 
boundaries and need different methods to design them effectively. Some  
organizations are entirely defined by a set of projects, so Chapter 3.5 covers 
how to design for these dynamic processes.
We all have different skills, knowledge bases, aptitude and behaviours  
or what is commonly called ‘competencies’. Chapter 3.6 helps you think 
through what is required, where there are gaps and how to aggregate this  
in such a way that it can be improved. My perception is that competency 
management has a bad reputation because it has been too fluffy, not data-
driven, too tied to performance management and reward. I therefore make 
the case for investing in this area and using it to improve performance.
Finally, I tackle the subject of rightsizing. Too often rightsizing is taken to 
mean downsizing. That is unfortunate. Rightsizing is fundamentally know-
ing how many FTEs in each role are required. Given the importance of this 
question, I find it surprising that there is a relatively modest amount of  
literature or thinking that has gone into answering it. It is also one of the 
hardest questions to answer effectively because there is no silver bullet. And 
the answer is often: ‘it depends’. It depends on the level of productivity; the 
scale of the organization; the economics of the business; whether there are 
system dynamics such as the impact of queues and service level trade-offs.

Introduction
107
Throughout the micro design there is a recurring theme of dealing with 
ambiguity. As part of the methodologies outlined in Chapter 1.3, a key part 
of micro design is about understanding the as-is, linking the organizational 
system and analysing and visualizing to understand your design. It also 
requires you to model scenarios and test the impact of each one. Getting  
the level of detail right is one of the biggest arts, and building strong 
analytical foundations is the greatest enabler.

3.2
The data  
goldmine
Introduction
There is currently a gap. A business opportunity if you will: to connect your 
people with business performance; to tie the crucial elements of the business 
together by tracking and managing drivers from across the organization, 
and understanding their impact. Data lies at the heart of achieving this – 
linking all the elements of the system together by bringing organizational 
and business data together.
We are living in the information age and the pace of growth in human 
knowledge is exponentially increasing. In 1965 Gordon Moore noted that 
the processing power of computer circuits had doubled every year since 
their invention and predicted, correctly, that this trend would continue into 
the future, except now the accepted time is 18 months (Moore’s Law). As 
Buckminster Fuller predicted, new knowledge, which doubled every century 
until 1900, is now estimated to double every 18 months.1
This is a hard thing for the mind to grapple with. For example, take a 
piece of paper a tenth of a millimetre thick. Fold it ten times and it will be 
will be 102 millimetres thick; 20 times takes you to 105 metres, 30 into 
space at 107 kilometres, 42 to the moon, and after 51 folds you reach the 
sun. After 103 folds you will be outside the observable universe, which is 
estimated at 93 billion light years in diameter.2 With exponential growth 
comes exponential value. For example, in the 1990s it cost billions to map 
the human genome. Today it costs less than $3,000 and that is predicted to 
drop even further.3
The most successful organizations of today are those that can harness 
these exponential gains of the information age. For example, when Google 
first indexed the internet in 1998 it found 26 million pages; it now indexes 
over a trillion unique URLs.4 And Facebook gained more than a billion 
users in just 10 years.5 Businesses are sitting on a goldmine of organizational 
108

The Data Goldmine 
109
data that, if used in the right way, could return exponential amounts of 
value by connecting the organizational system. However, many still struggle 
to simply track headcount.
A lot of the basic building blocks for getting the most out of organ­
izational data are currently missing: ensuring data quality; having consistent 
role titles; counting FTEs by a common understanding of grade, function or 
geo­graphical unit. Organizations need an end-to-end data-driven approach 
to process and maintain organizational data over time and connect the various 
elements of the system. Today we are at the beginning of this journey. A shift 
is emerging as organizations begin to appreciate the value of this data 
more. For example, Norwegian retailer Elkjøp, working with psychological 
testing company Cut-e, increased sales performance of new hires by 14 per 
cent. They identified the personality types most effective in sales roles and by 
screening candidates they were able to target recruitment. Then by connect-
ing their recruitment profiling data with sales data they were able to compare 
the two and measure the value returned to the business.6
In this chapter, I set out a method for building a baseline of data and 
gaining an understanding of your organizational as-is. I begin by exploring 
four data myths, which have traditionally hindered those working with 
organizational data from making progress. I then provide an end-to-end 
seven-stage process for how to collect, understand and maintain a baseline 
of data. Finally, the last section investigates how to analyse your data effec-
tively so that you are getting the answers you need and you can avoid  
some common statistical traps when analysing it. This chapter provides the 
platform for the rest of the book. Building a comprehensive and focused 
baseline is essential for designing and managing your organization, because 
if you don’t know where you are, how can you know where you are going? 
By getting your data processes right you are setting yourself up for success 
throughout the rest of your design.
Data blockers and myths
A trend has emerged over the last few years that spending on technology is 
increasingly moving away from the IT function and towards specific digital 
units.7 One of the best examples of this is the rise of digital marketing. The 
ease with which marketers have been able to gather and analyse data has 
transformed the industry: from how consumers are targeted down to the very 
skills considered essential to become a marketing professional. As Marketo’s 
chief marketing officer Sanjay Dholakia commented, ‘Marketing’s changed 

Part Three: Micro Design
110
more in the past five years than in the past 500 years.’ It is a ‘whole new 
learning curve for marketers, who are starting to have to be more and more 
technical’.8 Indeed, in 2012, Gartner analyst Laura McLellan declared that 
by 2017 the Chief Marketing Officer would spend more on IT than the 
Chief Information Officer.9
People and organizational effectiveness functions are increasingly seeing 
the need for investment into systems that make the most of their data. 
However, they are lagging far behind other business functions such as 
marketing. Why have other organizational functions got so far ahead in 
their utilization of data? For a start, in contrast to functions like marketing 
and finance, organizational analytics are less obviously connected to busi-
ness outcomes, and so by their nature it is harder to demonstrate their value. 
More importantly, though, I believe it comes to an approach. Unlike market-
ing and finance, functions typically dealing with organizational data have 
been slower and less eager to embrace a data-centric approach. The result is 
they have found it harder to substantiate arguments and demonstrate value 
to the business, in turn making it hard for them to get the funding required 
to put people at the top of the business agenda. A range of data myths has 
emerged over the years which have obscured, blocked and been provided  
as excuses for not embracing a data-centric approach. In this section I out-
line four of these myths to help highlight how the systematic process of 
building a baseline (covered in the next section) can help you make the most 
of your data and overcome these traditional blockers.
●
●Myth One: ‘Data and technology are scary.’
●
●Myth Two: ‘Organizational data is too hard to process.’
●
●Myth Three: ‘One system fits all.’
●
●Myth Four: ‘More data means more insight.’
Myth One: Data and technology are scary
Two years ago I worked on a project with an HR manager who was ex-
tremely competent in many aspects of HR. We were looking at a spreadsheet 
containing employee pay, pay increase and bonus. I asked her to calculate 
the total pay increase (a simple calculation of pay increase + annual bonus) 
and it emerged she had never learned to use the sum function in Excel. 
Despite holding a master’s degree in HR, and five years of work experience, 
she had not moved beyond the stage where Excel terrified her.
Too often when working with people who have traditionally dealt with 
organizational data, I hear ‘I don’t do numbers’ or ‘I don’t do data.’ Unlike 

The Data Goldmine 
111
the marketing function, organizational analytics have not been made a 
business priority. There is a lack of urgency to appreciate and understand 
the value data can give to enhance people functions and employee relations. 
For example, how a data-driven approach to areas such as objectives or 
competency management can help individuals improve performance and  
develop by identifying specific areas for improvement. Professionals work-
ing with organizational data are going to have to transition from a soft-skill 
focus and combine them with hard skills, if they are to keep up with skills 
required for the demands of data-driven organizations. Likewise, organ­
izations that do not invest in this area will find themselves missing out on  
a huge area of potential business value. To help address this myth explicitly 
I have put together a set of definitions for technical terms when handling 
data and building a baseline (see the Appendix).
Myth Two: Organizational data is too hard to process
As I highlighted in Chapter 1.3, organizational data is naturally complex 
and messy. It can feel impossible to process because it is stuck in numerous 
isolated Excel islands and systems. Data professionals have reported that 
cleaning and transforming their datasets are an extremely time-consuming 
and boring part of their analytical workflows, often comprising 80 per cent 
of the work.10 When dealing with organizational data this represents a real 
challenge, and can often be used as an excuse to not begin to use data.
Data quality should never be used as an excuse. You have to start some-
where and it is only by using data that you will be able to understand what 
data is valuable, what is not, and where improvements are needed. There is 
no doubt that data is hard work, especially to begin with when building 
your baseline. This means employees need to have the benefits the data will 
bring to themselves and the organization as a whole communicated to them. 
Too often the employees handling data get little personal value from the 
outputs of their work. It is no wonder, therefore, that excuses are found to 
avoid working on what is perceived to be a thankless task.
Myth Three: One system fits all
Technology is achieving some amazing things, with a range of tools now on 
the market to help those working with organizational data. And yet, Excel 
and PowerPoint are still the main tools of choice. Excel is great for many 
things but it has many flaws when dealing with organizational data: it isn’t 
that visual; links between worksheets are easily broken and hard to track;  

Part Three: Micro Design
112
it struggles to handle hierarchies; and it is typically used offline by one person 
at a time, making duplications very easy to make.
Static use of technology has meant organizations are struggling with their 
data, and professionals find it time consuming and uninspiring to process. 
As our understanding of data and its possibilities has grown, so has the  
refinement of the tools available to us. Depending on the data you are 
collecting and what you are trying to achieve with it, you may require  
a different tool. At this point in time, I think there are four broad options 
you can consider to aid your approach to your data: a data warehouse;  
an Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) system; a data intermediary; and 
specific visualization software. A data warehouse is the standard choice,  
but as already mentioned in Chapter 1.3, it does not suit organizational data 
very well. Going down the data warehouse route is a hugely complex, long 
and painful journey, only solved by brute force and Herculean commitment 
in order to collect, structure and query the data. ERPs are a vital organ­
izational tool because of their ability to integrate and handle flows of infor-
mation from across the organization. However, they often leave you short  
of flexible analytics and reporting capabilities, and the ability to model  
and run organizational scenarios so key in organization design. As the name 
suggests, data intermediaries are beginning to offer a middle, more niche 
ground. These are software and applications designed for specific organ­
izational events rather than overarching operations: for example, specific 
organizational modelling software. Finally, out-and-out visualization software 
allows you to perform advanced analytics on top of your data, although it 
may lack some of the modelling capabilities of intermediary software and 
have very few operational capabilities. The trick is to work out exactly what 
you are trying to achieve and then choose the best tool for the job. Having 
the right tool makes the data less scary and easier to process along every 
stage of the data journey. And given the potential value, the investment is 
certainly worth it.
Myth Four: More data means more insight
Just because organizational data represents a goldmine, much of which  
hasn’t been exploited yet, it doesn’t mean you need to collect all of it. Think 
of data as a value chain, starting at source systems and ending in actions and 
behaviours. Good Business Intelligence (BI) starts by thinking through the 
information needs for the highest-priority actions and decisions first, and 
working backwards. Too often an IT team will be told ‘Give me BI’ without 

The Data Goldmine 
113
guidance about the end requirement or output. The team then starts by 
building a data warehouse with the information it has from various systems 
and never moves beyond that point. I have seen companies with a 10-year 
plan to build a warehouse, and other companies spend millions to achieve 
little more than the insight they started with.
There is so much data around that often the challenge is actually to 
specify and focus on what you are trying to achieve and, therefore, which 
data is relevant. Too much information is no information. I’ve heard of con-
sultants compiling lists of 800+ HR metrics in the belief that if you think of 
everything, then you will be able to answer any question. However, collect-
ing too much data will overburden people and cripple your data collection, 
and analysis processes will be more difficult, running the risk of nothing 
getting delivered. Much better is to collect high-priority data and then add 
to your baseline as you go. Remember, there is nothing stopping you from 
collecting more and new data further down the line.
Most of these myths are due to a mindset towards data. By approaching 
data in the right way you can overcome many of the barriers that have 
traditionally ‘stopped’ organizational analytics being at the heart of busi-
ness decisions. Much of the challenge is simply a question of discipline when 
building up and maintaining a reliable baseline of data to work from. The 
next section provides a systematic process for how to build a baseline, taking 
into account and tackling head on the myths addressed in this section.
Building the baseline – get ready to wrangle
As I have already highlighted, organizational data can be a nightmare to 
work with: incomplete, hidden in numerous systems and spreadsheets, and 
constantly moving. No set of organizational data will ever be absolutely 
perfect. So get ready to wrangle. Data wrangling is at the heart of building 
a baseline, and covers the steps of cleaning, converting and manipulating 
data into a usable, convenient format. I love the idea of wrangling with data. 
The word wrangle captures beautifully the essence of the battle with data  
to keep it up to date, uniform and useful. And it is a battle. Making the 
baseline process as simple and as accessible for employees as possible will 
immediately get you a great deal nearer to business-changing insights. In 
this section I go through seven iterative steps of how to go about building  
a baseline set of data as shown in Figure 3.2.1. These include the steps from 
deciding which data to collect, right through to the collection, visualization 
and analysing of that data.

Part Three: Micro Design
114
Figure 3.2.1 
Building a baseline process
Visualize
Make the process Valuable for all
Locate and 
pull together 
existing data
follow 
your intuition 
and get your 
questions  
straight
Crowdsource
Create rules and 
clean the metadata
stop 
analysing  
and start 
playing
1  Follow your intuition and get your  
questions straight
For many years, strategy consultants have used a hypothesis-led approach 
to focus investigations – and it works. Data and analytics are not all about 
facts and figures. Often the best insights come initially from intuition, inves-
tigation and creative thinking. Therefore, when building a baseline of data 
think beyond the simple organizational metrics such as headcount and 
absence. Go back to your design criteria to help direct your focus. For ex-
ample, if a key part of the design criteria is to boost productivity through 
centralizing the business, come up with a series of questions which will help 
you understand productivity throughout the business: Are some depart-
ments more productive than others? Does training affect productivity? 
Where do our top performers come from? These types of question will help 
direct the metrics you need to collect to build your baseline.
When doing a major transformation there are certain sets of metrics that 
you will almost certainly need, regardless of the focus of the project. A sample 
list is shown in Figure 3.2.2. Remember, though, your baseline is not a one-
off, but an ongoing set of data which should support the ongoing develop-
ment of your organization. So when tackling any problem, refer back to 
your intuition and the fundamental questions to guide your approach.

The Data Goldmine 
115
Figure 3.2.2 
Example baseline properties (fields)
Category
Must have              (20)
Should have          (20) 
Could have            (28)
Calculated             (17)
Type
Business     (8)
 Actual sales 
  Customer 
satisfaction 
 Sales targets
3
 Gross revenue 
 Net revenue 
 Revenue 
 Process level cost 
 Direct/indirect cost
5
Core OD                                (16)
  Number of hours 
worked (per week)
 FTE 
 Function/department 
 ID number 
 Manager ID 
 Title (role; post)
 Area (geographic)
 Vacancy 
 Country 
 Grade
10
 Office location (City) 
 Is temporary 
 Subfunction
3
 Is current employee
 Span of control
  Team potential  
rating
3
Demographic (12)
 Birthday 
 Gender 
 Leave date 
 Start date
4
 Ethnicity 
  Role start /
appointment date 
  Expected retirement 
age
3
 Age 
 Tenure 
 Tenure in current role 
  Tenure in previous 
role 
 Years to retirement
5
Financial                                    (22)
 Current salary
 Currency 
  Currency exchange 
rate
3
  Share-based 
payments 
 Cost centre
2
 Cost of termination
 Current bonus 
 Expenses 
 Healthcare costs 
 Other benefits 
 Payroll taxes 
 Pension 
 Recruitment cost 
 Relocation costs 
 Total benefits
 Total payroll cost 
 Functional cost
12
  Currency converted 
bonus
  Currency converted 
employee costs
  Currency converted 
salary 
  FTE salary 
 Total cost
5
Personal      (9)
 Email address 
 First name 
 Surname
3
 NI or tax number 
  Other unique identifier 
 Personal address 
 Photo work 
 Telephone number
5
 Full name
1
Talent and performance (18)
 Absence detail
  Employee 
engagement
  Employee potential 
rating
 How recruited
  Prior period 
performance ranking
  Successor information 
 Training days
7
 Absence days 
 Absence instances 
 Absence type 
 Left voluntarily? 
 Performance ranking 
 Reason for leaving 
 Training cost
  Target performance 
distribution
8
 Bradford factor 
 Team absences 
  Performance rating 
category
3
Category
Must have
Should have
Could have
Calculated

Part Three: Micro Design
116
2 Make the process valuable for all
As a general rule, people don’t like to provide data. It costs them time and 
effort; it can cause embarrassment and show their shortcomings. Even if you 
have top-down sponsorship, your priority won’t necessarily be the same as 
every employee. Not everyone is intimidated by authority, and those provid-
ing data can be highly creative in their delay tactics. So make the process 
worthwhile for them. At a high level, make sure you can answer the key 
questions of why you are collecting the data, how they are going to help, what 
the consequence of not getting the data will be, and if there is any upside  
for them. A good exercise is to tie the data back to the list of questions in 
step 1. The answers should be compelling enough to get buy-in.
At the lower data-entry levels, for those performing the day-to-day task of 
entering and cleaning data, you have to answer the data owner’s concerns: 
‘If I’m going to input data, what’s in it for me?’ There are two methods here: 
first, ensure the data owner can see the value they are contributing or getting 
back. One way of doing this is ensuring they can see the end-to-end process. 
They can then understand the holistic benefits the data will lead to. Second, 
make the process into a game. For example, on one project, a network of 
hospitals wanted to clean their data. However, none of them was progress-
ing. To incentivize them we put up a map of how each was progressing and 
who was top week by week. Just a week after the map went up, the progress 
made increased exponentially. Gamifying the process through visual feed-
back and competition made the process fun and part of a team effort. To get 
the most out of your data you have to be creative. Not just with how you 
analyse it, but getting it in the first place. After all, data sits with people,  
so you have to find ways to incentivize them and get them to buy into the 
process.
3 Locate and pull together existing data
It amazes me how often organizations jump straight to implementing new 
data collation and creation, overlooking their existing data. Often you already 
have in place a lot of the data you need in order to see the as-is picture; you 
just need to bring it all together. By trying to get insight out of your data 
early on in the process, you can:
●
●show those working hard to provide the data that they are being 
used and how you are using them;
●
●start to answer some of your hypothesis and make sure you are 
collecting the right data for your needs;

The Data Goldmine 
117
●
●gain a much better understanding of the data cleaning and further 
collection processes ahead.
The starting point is to be extremely clear about the data you need to collect. 
Figure 3.2.2 shows a sample list of properties (or fields in relationship data-
base speak) that are frequently collected as part of an OD project. Note that 
I have categorized them by two dimensions. The first is the level of priority. 
Some properties are critical and you can’t build your baseline or do an OD 
project without them. These nine properties fall within the critical dimen-
sions with eight in core OD and one in financial types of data.
Once you know what data you need, the next step is to determine where 
to source it. In doing this, understand:
●
●What systems are used in the organization and where are they being 
used? For example, often different geographical locations will use 
different systems.
●
●How do the required properties map to the various systems and 
which properties currently don’t exist in any system?
●
●Who owns which system and what is the process for getting the data 
extracted?
If you need to repeat the extraction process, ensure you document and test 
the process. Good sources to begin collecting data from include:
●
●Payroll – Typically this is the best source because it should contain all 
your people information. It is certainly a good place to start because, 
if you then match it up and compare it with your other sources, you 
can begin to see if you have a consistent view of your organization. 
You would be surprised how often payroll doesn’t match other 
source systems.
●
●Performance management systems – Comparing this source system 
with payroll is a great way of testing the quality of your people data. 
If they are the same, then great, but if they are different you need to 
look at your data quality.
●
●Excel spreadsheets – I have not seen an organization yet that does 
not have Excel islands, with pockets of information siloed away.  
It is a problem we constantly have to tackle in my company and with 
our clients. However, bringing all this data together is a good chance 
to collect all that ‘lost’ data.
●
●HR Management Information Systems (HRIS).
●
●Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) systems.

Part Three: Micro Design
118
●
●Customer Relationship systems (CRM).
●
●Financial systems for customer revenue and margins, and P&L cost 
information.
●
●Applicant tracking systems.
●
●Learning management systems.
●
●Quandl for externally published sources, eg unemployment, 
demographic, or economic growth.
4  Visualize
Visualizing data is a key part of the data and analytics processes as highlighted 
in Chapter 1.3. When visualizing the data try to stay away from Excel, and 
where possible use specifically designed software that helps bring all your 
data together in an interactive and visual way. Visualizing the data as early 
as possible in the process will bring it to life and achieve buy-in from people 
working with it and affected by it. It may also start uncovering some basic 
insights to help reaffirm your hypotheses and ensure you are going in the 
right direction.
Think back to your original hypotheses. What are the best ways to look 
at the data and what stories are you trying to tell? For example, if you are 
interested in salary across the spans and layers of your organization, take 
your existing ERP data with the given reporting lines. This only requires five 
properties of data: Employee ID, Manager ID, function, salary and grade. 
Using this data you can answer dozens of questions about the organizational 
structure and consistency of salaries across the organization. To tell this 
story, think back to some of the visualizations in Chapter 1.3 such as the 
box grid visualizations (Figures 1.3.13 and 1.3.14). Cycle the data through 
these visualizations so you can see different perspectives. When looking for 
further insights think through the various visualization options:
●
●traditional statistical representations (bars, columns, lines, scatter 
plots, box plots, Gantt charts, tables, dashboards);
●
●additional analytical elements such as colouring, scaling, hierarchies;
●
●plotting a fourth dimension of time to highlight trends.
From this point onwards this process of visualizing data will add value 
throughout each stage of building your baseline. For example, visualizing 
data quality alone (detailed in stage 5) as demonstrated in Figure 3.2.3, helps 
identify where the gaps are in your data and where there may be inaccuracies. 
Equally, when crowdsourcing data, handing visuals back to data owners 
helps them identify outliers and inaccuracies in seconds (stage 6).

The Data Goldmine 
119
5  Create rules and clean the metadata centrally
Inevitably when you bring data together there will be data quality issues.  
So, as soon as you can, create clear rules on data structure. For example, on 
one project a client had a database of more than 30,000 items of IT hard-
ware spend. The vast majority of the items were duplicates and the data 
could be reduced to a couple of hundred items, which accounted for well 
over 95 per cent of the spend. The company had made its life much harder 
by not having clear rules about how data was to be collected and stored.
Cleaning data is not a one-off exercise. Given that people are collecting 
and cleaning data in different offices or even different countries, once your 
data is clean you need to make rules about data collection and storage.  
For example, often the lowest level of data is acceptable, but it is how the 
data is categorized or tagged that is important. A common and easy cate-
gory to grasp is gender. The male sex may appear as Male, male, m, 0 or 1, 
MALE... and that is just in English. Consistency is key. You have to be clear 
about definitions; for example, what is an FTE, or total cost of utilization? 
If you decide this upfront, you will save serious amounts of time later on.
Data quality can be used as a reason for not generating information. In 
my experience, if data is being used and presented in an understandable  
way, it will drive behaviour and the data quality will improve naturally. 
Visualizing your data will help clean data naturally for two reasons. First,  
it is much easier to identify inaccuracies and outliers. For example, the  
visualization in Figure 3.2.3 provides an overview of all the metadata and the 
distribution of data for each property. Second, it highlights the completeness 
and consistency of particular data fields (dimensions and measures) and where 
there are orphans in the organizational hierarchy, so you can immediately 
identify problem areas and where attention is needed (see Chapter 1.3 for 
definitions of hierarchical data).
Visualizing data in this way makes it easy to obtain the data you need from 
across the organization. Alongside new and intuitive connections between 
data and visualizations, this means you no longer have to rely on database 
administrators or IT to solve data issues. This is because traditional data 
visualization layers in software are becoming increasingly intertwined with 
database layers. Visualizations are no longer just a representation of data, 
they also link back to the data they represent. The consequence is that where 
previously you had to change data within a database yourself, or via a data-
base engineer to alter the visualization, now you can alter data directly 
through the visualizations. You can drag and drop pieces of data to alter 
numbers of fields at once, making the process of cleaning data in line with 

Part Three: Micro Design
120
Figure 3.2.3 
Example data types and patterns dashboard
DATA SUMMARY
Dimensions
Text fields
Date fields
Image fields
4
4
0
0
Measures
Number fields
Yes/No fields
4
4
0
Hierarchy
Total records
Main structure
Max depth
Orphans
Orphan groups
 
1,505
1,505
9
0
0
Hierarchy checks
Tree roots
Duplicates
Blank IDs
Blank parent IDs
 
1
0
0
0
82%
complete
TEXT
13
groups
100%
complete
2
groups
65%
complete
38
groups
100%
complete
13
groups
100%
complete
Area
Gender
Role
Department
3 more categories
Liverpool
Crawley
Bristol
South
North
East
West
Head Office
Birmingham
Manchester
16
6
6
6
10
10
10
13
60
230
1,138
1.1%
0.4%
0.4%
0.4%
0.7%
0.7%
0.7%
0.9%
4.0%
15.3%
75.6%
(Blank)
Male
Female
524
474
507
34.8%
31.5%
33.7%
28 more categories
Research Level 1
Research Level 3
Driver
Research Level 4
Project Manager
Research Level 5
Delivery Grade 4
Delivery Grade 2
Delivery Grade 3
Delivery Grade 1
160
34
38
38
40
46
50
164
235
320
380
10.6%
2.3%
2.5%
2.5%
2.7%
3.1%
3.3%
10.9%
15.6%
21.3%
25.2%
3 more categories
HR
Finance
Sales
Distribution
Programme Delivery
IT Programme Delivery
Project Delivery
R&D
Projects
Ops Programme Delivery
16
20
22
44
47
58
195
212
224
282
385
1.1%
1.3%
1.5%
2.9%
3.1%
3.9%
13.0%
14.1%
14.9%
18.7%
25.6%
NUMBER
6
groups
100%
complete
9
groups
81%
complete
7
groups
13%
complete
7
groups
100%
complete
Current Salary
Engagement Index
Customer Satisfaction
Age
400K–450K
200K–250K
150K–200K
100K–150K
50K–100K
0–50K
0
220
440
660
880
(NA)
8.5–9
8–8.5
7.5–8
7–7.5
6.5–7
6–6.5
5.5–6
5–5.5
4.5–5
0
91.6
183
275
366
(Blank)
8–9
7–8
6–7
5–6
4–5
3–4
2–3
0
358
716
1.07K
1.43K
60–70
50–60
40–50
30–40
20–30
10–20
0–10
0
88
176
264
352
Data Key
Complete
Bad values
Blank

The Data Goldmine 
121
your rules on data structure on an ongoing and ad hoc basis infinitely 
easier, saving time and effort in the cleaning process.
6  Crowdsource
The data you need to further improve quality or for new properties will  
sit in different places of the organization. Often those who are in the best 
position to fix data are the ones who want the maximum insight from it but 
do not have the time to correct it. Therefore, make it easy for people to be 
able to provide and alter data. Technology now allows for fast feedback, 
such as surveying capability, which automatically updates a person’s records 
once completed. For example, a problem in many organizations is a simple 
question of organizational hierarchy. Who reports to whom? One particu-
larly useful exercise may be to send a two-question survey to all employees 
asking ‘Whom do you report to?’ and ‘Who reports to you?’ Collate the data, 
draw an org chart and very quickly you will expose any confusion or in­
accuracies. Big data is all very glamorous, but the most value is often in getting 
the basics right. Here are three tips to help you when crowdsourcing data:
1	 Make data easy to upload. If the upload process is complex people 
will become disengaged and turn to other work instead. For example, 
sending out a webform that takes two minutes to complete will give 
you instant updates on your data.
2	 Report data back to owners. Those who know the data should be  
the ones who interact with it. They will get new insights from the 
process. They are the ones who will identify outliers and be best 
placed to uncover data quality issues.
3	 Make the process mobile. Often the best time to spend a couple of 
minutes uploading or analysing data is when you are in transit or a little 
bored. If the data is available at all times and on all devices such as 
smartphones and tablets, it makes it easy to review charts and add insight.
To begin with, collecting data from different areas of the organization will 
come down to you and your team. However, the sign that you are getting 
this right is when the data is seen as a business issue and function leaders 
come to you to drive new insights and get further data.
7 Stop analysing and start playing with your data!
As the HR Information Systems Manager at one retail client once said: ‘One 
of the most exciting things about bringing all types of organizational data 

Part Three: Micro Design
122
together and visualizing is that you can start to answer questions that people 
didn’t realize they wanted the answer to.’ Having built your baseline, just 
enjoy yourself. Start exploring, slicing and dicing the data. (The slice is the 
ability to split the data according to any dimension or measure. The dice is 
the ability to use any aggregator such as sum, standard deviation, percentile, 
skewness, and many more.)
When analysing your data for the first time you will be amazed what you 
can find. One consultant I worked with, after quickly combining two client 
datasets and analysing the training impact, was able to tell her client that it 
was wasting half of its graduate sales training budget because one group of 
the target audience learned nothing. By contrast, for the other group it was 
a great investment. The client just needed to know which graduates to target 
for what type of training. Simply by splitting the trainees by geographic loca-
tion showed that particular office sales teams didn’t increase their sales post 
training, while others almost doubled theirs. The underlying reasons and the 
action taken as a result are a separate story, but what is powerful is the insight 
gained by combining different datasets, in this case sales and training data.
The combination of data is frequently referred to as mash-up data. Bring 
together your people data with data from across the organization and see 
what you can find. To make sense of all the data, break down areas of insight 
into topics by organization or theme. For example, functional areas: HR, 
finance, procurement, manufacturing; or organizational areas: people, process, 
systems; or strategic, operational, transactional. Using these categories you 
can start performing advanced analytics. For instance, can you see whether 
sales performance links to education or recruitment channels? Do those 
who attend training have lower attrition? Which actions post an employee 
engagement review had meaningful impacts? What human factors drive 
profit, productivity or retention?
We have now got to into the in-depth analysis. But when analysing and 
drawing your insights you have to be careful. What might seem obvious in 
the data may be wrong statistically speaking. It is too easy to oversimplify 
and make errors of judgement. The next section sets out three checks to 
ensure you analyse your data as effectively as possible.
Performing analysis: common statistical 
traps
All through these practical steps you will have been building your baseline 
understanding. However, I have included this section because data can often 

The Data Goldmine 
123
be misrepresentative and insights are only as good as those who draw them. 
The world is full of wrong and dangerous analysis and statistics. Numbers 
are aggregated and conclusions erroneously drawn. Linear correlations are 
calculated with high correlation coefficients (R) at the wrong level and bad 
science is peddled as robust analysis. There are many PhD dissertations that 
can be written on bad analysis. Given the scope of this book, I am going to 
focus on the three logical statistical flaws that I see most frequently. This 
doesn’t mean you should stop the learning here. More, I hope, that you gain 
an interest to want to learn more and avoid making recommendations that 
give the illusion of being robust but are not. The three I am going to cover are:
1	 The ecological fallacy
2	 Taking correlation for causation
3	 Ignoring statistical significance
The ecological fallacy
In the 2004 US election George W Bush won the 15 poorest states and 
John Kerry won 9 of the 11 wealthiest. The conclusion: wealthy people vote 
Democrat and the poor Republican. And yet 62 per cent of voters with 
annual incomes over $200,000 voted for Bush, while only 36 per cent of 
voters with annual incomes of $15,000 or less voted for Bush.11 So that 
conclusion is completely inaccurate.
This is a great example of the ecological fallacy in practice. ‘An ecology 
fallacy is a logical fallacy in the interpretation of statistical data where 
inferences about the nature of individuals are deduced from inference for 
the group to which those individuals belong.’12
In the context of HR, an example of the ecological fallacy in practice is 
the likely hypothesis of a correlation between performance and absenteeism 
as measured through the Bradford index. The Bradford index weights the 
number of absence instances higher than the total duration of absence. The 
theory is that short, frequent and unplanned absences are more disruptive 
than longer absences. The formula is B = S2×D where S is the number of 
spells (instances) and D is the duration. For example, if someone was sick 
once for 10 days, their Bradford score would be 12×10 = 10. But if they were 
sick 10 times a day at a time, giving the same total of 10 days, their score 
would be 102×10 = 1,000. For a given group of employees, the histogram  
(in Figure 3.2.4) clearly shows that those with a Bradford score below 100 
have an average performance of 5.6 out of 10, while those between 600 and 
700 have an average of only 3.

Part Three: Micro Design
124
This is proven even more emphatically through the ‘scientific-looking’ 
correlation in Figure 3.2.4. The figure on the left shows the average perfor-
mance for each Bradford index group while that on the right takes each of 
those six groups and draws a correlation between each group’s performance 
and their average Bradford score. The same groups of employees (those with 
Bradford factors less than 100, between 100 and 200, and so on) are correlated 
with their performance ratings. Unsurprisingly, the correlation (r) is –0.97 
or almost perfect (a score of r = 1 or –1 is perfectly correlated while a score 
of r = 0 means there is zero correlation). Wow, think the people reviewing 
these numbers. Conclusions are drawn: ‘We need to sort out the poor-
performing employees.’ ‘It’s so logical that it’s these people who aren’t 
performing!’ The analyst gets a pat on the back and now the management 
team thinks it has the proof and burning platform to take action against 
these low performers.
However, in this instance, they are all wrong. In fact, they are terribly 
wrong. They have just fallen for the ecological fallacy. In the above example, 
if you dig just a fraction deeper, the distribution of the 46 employees in-
cluded within the analysis is shown in Figure 3.2.5.
Figure 3.2.4 
Histogram and aggregate scatter with linear 
regressions of average performance rankings by 
average Bradford index category
0–99
100–199
200–299
300–399
400–499
600–699
5.61
5.04
4.85
4.5
4
3
Average Bradford index
0
160
320
480
640
Average performance ranking
0
1.4
2.81
4.21
5.61
y = –242.64x + 1.4e+3
r2: 0.98
Average performance ranking by 
Bradford index
Average performance ranking vs average 
Bradford index by Bradford index

Figure 3.2.5 
Pivot table of performance rankings by Bradford index category
Performance Ranking
2
0–1
4
1–2
3
2–3
4
3–4
18
4–5
16
5–6
12
6–7
4
7–8
6
8–9
5
9–10
Bradford Index
43 0–99
Jonathan Daniels
1
Nathan Savage
Mohammad Reeves
Jonathan Davis
3
Frank Moulton
Brenda Speers
2
Luke Anderson
1
Chelsea Walsh
Mark Patterson
Troy Garling
Melba Wilmore
Chelsea Lamb
Evie Dickinson
6
Eve Sykes
Elizabeth Cox
Jason Willis
Bethany Banks
Bailey Pugh
Whitney Kowalski
Ana Robinson
Rosa Hall
Jake Turner
9
Luke Hardy
Daphne Sims
Lara Moore
Melissa Cloninger
Stephanie Mercado
Lauren Ray
Connie Jameson
Jude Whitehead
George Guillemette
Frank Reeve
10
Cory Freeman
Charlie Goodwin
2
Natasha Hamilton
Gabriel Davies
Robert Sullivan
Mamie Collins
Inez Read
Deborah Evans
6
Tom Cox
Fred Cole
Lewis Yates
3
8 100–199
Sophia Hopkins
Christine Giddings
Billy Brooks
3
Archie Rahman
Benjamin Wall
2
Yuko Garcia
1
Gladys Powell
1
Scott Bird
1
13 200–299
Eva Robinson
1
Jodie Pugh
Michael Redmon
Max Schofield
Leo Waters
Thomas Miles
Jordan Bell
6
Sarah Cole
Benito Rhoden
Roy Roberts
Charles Farias
4
Mohammed Hilton
1
Wendy Smith
1
6 300–399
Kent Strahan
1
Mary Smith
1
Owen Oliver
Ryan Savage
2
Matthew Warner
1
Dominic Gardner
1
2 400–499
Georgina Murphy
1
Jonathan Cyr
1
2 600–699
Dorothy Gardner
1
Sadie Villegas
1
125

Part Three: Micro Design
126
You can see, straightaway, that there are very few (four) data points of those 
with a Bradford score above 300. You can also see a large range of perfor-
mance rankings of those with a Bradford score below 100. In fact, if you 
draw the scatter chart at the individual rather than group level, you can  
instantly see there is, in fact, no correlation (it is just 0.023).
There are only two employees with high Bradford scores and poor perfor-
mance scores. This is a good example of what is officially called ‘outlier 
analysis’. So no drastic or group action is necessary. Instead, a quick investi-
gation into their historical performance to find out if they have always 
been poor performers would be advisable (if possible). Then a conversation 
can happen either to find out if something or someone is affecting their 
performance, or how the manager can help bring them back on track. This 
is obviously a tailored example, but it is an excellent reminder of the value 
of digging into statistics, questioning what you see and ensuring that you 
don’t make sweeping conclusions which could have a negative impact.
Correlation versus causation
Did you know that it is dangerous to eat ice cream and then go swimming? 
There is a correlation between ice cream consumption and the likelihood  
of shark attacks. Sharks like people who have just eaten ice cream, right? 
Clearly, no. So how can they be correlated? The real correlation is that the 
hotter it is, the more ice creams people eat, the more they swim and the 
more likely it is that they are going to be attacked by sharks. This may be 
Figure 3.2.6 
Departmental and individual scatter plots of  
performance rankings by Bradford index category
0
99
198
297
396
Average performance ranking
0
2.4
4.8
7.2
9.6
y = –8.00x + 1.9e+2
r2: 0.023
Average Bradford index
Average Bradford index
0
50
100
150
200
Average performance ranking
0
1.6
3.2
4.79
6.39
y = –33.03x + 3.2e+2
r2: 0.34
Performance ranking vs Bradford 
index by full name
Average performance ranking vs 
average Bradford index by department

The Data Goldmine 
127
obvious, but every day people jump to overly simplistic and inaccurate 
conclusions, confusing correlation with causation.
A correlation is just a number. It happens to calculate the strength of a 
linear relationship between variables, but it does not carry any information 
about causation. Why? Because causation is far more complicated than the 
idea of how nicely it can fit a line to data. In general, it is very difficult to show 
causation. Why? Because we need to rule out all other factors that could 
influence the relationship. In general, showing causation is only possible in 
scenarios such as a laboratory environment where external factors can be 
controlled or at least limited and explored.
In a business context, we can show correlations are high and use these 
effectively for prediction. But it is important to ask why this correlation is 
occurring in order to examine causation. For instance, suppose that perfor-
mance ratings were inversely correlated to number of absences. However, 
the driver of the relationship is unclear. That is, we cannot determine whether 
performance ratings were assigned as a penalty for absences or whether 
missed days actually contributed to lower performance. The causation is 
unclear but the correlation is still useful to drive conversation, investigate 
the potential drivers before acting and run relevant analysis for future con-
clusions to be drawn.
Statistical significance
If we are going to draw conclusions about a set of data, then we should have 
some understanding of how strongly we can draw those conclusions. I am 
going to use a simplified example to demonstrate my point. The example 
below shows that for a set of employees, males are higher performers than 
females. So does that mean that we should only hire men? The problem here 
is that the stats can get quite complex, so here are a couple of simple tools 
and thoughts. The first is to look at the variation within the dataset. The 
greater the standard deviation, the less likely you can draw the conclusion. 
Why? Standard deviation measures the average of how spread-out the data 
is. You can think about it this way: if female employees all have really similar 
performance measures, then it is possible to make better generalizations 
about that group. More similarity means small standard deviation. If, instead, 
some are performing really well, some are performing really poorly and 
some are doing okay, it is harder to tell a story about what is happening to 
the whole group. This is a situation with a large standard deviation – lots of 
differences, a more spread-out group.
A good way to visualize this is through the box plot diagram, which is  
described in Figure 3.2.7. The boxplot shows the distribution of the data. 

Part Three: Micro Design
128
For the median, there is a thick line and a box is drawn to show the majority 
of the data points. This could be the upper and lower deciles (where 90 per 
cent of the points are above it and 10 per cent of the points below) or quar-
tiles (the same, but 25 per cent and 75 per cent). A further set of lines shows 
the upper and lower limits of the data. This could be the max and min, or 
the 99 per cent and 1 per cent points (the percentiles). The box plot gives 
you a visual sense of distribution, which helps to indicate where there is 
more than just a simple story in the data.
The risk of using bar charts and the power of the box plot is highlighted 
in Figure 3.2.8. The left-hand bar chart shows the performance scores of 
males and females. At face value it appears males are performing far better, 
with an average of 6.4 out of 10 compared with the female average of 5.9. 
But when the same data is plotted using the box plot, another picture 
emerges. The median performance for females is actually 7.5. There is far 
more variability within the female population, with the lowest scores of ‘0’ 
being ‘achieved’ and therefore taking the average down.
The next thing to look at when thinking about statistical significance is 
the sample size. The smaller the sample size, the greater the danger. This also 
makes sense. If you want to make a claim about the performance of women 
and you only measure the performance of 10 women, how confident are you 
Figure 3.2.7 
Box plot explanation
Q1 – 1.5 x IQR
24.65%
50%
24.65%
Q1 
Q3 
Q3 + 1.5 x IQR
IQR
Median
–4σ
1σ
2σ
3σ
4σ
0σ
–1σ
–2σ
–3σ
–2.698 σ
2.698 σ
–0.6745 σ
0.6745 σ
–4σ
1σ
2σ
3σ
4σ
0σ
–1σ
–2σ
–3σ

The Data Goldmine 
129
that they reflect all women the company would ever be interested in hiring? 
If you get performance measures from more women, you have a clearer  
idea of what is happening on average. How can we make a statistical deci-
sion about whether men perform better on average? We turn to the most 
common statistical significance test, which is called the t-test. We can plug 
all of these numbers into the formula for a t-test comparing two averages. 
The result from such a test is a single percentage called a p-value.13 (It is not 
in this book’s scope to outline the t-test. For further reading on this please 
see the suggestions below.) In our scenario, this value is 15 per cent. Great 
– so how do I get any information about my employees’ performance based 
on this number? In this scenario, the p-value measures the likelihood that 
these differences in employee performance arise completely by chance rather 
than due to any real average performance differences. It is standard practice 
to conclude that a p-value less than 5 per cent indicates a ‘significant’ dif­
ference. Here, with our value of 15 per cent we cannot make this claim. Are 
men performing better than women on average? Yes. But are they perform-
ing significantly better on average? No. So should we hire only men to boost 
performance scores? Not according to the data.
If you are told that a value is ‘statistically significant’, you should ask: 
‘Statistically significant compared with what?’ and ‘According to which 
statistical test?’ Statistical significance is used within a section of statistical 
analysis called hypothesis testing and is used to infer how likely it is that we 
observe data by chance. Instead of using the phrase ‘statistical significance’, 
Figure 3.2.8 
Average and box plot of gender performance 
levels
Male
Female
2
0
8.43
7.5
10
9
7.6
6.3
4.2
5
Male
Female
6.4
5.9
Average performance score
Box plots for performance score

Part Three: Micro Design
130
you will save a lot of energy and confusion by just explaining in words the 
conclusion your data leads you to. For example, it isn’t (statistically) possible 
to conclude that men are performing better than women. It is also good 
practice to include details about the statistical test used to reach your 
conclusion and the number of data points included in the calculation.
While each of these three statistical traps is relevant, the point to take 
away is that data analysis isn’t as much of a magic wand as many people 
think. Too often, people work extremely hard to build a baseline of data and 
leave the ‘insight phase’ of the work to the last minute. They then jump to 
erroneous conclusions because they don’t think hard enough about and 
make too many predictable mistakes, such as the three outlined above. 
Unfortunately, from what I have observed from countless business present­
ations, most of the business world is full of terrible statistics. The bar chart 
is probably the most common stats tool used, yet as shown above it hides  
a whole range of flaws. The aim of this section isn’t to make you an expert, 
but to improve your awareness of the dangers. If you are interested in learn-
ing more there are a couple of books I suggest you look at: Essentials of 
Social Statistics for a Diverse Society14 and Statistics for People Who (Think 
They) Hate Statistics.15
Final thoughts
Data should be used to turn hindsight into insight and then foresight. While 
building a looking-back baseline is the logical first step in the micro stage of 
design, it is that dataset that you will come back to the most. In fact, it never 
stops being important, either through the design or afterwards. By maintain-
ing the dataset and mashing it with other data, greater insight will be gener-
ated. You will use this data to generate scenarios and plans. With enough 
history, other projections will become possible and you move into helping to 
shape the future. The key is to make sure that you set yourself up for success 
by collecting, cleaning, analysing and reporting on your data consistently.
Organizational analytics have an opportunity to deal with the world as  
it really is: a complex, interconnected system. Consistent and focused data 
collection must be backed by a deep understanding of the multiple con-
nections between people, roles, skills and activities. Too many change 
programmes have been overwhelmed by the sheer complexities of the 
organization. As you continue to build your baseline you can add more data 
from across the organization to really see which areas are performing well, 
need improvement or a downright overhaul. This is not just about a one- 
off design. In the future, those functions dealing with organizational data 

The Data Goldmine 
131
Notes
1	 Buckminster, F (1981) Critical Path, St Martin’s, New York
2	 Diaz, J [accessed 19 February 2015] Sploid, [Online] http://sploid.gizmodo.com/
if-you-fold-a-paper-in-half-103-times-it-will-be-as-thi-1607632639
3	 Stratified Medicine in the NHS; An assessment of the current landscape and 
implementation challenges for non-cancer applications (2014), Association of 
the British Pharmaceutical Industry
4	 Official Google Blog [accessed 19 February 2015] We knew the web was big, 
Google, [Online] http://googleblog.blogspot.co.uk/2008/07/ 
we-knew-web-was-big.html
1	 To get the most from your data you need to recognize potential value 
and communicate that value to the business.
2	 Be disciplined throughout the data process. Be clear about the data you 
need and who or where you need to get them.
3	 Make the process of collecting data valuable to everyone involved,  
from business owners to the employees working on the ground with  
the data.
4	 Use the right tool for the right job. Do not try to do everything in Excel, 
and where possible use specialist tools to help with particular tasks.  
It is worth it!
5	 When analysing your data, be wary of jumping too quickly to 
conclusions. Use analysis as guidance for further questions. It is not 
always a final answer and be mindful of the many hidden statistical 
traps.
Remember this
and analytics have to be able to resolve business issues before they happen 
by connecting the organizational system. They need to drive leaders from 
across the whole business to think through what their people do now, what 
they will do in the future and what the cost impact will be if activities 
change. With this, your data will become a goldmine: an invaluable resource 
with exponential and sometimes unpredictable benefits.

Part Three: Micro Design
132
  5	 Sedghi, A [accessed 28 March 2015] Facebook: 10 years of social networking 
in numbers, Guardian [Online] http://www.theguardian.com/news/datablog/ 
2014/feb/04/facebook-in-numbers-statistics
  6	 As presented by Evensen, K and Aaserød, J, presentation to HR Recruitment 
Days, HR Norge, March 2015
  7	 Press, G [accessed 15 January 2015] Gartner Predicts Top 2015 and Beyond 
Trends for Technology, IT Organizations, and Consumers, Forbes [Online] 
http://www.forbes.com/sites/gilpress/2014/10/09/gartner-predicts-top-trends-
for-technology-it-organizations-and-consumers-for-2015-and-beyond/3/
  8	 Koetsier, J [accessed 21 November 2014] Marketo CMO: ‘Marketing  
has changed more in 5 years than the past 500’, Venture Beat, [Online]  
http://venturebeat.com/2014/03/01/marketo-cmo-marketing-has-changed-
more-in-5-years-than-the-past-500-interview/
  9	 Gartner official website [accessed 19 February 2015] Gartner [Online]  
http://my.gartner.com/portal/server.pt?open=512&objID=202&mode= 
2&PageID=5553&resId=1871515&ref=Webinar-Calendar
10	 Kristi, M (204) Support the Data Enthusiast: Challenges for Next-Generation 
Data-Analysis Systems, Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 7 (6)  
pp 453–56
11	 Gelman, A (2008) Red State, Blue State, Rich State, Poor State, Princeton 
University Press
12	 Robinson, W (1950) Ecological Correlations and the Behavior of Individuals, 
American Sociological Review, 15 (3), pp 351–57
13		 	
	
For our example:
Variable
Men
Women
Mean
Standard deviation
Sample size
14	 Leon-Guerrero, A and Frankfort-Nachmias, C (2012) Essentials of Social 
Statistics for a Diverse Society, Sage
15	 Salkind, N J (2010) Statistics for People Who (Think They) Hate Statistics, Sage
t =
X1 − 
−
X2
−
s
n1
1
n2
1
+
s =
(n1 − 1)s2
1
(n2 − 1)s2
2
n1
n2 − 2
+
+
X1 = 5.43
−
X2 = 4.72
−
s1 = 2.47
s2 = 1.66
n1 = 29
n2 = 17

“
3.3
Objectives 
management
Management by objective works – if you know the objectives. 
Ninety per cent of the time you don’t.  Peter Drucker
Introduction
Objectives management (OM) is the start of detailing your to-be design. Objec­
tives management, often referred to as strategic performance management, 
was defined by Bernard Marr as ‘the organizational approach to define, assess, 
implement, and continuously refine organizational strategy’.1 Corporate 
performance management is recognized as a priority and key technology 
investment area for businesses.2 It is a priority for two reasons: first because 
companies are failing to deliver their business objectives using traditional 
methods; and second because they all recognize the value provided when 
objectives are correctly implemented and strategy is delivered. Objectives 
give a means of aligning everyone’s effort and ensuring the most important 
business activities take priority.
Undertaking ‘strategic corporate-wide performance management’ means 
first defining what is the overall corporate strategy. From this, it is about 
defining what the objectives need to be in order to achieve the given strategy. 
As I outlined in Part Two, objectives are not the same as goals. Goals are 
directional and aspirational; they are influenced by a company’s vision, and 
should be audacious and inspiring. Objectives are what turn these high-level 
visions into something meaningful and tangible; concrete, actionable steps 
that can be worked on and impacted immediately. The management aspect 
is managing the organization against meeting those objectives. I have used 
the term ‘objectives management’ instead of ‘strategic corporate-wide perfor­
mance management’ because it speaks a lot more closely to the actual process 
133

Part Three: Micro Design
134
you are doing day to day. The focus is on defining explicitly what you want 
to achieve, aligning this with the organization and then managing to ensure 
you achieve it.
A good example of objectives management in practice is the Objec­
tives and Key Results (OKR) method, first applied by Intel and now used by  
companies such as Google and LinkedIn. The method defines clear Objectives 
(O) with each objective needing to have a set of Key Results (KR). Using 
Google as an example, the company reviews its OKRs every quarter with 
the expectation that employees will only average 0.6–0.7 for their OKR 
grade. If someone achieves 1.0 regularly then the OKRs are deemed to be 
not stretching employees enough. The benefits of this method, stated by 
Rick Klau of Google Ventures,3 include:
●
●ensures disciplined thinking;
●
●facilitates clarity in communication and priorities;
●
●establishes indicators for measuring progress to track against plans;
●
●focuses effort.
These four benefits are all core goals when defining and implementing an 
effective organization design. In fact, the reason I have placed objectives 
management before detailed process, projects or competency design is 
because I believe that before these can be defined you need to know where 
you want to go and why. In this chapter I take you through a comprehensive 
process for objectives management. I begin by outlining some of the reasons 
organizations traditionally struggle with this area, before exploring how 
you can set and manage your objectives drawing on the methodology set  
out in Chapter 1.3. I then address some considerations when implementing 
objectives management in practice to ensure your objectives management 
process gives you value on an ongoing basis.
Why organizations struggle with corporate-
wide performance management
If businesses recognize the value of corporate-wide performance manage-
ment, why do they struggle with it in practice? I believe there are six main 
reasons: it is perceived as an individual performance assessment process; it 
is not made relevant to those lower down the organization; it is not regarded 
as a value-adding process; performance reviews are qualitative, not data-driven; 
technological issues; and inherent issues with objective methodology.

Objectives Management
135
OM is perceived as purely an individual performance 
assessment process
Objective setting in companies typically happens as part of an individual 
annual performance process. This has three issues. First, there is a lack of 
business focus because individual objectives are not connected explicitly to 
the high-level business objectives set in the macro design. Second, a conse-
quence of the first issue is that individual behaviour is driven by individuals 
wanting to optimize their personal balanced scorecard rather than what is 
right for the whole company. Thirdly, the performance assessment process  
is traditionally done no more often than twice a year. The result is that 
month to month there is no way of knowing if objectives are on track. If 
they are heading off target by the time the review arrives it can be a lot more 
difficult or even too late to address the situation.
Objectives are not communicated effectively
There is often a lack of visibility and communication about the purpose of 
objectives across the business. This makes it hard for employees to under-
stand how their work fits into the direction of the overall business. In addi-
tion, employees are given few opportunities to engage with their objectives 
directly and give input to the objective-setting process. The result is a lack of 
engagement with the process of objective setting and personal objectives 
themselves. This situation is then exacerbated by infrequent and subjective 
appraisals used to inform feedback, bonuses and promotions.
Objectives management is not regarded as  
a value-adding process
A result of a lack of communication, the benefits of objectives management 
for both the business and individuals are not appreciated. Traditionally, 
people do not like being measured. Employees are often fearful of objectives 
because they believe the process of measuring them and their progress 
against unambiguous results will turn into a mechanism for either micro-
managing them or uncovering and punishing low performance. The result  
is that the process is not taken seriously and can often be undermined from 
the top, with a lack of engagement and support from leaders, which then 
translates down the organization.

Part Three: Micro Design
136
Performance reviews are purely qualitative and not 
data-driven
While most high-level objectives are tracked, invariably by financial results 
such as revenue or sales, objectives across the company are rarely linked to 
these high-level objectives and are not data-driven. Individual performance 
is often assessed purely on annual qualitative reviews. There is no real way 
of gauging quantitative and accurate performance of objectives. This is not 
to say qualitative reviews are not important but that you need both qualita-
tive and quantitative reviews side by side to support each other. Currently, 
objectives management is implemented using old frameworks such as 
Management By Objectives (MBOs). This involves writing out people’s objec-
tives at the beginning of the year. However, in practice all this results in is  
a set of lists that quickly lose their impact and are unable to be understood 
in the context of the organization as a whole. Also, because appraisals are 
usually annual and performance is not tracked rigorously, appraisals come 
to represent only an employee’s contribution over the few weeks or months 
leading up to them. In other words, objectives management stops being 
data-driven and a tendency to claim responsibility for company success 
gradually redefines the culture of a business. Office politics become unpleasant 
as those who shout loudest outdo those who contribute most.
How people use technology
While technology associated with performance management has moved for-
wards significantly, few companies have updated their technology or approach. 
Around 61 per cent of companies use generic tools such as Word and Excel 
rather than dedicated software for objectives management implementation.4 
And even when more appropriate software is used, such as Enterprise 
Resource Planning (ERP), the methods used are inefficient and inconsistent. 
To start with, traditional relational databases or Word are unsuited to link-
ing the many-to-many links of the organization. This makes it impossible to 
connect objectives to people or roles and effectively analyse impact. Second, 
much of the process of objectives management is not done in a data-driven 
manner. It often involves filling in forms and providing manager or self-
assessments against objectives. However, this means that those best at justify-
ing their work are perceived to be the highest performers, rather than those 
who have actually had the biggest impact. Finally, the combination of the 
technology and the way it is used means objectives are not tracked consistently. 
Organizations find data maintenance near impossible with almost half of 

Objectives Management
137
organizations having reactive rather than active data management, that is they 
fix problems rather than making sure that they don’t occur in the first place. 
Ensuring ongoing quality and usefulness of objectives data is key as it is what 
drives agile management and intervention when objectives deviate from plans.
Improved objectives performance doesn’t always 
mean improved business performance
While I am a big believer in measurable objectives, on an organization-wide 
level they have inherent conflicts of interest and they can be used as motiva-
tion for bad decision-making. Taking the first issue, often objectives associated 
with particular measures will be in direct competition across different 
organizational functions. A good example comes from the trade-offs in supply 
chains. A manufacturing manager’s performance will often be measured 
on manufacturing costs. Therefore, he or she will want longer runs for each 
individual product to minimize set-up costs. In contrast, the person respon-
sible for inventory management will be measured on inventory costs. 
Therefore, he or she will want short but frequent runs to reduce inventory 
costs. Their objectives and assessed performance are in direct conflict, run-
ning the risk of decisions being made for individual gain rather than what 
is best for the business.
This example highlights the danger of measuring and linking perform­
ance too explicitly to one measure. In one instance, again using the supply 
chain example, an initiative to improve productivity and machine utilization 
meant each manager was measured on utilization over time. However, this 
resulted in one manager moving a set of subcomponents to their manufac-
turing site. The movement cost the company money and did not result in 
any overall improvement for the business in terms of utilization. It only 
meant the shift manager could publish a higher measure for his or her site  
at the cost of another. I have seen this type of behaviour numerous times. 
The root cause is that the measures against which objectives are assessed  
are not connected, so no one has a holistic view of the objectives across the  
organization, and the knock-on effect of poor decision-making cannot be 
fully appreciated and addressed.
In outlining an end-to-end framework for setting and managing objec-
tives I hope to address many of the issues highlighted above. However, a lot 
of these issues come down as much to attitude and communication as to 
methodology. As with any process you have to get buy-in from everyone 
across the organization, and lead by example to make it work. In the next 
section I will set out my data-driven process for objectives management.

Part Three: Micro Design
138
Process for setting and managing objectives
A correctly and consistently implemented OM process should act as a guide 
for an organization to follow, not as a post mortem when things don’t go to 
plan. A great organization is an organization in which everyone pulls in the 
same direction with the strategy driving desired behaviours and activities. 
Yet all organizations have to balance central direction with local informa-
tion. How to achieve that is a key element throughout the rest of this chapter.
Summary steps
Objectives management is the process of breaking down your strategic  
goals (defined in your macro design) into a hierarchy of high-level objectives 
and sub-objectives, cascading them by linking them to people/roles in the 
organization, and maintaining them over time, as summarized in Figure 3.3.1. 
There is a debate to be had about whether objectives should be set top-down 
by management or bottom-up by employees. On the one hand, top-down 
objective setting ensures alignment and accountability, while bottom-up en-
courages employee buy-in and realistic objective setting based on knowledge 
Figure 3.3.1 
Goal, objective and trackable KPI pyramid
goal
define top 
objectives
cascade  
through organization
Splitting up, linking to people,  
agreeing and sign off
track and  
maintain objectives
Update, modify, analyse,  
report and reassign 
balancing  
top-down  
expectations
and 
bottom-up 
feasibility 

Objectives Management
139
on the ground. To clarify my stance from the start, I believe that either one 
on its own is tricky to implement in any large organization. I therefore 
advocate a top-down focus but with plenty of bottom-up discussion and 
input, and many cycles of refinement.
Before I go into the process in detail, what does successful OM look like 
in practice? I believe that success can be measured by how useful the feed-
back is; for example, whether you can begin to answer some of the questions 
below:
●
●How are strategic goals broken down across your business?
●
●What progress is being made towards each of these objectives?
●
●How has organizational performance changed over time?
●
●Who is responsible for delivering key objectives?
●
●How many objectives are there by person and how many objectives 
are without a person responsible?
●
●Is it realistic to expect that objectives will be met in the time frames 
stated?
●
●Are the right people focused on the right things with adequate resources?
Going through an OM process helps answer these questions not only as a 
one-off. The real trick is setting up ongoing management, so these questions 
can be answered consistently. Like many aspects covered in this book, the 
OM process is not linear. Each area overlaps with another as iterations  
take place. For simplicity, I have drawn it as a three-stage linear process as 
shown in Figure 3.3.2.
Setting high-level goals and objectives
Setting the goals should already have been done as part of the macro phase. 
If those summary goals are not clear, then they need to be. Once the goals 
are clear, it is time to define how they are going to be achieved. What are the 
underlying things that need to be achieved? Developing this list is useful as 
a means of guiding and measuring the business as a whole. However, you 
need to break objectives down and structure them in a way that corresponds 
to the roles and people they apply to. To start off with, this means ensuring 
your objectives really are objectives and not goals. Objectives are Specific, 
Measurable, Attainable, Relevant and Time-bound (SMART). I believe in 
SMART objectives because they make objectives easier to measure against, 
and manage and track in a data-driven way. To determine whether you’re 

Part Three: Micro Design
140
Figure 3.3.2 
Objectives management process
  Maintain  
eg when  
people leave
 Add/modify 
objectives
 Record actuals
 Analyse/report
Track & 
MainTain
  Identify goal(s) 
and list potential 
objectives
 Weight (if needed)
 Sign off
One-Off, 
executIve 
OWned
WhOle ORg, 
MAnAgeR 
OWned
 
OngOIng
Define 
Top-LeveL 
objecTives
cascaDe & 
sign off
 discussion
 Set targets
  Allocate  
objectives  
to roles
  feedback and 
check feasibility
  check for ‘SMARt’ 
and ‘Mece’
really dealing with relevant SMART objectives, throughout the objectives 
setting process ask yourself the following questions:
1	 Is this objective directly relevant to the high-level strategy?
2	 Is it achievable given the company’s financial or human resources, 
outside regulation, or other restrictions?
3	 If you agree that a company has the ability to achieve an objective, 
and it is one that should be achieved, has it been assigned a deadline?
4	 Have you costed the implications of trying to achieve the objective? 
Do you have the resources to do it or should you use external support?
5	 Is the objective in question appropriately specific? The objective 
should be explicitly targeted at an area of the organization and not 
too vague for actual implementation. However, you should balance 
this with avoiding getting bogged down in the ‘nitty-gritty’ of how an 
objective is to be achieved (for more detail, see the section on 
‘Cascading objectives’ below).
6	 How will I measure this objective? I come back to specific measures 
later in the chapter but, at a basic level, how will the objectives be 
analysed? For example, is it a KPI or a project deliverable that needs 
to be achieved by a certain date?

Objectives Management
141
The SMART framework is a good place to begin when thinking about setting 
objectives but it is not the only thing to consider. Drawing on the methodo­
logies in Chapter 1.3, objectives need to be organized and cascaded in a way 
that can connect them to particular roles and people through the organization.
Cascading objectives throughout the organization
Once you have clear overall goals and clear summary objectives, you need 
to break objectives down and structure them in a way that corresponds  
to the roles and people they apply to. When you break down top-level objec-
tives they become a ‘tree’. As laid out in Chapter 1.3, having the various 
parts of the organizational system mapped as hierarchies makes it much 
easier to link and see the connections across the system. The end result of  
the OM process is that you map your objectives tree onto your role tree by 
linking roles to specific objectives.
Start with your top-level goals and break them down. For example, take 
all the objectives that need to be achieved to reach your HR goal. Figure 3.3.3 
provides an example of an objectives tree starting with a high-level aspira-
tional goal and cascading the objectives from this.
Figure 3.3.3 
Objectives tree example
HR
Challenging us all to be the
best we can
Employee engagement/
relations
Putting people at the forefront
of our philosophy
Recruitment
Building a strong employee
brand that will attract top talent
to apply directly
Performance
management
Actively manage and challenge
our staff to be the best
Improve employee
satisfaction
Conduct biannual survey and
increase satisfaction index by
10%
Ensure regular
communication
Weekly company newsletter,
monthly social events,
quarterly division meetings
Turnover (%)
Maintain annual employee
turnover at 15%
Referral rate
(% over 12 months)
Maintain annual referral rate at
25%
Optimize new hires
Maintain costs per hire at 
<£1,000. Focus on direct
recruitment and increased
referral rate
Improve average
calibration score
Improve overall calibration
score year on year
Increase employee
support
Identify training needs for
lowest 20% performers and
address development needs to
increase their performance
Strengthen internship
programme
Ensure careers’ fairs are
planned well in advance.
Maintain database of students/
interns/work placement
Reduce average time to
hire
Average time to hire: 12 weeks
Conduct skills gap
analysis
Monthly employee surveys
Category
Goal
Header
Objective

Part Three: Micro Design
142
Figure 3.3.4 
Depth and breadth sum
DEPTH
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
BREADTH
3
1
4
13
40
121
364
1,093
3,280
5
1
6
31
156
781
3,906
19,531
97,656
7
1
8
57
400
2,801
19,608
137,257
960,800
9
1
10
91
820
7,381
66,430
597,871
5,380,840
Cascading works by starting at the top and defining only two to four levels 
down. Over-complexity can rapidly follow unless you are careful. To illus-
trate (and this applies to many of the frameworks within Part Three) the 
table (Figure 3.3.4) shows the potential consequences of letting hierarchies 
grow out of control. If each objective has five ‘children’ and you have three 
layers, you have 31 objectives. If the average number of children were nine, 
that would be an increase by a factor of approximately three, or a total of 
91. If there are four levels (a depth of four) and an average breadth of five, 
then that is 156 points which need to be linked into the organizational roles 
and managed. If you have 50 people, then fine. If you have three, it feels like 
overkill.
Does the objective tree have to mirror the 
organizational structure tree?
There is no need for the objectives tree to stick rigidly to the reporting 
structure of an organization, although using the reporting structure is the 
most obvious way to set objectives. Another option is to cascade through 
the process structure of the organization. This works by the process owner 
defining what needs to be achieved for each step of the process, and using 
the R in the RAS framework to cascade the responsibilities.
Setting measures and targets
Once you have laid out your objectives you need to start detailing them to 
ensure you can track progress over time. When thinking through the specific 
wording and scope of each objective, think through what measures are 
attached to each objective to quantify them. I believe there are five types  

Objectives Management
143
of objectives measures. These measures are similar to what Google calls its 
‘Results’ within its OKR method. These groups capture fundamental dif­
ferences in the way in which objectives are measured and the way in which 
they can be treated and analysed. Each one deals with a different type of 
data input, be it a date, a percentage, an absolute number or a combination 
of these.
1	 Milestone (event objective) – where a target date of completion is  
set and progress is measured against that, either as a simple output 
status (‘not started’, ‘started’, ‘in progress’, ‘completed’, ‘signed off’) 
or using an RAG scale (Green = ‘on target to finish’, Red = ‘serious 
concern’).
2	 Recurring – This is different from a milestone objective as it is a 
recurring objective rather than a one-off that needs to be achieved by 
a certain date. There needs to be a way of signing off if the objective 
is achieved or not for each period. An example is monthly financial 
reporting or credit control; for example, have all the invoices for this 
month been sent out on time? Yes or No.
3	 Averageable (KPI objective) – where the objective is to achieve  
a certain level of performance (high or low) in indices such as 
Customer Satisfaction (CSAT) or percentage growth. It is worth 
noting that KPIs are probably the most commonly used measurement 
in OM as they make good quantitative measures for objective 
progress and can be either averageable or summable (see below).
4	 Summable (roll-up objective) – where success can be measured as  
an absolute number (eg £ sales) and therefore values achieved can  
be aggregated (‘rolled up’) within business functions.
5	 Composite – It is also possible that an objective is divided into 
sub-objectives of different types, and is therefore analysed as  
a ‘composite’.
Weighting objectives and assigning a budget
A consideration when setting objectives and the tracking of these objectives 
is whether some are more important than others. Weighting each objective 
helps focus effort, and if tracked correctly helps direct and balance people’s 
time and resources. Weighting objectives should not be confused with 
weighting people’s performance scores and then dogmatically calculating  
a bonus or salary increase based on a mathematical formula. I don’t believe 

Part Three: Micro Design
144
there should be a direct translation of someone’s objectives and how their 
performance is evaluated. First, individual performance is as much a function 
of behaviour and level of competence, as outlined in Chapter 3.6, as whether 
they achieve every objective. Performance management should not become 
purely a game of hitting a set of targets. An example of this is a story that 
one of my colleagues told me of a Fortune 500 company that he used to work 
for, where the board fired their highest-performing salesperson because that 
salesperson broke their contract on behaviour terms. The single pursuit of 
objectives above all other things resulted in him treading on other employees 
and engaging in inappropriate behaviour. Equally, just because you have  
an objective, doesn’t mean you have full control over it and, as already 
stated, there are many instances where objectives are negatively correlated 
with each other. Sometimes not achieving them can be the best thing for the 
business and might even be expected, as in the case of Google outlined at  
the beginning of this chapter.
Within that further context, when deciding weighting it can be done either 
by top-down management, or through discussion between the employee and 
his or her manager (the preferred approach). Here the main focuses of the 
manager’s objectives will be aligned with the aims and objectives of the  
employee to give a balanced weight to each objective. The weights can be 
any value so long as the same scale is used for each one of an individual’s 
objectives, allowing them to be normalized and rolled up. Rolling up means 
that the relative importance of a low-level objective can be seen at higher 
levels of the hierarchy.
I would add the note that weighting can be complex, and its benefits 
should be traded off against using that time to actually work towards objec-
tives. I like the swing method described in Chapter 2.3. If the most impor-
tant objective achieves a score of 100, every other objective should be rated 
relative to that on a range of 1–100. The weighting helps make clear what is 
the real strategy. Let me explain this by way of an example. In my supply 
chain I can have: cost, agility, working capital and customer service. If  
I compete on price, then cost may score higher than service. If I am the fashion 
retailer Zara, then my strategy is about having an agile supply chain. In that 
instance I may be willing to pay more per unit. My focus changes even 
though my supply chain measures are the same.
If an objective is important, then you may need to ensure there are suf­
ficient resources and/or spend allocated to each objective. It isn’t always 
possible to deliver something through internal resources only. I have experi-
enced a number of internal projects that were delayed or dropped because 
day-to-day business activities and client work got in the way. Weighting 

Objectives Management
145
objectives gives prioritization to those working on a project and also can 
help you decide where budget should be put aside for external help.
Linking, checking and signing-off
Having set and cascaded your objectives, you need to link specific objectives 
to roles/people. This means building an accountability matrix (eg the RAS 
framework) in the context of objectives to ensure each objective has clear 
ownership, targets and tracking. The accountability linking process is 
iterated for each level of the organization until 100 per cent of objectives 
are mapped to roles or deprioritized. Once the mapping is done and you 
have an overview of the whole organization you can perform a sanity check 
to ensure that the overall strategy and the cascaded objectives align, poten-
tially escalating objectives and targets as necessary. Make sure you check 
that the tree is:
1	 Coherent: it has a clear structure with meaningful categories that 
don’t overlap. This ensures there is no repetition or duplication of 
efforts. This fits with the ‘mutually exclusive’ part of MECE outlined 
in Chapter 1.3. For example, if there is more than one person linked 
as ‘Responsible’ to a certain objective has there been a duplication by 
mistake?
2	 Comprehensive: it provides objectives that cover all the key areas of 
the business. This doesn’t mean we’ve covered everything, but it is 
complete to the appropriate level of detail. This fits with the 
‘collectively exhaustive’ part of MECE. It should be noted that 
achieving a true MECE tree is extremely difficult. Don’t be too hard 
on yourself if you struggle.
3	 Simple: objectives should not be too detailed although they should  
be more detailed, with less discretion, the lower the level. They 
should provide an overview of your focus for the coming period.  
The language has to be clear and unambiguous. Are the definitions  
of the measures clearly defined and actually possible to calculate? 
This makes it easy to communicate with everyone and if any 
confusion arises gives a clear reference point.
4	 Balanced: are there too many objectives or too few? The chances are 
that the first passes of defining them will result in people having too 
many. Define how many objectives each person has and at what 
weighting. Set a limit. For example, if a role has more than 12 
objectives then the employee will probably be overstretched.  

Part Three: Micro Design
146
Equally, does everyone have a set of objectives appropriate to the 
role? If the levels of effort and difficulty for objectives differ greatly 
between roles it can make analysis less intuitive. Also, think through 
how the objectives might shift and what the impact would be if 
priorities change.
Part of doing a sanity check is to finalize and sign off with each employee 
which objectives they are responsible for. When implementing OM in an 
NHS hospital we created objectives contracts which employees and managers 
physically signed. This gave employees the final say over their objectives  
and helped define a commitment and achieved buy-in for each objective. 
This ties into the mantra ‘conversation is key’ which I expand on in the next 
section.
Visualize, track, analyse and manage
In Chapter 4.8 (Sustaining the edge) I discuss the benefits and value of effec-
tive tracking: how they provide feedback loops; how you know where to 
focus; and when celebration is perhaps required. As a precursor to that, 
knowing how well you are doing against every objective over time is a 
crucial part of ensuring you manage the objectives. The first thing is to 
know what your targets and concerns are. Using the BRAG framework is 
useful for this. Namely:
●
●significantly below target (Red);
●
●just below target (Amber);
●
●on target (Green);
●
●significantly above target (Blue).
The first step is to define what each threshold is and how you normalize 
each objective so you can analyse each objective’s performance against the 
others, enabling the focus to be effectively directed. How each objective is 
scored can vary. One method is to give a score of 100 for hitting the target. 
The target is defined by reaching the Green threshold. But there are several 
other thresholds. The first is going from Amber to Red. This threshold can 
be given a score of 50. The question then is, what does it take to get zero  
and should it be possible to achieve less than zero? This type of data often 
has outliers or data errors that, if you have an unlimited scale, skew all the  
aggregations. I therefore find it useful to cap the max and min of the normal-
ized scores. I also like symmetry. Therefore, if the distance between the 
Green and Red is X (the threshold where you get a score of 50), then two 

Objectives Management
147
times X gives a score of 0. For example, imagine the measure in question 
was service levels, as shown in the third column of Figure 3.3.5. In this ex-
ample, achieving 95 per cent means hitting the target and being Green. If the 
level falls below 90 per cent, then it becomes Red. A score of exactly 90 per 
cent is therefore given a score of 50 on our normalized points method. In 
this scenario, if the service levels were at or below 85 per cent, then a score 
of 0 is given. The inverse is true with performing better and achieving Blue. 
If the level is at 97 per cent it scores 150 and, therefore, 99 per cent gives the 
max score of 200. In the scenario below, an actual level of 86 per cent was 
worth 10 points. If, for whatever reason, you want to score between –100 
and +100 or –1 and +1, then the same concept can apply. It doesn’t matter 
that much as long as you are consistent.
Other examples include a cost per unit or defects per thousand, where  
the lower the cost or number of defects the better. What this logic, combined 
with weighting and cascading, results in is the ability to see every type of 
objective at every level of the organization in one view. The visual cue of  
the BRAG colour combined with the size of the node helps to visually  
prioritize where to focus. Figure 3.3.6 shows how this can look for a larger 
objectives tree where you can drill into each example.
For every objective you should then be able to track the actuals versus 
target as shown on the left-hand graph in Figure 3.3.6. In this example  
of inventory, the target is a static 94 per cent, but the actuals vary between 
87.6 per cent and 96.6 per cent. It is important for the team focused on that 
Figure 3.3.5 
Objective normalization examples
ExamplEs
score
service levels
Cost per unit
Defects per 
1,000
B
200
97%
$3.90
2.0
G
100
95%
$4.50
4.0
a
50
90%
$6.00
3.5
R
0
85%
$7.50
3.0
actual
86%
$4.10
3.8
Normalized 
score
10
160
60

Part Three: Micro Design
148
Figure 3.3.6 
BRAG summary objectives tree
!!
100
Hospital XYZ
R
G
B
!!
100
Women's & Children's
Services
R
G
B
!!
100
Medicine
R
G
B
!!
100
Diagnostics &
Therapies
R
G
B
!!
100
Children's Services
R
G
B
!!
1
Paediatric A&E
R
G
B
!!
100
Paediatric theatres
R
G
B
!!
100
Obstetrics
R
G
B
!!
100
Reproductive
Medicine
R
G
B
!!
100
Paediatric Intensive
care
R
G
B
!!
100
General Medicine
R
G
B
!!
100
Endocrinology
R
G
B
!!
11
Neurology
R
G
B
!!
2
Sexual Health
R
G
B
!!
100
Physiotherapy
R
G
B
!!
100
Nutrition & Dietetics
R
G
B
!!
100
Laboratory Medicine
R
G
B
!!
100
Medical Physics &
Bioengineering
R
G
B
!!
0.01
Cost per Visit of
Children Services
101
90.8
102
101
Current Difference
0.14
Current Percentage
100.10%
!!
35
Feedback from
Parents
61.8
44.6
49.5
45
Current Difference
16.8
Current Percentage
137.30%
!!
0.01
Number of Patient
Visits
1.49K
2.18K
2.42K
2.2K
Current Difference
-711
Current Percentage
67.70%
!!
35
Cost per Visit of
Paediatric A&E
8.35
7.47
8.38
8.3
Current Difference
0.05
Current Percentage
100.60%
!!
0
Feedback from
Parents
Current Target
NA
Current Value
17713.12
!!
42.5
Average Queue Times
16.8
19.8
22
20
Current Difference
-3.19
Current Percentage
84%
!!
25
Mainentance Cost of
Theatres
230
197
221
219
Current Difference
11.3
Current Percentage
105.20%
!!
100
Number of Functional
Theatres
87.9
76
88
80
Current Difference
7.9
Current Percentage
109.90%
!!
0.1
Operating Costs of
Theatres
177
147
165
163
Current Difference
14
Current Percentage
108.60%
!!
0.1
Cost per Visit of
Obstetrics Services
1.08K
896
1K
995
Current Difference
89
Current Percentage
108.90%
!!
100
Patient Satisfaction
6.46
4.75
5.5
5
Current Difference
1.46
Current Percentage
129.20%
!!
100
Failed Pregnancy Rate
0.7
0.86
1
0.95
Current Difference
-0.25
Current Percentage
73.70%
!!
100
Units of Reproductive
Medicine Sold
7.55K
7.05K
8.16K
7.42K
Current Difference
126
Current Percentage
101.70%
!!
0.01
Cost of Medicine
102
90.8
102
101
Current Difference
1.08
Current Percentage
101.10%
!!
100
Patient Satisfaction
92.6
76
88
80
Current Difference
12.63
Current Percentage
115.80%
!!
35
Cost per Visit of
Paediatric Care
8.35
7.47
8.38
8.3
Current Difference
0.05
Current Percentage
100.60%
!!
100
Mortality Rate
Current Target
NA
Current Value
0
!!
100
Feedback from
Parents
100
95
110
100
Current Difference
0
Current Percentage
100%
!!
25
Cost of General
Medicine
230
197
221
219
Current Difference
11.3
Current Percentage
105.20%
!!
25
Units of General
Medicine Sold
261
225
250
227
Current Difference
34
Current Percentage
115%
!!
35
Patient Satisfaction
171
130
144
131
Current Difference
40.08
Current Percentage
130.60%
!!
25
Profit per Visit of
Endocrinology
Services
261
225
250
227
Current Difference
34
Current Percentage
115%
!!
35
Number of
Endocrinology Ops
1.9K
3.33K
3.7K
3.37K
Current Difference
-1464
Current Percentage
56.50%
!!
25
Patient Satisfaction
362
178
198
180
Current Difference
181.97
Current Percentage
201.10%
!!
35
Profit per Visit of
Neurology Services
177
131
145
132
Current Difference
44.96
Current Percentage
134.10%
!!
35
Number of Neurology
Ops
1.9K
3.33K
3.7K
3.37K
Current Difference
-1464
Current Percentage
56.50%
!!
35
Patient Satisfaction
102
104
115
105
Current Difference
-2.31
Current Percentage
97.80%
!!
35
Profit per Visit of
Sexual Health
Services
171
130
144
131
Current Difference
40.08
Current Percentage
130.60%
!!
0.1
Number of Sexual
Health Ops
81.9K
85.7K
95.3K
86.6K
Current Difference
-4744
Current Percentage
94.50%
!!
25
Patient Satisfaction
213
112
124
113
Current Difference
100.08
Current Percentage
188.60%
!!
0.01
Avg Cost of
Physiotherapy
Services
102
90.8
102
101
Current Difference
1.08
Current Percentage
101.10%
!!
0.1
Number of
Physiotherapy Ops
177
147
165
163
Current Difference
14
Current Percentage
108.60%
!!
0
Patient Satisfaction
Current Target
NA
Current Value
NA
!!
25
Avg. Cost of Nutrition
& Dietetics Services
230
197
221
219
Current Difference
11.3
Current Percentage
105.20%
!!
35
Number of Nutrition &
Dietetics Ops
1.9K
3.33K
3.7K
3.37K
Current Difference
-1464
Current Percentage
56.50%
!!
35
Patient Satisfaction
(Nutrition & Dietetics)
13.5
11.4
12.7
11.5
Current Difference
2.03
Current Percentage
117.70%
!!
35
Total R&D Spend
242K
220K
244K
222K
Current Difference
20277
Current Percentage
109.10%
!!
25
Number of Successful
Experiments
100
99
110
100
Current Difference
0
Current Percentage
100%
!!
100
No. of Medicines
Introcuded to the
Market
Current Target
3
Current Value
NK
!!
100
Bioengineering R&D
Spend
1.03K
1.4K
1.62K
1.47K
Current Difference
-440
Current Percentage
70.10%
!!
100
Medical Physics
Revenues
6.09K
6.87K
7.95K
7.23K
Current Difference
-1137
Current Percentage
84.30%
!!
100
Number of Student
Internships
66
27
31.5
30
Current Difference
36
Current Percentage
220%
R
G
B
R
G
B
0%
35
Neurology
ps
K
3.7K
3.37K
Difference
-1464
Percentage
56.50%
35
ent Satisfaction
2
104
115
105
Difference
-2.31
Percentage
97.80%
35
rofit per Visit of
Sexual Health
p
S
p
Services
171
130
144
131
Current Difference
40.08
Current Percentage
130.60%
!!
0.1
Number of Sexual
Health Ops
81.9K
85.7K
95.3K
86.6K
Current Difference
-4744
Current Percentage
94.50%
!!
25
Patient Satisfaction
213
112
124
113
Current Difference
100.08
Current Percentage
188.60%
!!
0.01
Avg Cost of
Physiotherapy
g
i
g
Services
y
S
i
y
102
90.8
102
101
Current Difference
1.08
Current Percentage
101.10%
!!
0.1
Number of
Physiotherapy Ops
177
147
165
163
Current Difference
14
Current Percentage
108.60%
!!
0
Patient Satisfaction
Current Target
NA
Current Value
NA
!!
25
Avg. Cost of Nutrition
& Dietetics Services
g
i
i
S
i
g
230
197
221
219
Current Difference
11.3
Current Percentage
105.20%
!!
35
Number of Nutrition &
Dietetics Ops
1.9K
3.33K
3.7K
3.37K
Current Difference
-1464
Current Percentage
56.50%
!!
35
Patient Satisfaction
(Nutrition & Dietetics)
13.5
11.4
12.7
11.5
Current Difference
2.03
Current Percentage
117.70%
!!
Total R&D Spend
242K
220K
244K
222K
Current Difference
20277
Current Percentage
109.10%
!!
25
Number of Successful
Experiments
100
99
110
100
Current Difference
0
Current Percentage
100%
!!
100
No. of Medicines
Introcuded to the
Market
Current Target
3
Current Value
NK
Curr
Current
!!
Medical P
Revenu
6.09K
6.87K
7.95K
7.23K
Current Difference
-1
Current Percentage
84.3
!!
1
Number of Student
Internships
66
27
31.5
30
Current Difference
36
Current Percentage
220%
35
Current Difference
-1464
Current Percentage
56.50%
!!
25
Patient Satisfaction
362
178
198
180
Current Difference
181.97
Current Percentage
201.10%
!
Patient Satisfaction
This Month (Jul)
Actual  102
Target  105
Actual  105
  105
YTD
Actuals against Targets
109
108
107
106
105
104
103
102
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
6
1
35
Patient Satisfaction
This Month (Jul)
Actual  102
Target  105
Actual  105
  105
YTD
Performance against Target
B
G
A
R
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
6
1
35
Visualization of 
achievement levels
(B)RAG status
objective to know how well it is doing and if it is improving or not. However, 
most objectives will have different units of measure. Some will be in $000, 
others on a scale of 1–6 (eg CSAT), and others on percentage overruns or 
service levels. Therefore, it is useful to compare all the objectives in the 
common normalized way. The right-hand graph shows an example of how 
this can look.
Maintaining and improving objectives 
management
No framework is perfect, and it is only as good as its use in context. With 
that in mind, here are five things to look out for to maintain and improve 
your OM process.
1	 Setting objectives measures (KPIs): The objectives and KPIs should 
be strongly aligned to the strategies and goals of the organization. 
For instance, a growth company, division or region needs a greater 

Objectives Management
149
focus on revenue growth, the building of the brand and awareness 
versus a limited growth company that might be focused on driving 
profit and productivity. Getting the right measure helps. For example, 
in my own company we used to focus a lot on realization losses 
(project overruns) instead of project margins. What we really wanted 
was to ensure our projects reached a certain margin, and realization 
losses are a potential reason for not doing so. So we needed to 
address our objectives and measures accordingly, changing the focus 
to margins.
2	 Objectives are not always static: Make sure you revisit objectives  
and keep asking whether each one is still relevant. It feels like a great 
waste of time to have these discussions only at the end-of-year 
annual review process.
3	 Balance the whole, not the parts: Accountabilities are complex as 
there are so many interdependencies in the organization. As already 
highlighted in this chapter, they need to be treated with care to ensure 
individuals are competing with each other in as productive a way as 
possible. Accountabilities need to be given to those who can control 
the outcome but the targets have to be set within an intelligent 
consideration of the other elements of the organizational system and 
goals. Develop an understanding as to how the various KPIs impact 
on each other. For instance, check for negative correlations (where  
an increase in one KPI will lead to a decline in another) and look at 
groups of KPIs rather than in isolation to each other. Make the right 
trade-offs and work hard in ensuring that those who do the right 
thing for the ‘whole’ are not punished for their ‘part’. This requires 
you to try to predict areas of conflict and intervene proactively.
4	 ‘Average is OK’ trap: Objectives analytics can lead to wrong 
conclusions being drawn. Remember the statistics traps in baseline? 
A good example for OM is the ‘average issue’: where each objective 
could be off but overall the average could be fine. For example, if you 
were monitoring average temperature of patients in a hospital, the 
average could be fine but 7.5 per cent are dead with 0 degrees and 
92.5 per cent are at an extreme 40 degrees. This gives an average of 
the ideal 37, but that average is extremely misleading. In other 
words, you need to look at the range and drill into the detail.
5	 Present the right level of detail to the right groups: Make sure the 
analytics and objectives are in the right hands with the right  
context and presented in the right way. For example, one FTSE  

Part Three: Micro Design
150
100 organization I worked with had a large team of highly paid 
people producing hundreds of KPIs each month for the global board. 
The person responsible for this effort told me that in all his years of 
putting the book together he seriously doubted if any of the board 
members had ever read them properly. If you publish everything in 
detail there will be an information overload. Also, a document gives 
no ability to drill into detail or slice and dice. Its use is limited when 
it comes to answering questions. This is where, if you use technology 
appropriately, you can present the most relevant analysis and drill 
into detail only where required on demand.
In maintaining your objectives and management process, think through 
how you will deal with organizational changes. For example, people coming 
and going or priorities being modified. I am beginning to move into the 
Making it Real realm of scope; Figure 3.3.7 gives some important example 
situations and how to deal with them.
Final thoughts
Done badly, objectives management leads to dangerous and dysfunctional 
behaviour. It needs a holistic end-to-end view, especially where there are 
negative correlations between various objectives. The term ‘objectives 
management’ might immediately make you think of individual ‘performance 
management’ associated with activities such as skills assessments and 360 
reviews, but its meaning is very different. The process of doing OM starts by 
being clear about what you want to achieve (your goals) and then working 
out what tangibly needs to be achieved in order to get there (the cascading 
of your objectives). The transparency should result in a better balance of the 
level of ambition set for each person. If you develop an understanding of  
the relationship between the various objectives, especially those that are 
negatively related to each other, then you have a fighting chance of optimiz-
ing the whole. The consequence of not doing this will result in rash decisions 
being made and poor behaviour.
The data-driven aspect starts by quantifying the numbers of objectives 
and, therefore, helps you think through exactly how much work you can 
take on. Once defined and in live management, you will be able to track 
progress. This is discussed in more detail in Chapter 4.8. By knowing what 
you want everyone to achieve, you have started the detailed design. The next 
stage is to define the work required to achieve it, and that is the focus of  
the next two chapters.

Objectives Management
151
Figure 3.3.7 
Maintaining objectives management example 
‘what if’ solutions
Someone leaves  
or changes role
è 
If objectives are handed over to 
their successor-in-role, these are 
automatically mapped across to the 
new owner when they are linked to the 
role tree 
è 
If objectives are retained by the 
person, move the link in the Objectives 
RAS matrix from the old role to the 
new role 
è 
If objectives are abandoned, delete the 
old objectives 
Objective(s) 
change(s)
è 
This is an inevitability. Know and set 
the process for changing them and 
monitor how they change during the year 
è 
If the change is at a larger level, 
consider re-drawing your objective tree
Objective/personnel 
hierarchy changes
è 
If a change in reporting lines, then there 
is no change and no action required 
è 
If a change in responsibilities then 
consider reassignment
Objectives are 
orphaned
è 
Line managers monitor orphaned 
objectives and bring them to the 
attention to the right forum on a  
monthly basis 
It is clear someone 
will not achieve one 
of their objectives
è 
What is the root cause for them not 
achieving it? Do they have too much 
on? Lack the resource and/or support? 
There are blockers? Lack the skills or 
motivation?  
è 
It is useful to have an idea as to why 
with a recommended cause of action 
prior to escalating upwards
 
A
B
C
X
Y
Z
A
B
C

Part Three: Micro Design
152
1	 Common performance management practices are both dangerous  
and drive dysfunctional behaviour, and should not be confused with 
objectives management.
2	 An holistic end-to-end view is required to pull everything together  
into one picture.
3	 Objectives management is both a strategic process that ties the 
strategy back to what each role should do, and operational process  
that should be maintained on a monthly basis.
4	 A great organization is an organization in which everyone pulls in the 
same direction. You need to create systems that enable rather than 
hinder this.
5	 Stop seeing the purpose of objectives as evaluating people, but rather 
as a mechanism for feedback and knowing what the business should  
be focused on.
Remember this
Notes
1	 Marr, B (2006) Strategic Performance Management: Leveraging and measuring 
your intangible drivers, Elsevier, Oxford, p 3
2	 Eddy, N [accessed 28 March 2015], eweek [Online] http://www.eweek.com/
small-business/business-intelligence-analytics-top-areas-of-investment-in-
2014-gartner
3	 Hoffman, J [accessed 15 March 2015] Slideshare [Online]  
http://www.slideshare.net/jaymeh13/object-25288039
4	 Marr, B (2012) Executive Summary: 20 Years of Measuring and Managing 
Business Performance. From KPIs and Dashboards to Performance Analytics 
and Big Data, Advanced Performance Institute, Milton Keynes, p 6

“
3.4
Fixed process 
design
Indecision is debilitating; it feeds upon itself; it is, one  
might almost say, habit-forming. Not only that, but it is 
contagious; it transmits itself to others.  H A Hopf
Introduction
Good process is a process that disappears seamlessly into the background. 
You don’t need to think about it; it just happens with minimal stress and 
effort. All good processes are simple, repeatable and reducible. Simple  
does not imply unskilled. As Malcolm Gladwell puts it,1 to perfect a set of 
skills requires 10,000 hours of experience. Aristotle said: ‘We are what  
we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act, but a habit.’ All this leads 
us to ask: What work do those within your organization repeatedly do?  
Are those the right things? How do you know?
If objectives are about showing where you are going, process is the basis of 
how you get there. A good process requires everyone to know what they are 
doing and to know what everyone else is doing, while making the most of each 
individual’s specialist skills. Mapping and designing processes for a new organ­
ization can seem daunting, especially because processes translate laterally 
across the whole organization. It comes down to reducing the problem into 
small pieces, and it helps if you involve domain experts on each of the process 
elements. What can waste time is not knowing much about the actual con-
tent and spending too much time trying to figure it out. In addition, process 
design is highly related to the practice of business analysis (BA) and the myriad 
of tools that this involves. In mapping and designing processes, leveraging 
agile methods where data flows, handoffs are simple and have the minimum of 
ceremony, iterations can rapidly evolve, and learning is built into the method. 
This is preferred above trying to detail everything upfront to perfection.
In this chapter I will begin by outlining how you can map the different 
levels of your organizational processes, before going through the processes 
of collecting, building and understanding your as-is organizational processes. 
153

Part Three: Micro Design
154
The third section investigates techniques for analysing processes, setting 
the platform for the final section on how to create and define a to-be design 
and link it to your detailed organizational structure.
Types of process map
When most people think of process design, they think of process flows with 
‘swim lanes’ representing the group responsible for the activities or deci-
sions within that swim lane, icons to signify the type of work (for example, 
decision, system, sub-process), and connections showing the various flows 
as depicted in a simple example in Figure 3.4.1.
However, a process map does not need to fit neatly into this particular 
type of process map. In fact, there are five possible levels of process design 
with four types of visuals as depicted in Figure 3.4.2.
For the purpose of organizational design, in the vast majority of cases, 
Level 1 provides sufficient detail. Far too often, companies put huge amounts 
of detail into Level 2 and below. However, generally this is surplus to require-
ments when performing OD. There are two scenarios, within the context  
of performing OD, when delving into Level 2 design is necessary. The first is 
to validate that Level 1 is complete, and the second is to define how the 
Figure 3.4.1 
Example Level 2 swim-lane process map
Teacher
sTudenT
Validate 
understanding
summerize
nO
Test if 
understood
do 
exercise
sTarT
end
Yes
Present 
theory
ask 
questions
answer 
questions

Fixed Process Design
155
Figure 3.4.2 
Five levels of process map and visuals
level 2
Only develop these, 
from an org design 
perspective, in order 
to define interfaces, 
handoffs. Is useful for 
building systems
Helpful for detailing 
how people will 
work in practice, for 
complex processes 
with many actors
Detailed policies and 
procedures required 
for high-frequency 
activities in complex 
situations with lower-
skilled workforce
WarnIng  
aIm to stay  
abOve level 2
Overall mapping of 
business processes. 
Create a useful structure 
so that everyone can 
align around a mental 
representation
Identification of the 
main activities  
involved in the 
processes; this is the 
basis for role definition 
and rightsizing
HIgH-level 
WorkfloWs
level 2
lOw-level 
WorkfloWs
level 3
level 4
mappIng
level 0
aCtIvItIes’ 
IdentIfICatIon
level 1
proCedures

Part Three: Micro Design
156
process will work in practice as defined in the HOWWIP (see Chapter 4.3). 
Like peeling an onion, you can always create more layers of detail, and it is 
tempting to do so. But hold back. The first fear that people have is that, with 
too little detail, the roles will not be defined in a meaningful way and everyone 
will be unclear about the role. The second fear is that an employee’s work 
will be regarded as superficial and lacking quality. The first fear is legitimate 
and easily overcome. The second is just in someone’s head and unfounded. 
Too much detail means too much complexity and can easily overwhelm the 
design process. Therefore, in this chapter I focus on top-level processes.
Level 0 value chain
The Level 0 value chain map is the summary. It is what you created and used 
for the macro design as described in Chapter 2.3. It covers all the core elements 
of the business and can fit on one page. Like the strategy map in objectives 
management and many other elements to come, it is crucial that it fits on 
one page because it represents a mental map for thinking about how ‘every-
thing’ fits together. Michael Porter first described and popularized this way 
of thinking about value chains in his classic work Competitive Advantage.2
An example of a Level 0 process map is provided in Figure 3.4.3. It details the 
generic top-level processes that a product and services (delivery) company 
Figure 3.4.3 
Example Level 0 value chain map
LEADERSHIP
STRATEGY
PERfoRmAncE AnD  
oPERATIonS mAnAGEmEnT 
SuPPoRT
PEoPLE
quALITY
fInAncE
Attract
Sell
Define
Build 
Test 
and 
implement
Support  
& realize  
benefits
Ideation
Test and 
focus
Develop 
value  
props
Build  
and  
package
Roll out
Learn  
and  
improve
PRoDucT offERInG AnD DEvELoPmEnT
DELIvERY

Fixed Process Design
157
might have. Both these aspects of the business represent value chains, sup-
ported by a series of functions such as Finance and HR. While many businesses 
may have only one value chain, this helps show how your processes can fit 
together even in a more complex business.
When done well, this Level 0 value chain map should give a good sense 
of how the organization actually works. A natural way to think about it is: 
If you had to explain the business to a ‘generalist journalist’, how would you 
do it? How would you define the value that is created in a couple of steps? 
How would you capture all the key summary parts? It is like writing a short 
soundbite; it takes iterations and debate to get this right. In fact, it is the 
hardest bit to get right. Once you’ve got it, though, the rest of the process 
design will flow.
Level 1 activities
Level 1 breaks down the Level 0 value chain map into greater degrees of 
granularity and highlights the activities linked to each process. It is, therefore, 
still value-chain driven. You start with the high-level process and break it down 
into sub-processes, then top-level activities. Thinking of this level as a hier-
archical tree is useful: the nodes are the processes and the leaves are activities. 
An example of a Level 1 map of people processes is shown in Figure 3.4.4.
Figure 3.4.4 
Level 1 process map
PEOPLE
Strategy 
Development
Organizational 
Development
Resource 
Planning & 
Management 
Employee 
Total Career 
Management 
 Communicate
 Deﬁ ne
 Build
 Formulate
 Design
 Support 
 Develop
 Assess
 Select
 Analy
pport
aly
And then 
broken down 
again until the 
activities are 
deﬁ ned
Each 
Level 0 process 
is broken 
into sub-
processes

Part Three: Micro Design
158
Getting the granularity of Level 1 right is more art than science. But to help, 
here are some rules of thumb:
●
●A minimum of three and maximum of eight activities should suffice 
for 95 per cent of roles.
●
●Avoid too much complexity by ensuring the maximum number of 
activities within the entire list is around 0.3–0.6 of the number of 
FTEs. For example, if you have 600 FTEs in scope, then it is a range 
of 180–360 total activities. I have seen organizations define 200–300 
activities for organizations of fewer than 100 people; in practice it is 
too much detail and becomes unworkable.
●
●If all the activities within the parent process obviously fit into one 
role, then the parent detail suffices.
●
●The larger the organization and the more specialized the roles, the 
deeper one needs to go. But still start with the summary levels.
For example, if we were building a Level 1 process map for an organization 
that employed only two people, say Tim and Tanya, then the ‘three-to-nine 
activities’ would be enough for them to split the work. For example, Tanya 
might be responsible for the top-line or sales and marketing, with Tim re-
sponsible for delivery. As more people are added, the need for granularity 
starts to increase. If we add Bill and Bridget to the mix, Bill may do lead 
generation and Tanya the sales only. Bridget could do post-delivery support, 
letting Tim focus on the upfront delivery. There are no hard-and-fast rules 
about when to go into more detail, but the role of the organization designer 
is to ensure the processes are structured logically. Figure 3.4.5 illustrates how 
the level of granularity expands with the number of employees within scope. 
Note: the employee numbers associated with each level are examples, not 
strict rules.
When creating your Level 1 map, you could also think in terms of an 
‘RAS’ accountability matrix, connecting specific roles to each process as 
detailed later in this chapter and in Figure 3.4.17. However, the main thing 
is to have a clear understanding of the standalone organizational processes 
required. You can think about whom they connect to and affect later when 
it comes to analysing the as-is versus the to-be designs, which I explore later 
in this chapter.
Level 2 and below
Level 2 is the high-level workflow. It shows not just the activities, but also 
the order in which they happen. It shows the decision paths, swim lanes and 

Fixed Process Design
159
Figure 3.4.5 
Process depth versus number of roles
2-3 employees
4-c20 roles
c20 to ‘200’ roles;  
or more if roles are 
replicated across 
growing numbers  
of business units
depth 
detail 3
depth 
detail 2
depth 
detail 1
delivery
process 
summary 
support
top-
liNe
how systems might be involved in the process. Level 3 is a further detailing 
of these activities. Within Level 2, there may be boxes called ‘Sub-process’. 
Level 3 includes all these sub-processes. Each of the steps, loops, systems 
and decision points is documented. Level 3 is needed for designing inte-
grated systems, like the operations of an Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) 
system. Finally, at Level 4 there are detailed procedures for each activity. 
This is likely to be captured within job manuals or detailed use cases. 
Examples of this might include operational procedures for multinational 
fast-food chains, organizations that need to reproduce the exact same product 
millions of times by thousands of people. For them, detailing each micro 
step is crucial.
Understanding the as-is
I believe you can only get to where you want to go if you know where you 
are starting from. So before you design your to-be processes, start by fully 
understanding your as-is.

Part Three: Micro Design
160
Creating Level 0 and Level 1 process maps
I am a big advocate of using workshops to collect the information needed  
to create an as-is process map. Workshops bring people together to think 
through their processes and engage as a group. Have separate sessions with 
the relevant teams across the organization so you can ask those who know 
how the processes work in practice to talk through them. Start with the 
Level 0 processes, and then get teams to break them down. I find that while 
teams are exchanging ideas, writing the different levels or types of processes 
and activities on sticky notes of different colours is extremely useful as a 
quick way to start seeing a process hierarchy (as well as for documentation 
purposes).
Having collected the basic information, you now need to collate it so you 
can understand how the processes fit together in the context of the wider 
organization. A great way to do this is by creating process cards. These are 
inspired from seeing my kids play with Match Attax or Top Trumps cards. 
They are forever sorting the cards into groups and also seem to have an 
unbelievable memory for the stats. So why not do the same for your organ­
izational processes? Take all the information you have on each process and 
condense it into ‘process and activity’ cards. An example of a card is shown 
in Figure 3.4.6. Each card could have:
●
●in large bold letters, what is the process/activity;
●
●how it fits within the taxonomy (ie what the parent processes and 
value streams are);
●
●colour coding and icons for the key dimensions (as described in 
Figure 3.4.6) such as: Daily, Weekly, Monthly, Annually;
●
●if it has been defined, clarity of who is responsible (which is not yet 
done in the scenario shown in Figure 3.4.6 because it depicts the 
process of actually allocating activities to teams as symbolized by the 
yellow sticky notes);
●
●a succinct description on the back of the card, if possible.
Start by taking all your process cards and lay them out on a table. Divide 
them into categories: for example, geographic location, sub-function, inter-
nal versus external, suppliers or role based. Very quickly you will be able to 
see if any processes or activities are missing. By doing this you will also be 
playing back information people have given you so they can fill in gaps on 
the cards or correct any inaccuracies. The end result will be an initial group-
ing of all the processes in the area you are focusing on, whether organization 

Fixed Process Design
161
Figure 3.4.6 
Match Attax-inspired process cards
   Weekly
   4,200
   6
   Local
   12
    2

S
L
T
H
O
M
Workforce 
Planning
HR
   Weekly
   4,200
   6
   Local
   12
    2

S
L
T
H
O
M
Workforce 
Planning
HR
Administer 
Payroll
HR
   Weekly
   4,200
   6
   Local
   12
    2

S
L
T
H
O
M
Induction
HR
   Weekly
   4,200
   6
   Local
   12
    2

S
L
T
H
O
M
Exit 
Process
HR
   Weekly
   4,200
   6
   Local
   12
    2

S
L
T
H
O
M
Salary 
Reviews
HR
   Weekly
   4,200
   6
   Local
   12
    2

S
L
T
H
O
M
   Weekly
   4,200
   6
   Local
   12
    2

S
L
T
H
O
M
Competency 
Management 
HR
Performance 
Management
HR
   Weekly
   4,200
   6
   Local
   12
    2

S
L
T
H
O
M
Learning & 
Development
HR
   Weekly
   4,200
   6
   Local
   12
    2

S
L
T
H
O
M

Job 
Evaluation
HR
   Weekly
   4,200
   6
   Local
   12
    2

S
L
T
H
O
M
Succession 
Planning
HR
   Weekly
   4,200
   6
   Local
   12
    2

S
L
T
H
O
M
   Weekly
   4,200
   6
   Local
   12
    2

S
L
T
H
O
M

HR 
Analytics 
HR
   Weekly
   4,200
   6
   Local
   12
    2

S
L
T
H
O
M
Workforce 
Planning
HR
   Weekly
   4,200
   6
   Local
   12
    2

S
L
T
H
O
M
Workforce 
Planning
HR
wide, departmental or project based. These can be captured and documented 
in a Level 1 process map.
Individual Activity Analysis (IAA)
The reason for doing Level 1 process design is to understand what work is 
happening. Ideally, before starting to think about a to-be design, aim to  
understand how much time each activity is using and which roles or people 
are doing what. This is how you can start spotting inefficiencies and paths 
to more simple ways of working. Doing this requires an Individual Activity 
Analysis (IAA). The question I am always asked is: ‘But how do you get the 
data?’ This section outlines three methods to answer that question: interviews 
and workshops; surveys; top-down estimate. These methods don’t need to 
be mutually exclusive; in fact, using them in combination will give you the 
best results. Also, remember when performing an IAA you are only building 
on your Level 1 process map, documenting the three to eight activities done 
by each person. You are not trying to get everything 100 per cent perfect. 
The most important thing with all of these methods is to make sure the 
outputs are properly documented and stored for future reference.

Part Three: Micro Design
162
Interview and workshops
Here you sit with the various people doing the work. They say how much 
time they spend doing the work with the Level 1 process map in front of 
them. The percentage time is written down during the interview. This is then 
entered and extrapolated for those doing the same roles. A great interactive 
exercise is to give interviewees an ‘allocation of $100’. Using the Level 1 
process map they split and allocate portions of that $100 according to the 
work they do, and how much time they spend on that activity. This works 
well as a physical workshop with physical coins with 4–15 people present. 
Have them briefly talk through their work: for example, where they spend 
too much time, where they are frustrated that they are not spending more 
time, what is working well and what isn’t. This all helps improve your case 
for change.
Survey
Send a survey to a representative sample or everyone. Ensure those complet-
ing the survey can select the activities they do from a process taxonomy and 
enter their proportion of time. Ideally, have space to collect qualitative 
data, too. The extra information is extremely useful if you can get it, as it 
means once you’ve aggregated the data and extrapolated it you can start to 
assess the amount of time spent on each activity, by region and/or any other 
dimension that you happen to have recorded. Before doing a survey I strongly 
recommend that you test the Level 1 map for completeness and ease of 
compression through interviews or workshops as above, and phase the 
rollout of the survey. Otherwise the survey will cause more questions than 
answers and be ineffective. Make the surveying process into ongoing learn-
ing, making small iterations and constant refinements to your Level 1 map.
Top-down estimate
This method is used if you don’t have the time or remit to engage with all 
those doing the work. It is, therefore, less accurate, but sometimes ‘needs 
must’. In this method, you start by listing all the activities in an ‘n n’ grid. 
One axis is the frequency in which the activities are done while the other is 
the duration of the activity. By multiplying duration and frequency, you get 
the amount of effort required for each activity. The total effort won’t equal 
the total supply of hours by the employees, so you pro-rata the time to 
supply. You then look at the numbers of people and hours of work and use 
this to allocate people’s time to the total. You still have to define who does 
what through accountability mapping (for example, use the RAS matrix). 
Although less accurate, this method gives valuable additional information 

Fixed Process Design
163
that can be used in dimension creation described below. In other words, 
knowing the frequency and effort per unit is useful. I explain why this is 
relevant within the dimensions subsection below.
Running an IAA is a non-trivial exercise. Employees often push back on 
why they are being asked about what they are doing, scared of the implica-
tions of what they share. This is why facilitated workshops, while more  
resource intensive, are a much more effective method to start with. This is 
the only realistic way of overcoming people’s naturally defensive position in 
the beginning. Equally, creating a survey, defining who should complete it 
and deciding whether it should be a sample is not simple. For more informa-
tion on techniques to understanding the as-is, Cadle, Paul and Turner’s 
Business Analysis Techniques3 is a good source.
Analysing the as-is
Having mapped your as-is organizational processes and activities, the key  
is to slice and dice it further to get insight into how the organization really 
works. You should be able to start answering questions like:
●
●How many people and FTEs are involved in each process?
●
●What is the average cost and range of grades working on each activity?
●
●How many, and which, functions or sub-functions are working on 
each process?
●
●What percentage of time or cost is going into particular processes or 
types of process?
For example, with the information now at your disposal you will have a 
perspective on cost that no one has ever seen before. Based on the number 
of people who work on a process and the amount of time they put into it, 
you can see your people costs rolled up in the context of your processes. 
Figure 3.4.7 shows what this looks like, visualizing your processes as a 
hierarchical tree. The size of the circle shows the relative cost of a process 
based on a roll-up of all the costs of the processes or activities underneath 
it. For instance, Reward costs £98.5k and it consists of four sub-activities.
From this type of analysis you can start to work out where a resource is 
being used in unexpected and undesirable areas, and use that as a platform 
to find out why, and how you can reallocate your resource effectively.  
A good example of this analysis in practice is referenced in the introduction  
to the methods section of Chapter 1.3. In that scenario the cost of ‘Client 

Part Three: Micro Design
164
Figure 3.4.7 
Example HR Level 1 cost breakdown
367K
HR Processes
26.8K
2. HR
Insight
143K
3. Employee
Journey
99.1K
4. Employee
Relations
98.5K
6. Reward
12.1K
HR
Analytics
14.7K
Workforce
Planning
16.4K
Recruitment
21.7K
Offer and
Contract
21K
Induction
25.8K
Performance
Management
24.3K
Learning and
Development
13.9K
Succession
Planning
19.8K
Exit Process
18.1K
Employer
Branding
25.6K
Employee
Engagement
16.7K
Employee
Communication
17.7K
Disciplinary
and
Grievances
21K
Health&Safety,
Employee
Well-Being
27.3K
Job
Evaluation
22.9K
Salary
Reviews
27.9K
Administer
Payroll
20.4K
Benefits
Support’ activities was four times greater than expected. It turned out that  
a large proportion of the account manager’s and sales teams’ time was 
spent doing reactive client-facing support work. Although there was a team 
dedicated to this, it wasn’t equipped to deal with quantity of work. This 
depth of insight tells you where to focus your to-be design and know what 
the impact on your people will be. To do this requires dimensional analysis 
and segmentation.
Performing dimensional analysis and segmentation
Having performed your IAA, you will have a huge amount of information 
at your disposal. To help organize and analyse it in a way that provides  
useful outputs to feed into design improvements and decisions it is useful  
to segment similar activities into categories. These categories can be defined 

Fixed Process Design
165
Figure 3.4.8 
Segmenting processes example
Degree of specialization
Low                                     (12)
Medium                                 (8) 
High                                      (8)
Economies of scale
Low  
(4)
 Employee engagement 
 Vacation management
2
 Recruitment 
Benefits
2
High
(8)
 Work time recording 
  Employee communication 
  Administerpayroll
   Induction
  Health&safety,employee
well-being
5
 Learning and development
1
Workforceplanning
Successionplanning
2
Neutral 
(16)
Offerandcontract
Absencemanagement
 Flexible working
Minorestablishment 
changes
Exitprocess
5
 Job evaluation 
  Employer branding 
HRpolicies
Salaryreviews
Disciplinaryandgrievances
5
HRstrategy
HRanalytics
Macrodesign
Microdesign
Performancemanagement
OrgDesign–makingitReal
6
Category
Core
Semi-core
Non-core
by creating a set of activity dimensions based on the design criteria you set 
out in Part Two. For example, your design criteria might be to: 1) drive a 
greater focus on core business activities; 2) increase customer responsiveness. 
From these you can categorize processes into activity dimensions, ‘core’ or 
‘non-core’ business activities and ‘customer facing’ or ‘non-customer facing’ 
activities. By grouping them you can plot these dimensions against each 
other on a graph as shown in Figure 3.4.8. Using this analysis you can see 
which activities are high priority (that is, those which are core and customer 
facing), and if they need more investment or a change in structure. You can 
also plot them separately against other dimensions to answer other questions 
such as resourcing. For example, by plotting core activities versus economies 
of scale you can see which is non-core and has high economies of scale and 
so would be more efficient if it was outsourced.
Depending on your design criteria they may demand different dimen-
sional analysis. For example:
●
●reason for the work;
●
●nature of the work;
●
●fixed or variable;
●
●economies of scale;

Part Three: Micro Design
166
●
●customer facing;
●
●time horizon – Strategic–Operational–Transactional (SOT);
●
●geographical;
●
●current (excellent, okay, poor) or new (currently not done).
Not all of these dimensions need to be used for every analysis. Think through 
your key questions and use the dimensional analysis to support your 
analysis.
Reason for the work
What is the reason for doing the particular activity? Or another way of 
thinking about it: if you were asked to stop doing it, what argument would 
you use to keep doing it? Examples include health and safety procedures  
for legal/compliance reasons, sales and marketing activities to drive top-line 
growth, operations such as procurement to drive delivery as part of the  
business value chain or training to support capability building in the  
organization.
Nature of the work
If you look at a process flow chart there is a range of different types of  
activity. There are high-level value streams, processes that form these value 
streams, activities that sit within these processes, decisions that input into 
these activities, and outputs produced by the activities or processes. You 
could also include who is doing the work, for example system versus  
supplier versus outsourced. However, I typically leave this out as it is often 
too early to decide or worry about where the work is being done. If you are 
looking at the outsource option, you may consider including the already 
outsourced processes and costs within your baseline.
Fixed or variable
A cost is fixed if it doesn’t increase with an increase in volume. For example, 
the annual salary of a CEO is fixed, while his or her bonus, because it is 
dependent on performance, might be variable. This is not necessarily as 
clear-cut as this, because your CEO might demand higher pay if sales 
double. In fact, in the extreme you could argue that nothing is fixed – you 
never really know what might happen. However, I still think it is useful to 
think of activities as fixed or variable. If you wish, you could add in semi-fixed 
to the list and define the range of volume changes that drive fixed, semi-fixed 
and variable measures. For example, you could define your dimensions as 
follows:

Fixed Process Design
167
●
●Fixed: No change in cost if volume increases by up to 50 per cent.
●
●Linear variable: For a 10 per cent increase in volume there is a  
10 per cent increase in total cost. Put another way, the unit cost 
remains the same.
●
●Semi-fixed: Costs will increase by 2 per cent for each 10 per cent 
jump increase and only once that 10 per cent threshold is met. So if 
the costs were $1 million and volume increased by 5 per cent, then 
the cost remains $1 million. However, if the volume increases by  
10 per cent or even 19.9 per cent, then the cost would increase by  
2 per cent of $1 million or $20,000.
●
●Non-linear variable: For a 10 per cent increase in volume the cost 
increases but by more or less than the 10 per cent. For example, the 
unit cost of the additional 10 per cent volume may reduce by 5 per 
cent due to economies of scale. Without economies of scale the cost 
would increase by $100,000 (assume $1 million is the base cost 
again) but with it, the increase is $5,000 less or an increase of 
$95,000 to a total of $1,095,000.
The reason for defining whether something is fixed or variable is to support 
the thinking when doing scenario modelling as part of a rightsizing exercise, 
as explained in Chapter 3.7, or strategic workforce planning as explained in 
Chapter 4.5. For instance, if running a scenario where I expect my volume 
to increase by 30 per cent, which activities are going to increase by 30 per 
cent and, therefore, require 30 per cent more people to be recruited to do 
that work? Equally, which activities are not impacted, or may vary but do 
not have immediate consequences?
Economies of scale
Building on the idea of fixed versus variable dimensions, you can nuance 
your analysis further by defining what the economies of scale are. An 
economy of scale means that the level of scale affects the unit cost. For ex-
ample, the more of a particular product you sell, the more the cost is reduced. 
By aggregating processes or activities that have high economies of scale, 
then the efficiency from those can be realized. Possible dimensions might be:
●
●high: eg >15 per cent decrease in unit cost or better per doubling of 
output;
●
●low: eg between 2.5 per cent and 15 per cent decrease in unit cost per 
doubling of output;

Part Three: Micro Design
168
●
●neutral: eg between –2.5 per cent and +2.5 per cent change in unit 
cost per doubling of output;
●
●negative: eg <–2.5 per cent increase in unit cost per doubling of 
output.
This type of analysis is particularly relevant if your hypothesis is that work 
should be pulled together: for example, by creating a centre of excellence, 
consolidation into one team, or outsourcing. It gives you a way to understand 
the range of benefits by making top-down assumptions as to percentage 
savings through consolidation.
Time horizon or SOT – Strategic, Operational, Tactical
The time horizon is the length of time into the future that you need to think 
when doing the activity. For instance, when establishing a brand, the group 
doing this activity has a multiyear time horizon in mind. They are thinking 
what will work in the coming years and probably as far into the future as 
they can realistically imagine. At the other extreme, if a credit controller is 
chasing payment or sending invoices, they are thinking within the time 
horizon of a month. What needs to be done by month-end? I often define 
three or four dimensions here:
●
●strategic: eg greater than 1.5-year impact;
●
●operational: eg between 1 month and 1.5 years;
●
●tactical: eg less than 1 month;
●
●transactional: eg less than 1 day.
This framework is used in other parts of the book. For example, in work-
force planning there are three categories or levels of planning following the 
exact same lines. The type of person doing the strategic workforce planning 
and the nature of the strategic planning are fundamentally different from 
the tactical one. Another use is in checking whether the job levels (grades) 
reflect the time horizons. For example, your senior executives shouldn’t be 
doing transactional work. I come back to this in Chapter 4.6.
Customer facing
Is the end customer or client engaged directly through the activity? A simple 
example is that a waiter in a restaurant is engaging with customers when 
taking their orders, while counting the cash at the end of the night is not 
engaging with customers. If you wanted, you could have a third ‘indirect’ 
group. For instance, ‘cooking the food’ has an indirect impact on the customer.

Fixed Process Design
169
Geography
One of the common macro design trade-offs is the geographical design. 
What gets done locally, regionally or globally? For me, the question is really 
about what happens at what level. And to a large extent that really depends 
on the detailed activity. If you are setting your brand, it will likely be a 
global activity whereas recruiting agency admin support staff is more likely 
to be local. What is the geographical scope of the activity? For example, 
global, regional (Americas, EAME, Asia), country, sub-country (physical 
states or sub-regions within the country) and physical location of each office 
or business activity centre. The scale you go to obviously depends on the  
size and reach of your organization.
‘Current’ or ‘new’ with level of excellence
At one level, this can be extremely simple. Are you currently doing the activity 
in question or not? From there, you can add a value judgement on how well 
you are doing it. You may be ‘theoretically’ doing something, but it is so 
‘hopeless’ that it isn’t really being done in a meaningful way. Alternatively, 
you may be world-class. When using this sort of dimensional analysis be 
realistic and set your expectations and priorities. You cannot be world-class 
in everything and, in fact, it isn’t necessary to be. So think through the pro-
cesses in which you genuinely need to be world-class and which you don’t 
– the emphasis will come from your design criteria and priorities. Having 
done this, identify areas of misalignment. How good are you versus how 
good do you need to be? If you need to be world-class at something but 
aren’t currently doing it, then it is likely to be one of the big drivers of 
change. A good example is the need for organizations to increasingly 
change their operating model to incorporate more digital ways of working. 
The types of work and talent required to succeed in these transformations 
are new, and a real source of competitive advantage. Therefore, they take 
priority. I explore the nature of implementing a digital transformation 
later, in Chapter 4.5.
Dimensional analysis in practice
Performing dimensional analysis is not a one-off exercise, but one which 
should be performed both to analyse the as-is and to-be designs while com-
paring the two once that to-be design is in place. I am jumping ahead here, 
but an example of how to do this would be to investigate what percentage 
of time client-facing people spend on non-client facing and non-core activi-
ties. When you then get to the to-be process design you can look at how to 

Part Three: Micro Design
170
ensure roles have a group of similar types of activities within a process area. 
Before going back to your dimensional analysis you need to use your under-
standing and the analysis of the as-is to design your to-be processes and 
to-be structures.
Design the to-be process and structures
Using the insights you have got from your analysis work you can create 
your to-be process design and then bundle that work into roles, positions 
and reporting hierarchies. However, before you even start detailing your 
to-be processes, start by establishing the principles for the kinds of improve-
ments that you want to achieve. Your design criteria and, if you have set 
them already, your objectives should feed explicitly into this. Define specific 
improvements. For example:
●
●Improving efficiency:
–– Consolidating effort by aggregating work done by many people to 
achieve the same output with less input.
–– Moving work from high-cost resources to lower-cost work.  
This does not just mean off- or near-shoring. Examples that  
I have seen include upskilling highly trained nurses to do more of 
the work of the clinicians.
–– Process change through automation, fewer and/or better steps.
–– Do the same but faster through improved execution. This is doing 
the same with less time. For example, by increasing training and 
upskilling employees.
●
●Cost savings:
–– Think through which activities you could and should stop doing.
–– Which activities could you outsource? Are there activities which 
are high risk or outside the core skills of the resource available to 
you? Having a strong understanding of your IAA should give you 
a solid foundation for quantifying the value of outsourcing.
●
●New business priorities:
–– What are you not doing that you should be doing in order to meet 
your business goals?
–– What are the key things within the case for change that need to be 
prioritized?

Fixed Process Design
171
Defining your to-be processes
In defining your to-be processes you are creating your to-be Level 0 and 
Level 1 process maps, just as you did when mapping the organizational as-is. 
A good starting place to do this is your as-is baseline. Using the analysis 
performed you can get key stakeholders to clarify their thoughts and reflect 
on what works well, what can be improved, what they believe they and their 
teams shouldn’t be doing, and what should be stopped. Here, running tight 
workshops alongside two or three experts in a similar style to the process 
outlined when creating your high-level process maps is extremely useful. The 
reason I advocate using outside support is that it will give focused energy 
and provide a neutral voice for debates. Often how a process is defined can 
be a contentious issue, so it is helpful to have them as intermediaries to 
balance and guide the debate to find the best course. The skills required  
to do Level 1 design may not reside in your organization or those with the 
capability of running the process may be either too busy or biased. However, 
if you do use outside help, leverage those who are genuine subject matter 
experts, whether in process design or that particular function, so that they 
can bring real business value to the table and add to the content you are 
discussing.
Another useful exercise for workshops or the design process is to use 
templates for generic functional processes such as HR, Finance or Procure­
ment. They are extremely useful because quite often when creating a to-be 
design you are not trying to reinvent the wheel, but are actually trying  
to simplify things. Having a generic template can really help focus people  
on the basics. Having a draft template pre-prepared saves time and gives 
everyone something to react to. Getting a subset of people to modify or  
create a ‘starter for ten’ makes the contribution from everyone else far  
more productive. It doesn’t have to be perfect. In fact, it helps if it isn’t  
perfect.
When coming up with your to-be processes remember that you don’t 
need 100 per cent perfection. Don’t try to achieve this because it will be 
too costly. Get enough granularity to be useful and answer the design 
questions. This is not necessarily a business process optimization exercise.  
If you want to optimize your processes then you should do Level 2 and  
Level 3 design. Level 1 design is about developing an understanding of what 
work is being done and what work should be done.

Part Three: Micro Design
172
Defining strong processes with clear improvements
Just because you have defined a set of processes doesn’t mean they are any 
good or even workable. Like so many elements of effective organizational 
design, it is important to think through the unintended consequences of 
the design. Think about the underlying cost and practicalities. A little bit  
of thought can save a huge amount of effort and frustration later in the  
day, otherwise the size of the organization or complexity of the stakeholders 
involved can halt the success of the design. Design for success, design for 
simplicity and – to adapt the old carpenter’s saying – ‘measure twice before 
deciding’.
To help ensure the strength of your process design, the five CUWIE tests 
and checks as shown in Figure 3.4.9 should really help. Many of these tests 
come to life in Chapter 4.3 and this section is closely related to that chapter.
Gap test or is it Complete?
A large part of this is checking how MECE the process is, as already explained 
in Chapter 1.3. It is also a question of scope. Is the work of contractors or 
suppliers in or out? Most fundamentally, will it deliver the strategy and meet 
the requirements of the design criteria?
Visual test or is it Understandable?
Visualization techniques reduce the effort and time required to understand, 
learn and internalize. They make issues more likely to jump out at you. 
There is not one single or optimal way to visualize processes. So use a range 
of techniques. Each will support the other. For example, think about using 
swim lanes of the various dimensions for each of the activities, hierarchical 
scaled cards, chevrons, Match Attax-inspired cards or graph network layouts. 
The important thing is to use colour and icons of differing sizes to signify 
variation and provide focus.
Practicality test or is it Workable?
Lots of things are great in theory. Anyone can design a process but will it 
work in practice? Are there too many moving parts? During handoffs, balls 
will be dropped, information lost, actions or decisions stuck, progress 
stalled. The more complex and the more roles involved in a process, the 
greater the risk things will fall between the cracks. Do we have the skills  
to do it? For example, you may have health and safety processes, but how 
do you know if people follow them properly or know what they are?  
This test is about once it is implemented: how it will work in practice 
(HOWWIP) as explained in Chapter 4.3.

Fixed Process Design
173
Figure 3.4.9 
CUWIE process design tests and checks
U
U
U
U
U
Understandable
COMPlete
WOrkable
IMPleMentable
eCOnOMICal
VIsUal test
GaP test
PraCtICalIty tests
CHanGe test
effICIenCy tests
è What are the  
issues going  
to be? 
è What is going to stop  
this from working?
è Will it deliver the 
strategy?
è Are the priorities from the 
design criteria met?
è Start each activity with 
a verb
è Use colour, size and icons 
to reflect dimensions  
and measures
è What are the 
improvements and case 
for change? 
è What is the cost and 
barriers to change?
è Are the right  
job-levels doing  
the right work?
è Where will the 
bottlenecks be?
è Test through simulation 
and role-play
è Count the number  
of handoffs
è Is everyone’s work 
covered?
è Do you need to define 
the work of contractors 
and suppliers?
è Design so can be 
printed out effectively 
on cards and A3+ paper 
è Use short  
sentences
è How big is the change 
for each person and 
how do that roll-up? 
è What investment is 
required? 
è What will it cost?
è What steps should be 
automated, outsourced 
or stopped?
C
U
W
I
e

Part Three: Micro Design
174
Change test or is it Implementable?
Change can be costly and hard to manage, so make sure you know what is 
changing. Starting with the actual processes: What is new, different, improved, 
going to be outsourced or stopped? Is this change going to require invest-
ment or significant cultural change? Who is impacted by the change and to 
what level? Given your time frames, is it realistic to expect the organization 
to absorb this change and do you have the competencies needed?
Efficiency test of is it Economical?
How much is it going to cost? Is it affordable? Imagine you weren’t doing 
this activity; what would be the business case be for doing it? For example: 
legally required; needed to improve customer services; drive top-line growth; 
or to improve talent. By segmenting the processes and activities as described 
below with the dimensions, you will begin to be able to break the problem 
down.
Decision-making
Having set out your to-be processes you then need to organize which roles 
are connected to which processes and how decisions are going to be made. 
This is an area that, if not thought through, can significantly hinder organ­
izational performance. For example, a few years ago, my uncle moved from 
being a senior partner in a law firm to an executive with a global insurance 
firm. Having served large institutions in their M&A for over 30 years, he 
thought he knew how corporations worked. He was wrong. One of the 
biggest shocks was the number of meetings and endless global conference 
calls, the number of people involved in any number of decisions and the 
sheer magnitude of the ‘politics’ and ‘noise’ involved to decide on seemingly 
obvious things. Large organizations are rife with lobbying; aligning large 
numbers of stakeholders prior to meetings; and lack of clarity on how to 
actually get decisions through. One study of 500 office workers in the UK 
found that ‘the average office worker spends around 16 hours in meetings 
each week’.4 That is, 40 per cent of the time. And how much of that time is 
to coordinate decision-making? My guess is a significant proportion.
Are you playing like a pro or a team of six-year-old 
children?
Decision-making in most organizations isn’t too dissimilar to the insurance 
firm in the example above. Lots of people feel they need to be part of the 

Fixed Process Design
175
Decision-Making Process (DMP). This is, in part, because often the actual 
process isn’t even defined nor are the accountabilities for making the decisions. 
Those needing to have a decision made can waste large amounts of time 
navigating through the power players in the search for what the DMP is, 
let alone actually get a decision made. One of the real drains on the organ­
ization is the seniority and cost of those involved.
I have coached children playing rugby for a couple of years. I started with 
6–7-year-olds and am now busy with 9–10-year-olds. The hardest thing to 
get the kids to understand is playing in a field position: to learn how to  
pass into space and maintain a position to receive a pass. The sight of kids 
running around in a large group like bees around the honey pot is all too 
familiar and not dissimilar to many of the ways in which organizational 
decisions are made.
Sports teams demonstrate, when everyone knows their role, what every-
one else is doing around them and exactly what they are trying to do, the 
result can be beautiful and appear to be effortless (Figure 3.4.10). Defining 
the DMP is pretty simple: define the decisions; define the accountability 
matrix for each one; and reflect on the practicality of the structure. Then  
ask yourself if it will lead to good, timely decisions.
Figure 3.4.10 
Playing like novices or pros
Novices chase the ball
 Chasing the ball
 Poor communication
 All in the same place at the  
same time
 Don’t trust others to do their job
 Poor skills
 Huge waste of energy with the  
ball doing no work
Pros use the ball
 Know where everyone is
 Trust in team mates
 ‘Kick the ball to where the player  
will be, not where he or she is’
 Turn structure and trust into  
a competitive advantage
 Let the ball do the work 
Efficientuseofenergy

Part Three: Micro Design
176
One of the elements to define here is who has veto power or must approve 
the decisions. Figure 3.4.11 highlights how the number of conversations and 
politics rapidly increase as approvers are added. Imagine a world where 
there is only ever one approver. In that world, there is only one person to 
influence or lobby. That one person doesn’t need to lobby anyone else. That 
person ‘just’ needs to do his or her best to make the right call. The downside, 
however, might be that that one person doesn’t have all the right perspec-
tives and motives to make the right decisions. So, you add another person 
into the mix. Now there are two minds at work, but also two people who 
need to attend a meeting or be part of a process to agree the decision. As  
you add more approvers, the number of possible 1-2-1 conversations grows 
factorially as shown in Figure 3.4.11.
Then think through what happens if people don’t agree. Does nothing 
happen, does it get escalated or is there endless horse trading of decisions? 
The question you have to ask is whether the increase in decision-making 
quality is worth the extra cost. Equally, the assumption that the more people 
involved means the better the decision isn’t always true either. Committees 
don’t always do the best thing and will as a rule of thumb be more risk  
averse. Therefore, quantify the numbers of those involved in the DMP.  
Figure 3.4.11 
Decision-making combinations
One person  
decides; one  
person to influence;  
efficient if the person is  
a good decision maker.
Does extra  
effort really lead 
to improved 
results?
Four people 
and the effort 
starts to 
compound.
Two people, if they 
share common goals 
and priorities, should 
improve the level of 
consensus and balance.
6 
 
Approvers
1 
 
Approver
2 
 
Approvers
4 
 
Approvers
15 
Possible  
conversations
6 
Possible  
conversations
1 
Possible  
conversations
0 
Possible  
conversations

Fixed Process Design
177
Figure 3.4.12 
Decision-making quantification
Number
Area
Decision
Chairman
NEDs
Managing Director
Finance Director
Marketing Director
HR Director
Director of area X
Manager of X
1
Strategy
Launch a new product
2
Strategy
New launch plan
3
Strategy
Pricing of a new product
4
People
Set senior exec compensation
5
People
Hire new role X
6
People
Recruit candidate X
7
People
Agree X holiday
Average number of
Approvers
2.0
Stakeholders, excluding those informed after the fact
3.0
Total people involved
6.0
KPIs
Chairman
NEDs
Managing Director
Finance Director
Marketing Director
HR Director
Director of area X
Manager of X
roduct
n
product
compensation
e X
0.7
d after the fact
1.7
5.0
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Think through whether the increase in the number of approvers will lead  
to better results.
Figure 3.4.12 shows how you can quantify the numbers involved in 
each decision if you use the RAS accountability framework outlined in 
Chapter 1.3 and drive complexity out of your organization. Given that 
efficient processes are predicated on trust, you need to ensure alignment to 
common objectives as outlined in Chapter 3.3. Inherent conflict over what 
each role is trying to optimize is extremely common. In such conflicts, 
having more people involved in DMP makes sense, as does involving more 
senior executives than those within the conflict.
Furthermore, not all decisions are equal. Most have insubstantial impacts 
and occur on a weekly basis. They are part of the standard day-to-day routine. 
Others set the direction of the entire business and could have terminal 
implications. So in overlaying the number and seniority of those making the 
decisions, it is worthwhile thinking through the frequency and impact of 
the decision when building your RAS matrix.
Figure 3.4.13 highlights five segments of increasing criticality and seniority 
required to make the decisions. The senior executives or board should be 
making those decisions with the greatest strategic impact, which by their 
nature happen infrequently. At the other end of the spectrum, those decisions 
with low impact that are infrequent should be made by a single person.  
If the frequency is high, then the data required to make the decision should 
be prepopulated with decision rules. I’ve included a couple of marketing 

Part Three: Micro Design
178
Figure 3.4.13 
Organizational level of decision-making matrix
Low
High
SingLe Manager 
JudgeMent
eg Venue for ad-hoc  
and low-budget event
Standard ProceSS
eg Agree copy for  
blogs and PR posts
ad-Hoc Meeting  
of rigHt PeoPLe
eg Agree launch strategy
Standard  
governance Meeting
eg Agree sales campaigns
 
Senior  
exec/Board deciSion
eg Whether to enter a  
new geographic market
By definition doesn’t exist
Strategic
High
Low
frequency
impact
examples as a further guide. Depending on the level of detail of your detailed 
design, stop at defining your RAS matrix at either stage 3 or 2. I don’t see 
the point in defining all the Level 1 decisions. There will just be too many. 
The Level 5 and to some extent a sample of the Level 4 decisions could be 
defined as part of the macro design phase.
Just like the ‘dimensionalization’ and segmentation of the processes earlier 
in this chapter, you are doing the same for the decisions here. If you then 
overlay the numbers and seniority of those involved in the decision, you can 
list the proportionality of the resource you are dedicating to each one.
Link the to-be work to to-be positions and 
hierarchical structure
Now that you have defined what work needs to happen and given that you 
should have decided (reference the macro design and Chapter 2.3) in what 
fundamental way your organization will be structured, it is time to link the 
two. In defining the detailed organization, you move into role and position 
definitions. A position is a role that reports to the same position in the  
same geography. The reason for the geography distinction is because the 

Fixed Process Design
179
geographical location impacts workforce planning and recruiting. There is  
a many-to-one relationship between positions and roles. A role has the same 
job title, accountabilities and competencies. It is possible to have more than 
one FTE and person per position. As an example, imagine your sales organ­
ization had 23 FTEs across four roles in four different locations as shown in 
Figure 3.4.14. What this shows is the four roles divided across 10 positions. 
Each box on the to-be org chart is a separate position. Some positions require 
one full-time person (for example, VP Sales), while others require more than 
one (for example, the five account managers in the South East Office).
Having defined the work and your macro level design, you should be ready 
to iterate your way through the entire detailed design. The first iteration was 
done in the macro design phase where you chose your depth 1 and 2 org charts. 
The meanings of the positions in those org charts were defined by what  
they were responsible for. The summary value chain elements were defined 
(to a max of 50 process elements or depth 2 of your Level 1 process map).
Figure 3.4.15 shows how each of the process steps iterates. For each iteration, 
you define the position hierarchies and link those through an RAS account-
ability matrix to the Level 1 process map. If you wish you could decide that 
Figure 3.4.14 
Roles versus position example
VP Sales
FTEs
1
Location
HQ
Senior Sales
Manager
FTEs
1
Location
HQ
Senior Sales
Manager
FTEs
1
Location
South Office
Account Manager
FTEs
4
Location
HQ
Account Manager
FTEs
3
Location
North Office
Sales support
FTEs
2
Location
HQ
Account Manager
FTEs
3
Location
South Office
Account Manager
FTEs
5
Location
South East Office
Sales support
FTEs
2
Location
South Office
Sales support
FTEs
1
Location
South East Office
Account Manager
4
3
5
3
15
Sales support
2
1
2
5
Senior Sales Manager
1
1
2
VP Sales
1
FTEs by Role
Location
HQ
North Office
South East Office
South Office

Part Three: Micro Design
180
Figure 3.4.15 
Iterative process and position design method
IteratIon 1
Define high-level  
role hierarchy
Link through 
Responsibilities  
Map
Define summary  
value chains and 
processes
 
Depth of 2
Micro design phase
 
Depth of 3–4
Micro design phase
 
Depth of 4–6
Micro  
design phase
 
Depth of 6–9
Micro  
design phase
IteratIon 2
Define next level 
position hierarchy
Link through 
accountability matrix 
and/or % time
Define Level 1  
process map  
Segment the work
IteratIon 3
IteratIon 4
Keep on IteratIng untIl Done
repeat 
 Step 2 for 
depths 4–6
repeat 
 Step 2 for 
depths 6–9
Step 
1
Step 
2
Step 
2
Step 
2
the link is the percentage of time in addition to or instead of using the RAS 
matrix. The reason for the iterations is you need to define each level of detail 
together. Only once you know what the summary elements look like can 
you define the next level down. You keep on iterating until all the required 
work is allocated to a position. The number of FTEs required is not defined 
at this stage but during the rightsizing step, as defined in Chapter 3.7.
Working this through in more detail, again, the starting point is the over-
arching structure from the macro to-be design phase. With that chosen option, 
start to add the obvious senior roles: the senior executives and managers. 
Figure 3.4.16 shows an example of a manufacturing plant. The first step is 
to define the top (Level 1) structure. If you have the metaphor of a tree, you 
are adding in the big branches. The senior roles tend to be roles that have 
predominately fixed activities with a strategic and operational focus. By fixed, 
I mean those where the number of FTEs required doesn’t vary by a volume 
driver like the number of customers or revenue. These sorts of roles tend to 
have a greater number of activities they are accountable for. From a design 
perspective, they are harder to define because the work is more complex.  
I am using a dense layout so that I can see more of the roles on a page. And 
then I add the variable roles, coloured here in orange.

Fixed Process Design
181
Figure 3.4.16 
Detailing the org chart with fixed and variable positions
Plant Director
Manf. Ops Manager
QSE Manager
Manuf. Operations
Scheduling
(production planners)
Quality Assurance
Team Leaders
Quality Systems
Team Leader
H&S Manager
Team Leaders
Team Lead - C
Senior Technical
Operators - Type C
Materials In & Out
Operators
Process Coordinator -
Process/Mixing Room
Quality Assurance
Technical Operators
Quality Systems
Document Controller
Quality Sampler
Safety Technician
Line Type A
Operators
Line Type B
Operators
Line Type B
Operators for
complex packing
Line Type C
Operators
Process/Mixing Room
Fixed or Variable
Fixed
Variable
Defining the draft to-be position structure should be about getting the key 
roles down. Start with your gut feeling as to where they report based on 
your design criteria. Don’t worry too much to start with, as this isn’t the 
final version. As you go through the process you will continuously add roles 
and take them away. As explained in Chapter 1.3, the main step is defining 
what each role does. What are they responsible for? You have two angles to 
think from: the org chart view with the positions; and the work view with 
the processes, activities and decisions. By flipping your view to the work 
perspective, you can see what each role and position is going to be doing,  
as shown in Figure 3.4.17.
There are many questions that you need to ensure are answered at this 
stage:
●
●Does each activity have the right job level (grade) of role working  
on it?
●
●Are all the activities at a similar level? For example, using the SOT 
framework, if the role is predominately ‘Strategic’, does it also have 
lots of ‘Transactional’ work? If it does, is that likely to be an issue?

Part Three: Micro Design
182
Figure 3.4.17 
Detailing the work with the process and  
position views
Chief People Officer
Determine outsourcing
strategy
Set HR budget
Determine HR goals
Define plan to close gap
Review HR progress vs
strategy
VP HRBP
Agree governance for
distribution, access,
security
Define data needed
Identify prioritized
business questions
Review and adjust HR
analytics approach
Analyse future demands
of organization
VP HR Systems
Agree governance for
distribution, access,
security
Define data needed
Define data update cycle
Review and adjust HR
analytics approach
Define HR policies and
procedures
2. HR Insight
HR Analytics
Identify prioritized business
questions
VP HRBP
Define data needed
VP HR Systems
VP HRBP
HRBP
Identify data source
HR Systems Engineer
HRBP
Collect and merge data
HRBP
HR Systems Engineer
Analyse data
HRBP
Define regular report
VP HRBP
HRBP
Workforce Planning
Analyse future demands of
organization
VP HRBP
VP HR Operations
Identify competencies which are
core to business
VP Org Effectivness and
Engagement
Define metrics to measure
competencies
VP Org Effectivness and
Engagement
Map competencies into roles
Resourcing Manager
VP HR Operations
Define full job description including
competencies, scope,
responsibilities
Develop strategy to meet the
needs of organization
Determine headcount baseline
Position View
Process View
●
●Is it complete? Have all activities been linked to a position and do  
all positions have clear accountabilities?
●
●In your judgement, do all roles that are not variable add up to a 
balance of effort that is equal to one FTE?
●
●Will you be able to recruit such a person do to the role? The types of 
competencies defined in Chapter 3.6 will further help you answer this 
question.
●
●Test that similar work dimensions and segments map effectively.  
For example, are client-facing activities clearly done by client-facing 
types of roles?
●
●How many handoffs will there be and/or are too many people 
involved in any given process? You can see this by counting the 
number of roles in the process. Heat-map the processes by the 
number of roles involved and use this as a sanity check.
So, from the position perspective, you can see all the activities plus:
●
●number of activities;
●
●the percentage of a given dimension, for example client-facing time;
●
●given the as-is IAA, the current number of FTEs that would be 
required. Chapter 3.7 takes this analysis further.

Fixed Process Design
183
I find this sort of mapping and structural design work is best done in small 
teams in a workshop style. What kills energy and open discussion is a group 
of people sitting around someone presenting the information (for example, 
org charts; process maps) on a screen with one person driving the mouse.  
An exercise, therefore, is to go back to the ‘process cards’. Have sheets of 
flipchart paper laid out on a large table. With marker pens or sticky notes, 
write out draft roles. Then physically place each process card into the role 
box. Some things will be obvious. Again, use the segmentation thinking and 
dimensions described as a way to help sort the thinking. Build momentum 
by sorting the easy decisions first. As you go, you will end up creating new 
roles and/or merging two or more roles into one. You may realize that you 
need to break some of the activities into a bit more detail or that the to-be 
process isn’t really clear enough. While doing this, have someone create the 
to-be org charts and project that on the screen. Iterate until you are happy 
and then ensure your information is appropriately documented (ideally in  
a dynamic system and not hundreds of PowerPoint slides). Remember my 
saying ‘It’s what in the box and not where the box sits’? I hope that is now 
ringing true. Once you have the accountabilities and structures clear, then it 
is time to think about how many FTEs are needed for each role. That is a 
question of rightsizing and is fully covered in Chapter 3.7.
Final thoughts
Good process design and analysis are core to doing good micro design. Once 
you have a taxonomy of processes and a knowledge of who does what, then 
you have a base of understanding on which to build meaningful change. By 
slicing the analysis in different ways as described by the dimension analysis, 
you can answer many of the significant detailed design questions. For example, 
what should be outsourced, centralized, stopped or refactored or started as 
a new investment. Equally, you can drive complexity out by quantifying how 
many people are involved in the same decision or work. Think about how 
many handoffs there are or the cost of making low-impact, but frequently 
made decisions.
Once you understand the current work and how to improve it at the 
process level, you can also start to think through the future role design. What 
roles should be doing what work? Where should that work be done? The 
first step is to agree the content of the roles. Where a role reports to, in my 
view, is of secondary importance. It is the stuff of egos and power plays.  
Not everyone of major strategic importance should need armies of people 
reporting to him or her to show their power or how important they are.

Part Three: Micro Design
184
By linking the work to roles you are defining exactly what each role does, 
how it connects to other roles and, therefore, how it fits within the whole. 
This enables you to understand your cost base in a way totally different from 
the traditional financial view. Once you have done your process analysis, 
you have broken the back of your micro design. Having done your process 
design you are on your way to rightsizing the organization and providing 
huge clarity on how the new organization will work in practice. However, 
not all positions can be defined by these repeatable and predictable value 
chain processes, for example project work, and in other cases the detailed 
drivers need to be analysed, for example the sales force and how they best 
map to customers. This dynamic process design is the focus of Chapter 3.5.
1	 Understand your process maps and keep them simple.
2	 Get an understanding of the as-is through information capture.
3	 Analyse the as-is and your to-be design through dimensional analysis.
4	 Create your role hierarchy and connect it to your to-be process design.
5	 Ensure decision-making is simple and you avoid having too many 
approvers.
Remember this
Notes
1	 Gladwell, M (2008) Outliers, Penguin
2	 Porter, M (1985) Competitive Advantage: Creating and sustaining superior 
performance, The Free Press, New York
3	 Cadle, J, Paul, D and Turner, P (2010) Business Analysis Techniques, BCS The 
Charted Institute for IT
4	 Burn-Callander, R [accessed 18 March 2015] Management Today  
[Online] http://www.managementtoday.co.uk/news/1175002/

“
3.5
Dynamic  
process design
Time is the scarcest resource and unless it is managed 
nothing else can be managed.  Peter Drucker
Introduction
When doing organization design there are many work areas that don’t fit 
neatly into the method described in the previous value-chain-driven fixed 
process design chapter. Unfortunately, not all work can be captured in repeat-
able process maps. Areas that are more dynamic in their nature include:
●
●portfolio management and project work;
●
●risk and compliance maintenance;
●
●sales force effectiveness;
●
●procurement optimization;
●
●software product development.
Each of the above examples could easily be significant chapters in their own 
right, if not their own books! I think it is extremely important to address 
these areas, even if not in such detail, as they are so often the focus of design 
work. I have positioned all these areas under the term ‘dynamic’ process 
design because of the variable and constantly changing nature of their 
drivers. They demand a flexible and continuous approach to their design. 
Each area has its own nuances and related drivers, but you can approach 
them, if not with exactly the same methods, with some shared principles for 
designing each one.
In this chapter I begin by defining the impact of having variable drivers.  
I set out how you can generically approach dynamic design before detailing 
a specific data-driven approach to portfolio management and project work. 
I finish by covering the high-level drivers and points that you should con-
sider when designing other dynamic areas of an organization.
185

Part Three: Micro Design
186
Dynamic process design methodologies
The nature of work within dynamic process design requires greater agility, 
is less formulaic and cuts across more functions than in fixed process design. 
Fixed processes are stable for long periods until conscious changes such as 
process engineering or system automation are implemented. Otherwise, they 
are subject only to limited change through relatively small tweaks where 
efficiencies can be realized or handovers improved.
By contrast, dynamic processes have a range of drivers that strongly im-
pact how the work should be organized. In the context of sales these include 
drivers such as the number of potential customers, how much profit can be 
generated, what the cost of sale is, the geographic dispersion, the number of 
products you are selling and much more. Procurement drivers include the 
nature of what is being purchased, the nature of the supply market and 
which categories are global, regional, local; which categories have a strategic 
impact or not; your degree of market power, and much more. These drivers 
change with time and can often change rapidly.
There are two main consequences of having variable drivers. First, you 
have to continuously assess what and where opportunities for improved 
performance are, second you have to design the organization around how 
much resource you allocate to make the most of a particular opportunity. 
For example, a sales force could be impacted by the launch of a new product. 
To make the most of the sales opportunity this may require the sales force 
to be reallocated or increased in a particular market. In procurement, the 
organization may be impacted because the supply market is evolving with 
new technologies, entrants, aggregators or disaggregators, or the decision to 
buy rather than make a new product. Each time one of these drivers changes, 
you will have to assess whether that area of the organization needs to be 
altered to make the most of opportunities or head off risks.
To deal with dynamic processes, there are some generic approaches you 
can use by adapting methods used in other areas of design work (and covered 
elsewhere in the book). I briefly touch on each one and refer you to where 
to read (or reread) further.
Treat each dynamic process design as a mini-macro 
design project
Each dynamic process can be thought of as its own mini end-to-end design 
project. The place to start, therefore, is with the macro design. The same steps 
outlined in Chapters 2.2 and in particular 2.3 can be applied. What are the 

Dynamic Process Design 
187
goals for that part of the organization and how do they fit with the vision  
of the organization as a whole? Within the area, what are the strategy, growth 
potential and economics? Then for each area of dynamic process create a 
list of drivers and build them into a taxonomy. This will give you a compre-
hensive understanding of your value chains and areas of potential impact. 
For example, for procurement, you need to understand spend, number of 
suppliers, complexity, and supply market dynamics. Based on these dimen-
sions you will be able to come up with a set of design criteria and options, 
and analyse them to choose the best one to deliver your strategy.
Rightsize based on demand drivers and economics
Having understood the value drivers and defined the dimensions you can 
start to rightsize the organization. If there is a change in one of the drivers 
such as launching a new product for sales, or a change in the supply market 
for procurement, you need to know how that will impact the number and 
nature of the employees. Taking the example of sales force further, if the cost 
of sale halves for a given product, for example because market acceptance 
means it has become significantly less complex, what does that mean for the 
sales model, numbers and ability to reallocate resources to other opportuni-
ties, as detailed in Chapter 3.7?
Treat as a dynamic system
The drivers for each area will be constantly changing. It is useful to track 
these changes so that you can assess the performance of your dynamic design 
over time, keep the design up to date and model organizational scenarios to 
prepare for change. For this you need to define the system so that you can 
track actuals against plans whether those are objectives, headcount or 
competencies so that you can react with focus and agility when required.
Having said this, you have to rely on your workforce on the ground to 
adapt to a certain amount of granular change. There is no doubt dynamic pro-
cesses require a highly skilled workforce with a greater level of autonomy so 
that they can adapt to the small changes that will inevitably occur without 
requiring unnecessary attention on redesigning the whole area. In a beautiful 
example, the US retailer Nordstrom’s Employee Handbook says: ‘Use good 
judgement in all situations. There will be no more rules.’ Nordstrom relies 
on its employees to deliver famously good service – a dynamic requirement 
– and does so while paying the second-highest wages in US fashion retail.1
Finally, do not assume that one model for dynamic design will work in 
another context. For instance, a sales model that works brilliantly for one 

Part Three: Micro Design
188
region could be a disaster in another owing to different drivers. For example, 
this was experienced by a high-growth US tech firm. In the United States, their 
sales organization was centred on industry verticals. It worked brilliantly 
because each market was large and the sales force could easily travel. How­
ever, when this model was applied to Europe, it dramatically failed. Each 
vertical was too small within its national market.
Detailed example: project-driven 
organizations
Kenichi Ommae, a Japanese organizational theorist, once famously said: 
‘Nobody knows how Honda is organized, except that it uses lots of project 
teams and is quite flexible.’ Many organizations are project driven and I have 
spent a good 75 per cent of my professional career sitting within projects. 
When I talk about projects I am referring both to external projects such as 
services delivered by professionals, technology and engineering firms, and 
internal projects such as change programmes, technology implementations 
and product development.
We don’t live in a world of certainty and when it comes to programmes 
and projects, you have to bring these uncertainties into your design process. 
As Bent Flyvbjerg, Professor of Major Programme Management at the 
University of Oxford’s Saïd Business School, says, overruns in the order of  
50 per cent in real terms are common for major infrastructure projects.2  
He says this is because it is not uncommon for demand and benefit forecasts 
to be wrong by 20–70 per cent compared with actual development. Public 
passenger rail and urban projects tend to have especially big overruns. A 
study of more than 5,400 IT projects found the average overspend of the 
starting budget can top 45 per cent. The average budget overrun for produc-
ing the Olympic Games since 1976 has been around 200 per cent.3 Projects 
might be uncertain, but the uncertainty is predictable. So you need methods 
for effectively dealing with and designing for that. The first step is to agree 
which projects should be prioritized and allocate the right resources to 
them.
In many organizations there will be a large number of projects planned 
or in progress. In one extreme case I worked with an organization that had 
12,000 projects. When we arrived to do a ‘procurement transformation’, we 
had to identify any existing projects with which our scope would overlap. 
The number turned out to be a whopping 6,000. We then had a lot of 
questions about who would get credit for what savings. It was a dream day 
for financial controllers; a nightmare for anyone who had to get stuff done. 

Dynamic Process Design 
189
I am all for projects that sit outside the ongoing business-as-usual structures 
to drive any range of improvements or to move strategic goals forwards, 
but they need to be controlled. It helps to have a list of all the projects with 
the key pieces of information about each one quantified; for example, start 
and finish dates, resources required, cost and benefits summary.
For me, this has to be integrated with your workforce planning and how 
you manage resource, as described in Chapter 4.5. Also, many of the visual 
aids as described in Chapter 3.3 are extremely useful and the projects should, 
in a perfect world, be linked to specific objectives in the objectives map.  
Just like with the rest of the micro design, when it comes to projects a whole 
host of questions are raised: Do you have the right skills working on the 
right projects? Are all the experienced people on the same projects and those 
with less experience on others? Do you have the right resource allocated to 
the right type of project? Do people have the time to commit to the project? 
And my personal bugbear: How many projects is each person on and how 
does this work with all their other ‘day-job’ commitments? If you add up  
all the commitments you will see that many people are frequently overly 
committed, with most of their time dedicated to a range of projects. This 
falls into one of the common traps I describe in Chapter 4.2: having too 
many initiatives. However, getting things done on time and in budget also 
requires planning at the detailed level.
Three levels of project planning
Most project managers I know start their planning by creating a plan in 
Microsoft Project. They are keen to define start and finish dates, capture the 
dependencies and work out the critical path. This is all good practice. But 
plans can quickly become unwieldy. In one example (which discuss in detail 
below), the programme ended up with six MS Project files, each having 
1,000 rows. Like a lot of other aspects covered in micro design, when it 
comes to project planning I find three stages useful:
1	 the milestone map and project summary;
2	 the integrated plan;
3	 the detailed actions.
As in the rest of micro design, there are many more facets within each stage, 
and I think these parallels should be drawn. For example, there are:
●
●stakeholders;
●
●objectives;
●
●deliverables;

Part Three: Micro Design
190
●
●competencies;
●
●positions and people who need to fulfil those.
Project planning is based on assumptions. So there needs to be a great deal 
of scenario planning and rigorous risk management. Implementing a project 
requires fluid feedback loops to ensure learning, improvement and tracking 
along the project life cycle. These plans are where you start.
The milestone map and project summary
The milestone map is a one pager, similar to the strategy map or the target 
operating model. It has swim lanes with the key areas down the left side, 
and time along the top. For each area, the key milestones will be clearly 
noted. They will show start and/or finish dates. The swim lanes will be the 
key organizational and delivery elements. Although this milestone level 
should be relatively static, it does require iteration with the bottom-up detail 
from the two lower levels. As you move down the levels of detail, each 
should act as a sense check for the level above. The other key elements of the 
project brief are: a summary of the overall goal and objectives; key stake-
holders; and costs and benefits. The milestones should be seen in the context 
of this crucial summary information.
Integrated plan
The next level is the integrated plan. The milestone map is an extract 
from the integrated plan. For this, I think a Gantt chart is the most useful 
visual (see Figure 3.5.1). The chart was created by the mechanical engineer 
and management consultant Henry Gantt in the 1910s. Gantt worked on 
major infrastructure projects like the Hoover Dam and the US Interstate 
System. The Gantt chart is in reality just another hierarchical breakdown 
structure. What is clever is how the relationships between a whole range of 
activities or deliverables are captured.
To create a Gantt chart like the one below you need to define:
●
●Start and finish dates.
●
●The amount of effort required (eg how many days or FTE months of 
work).
●
●Who is responsible for doing the work (use the RAS framework in 
Chapter 1.3).
●
●Dependency relationships.
–– A start–finish where a given activity can start only once a 
particular activity or set of activities has been completed.

Figure 3.5.1 
Example Gantt chart
Develop initial activity map
Interview key managers
Phase 2. Activity map (tree) development
Collect data
Brief data model and provide data templates
Check data availability and data owners
Define cost basis and assumptions
Kick-off meeting
Phase 1. Data definition and collection
Activity Analysis - Retail & Co.
Propose preventive solutions and data control system
Data quality review
Verify data with owners
Track the changes and quantify outcomes
4. Tracking & review
Standardize formatting and correct the errors
Top-up missing data
3. Cleansing implementation
Plan cleansing measures & priority
Data quality review
Set up quality scoring logic
2. Quality diagnosis
Integrate data into one place
Identify source data & owners
Kick-off meeting
1. Data consolidation
Data cleansing - International Bank
2015
Q1
Jan
Feb
Mar
W03
W04
W05
W06
W07
W08
W09
W10
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28
1
2
3
4
5
6
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
M
T
W
T
F
S
S
M
T
W
T
F
Data cleansing - International Bank
1. Data consolidation
Identif...
Integrate data into one place
2. Quality diagnosis
Set up qualit...
3. Cleansing implementation
Top-up missing data
Standardize formatting and correc...
4. Tracking & review
Track the changes and quantify outcomes
Verify data with owners
P...
Activity Analysis - Retail & Co.
Phase 1. Data definition and collection
Define cost basis an...
Check data availability an...
Collect data
Phase 2. Activity map (tree) development
Interview ke...
Develo...
Category
Activity
Meeting
Phase
Project
191

Part Three: Micro Design
192
–– A start–start where two or more activities have to start together or 
one activity can start only once another one has.
–– A finish–finish relationship where two or more activities have  
to finish together.
●
●Types of node and dimension (for a detailed explanation of how  
to build a taxonomy see Chapter 1.3):
–– Milestone: A key event that needs executive monitoring.  
For example, a ‘go-live date’.
–– Work stream: A contained set of actions that can be grouped 
together. Will often have substreams and list of activities.  
For example, ‘training’.
–– Activity: An activity has inputs and uses resources to turn those 
inputs into outputs. Will always start with a verb. For example, 
‘Develop training materials for logging on’.
–– Dimensions: A way of categorizing elements of the work. 
Examples include: grouping particular activities by the geographic 
location in which they will be done; the phase; whether it is done 
internally or externally; or if it is on or near the critical path.
The risk in developing your Gantt chart is going into too much detail. I think 
it becomes too much of an administrative burden to define every action in 
this format. Action plans need a different mindset and method. The Gantt 
chart is for the integrated plan, to define the interfaces and the critical 
path. My rule of thumb is that the integrated plan shouldn’t be longer than 
100 rows.
Action plans
Once you have those key elements, you then break down all the actions that 
are required to deliver it. These are task-level items. Because of the number 
of tasks and the management routines necessary to manage them, don’t try 
to manage these in a centralized way or capture the dependencies with all 
other tasks. The person responsible for each task should know what he or 
she needs to do. In many projects this list of actions is likely to be a living, 
evolving backlog of activities whose delivery is measured in a higher-level 
meta-process such as Scrum or Kanban. The process of managing these 
tasks and getting the work done is covered in Chapter 4.7.
Estimating the resources and impact of risk
The scope of the micro design is to determine not just what needs to happen, 
but the resources and cost required. Within projects and programmes this  

Dynamic Process Design 
193
is often far more complex than with the business-as-usual processes. I will 
highlight this with an example. A number of years ago I was brought in to 
review a large multi-year, £350 million government programme being delivered 
by a large systems firm. What we found exemplified why data-driven project 
design is so essential. On the surface everything seemed in place with all the 
classical elements: detailed project plans, risk and assumption logs; cost 
estimates and budgets; governance meetings; a change plan. After a couple 
of weeks’ reviewing the detail, it was clear the programme was going to miss 
its budget and target dates that had already been announced publicy. The 
key questions were: ‘Will it deliver?’ ‘At what cost?’ ‘By when?’ In this section 
I outline the case study, bringing out the key questions that need to be asked 
when doing project planning.
Does everyone understand the plan?
This programme had 6,000 rows of project tasks in six files on Microsoft 
Project. But no one knew what the overall milestones were, as they were 
hidden in the detail. So we created a one-page milestone map and an 80-row 
integrated plan of all the key elements. The milestone map was printed out 
and put on the wall. The milestones had clear owners and an RAG status  
as to the likelihood of meeting the dates and budgets.
Is the resourcing plan realistic?
What was interesting was that the detailed project plans had not only start 
dates and end dates, but also the number of days’ effort by task – a wealth 
of information. We took those numbers and turned them into a resource 
profile. It showed that the number of FTEs would need to grow from a 
team of 150 to 400 in a matter of months and then it would drop almost as 
rapidly – an impossibility to implement. Figure 3.5.2 shows what the profile 
looked like before and after we had planned out the work.
Are the cost estimates realistic?
Cost is a major area of risk when it comes to projects. In this example the 
cost estimates were provided by around 15 stream owners for 25+ major 
work streams. They had a spreadsheet showing each deliverable, the amount 
of time per resource type per deliverable and a three-point estimate to give 
the range of that time. In total, this resulted in more than 500 separate spread­
sheets. A master spreadsheet took all this data in, providing a summary of all 
the costs. The problem was that no one understood the numbers in totality 
nor had confidence in them. When the senior government stakeholders 
asked which levers could be pulled to reduce cost, no one could provide  
an answer. When asked if they could be certain that everything was captured 

Part Three: Micro Design
194
Figure 3.5.2 
Before-and-after project resource profile
Jan 12
Aug 12
Jan 13
Aug 13
Dec 13
Jan 12
Aug 12
Jan 13
Aug 13
Dec 13
400
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
TEAM 1
TEAM 2
TEAM 3
TEAM 4
BEFORE
AFTER
or they were not double counting costs, again, no one could answer. So we 
built a single integrated costing model with all the assumptions fully linked 
in it.
How do we factor in risk and uncertainty?
There was an assumption log with over 1,000 assumptions. But it was just 
a log. What the impact was of an assumption change or the probability of 
that happening wasn’t clear. It was just a long list. There was a risk log, but 
each risk just had a high-, medium- and low-impact and probability rating. 
So we defined how each risk would specifically impact both cost and time, 
using a simulation model to quantify the impact.
What management tools should we implement?
At face value, all the elements were in place but in reality none were. The 
interconnections between the teams were not well defined, nor were the means 
to control cost, risk, resourcing levels or any of the other basics. The reason 
for this was that the programme data was all in unconnected Excel islands. 
Scenario modelling, visual analysis and effective tracking simply weren’t 
practical, even for a project office of at least 10 people. An integrated plan, 
as described above, was developed, but with a difference. Each risk was 

Dynamic Process Design 
195
Figure 3.5.3 
Milestone delivery distribution curves
Months delay
Probability
0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
12.0
14.0
–4.0
–6.0
100%
0
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
16.0
18.0
–2.0
Milestone 1
Milestone 2
Milestone 3
Milestone 4
6%
Probability 
Milestone 1 
achieves its 
target date
linked to the plan (and cost model), so that we could quantify the impact on 
the plan if that risk would happen. By assuming risk probabilities, we ran  
a Monte Carlo simulation that gave a distribution of the probability that 
each of the key milestones was going to deliver on time. A Monte Carlo 
simulation runs a model through a large number of iterations. For each  
iteration, the assumptions and risks are randomly selected based on their 
distribution (and sometimes their correlation matrix). What it showed was 
that the chance of one of the key dates being met was only 6 per cent. A 
sanitized version of the curve is shown in Figure 3.5.3 below.
It is always possible to make models more accurate and sophisticated,  
but bear in mind the famous words of the mathematician George E P Box: 
‘All models are wrong but some are useful.’ The complexity and size of 
the programme made it worth investing in a more complex model and it 
turned out to be extremely useful. With this information, we managed to 
identify what the critical path was and what the likely impacts of each risk 
happening were going to be. From this base, it was relatively easy to de-scope, 
taking large areas of work off the critical path, and build effective buffers into 
the plan. For example, the number of extensions that were going to be 
built was reduced from 429 to 280, interfaces for the first go-live date re-
duced from 23 to five, and the number of data items required to be migrated 

Part Three: Micro Design
196
was reduced by 45 per cent. It enabled the programme office to pull the right 
levers, using information rather than just opinion and conjecture in their 
arguments. We significantly increased the probability of on-time delivery 
and in the end the programme was saved. We would never have got there 
without data-driven methods.
Mini-examples
The generic approaches applied at the beginning of this chapter are a useful 
way of thinking through how to approach different areas of dynamic 
process design. Combined with these approaches there is a certain amount 
of specialization and focus required for each area. This section briefly high-
lights the key opportunity drivers and design trade-offs to be made for each 
of the dynamic processes mentioned in the introduction.
Risk management
●
●What is it? Risk management is the process of analysing, prioritizing 
and addressing (where possible) risks to ensure organizational 
performance is sustained. Risk management cuts right through every 
aspect and function of the organization. Each risk is defined by: its 
impact; the probability it will impact; when it might impact; and how 
controllable it is. Over time, all of these will change depending on 
various drivers. To reduce each risk there will typically be a set of 
actions you can take. Often these actions will impact more than one 
risk. For example, for a law firm high-level risks could include losing 
top talent and failing to follow compliance laws. Implementing the 
necessary training will impact both of these risks.
●
●Doing dynamic risk management: Risk management is often done  
in a manner that doesn’t truly reflect the dynamic nature of risks. 
Risks are constantly changing but the standard process is that risks 
are listed and defined by a small group, attributed a level of priority 
and mitigating actions. The risk scores don’t change much and all the 
details get held in static spreadsheets. How these risks evolve over 
time and what the impact of mitigating actions has been isn’t made 
clear. To deal with this, you can set an operating measure to act as an 
early warning when an area needs attention (an approach often used 
in preventive maintenance in oil refineries). For example, in sales you 
might track leads generated and if they drop below a certain level it 
triggers an alert. See more on measuring in Chapter 4.7. An 

Dynamic Process Design 
197
alternative approach is to improve risk identification by periodic 
crowdsourcing and scoring perceived risks across the workforce. 
Often those on the ground will have a much better idea than 
management of potential risks.
Salesforce effectiveness
●
●What is it? Salesforce effectiveness refers to the process of ensuring 
your sales force is converting clients at each buying stage of the sales 
cycle. Salesforce is one of the most common areas addressed in 
organization design because of its importance to many businesses. 
Owing to the way sales fits with with the target market according to 
customer profile, ambition and cost of sale, the sales force requires 
constant analysis, redesign and structuring to ensure it is performing 
to its optimum potential. In essence, what is the maximum return 
you can get from a limited set of resources? There is process within 
designing sales force, but the dynamism comes from the flexibility 
and continual adjustments you have to make to adapt to the market. 
Examples of the key questions that need to be answered include:
–– How big and concentrated is the market with how many potential 
customers?
–– Is there a particular demographic, function or sector I should target?
–– What am I promoting and what is my value proposition?
–– What type of people am I talking to and what messages will be 
most effective?
Dimensions you may consider include: geographical focus, product 
mix per sales team, stage and use of presales support, vertical market 
segmentation and what the sales process is. This last point relates to 
where sales stops and starts. What is the handoff with marketing and 
operations? Defining this should be done using the techniques 
described in Chapter 3.4.
●
●Doing dynamic sales force effectiveness: A simple way of segmenting 
a customer population is by looking at the concentration of a product 
or market across all potential customers. First, compare your 
customers in terms of potential for your product and the market. 
Note that the scale of value for the product is smaller than the total 
market sales, so absolute comparisons will be misleading. A method 
is to segment the customer population into deciles for the product 
and market sales, to make them comparable. Customers in decile 1 
are those who contribute to the top 10 per cent of business, decile 2 

Part Three: Micro Design
198
Figure 3.5.4 
Analysing product and customer deciles
MARKET DECILE
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
1
2
8
10
2
2
7
7
16
3
4
10
7
1
22
4
1
8
7
5
5
26
5
1
6
12
9
6
34
6
1
5
11
9
10
3
4
43
7
1
7
16
15
9
5
2
55
8
5
9
25
28
11
5
4
2
1
90
9
23
44
32
18
10
4
1
1
1
134
10
427
85
34
8
7
4
2
3
570
455
139
99
76
61
51
42
34
26
17
1,000
MY PRODUCT DECILE 
customers contribute the next 10 per cent of business, and so on. 
Once we establish which decile each customer resides in for both my 
product and market, we can cross-tabulate their positions. This is 
shown in Figure 3.5.4.
You will want to avoid placing resource on the low-value 
customers (red shaded), as any effort made to these customers will 
not result in sufficient benefit. Once you know whom to target, then 
you can align this with your team capacity to build up an answer to 
the level and frequency of contact.
Procurement optimization
●
●What is it? Just like the sales force needs to be managed to best align 
with the market, the procurement function needs to align with the 
supply market. The first step is to define what the overall 
procurement process is using the fixed process design methods 
explained in Chapter 3.4. What is the category manager responsible 
for relative to the buyers, technical specifiers and finance? 
Procurement functions typically break down into various roles 
including what are commonly called category or sourcing managers 

Dynamic Process Design 
199
who are responsible for defining which suppliers to buy from and on 
what commercial terms. It is this role that I will do a deep dive into.
There are several drivers that determine how to design the 
category managers. Examples include: the impact of each category in 
terms of spend and business impact; the savings potential; the 
technical and supply market complexity; how global or local each 
category is; and any contractual constraints. The driver for how you 
best organize category managers is to design them around how the 
supply market is organized. If it is a global supply market, then have 
a global category team. If it is a local supply market then have  
a local category team. The other element is the level of knowledge 
required in understanding exactly how that category works. What 
complexities should the category manager be aware of and what are 
the additional value drivers? The level of knowledge required is so 
great a whole industry of procurement outsourcing and category 
management consultants has emerged!
●
●Doing dynamic procurement optimization: Too many procurement 
teams struggle to understand the true business impact of what they 
are sourcing and struggle when there isn’t a true competitive market 
so that they can run their bids and simply pick the lowest price.  
The ability for many teams to quantify the value suppliers can bring 
is missed. The idea of value-adding resourcing is an opportunity 
being missed. The techniques of multi-criteria decision-making, as 
described in Chapter 2.3, can be applied in the sourcing decision-
making process to help make these decisions. Lastly, the decision  
as to whether you make something yourself or buy it in is an 
organizational design decision. It requires a good understanding of 
which competencies are core and how much the area in question 
currently costs. Doing an IAA, as described in Chapter 3.4, can help 
with this. The IAA quantifies how much each activity costs, who is 
doing it and where it is done. By providing this information to  
an outsourcing firm, they have a basis to provide a proper quote.  
You can then effectively decide whether outsourcing or not is right.
Software product development
●
●What is it? Some of the most valuable and fastest-growing companies 
in the world are software development firms. Many other firms need 
to create digital teams to take advantage of new market opportunities 
like e-commerce in the retail sector or the level of software 

Part Three: Micro Design
200
integration in the automotive sector. Software development is a 
complex intellectual process. Often, the idea at the beginning of the 
requirements definition evolves into something radically different. 
The process of design, develop, test, release, maintain is pretty 
standard. But how that is done does not always reflect the linear 
structure you would expect. There are constant feedback loops,  
new ways of solving old problems and changing requirements. 
Sometimes, it is only when you see the solutions that you understand 
what was wrong with the design and how it should change. It can be 
extremely onerous to actually detail the design; the fact is, it needs to 
evolve is a core part of the process. There is a large range of 
competencies and computer languages to write the code for.
Therefore, I think it is best to base the organization around 
competency areas and common elements of the product or solution 
that is being developed. At Spotify, to enable agile software development, 
there are teams of eight called ‘squads’ that focus on specific features 
of the product.4 These are interlinked flexibly throughout the 
company so that small releases to the software can happen often and 
with minimal bureaucracy. This is similar to the way my current 
company is structured, with each team organized into technology 
capability pods. Each pod has a project manager, a designer, three to 
five developers and a quality engineer. Each discipline, for example 
quality, has a manager who forms skills groups, provides a career 
path down that competency and, therefore, co-manages the person. 
Other considerations to factor into the design include: the product 
roadmap; future capability needs; how agile or fixed is the 
development process including how the design–develop–test set of 
iterations is done; the cost and complexity which can help define 
whether the teams should be either onshore or offshore.
●
●Dynamic software product development: I have learnt so much from 
my seven years of managing a software firm that applies beyond the 
scope of just software. How to be truly ‘agile’ and what that word 
means are illuminating for many outside the industry. Chapter 4.7 
provides an overview of this agile approach that many leading 
software teams use.
Final thoughts
There are many examples of organizational elements that require dynamic 
design. Fortunately, many of the techniques described throughout this  

Dynamic Process Design 
201
book apply to these areas. Like the rest of the micro design, there are well-
established methods for designing these areas and linking them into the 
overall org system. Chapter 3.4 dealt with those more repeatable and pre-
dictable activities, that is those that can be mapped onto traditional value 
chain process maps. This chapter is no less method driven, but because of 
the uncertainty and more rapidly evolving nature of these areas, a more 
agile risk-based approach is required.
You should also note how organization design cuts right across all 
elements of the organization and needs to bring in broad levels of non- 
traditional HR data. The best example from this chapter is the sales, cus-
tomer and marketing data needed to support the design of the sales force. 
But this is also true in other areas that I haven’t detailed like procurement 
and spend data or R&D pipeline or product roadmap ambitions. The other 
principles in the remaining chapters apply equally here. Given you need 
people to manage your projects, risk and to make your sales, you also  
need to determine how many people are required, with what skills, experi-
ences and behaviours. The added insight is that you are using other business 
drivers to determine how the work is defined and organization designed.  
I hope the examples in this chapter serve as a practical reminder as to how 
holistic your thinking, and therefore data to support it, need to be.
1	 A large proportion of the work is not defined by fixed value chain 
processes as described in Chapter 3.4, but by more dynamic variable 
drivers.
2	 When doing portfolio and project management design, break up your 
plans into three levels.
3	 The redesign of each dynamic area can been seen as end-to-end OD 
projects where the steps within macro design are required.
4	 For each area, for example sales, procurement or software 
development, you have to think through what the fundamental driver is. 
For sales it is the customer, for procurement the supply market, and for 
software the combination of competency with the roadmap.
5	 Because of the dynamic nature of these areas, there will be faster 
change and more need for continuous assessment and redesign.
Remember this

Part Three: Micro Design
202
Notes
1	 Peterson, H [accessed 26 January 2015] Business Insider [Online]  
http://www.businessinsider.com/the-10-top-jobs-in-fashion-retail-2013-10?
2	 Chartered Institute of Management Accountants [accessed 26 January 2015] 
Financial Management [Online] http://www.fm-magazine.com/infographic/
prime-number/15-world%E2%80%99s-biggest-cost-overrun-projects#
3	 Sources: CIMA, Centre for Major Programme Management, University of 
Oxford’s Saïd Business School; McKinsey and the London School of Economics
4	 https://dl.dropboxusercontent.com/u/1018963/Articles/SpotifyScaling.pdf

“
3.6
Competency 
management
Every artist was first an amateur.  Ralph Waldo Emerson
Introduction
There is a lot of noise made about ‘talent management’. I have lost count of 
the number of talent management speeches I have heard at every HR con­
ference I have ever attended, references in the papers to the ‘war for talent’, 
let alone the vast number of articles, blogs and tweets on the subject. The 
HR profession is obsessed by talent and rightfully so. However, the debate 
has to move on from the recruitment and retention ‘war’ to a constant 
development of the core competencies. Strategy professionals talk about 
how organizations need to focus on their core competencies while talent 
professionals talk about learning and development, performance versus  
potential, and retention strategies. Data-driven competency management 
can bring these two perspectives together and put it at the heart of the organ­
izational design debate. I believe it can also drive an increase in employee 
engagement, productivity and retention together with transforming the 
way people are reviewed.
The tool of choice for most HR professionals for talent management is 
the nine-box grid. Developed by the consulting firm McKinsey in the 1970s, 
HR has embraced it as a simple and effective way to carry out talent 
management. The nine-box grid locates an individual’s talent by mapping 
performance on the x-axis against potential on the y-axis in three columns 
and rows: for example, low; medium; high. Depending on the two scores,  
an individual can be in position 9 – ‘Underperformer’ – all the way up to 
position 1 – ‘Future Leader’. HR has utilized the nine-box grid too much as 
a solution for talent management, resulting in a debate that hasn’t moved 
on. The profession hasn’t challenged itself to find something better, and  
this is a problem as the nine-box grid, for all its usefulness, has some signi­
ficant gaps:
203

Part Three: Micro Design
204
●
●It is opinion-based. More often than not it is just a manager’s 
judgement at a point in time.
●
●It lacks clarity of measurement. So you are talking about 
performance, but what does that mean? Before even getting on to 
which metrics it is linked to, does performance mean performance in 
relation to objectives or competencies? For example, if you are 
talking about achieving objectives, then lack of achievement may not 
necessarily mean someone is not top talent, but that he or she needs 
more support in developing competencies.
●
●It lacks clarity of purpose. The nine-box grid helps you think through 
potential, but what potential are we talking about? Potential for 
what sort of role – one level up, or a role in another area of the 
business that is in critical need of new blood? Particularly, when 
thinking about succession planning you are thinking at two levels: 
‘What is the full potential for an employee?’ and ‘Are they ready for 
role change?’ (See more in Chapter 4.6.)
Managers sit down to review the performance of their team members  
approximately every six–12 months and the decisions made off the back of 
this process include bonuses, salary increases, promotions and, in some  
instances, who gets to keep their jobs and who doesn’t – not trivial matters. 
If I asked you: ‘What and where are the talent pools in your organization 
where a 20 per cent improvement in quality or availability would make the 
biggest difference to organizational success?’ could you answer the question 
for certain? It’s likely that while intuitive knowledge of strengths, gaps and 
talented individuals exists in most organizations, there may be little logic  
or data to hand to answer this fundamental question. If this is the case, then 
how can we systematically identify the pivotal resources needed for organ­
izational development and sustainability? The idea of competency manage-
ment isn’t new. It has been around since at least Roman times and still adds 
value when done well. But too often it isn’t done well. Many of the root 
causes of implementation failure include:
●
●a confusion between objectives and competency management;
●
●a linear rather than holistic approach to appraisal and management;
●
●a strong link to progression and reward, therefore taking away from 
development and an improvement focus;
●
●an isolated view rather than part of the organizational system;
●
●a lack of emphasis in ensuring employees and managers receive 
genuine added-value information.

Competency Management
205
Competency frameworks need to be seen in context of making an organ­
ization fit, not just lean, to sustain performance for the long term. Frameworks 
need to be linked to what motivates employees; language used must be 
meaningful and relevant; they need to be visual and interactive. Competencies 
are important for individuals to track their development and should be 
seen first and foremost as a development rather than performance tool.  
In this chapter I put to you the business case for data-driven competency 
management. First, I define my interpretation of competency management 
in relation to objectives management. I explore the value of competency 
management and the benefits it can bring to the organization as a whole and 
to individual employees. Finally, I will present a framework for implement-
ing a thorough and data-driven approach to competency management, 
connecting it to the other aspects of the organizational system.
Objectives versus competency management
Both objectives and competencies need to be discussed, measured and 
managed, but in different ways. When measuring anything, the first thing  
is to get your definitions straight. Having sat through several thousand  
performance reviews, I reflect that a large proportion of the objectives 
listed next to someone’s ‘MBOs’ are really competencies. (MBO stands for 
Management By Objectives. The process requires each person to list his or 
her objectives and that person is then judged against them at the end of  
the year. This is most typically a form-filling process.) For example, I often 
see evaluation areas such as ‘How well do they communicate?’ ‘How good 
at building rapport are they?’ ‘What are their technical knowledge and  
expertise?’ or ‘How resilient are they are in achieving sales or delivering 
CSAT (Customer Satisfaction Score)?’ As discussed in Chapter 3.2, objec-
tives management is the process of setting, measuring and tracking specific, 
time-bound and measurable outcomes. Achieving an objective can be the 
result of an individual or set of activities using a range of resources that 
produces an outcome. It is an output measure and normally not fully in  
the control of the person held to account for achieving it. In contrast, com-
petencies are linked specifically to individual people and are not the product 
of a team or set of resources. They are a set of behaviours, experiences and 
skills. It is an input measure. Competency management, therefore, is the 
process of setting, measuring and tracking these.
Competencies can be a mix of soft and hard attributes. The soft side is the 
cultural fit, attitude and aptitude. It is the kind of stuff that is innate. It is  

Part Three: Micro Design
206
the sort of thing that one already sees in a five-year-old child: the ability  
to empathize; learn quickly; be open-minded; be tenacious; or have a high 
pain threshold. It is also much harder to quantify and measure. When CV 
screening, it shows itself in the extracurricular activities. In an interview,  
it is the answers to the personal questions, the rapport that is developed, and 
the answer to the airport test (If I was delayed at an airport for seven hours 
with this person, how happy would I be given it is this person versus another? 
Would he or she make the delay much easier or harder to endure?). The 
hard side is the technical ability, the official certifications, the expertise. Both 
are important, and the emphasis on either one depends on the type of role 
you are looking at, as I explore later in the chapter.
Both objectives and competencies are intrinsically linked, given that 
competencies are attributes that allow a resource to effectively complete  
a set of activities or have the judgement to make good decisions. By default, 
therefore, achieving certain objectives requires having or building the right 
competencies. Competencies are inputs into the value chain and not the 
outputs. From that perspective, they are easier to manage because they 
are more controllable. It is relatively harder to control the outcomes and 
relatively easier to control the inputs and what work is done by whom, as 
defined in Chapter 3.4.
The business case for competency 
management
Competency management has a bad name. It is regarded as old-fashioned. 
My clients don’t ask for it and it is not on many senior managers’ to-do 
lists. Clearly the business case isn’t compelling enough for managers and 
employees to go through the effort of putting a competency framework in 
place, let alone populating it. And that is understandable. Competency 
management is advanced. It requires a level of granular analysis that can be 
put in place only once the other basic foundations are in place. But that 
doesn’t mean it shouldn’t be an ambition or isn’t the right way to do things. 
So let me put the business case to you.
The management perspective
Consistency
For the Human Resource (HR) and management functions, competency 
frameworks can help to improve consistency in HR processes such as:  

Competency Management
207
recruitment and selection; performance management; workforce and succes-
sion planning; and the learning and development function. For example, 
competency-based role specification and interview techniques can help to 
make the recruitment and selection processes fairer, and help recruiters adhere 
to legal requirements. Appraisals become more transparent and differences 
in role levels and job titles become more meaningful.
Effective talent management
Competency management can act as one of the foundations of your work-
force and succession plan. After all, if you can map role-specific competencies 
against people’s competencies and connect them, you can identify future 
successors or gaps in talent. On the one hand, you can predict with a lot 
more certainty whether a potential successor is ready or will fit well into  
a role. On the other, by identifying the gaps you can start to build an idea  
of your recruitment strategy going forward, and where the focus will need 
to be (read more in Part Four).
Close the gap
You can define which competencies are crucial and quantify your strengths 
and weaknesses. By identifying key gaps, you can focus on closing them.  
By measuring you can keep on track and focus on improving. Having an 
overview of which competencies need to be developed means you can  
target learning and development resources more effectively. You can define 
performance standards and provide clear guidelines to employees regarding 
what the organization expects.
The employee perspective
Employee engagement
An accurate and thorough competency framework can help boost engage-
ment in everyday work. By matching people’s skills more effectively to 
specific job requirements you can build an individual’s competence through 
appropriate utilization of skills. If people are involved in activities that both 
reward and stretch their capacity to perform they will achieve ‘flow’. As 
Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi writes in in his book Flow: ‘The best moments in 
our lives are not the passive, receptive, relaxing times. The best moments 
usually occur if a person’s body or mind is stretched to its limits in a voluntary 
effort to accomplish something difficult and worthwhile.’1 Flow is achieved 
(and is defined as) when an activity is goal directed so that there are direc-
tion and purpose to action; when perceived challenges are balanced by a 
perception and self-confidence in individual levels of competence; and where 

Part Three: Micro Design
208
there is immediate feedback in order to support continuation or adjustment 
of current actions and behaviour.2 It becomes an intrinsically rewarding 
experi­ence that both supports and is enhanced by successful goal achieve-
ment (for example, closing a sale) and skills development (for example, 
communicating more effectively and succinctly in the sales process).3
While anyone can experience flow, there needs to be a specific challenge 
for an individual’s particular skill set to promote efficacy and achievement, 
and to increase motivation to perform at a high level. Good organizational 
design and thinking about competencies across the organization can directly 
support the development of two out of the three preconditions above in 
achieving this: clarifying and identifying stretch goals, and achieving balance 
between challenges and skills.
According to the flow model, the correspondence of the appropriate level 
of challenge together with a positive self-concept of capability can encourage 
persistence and active engagement because of the intrinsic rewards and experi-
ence of achievement. This is depicted in Figure 3.6.1. Flow also supports  
the development of skills and expertise in a relatively short period of time. 
According to Csikszentmihalyi, in order to achieve flow, nine conditions 
Figure 3.6.1 
Flow Channel (adapted from Nakamura and 
Csikszentmihalyi, 2002)
RELAXATION
BOREDOM
APATHY
COMPETENCE
CHALLENGE
ANXIETY
AROUSAL
CONTROL
WORRY
FLOW
The goal is to match 
high levels of challenge 
with high levels of 
competence in order to 
achieve ‘ﬂ ow’ resulting 
in optimal performance 
and happiness. 
The goal is to avoid 
being out of ﬂ ow. 
For example, if the 
individual has low 
competence for a 
highly challenged 
task, he or she will 
be worried or highly 
anxious, resulting in 
poor performance and 
misery.

Competency Management
209
must be met (Figure 3.6.2). Of these nine, four are preconditions and five are 
how you feel while doing an activity. Of those four preconditions, I believe 
the micro design sets the first and third conditions. The second condition is 
also a large part of the data-driven method described in this book.
The challenge is how an organized set of challenges and a corresponding 
set of skills result in optimal experience. This is where, I believe, the concept 
of ‘flow’ and helping individuals to achieve positive ‘flow’ reaps benefits for 
organizations. Individuals who are happy, have a positive outlook and are 
engaged in their work are more productive than those who are negative, 
neutral or stressed.4 By putting emphasis on achieving excellence rather 
than identifying deficiencies5 it helps to create an environment that nurtures 
individuals and supports organizations that ‘flourish’.6,7,8 If they can see the 
competencies they need to progress, and can personally track their progress 
then they are going to engage more in their personal development.
It is supportive
If someone isn’t achieving their objectives it is either because they don’t 
have the time/resource to do so OR they don’t have the competencies re-
quired. Assuming it is the latter and they have the will and aptitude to learn, 
Figure 3.6.2 
The nine conditions of flow
The sense of 
time becomes 
distorted
There is 
immediate 
feedback to  
one’s actions
Self-
consciousness 
disappears
There are clear 
goals every step 
of the way
OD 
Impact
1
Distractions are  
excluded from 
consciousness
Action and 
awareness are 
merged
5
8
There is no  
worry of failure
6
9
2
There  
is balance 
between 
challenges
3
4
7
HOw It feels
precOnDItIOns
key
OD 
Impact
The activity 
becomes 
‘autotelic’
(done for its  
own sake)

Part Three: Micro Design
210
then what better conversation to have than working out together how to 
overcome whatever competency needs to be developed? Helping the team 
succeed is a crucial role of management and one of the nicest parts of the 
role.
Career progression
Competency management can help individuals to map their careers. Where 
competencies are mapped clearly to roles within the organization, and 
this information is available to all employees, then it is possible for indi-
viduals to identify routes for possible development or job specialization, and 
become aware of specific skills and competencies required or roles to which 
they may aspire. This supports a transparent approach to career progression.
Developing and putting the framework to 
work
Like all frameworks, there is a process for defining, designing, measuring 
and driving improvements over time. With competency management, there 
are six steps:
1	 Create the framework and descriptors.
2	 Create targets for the roles (and/or activities).
3	 Populate actuals.
4	 Calculate competency gaps.
5	 Improve over time.
You will note we are creating a framework that is ready to be data-driven. 
The framework should enable you to answer:
●
●Who has what competency?
●
●How many people have them?
●
●What is the average level for each competency?
●
●What and where are the gaps?
●
●Who is above or below where they need to be?
●
●Who is improving and by how much over time?
●
●Where would our training budget get its biggest return?

Competency Management
211
Create a framework
The first step is to define your competency map framework. As with all of 
the ‘micro system datasets’, we follow a process of making a taxonomy 
that is as intuitive as possible, as explained in Chapter 1.3. It is common 
practice for each competence to have a list of levels. Figure 3.6.3 is a four-
stage example of this.
In this example I have given an even number to each level so that there is 
no middle ground and have chosen four categories above two in order to 
give that extra nuance. However, there will be certain competencies that are 
binary: you have it or you don’t. This is particularly true when it comes to 
needing certification in regulated environments like healthcare. In those cases, 
you could choose to either not score it (so a zero) or give it a ‘Competent’ 
level. If you want to define greater levels of competence, you could document 
them separately. This would result in having a larger list of competencies 
(the number of nodes or rows in your framework) but less work needed to 
define four descriptors for each one. Because of my data-driven ethos, I be-
lieve it is useful to turn each level of competency into a number. That helps 
with analysis and aggregation. The simplest is to score 1, 2, 3, 4. But that 
assumes a purely linear progression in something that isn’t linear. It is much 
harder to become ‘World Class’ in one thing than a ‘Novice’ in four things. 
So why not use an exponential scoring sequence with the implicit logic it is 
twice as hard to move up a level again? For example, 1, 2, 4, 8 (or 16).
Figure 3.6.3 
A four-stage competency framework
Needs occasional 
guidance but 
is generally 
self-sufficient. 
Performance is 
improving with 
practice.
Is demonstrating 
early signs 
of getting to 
grips with the 
competency. Is 
able to understand 
the basic 
concepts. Still 
needs support to 
do it. 
Highly skilled and 
completely  
self-sufficient.  
Can support, 
advise and  
coach others.
Has mastered 
the competency. 
Quickly recognizes 
patterns; executes 
all aspects of the 
competence; is 
recognized as an 
expert; is a leader 
and example to be 
followed.
novice
competent
expert
World 
class

Part Three: Micro Design
212
The next stage is to really define what you mean by each level. For each 
state, you need to describe what the specific competency is. For each level, 
an additive set of skills that depict reaching that increasing level is detailed. 
It takes a great deal of effort to create descriptors. The key is to ensure 
everyone understands the same thing when they read the descriptors and  
it is easy to judge whether or not someone has reached that given level. The 
list of all competencies can be quite large. Just as with Google Maps, it is 
useful to be able to zoom in and out, to be able to see the whole and then 
dive into the detail. A good taxonomy is useful to support navigation and  
is a key part of the framework. Figure 3.6.4 shows a heat map of 15 com-
petency areas with a total of 56 separate competencies. The colour represents 
the count of people with a competency at each level.
Create targets
There are two sets of competencies. The first is the required competencies or 
the demand. The second is the competencies that your employees actually 
hold or the supply of competencies. This subsection starts with defining 
the required targets before moving to actuals in the subsection following. 
For the target competencies, you have three options:
1	 At the activity level: Here you are defining what competencies each 
element of the process map needs.
2	 At the role level: Here you are making the jump to assuming what 
competencies are needed for each of the activities for which that role 
is responsible.
3	 At the workforce planning group level: A workforce planning group is 
a group of roles that have broadly fungible skills Fungible means that 
the the employees can be easily be substituted or replaced with each 
other, as their skills, experiences and behaviours are sufficiently 
similar. This is the level at which strategic workforce planning is 
done (Chapter 4.5) and ideally the level you think about your 
transition management (Chapter 4.4).
If you do your target creation at the activity level, assuming you have defined 
who is responsible for each activity, then by defining the accountability 
matrix, you can by definition list the competencies required for each role.  
If you have IAA information, then you can calculate exactly the percentage 
of time each competency is required, leading to real prioritization. The 
downside is the number of elements that need to be defined and maintained. 
I doubt many will have the resources to do this. If you define competencies 

Competency Management
213
Figure 3.6.4 
Heat map example of 26 generic competency 
frameworks
Learning & Talent Development
Talent Development
Capability Development
Learning Solution Development
Talent Management
Talent Recruitment
Internal Recruitment
Managing the Exit Process
Orientation
Resourcing & Talent Planning
Resource Planning
Strategy insights and solutions
HR Partnering Insight
Managing HR Change
Functional Networking
Handling HR Case Work
Performance & Reward
Reward Systems & Processes
Performance Management
Recognition Systems & Processes
Organization Development
Organization Development
Delivering Organizational Change
Employee Relations
Deploying IR
Shaping Employee Relations
Organization Design
Structure Design
Job Design
Employee Engagement
Employee Satisfaction
Employer Branding & Values
Service Delivery and Operations
HR Operations
Managing HRIT
Category
1–3 people
4–7 people
7–15 people
16–30 people
31–100 people
101–300 people
HR Competencies
at the role level, then you can still define a subjective level of importance. 
That will be far simpler and require less work. If you define competencies  
at the workforce planning level, the number of links and data entry will  
be minimized. No matter what, it is extremely useful to define workforce 
planning groups because it is at this level that you will do so much of the 
Making it Real work. If you define the target competencies at either the  
activity or role level, it is useful to then determine which roles have broadly 

Part Three: Micro Design
214
the same set of competencies and, therefore, are by definition within the 
same group. Some additional practical advice:
●
●When linking competencies to roles to create target competencies, 
don’t give in to the temptation of linking large numbers of 
competencies to each role. Keep the numbers small and manageable. 
Be realistic when creating this target. My rule of thumb is an average 
of 15 and maximum of 20.
●
●You may want to define the target competencies as Must Have or 
Desirable. This relates to the prioritization point above. But, be 
careful: it will mean creating and maintaining more and more data.  
If it is Must Have, then it is a strong reason not to give someone the 
role if he or she doesn’t have the competency.
●
●The descriptors need to be clear and tightly written. Words matter  
a great deal here and ambiguity will come back to haunt you.
●
●When recruiting to fill the role, think through how you are going to 
test for each competence. For technical competencies, run technical 
tests. It is easy for some people to blag their way through an 
interview. After CV screening and a brief HR lead phone interview, 
we put our candidates through a range of job-specific technical tests. 
It saves a lot of recruitment time and significantly improves our 
decision-making process.
Populate actuals
Populating actuals is the hardest step, especially if the scores directly affect 
pay and promotion chances. So, as with objectives, try not to make the com-
petency score link dogmatically with pay. For example, don’t say: ‘If you 
meet all your target competencies you will get a bonus of £x and if you 
overachieve them by 10 per cent then you get a further £y.’ This isn’t physics 
or engineering with precision in measurement or direct predictable cause 
and effect. Just because you give stuff numbers, it doesn’t mean they are 
100 per cent precise. They are directional. Be mindful and careful. Once 
you have reassured everyone about the sort of thing that will be done with 
the information, go through a scoring process. This can include any com-
bination of:
●
●a self-assessment;
●
●a manager assessment;
●
●calibration reviews by a committee;

Competency Management
215
●
●peer-to-peer 360 assessments;
●
●outside assessment centres.
Once done, you can start to see not only who has achieved what score, but 
also how each team scores. Figure 3.6.5 shows where a group of employees 
sit. Amber Hutch is a Level 1 for deploying IR. The colour of the dot against 
each employee’s name represents how far off or ahead of the target em-
ployees are: blue is ahead, green on target, amber is one below and red is 
two below. The colour on each descriptor is the heat map of the number  
of people with that competence.
One of the issues here is grade inflation. Grade inflation is increasing the 
scores for the same level of competence over time. That is why the descrip-
tors need to be so precise. It is also why a group of people should be validat-
ing the scores as part of a calibration exercise. I believe that whatever the 
mechanism is for generating the first draft of the actual scores, having a 
group that both understands the framework and each of the people being 
assessed is a crucial step. This group validates the scores and ensures both 
fairness and completeness. This is a timely process and requires significant 
management commitment.
Figure 3.6.5 
Example scores
Amber Hutch 
Fran Daniels 
Sarah Flynn 
Barbara Stultz 
Jack Little 
Barbara Gray
Frances Bush 
Thomas Lee 
Logan Price 
Joseph Mack 
Cameron Lane 
Connor Mann
Charlie Goodwin
 Denise Towner 
Greg Johns
Declan Reid 
Sarah Cole 
Michael Reed
Wendy Smith
Tylor Swift
Amber Hutch
Fran Daniels
Frances Bush 
Thomas Lee
Barbara Gray
Michael Reed 
Greg Johns
Declan Reid 
Sarah Cole 
Connor Mann 
Joseph Mack 
Logan Price
Charlie Goodwin 
Denise Towner 
Cameron Lane 
Barbara Stultz 
Jack Little
Sarah Flynn
Tylor Swift
Wendy Smith
Deploying IR
Shaping Employee Relations
COUNT: 20  AVG TARGET: 2.3  AVG ACTUAL: 2.2  AVG GAP: –0.1 
COUNT: 20  AVG TARGET: 2.3  AVG ACTUAL: 1.5  AVG GAP: –0.8
Level 4
Shapes culture by 
ensuring the appropriate 
ER/IR principles and 
tools, policies and 
practices are well 
executed
Level 3
Leads the development of 
employee relations policies 
and practices
Level 2
Ensures that employee 
handbooks, contracts and the 
intranet site are consistent, 
up to date and in line with the 
organization’s ER/IR 
principles and policies
Level 1 
Ensures that staff and 
managers receive new 
information and updated 
literature when policies and 
procedures change or are 
updated
Level 4
Leads the development of 
the employee relations 
strategy and plan that 
delivers and supports the 
organization’s objectives
Level 3
Ensures that policies and 
practices cover the full 
employee relationship and 
industrial relations strategy
Level 2
Supports and coaches 
managers in understanding 
employee relations policies 
and practices, ensuring 
understanding of 
compliance imperatives
Level 1 
Informs and advises 
managers and staff about 
employee relations policies 
and practices
Employee Relations

Part Three: Micro Design
216
Calculating competency gaps
Now that you have defined the actuals and target competencies, then you 
can calculate the gaps. The sort of questions you can answer and points to 
reflect on include:
●
●Does the person in a particular role have all the competencies 
required?
●
●When an individual exceeds the target, what does this mean?  
You may want to think about how to use this person’s expertise and 
skills in another area. Should the person be promoted? Maybe the 
person can design and deliver a training course and share his or her 
knowledge with colleagues? Will the person get bored and do you 
need to challenge him or her in a new way? That is, add to their 
responsibilities and required competencies.
●
●When an individual falls short of the target, identify the areas that 
require improvement (that is, the gaps). Then encourage the 
individual to suggest ways of addressing these gaps and support him 
or her through this process.
But having this information makes organizations think about competencies 
in new and different ways. You can start to utilize individuals’ skills and 
capabilities more effectively and, ultimately, it supports the entire succession 
planning, development and talent agenda. The ability to aggregate this data 
in the context of the organization then becomes possible. Figure 3.6.6 shows 
the status of each role or you could drill down to a summary for each 
employee, for example Tasha Allred.
We can see the competence target for each role and person. At a group  
or organizational level we can start to see hotspots for development and 
map concentrations of high-level skills. This can support strategic thinking 
and risk assessment in relation to managing change, defining the learning 
and development plan, ensuring the core strategic competencies are given 
sufficient attention or recruiting to fill key gaps.
Improve over time
Competency management isn’t just about auditing today. It is about develop-
ment and progress. Figure 3.6.7 shows the target competencies for a given 
employee, but this could equally be for a team, function OR a given com­
petency and those who need to have it. Each colour represents a different 
area of competency while each line a specific competency. For this employee, 

Competency Management
217
Figure 3.6.7 
Individual example of tracking competency gaps over time
Q2 2012
Q2 2012
Q3 2012
Q3 2012
Q4 2012
Q4 2012
Q1 2013
Q1 2013
Q2 2013
Q2 2013
Q3 2013
Q3 2013
Q4 2013
Q4 2013
Q1 2014
Q1 2014
Q2 2014
Q2 2014
Q3 2014
Q3 2014
Q4 2014
Q4 2014
Q1 2015
Q1 2015
Q2 2015
Q2 2015
Q3 2015
Q3 2015
4
3
2
1
0
Parent
Behaviour
Communication
Knowledge & Skills
Technical
Figure 3.6.6 
Example summary results for a series of roles and 
individuals
HR Director
Actual Score
25
Target Score
37
Gap
-12
Learning &
Development Lead
Actual Score
12
Target Score
23
Gap
-11
Performance &
Reward Lead
Actual Score
14
Target Score
19
Gap
-5
Recruitment Lead
Actual Score
23
Target Score
23
Gap
0
HR Insight Lead
Actual Score
21
Target Score
19
Gap
2
HR Insight Assistant
Actual Score
31
Target Score
26
Gap
5
Tasha Allred - HR Insight Assistant
Competency Actual
11
Competency Target
13
Competency Gap
-2
2
Managing HR Change
2
HR Partnering Insight
3
Functional Networking
3
Handling HR Case Work

Part Three: Micro Design
218
the two orange lines represent behaviours. The Innovation behaviour is 
deemed to have significantly decreased while Collaboration has increased 
over the 14 quarters. This highlights the fact that not all competencies in-
crease in a linear fashion. For instance, my personal Excel skills have eroded 
over the past eight years as I have stopped using that as my primary tool 
for analysis.
As another example, every six months a snapshot of everyone’s competencies 
could be taken for biannual review meetings. Each line would represent  
a competency. The colour could also represent how far off target each one  
is with the frequently used BRAG status. This example could be aggregated 
to a team, function or geographical level. When you flip to a team view, the 
patterns change. As members of the team come and go, so too does the 
average score. There will be more volatility. It is likely that, as highly skilled 
people move on, the averages drop. Other visual additions that could be 
made include changing the thickness of the lines to represent the number  
of team members who actually have that competency or to aggregate the 
lines by competency areas rather than specific ones.
Final thoughts
The reality I observe is that the pervasive way of reviewing people’s perfor-
mance muddles objectives and competencies. The first is an output and not 
fully under someone’s control while the latter is an input and it is broadly 
under someone’s control, though that person will need time and sometimes 
investment in training to move his or her levels forward. My observation is 
that the lack of this competency management theory being practised or even 
desired has to be a result of the perception that it will not add enough value 
to either the managers, individuals, L&D departments, OD practitioners or 
leaders. Because the competencies are looked at only on a biannual or  
annual basis and owing to their strong if not direct link to reward, they are 
not properly used as a tool to either manage the business or drive improve-
ments. More often than not I observe that the actual competencies defined 
are too flaky and subjectively measured. I have, therefore, mostly witnessed 
these as a box-ticking exercise with limited business value. If you make the 
required competencies challenging enough and provide continuous feed-
back, with good role design, you have a chance to create roles that provide 
‘flow’ for all your employees. When in flow, work doesn’t feel like work. 
Engagement, happiness, productivity and superior business performance 
will soar.

Competency Management
219
Notes
1	 Csikszentmihalyi, M (1990) Flow: The Psychology of Optimal Experience, 
Harper & Row, New York, p 5
2	 Csikszentmihalyi, M, Abuhamdeh, S and Nakamura, J (2005) Flow, in Elliot, A J 
and Dweck, C S (eds), pp 598–608, Handbook of Competence and Motivation, 
The Guilford Press, New York
3	 Nakamura, J and Csikszentmihalyi, M (2002) The Concept of Flow, in Snyder, 
C R and Lopez, S J (eds), pp 89–105, p 90, Handbook of Positive Psychology, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford
4	 Anchor, S (2010) The Happiness Advantage: the seven principles that fuel 
success and performance at work, Virgin Books, New York
5	 Searle, T P and Barbuto, J E (2011) ‘Servant Leadership, Hope, and 
Organizational Virtuousness: a framework for exploring positive micro and 
macro behaviours and performance impact’, Journal of Leadership & 
Organizational Studies, 18 (1), pp 107–117, p 107
6	 McLean, J and Wells, S (2010) ‘Flourishing at the edge of chaos: leading 
purposeful change and loving it, Journal of Spirituality, Leadership and 
Management, 4 (1), pp 53–61
7	 Ghaye, T (2010) ‘In what ways can reflective practice enhance human  
flourishing’, Reflective Practice: international and multidisciplinary  
perspectives, 11 (1), pp 1–7
8	 Bakker, B and Schaufeli, W (2008) ‘Editorial: Positive organizational behaviour: 
engaged employees in flourishing organizations’, Journal of Organizational 
Behaviour, 29, pp 147–154
1	 The debate has to move on from the recruitment and retention ‘war for 
talent’ by using competency management as a key management tool.
2	 Carrying out competency management effectively will drive employee 
productivity and happiness through flow.
3	 Objectives are an output measure while competencies are an input.
4	 Capture the demand and supply within a competency taxonomy so that 
gaps can be identified and performance improved.
5	 Create workforce planning groups so that broadly fungible roles can be 
grouped together (this supports several processes, such as workforce 
planning and transition management).
Remember this

“
3.7
Rightsizing
The Ringelmann effect, also known as ‘social loafing’,  
was discovered by the French professor of agricultural 
engineering Maximilien Ringelmann. Ringelmann had  
his students, individually and in groups, pull on a rope.  
He noticed that the effort exerted by a group was less  
than the sum of the efforts exerted by the students acting 
individually.
Bernard Simon1
Introduction
Although the two are often confused, rightsizing is different from down­
sizing. Rightsizing is the decision on how many people and how much effort 
to invest against any set of activities. The outcome is a resource profile allocat-
ing talent within the organization to a particular area. In my experience 
rightsizing has not been data-driven and so has lacked focus when it comes 
to ensuring you have the right amount of people doing the right activities 
and processes to deliver your objectives and strategy.
There is not much literature on the subject, so in this chapter I provide 
four data-driven methods to help take you through the process of rightsizing 
your organization. Before exploring these methods I begin by highlighting 
how most rightsizing is typically done. I then go through each rightsizing 
method in turn: ratio analysis, activity analysis, driver analysis and mathe-
matical analysis. There are case studies throughout to demonstrate the 
application of these methods and bring them to life. This is the final stage  
of the micro design and will be the foundation for delivering and imple-
menting your organization design successfully.
220

Rightsizing
221
Common currently used flawed methods
Before we get into the solution, it is worth reflecting on how rightsizing cur-
rently is often carried out. I observe four broad methods, shown in Figure 3.7.1.
1 It just evolves
This is the most common. Ask employees why their organization or depart-
ment looks like it does and often the answer will be ‘It just is.’ Decisions are 
made for one reason or another and a shape is created. Natural evolution is 
not a problem in itself, but the lack of control is.
2 Who shouts loudest
The evolution of a team is often driven by who shouts the loudest – by 
managers who are adept at getting their way and ensuring they have resources. 
This is what makes rightsizing so fraught. It defines people’s empires, and 
that is an emotional subject. You can be sure that in a discussion about 
rightsizing, egos will be challenged and dented.
Figure 3.7.1 
Most common organizational sizing methods

Part Three: Micro Design
222
3 Across the board cut
Just as wages have ‘stickiness’ (a term economists use to mean basically that 
once people are given a set wage, they don’t take pay cuts), so does headcount. 
Last year’s budget is the basis for this year’s budget. Which works until there 
is a shock. When that shock happens, Finance demands cuts. Because it is so 
hard to work out exactly where those cuts should be, they are made across 
the board and unilaterally, for example ‘20 per cent reduction no matter 
what’.
4 Magic number
There is no magic number to rightsizing. Using any one number for it is 
dangerous. Benchmarks are rarely direct comparisons, and too often based 
on a tiny sample. Proper thought is required. For example, your marketing 
department should not necessarily look the same as your finance department. 
Or the group of companies from which the benchmark is drawn may have 
different priorities. What works in one company may not work in another.
Four methods for rightsizing your 
organization
In a balanced system, the ‘right’ size is the size that delivers the desired busi-
ness outputs most effectively. Rightsizing naturally follows on from all the 
work done in the rest of the micro design. Without fully understanding your 
organizational as-is, objectives, processes and competencies, you are simply 
shooting in the dark. Given both how important and political rightsizing  
is, it often scares executives. It is a political hot potato. So when you start 
the estimation process of the number of FTEs required, ensure you discuss 
the methods you are going to use first. Ideally, sign off the method; even if 
you end up changing it, you have protected yourself. You are going to need 
to take all the key stakeholders on a journey. Everyone needs to understand 
that no matter what, there will be ambiguity. If a frank and honest debate is 
not had you will likely sleepwalk into making bad decisions.
This chapter outlines four rightsizing methods, as shown in Figure 3.7.2. 
The first method is the simplest and the one that should be most frequently 
used. As you deal with more complex sizing situations you will need to include 
more of the methods from further down the list. The more complexity, the 

Rightsizing
223
Figure 3.7.2 
Recommended rightsizing methods

A ratio says how 
much of one 
thing there is 
compared with 
another thing

Always used  
with broad  
range of 
calculations

The allocation  
of time to  
Level 1 process 
map activities

Frequently 
used for roles 
where the work 
isn’t clear nor 
definable by a 
simple driver

The 
multiplication 
of volumetric 
drivers to 
calculate the 
demand

Frequently used 
for variable 
roles that can 
be captured by 
deterministic 
drivers

The modelling  
of system 
dynamic 
and non-
deterministic 
scenarios with 
significant 
uncertainty

Rarely used and  
in the most 
complex 
situations
IncreasIng frequency
IncreasIng complexIty
actIvIty 
analysIs 
mathematIc 
modellIng & 
sImulatIon
drIver 
analysIs
ratIo 
x:y
x y
x2
more of the four techniques you should use. To be clear, as you use the more 
sophisticated techniques, this doesn’t mean you stop leveraging the others; 
that is, you will always use ratio analysis.
Method 1: Ratio analysis
When designing or creating something new you want to create comparisons. 
In an organizational context this often means asking: ‘How do I compare?’; 
‘Where are we relatively lean or fat?’. The answers to these questions are 
typically found through ratios. A ratio in this context is the number or cost 
of one group relative to another. For example, the number of direct reports 
that each manager has is a ratio and is called the ‘span of control’. Another 
common ratio is the number of FTEs divided by the total number of HR 
professionals. Each time you calculate a ratio, you are defining a numerator 
and denominator, for example Total FTEs/HR FTEs or Direct Reports/1 (the 
manager). The numbers used don’t need to be headcount numbers either; 
they could be the Total Revenue or Profit/FTEs.

Part Three: Micro Design
224
Example: Salesforce ratios
Ratio analysis helps identify opportunities for investigation. It does not 
define the answer. The trick is to define a series of ratios and not to rely on 
just one. For example, if you are trying to size a sales team, the following 
ratios could be used:
●
●average revenue per sales person;
●
●sales cost as a proportion of revenue;
●
●number of clients per person;
●
●number of leads per person;
●
●sales force to presales support.
The goal here is not to be blinded by one number. For instance, it might be 
possible to sell £1 million per person, but is it possible to manage 30 client 
relationships per person? What if the deal size is £20,000 versus £200,000? 
When dealing with people as the agents, there is a huge variability in perfor-
mance by individual and by time. A team cannot be composed of equally 
performing people, and you cannot model around the best performer. For 
this, you need to look at availability of resource, not optimal resource, since 
optimal resource will very likely not be available.
As the number and nature of the sales vary, so too do the ratios. For ex-
ample, if the deals average £20,000 each, then the ratio of leads and clients 
per person will be much higher. The type of person who can transact that 
flow will be quite different from someone who has two to five key clients 
and sells deals worth £500,000–£5 million+. As the deal size increases, then 
the ratio of salespeople to presales support will probably change. For more  
on optimizing your sales force, refer back to dynamic process design in 
Chapter 3.5.
The problem with benchmarking
Benchmarks are dangerous. To be applied, benchmarks have to be an exact 
comparison within a comparable context. For example, are the benchmarks 
from similar industries, geographies, scale and maturity (to name a few of 
the context drivers)? Because of this, always start benchmarking with an 
internal focus. You can see how business units or regions compare with each 
other and how these ratios may have changed over time. However, even with 
internal benchmarks there are dangers. An example is one of my clients, which 
operated in 180 different markets. But these markets (they were countries) 

Rightsizing
225
were radically different. How can you compare Ivory Coast and the United 
States? There are a number of drivers making comparison dangerous: the 
rate of GDP growth, GDP per capita, market share, regulatory environment, 
number of years’ presence, the labour market conditions. My client’s market 
share varied significantly for a range of historical reasons owing to all the 
factors I mentioned. The regulatory environment was a big driver of cost for 
the company, as was its strategy for determining whether the market had a 
high growth potential or was declining. So in order to compare meaningful 
ratios, the markets needed to be clustered into similar groups. The purpose 
of calculating the ratios was to see if there were productivity opportunities 
and we didn’t want the entire analysis to be nullified by logical differences. 
The political complication was the fact that this company was regionally 
organized with powerful regional owners sitting on the main board. So to 
suddenly compare markets across regions required a new mindset. All of a 
sudden Canada was being compared with Australia while many of the South 
East Asian countries were being compared with some from Africa.
Generic ratios
Another way to think about ratios is to take a financial lens. For example, 
review the top-down annual budget as a set of ratios. The simplest example 
is percentage of revenue or cost. In financial budget terms this includes ratios 
such as:
●
●What percentage of the total cost is labour?
●
●What is and should be the operating margin?
●
●How much of the cost of goods sold should people represent?
●
●What percentage of labour should be indirect?
A note worth mentioning here is that for the public sector, revenue is less  
of a driver, so when it comes to budgeting the questions focus on trade-offs 
required in each department to achieve the quality and quantity of work 
required. Other examples of ratios include comparing the headcount or cost 
of one function, or even set of roles with another. For example:
●
●How many HR FTEs:Total FTEs.
●
●The number of ‘software developers’ to ‘technical project managers’ 
to ‘quality engineers’ or to generalize this: Role X:Role Y.
●
●The number of marketing managers to marketing spend or marketing 
projects, or to generalize this: Role X:KPI or financial number.

Part Three: Micro Design
226
●
●Ratio of grades. For instance, billable staff per partner for a whole 
range of professional service firms.
●
●Average number of people being managed per manager (ie the span 
of control).
●
●Comparing ratios over time makes them even more useful; for 
instance, what is the number of caseworkers to total cases per 
month? This is an example of a productivity ratio.
Each industry and function will have its own set of useful ratios. Some ratios 
can be interpreted as a productivity number (for example, revenue per con-
sultant in a consultancy firm) while others are about balance (number of 
software developers per quality assurance engineer in a software development 
firm). The danger comes when some are thought of as productivity ratios 
but are not, or are fraught with danger when taken out of context. The most 
famous organizational design ratio is the span of control. Given the obsession 
with span of control, I believe it is worthy of special attention.
Example: Span of control
One of the questions most often asked in rightsizing is: ‘What is the ideal 
span of control?’ Span of control is the number of people that each manager 
has reporting to him or her. There is a famous example of a consultancy 
firm marketing a blanket 88 approach: never more than eight layers and 
no fewer than eight in the span of control. I am sure there are situations 
where eight is the ideal figure, but realistically there is no such thing as an 
ideal span of control. It depends on a large number of factors and dogma is 
incredibly dangerous. Numerical rules neglect the realities of different work 
complexity in specific areas of the organization. In call centres, typical spans 
will be 12–15 people while in executive teams Neilson and Wulf report a 
median of eight people in the CEO’s span of control.2 As I have said, there 
is no magic number. For example:
●
●A highly technical role might just have two or three people reporting 
to one senior manager.
●
●A pool of support staff might be managed with 30 people reporting 
to one manager.
●
●If the manager of four people spends half of his or her time actually 
doing technical work, should we count it as one manager, or actually 
only half a manager, giving a span of control of 0.5:4? A smaller span 
means a technical resource can dedicate a greater percentage of their 

Rightsizing
227
time to technical work. Given that a more senior resource may be  
a more productive one in these roles, smaller spans could lead to 
greater productivity.
The questions people often want to answer are:
●
●How can I calculate the span of control? (Sum the number of direct 
reports for each manager.)
●
●What is the average span of control for my whole organization? 
(Take the above sum and aggregate it.)
●
●What is the average span of control at each level? (Slide by job grade 
or depth.)
●
●What is the average span of control for each of the top 10 roles? 
(Filter to those top 10 roles and calculate it.)
●
●Where are the outliers in span of control for each of the top 10 roles? 
(Develop a leader board by ranking each manager by his or her span.)
●
●If we set a minimum span of control, how many people would be 
affected? How much money would we save? (Take all people with 
that minimum and sum their costs.)
●
●Where are managers dangerously overstretched? Finally, we are 
getting somewhere interesting: this isn’t so easy to answer. It’s a point 
I aim to address below.
The problem with many of these questions is they focus too much on aver-
ages. What is more interesting is the spread and seeing where the possible 
outliers are. Figure 3.7.3 shows, by department, how many managers have 
what span of control within a new design. In HR there are four managers: 
three with a span of four and one with five. In this view, you can quickly see 
where there might be issues across the 230 managers you have designed. 
Iterate the design in areas that don’t make sense. The big question in dis-
cussing spans of control is: ‘What number makes sense?’
A framework for thinking through an ideal span of 
control
There are three factors that drive what the span of control should ideally be, 
as shown in in Figure 3.7.4. These are: the nature of the subordinates, nature 
of the boss and the overall context of the organization. Each of these has 
various sub-drivers, and understanding these drivers should help to answer 
what the span of control ought to be.

Part Three: Micro Design
228
Figure 3.7.3 
Average span of control by department
Department
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
28
33
Sales
R&D
Projects
Project Delivery
Programme Delivery
Ops Programme Delivery
Operations
IT Programme Delivery
Executive
Distribution
Admin
Finance
HR
1
1
1
1
3
4
6
1
1
2
5
1
2
12
4
1
2
10
4
7
3
2
1
1
3
1
2
5
4
1
6
6
1
6
1
3
2
6
6
1
2
2
2
3
2
2
12
1
4
2
1
2
1
2
8
4
3
2
6
1
1
1
4
1
1
8
2
1
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
4
15
27
33
33
18
13
23
26
16
7
5
2
1
3
2
1
1
5
32
44
25
10
61
1
29
4
9
1
5
4
230
Span of Control
12
1
Figure 3.7.4 
Span of control drivers
Amount of other 
duties and work
Trust and 
relationships
Management 
experience
Knowledge  
of work
Culture
Cost pressure
Training and 
development
Growth
Motivation
Capabilities
Maturity and 
judgement
Repeatability  
of tasks
Context  
of the 
organization
nature of 
subordinates
nature of 
manager

Rightsizing
229
Nature of the subordinates
Level of self-direction of work and amount of supervision required:
●
●Capability of workers. If highly capable they will need relatively less 
supervision.
●
●Degree of repeatability of task. The more similar the tasks are, the 
easier it is to manage more people because I can manage by a process 
and become more numbers-driven in that management.
●
●Motivation, judgement and maturity, autonomy of workers. Are they 
self-starters? Are they prepared and allowed to make mistakes?  
Do they know when to escalate and is real trust given? If the answer 
is yes, then less supervision is required.
Nature of the managers
●
●Capability of managers. Do the managers have a good understanding 
and knowledge of the required work? How technical are they and 
have they fulfilled the role they are supervising or not? What is the 
average time in grade of the average manager? Think of those new  
to managing or those who are more junior. Management is a 
competency like many others and takes time to develop.
●
●Trust and relationships. The greater the trust, the better the 
relationships and the easier it is to supervise more people. How  
long have the core members of the team been working together?
These factors are driven more by the nature of the people. When designing 
a group when you don’t know who is in what role, assumptions will need to 
be made about competence and strength of relationships.
‘Task activity’ versus ‘management activity’
●
●Level of content and technical work required from the manager.  
If the role has technical deliverables and is required to produce 
output and not ‘just manage’.
●
●Volume of other tasks. Tasks such as membership of committees, 
involvement in project work and need to liaise with stakeholders are 
all factors which make the ability to manage larger teams more difficult.
Context of the organization
●
●Level of geographical dispersion. The more widely dispersed a 
business is, the harder it is to supervise, resulting in a smaller span of 
control. It is easier to manage face to face.

Part Three: Micro Design
230
●
●Training and development. How much training and development 
needs to come from the manager? Is it an apprenticeship or a 
providing-direction-only model?
●
●Need for cost savings and perspective on the maximum number of 
layers.
●
●Culture: How autocratic versus democratic? The more autocratic the 
greater the span of control can be.
●
●Administrative management. Amount of administrative management 
tasks and the maturity of the organization’s systems to make those 
tasks efficient. Examples include: appraisal and development plans 
process, input to remuneration plans, need to explain employment 
policy changes, time required in recruitment, time to specify and 
manage the objectives.
●
●Amount of change. The greater the change, the lower the span of 
control.
Thinking from a drivers perspective demonstrates the holistic approach 
needed. You should segment each management role using the above span of 
control drivers. To do this practically, use proxies where possible like the 
number of different roles (specific job titles) reporting to the manager or the 
percentage of time allocated to specifically managing. (This is the type of 
information you will have if you have done an IAA – see below.) Develop 
rules of the expected span of control by clustering similar roles and then  
do a gap analysis for each manager against that cluster.
Method 2: Activity analysis
Chapter 3.4 detailed how to build an Individual Activity Analysis (IAA).  
To recap, the activity analysis quantifies the amount of time that each person 
spends on his or her main activities. It answers what people actually do 
rather than what their job descriptions say they do. It is worth pointing 
out that this type of IAA analysis is not appropriate for everyone. For 
rightsizing people in roles involving highly repetitive basic activities, such  
as working on a manufacturing line or taking calls as first line support, the 
third method of driver analysis is more appropriate.
In my experience, simply seeing the cost of every process and activity 
produces incredibly valuable insights. It immediately shows where there are 
likely to be inefficiencies or a lack of investment. Figure 3.7.5 shows the cost 

Rightsizing
231
Figure 3.7.5 
Process cost coloured by number of FTEs  
involved
IT Support
Group Management
Business Change
Finance Reporting
Financial Control and Taxation
IT Supply Charges
IT Projects
Office Refurbishment
Asset Valuation
Business Development
Product Development
HR Advisors
Corporate Governance
3.08M
2.36M
1.12M
1.06M
982K
924K
888K
681K
607K
341K
307K
307K
268K
Process Cost by Name
No FTEs Doing Activity
0–2
2–4
4–6
6–8
10–12
32–34
broken down by a given number of processes. The chart is heat-mapped to 
show the number of different people involved in that process. The more 
green, the fewer people involved. For the organization in this example, we 
can start to ask valuable questions such as: does it really make sense for 
‘Finance Reporting’ and ‘Financial Control and Taxation’ to be the fourth 
and fifth greatest cost areas?
Example: Building a new product commercialization 
team
On one project, I worked with a fast-moving consumer goods company to 
improve how it took new products to market. We had no idea who was  
involved with this process because no one had a job title referring to new 
product introductions, innovation or commercialization of the new products. 
Adding to the complexity, lots of functions were heavily involved at differ-
ent stages of the process. By performing an IAA we were able to see that of 
the 1,000 people who were not directly involved in manufacturing and dis-
tribution elements of the process, approximately 40 FTEs-worth of effort 
was involved in the planning and liaising of new product introductions. 
Broken down, this represented 50 per cent of 50 people’s time and 10 per 
cent of another 30 people’s time. Knowing the current effort from an activity 

Part Three: Micro Design
232
perspective gave us a starting point for sizing a new team focused purely on 
a large number of these activities.
We noticed a large amount of duplication across the countries. Each 
country had a group of engineers and buyers doing exactly the same work. 
By centralizing, we could save redundant effort. We created an area of expertise 
or what is commonly referred to a centre of excellence and we consolidated 
the new team to 25 permanent roles by prioritizing and reallocating certain 
activities. A further four FTEs were added to do new activities, which had 
previously been missing, such as project managing and coordinating pro­
duct launches, which required new competencies that didn’t previously exist 
in the organization.
Further activity analysis
By doing activity analysis you are providing the basis for a robust and 
detailed business case. To add insight and rigour to your analysis you can 
use internal benchmarks. For example, compare the amount of time across 
different organizations (countries, divisions, products) for the same activity 
in the same way you do ratio analysis. I have seen 300 per cent more time 
spent on the same activity from one site to another in situations where the 
scope, order of magnitude of complexity and underlying work were funda-
mentally the same. The dimension categories explained in Chapter 3.4 now 
become extremely useful. For instance:
●
●By using each of the chosen dimensions from Chapter 3.4, you can 
group them into logical areas and optimize how they are delivered. 
For instance, are the ‘transactional activities’ in the SOT dimension 
being done by appropriate job levels (grades)?
●
●What percentage of people are customer-facing by function, and are 
customer-facing roles spending enough customer-facing time?
●
●What are the highly variable activities? Once you know which ones 
are significant, you can then use this information as an input for 
driver analysis (where FTE required is directly related to the volume 
of production).
From this you can ask and try to answer:
●
●Are there economies of scale by aggregating activities?
●
●Should a more junior grade be doing the work?
●
●How much duplication is there?

Rightsizing
233
●
●Could this activity be outsourced? If it could:
–– What kind of cost saving would that deliver?
–– Would it mean losing a core competence?
●
●Should we even be doing it? What would be the impact if we just 
stopped the work?
●
●Given our goals, objectives and issues/case for change, are we doing 
enough in our key focus areas?
●
●What impact would automation or streamlining have?
Because you know who is involved in every single activity, if you make 
changes to who does what and how much of that time you are expecting 
then you can complete a responsibility impact analysis, often the hardest 
element of an impact analysis to quantify. It means defining the percentage 
of each person’s work time that will change. Will only one or two small 
responsibilities (5 per cent to 10 per cent of their work) change or more than 
50 per cent? The impact analysis outlined in Chapter 4.4 shows how you 
can further use this information as part of the implementation process. 
The process of doing all this analysis will probably highlight data flaws. 
Socialize your analysis to those who have a feeling for the work and the sorts 
of improvements required. Sit down with them and gauge their reaction on 
where you are under- or over-investing. A great deal of this is a reflective 
process. It is about asking: ‘Does it look and feel right?’ At the end of the day, 
your experts’ intuition is the final arbitrator. Although this book is about 
data-driven organization design, gut feeling is always important in assessing 
results and analysis. A large part of using your gut feeling is thinking of 
possible explanations why there may be differences and testing them. The 
next example explains how.
Example: Testing why different areas have 
performance variances
Just knowing one area performs better than another doesn’t help you that 
much in closing the gap. Good analytics aims to help you understand why 
so that the right positive actions can be taken. For an example of applying 
internal benchmarking think of six manufacturing sites. The six sites all 
produce similar products and volume of outputs but are in different geo-
graphic locations. Figure 3.7.6 represents the results of an IAA for employees 
doing a particular ‘activity X’. The results suggest that sites 2 and 3 are  
extremely inefficient compared with sites 4 and 6. But why? What is the  
secret of the high-performing sites that can help me understand what actions 

Part Three: Micro Design
234
Figure 3.7.6 
Activity of multi-potential drivers
Activity Analysis
Site 1
Site 2
Site 3
Site 4
Site 5
Site 6
Total
Correlation
Activity ‘X’ hours worked pm 
2,077
3,876 
3,461 
1,661
2,769 
1,800 
15,644
FTEs doing ‘X’ 
1.5 
2.8 
2.5 
1.2 
2.0 
1.3 
11.3
Number of people that do ‘X’ 
2
 6
 8 
2
4 
2
 24
0.91
Average % dedication 
75% 
47% 
31% 
60% 
50% 
65% 
47% 
–0.78
Quality: Defects per thousand 
65 
61 
49 
110
 83 
75 
55 
–0.68
Avg Grade (1 = CEO; 10 = Lowest) 
5 
5 
6 
6
6 
6 
6 
–0.31
Performance (5 = Excellent; 1 = Poor) 
4 
3 
4 
3 
3 
4 
3
–0.33
Competence in skill ‘Y’ (4 = Expert; 1 = Novice) 
4 
3 
4 
4 
2 
4
 4 
–0.63
Avg years experience 
7 
5 
7 
6 
5 
6 
6 
–0.22
Average Salary Cost
$49,000 
$36,490 
$51,935 
$44,201
$35,558 
$39,842 
$42,607 
–0.12
Total cost for activity X 
$73,500
$102,172 $129,838
$53,041
$71,116
$51,795
$481,462
0.87
I need to take to make those unproductive sites productive? Use additional 
information captured from a series of potential explanations (hypotheses) 
together with more input and output measures. An example where the IAA 
can help is by quantifying the percentage time that each person doing the 
given activity is focusing on it. With site 4 it was 60 per cent versus 31 per 
cent for site 3, or twice as much dedication.
To analyse the data further, start visualizing it. The scatter plot on the left 
of Figure 3.7.7 shows the six sites’ percentage dedication versus number of 
FTEs. The colour is the competency score, where green is excellent. The size 
of the bubble is the average number of defects. From this I can see that the 
most productive sites have far greater dedication of time and are far greener, 
but the quality doesn’t seem to be better. The plot on the left shows visually, 
however, that neither the average number of years’ experience nor the perfor-
mance scores seem to have much of an impact. But looking at the scatter 
plots alone is a bit dangerous. Take a look at the data table (Figure 3.7.6) 
again and see the correlations in the right-hand column (to build a correla-
tion in Excel, enter =CORREL (first row or column of data, second row or 
column of data), for example =CORREL(B15:G15,$B$14:$G$14). I fixed the 
second row so that I could drag the formula down and it fixed on the dataset 
in question. This shows which factors statistically explain the most. There 
does seem to be a fairly high correlation between quality and productivity 
after all. The main decision based on this data would be to increase the  

Rightsizing
235
focus and train the team to improve its competency levels. If unsure, pick 
one of the sites and run a pilot to see if the interventions work.
Clearly, the sample size is small and there might be other factors at play 
(refer back to Chapter 3.2 for the dangers of drawing conclusions from small 
datasets). The point of this analysis is to try to find patterns and insights. Be 
careful in drawing any definitive conclusions. However, the analysis should 
give sufficient evidence to allow us to probe further into the reasons for a 
site’s performance and run a pilot at the site. What I hope the above example 
demonstrates is:
1	 The risk of over simplicity. If only one measure was used, then 
insights could and most certainly will be missed. I should also point 
out that this analysis is far from being statistically significant: the 
sample size is so tiny it could just be random. What I’m looking for  
is signs of patterns, of hypotheses that may be interesting to test.
2	 The power of supporting statistical analysis with visuals. The way 
you see the world defines how you understand it. Most minds find  
it hard to look at a table and draw from it all the relevant conclusions.
3	 The power of using activity analysis combined with other measures. 
The value one can gain should far outweigh the activity analysis on 
its own. For instance, the relationship between the various measures 
could be totally different from the above example. What if time in 
grade was the main reason for variation in efficiency?
Figure 3.7.7 
Activity of multi-potential drivers
Average Average % Dedication
0
0.19
0.38
0.56
0.75
Average FTEs Doing ‘X’
0
0.7
1.4
2.1
2.8
Average Avg Years Of Experience
0
Average FTEs Doing ‘X’
0
Site 1
Site 2
Site 3
Site 5
Site 6
Site 4
Site 1
Site 2
Site 3
Site 5
Site 6
Site 4
1.75
3.5
5.25
7
0.7
1.4
2.1
2.8
Average % Dedication vs FTEs Doing ‘X’ by Site 
sized by Quality: Defects Per Thousand
Avg Years Of Experience vs FTEs Doing ‘X’ by Site 
sized by Quality: Defects Per Thousand
Competance In Skill
2
3
4
Performance
2–3
3–4
4–5
5–6

Part Three: Micro Design
236
4	 It doesn’t need to take much more effort. Collecting the activity data is 
the hardest bit. Collecting other measures like output or quality should 
be easy. Your baseline information should already contain collected data 
items like start date, tenure and, hopefully, time in grade/role information.
Example: Step change in cost structure
If the goal is to dramatically reduce the costs through headcount reduction, 
the activity analysis is an excellent starting point. Improvements in efficiency, 
that is doing the same thing with less, will only take you so far. What if you 
need a dramatic reduction of approximately 20 per cent to 50 per cent? 
Then you need to start thinking about what you are going to stop doing.  
In order to continue with a certain activity, the answers to the questions 
below have to be an emphatic Yes:
1	 Do we need to do X for legal or compliance reasons?
2	 If we stopped doing X, would it cost us significantly more?
3	 Is X best done in house, because it is core and outsourcing it would 
affect our competitive position negatively?
4	 Is the cost of automating X far too high, risky or impossible?
Another thought process to go through is to ask the specialization question: 
‘If the activity was the only thing that someone did with the optimal skills 
and operational settings, then how many FTEs at what level would be  
required?’ For these activities, flag them as such (create dimensions against 
them) and then review the number of different people who do the activity 
and what percentage of their time this takes. If the answer is lots of people 
with a small percentage of their time doing these sorts of ‘high economies’ 
activities (economics of scale were explained in Chapter 3.4), then think 
through radically changing the delivery model. This kind of analysis includes 
answering the following questions:
●
●Is it regular enough to fill someone’s time?
●
●Would it be too risky for having only one person/role dedicated to it?
●
●If you created a role that only focused on it, is there a sufficient pool 
of candidates to be able to staff this job?
Method 3: Driver analysis
Driver analysis is an extension of ratio and activity analysis. It is only 
really relevant for variable roles or activities. The questions asked in driver 

Rightsizing
237
analysis are: ‘What is the driver and if that driver changes, what is the impact?’ 
For instance, drivers for a call centre are the number of calls, flow of calls, 
service levels demanded, skills needed, time in grade and, therefore, time to 
resolve a case. In other words, there are numerous influences. The fact you 
can have multiple drivers is one of the reasons having a magic number for 
rightsizing can be so dangerous. However, by doing such in-depth analysis 
you are mitigating the risk of applying one number too soon.
Driver analysis is effectively a subset of ratio analysis but for variable 
roles and, ideally, activities. For example, if the main ratio for sizing the 
account management team is the number of clients, then if the number of 
clients doubles, we would expect the number of account managers to double, 
all things remaining equal. This type of analysis is used in ‘what if’ scenario 
building, or where there is an expectation of significant change. Only use this 
method if:
1	 there is one or a number of variable drivers that impact on the 
demand for FTEs;
2	 there is more than one FTE in the role;
3	 the driver(s) is measurable.
Another tip is to start simple, for example one linear driver, and then build 
in complexity if the cost of that additional complexity is worth the cost of 
the measuring and maths. Use the driver analysis as a rule of thumb, not 
scientific certainty. By doing this sort of analysis, one is simplifying the universe 
so that decisions can be made. Once the analysis is completed, think through 
how to factor in the complexities. For example:
●
●other relevant ratios;
●
●economies of scale;
●
●the option to apply a more complex group of roles.
Example: Multi-plant driver analysis
I once carried out driver analysis for a group of 20 manufacturing plants. 
Each plant had grown independently from a design perspective. Having 
done the role ratio and activity analysis, we found that, correcting for scale, 
some plants had eight people fulfilling a given role while others only had 
two. It was a stark difference, even when corrected for the level of auto­
mation and age of the plants. The 400 per cent difference was replicated 
across many other roles. Another issue was that different plants had subtly 
(and not so subtly) different structures: orders-of-magnitude differences in 

Part Three: Micro Design
238
investments in core processes and large ranges in the percentage cost of 
supporting functions. Each plant was different in terms of its volume, mix 
of lines and to some extent the level of technological capability. But they all 
had a broadly similar process and were all making exactly the same product.
The goal was to define a generic organizational chart that would work 
for each plant. The roles were broken into fixed or variable dimensions, as 
explained in Chapter 3.4. If the role was fixed, it typically required only one 
FTE. If the role was variable, we then determined what the driver was and 
how that driver impacted on the number of FTEs required. Building the 
model included defining: driver assumptions for each plant; calculations; 
and output reports. The mechanism and logic were then sense-checked by 
several acting and former plant managers.
Define the standard org chart blueprint
The standard org structure was defined with the focus on whether the role 
was fixed or variable, represented by the blue colour for variable as shown 
in Figure 3.7.8. In total there were 39 roles shown of which ‘only’ 16 were 
variable (the figure doesn’t show all the roles).
Figure 3.7.8 
Role tree coloured by fixed or variable
Plant Director
Manf. Ops Manager
Eng Manager
HR Manager
QSE Manager
MIS Manager
Secretary
Manuf. Operations
Scheduling
(production
planners)
Asset Care
Manager
Facilities Manager
Technical Manager
and CapEx
HR Wages and Pay-
Roll Clerk
AAs
HR Administrator
Quality and
Environment
Improvement
Manager
Quality Assurance
Team Leaders
Quality Systems
Team Leader
Microbiologist
H&S Manager
MIS Analyst
Accounting Clerk
Team Leaders
Team Lead – C
Senior Technical
Operators – Type C
Materials In & Out
Operators
Process
Coordinator –
Process/Mixing
Room
Fixed Or Variable
Fixed
Variable

Rightsizing
239
Define the list of drivers
After much discussion, it turned out there were only five basic drivers for the 
volume of people required:
1	 The number of lines by types of line. Each line has a number of 
operators per line. Not all lines are the same in their nature.
2	 Number of shifts. There are shift workers and non-shift workers. The 
number of shift workers needs to be multiplied by the number of shifts.
3	 The presence or absence of a technology. Not all plants have the 
same technology. By having a ‘yes’ or ‘no’ response to a type of 
technology, then the accuracy of the model can be improved.  
This can also lead to the easy development of a business case.
4	 Senior roles. The number of admin staff is driven by the number of 
senior roles as one admin role looks after x executives.
5	 The volume. In the end, volume wasn’t treated as a driver in this 
model. But it was useful for sense-checking the scale and economics 
by doing ratio analysis with volume as the denominator.
The drivers and the volume of each driver for each plant were then added to 
an assumption lookup table. Figure 3.7.9 is an example. A lookup table is used 
to capture the key assumptions and it is connected to the main calculation 
table. Using assumption lookup tables allows you not only to be clear about 
your assumptions, but also to run automated sensitivity analysis.
Figure 3.7.9 
List of drivers
Plant Driver
Num
Notes
Num lines – A
3
How many lines of this type
Num lines – B
4
How many lines of this type
Num lines – C
3
How many lines of this type
Volume – A
11,500,000
What volume of this type
Volume – B
17,600,000
What volume of this type
Volume – C
8,600,000
What volume of this type
Number of Shifts
4
How many shifts
Senior Roles
12
In the standard model, how many senior roles
Total Line
10
How many total lines are there?
Has tech X
Yes
Does the plant have Technology ‘X’, which enables the nu
XYZ
4,234
Dummy driver

Part Three: Micro Design
240
Build the model and populate it
Figure 3.7.10 highlights most of the calculations. For each role, there is a driver. 
Take the example of ‘Line Type B Operators’. The driver was the number of lines 
being operated, the number of FTEs per line and the number of shifts. In this 
case there were 2.5 FTEs per line and four shifts with four lines = 2.5×4×4 = 40.
The calculation numbers for Line Type B Operators are highlighted in 
Figure 3.7.10. The other calculations are the sum of FTEs and the FTE 
Roll-up. The FTE Roll-up at the Plant Director level is the total number of 
FTEs required for the entire plant. This worksheet shows each of the roles 
in their reporting hierarchy, so you can see the numbers as you cascade down 
the organization. The Function and Senior Role dimensions are used for  
additional analysis. The number of FTEs for that given role is determined by 
the driver. It should be easy to change the drivers in order to see what impact 
other assumptions have, as explained in ‘Method 4: Mathematical model-
ling’ below. The ‘Num’ is from the lookup table in Figure 3.7.9. For instance, 
in this example, there were four Line Type Bs (that means four different 
manufacturing lines of a given type). The 2.5 FTEs per line is shown in the right-
hand column. The productivity assumption is one of the critical assumptions 
or ‘driver ratios’. Once this has been set, you can start to analyse it. From 
this example you can roll up the total number of FTEs, as shown in column 
6. In this case, there is a demand for 272 FTEs. This data can be seen visually 
in the scaled org chart view for the manufacturing roles in Figure 3.7.11.  
Figure 3.7.10 
FTEs calculation for each role
Role Title
Function
FTE Actual
FTE Demand
FTE Gap
FTE Roll-up
Fixed or Variable
Driver
  Plant Director
GM
1
1
0
272.75
Fixed
      Manf. Ops Manager
Make
1
1
0
210.75
Fixed
          Manuf. Operations
Make
6
5
1
204.75
Variable
Total Line
              Team leaders
Make
17
20
-3
130
Variable
Total Line
                   Line Type A Operators
Make
65
54
11
54
Variable
Num lines - A
                   Line Type B Operators
Make
35
40
-5
40
Variable
Num lines - B
                   Line Type B Operators for complex packing
Make
15
16
-1
16
Variable
Num lines - B
                 Team Lead - C
Make
1
0.75
0.25
0.75
Variable
Num lines - A
               Senior Technical Operators - Type C
Make
3
3
0
15
Variable
Num lines - A
                    Line Type C Operators
Make
11
12
.1
12
Variable
Num lines - C
                  Materials In & Out Operators
Make
46
40
6
40
Variable
Total Line
                Process Coordinator - Process/Mixing Room
Make
4
4
0
14
Variable
Number of Shifts
                     Process/Mixing Room
Make
10
10
0
10
Variable
Total Line
               Scheduling (production planners)
Make
5
5
0
5
Variable
Total Line
         Eng Manager
Engineering
0
1
-1
22
Fixed
             Asset Care Manager
Engineering
1
1
0
16
Fixed
                   Engineers (Asset Care)
Engineering
14
12
2
12
Variable
Total Line
                   Storeman
Make
3
3
0
3
Fixed
Total Volume
             Facilities Manager
Engineering
1
1
0
2
Fixed
                   Site Services Support
Engineering
1
1
0
1
Fixed
Technical Manager and CapEx
Engineering
3
3
0
3
Fixed
Fixed Or Variable
Fixed
Variable

Rightsizing
241
I like the scaled org chart because it helps to give a sense of proportion 
within the familiar org chart picture. The bar chart shows the same informa-
tion, but this time how many FTEs are required by organ­izational depth.
Once the driver model blueprint has been developed, it is crucial to test 
the thinking and results. The best way to test is for a group of stakeholders 
to review many of the conclusions in graphical format and to see the organ­
ization in different ways. Each way is likely to raise a different question, 
building both confidence and refinement in the recommendations. For ex-
ample, the split of the roles can be seen by depth. In Figure 3.7.11, depth 1 is 
the Plant Manager, who has a team of six. Again, the blue and yellow are 
showing the number of fixed and variable FTEs required according to driver 
analysis. In this example, although there were only 16 variable roles, those 
roles accounted for 93 per cent of the total FTEs. For the highlighted plant, 
the calculated FTE demand was 273 compared with the as-is number of 
314, implying a potential saving of 41 or 13 per cent.
Scaling the analysis for all plants
Once the model works for one plant, the next step is to run it for all of them. 
In this example, the 20 plants had a total of 4,400 as-is FTEs. The driver 
Figure 3.7.11 
Required FTEs by role and by depth
1
Manf. Ops
Manager
5
Manuf.
Operations
5
Scheduling
(production
planners)
20
Team Leaders
0.75
Team
Lead – C
3
Senior
Technical
Operators –
Type C
40
Materials In &
Out Operators
4
Process
Coordinator –
Process/Mixing
Room
54
Line Type A
Operators
40
Line Type B
Operators
16
Line Type B
Operators for
complex
packing
12
Line Type C
Operators
10
Process/
Mixing
Room
1
2
3
4
5
1
6
14
18
32
10
91.8
102
132
Fixed or Variable
Fixed
Variable

Part Three: Micro Design
242
model based on a standard plant org model reduced this to 3,800 or 600 
fewer. The scatter plot (Figure 3.7.12) shows each plant as a circle, coloured 
by its geographical region. The x-axis is the difference in number of FTEs 
between the as-is and to-be scenarios. The y-axis is the number of current 
FTEs. The size of the circle (or what is often referred to as the bubble) can 
be any other measure: for example, the quality score, average tenure, pro-
ductivity or service measures like line fill rate or a measure of the overall 
equipment efficiency (OEE) which is a percentage measure of the actual 
output versus the potential output.
Further analysis was conducted at both a function and a role level. What 
transpired was that some plants have significant variances at the function 
and role levels. Additional elements of analysis and testing included:
●
●Spans of control – have a max and min for each role type.
●
●Output measures versus the numbers; for example, revenue or units 
produced versus the number of FTEs, and broken down by plant 
clusters, for example:
–– large plants and modern;
–– large plants and old;
–– small plants.
●
●Quality scores for those with a higher ratio of staff in a function  
(for example, quality FTEs).
Figure 3.7.12 
Scatter plot of plants FTE difference by as-is 
FTEs
Total As-Is FTEs
0
85.3
171
256
341
Difference between total As-Is and Modelled FTE
0
20.8
41.5
62.3
83
Area
East
North
South
West

Rightsizing
243
●
●Other possible drivers that are harder to quantify, but might have  
an impact. For instance:
–– age of the plant;
–– level of capital investment.
●
●Items like level of automation should be captured within the model. 
However, if they are not, consider this as a way of explaining the 
variances in the number of FTEs. If automation is a big driver, then 
this sort of analysis should support your business case for increasing 
the level of automation.
These sorts of exercises don’t mean that each plant has to suddenly reduce 
its numbers in some sort of dogmatic way, hence the recommendation for 
additional analysis. There may be robust reasons for why some plants need 
more people relatively. For example, capital investment is required to increase 
the numbers of operators on Line Type B from 2.5 to 4 in many plants and 
the ROI from that investment might be below the minimum hurdle rate (the 
minimum rate of return on a project or investment required). The quality of 
the analysis is based on the robustness of the standard org design and the 
drivers selected. That requires a good understanding of many of the as-is 
current designs through interviews and workshops with those who manage 
and understand the plants.
Method 4: Mathematical modelling
In scenarios where there are system dynamics impacts, such as trying to 
size complex pathways where the demand and productivity are variable or 
when the drivers are not linear or deterministic in nature, then mathematical 
modelling is useful. The number of times you come across the need to under-
stand this sort of complexity is rare. You should only use this last technique 
when there are system dynamics at play. An example includes queuing effects 
or variability in demand with target service levels that need to be achieved. 
Modelling is a fantastic way of testing hypotheses and scenarios in complex 
situations, but it is not always straightforward, and it comes with a price 
tag and a number of risks, for example:
●
●Getting lost in the detail.
●
●Over-complexity. The modeller becomes fixated on everything  
that can be done rather than what should be done. Keeping it as 
simple as possible is the name of the game and is really hard to do. 

Part Three: Micro Design
244
Each added bit of complexity has an exponential impact on the 
modelling task.
●
●Poor communication. The model needs to be structured to facilitate 
communication. Assumptions need to be separated, and it should be 
easy to see the impact of changing an assumption on the key output 
parameters. The logic of the model should be structured so that 
others can understand it.
A mathematical model is a description of a system using mathematical con-
cepts and language. Mathematical models can take many forms, including 
but not limited to dynamical systems, statistical models, differential equations, 
or game theoretic models. A deterministic model is one in which every set of 
variable states is uniquely determined by parameters in the model and by 
sets of previous states of these variables. Deterministic models perform the 
same way for a given set of initial conditions. By contrast, in a stochastic 
model, randomness is present. Variable assumptions have probability distri-
butions rather than just being a single number. Model complexity involves  
a trade-off between simplicity and accuracy. Often it is best to start simple 
and add complexity with time. It is equally important to think through the 
exact questions which need to be answered first and only add complexity as 
that complexity supports improving the accuracy and ability to answer 
those questions. A model should have the six modules described below.
About
This should summarize the objective of the model: aims; scope; context; 
history; team; versions; functionality.
Inputs
This essentially comes down to data. Start with the solid facts, and if external 
data sources are used ensure it is easy to take further extracts from the 
sources. Ensure that it is easy to update data loads, if you rely on external 
sources. The other crucial point is to manage your metadata effectively in 
separate tables. With Excel models avoid hard-coding meta tags as it will be 
impossible for you to dynamically add new elements to the model. In par-
ticular, avoid hard-coding numbers to cells as these may well change over time.
Assumptions
Assumptions are also data, but they are variable and, as the term suggests, 
assumed. What is important to understand about each assumption is how 
changing it will impact the outputs and which ones require the greatest focus. 
An example of an assumption might be how long it takes to do a certain 

Rightsizing
245
task on average. As explained in Chapter 3.5, it is useful to specify the min-
imum expected and maximum possible numbers for each assumption in 
order to get a sense of volatility. Equally, for each assumption, understand 
what the impact would be on your key output measures so that you can 
categorize each assumption by its Volatility Impact Category (VIC). Further­
more, with this information, it is possible to run an automated Monte Carlo 
analysis. By automating the sensitivity analysis and creating structure around 
it, you can focus management attention and you will rapidly improve the 
insight generated.
Working pages
Inputs and assumptions once entered into the model get manipulated to 
produce output calculations. A good example of this is what happens in  
a budget, taking past results and making assumptions about future work to 
create a forecast. Working pages demonstrate the manipulations so you 
know what is happening beneath the data; it is the logic of the model. The 
key is to structure these logically so that the calculations can be checked. 
Build flexible structures so that if you add new categories of data the model 
can easily accommodate them.
Outputs
The results of the calculations of the inputs and assumptions form a set of 
output tables or files. The key thing is to structure these so that the analysis 
can be flexible with slicing and dicing along any of the metadata tags.
Visuals and analysis
Develop visuals that answer the key questions the model was designed to 
answer. The model should feel like a presentation and help the users walk 
through a story.
There is a variety of tools that can help with modelling. I am going to give  
a brief overview of three types: Excel, Monte Carlo simulation packages and 
bespoke solutions. For each one I will give an overview, the advantages and 
disadvantages. The aim of this section is to give an introduction and help 
you decide which approach works best. It is not intended to teach you 
how to do the modelling.
Excel
●
●Description/summary of approach. When dealing with a simple 
model and a relatively small amount of data, Excel is probably  
the best tool for the job.

Part Three: Micro Design
246
●
●Advantage. Excel is highly flexible and allows you to insert plugins 
such as the software Monte Carlo plug-in @risk, which further 
enhances modelling capability.
●
●Disadvantage. The visualization functionality is poor and it doesn’t 
do discrete event simulation. The fact that it is offline makes it 
difficult to share with people and it is hard to maintain if you want 
to repeat the model – something you will often want to do.
Simul8/Monte Carlo simulation package
●
●Description/summary of approach. This off-the-shelf product helps 
define process and simulation rules, built for discrete event 
simulation.
●
●Advantage. It is more accurate than Excel and can handle more 
complexity.
●
●Disadvantage. It is a reasonably technical tool and will often require 
a third party to implement it. It can become a black hole.
Bespoke solution 
●
●Description/summary of approach. There is a range of technologies:  
.Net, SQL, Scala and Python. You will need a range of resources to 
design, build and test the system. The crucial piece is the upfront 
definition of the method. Rapid prototyping is a must.
●
●Advantage. You can answer all possible questions and complexities.
●
●Disadvantage. Expensive and once built hard to change. Extremely 
difficult and expensive to build a highly usable front-end interface.
I have built a number of models over the years using all three types of ap-
proaches. I have had my share of successes and failures. You will need a range 
of highly specialized skills, potentially from outside your organization. If you 
do go down this route, be sure:
●
●the business case is significant;
●
●you have the budget and resources allocated to it;
●
●you allow enough time.
The process of developing your models is a learning process. As you write 
them you think about the nature of the problem you are trying to solve in 
new and deeper ways. Because of this intellectual journey, prototyping can 
be invaluable.

Rightsizing
247
Final thoughts
Be sensitive in determining the final numbers required. The outcome of this 
analysis is going to lead to decisions about hiring and firing. The ability of 
your organization to meet its goals requires channelling the right number of 
resources into the key pieces of work in an optimal balance. Achieving that 
is no mean feat. Unfortunately, the world isn’t static. The numbers of FTEs 
required will change and managing that ongong demand forecasting is a 
central part of doing workforce planning as I will explain in Chapter 4.5.
I believe that it is time to stop leaving to chance an issue as important as 
the number of FTEs that should be in each role. Too often the answer comes 
from a combination of the four dangerous methods, namely: 1) who shouts 
loudest; 2) it just evolves; 3) blanket cuts across the board; 4) the magic 
number. I fully appreciate that the four methods you should use require 
investment in time and effort. These four methods (ratio analysis, activity 
analysis, driver analysis and mathematical modelling) don’t all have to be 
used all the time. Mathematical modelling will rarely be used and driver 
analysis only in certain scenarios. I’m a big believer in activity analysis and 
how it can provide such a deep and rich understanding that it will transform 
how you think about your organization. But again, you don’t need to do 
activity analysis for everyone. For example, certain variable roles with lots 
of FTEs in them can be sampled and if roles are similar, ratio and driver 
analysis are better tools.
The key to doing good rightsizing analysis is to use the right tools for the 
right set of roles. Start with the simple and add complexity if the cost of the 
additional robustness is worth it. Although this is very analytical, it is also 
one of the most emotive and politically charged topics in this book. There­
fore, make it easy for your assumptions to be varied, so that sensitivity 
analysis can be done. Make the source and logic for all assumptions clear. 
Do your best to build your analysis on robust data-quality foundations  
and if you need to make top-down estimates, get your key stakeholders to be 
part of that estimating process. It is a journey and requires as much judge-
ment as number crunching to get to the best possible answers. I say best 
possible, because there can be no definitive right answer. It is about getting 
the right balance.
By the time you have finished your rightsizing, you will be done with your 
design work. Now the real work starts because you have to execute that 
design into reality. Going back to the introduction in Chapter 3.1, there is 
no point just having designs on paper. Using the architectural metaphor, the 

Part Three: Micro Design
248
drawings only have value if you turn them into buildings that people can 
live and work in. In other words, you have to make the design real. That is 
the subject of Part Four of this book.
1	 Ensure you define and get sign-off for the methods you are going to use 
to rightsize.
2	 Don’t use poor magic numbers to deterministically produce the answer. 
An example is assuming the span of control should be eight.
3	 Activity analysis is powerful, will support writing robust business cases 
and ensures everyone focuses on the right thing.
4	 In situations where you have large numbers of variable roles, use driver 
analysis to estimate the numbers.
5	 Sophisticated modelling methods like Monte Carlo simulation have their 
place in highly complex settings, but in those settings the other three 
methods should still be applied as a way of triangulating your answers.
Remember this
Notes
1	 Simon, B (1998) Max Ringelmann (1861–1931) et la recherche en machinisme 
agricole, in Cahiers d’Histoire et de Philosophie des Sciences, No. 46: Histoire 
de la méchanique appliquée. Enseignement, recherche et pratiques mécaniciennes 
en France après 1880, Fontanon, C (ed), pp 47–55, ENS Editions, Paris
2	 Harvard Business Review (2012) How many direct reports?, April [accessed 
online 12 January 2015] https://hbr.org/2012/04/how-many-direct-reports/ar/1

Part Four
Making it Real
249

250
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

“
Introduction
Theories are always very thin and insubstantial;  
experience only is tangible.  Hosea Ballou
What is Making it Real?
Good strategy is strategy that is executed.1 Up to now, we have been in the 
world of theory and design, of concepts and how things should work in a 
stylized and abstract way. If we stop now, I fear there is a large chance that 
you would be worse off. You would have thrown great concepts around, 
created a huge amount of work and built large expectations. This book is 
intended to help you achieve and sustain your competitive edge through  
effective, data-driven organizational design. It isn’t the design, however, that 
will ensure you get the edge; it is the execution of the design. You know you 
need to eat fewer calories than you burn to lose weight, but will you actually 
do it? An architect can draw hundreds of pictures, floor plans and electrical 
schemas, but if nothing is built, then so what? The only value of a theory  
is if it works in practice. It is easy to live in the world of theory, plans or 
designs. It is safe. Changes, scenarios and tweaks can be made without  
an impact. But, once a design or plan has been decided upon, then what? 
How do you ensure success? How do you sustain it? How do you mitigate 
the downside risks?
The first thing is to realize that no matter how good the design is, no matter 
how much you have thought about it, you will have missed many elements 
and that the design won’t be 100 per cent right. It is going to need to change 
and you need to be comfortable with that notion. The second thing to realize 
is that we don’t live in a bubble and circumstances will change, so you need 
to be alert and adaptable. The third thing is: this is a learning process. Every 
day we learn more. We refine and with luck improve. Lastly, no matter how 
hard you think it is going to be, it will be harder. But I believe one of the 
4.1
251

Part Four: Making It Real
252
strengths of many of the people who do great things is a kind of forecast 
optimism bias. They believe they can do more, faster, better than you could 
realistically expect. And then once they push forward, with more than 
normal resilience, somehow they achieve it.
Making it Real isn’t just about running through all steps in an imple­
mentation process. It is about winning the hearts and minds of everyone 
involved so that they are willing to make it a success. Figure 4.1.1 highlights 
the importance of moving the perception of change from being uncertain, 
full of fear and lacking intrinsic motivation for the workforce to one where 
everyone is full of growing optimism, a clear understanding of what will 
change and why, together with the highest possible levels of motivation of 
where you want to move them from and to. The last point is probably the 
most important. As Daniel Pink wrote in his book Drive, there are three 
things that make a role in the knowledge economy truly engaging: purpose, 
autonomy and mastery.2 The micro design creates the structure that ensures 
that each of these three conditions of achieving highly motivated employees 
is possible:
●
●Purpose is provided by the vision and strategy, as outlined in  
Chapter 2.2, but also in ensuring each employee has meaningful 
personal objectives, as discussed in Chapter 3.3.
●
●Autonomy means defining the accountabilities and decisions to strike 
the right balance between top-down control and the autonomy that 
so many people desperately seek. Chapter 3.4 discussed how to 
define the accountabilities using the RAS framework described in 
Chapter 1.3.
●
●Mastery is best achieved when employees are working within the 
flow channel as described in Chapter 3.6. It is not only developing 
competencies to the highest possible levels and being great at what 
you do, it is also being sufficiently challenged in the process.
In other words, if you have done the macro and micro designs well, you are 
positioning yourself perfectly to create an organization of highly motivated 
and engaged people.
But even with all the strengths and possible upsides, the most important 
question to tackle is whether you are brave enough and committed enough 
to go for it. Be under no illusions as to how tough it is likely to be. Structure 
the work into bite-size chunks so that it doesn’t overwhelm you. Learn 
how to be both brave and realistic. Improve the odds of success and make 
the process of doing so rewarding. In order to become fit, to become a top 

Introduction
253
athlete, you have to find a way to enjoy training. Similarly, to get the com-
petitive edge, you have to find a way to enjoy the journey and build in 
institutional resilience.
Realize the design is only a sketch
Economics is a dismal science. As people often say, put six economists in  
a room, ask for their opinion, and you will have seven or more opinions.  
It is not dismal because ‘economists’ are unintelligent or lazy. It is because 
the subject is just so hard. Unfortunately, it can’t all be captured in mathe-
matical equations, but still we try. We try because we need to improve our 
understanding and the only way to achieve that understanding is by simpli-
fication. On the first day of my economics education we were taught a model 
of perfect competition where no businesses are large enough to have market 
power; where there are infinite numbers of buyers and sellers; with no entry 
or exit barriers; all products are the same; everyone has perfect information 
and everyone is rational. This model allows would-be economists to learn 
how firms would maximize their profit and how prices would be set. The 
model is useful not because it is so accurate – the number of markets that 
operate ‘perfectly’ is clearly limited – but because it provides a base against 
Figure 4.1.1 
Position the change from uncertainty, fear and 
unengaged people to optimism, transparency 
and high levels of motivation
I
N
 
T
H
E
worst
the
Assuming
Anticipating
the
best
MOVE FROM

Part Four: Making It Real
254
which adding in more complexity can be tested. It enables us to ask: What if 
there were only one company or piece of imperfect information or product 
differentiation? With the relaxing of each assumption comes a host of new 
insights into how the world works. Only once something is understandable, 
in simple form, can more complexity – more truth – be added.
What is interesting, in the social sciences at least, is that our understand-
ing of this world changes it. For example, option pricing theory has led to 
more sophisticated instruments, which change how capital is allocated and 
returns for investors are maximized. In many respects, organization design 
in large organizations is not too dissimilar. It is an intellectual model of 
something too complex for us to fully understand. Our model has to be 
simple enough for one to understand. It is a model of reality, not reality itself. 
But like option pricing, the model will affect reality. By defining who is 
responsible for what and how many of a given role are required, it will change 
how people behave, what they do and how successful the organization will 
be in achieving its goals. However, it isn’t reality. Employees won’t and 
shouldn’t just do what is written down in their job spec. The activities 
described in the activity analysis do not reflect all the activities that happen 
or should happen. It is a guide. Reality is what all those people actually do 
on a minute-by-minute basis. It is how decisions are really made during 
unstructured conversations in corridors, by coffee machines, at the bar or 
just popping into an office, as well as in those structured meetings.
We try to make our designs more complex, in order to deal with the greater 
complexity. Multiple reporting lines and complex matrixes are examples of 
this. But we can’t make our design too complex to understand. We shouldn’t 
even try to define everything. The idea is to define enough so that everyone 
is clear as to what they need to do. Where does their role start and stop 
relative to others? What should success look and feel like?
Structure and logic for Part Four
The metaphor that is used to structure this section is that of a Formula 1 
race team. There are three phases in a race. First, there is the pre-race pre­
paration and planning. Second, there is the in-race delivery and reacting to 
events on the ground. Third is the post-race tracking of the results, root-
cause analysis of what went well and what could be improved, together with 
celebrating the achievements. The pre-race preparation includes detailing 
how it will all work with a range of decisions that need to be made. It is where 
you have the luxury of time to think it all through and aim to maximize 

Introduction
255
your chances of success. It should include practising and ‘what ifs’. It is think-
ing through how it will really work in practice; understanding the impact 
from all the key angles; planning for empathetic communication. There are 
two chapters dedicated to this pre-race phase: Chapters 4.3 and 4.4.
Chapter 4.3, HOWWIP or How will it work in practice, deals with ‘vision-
ing’ the new work, and understanding the issues that will be thrown up, 
knowing how they will be resolved and understanding the interfaces between 
various positions and functions. A range of practical team exercises is pro-
vided to enable the key players to fully test how the new organization will 
work and how they will work together.
Chapter 4.4 covers implementation. It starts with how to do the range of 
impact assessment analyses required. From this understanding is derived  
the selection process for determining who is to get what job and why. Within 
this are a number of legal and consultation considerations. We are talking 
about human impacts and aiming to drive a new organization forward. 
Good communication is crucial but all too often left as an afterthought.  
At the end of Chapter 4.4 you will have learnt how to fully transition the 
entire organization from the as-is to the to-be world, and you will know 
how to generate a clear audit trail for every judgement and decision made.
Military strategists say that a plan lasts until first contact with the enemy. 
As soon as the plan starts to be executed, you are in the race. Unforeseen 
events start to impact and, therefore, change it. Unfortunately, you can’t 
think of everything during the pre-race phase. It is about having the right 
feedback loops to know when something has changed; to know what to do 
to stay in the race; to be better at reacting to things than your competitors 
and take advantage of any changes; to be sufficiently nimble. The micro 
design phase is an explicit world of two points in time, the as-is and to-be 
states. This doesn’t reflect how things will really be. Time is continuous and 
ever changing. Therefore, in order to make the design real, you need to have 
the analytical tools to manage that ongoing evolution. You need to be able 
to track how you are doing versus the initial set of plans (which become your 
targets). But as things change, your targets will change too. These become 
your forecasts.
Chapter 4.5 is about how to plan the supply and demand of your work-
force over time, and how to track actuals against these targets and forecasts. 
To me, workforce planning is just an extension of the micro design and 
inextricably linked to it. Unfortunately, there is confusion as to what it 
really is and what the differences are between strategic, operational and tactical 
workforce planning. This chapter details the definitions of each together 
with how to do both the strategic and the operational planning. Because we 

Part Four: Making It Real
256
are dealing with people and talent over time, Chapter 4.6 highlights how to 
do data-driven succession planning. It describes how to ensure you have the 
right talent in the right roles so that you can manage the evolution of your 
workforce over time.
This is a book about getting and sustaining the competitive edge. I didn’t 
want it to stop with planning and managing the transition. An organ­
ization is only successful if the strategy is being met and the goals are being 
achieved. To do this, an organization has to get things done. There is a 
wealth of good practice and I describe how to take advantage of that 
practice within this broader context in Chapter 4.7. The post-race phase is 
the reflective phase and is covered in the Chapter 4.8. It deals with how you 
did. Did you meet the goals and how do you ensure you continue to do so? 
If you didn’t or are not meeting the goals then what was the root cause? 
However, what is the point of just getting all this work done? We need more 
than that. What better way to finish than with celebrating and then giving  
a chance for the organization to rest, recoup and prepare for the next stage 
in its journey? It isn’t all about work. We are human. Our bodies and minds 
need downtime. Time to rejuvenate. If all has gone well, if we meet or exceed 
our goals, then celebrate. At the end of the day, when top sports teams win 
trophies, they sing, spray champagne and party. Why shouldn’t we?
Keeping that end in mind and before we get into all this planning, delivery 
and reviewing, it is worthwhile to take a step back and think through how 
many things can and will go wrong. Too many implementations go wrong 
for predictable reasons. Chapter 1.2 mostly focused on the macro and micro 
challenges. It was too early to focus on all the traps resulting from imple-
mentation and making the design real. But it is now time and, therefore, 
Chapter 4.2 highlights all the common traps with a focus on how to mitigate 
three specific ones.
Notes
1	 Thought to have first been said by Peter Drucker, the founder of modern 
management.
2	 Pink, D H (2011) Drive: The surprising truth about what motivates us, 
Canongate Books Ltd, Edinburgh

“
4.2
Common traps
Man is the only kind of varmint that sets his own trap,  
baits it, then steps in it.  John Steinbeck
Introduction
When it comes to a redesign or transformation there is so much that can go 
wrong. In some respects it would be a surprise if any implementation was 
ever 100 per cent successful and was implemented as anticipated. There are 
traps everywhere and a lot of the Making it Real section deals with how to 
avoid them. But to avoid them you need to recognize and understand them. 
In this chapter I begin by outlining some of the signs that indicate when 
things may not be going to plan. I then highlight some of the common traps 
you are likely to come across and explore three in detail: not allocating 
enough resource; too many initiatives; and forgetting the basics. This is the 
shortest chapter in the book because much of the detail is covered within 
other chapters. However, I didn’t feel I could write a book on design without 
going into the traps in a little detail. Also, much of dealing with these traps 
is mindset. If you can begin to predict what’s coming and recognize when 
things are going wrong, then the probability of the success of your design 
will increase.
Knowing when and what things are going 
wrong
To ensure an organization design remains on track the first thing is to recognize 
when things are going wrong. So what are the common signs that something 
is going wrong during the implementation of a new organization design? 
This list is not intended to be exhaustive. Common examples include:
●
●a feeling you are just shifting boxes around org charts rather than 
implementing real, visible change on the ground;
●
●challenges from people that jobs are being allocated based on 
personal connections rather than competencies;
257

Part Four: Making It Real
258
●
●lots of one-to-one side meetings to share concerns and find out 
what’s really going on;
●
●meeting mania where people are constantly in meetings with  
an excessive number of participants;
●
●initiative fatigue with a feeling of achieving little while being too 
busy to change that fact;
●
●absenteeism and attrition increase with key talent leaving for 
competitors;
●
●having a lack of clear priorities as to what needs to be done and  
why it is needed;
●
●discussions and debates are becoming personal and are damaging 
relationships.
These are signs that the implementation of the design is being ineffective.  
So what are the possible root cause factors that drive this? There are count-
less examples, so I have included a sample, as shown in Figure 4.2.1. The 
common traps are organized into six broad themes.
There are a lot of things that can go wrong and this list isn’t even exhaus-
tive. That is why Making it Real is such a crucial section. It is the make or 
break time. You have to draw attention to these traps before and during the 
implementation of the design. To understand the traps specific to your design, 
before you implement do a post-mortem analysis. Gather your implement­
ation team into a room and imagine you have just finished the design. Then, 
working backwards through the timeline, ask everyone to say ‘what went 
wrong’ and ‘what the impact was’. This acts as a great way to uncover 
possible traps before you start and to document risks and priorities for the 
implementation. A lot of the chapters throughout this book are designed to 
deal with many of the specific traps in the areas they cover. However, I want 
to expand on three generic traps, which I believe can often be the main cause 
for a design derailing. The three traps I have chosen to address here are:
1	 not allocating enough resource;
2	 too many initiatives;
3	 forgetting the basics.
Not allocating enough resource
Months and months can be spent on doing the macro and micro design, and 
they often overrun. However, implementation milestones are still expected 

Common Traps
259
Figure 4.2.1 
List of example traps
How the design 
will actually work in 
practice is neither 
thought through nor 
explained
The communication 
is in management 
speak and not
tailored to how they 
feel
Mixed messages are 
being sent, because 
different
members of the 
‘Executive Team’ 
conveying the
messages have or 
spin a different story
Communication
No one knows what 
the design or change 
means to
him or her personally. 
Why and how is it  
a good thing?
There is not a proper 
understanding as to 
what the degree of 
change really is
Mapping of 
processes and
accountabilities die 
a quick death and all 
that work fizzles out 
or gathers dust
on a metaphoric 
shelf
Time wasted by poor 
tools and manual 
processes
Risks of industrial 
tribunals
Process not followed or maintained
The actual design 
process is neither 
clear nor well 
understood
People don’t 
understand or
buy-in to the vision, 
the case for change, 
the goals, the 
strategy, and/or the
design criteria
Try to do too much 
with initiative 
overload
Implementation is 
rushed
Complexity of 
change overwhelms 
the business,
leaving everyone 
confused
Doing too much
The key people burn 
out because they 
do too much, in part 
because they are
compensating for 
lack of clear priorities 
or sufficiently 
performing 
colleagues
The key people feel
exhausted and are 
sick of giving so 
much and getting
so little in return
External events 
create a shock that 
distracts the key 
people, and the 
whole thing fizzles 
out, is partially
implemented or just
generally blown off 
course
Don’t allow for 
contingency 
and the smallest 
shock derails the 
implementation
Unknowns derail
Losing the ‘why’ – 
not tying the case 
for change back to 
the vision but just 
moving in to get it 
done because the 
burn rate is so big
Loss of employee 
morale and survivor 
guilt
Emotions
The data are not 
maintained and 
become obsolete
The information does 
not flow at the right 
time
Fragile evidence 
is going into 
the employee 
consultation
resulting in having to 
spend cash to buy 
people out
Data
No tracking of 
actuals versus plan
Lose the wrong 
people because you 
can’t differentiate 
between high/low 
performers/potential

Part Four: Making It Real
260
to adhere to original timescales. Because management is involved closely 
with macro and micro design, and these stages are theoretical, the impact of 
the delays are not as keenly felt as those working on making the design real. 
Having put the macro and micro design in place alongside an implementa-
tion plan, it is often assumed by management that the design will ‘just happen’. 
All too often senior managers stay clear of the detailed nature of implemen-
tation, leaving it to junior resources. The result is that the execution is not 
managed or tracked properly.
To get an implementation right takes considerable effort. If anything, 
executive sponsorship needs to be more committed and public than in the 
macro and micro design. The risk with the macro and micro design is going 
into too much detail. The risk within Making it Real is not going into enough 
detail. Making it Real is all about a conscientious, thorough and dogmatic 
eye for detail and approach to delivery. You will need resilience and you  
will need to stick at it (something I come back to in the conclusion). There 
are no hard-and-fast rules here in terms of the numbers of resources needed 
or the time required (for more on project management read Chapter 3.5). 
However, before you go into your implementation make sure you have:
●
●a detailed plan with appropriate staffing;
●
●significant contingency times in place as not everything will go to 
plan;
●
●an appropriate budget – you can’t afford not to.
Too many initiatives
In January and February 2011 I had the privilege of interviewing a series  
of senior executives from the world of private equity. They were a mix of 
members of value enhancement teams, chief experience officers (CXOs) and 
investment committee decision makers. The focus of the interviews was to 
acquire an understanding of ‘how private equity firms can best ensure they 
enhance the value of their investments’. One of the questions I asked each 
interviewee was: ‘Why do things fail?’ Remarkably, every single person gave 
the exact same answer:
‘Things failed in the past because an organization was trying to do too much.’
They all agreed that too many high-level initiatives and too much change 
leads to inevitable failure. When I asked what the ideal number of initiatives 
was for a business at any one time, the highest number given was six. My 

Common Traps
261
main takeaway from this was that it is all about choosing your priorities 
when implementing your design. Go back to your macro design. What are 
you trying to achieve and what is your case for change? Based on these, pick 
the most important initiatives to implement first. Be wise in that choice. 
Don’t pick too many and ensure you see them through. And when you think 
they are done, you are probably only halfway there. To make something 
real, to make it truly sustainable, takes years of effort. It takes a dogged and 
relentless commitment to a limited set of initiatives. Less is more. When it 
comes to implementing your organization design it is all about getting things 
done (a subject I return to in Chapter 4.7).
Forgetting the basics
When you look across disciplines such as sport, those who are at the top  
of their game emphasize the same point: they train and train until they can 
execute their basic skills to perfection without a moment’s hesitation. 
However, when it comes to business, we struggle with the basics. We strug-
gle to communicate effectively, sort our management information, be clear 
about who is doing what by when, plan and know the plan seamlessly, and 
fundamentally, be clear about why we are doing what we are aiming to do 
in the first place.
Getting the basics right means knowing what is core to your organization 
and ensuring you are world-class at achieving that core. This approach is 
central to both good strategy and the execution of that strategy. Go back to 
micro design and define the core goals, objectives, processes and competen-
cies. It might sound simple, but the process of defining which of the elements 
within the micro design is core will make your design team think and debate 
more than almost anything else. Try to keep it focused and principled. Once 
you are clear as to what is truly core, ensure you achieve those objectives, 
run those processes seamlessly and grow those competencies.
In terms of the organizational design basics, this is a long book with lots 
of details. But if I was going to prioritize three elements from each section 
required for the implementation of the design they would be:
Macro:
●
●A clear vision, strategy, case for change and design criteria.
●
●A clear target operating model that ties the structural design to the 
value chain through a high-level accountability matrix (RAS).
●
●A clear and compelling business case.

Part Four: Making It Real
262
Micro:
●
●A solid understanding of the as-is and to-be organizations, in terms 
of headcount and cost by role, including the detailing of reporting 
lines.
●
●A clear definition of the work required using the Level 1 process map 
and what each role is responsible for.
●
●A robust logic for determining the numbers of FTEs required in the 
to-be model as detailed in Chapter 3.7.
Final thoughts
Murphy’s Law is an old adage that states ‘anything that can go wrong,  
will go wrong’. I think this is a very apt phrase when making a design real. 
No matter how well you plan or how great your design process is, in imple-
menting change and striving to achieve your organization’s vision and goals, 
many things can and will go wrong. There can be an exodus of talent, lawsuits 
for discrimination and unfair dismissal, paralysis, companywide confusion 
and a breakdown of trust, to name but a few of the many consequences. 
These and other issues are caused by a range of bad management practices 
and most are avoidable. To some extent, you can even plan for the unfore-
seeable by committing enough of the right resource and allowing enough 
time.
I think everything I’ve said in this chapter and everything that I’m going 
to say in the Making it Real section is just business basics. I hope the 
remainder of this book will give you a roadmap for effective execution.  
It isn’t just about planning or implementation. It is about achieving the  
desired results without falling into a range of predictable traps. If I’ve done 
my job right, there is no reason to be fooled by these traps because, I hope, 
enough of them are now clear so that you have sufficient reserves to deal 
with those that are not clear.

Common Traps
263
1	 Watch out for and recognize signs that indicate the design isn’t being 
implemented according to plan.
2	 Make sure you think through the possible traps before doing your 
implementation.
3	 Ensure you allocate enough time and resource to the implementation.
4	 Have a limited number of priority initiatives at one time so that the 
implementation doesn’t get overloaded and stall.
5	 If you have done a good job on the macro and micro design simply 
focus on getting the basics right for the implementation and the rest  
will follow.
Remember this

“
4.3
HOWWIP
In theory, there is no difference between theory  
and practice. But in practice, there is.  Anon
Introduction
I love acronyms because they communicate whole ideas and methods in one 
short, memorable word. One of my favourites is HOWWIP, which is short 
for How will it work in practice? This acronym came up when doing a par-
ticularly complex and detailed project with a colleague and it has stuck with 
me ever since. The reason why I like it so much is it is a very quick and easy 
reminder to think through how something will work in reality. Much of this 
book so far has been focused on theoretical design. This chapter is about mak-
ing sure the theoretical is really possible, and how to make it work in practice, 
and I mean really work. Does everybody know what he or she is doing from 
day one of the implementation through to two months down the line?
In reality, the HOWWIP question is one which will have been naturally 
popping up throughout the design process. Think back to the dreamer, realist 
and critic in Chapter 2.3. Throughout the steps in the macro and micro 
phases, the issue of whether something is practical or not will have already 
been addressed. The reason for spelling it out at this point is to ensure the 
detail has been thought through. It acts as a natural check on the implemen-
tation to head off issues before they arise, and to uncover the answers to the 
questions that haven’t been asked yet.
A large part of Making it Real is getting people’s heads around what the 
design really means to them personally, how they will be affected and how they 
expect it to work. In this sense, this chapter links very closely with Chapter 4.7 
on organizational getting things done. After all, if people don’t know what 
they should be doing, how are they going to get it done? Furthermore, it is 
the process ‘exceptions’ that can drive the majority of the work. By bringing 
the design to life, focus on how the new design will deal with things like:
●
●What to do when actual performance is adrift from budget?
●
●When there is an ‘event’ like a safety incident or an embarrassing  
PR incident, what happens?
264

HOWWIP
265
●
●What happens if the two approvers for a given decision can’t agree?
●
●How does the implementation team hand over to the ongoing service 
team?
Part of this process is about the interface design; how items of work will be 
handed from one person to another. Another part is bringing tangible clarity 
to what can seem like a pretty theoretical design. To see a decision matrix 
with a set of acronyms such as RAS (responsible, approve, support) is one 
thing; to understand what ‘approve’ or ‘support’ really means in the context 
of that decision is another. For example, ‘approve’ the recruiting plan might 
have the Finance Director, HRD and Business Director with A’s for approve. 
The key is to think through the practicalities of delivering those processes.  
It anticipates issues and deals with them. The approval process could be that 
a hire form is filled in by the second Tuesday of every month and signed off 
in a committee meeting of approvers, or that all roles must be in the budget 
that is signed off annually, with a separate exception process that requires 
the CEO to approve. Beyond this, what information needs to be produced 
by whom? Does HR need to come with job specs and the expected hiring 
costs? For certain roles, does the requester need to produce a business plan? 
If yes, what needs to be on that plan?
HOWWIP is both a natural ongoing process through the design and  
implementation as well as a practical framework for structuring a set of 
workshops or exercises. In this chapter I will work through three exercises 
that I have found useful in testing the feasibility of a design implementation. 
These are simply tools to help you think through exceptions and issues; to 
discover the sorts of things that will trip the design up so you can prepare 
effectively for the change to come.
HOWWIP outcomes
Before jumping into the exercises it is worth demonstrating how they fit  
into the bigger picture, and how they can be documented in a useful manner 
as part of the overall project. The point of the exercises is to clarify answers 
to the question ‘How will that work?’ These answers are worth recording  
if they are going to be of ongoing use, as people won’t remember later on, 
and the same questions often pop up from numerous sources. Another point 
is that sometimes a question cannot be answered immediately. By noting it 
down it gives you the time to think it over before fleshing out the detail, 

Part Four: Making It Real
266
without it being lost and forgotten. I am not suggesting you need to note 
down everything, and quite often it simply requires adding to existing 
documentation, but depending on the level of work, independent documen-
tation can be invaluable. There are three documents you can produce:
1	 HOWWIP log. The HOWWIP log is almost like an FAQ list combined 
with a car park list. As you are detailing the processes in your 
workshops, questions and concerns will be raised that you won’t have 
time to deal with immediately. So you ‘park’ them. Those parked 
questions get written into a log. So that you can structure it, link the 
questions to the Level 2 value chain and main activity it relates to.  
It is helpful to provide a priority rating so that you can manage the 
order in which questions need to be dealt with, together with an audit 
trail of when the question was raised, by whom and what the status of 
the question is. As you answer the questions, document the outcome. 
Figure 4.3.1 shows a simple example log investigating the efficiency 
of a sales process for a delivery and support team.
Process descriptors: For those processes which are relatively simple, 
all you need is a quick one- or two-line descriptor on the steps of  
a Level 1 value chain process map. The descriptor should give a little 
more detail so that it is obvious what is meant by each step. If a 
question was raised in the HOWWIP log, it is also good to include 
the answer within this descriptor. For example, the process could be 
‘Annual budget’ and the descriptor ‘How the annual budget is 
generated, reviewed, approved and managed in-year’.
Figure 4.3.1 
HOWWIP issues log example
Dates
Item
Nearest  
Current Activity
Level 2 
Activity
Question
Priority
Raised
Closed
Who
Status
Outcome
Comment
1
Solution Design
Proposal
How to 
flag...
M
Tuesday, 
03/03/2015
Rupert/ 
Peter
Open
Affects 
sales...
2
New Client Sale
Proposal
Why is it 
that...
H
Thursday, 
02/04/2015
Thursday, 
09/04/2015
Rupert
Closed
A level 2 
activity...
n/a
3
Issue 
Management
Issue 
Triage
Why does 
Support...
H
Thursday, 
02/04/2015
Michael
Open
For 
example...
4
Customer Care
Monitor 
Customer 
Satisfaction
Customers 
who...
L
Thursday, 
02/04/2015
Michael
Open
The worry 
is that...
5
Solution Design
Data  
Integration
All too 
often...
H 
Tuesday, 
07/04/2015
Ben
Open
A bad 
data...

HOWWIP
267
2	 Detailed process. There are going to be instances where the detail is 
just too complex; where there are loops, branching of activities and 
systems required to support the process. Where there is clear use for 
a subset of detailed workflows and the number of positions involved 
is three or more, then detail the Level 2 process swim-lane map 
described in Chapter 3.4. In Chapter 3.4 I mentioned how most 
design only needs to be based on Level 0 and 1 maps. To recap,  
Level 0 is a summary value chain map used in designing the target 
operating model while Level 1 is the processes depicted as value 
chain steps in a hierarchy, with activities, decisions and outcomes 
listed below each process or subprocess.
Level 2 is a swim lane with owners and icons representing various actions 
such as: decision; activity; subprocess; and outputs. Figure 4.3.2 shows an 
example of how a support desk might deal with client issues.
Each row, or what looks like a swim lane, is a function or position. There 
are a clear start and end, so a sense of timing can be shown and the number 
of handoffs (interfaces) counted. A ‘swim-lane Level 2 process map’ details 
how a process should work. My experience is that these have their time and 
place, but should be started with caution. They can be confusing, they are 
Figure 4.3.2 
Level 2 process map example
CLIENT
Client contacts 
support desk 
with issues
SUPPORT 
DESK
CONSULTING 
TEAM
DEVELOPMENT 
TEAM
ACCOUNT 
MANAGER
Client 
 informed of 
resolution
CLIENT
Client  
informed of 
non-resolution
NO
NO
YES
YES
YES
NO
Support 
informed of 
resolution
Support 
informed of 
non-resolution
Account 
Manager 
informed of 
non-resolution
Account 
Manager 
informed of 
resolution
Can 
Consulting 
resolve 
issue?
Can 
Support 
resolve 
issue?
Support 
triages  
issue
Can 
Dev team 
resolve  
issue?

Part Four: Making It Real
268
idealistic, they can be hard to follow and they take lots of time to generate. 
So don’t try to define everything as a Level 2 process map. Just do it where: 
there are lots of handoffs; when a fairly strict process should be followed; 
where there are loops and complexities. Count the number of handoffs and 
ask whether that is going to be workable. The number of times that I have 
seen 15+ handoffs within a single process is pretty remarkable. I’ve seen 
processes take three months to execute when it should have been possible  
to do them in a week.
For example, a few years ago I worked with a pharmaceutical client on 
its promotional meeting process. The number of meetings reduced by over 
50 per cent due to the client’s need to meet increasing compliance require-
ments. The sales and marketing teams had to fill in complex requests, get 
financial and compliance approvals together, and complete a range of 
questionnaires. It took months to get decisions through and everyone spent 
time waiting for everyone else. So we mapped the as-is Level 2 process and 
saw that there were 16 handoffs. We quantified the times taken and where 
the bottlenecks were. Once this was done it was pretty straightforward to 
reengineer the process and identify a simple workflow system that auto-
matically tracked various SLAs to ensure the to-be process would work. 
Within months, the number of promotional meetings returned to the desired 
levels.
Exercises
These exercises are simply tools to solicit where the issues will be and get to 
the point of answering them. A great deal of the purpose in these is simply 
to encourage people to talk about and to visualize what is ahead of them.  
I have three simple examples:
Exercise 1 – Talk through the process with cards
Top sportspeople spend a lot of time visualizing each element and scenario. 
They think through how it will work and feel. This exercise aims to replicate 
that in a group setting. Take one subprocess that involves interaction at many 
points within the business – for example, recruitment, L&D or appraisals. 
For each step, print out the cards described in Chapter 3.4. Lay the cards 
out in order on the table.
●
●Define where the process starts and finishes.
●
●Identify the points where there are handoffs.

HOWWIP
269
●
●Define in the Inputs; Activities; Outputs at each stage plus any decisions.
●
●Test that the process will work and that it is clear:
–– List a set of questions concerning how the process will work.
–– Have a group stand up in a small circle with each person in the circle 
‘acting’ one (or more if there are more roles than people in the 
circle, but always being clear what role each person is ‘playing’ at 
any time) of the roles. Start with the first step and then pass a ‘who’s 
got the monkey’1 juggling ball to the person who acts next. The 
monkey is a metaphor for who is responsible at that point in time.
–– At each step, say: what it is you need; what you will do; and what 
the outcome will be. By walking the process, each person talks 
through what they do and how they will do it.
●
●Write up any orphans (activities or decisions that don’t have  
an owner), gaps, issues and questions on the HOWWIP log.
●
●Review after the completion of an area to understand the amount of 
workload that was missing from the original description.
Exercise 2 – Interface ball game
Building on exercise 1, a good game to play is the ‘interface ball game’. The 
main issue this game addresses is sorting how the interfaces between people 
will work; to understand who does what, and how information and work are 
transferred between people. The way the game works follows the process 
described below:
1	 A process is chosen. For example, the client issue resolution process 
illustrated in Figure 4.3.2.
2	 Those involved in the process stand up (or someone acts as if they 
are one of the participants in the process).
3	 The facilitator gives a context to a selected situation and then asks 
practical questions; for example, ‘What happens when the client 
contacts us with an issue?’
4	 The person responsible for the first action raises his or her hand and 
catches a ball thrown by the facilitator (in this instance the Support 
Manager). The person with the ball then talks through with the group:
–– What they need: ‘Detailed description of the issue from the client.’
–– What they do: ‘Understand and document the issue for internal 
purposes.’

Part Four: Making It Real
270
–– The outcomes they have generated: ‘Resolve the issue within the 
support team or triage the issue to the consulting or development 
team.’
5	 The person who then needs to pick up the next action raises his or 
her hand and receives the ball from the first person. They repeat the 
three points (Need; Do; Outcome).
6	 This continues until the process is completed.
For the game to work, it needs to have enough pace; those with the ball  
need to be succinct and to the point. Short punchy sentences and humility 
are at a premium. If people are unclear, have a brief discussion and try to 
resolve the issue. If it is too difficult to resolve, then capture it as an issue  
for the HOWWIP log and move on. This requires excellent facilitation and 
documentation skills. Ideally, these are two different people. One capturing 
the details of what people say; what they need; how it works; concerns and 
issues. The other, the facilitator, needs to keep the game going and needs to 
keep it playful. Equally important is picking good processes to talk through. 
Start with the blatantly obvious and incredibly easy ones. Get everyone  
familiar and comfortable with how to play and then add complexity.
Exercise 3 – The round robin interface conversations
Another good exercise is to get a group of people together who will be 
working cross functionally and where there are lots of connection points. 
The way the game works is everyone has a conversation with everyone else 
and a facilitator documents the conversations. Each ‘date’ follows a pattern 
of both parties writing down:
●
●What they need from the other person/position (each person is 
representing a position, but it is ideal for the person who will occupy 
that position to be preparing and participating in the date).
●
●Things they are unsure about. For instance, who will be doing 
something or when something will be done.
The first person then states what he or she needs and the second person 
seeks clarification or raises an issue if he or she believes that something 
shouldn’t or can’t be provided. This is then repeated the other way around. 
Finally, there is a discussion about the lists of items both parties are unsure 
about with a goal of resolving as many issues in the list as possible. The key 
to making this work is good time management and like so many things in 

HOWWIP
271
life, good preparation. Try to keep each date to 15–30 minutes. Bear in 
mind that if there are eight positions, then everyone will have seven con-
versations. So with seven 30-minute conversations, scene setting and coffee 
breaks, that is a good half-day session. But if done well, 56 detailed interface 
conversations have taken place in a focused and controlled way. This is 
far better than everyone scrabbling around independently trying to work  
it out. (For an example of how to organize this type of session, see the 
Appendix.)
Below is an example of the type of conversation you are trying to 
facilitate. This is between a Project Manager (PM) who delivers a client 
solution and the Support Manager (SM) who will look after the client from 
that delivery point to discuss the handover and possible ongoing issues:
SM:	 Prior to the end of a project, I need to know the scope and issues 
with the client. What did we deliver? What is different? Who are the 
key stakeholders?
PM:	 OK – I will provide a detailed list answering each of these questions. 
In addition, I’ll talk you through the key concerns and issues. I will 
ensure you know who the key users and super users are.
SM:	 My fear is the support test will become a training desk if we are not 
careful. So if there are continued user issues down to poor under-
standing on items that should be covered by the training, would you 
mind calling the client to verify the issues and test what a solution 
might be?
PM:	 That is a great point and valid concern. I will ensure only those who 
have attended super-user training will be able to call the support 
desk. Equally, I will test their understanding and will follow up one 
week after the training to ensure they are comfortable.
These conversations are important because they get right into the detail. 
Commitments are being made to each other, which can be captured in the 
process charts as ‘Outcomes’, Level 2 process maps, if needed, or the Give 
and Get matrix.
Exercise 4 – Give and Get matrix
Building on Exercise 3 is the Give and Get matrix that summarizes what 
each position will give to a list of other functions and, therefore, in turn, 
what it will get in return. Another way to think of this is as an enabler and 

Part Four: Making It Real
272
dependency matrix. What will each position enable another position to do? 
What does each position depend on from each other one? The way it works 
best is to create a large matrix on a wall and for those in each position to list 
what they will give and get. For example, Figure 4.3.3 illustrates a Give and 
Get matrix for the different people involved in a sales process.
An example of the effectiveness of this technique occurred on a supply 
chain transformation project in East Africa. My client was growing rapidly 
and needed to overhaul the processes, physical network and flows, inven-
tory and organization. To transform, we defined 13 projects. Each project 
had a business case in terms of CapEx and operational investment, benefits, 
cash flow, payback, Net Present Value (NPV) and Return on Investment 
(ROI). My concern was that the client would salami-slice the highest ROI 
projects and those that didn’t require much investment. There was a risk 
that some of the key enabler projects that didn’t provide a strong return on 
their own would be pushed into the long grass, and that the client wouldn’t 
see the strategy as an integrated strategy. But how could we communicate 
that to the board? What we did was to create the dependency matrix and 
then we used that matrix to quantify the set of relationships as shown in 
Figure 4.3.4.
Figure 4.3.3 
Example Give and Get matrix
Account MAnAger
Project MAnAger
SuPPort teAM
è Project update
è Budget update
è  Overview of 
proposed solution
è  Product  
usage report
è  Customer 
satisfaction reports
è  Escalation of issues
è Client deliverables
è High-level design
è  Budget and 
commercials
è  Product  
usage report
è  Client issue report
è Proposal
è Commercials
è  Detailed solution 
design and 
implementation 
documentation
è  Deliverables 
update
Account 
MAnAger
Project 
MAnAger
get
SuPPort 
teAM
give

HOWWIP
273
There was only one project that was a true island. It didn’t enable any 
other projects and only relied on one. The island projects are shown in the 
left-hand corner. There were a couple that were only enablers (bottom right-
hand corner) and one that relied on 12 of the 13 others (top-left corner). 
However, eight of them were a combination of relying on and enabling  
four to seven of the other projects. Those are the clustered projects in the 
centre of the scatter plot. The size of the circle reflects the level of investment 
required while the colour is the ROI, from negative (red) to below the hurdle 
rate (amber) to above the hurdle rate (green).
Final thoughts
HOWWIP is about how it will work, pure and simple. During the design 
process, it can all get a little too theoretical. There are hundreds of really 
simple questions that need answering. Not all those questions can be answered 
during the design phase, but the HOWWIP aims to address the nitty-gritty 
of how things will really work.
Figure 4.3.4 
Dependency matrix scatter plot
Average Dependence
0
1.05
2.1
3.15
4.2
Average Impact
0
1.25
2.5
3.75
5
Impact vs Dependence by Label sized by Investment
ROI
>1.2
>=1.0
<1.0

Part Four: Making It Real
274
Embrace the HOWWIP. Embrace making things real and thinking 
through how stuff will really work. In my experience, it is only at the 
HOWWIP stage that you know whether the design will really work. It is 
the place where you will get the ‘Oh no!’ and ‘We really need to work that 
one out’ moments as well as the ‘Ah-ha’ ones and ‘Yes, I can finally see how 
this is actually going to work.’ It is where it all starts to become real.
1	 When thinking through the implementation, document the questions  
and issues that arise so you can flag them and, where possible, address 
them.
2	 Use process cards to help you work through and summarize processes 
and handovers.
3	 Facilitate conversations between people at the interface of handovers 
by using games such as the interface ball game or structured round 
robin workshops.
4	 Map out the handovers so you can see when and where dependencies 
interact and ensure they will support each other.
5	 Keep asking How will it work in practice throughout every stage of  
the design.
Remember this
Note
1	 See https://hbr.org/1999/11/management-time-whos-got-the-monkey/ar/1

“
4.4
Implementation
A good idea is about ten per cent implementation  
and hard work, and luck is 90 per cent.  Guy Kawasaki
Introduction
Once you have done all your detailed design and developed a strong perspec-
tive about how it will work, it is time to implement it. This is both a change 
process and a mechanical one governed by law. It requires you to take 
everyone with you and for you to follow the right steps at the right time.  
As soon as employees hear there is change, they will immediately start inter-
nalizing a range of questions: What do you really mean by change? How 
will it affect me? Is my job on the line? Should I get my CV out there? What 
do I tell my family and friends? It is emotional and the first instinct that 
most people have is to think about all the downsides. Even those employees 
who are not directly impacted will still be affected by how those who are 
impacted are treated and the fairness of the process.
What you will notice is that a great deal of the work required in making 
the change happen actually starts at the early macro and micro stages – this 
is where all that work comes into its own. One of the big risks is that you see 
the macro, micro and Making it Real phases as fully sequential. Although 
one follows another for the most part, this is not strictly the case. For exam-
ple, the communication and consultation phases need to start way before 
you get to the implementation. They start right from the beginning, and in 
reality never stop.
This chapter outlines several important areas of consideration when 
doing your implementation. I begin by going through how to quantify what 
will actually change through an impact assessment. I then explore how to 
develop your communication strategy in a way that is not only thorough, 
but also truly empathetic so you bring people along the journey with you. 
The last section focuses on managing the transition and ensuring you run  
a legal and fair consultation process at group and individual levels. The 
implementation is where you need to bring all the work and documentation 
you have done together. There is a lot to think about, process and manage. 
The place to start is by getting your head around exactly what is going to 
change from every angle.
275

Part Four: Making It Real
276
Impact assessment
In order to measure the impact on people you have to understand how each 
person will be affected. In order to aggregate the effect of the change, you 
need to create a series of common change categories that answer specific 
questions. The change categories summarize the ways in which people will 
be affected. Is there risk of redundancy or just a change in desk location? 
Have elements of the role changed or new accountabilities been added? 
Example impacts include a change in the reporting lines, responsibilities or 
content of the role; grade (job level) and reward; salaries; physical location; 
whom someone will work with.
The starting point with knowing what will change goes back to building 
the baseline and understanding the as-is from Chapter 3.2. If that data 
is wrong, then you just compound the risk, manual effort and cost of the 
implementation. This is a moment you have to have the facts. If you are 
unclear or inconsistent then those employees you want to keep may leave, 
and the implementation will become that much harder.
Understanding impact 
The goal here is to quantify how every person in the organization is impacted. 
The aim, therefore, is to flag for every employee what the impact is. You 
start by listing each possible impact area. For example, if there is a change 
in reporting line, are they at risk? If there is no change, it is also useful to flag 
that there is no impact. Figure 4.4.1 shows an example for all the employees 
reporting to a given manager, in this case Johnny Gomez. The first row 
shows that Scott Knowles is at risk while Bailey Johnson has a significant 
change in his responsibilities and a change in his reporting line.
Figure 4.4.1 
Manager’s team impact table
Full Name
Role
As-Is Manager Name
FTE Impact
Role Change
Relocation
Reduction in Pay
 Scott Knowles
Recruitment Specialist
Johnny Gomez
-1
 Mohammed Sanderson
HR Manager
Johnny Gomez
0
 Harvey Morris
Assistant Recuitment Specialist
Johnny Gomez
0
 Donna Lawrence
Assistant Recuitment Specialist
Johnny Gomez
0
 Bailey Johnson
Learning & Development Specialist
Johnny Gomez
0
 Bryan Korn
Assistant Recuitment Specialist
Johnny Gomez
0
 Mia Tomlinson
Compensation Administrator
Johnny Gomez
-1
 Riley Norton
Assistant HR Manager - South
Johnny Gomez
0

Implementation
277
Once you have this individual analysis, it should be easy to aggregate  
the information. I suggest you do this at the planning group level (a plan-
ning group is a cluster of similar roles rolled up. For more on planning 
groups see Chapter 4.5.). Slice and dice the data. Test it and ensure all bases 
are covered. The types of question that commonly need answering include 
calculating:
1	 Headcount and Full-Time Equivalent (FTE) changes.
2	 What is the change in total employee cost? The total cost typically 
includes elements like base pay, pension, healthcare, car allowance 
and tax. It can include allocations for direct attributable costs such  
as IT, property (their desk) and telecommunications.
3	 The cost of redundancy. This is often driven by tenure, salary and grade.
4	 Average depth and spans of control.
5	 Relocation costs.
For each measure that you are aggregating, it helps to slice the data by each 
of the key dimensions, for example by function, grade, location, tenure, 
gender, age.
This is why having an accurate as-is is so crucial. Because it is about 
people, you have to do everything to avoid making a mistake while recog-
nizing that mistakes will probably be made. Getting something wrong 
means sending a strong signal that you just don’t care about your people. 
On top of that, it will possibly open you up to greater risk of an employment 
tribunal, decrease your credibility as a management team and raise ques-
tions that if you are wrong about something so fundamental what else 
might be wrong?
A good example of how this could affect the impact assessment is not 
putting everyone in the same role at risk. If the number of full-time employ-
ees (FTEs) required for a given position is reduced, then all those in that  
role are at risk. A common issue is the lack of consistency of job titles. For 
example, one organization I worked with had 75,000 employees with over 
14,000 job titles and yet thousands were doing the same role. It is remark-
able how many different titles you can give to ‘Personal Assistant’ or ‘PA’ or 
‘Exec Assistant’ or ‘Secretary’. This type of ratio of job titles versus employees 
is common across organizations. I commonly see a ratio of employees to 
job titles as low as 2:1. In other words, for roughly every two employees 
there is a separate job title. Make sure you have been clear in your baseline 
and maintained strict rules to make your life easier now and decrease the 
risk of making a mistake.

Part Four: Making It Real
278
Quantifying impact for roles
One of the hardest elements to understand is whether the role of a person 
has changed. A change means a substantive difference in accountabilities. 
For instance, you could define substantive as being a greater than 25 per 
cent impact (measured by time) on the time required to do the work (the 
activities). If it is less than 25 per cent, then it isn’t significant. Technically, 
the trick to doing this is mapping employees into both as-is and to-be role 
and process trees. By doing an Individual Activity Assessment (IAA), you 
know what each employee currently does. A similar IAA is used to define the 
to-be accountabilities (see Chapter 3.4 for more information on how to  
do this). So, as long as the data structure of the IAA and to-be processes are 
the same, you will know if their responsibilities have changed and in what 
proportion. Practically, you should triage the areas addressed. Take out 
those unaffected and those completely changed (for example, outsourced  
en bloc, or eliminated due to technology). There will typically be only a few 
areas where the impact of the change is complex.
Figure 4.4.2 gives an example analysis to quantify the change of activities 
in each function for the to-be design. In this case there are four categories 
for which no change is needed (green), where productivity improvement is 
required (yellow), where activities need outsourcing (amber) or need to be 
stopped (red). For example, the Commercial function has 46 distinct activities, 
17 of which won’t change for the new design, 15 where more productivity is 
needed, 10 that will be outsourced and four that will be stopped altogether.
Figure 4.4.2 
Processes impacted
Commercial
17
15
10
4
46
Manufacturing
19
14
4
2
39
Client Support
10
14
9
4
37
Supply Chain Management
8
7
3
2
20
Finance
6
5
11
Human Resources
7
9
Savings by activity
0% – 5%
5% – 20%
20% – 50%
50% – 100%

Implementation
279
Figure 4.4.3 
Aggregated people impact by location for an 
example value stream (Commercial)
0–1
1–10
10–30
30–50
50–80
80–100
21
78
101
12
8
8
5
33
11
38
19
28
96
8
15
28
2
3
Total Records by Saving Percent
Location
Ardleigh
Beeston
Carlisle
Dunston
Assuming the IAA is done, you can quickly see the number of employees 
impacted by these changes. Looking now from the people perspective,  
Figure 4.4.3 shows that within the Commercial function, 101 people have 
no impact while 33 have less than 10 per cent change to their role. The  
colour highlights the numbers within the Commercial function as they  
are broken down by their specific locations (for example, regions). We can  
see that 78 in the blue location are not impacted, while 15 are impacted 
30–50 per cent of their time. In other words, 15 people who work in the 
blue location and within the Commercial function are going to have their 
work reduced by 30–50 per cent. Assuming the average is 40 per cent, this 
represents a total of six FTEs who are at risk within their current positions.
The point then is getting down to the individual level. Who are those with 
a greater than 30 per cent impact and where are they based? Figure 4.4.4 
gives an example of just that. Each person is coloured by planning group.
Quantifying impact across dimensions
As noted above, there are several ways in which each employee can be im-
pacted. Figure 4.4.5 shows by site how these can be aggregated. Having defined 
at the individual level the impact flags, you can now aggregate the change.
This example has a total of 60 as-is FTEs (the second column) and it is 
planned that this number is going to reduce to 50 in the to-be organization. 
However, the aggregate numbers don’t reflect the true nature of the change 
as there are a total 20 FTEs at risk and 10 new FTEs (new roles) required 
resulting in a net 10 FTE change. In addition, eight FTEs have a significant 
change in their work, of which four currently work in Foxfields. In this  

Part Four: Making It Real
280
Figure 4.4.4 
People impact listed by location and planning 
group
Location
Ardleigh               (10)
Beeston               (15) 
Carlisle                   (5)
Dunston                 (3)
Saving Percent
30–50     
(8)
 Thomas Lee 
 Omar Webb 
 Gracie Doyle
 Eloise Jenkins 
 Steven Bias 
 Rick Jones 
 Harry Manning 
 Luca Carroll
8
 Frances Bush
 Bryan Korn
 Bill Ha
 Libby Lucas
 Donna Lawrence
 Sebastian Coates
  Mohammed 
Sanderson
 Mia Tomlinson 
 Jessica Talbot 
 Riley Norton 
 Elise Morris 
 Charlie Mellor 
 Gracie Oliver 
 Harvey Morris
 Bailey Johnson
15
 Tegan Murray 
 Thomas Richard
2
 Tyler Swift 
 Amelia Yates 
 Andrew Williams
 
3
50–80
(2)
 Logan Price 
 Sienna Miah
2
100–80
(3)
 Spencer Sinclair 
 Joseph McCool
2
 Lora Williams
1
Category
Account 
Manager
Line worker 
type A
Line worker 
type B
Line worker 
type C
Supply Chain 
Manager
Warehouse 
Worker
Figure 4.4.5 
Aggregate impact numbers by impact type by site
Roles 
Changes
Relocation 
Site
As-Is
To-Be
Change
Exit
Change
From
To
Reporting 
Change
Reduction 
in Pay
Ardleigh 
4
3 
–1 
1 
0 
1 
1 
2 
2
Beeston
2
0 
–2 
0 
0 
2 
0 
1 
1
Carlisle
10
17 
7 
0 
1 
3 
10 
9 
7
Dunston
3
0 
–3 
0 
0 
3 
0 
3 
2
EastLancs
16 
13 
–3 
6 
3 
1 
2 
4 
0
Foxfields
25 
17 
–8 
13 
4 
3 
6 
8 
3
Total
60 
50 
–10
20
8
13
19 
27 
15
example, there is also a large relative degree of roles moving location with 
three roles leaving Foxfields and six new ones arriving. In total there are 
significant levels of reporting line changes with 27 people changing their 
manager. Now that you know exactly who is impacted in what way, how 
are you going to communicate the change?

Implementation
281
Communication
I will be the first to admit that I have messed up at this stage on many occa-
sions. I have thought it all through only to miss fundamental points. I have 
tried lots of different approaches in different circumstances and what seemed 
good in theory was, in reality, disappointing and even the cause of signifi-
cant issues. The worst situation in which I was personally involved was the 
first time I ran a redundancy programme. My company’s growth had stalled 
after 24 months of spectacular expansion due to a particularly bad sales 
quarter. We had to make cuts. Not drastic cuts, just corrective cuts. After 
management discussions and negotiations we established where we needed 
to get our cost base down, what roles needed to be reduced, our selection 
criteria and finally the names. The key communication messages were then 
agreed:
●
●We needed to make reductions because sales were insufficient and to 
ensure we returned to profit.
●
●We needed to give reassurance that the business was still strong:  
we had a great reputation; loyal clients; a committed team; a strong 
balance sheet; and the backing of investors.
My plan was:
●
●Tell everyone at once on a Tuesday afternoon at 3.00 pm.
●
●The managers to follow up with their teams and conduct one-to-ones 
with people who were worried.
What went wrong and what did I learn?
The main issue was my speech. It was not so much what I said, but how  
I said it. I rehearsed the whole thing and wrote down exactly what I was 
going to say. During the rehearsals, I was coached by a couple of members 
of my senior team. But when I spoke the words I wasn’t myself. I didn’t talk 
to the team and instead I gave this prepared speech. I wasn’t authentic.  
I didn’t look everyone in the eyes and spell out from the heart why and how 
we were going to get out of the situation we found ourselves in. I spoke 
the words but didn’t build empathy, resulting in a lack of trust and creation 
of unnecessary distance. I spoke from the head, not the heart. I also didn’t 
drive the message home. I didn’t follow up with smaller groups and I didn’t 
repeat the key points. My team had follow-up meetings, but it wasn’t enough. 
Everyone radiated fear and frustration. It is easy to communicate when 
times are good. When times are tough, it is easy to fall into silence. My final 

Part Four: Making It Real
282
takeaway from this experience is that after the process I didn’t sufficiently 
talk through what we did wrong or what we would do to avoid being in 
this situation again. What did I learn? What was to be the plan moving 
forward? How were we going to regroup? Having gone through complex 
and straining processes you need time to reflect and learn. This is something 
I come back to in Chapter 4.8.
Communication is clearly a huge topic: one far too large for a single 
subchapter in a book. Hundreds if not thousands of books must have been 
written on communication. What I am going to do is talk through my top 
tips and perspectives that are relevant for organization design.
Build real empathy
Of the tips, this first one is by far the most important and most certainly the 
hardest. As Stephen Covey says in his book The 7 Habits of Highly Effective 
People, one of the habits is to ‘seek first to understand, then be understood’.1 
You need to aim to feel what it is like from your employees’ perspective, not 
yours. A useful framework for this is the WIFM and WAMI analysis. (WIFM: 
‘What’s in it for me?’ WAMI is ‘What is against my interest?’
Asking these questions across the board helps to articulate how your 
audience will feel and probably react. The WAMI is actually easier to 
investigate because most of the time people look at the downsides and the 
negatives. If you know what people are interested in and expecting before 
you start the communication process then it’s much easier to frame and 
articulate the messages in the right way.
Acknowledge and plan for the communication 
challenge from the start
Accept that communication starts from the first moment a project gets dis-
cussed. As soon as a decision is made to do something, and that is mentioned 
from one person to another, communication has started. From the first 
second of your design process, start by thinking and planning through who 
is told what, and when. Don’t forget that we humans are experts at reading 
body language and picking up on a vibe that something is up. Assume that 
once more than a handful of people know, something will get out. So, as 
much as you try to lead and influence the process, recognize that it is not one 
you can possibly fully control.
If there are going to be redundancies, then think through the consultation 
process. The mechanics of this is discussed in more detail in ‘Transition 
management and consultation’ below. But don’t wait until the end to signal 

Implementation
283
that this is a possibility if you need to take unions and/or your works 
council with you, and make the consultation process real. Start early, even if 
off the record you have the trust of your union/works council colleagues. 
The key is to build trust. Trust is hard earned and easy to lose. This is a 
tightrope you are going to need to walk. Remember that case for change  
in Part Two. You must consider how you leverage and build on it together 
with how you link the design to the design criteria that follow from that.
The design process is a communication process
By its very nature, you will need to engage with people who are going to be 
affected by the design. The more professional, open (in terms of being open to 
the ideas of those involved in the process) and logical/fact driven the process 
is, the better. Be serious and take care to reach the right answers for the right 
reasons. The number of times decisions are made on a whim or political horse-
trading between power brokers is hard to believe and this must be avoided. 
If the design criteria say ‘what’ is most important, deciding ‘who’ is to be 
involved is a way of you saying who you think is important. Choose wisely.
Make it as fact- and reason-based as possible 
People want to know the reason why and don’t want to be treated like 
children. It is easy to dumb things down too much. If those affected can 
understand why, then they will be far better equipped to deal with it. I have 
had to let quite a few people go over the years for various reasons, be it  
redundancy or performance reasons. When the reasons behind the decision 
were clearly explained, the person was far more likely to deal with the news 
effectively. In order to make sure that your messages are as reason-based  
as possible, you need to consider:
●
●What are the design criteria and how did they translate into the design?
●
●What is the business case? How does it enable the strategy of the 
business?
●
●If employees are going to be put at risk, what are the objective 
selection criteria? What are you doing to provide other opportunities 
or support?
The worst thing is a lingering death. So when you make the final decisions, 
make them clearly and move quickly. Be generous in the pay-out and support. 
If you are quick and fair, the speed will pay for your generosity. If the process 
is fact-based, you will also do a much better job of retaining the good 
people who are often let go during a redundancy process. Why are they let 

Part Four: Making It Real
284
go? It is often simply too complicated to assemble all the information and 
make fact-based decisions across thousands of people. As a result, many 
companies have been through the experience of wholesale redundancy 
packages followed by hiring back experienced people as contractors or  
consultants because they had specific knowledge that was needed. A data-
driven approach, particularly when it comes to historical performance and 
competency data, will give you the best chance of reducing or eliminating 
these issues, resulting in a better outcome in quality of people retained, and 
a lower cost of subsequent rehires.
Communication map and tracker
A communication map lists who is being communicated to, how and when. 
As always, I propose that you make it visual and review it from various 
perspectives. The mechanism is for every employee whom you want to com-
municate to, to know what the change is going to be from all angles. Use 
your Impact Assessment to segment the workforce by the nature of their 
impact. For each impact, think through what the communication approach, 
messages and support need to be. By detailing how each employee is impacted, 
you can tailor your communication to him or her. For example:
●
●Those who have a change in reporting lines will need to know who 
their new manager is.
●
●Those with changes in accountabilities may be losing elements of 
their work that they love. They will need to understand why and  
how this will help their career development.
●
●Those at risk of redundancy will have thousands of thoughts rushing 
through minds: ‘How am I going to find another job?’ ‘What kind  
of package am I likely to get?’ ‘How am I going to pay my rent or 
mortgage?’ ‘What are my family and friends going to say?’ They  
are going to need lots of support through the process.
●
●Some may just be confused, even though the change doesn’t affect 
them directly. Explain the business case and what it will mean for them.
It is good to know who has been communicated to and if there were any 
escalated issues resulting from the process. Implement a tracker so you can 
monitor the execution of your communication plan. For example, for each 
segment or group of employees, define the type of communication method, 
type of message, timing and responsibility for delivery. As the plan is delivered, 
each person responsible can then update his or her progress together with 
any issues requiring escalation. The key is to define what are the messages, 

Implementation
285
who gives them, when and how. For each segment, think through what mix 
of communication channels will best be used. Example channels include 
town hall presentations; team meetings; one-to-one meetings; breakfast or 
lunch Q&A meetings; video; short e-mails that emphasize key points; posters; 
intranet. For in-person communication, it is useful to create speaking briefs 
of the key points.
Listen
Remember that good communication is two-way. You have two ears and 
one mouth for a reason (as many of our grandparents will have taught us). 
But organization-wide listening isn’t easy. It requires the creation of listening 
tools such as fast-feedback surveys (for example, five simple questions that 
take two minutes to complete where the analysis is automatically generated 
so that action can be immediate). It requires giving the person receiving the 
message time to receive, reflect, understand it and then respond with ques-
tions, comments, ideas or simply a burst of emotion. If you provide a feedback 
loop and don’t act on it, you are going to make the situation worse. Like 
all these obvious points, it is about having the discipline to actually follow 
through with the action. Simply said, and hard to do well.
Transition management and consultation
Transition management is the process of determining which employees  
get what role in the new organization and the physical process of making 
that happen. It often involves running a consultation process. At the end of 
the process, the to-be organization needs to be populated. Some employees 
will be automatically transferred as their roles are not at risk, there is no 
change, and their roles won’t be open for others to apply for them. This is 
called opt-in. An example of this is likely to be the CEO. For the remaining 
roles, it is common practice that employees will have to apply for the roles 
they desire. In order to manage this, a workflow process is needed. The con-
sequences will be populating the to-be organization and the management  
of those who need to be made redundant (Figure 4.4.6).
Assessment and selection process
The assessment and selection process determines who is going to get what 
position. The first step is defining the inputs to the process: the assessment 
mechanism; the HR consultation policies; processes; and precedents. Then 

Figure 4.4.6 
Summary transition from as-is to to-be organization process diagram
4.03M
Sales
Director
910K
Sales
manager
990K
1.11M
783K
234K
Sales
person
169K
206K
55K
Sales
Assistant
57.2K
3.88M
669K
1.5M
1.48M
188K
87.8K
56.8K
55.1K
50.2K
Place 
successful 
candidates
Manage  
exit
People at  
risk and/or 
needing to 
apply
Perform  
data analysis 
to show
benefits
realization
Transition 
Opt-in current 
employees to 
roles
Sales
manager
Sales
manager
Sales
manager
Sales
manager
Sales
manager
Sales
manager
Sales
person
Sales
person
Sales
person
Sales
person
Sales
Assistant
Sales
Director
Sales
Assistant
Sales
Assistant
Sales
Assistant
286

Implementation
287
you need to think about how the general and individual consultation pro-
cesses work (I go into this more detail later in the chapter) and what your 
selection rules will be. For example, which people can be ‘automatically 
matched’ versus going through either a select-in or select-out process? With 
a select-in there are typically large numbers of people competing for the 
positions. For instance, you may have 60 people vying for 30 positions.  
A select-out is simpler with only a small number at risk, for example 22 people 
vying for 20 positions. In the select-out, you transfer all and determine 
which ‘two of the two’ should be removed.
The biggest issue to overcome is what the assessment mechanism is going 
to be. There is a range of mechanisms for you to select from:
●
●Historical data such as performance scores. If you have competency 
and objective management in place as described in Chapters 3.3 and 
3.6, then perfect. Unfortunately, the majority of organizations have 
poor historical data. If there has been a merger, then this may be 
irrelevant in any event.
●
●Generated data aims to collect the sorts of data specified in  
Chapter 3.6 so that a judgement can be made about who is best 
capable to do each role. These typically break down into a set of 
technical role-specific competencies and general behaviours. 
Mechanisms for collecting this data can include:
–– employees’ self-assessments;
–– interviews;
–– manager assessment and surveys of each of their team;
–– committee reviews;
–– third-party standardized tests;
–– assessment centre testing.
These mechanisms are not mutually exclusive. You may want employees  
to do a self-assessment so that you can see where there is alignment or risk 
of a large variation in perception. Whatever the method of collecting the 
assessment data, I think it is crucial to run a well-structured calibration 
process by a committee of well-informed managers. The role of the calibra-
tion process is to verify that each of the judgements is robust and consistent. 
Once this is done, you may decide to feedback the assessment and verify 
that each employee agrees or at least has a chance to challenge it. An excep-
tion process can be run to deal with the most contentious issues. Lastly, a 
decision has to be made.

Part Four: Making It Real
288
Define assessment and the implementation process
What is the implementation process going to be? In what sequence will  
the planning groups, geographies and functions be rolled out? What are the 
timetable and programme roadmap? What is the consultation and appeals 
process? The key thing is to define the process and get legal advice. 
Figure 4.4.7 provides an example I received from the law firm Kemp Little.
General consultation
In works council or union environments, formal consultation is required. 
This normally causes extreme levels of anguish. It is often seen as doing 
battle with the devil or a reason for people not to do many of the things 
deemed crucial by management. From the other perspective, those sitting on 
the works council or union side, it is all too often seen as paying lip service. 
They see a disingenuous management team that is not acting in their em-
ployees’ best interests. I’ve seen how general consultations can spiral into 
acrimonious strikes.
I am not an industrial relations expert but have spoken with many who 
are, and on both sides of the fence. What is interesting is their views are 
exactly the same and pretty simple. Again, it is all about trust. From the 
union’s perspective that means the consultation is genuine. That, in turn, 
means that the decisions are not yet taken and they have a genuine chance 
at influencing the outcome, which means involving them early enough in  
the process. From the management’s perspective, it means they can share 
thoughts and options without being held to ransom. They can have a personal 
relationship and rapport between the two parties, which can pay large 
dividends. There is an element of negotiation and an element of give and 
take without either side fully devolving everything they hear. To gain trust 
you need to have an open mind, but equally not be easily intimidated. You 
must see arguments from both sides and represent various perspectives 
without blatantly pushing your own agenda. Once a relationship is broken, 
it is almost impossible to fix and once a negative spiral is started, it is hard 
to stop.
Legal consultation
Getting your head around the legal requirements of redundancy can be a 
challenge. It is an area of great risk for organizations. So it is worth getting 
right. When putting together your consultation process I suggest you write 

Implementation
289
Figure 4.4.7 
Example individual redundancy consultation 
process from Kemp Little
 Arrange town meeting
 Present current situation
  Present what you are doing 
about it
 Explain the implications, eg:
 Select redundencies
 Sorts of numbers impacted
  Explain the process
 What the steps are?
 How long it will take?
 What everyone should do?
 The support you will provide
 Discuss with employees
 Nature of the proposal
  Business reasons behind the 
proposal
 Impact on the employee’s role
  Consultation process to be 
followed, including proposed 
selection procedure and criteria  
(if relevant)
  Whether there are any ways of 
avoiding or mitigating the impact
 Suitable alternative vacancies
 Redundancy package
  Allow the employee an  
opportunity to comment
  Respond to comments raised or 
agree on points to be taken away 
for consideration
  Run through the matters  
discussed in the first meeting
  Provide feedback on points raising 
in the first meeting (if any)
 Take further feedback (if any)
  Encourage the employee to 
apply for any suitable alternative 
vacancies
  Allow the employee an  
opportunity to comment
  Respond to comments raised or 
agree on points to be taken away 
for consideration
 Objective criteria
 More than one person scoring
 Moderated scores
  Consider whether it is necessary 
to make reasonable adjustments 
for disabilities or to avoid other 
discrimination
 Decide if there is another role
 Decide whether to proceed
 Decide final terms 
  If applicable: Communicate the 
employee’s score
  Reconsider suitable alternative 
vacancies. If none:
  If applicable: Allow them an 
opportunity to comment on  
the scoring
  If applicable: Respond to 
comments raised or agree on 
points to be taken away for 
consideration (if any)
 Confirm the outcome
  Provide support through the 
termination process
Individual redundancy consultation
Gate to  
proceed
Second 
consultation 
meeting
Apply the 
selection 
criteria
(if applicable)
Town Hall 
Meeting
First 
consultation 
meeting
Final 
consultation 
meeting

Part Four: Making It Real
290
it up and get legal input to make sure you are doing it properly for your 
jurisdiction. Figure 4.4.7, provided by Kathryn Dooks, Employment Partner 
at the City of London law firm Kemp Little, demonstrates what this could 
look like. Depending on whether you have redundancies across more than 
one jurisdiction can add significant complexity to the legal landscape you 
have to navigate. So in this section I highlight two important considerations 
if this is the case, and then investigate three common traps to avoid in the 
redundancy process.
Considering variation in redundancy processes across 
jurisdictions
When dealing with redundancy across jurisdictions, careful planning of the 
consultation in each jurisdiction is essential. Alison Dixon, a senior employ-
ment lawyer in the International HR Services team at the City firm Bird & 
Bird, says that although the law that requires employers to consult collec-
tively in the case of mass redundancies is likely to be similar across EU 
jurisdictions (as it derives from European Directives), the way in which the 
law has been implemented in each country varies quite significantly. For 
example, the threshold number of proposed redundancies that will trigger 
the obligation to consult on a collective basis differs from country to 
country. In Germany, the applicable threshold depends on the number of 
employees at the relevant establishment, while in France it is 10 or more 
redundancies within a 30-day period; in the UK the trigger is 20 or more 
over a 90-day period. There may also be additional obligations to consult 
with a European Works Council. The legal consequences of failure to comply 
with local duties to inform and consult range from financial penalties 
payable to the affected employees (UK) through to injunctions preventing 
the redundancies from being implemented (Germany) and criminal penalties 
(Belgium and France).
There are also strict requirements about when the duty to consult arises, 
which vary across Europe, meaning that in some countries the duty will be 
triggered at an earlier stage in the process than in others. Management  
and HR need to be educated about these requirements at a very early stage 
in the planning process, in order to avoid inadvertently triggering a duty to 
commence consultations in any particular country before the business is 
ready to do so, or even undermining the validity of the consultations al­
together. Communications with staff or their representative bodies need to 
be carefully coordinated across the affected jurisdictions to avoid this type 
of problem. A staff communication (or even an e-mail between members of 

Implementation
291
senior management) that is perfectly innocuous in one jurisdiction (such as 
the UK, which is one of the more permissive jurisdictions) may be a complete 
no-no in another (such as France, where the legal regime tends to be much 
more protective of employees). A famous example of a business getting it 
completely wrong is that of Marks & Spencer’s exit from Europe in 2001. 
They announced their closure plans to staff before consulting with the 
appropriate staff representatives. This resulted in the French courts ordering 
them to suspend the redundancy process in a blaze of terrible publicity, 
which included the French Prime Minister commenting that M&S should  
be punished and protests on the streets of Paris.
Clearly, central management and HR need to fully understand the legal 
landscape in each country where redundancies are proposed, and both the 
legal and practical risks associated with non-compliance, in order to come 
up with the most effective plan. For businesses unaccustomed to the regimes 
in mainland Europe, it can come as a shock to learn that non-compliance 
with consultation requirements can result not only in financial penalties  
but also lengthy and costly delays to the process. It is much better for that 
realization to come during the planning stage than when those plans are 
being executed.
Three common legal traps to avoid
The process is one thing. But what are some of the traps to be avoided?  
With this in mind, I asked Kathryn Dooks to add some more experiences 
and reflections.
Coordinate your consultation process across the organization
A common error in a restructuring context is to make a decision to close 
down one function of the business and to refocus the business by growing  
a different function. Employers often recruit for the growing function before 
starting to consult on the redundancies in the function that is being closed 
down, leading to accusations that the consultation process is a sham and 
that the restructuring is a done deal. This frequently arises from an (some-
times erroneous) assumption that the redundant employee does not have the 
skills and experience to undertake the duties of the expanding function. 
Employers should discuss the employee’s transferrable skills and experience 
as part of the consultation process; they will not be aware of all of their 
employees’ skills and reasonable retraining should be offered. Give each 
employee a chance to express interest in all open roles, not just those in his 
or her area.

Part Four: Making It Real
292
For example, one of Kathryn’s clients in the media sector was scaling 
down its administrative function while at the same time growing its market-
ing function. The client recruited for the marketing roles before putting the 
administration roles at risk of redundancy, and the administration staff  
who were at risk of redundancy claimed that they had the skills to carry  
out the marketing roles (or could have done with reasonable retraining)  
and that the redundancy consultation process was therefore unfair. This  
resulted in a litigation process that awarded significant costs. Given that 
only a small handful of people were involved, the client could easily have 
postponed the recruitment in the marketing function and started the redun-
dancy consultation process earlier, enabling management to discuss the 
vacancies with the administration employees to determine whether they  
had appropriate skills and experience for the roles.
Avoid grounds for constructive unfair dismissal claims
Employers often hire a new member of staff to slot into the structure over 
the head of an existing employee without consulting the existing employee 
(particularly in a rapidly growing business). This can result in a change of 
reporting line, team size, perceived status or responsibility for the existing 
employee, which may lead the existing employee to resign and claim  
constructive unfair dismissal. However, if the employer had taken the time 
to consult with the existing employee about its plans and the reasons behind 
them prior to recruitment of the new employee, there would have been 
greater chance of persuading the employee of the merit of the proposal and 
less chance of a successful constructive unfair dismissal claim.
Ensure selection processes are fair
When reducing the size of a function rather than eliminating it altogether, 
ensure you avoid discrimination issues arising from the selection process 
and criteria being applied. This most commonly arises where an employee is 
disabled or has been on a period of maternity leave during the period being 
assessed for the selection process. When the employers score the employee 
as part of the selection process, they often fail to take account of the dis­
advantage to the employee arising from the disability or maternity leave and 
don’t make adjustments accordingly. Apparent maternity discrimination (or 
other types) can arise inadvertently where, for example, it just happens that 
a large proportion of those selected for redundancy are on maternity leave. 
Pull your numbers together by each group, consider the risk and consider 
how a situation would look in front of a tribunal judge. Employers also need 
to take care not to go too far the other way and to overcompensate for the 

Implementation
293
impact of one group leading to allegations from the other. It is always best to 
seek advice on the criteria used and any adjustments proposed in this context.
From a process perspective, it is common for employers to think that HR 
managers should handle the process on their own. This can lead employees 
to think that management is shirking responsibility for its decisions and 
avoiding difficult conversations. It always best if the message is being deliv-
ered by the individual’s line manager or a senior member of management 
with an HR manager supporting and being present in the room. Last im-
pressions matter and how you treat those leaving the organization will have 
a significant bearing on how your organization will be viewed by the outside 
world and by those who remain. It is a process that needs to be run both 
efficiently and with empathy. Above all, ensure that all decision-making is 
carefully documented, can be justified on objective grounds and is fair, and 
that the process is well managed.
Collateral
Before you start the implementation process, you need to ensure the design 
and all the logic for the decisions you are making are effectively documented. 
The reality, however, is that the documentation process never stops because 
the detailed design never stops. The consultation process will throw up legiti-
mate issues that will result in subtle changes. Equally, as days turn to weeks 
and months, events will force change too. You will need to react to that change 
and many of the detailed designs will evolve. The process of documenting 
the design is, therefore, an ongoing rather than one-off activity. I believe the 
discipline required to do the micro design should become a core ongoing 
competence, only more so, as Chapters 4.5 and 4.6 demonstrate.
One of the greatest clichés about management consultants is that they 
write huge PowerPoint reports which end up collecting dust on a shelf some-
where. How the vision of all that labour eroding in value over time used to 
depress me! When you do this work, you put in a great deal of effort. If the 
collateral from the detailed micro design is not maintained then, eventually, 
it will erode and die. And so will the benefits. The design cannot be a static 
solution documented for all time in hundreds of PowerPoint slides and Excel 
files. An organization is constantly evolving and, therefore, the information 
about the organization needs to be updated in electronic form, too. The infor­
mation needs to be easy to share and drill into detail. It needs to support all 
the remaining elements of executing the design on an ongoing basis.

Part Four: Making It Real
294
Final thoughts
The essence of this chapter is pretty simple. Know what is going to change 
and make that change happen in a structured and fair way. Knowing what 
is going to change needs to happen at the individual level first and then be 
aggregated up. This is the impact assessment. Inversely, the communication 
and consultation processes need to start at the aggregate level and then be 
implemented at the individual employee level.
But the art of this isn’t so much the how but the when. The when for a 
great number of the elements is right from the start of the macro design 
process. That is when the communication starts. However, there is a catch-
22. If you start too early with general consultation and don’t have enough 
answers to specific questions you might send unfounded fear through the 
ranks. But if you wait until everything is worked out, you will at best break 
trust and at worst have missed an angle of thought that could have led to  
a far better outcome or you will need to do lots of re-working. It is a bit of 
a tightrope walk. No matter what, if you break trust it is hard to get it back. 
So be thoughtful both in your timing and in developing strong relation­
ships with those with whom you need to consult at the general level. For the 
individual consultation process, be fair and clear. Have a well-structured 
process that protects you both legally and minimizes risks, but is also effi-
cient so that you can move forward into getting the value from the to-be 
design.
Implementation requires both the soft and hard sides of management.  
The ability to be empathetic and to communicate accordingly versus the 
hard-nosed process management of those at risk through the application 
and redundancy processes within the law. There is a lot of information that 
needs to be managed. You need to have your systems and processes in 
place. Each person will want to know what the design looks like, what his 
or her role will be and how he or she fits into the bigger picture. To support 
that, you will need to move beyond the traditional PowerPoint and Excel 
documentation. Equally, you will need to be able to track progress on  
a daily basis as there are lots of moving parts and a complex set of anxious 
stakeholders. Once done, it will be time to move to managing the ongoing 
to-be or new ‘business as usual’ world. That to-be world won’t be static. It 
needs ongoing management if you are going to achieve the goals you set 
yourself.

Implementation
295
Note
1	 Covey, S R (1990) The 7 Habits of Highly Effective People: Powerful Lessons in 
Personal Change, Simon & Schuster, New York
1	 Build a comprehensive and detailed impact assessment at the aggregate 
and individual levels of the organization.
2	 When communicating change, be as true to yourself as possible.  
If you don’t, people won’t believe in you or follow you on the journey.
3	 Use all the hard work building your baseline to understand why things 
are changing and support your communication with the facts.
4	 Be clear and fair about your assessment and selection criteria and 
consultation processes. Where necessary, bring in professional support 
to avoid legal traps.
5	 Document the process and keep the design collateral up to date so you 
have an audit trail and can keep tracking progress.
Remember this

“
4.5
Workforce  
planning
A goal without a plan is just a wish. 
Antoine de Saint-Exupéry
Introduction
How do you know that you are getting the right people, doing the right 
things, at the right time, in the right numbers and with the required skills? 
How do you manage this over time? What is your governance process for 
dealing with changes and how do you keep a grip on basics like budget 
versus actuals? How is your forecast of headcount or salary cost changing?
These are all pretty fundamental questions and beyond the reach of most 
people to answer. If there is one area of poor organizational performance 
across all industries, it has to be workforce planning (WFP). At one con­
ference I attended in the summer of 2014, the final keynote speaker asked 
100+ senior HR practitioners, ‘Has anyone here even come close to getting 
workforce planning to work?’ She said that if any of them had, she would 
bite off their hands and pay whatever figure came into their heads for the 
answer. No one put up a hand.
Workforce planning is a really tough problem. For any significant busi-
ness, the numbers of employees involved and the change and complexity 
mean it can’t really be done using manual tools like Excel. However,  
according to the Aberdeen Group in their May 2014 research paper, over  
50 per cent of organizations still have manual or spreadsheet-based work-
force planning processes.1
In this chapter, I look to illuminate how to move forward in the work-
force planning journey. I explore what workforce planning is, breaking it 
down into three types: strategic, operational and tactical (often referred to 
as scheduling). I then explore how workforce planning is related and con-
nected to the organizational design and, in turn, how good design supports 
good workforce planning. In the final section I explain how to build a plan 
at the strategic and operational levels and maintain that plan in order to deal 
with changes over time, governance and making decisions such as approval 
to hire.
296

Workforce Planning 
297
What we really mean by workforce  
planning
I have found that everyone has a slightly different understanding as to 
what workforce planning means. When I hear people talk about workforce 
planning I often hear questions like:
●
●How many people do we have for a given age?
●
●What is the gender or diversity split?
●
●What is the split of permanent versus contract labour by factory?
●
●How many open posts are there?
This is not workforce planning; it is HR analytics as described in Chapter 3.2. 
Workforce planning is about the demand and supply of ‘workers’ (be they 
permanent or temporary; full time or part time) required for each time period 
(by year, month, week). Workforce planning has two components: supply 
and demand. It is about knowing the gap between actuals (the supply) and 
plan (the demand). It is about knowing why there is a gap. What is the root 
cause? Is it because you didn’t recruit the number specified in the plan?  
Is the churn rate higher than was assumed? Has the plan has changed?  
Only when you know why you are off plan in any given area are you in a 
position to actually do something about it. I will return to this later in the 
chapter in ‘Workforce planning in practice’. However, for now I want to 
define three types of workforce planning.
Breaking down the term ‘workforce planning’ helps to identify the dif­
ferent values you get from the activities associated with it. Each type of 
workforce planning requires a different approach, set of skills and is often 
done by different teams. What differentiates the different types is their time 
horizons and the level of granularity they are done at:
●
●Strategic workforce planning: looking forward 18 months to multiple 
years into the future. Done at the workforce planning group level.
●
●Operational workforce planning: looking forward monthly to  
12–18 months into the future. Done at position level.
●
●Tactical workforce management (sometimes referred to as 
scheduling): looking forward within the day to the coming weeks or 
a maximum of one quarter into the future. Done at employee daily 
schedule level.

Part Four: Making It Real
298
Strategic workforce planning
Strategic workforce planning looks forward multiple years. The drivers 
behind the need to do strategic workforce planning include external factors 
and business and operating model changes. For example, external factors 
could include wide-ranging social changes. A classic example is that of the 
medical profession in Western industrialized countries in the 1960s. A com-
bination of increasing wealth and technological advances in medicine 
(along with other factors such as state-funded procedures in Commonwealth 
countries) led to a greater demand for medical treatment and personnel. 
The surge of demand was beyond the service that the numbers of doctors 
could provide, a problem characterized by the press as national doctor 
shortages. Spotting that there was a gap in the domestic supply of medical 
personnel, many countries created new medical schools to increase the  
intake of students and the ‘talent’ to meet public demand.2 Other examples 
of these acute long-term shortages in talent include the number of nuclear 
scientists within the nuclear power industry or experienced mine engineers 
in remote regions of Australia. They are the sorts of trends that are hard  
to spot with an in-year or even in-decade perspective. The consequence of 
missing them can be fatal.
Another driver for strategic workforce planning is a change in operating 
model. For example, in the early 2000s I worked with a public sector client 
attempting a digital transformation in order to achieve a new range of goals 
and targets based on a radical shift in policy. The change was so big that all 
front-line staff needed weeks of training, on both the new major IT system 
being put in place and the new processes. We had to take into account a 
number of factors in the transformation:
●
●What was the training and learning curve going to be?
●
●What might be the productivity levels per agent (the number of  
cases they could deal with) or what might be the likely range?
●
●The estimate of data migration and the speed at which clients (certain 
members of the public) could be transitioned from old to new.
●
●How many agents for how long would need to work on the old 
system, and how fast would the ramp-up to the new system be?
●
●Lastly, there was a whole range of exceptions resulting in more work. 
These exceptions were workarounds because the standard system 
couldn’t deal with certain elements of complexity that the new 
legislation and government policy drove.

Workforce Planning 
299
The risks were high. One workaround alone, because of a complex piece of 
legislation, resulted in 360,000 work days of extra effort. Over a five-year 
period, this amounted to an additional 340 staff alone. The demand for the 
workforce grew from 12,000 people to well over 16,000 within one year. 
However, according to the business case this would need to be reduced to 
8,700 post-implementation. Given this was a government agency, redun-
dancy packages were not an option and attrition was low. The gap between 
the target and actual demand was too big, highlighting that either many of 
the policies or the business case and targets needed to change. The strategy 
of the entire agency rested on getting right many of the fundamentals high-
lighted above. And, in this instance, I wonder how funding for such a large 
programme could ever have been made without understanding this type of 
workforce impact.
In all instances of strategic workforce planning, because it is done so far 
into the future it doesn’t need to be done at a detailed position level. It is 
useful to chunk the level of analysis up a level to workforce planning groups. 
A planning group is a group of workers who are broadly fungible. They 
have similar competencies and can do each other’s work. Not all planning 
groups are created equal. Some take a long time to replace with limited labour 
markets and/or a lengthy learning curve to master the skills required to do 
the job. The above-mentioned nuclear physicist and drillers in the mining 
industry are two good examples. Furthermore, the impact that each planning 
group has can vary significantly too. Certain planning groups are core to the 
competitive position of the organization and it is, therefore, critical that they 
are directly employed, while others are hard to find and train. In many cases 
roles may be better ‘bought in’ from external sources, such as professional 
service firms or agencies, to meet this demand. The planning groups can, 
therefore, be segmented into four categories as shown in Figure 4.5.1.
The profile of the various WFP segments can be plotted into a matrix, as 
illustrated in Figure 4.5.1. When demand forecasting you can leverage many 
of the methods as described in Chapter 3.7. These segments can inform the 
complexity and level of effort you place into planning. The lower-priority 
segments (closer to the left-hand corner of Figure 4.5.1) are more easily 
rectified on an operational basis so strategic planning errors are less critical.
Operational planning
Operational workforce planning encompasses a medium-term view; for ex-
ample, ensuring you have the required workforce to meet annual objectives 

Part Four: Making It Real
300
Figure 4.5.1 
Workforce planning groups
 SpecialiStS
Specialist capability required by 
the business and hard to replace 
but have limited business  
value impact.
• Statutory accountants
 critical
Roles which deliver critical 
business value impact and are 
hard to obtain or replace.
• Commercial accountants 
• Strategy and planning 
• Treasury and taxation
 Flexible
Roles which have limited business 
value impact and are easy to 
replace. Often these roles are 
considered for outsourcing  
and/or contingent workforce.
• Transaction processing
 core
Roles with high business value 
impact but can be obtained or 
replaced easily.
• Financial controllers 
• Management accountants
impact on business value
Difficulty of 
replacing skills 
of operational business plans. It is done from a position perspective, the 
level that you recruit at. For example, what is the change in the recruitment 
list? What does the pipeline look like for the next 12 months? This element 
of workforce planning is, therefore, an input into the resourcing/recruitment 
function. I regard a budget as an operational plan and the process of the 
annual budget cycle falls within this scope.
Tactical workforce management or scheduling
This is the day-to-day view. It is reacting to unforeseen changes. A key member 
of staff leaves. Attrition suddenly jumps and you need to get a contractor in. 
Someone is sick for two weeks; how do you cover that? Who needs to 
work which shift? How to manage the nursing roster? How to do this falls 
outside the scope of this book; the activity is more transactional while this 
book is strategic and operational. However, if you would like to know more 
about this transactional activity, I suggest looking at how software packages 
like Quintiq, Primavera, Kronos or SAP do it.

Workforce Planning 
301
How micro design helps to drive workforce 
planning
Having clarified the different types of workforce planning, it is worth out-
lining how workforce planning fits into the work already done in the micro 
design. There is a large synergy between the two given they are both focused 
on numbers of people, which roles, competencies required and when they 
will be needed. Micro design needs to be regarded as an input into work-
force planning. It is more strategic in nature in terms of defining where you 
need to get to. Workforce planning and management are about how you  
get there. You could use the analogy of micro design being like a balance 
sheet at a fixed point in time, while workforce planning represents the cash 
flow, with volumes that constantly change and are tracked over time as the 
business changes. They are symbiotic. Workforce planning without a clear 
micro design is like driving somewhere without a map.
With micro design the questions are: What is the as-is situation and the 
to-be design? How and where do they differ? What are the improvements? 
How big is the change? What is the impact going to be? They are about two 
points in time and a variance between those two points. With micro design 
I am interested in the differences between these two points. With workforce 
planning, it is the number of FTEs over time. Each month is likely to have  
a subtly different view. Demands are shifted out or urgently pulled forward. 
It is tied up in budgeting and forecasting; for example you want to slice the 
required number of FTEs by role and then by geography for each month (or 
quarter).
Once the to-be numbers are signed off, it is the role of the workforce 
planner to get the organization from the as-is to the to-be state. It is about 
the transition of those states. Again, in all probability the exact envisaged 
to-be numbers will never be reached because too much will change as time 
evolves. During the micro design you just can’t envisage every angle, nuance 
or eventuality. The whole concept of steady state is, therefore, a bit of a 
misnomer.
The micro design is the platform from which you plan your workforce 
plan. It should define your workforce planning groups, roles and positions. 
It defines what each role means by defining each role’s objectives, account-
abilities and competencies, together with where each set of roles sits organ­
izationally and, therefore, defining the positions. As a reminder, a position is 
a role that reports to the same person in the same geography. The job descrip-
tion is done at the role level. Planning is done at the position level.

Part Four: Making It Real
302
Once you have the demand, WFP is then about the ‘how’ of filling the 
positions, or in other words ensuring supply of labour. In doing this you can 
take a simple headcount perspective, or, as much WFP literature advocates, 
you can look at competencies too. While I agree that taking a competency-
based approach is more valuable, I accept that it’s already extremely hard  
to do workforce planning well at the ‘headcount’ tracking level. Trying to 
predict the quantity of competencies required and available over time in 
practice may be too much. It is definitely much easier to see it as a journey 
and at least begin at the headcount level.
Good micro design should make the implementation of workforce 
planning and management workable. This is essential when it comes to 
implementing your design. Having said this, in all likelihood those doing 
the micro design may not be doing the workforce planning and certainly 
won’t be doing the workforce management as often they come from dif­
ferent parts of the business. Therefore, make sure those doing the design 
understand their impact on the implementation and those executing the 
workforce plan understand the design.
Workforce planning in practice
A useful way to approach workforce planning, regardless of the type of 
planning, is to think in terms of supply and demand. Workforce planning  
is governed by these two forces. The first aspect of workforce planning is  
the demand for resources. The demand is done at the position level. Each 
position has a title, set of reporting lines, desired start and end dates (excep-
tion: permanent positions will not have end dates) and approval status. 
The demand is, in effect, the workforce plan. It is what is required by the 
business unit, function, location and job families. In practice, this will look 
different depending on the type of workforce planning you are doing.
Strategic workforce planning is conducted by scenario modelling the 
future needs of the business. Business managers need the ability to think 
through what type and number of resources they need by answering a series 
of questions; for example:
●
●What does a given scenario look like?
●
●How big would the change be?
●
●How does it compare with a different scenario or the current headcount?
In contrast, operational workforce planning can be thought of in terms of 
how you manage that budget. Plans are drawn up by business managers in 

Workforce Planning 
303
accordance with the strategic plans and the more immediate demands of  
the business. Once they have the most appropriate plan they will seek sign-
off through the appropriate governance mechanisms. The operational plan 
will continually change, from small alterations in start dates to changes in 
business requirements and hiring freezes. The only thing you can know for 
certain is that the actuals will invariably vary from the plan.
Knowing your resource supply versus demand
The second aspect of workforce planning is the supply of resources. This is 
the current headcount and known changes to the headcount:
●
●Who are the known leavers?
●
●When do contracts for temporary labour end?
●
●When are the new starters scheduled to join?
●
●How long does it take to hire each role?
●
●Is it better to recruit internally or externally?
Once resource demand and supply are known, the business needs to under-
stand gaps.
Doing strategic workforce planning
From a strategic workforce planning perspective the key is making it com-
prehensible and avoiding too much detail. As highlighted earlier in the 
chapter, you plan based on your planning group whether at a subfunction 
or geographical level. Think through potential reasons for change, both ex-
ternal and internal and how they might affect the workforce. For example:
●
●How many people do you need in sales by country each year in order 
to meet the growth aspirations of the business?
●
●With the new FSA regulations, how big should the compliance 
function become?
●
●Given the age profile of each oncologist in London, how many people 
will need to be trained and qualified to meet the exodus in 10 years’ 
time?
●
●Given the number of new mines that are opening up in South America, 
how many project managers and rock engineers are needed?
If you want to be more precise in your plans you can also start to do driver-
based planning in a similar way to driver-based rightsizing as outlined in 

Part Four: Making It Real
304
Chapter 3.7. This is where you use drivers to help you estimate the number 
of FTEs required. For example, if the number of quality engineers is a function 
of the number of developers, then if the number of developers doubles the 
number of quality engineers probably also needs to double. Just like the 
rightsizing debate, the level of sophistication you should go to depends on 
materiality and complexity and whether a more precise answer is likely to 
be significantly different from a less sophisticated one.
An example of strategic workforce planning done well was a project 
undertaken by a large retail bank. The bank was facing substantial pressure 
on revenue and margins, driven by a change in customer behaviour linked 
to the economic climate and the uptake of digital and substantially increased 
competitive pressure. The bank recognized that it needed to change the way 
it did business and focused on several substantial changes to its business model:
●
●changes to the way it segmented customers and how these different 
customer segments would use the bank away from branches to 
ATMs, contact centres, internet and mobile;
●
●changes in product mix that customers would buy;
●
●changes in productivity driven by Lean Six Sigma improvements.
The implications of these business changes was that to deliver the business 
plan, the workforce needed to change in:
●
●the numbers of workforce required in each category (for example, 
fewer branch staff, more private bankers, more digital staff);
●
●the skills required of the existing and future workforce within each 
category.
A strategic workforce plan was produced that converted the required busi-
ness results into workforce requirements (demand) and compared that with 
a projection of the workforce available (supply) for each workforce category. 
This was based on a number of different scenarios around the pace and extent 
of business change.
The plan identified gaps in some critical areas of workforce (for example, 
private bankers) and some surpluses in other areas (for example, bank 
branch staff). A series of workforce interventions was identified to help 
better match the workforce to the new business model. For example, the 
bank had scaled back its graduate intake programme as a cost reduction 
measure. The strategic workforce plan showed that it would be cheaper and 
more effective to reinvest in that programme than to try to address some of 
the workforce gaps from the open market. It was estimated that the value  

Workforce Planning 
305
of these interventions was worth tens of millions of pounds in cost avoid-
ance and margin enhancement.
Doing operational workforce planning
A good way to think about operational workforce planning supply and  
demand is people and position planning. People and position planning cuts 
through to the core of what most people call workforce planning. It is more 
than planning, though: it is the execution of the plan. It goes into the month-
to-month management of an ever-shifting workforce. For instance, where is 
there a need for a position that is not currently filled? Where is there risk of 
redundancy? Where has resource been requested but not fulfilled?
To conduct workforce planning you need to link resource supply (current 
headcount in each position) with resource demand (demand for each posi-
tion). You can then model and plan resource demand, assess whether demand 
can be met with current resource supply (headcount), or alternatively plan 
additional resource. Every current resource will have a known position. The 
workforce plan will show the business need for each position. A summary 
of this methodology is illustrated in Figure 4.5.2.
Figure 4.5.2 
People supply and position demand in  
operational workforce planning
 Inputs
eg position data
  Position name, manager, FTE, start 
date (end date)
  Position target (e.g. salary, grade, 
competencies)
  Status; modelled, proposed, signed-off
 Outputs
eg  planned, occupied and vacancies
eg  target versus Actual versus Forecast  
(for FtE and cost)
 Inputs
eg Core HR data
  Name, salary, location, grade, age
 Outputs
eg  Headcount, by function, by Bu,  
by location
eg  Employee diversity,  
age diversity
eg Leaver reason, turnover
planned 
position
Existing 
employee
people fullfil  
positions. This is 
the link between 
supply and 
demand
DEmAnD: pOsItIOn tREE
suppLY: pOsItIOn tREE

Part Four: Making It Real
306
On a practical note, if you haven’t done the micro phase already and are 
jumping straight into WPF, then one of the problems you may face is a 
proliferation of job titles. When starting off with any given client, it is ex-
tremely common to see one job title for every two employees. The highest 
ratio I have seen is only 1:7. So the first step is to clean this. One way to 
deal with this issue is to try to simplify the data by bringing it up a level; for 
example, bringing job titles up to job family level and working from there.
In terms of a methodology this is all well and good, but the key is to be 
able to workforce plan and analyse your workforce on an ongoing basis,  
to see where the gaps are early in the process and identify where you can  
fill them from. A good source of inspiration in doing this well can be taken 
from sales and operational planning (S&OP). Good supply chain teams 
have a pretty robust calendar routine. Multiple functions are pooled together 
at fixed points during the year, month or week. Forecasts are frozen x days 
out. The decisions that need to be made are clear, as is the information to 
make those decisions. It is about being efficient with everyone’s time and 
that means pre-work, clear agendas and expected outcomes. To get this kind 
of ongoing holistic approach:
1	 Use your baseline data to gain an understanding for the 
organizational as-is; for example, actual headcount.
2	 Integrate your various organizational functions, aligning and 
synchronizing them to create a people forecast.
3	 Plan accordingly within a specified time frame based on 
organizational demand to create a budget.
If you do this rigidly you can start to get a view similar to Figure 4.5.3 
and begin to understand whether your actuals, budget and forecasts are 
synchronized and on track. Remember that the customers for workforce 
management are inside the business, not outside. They are related to and 
driven by the business strategy, while the demand comes specifically from 
requests to hire or plans to hire over a period of time. The demand plans 
need to be compared with the supply. You should ideally factor in time to 
retire analysis; the impact of attrition, or even the attrition levels by area 
and planning groups.
The maths is simple. What is difficult is getting the right metadata tags, 
understanding how to deal with temporal data and knowing the basics;  
for example: What is the attrition by role, area, group, grade, tenure or high 
performers? Which roles are hardest to recruit for and how long do they take 
to fill? What are the internal supply options for each role versus recruiting 

Workforce Planning 
307
Figure 4.5.3 
Tracking of the workforce supply and demand 
over time
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
2013
2014
2015
2016
forecast
17
24
23
31
26
33
46
43
50
47
53
target
59
58
63
61
51
49
47
49
46
48
44
Gap
–42
–34
–40
–30
–25
–16
–1
–6
4
–1
9
DEMAND
SUPPLY
Key
Demand 
Supply
Difference
outside? In this context, thinking about succession planning becomes a 
subset of workforce planning. Succession planning can be thought of as 
cultivating the long-term supply of core and strategic workforce planning 
segments. Chapter 4.6 goes into more detail about this. The result of all this 
is a picture of demand and supply over time, as shown in Figure 4.5.3. This 
graph also shows the gaps and the detailed numbers.
With this sort of analysis you can really start to understand the drivers of 
change and how they impact your organization. It can reduce the debates 
about whether plans should be altered and why decisions were taken in 
the past, because people can see how the organization has fluctuated and is 
fluctuating over time. It puts you in the best position possible to make quick, 
agile decisions to ensure you get the most value from your existing and future 
workforce based on business opportunities and risks.
Final thoughts
Workforce planning is one of those areas where the theory is easy but the 
execution is fraught. To execute requires strong metadata control of elements 
like roles and grade definitions. It then requires implementing a process and 
system so that the theory can be operationalized. In this book, I don’t delve 

Part Four: Making It Real
308
into systems implementations; it is about concepts and practices. However, 
I hope this chapter gives you, at the most basic level, what workforce plan-
ning actually means, and an insight into what is required to get a plan in place. 
From here, the challenge is creating a plan specific to your organization and 
design, and implementing it.
A lot of thinking in this chapter has been inspired by best practice in the 
supply chain function. Companies put huge amounts of investment into 
their supply chain capabilities. They know that it is about a combination of 
people, process and systems so they invest in all three areas. They know it 
can be a great source of sustainable competitive advantage and they know 
there is no quick fix. It takes years to build a truly world-class supply chain 
capability and it may require targeted outside help. It certainly requires 
continued senior leadership support, budget and a focused team. Mostly, 
however, it requires a long-term commitment to excellence. To do workforce 
planning well you can learn from all these things. It requires perseverance, 
resilience, dedication and investment. It isn’t a quick-win space. But then 
again, things of real value rarely are.
1	 Ensure clarity regarding the differences between types of strategic and 
operational workforce planning and tactical workforce management, 
and if you can, make time for the strategic and operational – they’re 
worth it!
2	 Make sure you have a good understanding of both the demand and 
supply of your workforce over time.
3	 Keep things simple, and at the strategic level use workforce planning 
groups and segment these so that you spend your effort on the most 
critical areas.
4	 Think of operational planning as people and position planning to help 
match your supply and demand.
5	 Ensure you have a clear process for tracking, approving, managing and 
then linking into the resourcing/recruitment functions.
Remember this

Workforce Planning 
309
Notes
1	 Aberdeen Group (2014) Workforce Planning: Mapping the Road to Success, 
Research report 5 May 2014, [Online] http://www.aberdeen.com/research/ 
9265/RR-workforce-planning-success.aspx/content.aspx
2	 Wright, D, Flis, N and Gupta, M (2008) The ‘Brain Drain’ of physicians: 
historical antecedents to an ethical debate, c. 1960–79, Philosophy, Ethics and 
Humanities in Medicine, 3 (24), pp 1–8

“
4.6
Talent  
management, 
succession 
development and 
succession planning
Change the name of the process from succession planning to 
succession development.  Marshall Goldsmith
Introduction
Succession planning is a hot topic and is high up the agenda for many senior 
HR leaders. This is no surprise given that attracting the right talent is crucial 
to your organization’s success. However, despite all the discussions about 
talent management and succession planning I believe there are three major 
issues with the way most organizations approach succession planning:
1	 There is not enough of a long-term focus.
2	 There is too much attention given to only top levels of the organization.
3	 The focus is on planning rather than development.1
I believe people are overly obsessed with the top organizational tiers of 
management or Top 150 in large multinationals. In a survey conducted by 
Ernst & Young in 2007 on the greying US workforce, 41 per cent of employers 
reported that their middle management ranks would be hit the hardest by 
mass retirements, yet 75 per cent of the same companies reported having 
succession planning that focused on senior positions only.2 I believe there 
needs to be a systematic process of improvement that goes much deeper 
than just the top level. Too often, succession planning is regarded as a  
one-off activity. However, as Marshall Goldsmith argues, the focus should 
310

Talent Management, Succession Development and Succession Planning
311
be on development rather than planning. You should focus on improving 
existing talent to minimize the impact when key people leave. Alongside 
this, I believe a far longer view should be taken of the flow of talent over 
time to give you time to develop that talent and help individuals fulfil their 
potential.
This chapter is linked closely with the ideas of competency management 
and workforce planning. If competencies define the talent you currently 
need and have, then talent management is about managing and nurturing 
that talent for your future workforce. In this chapter I begin by highlighting 
the importance of succession planning. I then outline two approaches to  
succession planning: the first based on defining priority and risk to focus 
plans; and the second a focus on individual talent-driven succession plan-
ning. I end on how to implement succession planning in practice, bringing 
together the work done on competencies (Chapter 3.6) and workforce plan-
ning (Chapter 4.5). Throughout this chapter remember that talent does  
not mean one type of talent, or a misguided focus on leadership, but a full 
range of focused skills and behaviours across the organization based on  
a particular role. The question is: Given your set of roles today and your 
roles in the future, how do you spot talent suitable for those future roles 
throughout the organization?
Why all the hype?
Why the obsession with succession? If someone leaves, why not just recruit 
from the outside? Does it really have a material impact on an organization’s 
performance? Can it really be a source of competitive edge? My view is, it 
can and that the hype about this crucial topic is justified. In 2011 New 
Zealand won the Rugby World Cup for the first time since 1987. It had a 
highly capped and ageing team, and with the World Cup being its seemingly 
singular focus there was a big question about whether it could sustain its 
success. Since then, it has sustained a win rate of over 80 per cent and at  
the time of writing has a 100 per cent winning streak. The secret? Talent 
management.
New Zealand faces an uphill struggle when it comes to achieving and 
sustaining success. It is a country with a population of only four million so 
talent is at a premium in comparison with other top rugby nations, such as 
England and France. So New Zealand has had to put a real focus on attract-
ing and developing talent. Its approach demonstrates three areas where organ­
izations could significantly improve their talent management processes:

Part Four: Making It Real
312
1	 Have a long-term perspective. New Zealand invested heavily in all 
stages of talent development, introducing special non-contact forms 
of the game so that talent can be nurtured from as early as the age  
of three.
2	 Ensure structured development. The talent system is not simply a 
plan but a structured system focused on developing talent. Each age 
group is introduced to different forms of the game with a focus on 
particular skills and aspects of the game to stretch them. There are 
apprenticeship programmes for the national team in order to ease 
talent in gradually, planning and managing succession.
3	 A focus beyond top talent. Just as organizations shouldn’t focus on 
the top level of management, New Zealand has built a system which 
goes beyond simply picking out the stars, by building talent which 
supports the whole team and the landscape of New Zealand rugby as 
a whole.
What New Zealand has done so well is executed a succession plan. The 
country’s ability to foster and grow talent is not simply paying lip service 
but has become part of the culture through rigorous thinking and disciplined 
development. Organizations should take all these lessons on board if they 
are going to make a difference. As Jim Collins argues in his book Good to 
Great,3 a good way of thinking about it is to get the right people on the bus, 
sitting in the right seats. Thinking about organization strategically means 
defining the ‘seats’ in the right numbers at the right level, and ensuring a 
flow of talent in the future capable of filling those seats. Succession develop-
ment, like so many things in business, is often talked about but not imple-
mented. In addition, the focus will be only on the top team. Who are the 
successors to the main board members and senior executives? In my view, 
this is all too little, too late. It needs to be much deeper and far-reaching 
down through the organization if there is any chance of developing talent  
in the long term.
Succession planning represents an area for significant performance im-
provement in organizations. According to the Corporate Research Forum 
(CRF), ‘Planning for Succession in Changing Times’ report, ‘only 56% of 
those surveyed said they are satisfied with their organization’s ability to fill 
senior positions, and 42% are actively dissatisfied with it’.4 According to the 
recent KPMG report ‘Rethinking Human Resources in a Changing World’: 
‘Executives see succession planning rising up the HR function’s to-do list 
over the next three years (20% compared with 18% for the past three years), 

Talent Management, Succession Development and Succession Planning
313
but only 22% of executives think their HR department “excels” in succession 
planning.’5
The rest of this chapter sets out an approach to address the challenges 
organizations currently face in this area. I start by returning to the platform 
you have been given to succession plan effectively given the competency 
management done in Chapter 3.6. I then explore two different methods for 
succession planning: first, a priority- and risk-driven approach; and second, 
a way to do that alongside talent-driven planning. I finish by looking at  
how to implement talent and succession planning in practice.
Approaches to succession planning
The starting point for succession planning means understanding the attributes 
required for each role and the attributes that each employee holds. In this 
respect, succession planning is closely linked with the fundamentals of 
competency management (Chapter 3.6). In Chapter 3.6 I highlighted the 
analytical limitations of the box grid. So, are there other analytical frame-
works that can really make this process more fact-driven and robust with 
any hope of being better than manager gut feeling?
A good place to start is with competency management. Start by system-
atically understanding the required competencies for each role and assessing 
the level of competence that each person has. In a similar way to creating the 
summary process cards in Chapter 3.3, every individual could have his or 
her summary competencies against a role’s competencies in one ‘competency 
passport’. With this, you could focus on gaps and desired areas of improve-
ment. However, this only gives the context of an employee’s current role.  
By extending the thought process to other roles, you should be able to see 
the gap in competencies versus all roles. This could apply beyond competen-
cies. For example, you could incorporate ‘skills and experience’ rather than 
the ‘attributes, aptitude and behaviours’ which are behind competencies.  
I am wary of placing too much emphasis on skills or experience as people 
will rise only to the level of their incompetence. It may solve today’s problem  
but it will not solve tomorrow’s. I believe that the attributes and behaviours 
wrapped up in competencies are more innate and harder to develop than 
skills and experience, which only require time to develop. Through your 
succession planning process you want to be able to determine who, accord-
ing to your measures, is the closest fit and, therefore, the best candidate  
for succession. For those who are potential successors, what are the things 
that they most need to work on? How are they progressing? Which skills  

Part Four: Making It Real
314
are in the shortest supply? In this section I demonstrate two approaches to 
help answer these questions. The first takes a short-term priority- and risk-
driven perspective, while the second focuses on a longer-term talent-based 
approach.
Priority- and risk-driven planning
Succession planning is not a simple case of competency mapping. In the 
more immediate term, succession planning should also take a priority- and 
risk-based approach. You need to know where focus is required, which roles 
will be hardest to replace owing to key technical skill or leadership, and 
whether any of those roles are at high risk of departure. This is not just 
about senior leaders, as often key roles can be at a low level. So you need to 
investigate flight risks across all the key roles regardless of the level at which 
they sit. Then you need to know which roles already have a large set of 
potential successors in place.
One way of thinking through flight risk is demonstrated in the fishbone 
diagram in Figure 4.6.1. The fishbone diagram is a causal diagram created 
by Kaoru Ishikawa in 1968 that shows the causes of a specific event.6 In it, 
we are asking, what factors act as a good prediction of flight risk? For  
example, if the tenure in a role is high and the attrition of the team that  
role is in is high, then all things remaining equal, they are more likely to 
leave. It is common for companies to rely solely on the perspective of the 
manager. My perspective is that the view of the manager is only one data 
source. The manager’s perception can be skewed by personal relationships, 
a lack of information or having the wrong motives. For example, one inter-
national software firm I worked with initially used to place sales talent 
within a nine-box grid approach, based on manager reports. When it 
combined sales and finance data with manager placements it found that 
manager perceptions of top performers were not in line with their perfor-
mance numbers. The lesson is to incorporate managerial feedback with data 
from across the organization, such as performance scores, sales records,  
360 feedback, and so on, to build a comprehensive understanding.
Using the risk mapping process highlighted in Figure 4.6.1, you can  
utilize a wide range of data to investigate which employees are in what risk 
and impact categories. In other words, you can narrow down the focus of 
discussion and action by plotting your employees into high, medium or  
low ‘flight impact’ versus ‘risk’ categories. In this case, it would be a 33 pivot 
graph, but in reality it doesn’t matter how you cut the data. The flight impact 
score for the organization, if employees leave, is a combination of ‘business 

Talent Management, Succession Development and Succession Planning
315
Figure 4.6.1 
Illustrative flight risk fishbone root causes
EmployEE 
pErformancE
managEr 
flight risk 
assEssmEnt
Bradford 
factor
EmployEE 
EngagEmEnt
EmployEE 
potEntial
tEnurE in 
organization
tEnurE in 
rolE
tEam 
attrition 
lEvEls
Calculated 
property
Calculated 
property
Calculated 
property
Source 
data
flight 
risk
Source 
data
Source 
data
Source 
data
Calculated 
property
impact’ and ‘time to productivity’ measures, as outlined in Chapter 4.5 for 
workforce planning groups. Having completed this analysis, the key em-
ployees to focus on first are the high-high employees. These are those mostly 
likely to leave, resulting in the worst impact. While initially this approach 
has a naturally short-term view, when it is combined with a talent-based 
approach you can begin to think long term about where future employees 
could sit in the organization and where the development priorities need  
to be.
Talent-driven planning
Life isn’t static, and you need to try to plan a long way into the future. What 
if you could predict which groups of employees are most likely to be able to 
step up into the senior roles? What if there was a body of research with 
practical uses that could help plan five, 10 or even 20 years into the future? 
Well, I believe there is. One way to think about the long term is to make 
predictions on where people could end up. The best predictor of the future 
is the past. So by looking at the speed of progress and development of your 
talent pool, you can start to think through five to 20 years hence.

Part Four: Making It Real
316
A useful approach is to make your predictions based on ‘stratified systems 
theory’. The idea, put simply, is that every employee is at a given ‘stratum’. 
Elliott Jaques, a Canadian organizational psychologist, defined these levels 
as corresponding to naturally occurring levels of cognitive capability or 
complexity of information processing that are a part of human nature.7  
As Ken Shepard, the President at Global Organization Design Society, ex-
plained it to me, you can judge what ‘stratum’ people are in by their mental 
models and how they frame things. This can be shown by how they answer 
questions such as ‘What is your view on the legalization of drugs?’ together 
with the time horizon in which they look forward (is their horizon tomorrow, 
next month, next year or what is going to happen in 10–20 years?), and the 
type of mental models they hold (simplistic to complex to a ‘meta model’  
of the world). Training and experience are required to identify where people 
sit and are not in the scope of this book. But simply, a Stratum I person 
would say to the drugs question, ‘It is bad,’ whereas those higher up have 
ever increasing levels of articulation and even meta models for answering 
the same questions.
It is typical practice to relate the stratum to the level someone is in. Is the 
person a front-line employee doing manual work or the CEO of a major 
corporation? A short explanation of each stratum from Elliott Jaques is:
●
●Stratum I: These jobs might include shopfloor operator, sales clerk,  
or general police officer; most work is routine, and supervision is 
commonplace for new tasks. Such jobs are good fits for Level 1 
people, who think forward with a time horizon of one day to three 
months.
●
●Stratum II: First-line managers, shopfloor supervisors, middle 
managers, proprietors of some small businesses and police inspectors 
have a felt-fair pay level of one-and-one-half times what a Stratum  
I employee might get. This job fits people with a three-month to 
one-year time horizon and who can handle assignments that take 
that long a time to fulfil.
●
●Stratum III: Department heads, workshop managers, owners of 
multistore franchises and police chief inspectors would make felt-fair 
pay that was three times that of a Stratum I employee. Stratum III 
managers typically know personally all the people below them in a 
hierarchy. Many professionals with high technical skill levels operate 
at this level, managing just a few people. People with a time horizon 
of one to two years can handle this.

Talent Management, Succession Development and Succession Planning
317
●
●Stratum IV: A plant manager, editor of a large media operation,  
lab manager, or any line leader with responsibility for diverse 
constituencies would earn felt-fair pay six times that of Stratum I. 
Appropriate time horizon: two to five years.
●
●Stratum V: Positions at this level include divisional executives of  
large companies, business-unit heads (at the vice presidential level), 
production directors and CEOs of 5,000-employee organizations. 
Most ‘zealot’ jobs are probably Stratum V positions. Felt-fair pay:  
12 times Stratum I. Time horizon: five to 20 years.
As Donald V Fowke wrote in Thinking About Organization Strategically: 
‘High potential employees are those who will be capable of general manage-
ment, or equivalent Stratum IV functional roles, before they are 43 years 
old. This means they will need to make the turn from front-line manager to 
manager of managers by 27 years of age.’8 Around 40 per cent of all employees/
people in society will only ever be Stratum I, with another 40 per cent only 
reaching Stratum II. Almost no one, ever, makes it to Stratum VIII. Those 
individuals include Steve Jobs (CEO of Apple, 1997–2011) and Jack Welch 
(chairman and CEO of General Electric, 1981–2001).
What I like about this model is how practical it can be. Based on where 
someone is and his or her age, the future trajectory can be mapped along an 
arc. Mapping where employees sit and their age gives you a good place to 
Figure 4.6.2 
Illustrative stratum model predictions
A
STRATUM 
AGE
EMPLOYEE A
EMPLOYEE B
EMPLOYEE C
VI
VII
V
IV
III
II
I

Part Four: Making It Real
318
start long-term workforce and succession planning. Think through attrition 
and the population sizes and form a view as to how much talent could make 
the cut in five, 10 or 20 years’ time. Imagine three people: Person A, Person B 
and Person C as shown in Figure 4.6.2. Person B has a slightly higher score 
than Person A, but is expected to max out at Stratum IV (which is still very 
senior), while person A is destined to be capable of becoming a Group VP 
and possibly even a CEO, even though Person B has roughly the same score 
as Person C. Another interesting point highlighted to me about this model  
is the insight that you should never have anyone manage someone else in  
the same stratum or more than one level away. For example, if the manager 
is at Stratum III, he or she should only manage those who are in Stratum II. 
In addition, each role demands a given level of person to fulfil it. But that 
doesn’t necessarily mean the person in that role actually hits that level. He 
or she could be a Stratum II or IV. Therefore, that person won’t perform 
well enough OR will be frightfully bored. Based on the research of 59,000 
manager – direct reporting line relationships in 76 organizations by Ronald 
G Capelle from Capelle Associates, 36 per cent of managers are in a com-
pression relationship.9 What that means is that 36 per cent of everyone’s 
manager is at the same stratum as those they are managing, resulting in over 
micro-management and doing too much of their teams’ jobs because they 
are not fully capable of doing their own job.
A Level 1 salesperson is transactional: ‘You give me the cash and I give 
you the product.’ The transaction time is extremely short. The Level 2 sales-
person is a relationship manager: someone looking after a range of accounts 
with a one to 12 month time horizon. The Level 3 salesperson, therefore, is 
the territory manager. However, too often the territory manager is actually 
spending large amounts of time babysitting the relationship managers and 
doing too much of the actual work. This issue of Level 3 managers spending 
too much time doing Level 2 work is pervasive. According to Capelle, about 
50 per cent of the time spent by professionals is doing lower-level work, 
with a conservative cost estimate of $10,000 per position.
Although to follow anything dogmatically is dangerous, I believe strati-
fied systems theory is a useful framework. You must remember, however, 
that it isn’t the final answer. It is about mapping out employees’ potential in 
terms of where they are likely to be at a given point in time, not necessarily 
what will happen. If only social science could give us anything that deter-
ministic. There are risks in doing this work. Does the process open you up 
to employment tribunals and does it become a demotivator? One of my 
previous clients in a highly regulated, government and unionized environ-
ment said she wouldn’t touch it with a barge pole. Her perspective was that 
it runs the risk of putting employees in different ‘potential’ buckets. By saying 

Talent Management, Succession Development and Succession Planning
319
someone is a successor doesn’t mean he or she would get the job, but some 
may not see it that way. It isn’t recruitment but it could be viewed as a de 
facto decision; it is driven by favouritism and doesn’t follow the proper 
recruitment selection processes. Marshall Goldsmith in his ‘4 Tips for 
Efficient Succession Planning’ HBR Blog Network said it nicely:
While development plans and succession charts aren’t promises, they are often 
communicated as such and can lead to frustration if they aren’t realistic. Bottom 
line, don’t jerk around high-performing leaders with unrealistic development 
expectations. Only give the promise of succession if there is a realistic chance of 
its happening! [that is, it’s about having the real conversations].
Harvard Business Review 200910
Like all pieces of analysis, more complexity and refinement can be added. 
You also need to think about what the business needs in terms of talent as 
the business model and operating model evolve and, therefore, what the  
required attributes are of the future workforce, and whether you should 
develop your existing talent or seek new talent. Everything is possible, but 
not everything is desirable. Each piece of additional accuracy in the model 
means collecting more data, involving more discussions, effort and time. 
There always has to be compromise between accuracy and practicality.
Implementing talent and succession 
planning
I have developed several principles and frameworks that impact on talent 
and succession management from some of the previous chapters. They  
include:
●
●Competency (Chapter 3.6):
–– The need to define a competency hierarchy and then set target 
competencies for each position.
–– Run a process that assesses each employee against those target 
competencies.
–– Understand the gaps from the employee level up to the overall 
organizational level, sliced by a range of dimensions; for example, 
function, grade, location and even recruitment channel, manager, 
time in grade.
●
●Workforce planning (Chapter 4.5):
–– Define workforce planning (WFP) groups based on broadly 
fungible positions.

Part Four: Making It Real
320
–– Map these WFP groups by two dimensions. The ‘time to productivity’ 
and the ‘strategic impact’. Where are the biggest issues?
●
●So far in this chapter:
–– Determine the flight risk of each employee and the impact of him 
or her leaving (combining the two dimensions from the WFP 
segments above).
–– Map each position to the Jaques system theory strata (levels).
–– Assess each person’s level (this should, therefore, be part of the 
competency mapping process, and form ‘just’ another view of 
competency levels).
–– Determine whether there are misalignments. For instance, the 
manager and team are either at the same level (they are compressed) 
or too far apart (there is a gap).
Assuming that you have all this information, what can and should you do 
with it?
Identify risks and opportunities
For each workforce planning group, and especially the strategic ones, which 
groups have the greatest risk? Which have the greatest number of high poten-
tials coming through and where do you need to recruit from the outside?
Develop and improve
The first step is development, led by the managers and other leaders within 
the organization. Are the managers aware of the gaps in their teams? Are 
the managers adequately trained in how to mentor and coach their teams? 
Where managers don’t have the skill or time to mentor their teams, do you 
have alternative mentors or coaches? Do you have a culture of providing 
constant feedback? I believe it is only possible to master skills with con-
stant focus and support, purposeful repetition and an environment that 
tolerates mistakes. This fits within the conditions of flow as explained in 
Chapter 3.6. It is fundamentally a core role of management to ensure 
managers constantly improve their teams. This process needs to be supported 
by HR, but it isn’t HR who is responsible.
The next step is more formal, centrally led, training and development. From 
a competency perspective, those competencies with the greatest gaps should 
feed into the training needs assessment. Group the poorly performing and 

Talent Management, Succession Development and Succession Planning
321
most critical competency gaps into bundles of what can effectively become 
training courses. Which courses have added the greatest impact? If you 
know when the various employees have attended their training courses,  
can you find evidence that they are more likely to attain their objectives? 
Can you find a positive correlation between gained competencies and hitting 
desired KPIs? Another method to test the value of training is through follow-
up surveys sent several months after the training with specific business 
outcome questions.
Beyond this, the range of options to address improving your talent and 
mitigating the risks is endless and falls into what can commonly be regarded 
as good business practice. Some other common activities include improving 
recruitment practices through more tailored skills and behaviour assess-
ments; understanding which recruitment channels and types of candidates 
deliver the best results; ensuring there is an open learning culture... The list 
is endless and begins to fall outside the scope of this book. Like many good 
practices, they are often easier said than done. Chapter 4.7 provides a range 
of tools to help you pull your thoughts together, create a plan and then  
use a range of tools to ensure those plans are executed.
Final thoughts
Once you get your competitive edge, can you keep it? Any review of the fall 
of the mightiest firms over the past 100+ years clearly shows most can’t. In 
order to sustain it, you are going to need to sustain employing great people. 
That means creating a culture of building a talent pipeline and ensuring 
succession planning becomes a core management process. It is going to  
need to become part of your culture. Talent is a big topic in HR circles.  
I don’t think anyone doubts its importance and the idea that there is a war 
for talent is no longer new. But the common practice I see is to focus too 
narrowly and in too much of a subjective way. It should start by knowing 
what type of talent you need. That is defined by the list of competencies 
(skills, experience and behaviours) required for each role (the demand). 
From there, it is about looking forward and working out the development 
needs of those people deemed to be critical successes. The importance of 
each role in terms of succession planning relates to the risk of those in that 
role leaving (the flight risk) and the impact that will have. The impact doesn’t 
just relate to how close the role is to the CEO. Some roles may be senior but 
easy to replace while others are far more junior but almost impossible to 
replace and take years to develop.

Part Four: Making It Real
322
Notes
  1	 Goldsmith, M [accessed 17 February 2015] 4 Tips for Efficient Succession 
Planning, Harvard Business Review [Online] http://blogs.hbr.org/2009/05/
change-succession-planning-to/ 
  2	 Ernst & Young LLP [accessed 17 February 2015] 2007 Aging US Workforce 
Survey: Challenges and Responses – An Ongoing Review [Online]  
http://www.plansponsor.com/uploadfiles/ErnstandYoung.pdf
  3	 Collins, J (2001) Good to Great, Random House
  4	 Hirsh, W (2012) Planning for succession in changing times, Report, Corporate 
Research Forum
  5	 Rethinking human resources in a changing world by KPMG (2012) Global 
study commissioned by KPMG and conducted by the Economics Intelligence 
Unit of 418 executive.
  6	 Ishikawa, K (1976) Guide to Quality Control, Asian Productivity 
Organization, Tokyo
  7	 Jaques, E (1971) Time-span handbook: The use of time-span of discretion to 
measure the level of work in employment roles and to arrange an equitable 
payment structure, Heinemann, London
  8	 Fowke, D V (nd) Thinking About Organization Strategically: A Systems 
Approach to Strategy, Structure and Staffing, New Management Network, 
Ontario [Online] http://www.new-management-network.com/publications/
Thinking%20About%20Organization%20Strategically.pdf
  9	 Capelle, G (2014) Optimizing Organization Design, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco
10	 Goldsmith, M [accessed 21 February 2015] Harvard Business School blog 
[Online] https://hbr.org/2009/05/change-succession-planning-to/
1	 Ensure you have effectively mapped employee and role attributes to 
compare and see the gaps.
2	 Prioritize and focus effort by assessing where high-impact staff are at 
high risk through analysing a range of data.
3	 Create a long-term view by predicting individual success and facilitating 
development to fulfil potential where possible.
4	 Invest in and take practical steps to ensure structured development.
5	 Connect inputs in talent development such as training and recruitment 
with outputs such as performance and career progression to 
understand effective methods.
Remember this

“
4.7
Organizational 
getting things  
done
Plans are only good intentions unless they immediately 
degenerate into hard work.  Peter Drucker
Introduction
A lot of this book has been focused on planning and implementing your 
organization design over time. No matter how good your design or plans look 
on paper, at the end of the day, achieving your strategy through successful 
design comes down to getting things done on the ground. Too often, great 
ideas and well-intentioned initiatives go from sizzle to fizzle. They start off 
with drive and enthusiasm and over time become lost in the general black 
hole of stuff that needs to be done day to day. The same blockers to making 
design plans a reality rear their heads again and again. For instance:
●
●People don’t know what they and others are responsible for or what 
deadlines they are working to. One part of a project gets finished but 
fails to be passed on to the next person, so the project slips between 
the gaps.
●
●Leaders flit from one priority to another giving impetus to one 
initiative without any consistency, resulting in activities being 
dropped for no reason but a whim.
●
●The wrong activities in an organization are perceived to be a sign of 
being busy. For example, people’s days are full of overly long, 
unnecessary meetings.
●
●People politics means the conversations that need to happen are avoided 
and sidelined for the comfort of tomorrow, which never comes.
●
●People can’t get access to the right information when they need it, 
resulting in a stream of e-mails back and forth as people search for 
that key document.
323

Part Four: Making It Real
324
Getting and sustaining the organizational edge mean addressing these issues, 
not just to implement plans, but also to create a culture of continuous im-
provement. This requires leveraging your organizational structure to ensure 
responsibilities and decision-making processes are clear, while putting ways 
of working and resources in place to maximize organizational networks 
and information flows for individuals and teams.
The micro design you have done sets the context for this, but it isn’t 
sufficient on its own. In Chapter 3.5 I listed the three levels of project plan-
ning and management. That chapter detailed how to create a summary map 
and integrated plan when project planning. In this chapter I want to address 
how on a day-to-day basis you can manage and get the hundreds if not 
thousands of tasks done. I start by highlighting the power of the list as a way 
of bringing discipline to individual and team ways of working. I apply the 
idea of using the dynamic lists when implementing a complex set of activities 
and plans across individuals and teams, through the example of an agile 
software approach to development. I then explore how you can use the 
processes and outputs from a data-driven approach to help remove tradi-
tional barriers to getting things done using the examples of meetings, office 
politics and resources. Throughout the chapter, while the techniques I am 
discussing are applied in the context of implementing an organization design, 
I hope they also give inspiration and ways of working more broadly across 
the organization, and on an ongoing basis.
The power of the list
The focus of this book is the organization as a whole, as a functioning system. 
However, an organization only gets as much done as its people get done – 
both as individuals and as teams. In building a framework for organizational 
‘getting things done’ I have taken my main inspiration from the power of 
the list. The idea of creating lists is by no means revolutionary, but it is 
undoubtedly extremely effective. In this section I will explore how lists can 
help ways of working on both an individual and a team level, before apply-
ing these techniques to the complex ways of working in an organization. 
Creating lists is extremely effective. Benefits include:
●
●Reduced stress. Brings a feeling of control by having all activities and 
tasks in one place. There is less worry that you will forget something 
or waste time doing the wrong things.

Organizational Getting Things Done 
325
●
●Increased focus. Gives you the opportunity to make better choices 
about where to focus your attention and time, taking into account 
your context.
●
●Improved delivery. Helps you keep commitments as you will be able 
to remember them, and prioritize so that you can stick to them.
As Atul Gawande says in The Checklist Manifesto, checklists help navigate 
the complexities of the world around us.1 He illustrates the power of the 
checklist from the medical profession to skyscraper construction. He 
highlights the power of the list as a reminder and a resource of empower-
ment for workers. For example, he explores how a simple five-point check-
list, including simple activities such as ‘washing hands with soap’, when 
implemented at the intensive care unit at Johns Hopkins Hospital in Balti­
more prevented an estimated 43 infections and eight deaths over 27 months. 
And when it was later implemented at another ICU in Michigan infections 
decreased by 66 per cent within three months.
On an individual level, one of the best methods for effectiveness is David 
Allen’s Getting Things Done: The art of stress-free productivity.2 It may be 
over 10 years old but it sets out a fantastic method for structuring everything 
you need to get done. In the context of this book I have set the four broad 
steps to this approach as part of a weekly review, but if you want to learn 
more I would recommend it as an excellent read.
1	 Set out all your objectives, responsibilities, projects/initiatives. Build 
them in a hierarchical list.
2	 Organize the list into a set of context-specific buckets. For example:
–– how urgent;
–– how time consuming;
–– whether it requires input or work from another person.
3	 Process the inputs and review options for next actions.
4	 Do actions and maintain steps 1–3.
These steps help map out the week(s) ahead and give priority to the things 
that need to be done. If a new urgent task hits the list, then you have the 
means rapidly to know what is going to be impacted. These two examples 
are, on the one hand, extremely useful to help follow static rigorous procedures 
and, on the other, help to organize yourself on a personal level. However,  
in the context of the day-to-day life within an organization, you need a way 
of combining the flexible and evolving nature of David Allen’s approach 

Part Four: Making It Real
326
with the thoroughness and simplicity of Atul Gawande’s checklist. You 
need a way of managing the detailed daily workflows and handovers, and  
a process to monitor progress on a continuous basis.
Getting things done in a team
As I argued in Chapter 2.3, employees are connected day to day through 
organizational networks. It is these networks that facilitate getting things 
done. The organizational hierarchy isn’t there to manage the detailed daily 
workflows. For many roles, the manager cannot manage all the elements of 
work. Teams need to self-manage and get things done. This does not mean 
simply creating lists in Excel, which get left to gather dust, but creating a 
resource that is intuitive and dynamic for both individuals and teams. In 
the context of any project, you need a way of itemizing all the things that 
need to get done, updating them and passing them between people, as well 
as a process to monitor the progress on a continuous basis. One way of 
achieving this is to use an agile approach to working.
The interactive backlog
An example of an agile approach is in software development. The idea is  
to maximize team resources, while maintaining a fluid list of actions and 
priorities to cope with the, sometimes unpredictable, nature of software  
development. Teams start with a backlog, a list of all the functionality that 
needs to be built. Each item is given a score as to how much effort it will 
take (called complexity points). Each element of the backlog is given a pro­
perty. Prioritizing is easily done by physically ranking each element in the 
list from most important at the top to least popular at the bottom. The next 
step is to create a generic process flow. For example: prioritize, design, build, 
test, release. All the items sit within a backlog until a decision is made to 
prioritize them onto someone’s specific list of actions. Once each person has 
finished, that person will transfer it to the next person’s in-tray. For example, 
the designer finishes the design and hands it off to the developer. If the  
design isn’t clear enough, they will have a conversation and perhaps even 
hand back the specific piece of work in question. This process of handing  
the work between everyone’s lists continues until the person responsible for 
releasing it does just that. In agile development, at any time a new item can 
be added to the list and the prioritization of that list can be changed. The 
only time the backlog can’t be changed is during a ‘sprint’. A sprint is a fixed 

Organizational Getting Things Done 
327
Figure 4.7.1 
Example Kanban
(18)
Not Started
(4)
On Hold
(4)
For Approval
(14)
Booked / Ordered
(5)
In Progress
(4)
Complete
Letterhead
Creative
Business cards
Creative
Case Studies
Creative
Flyers/One
pagers
Creative
Brochures
Creative
White papers
Creative
Pop up banners
Creative
Compliment slips
& Envelopes
Creative
Website
Creative
Events stand
design
Creative
Branded mugs
Directors
Employee
Surprise
HR
Office chairs
HR
Kitchen upgrade
HR
Water bottles
Directors
Drinks
Directors
Canapes
Directors
Posters
Directors
Business cards
Creative
Bags
Creative
Meeting room
signs
Creative
Logo above sofa
Creative
Wall sign in
hallway
Creative
Vinyl installation
Creative
Brand A5
document
Directors
Dance off
(Bounce)
HR
Catering
HR
DJ
HR
kayak
HR
Reception
upgrade
HR
Metal Pillars
HR
Office Clean -
Sunday
HR
Video
Creative
Group Train
tickets
HR
Transport
HR
Paint
HR
New lights for
darkside
HR
Branded bottle
openers
Creative
Lensbury
Creative
Table sweets
HR
Coffee table
book
HR
Owner
Creative
Directors
HR
Status
period of time in which to complete detailed design, development, testing 
and releasing of the software code. The goal at the end of each sprint is to 
have functional, fully useable software.
Figure 4.7.1 shows an example of a backlog from a member of my team. 
For simplicity’s sake (the technical software backlog is too complex for  
a book like this), the example here is a backlog for a list of activities related 
to launching a new brand. Each column is a stage in the process with the 
colour depicting who owns it. Once a task is done it gets passed across. The 
list can be changed dynamically and viewed by all. If the list is too large and 
things aren’t moving through, then everyone in the team can see there is a 
problem. In many ways, the backlog is exactly the same as a Kanban system 
for scheduling work. ‘Kanban’ means signboard or billboard in Japanese, 
and was a method developed by Tajichi Ohno to improve efficiency across 
the production process. The system ensures that production is demand-led, 
with Kanbans alerting suppliers to produce and deliver a particular material 
based on consumption. What is great about this process is that it is easy for 
everyone to see everything at any point in time: the list of things everyone is 
working on, how long they have had it, the history of that work item and 
where it will go next. It is extremely intuitive and brings together individual 
and team ways of working so they can see what they have achieved and 
what still needs to be done.

Part Four: Making It Real
328
The waterfall method
Another approach is the waterfall method. This is very different from the 
agile approach described above. It is used when the final requirement of 
what needs to be ‘built’ is fully understood and doesn’t change. In software 
development, for example, it has the same summary steps: design; build; test 
and fix; release. However, unlike the agile method these steps are all done in 
sequence. You design the entire solution first, then the development team 
builds the whole thing, then it is all tested, and so on. The waterfall method 
should only be used when there is complete clarity in what you are trying to 
achieve or build. It gives you less agility but a greater sense of control. You 
know exactly what you are getting before you start ‘digging’ the founda-
tions. However, if there are aspects subject to change, or you are learning as 
you go, the traditional waterfall will not give you the flexibility you need.
Tracking and management
One of the greatest benefits of using this type of agile approach across organ­
izational work is that it provides a huge amount of information, allowing 
you to hone and improve your ways of working. For example, each day the 
amount of work completed is known as each person either completes what 
he or she has done or gives a percentage complete at the specific action 
(backlog) level. This then makes it easier to know how much time and effort 
specific pieces of work will take in the future. It also means that when you 
meet as a team, you can easily and quickly review what has been achieved, 
areas for concern, and what needs to get done next and with what priority. 
For example, Figure 4.2.7 shows a burndown chart highlighting how much 
work has been done versus the plan. After each sprint, the number of com-
plexity points delivered (the output) can be compared with the plan and 
historical actuals. The team can then do a sprint review as to why it might 
have missed a certain goal, what the learning is and how to improve for the 
next sprint. Because the length of a sprint is relatively short (typically two 
weeks, but can be as long as four weeks and as short as one), the feedback 
loops mean that what has been learnt can be rapidly applied.
Applying an agile approach
In terms of bringing this type of approach from software development across 
other organizational ways of working, I do not believe in being too prescrip-
tive. Each team will have its own ways of working and its own networks. 

Organizational Getting Things Done 
329
Figure 4.7.2 
Example burndown chart
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
REMAINING EFFORT (HOURS)
REMAINING AND COMPLETED TASKS
DAYS
COMPLETED 
TASKS
REMAINING 
EFFORT
IDEA  
BURNDOWN
REMAINING 
TASKS
0
50
100
150
200
250
0
5
10
15
20
25
What I want to pull out is that the agile approach is a great way of mak-
ing sure everyone knows what they should be doing, how they could be 
doing it, and of tracking progress. It helps facilitate networks of people 
working with each other across functions, projects and other boundaries. 
For example, let’s return to Chapter 4.6. Part of the challenge for many indi­
viduals and organizations is the sheer amount of stuff that is on at one time 
and ‘needs’ to get done. By having a dynamic list assigned to people it will 
highlight conflicts and where there are bottlenecks or simply just too much 
to do.
Although this is applicable for every level of the organization it does  
undoubtedly start at the top. If you are the leader, you set the tone and 
standards. People will model their behaviour on their seniors, set the ex-
amples and tone. Once it gets out of hand, like so many things that are cultural, 
it is hard to pull it back. For example, use your visual implementation plan/
checklist to focus your own activities and instructions. When reading Bob 
Woodward’s book, State of Denial, I was struck by his story on the number 
of instructions Donald Rumsfeld would write and send. Called ‘snowflakes’, 
they would be written on white paper and seemingly come from the heavens! 
We have all been guilty of sending out requests or instructions either to  

Part Four: Making It Real
330
get something off our plate or in the heat of the moment. However, rather 
than getting things done, because these instructions come from on high, 
all other priorities are temporarily parked. The result? Nothing ever gets 
finished, or certainly not as efficiently as it could have been. The direction 
and motivation from leaders need to be prioritized and managed based on 
an awareness of what is going on the organization, who has time currently 
and what activities would suit them. Your implementation plan/checklist 
gives you a good opportunity to check whether your instructions are an 
urgent priority or can wait to be discussed and added to the list of things to 
do longer term.
Using a data-driven approach to  
get things done
In many ways, getting things done happens by building a particular organ­
izational culture. Culture, although linked to organization design, is an 
entire subject in its own right. However, I do want to demonstrate how 
using the processes and outputs from a data-driven approach, both from 
the above section and explored in the earlier chapters of the book, can be 
applied in practice to get things done in the day to day.
Meetings
Meetings are one of my bugbears. The phrase ‘I’m back-to-back all day’ is 
extremely common in large organizations. All too often meetings don’t have 
a clear purpose, agenda, outcomes or mechanisms for following up on 
actions or recording decisions made. We have all been that person sitting 
there wondering quite why we are there, and thinking through all the more 
useful things we could be doing. Part of this comes back to roles being 
unclear. If it is unclear who makes the decisions or who is responsible for 
doing the job at hand, then it is no surprise that a large group of people is 
involved. Here are three ways to use the materials and approaches outlined 
in this book to get more from your meetings:
1	 Get the right people in the room: A lot of this book has focused on 
bringing clarity to decision-making. Techniques like the implementation/
project plan detailed earlier in this chapter are an excellent way of 
ensuring people know whom they need to turn to if they want answers, 
and who the people responsible and involved in the process are.

Organizational Getting Things Done 
331
2	 Ensure the right information is in place for decisions to be made:  
A big issue for a lot of meetings is preparation. If the meeting is to 
make a decision, then what information is required should be clearly 
understood prior to the meeting and prepared. If the meeting is a 
routine one, like a weekly sales or finance review, then the 
information and agenda should be standardized. For example, create 
a dashboard, which covers all the ‘business as usual’ questions.
3	 Use live data and analysis: By bringing high-level visualizations, as 
well as the ability to drill into the data behind them, into the meeting, 
you can answer questions as they are raised rather than being a 
subject for another day. It allows decision makers to concentrate on 
the same information and engage with it. Meetings become more 
efficient and focused, with better decisions being made from the 
information available.
Politics
As I highlighted right at the start of this book in Chapter 1.2, politics are 
probably the biggest barrier to getting things done. Shared ambition to 
achieve the same results means information gets shared easily and freely 
with decisions motivated by getting the best solution. In contrast, a lack of 
trust will result in your organization struggling and losing its edge. When 
people play politics, then what could be decided in minutes can take months, 
years or simply never be resolved. An organization becomes paralysed. 
This is one of the biggest cancers within any organization. Typically, it isn’t 
anyone’s fault. If a group of individuals don’t like each other, trust each other 
and/or want the same thing, then that organization will fail. To a certain 
extent, politics are not something you can necessarily control. It comes down 
to personalities and egos. However, you can set up ways to put yourself in  
a position to help avoid the problem or at least expose it:
●
●Clear goals and objectives: Having a shared ambition is something 
which often grows with teams rather than being immediately 
internalized. However, you have to set yourself up for success by 
effectively communicating both the high-level organizational goals 
and individual objectives (Chapters 2.2 and 3.2). If employees know 
in which direction they are pulling it gives them a much better chance 
of being inspired and pulling together.
●
●Being clear on responsibilities: By ensuring you have clear 
responsibilities for both processes and day-to-day project 

Part Four: Making It Real
332
management, it is more difficult for things to slip through the gaps. 
Transparency over who is doing what will uncover quickly where 
projects stall and make it difficult for people to excuse continually 
blocking things.
●
●Tracking progress: Half the battle is simply knowing when something 
is going wrong. Having a data-driven approach means you can track 
how things are progressing against plans, whether objectives, plans 
or projects. Transparency over where things are going wrong 
facilitates feedback loops for both employees and managers to have  
a conversation about where there may be problems, and uncover 
political issues early on.
There are many tell-tale signs of office politics. For example, look out for 
lengthy papers or e-mails to justify decisions, or outside mediators being 
used to drive consensus, or the amount of time spent talking about people 
rather than on the task at hand. Sometimes a point of no return gets passed. 
No amount of process design, team building events, objective setting, or 
off-sites will be able to redress the situation. Once relationships are beyond 
repair, the only way to sort the situation out is for a person or group to leave 
either that team or the organization. It is easy to see why so many mergers 
struggle. Cultures can be very different and difficult to bridge. There is no 
doubt that office politics is a tough problem to solve: it is emotional and 
can be very difficult to resolve without conflict. In this regard, there is no 
immediate solution, except to be strict and bold in cutting it out at the first 
sign. It is worth it – trust is very hard to rebuild.
Resources
The final area I want to explore is that of resources. Initiatives are often 
slowed down, or stalled by the inability to get access to the right informa-
tion when needed. This wastes people’s time and pulls them off their focused 
activities. There are many content management systems out there, but it 
doesn’t matter how good a system is, it is only as good as the processes 
behind using it. Therefore, think through which resources are needed by 
whom and when:
●
●Make the most of your Kanbans/backlog: These give a great 
overview of all the work that is going to be done both over the long 
term of a project and the immediate future. Have an initial and then 
weekly review where you reaffirm priorities: who deals with them 
and what they are going to need to get them done. That means all the 

Organizational Getting Things Done 
333
resources can be put in place from the start, or at least before they 
hinder someone from achieving something.
●
●Don’t forget your data collection methods: Sometimes you simply 
need to extract information from across the organization. So don’t 
forget the methods discussed in the data goldmine (Chapter 3.1). 
Using pulse surveys and webforms are a great way of getting 
information from a wide range of sources quickly.
●
●Ensure plans are documented and in a shared location: Many of  
the materials employees will need, when it comes specifically to the 
implementation of the design, are the documents you created at  
the beginning whether they are the design criteria, process maps or 
objectives hierarchies. This is where all that hard work pays off.  
If all of these are well documented and advertised in a shared 
location it will make it much easier for people to implement the 
design along the lines it was intended.
Final thoughts:  
Use the right management tools
We are what we do every day. From an organizational context, we are not only 
what we do as individuals, but also how we work with those around us. Part 
Three of this book, ‘Micro design’, is all about defining who does what and 
the numbers of people required to do it. Part Four, Making it Real, is about 
actually doing it. Not all activities need to be managed this way. If the role 
is transactional (for example, first line phone support) then you will have 
other metrics to understand the effectiveness of the work (for example 
response times, customer satisfaction, time to resolve, resolutions percent-
ages). Like many of the tools and methods discussed in this book, it is 
about using the right tool in the appropriate context. I find many of the 
concepts explained in this chapter particularly useful for work that doesn’t 
fit within strict everyday processes. It is not a surprise that the amount of 
literature and people talking about self-organizing teams is on the increase. 
It is because the level of detail required to manage all the work is too great. 
In the future, teams will be given a set of tools to manage the work and 
provide the appropriate levels of transparency as to their progress.
As I have highlighted throughout the book, and the focus of the next and 
final chapter, measuring and tracking are fundamentally important to get-
ting things done and understanding progress and effectiveness in real terms. 

Part Four: Making It Real
334
How many of the ‘event’ objectives have been done on time as described in 
Chapter 3.3? How many critical actions, for example those to mitigate a 
significant risk as explained in Chapter 3.5, haven’t progressed since the last 
review? How many items does each person have on his or her plate within 
the next review period? In a team context, tracking the work and making 
this process transparent means people can see where the blockages are, 
who is responsible for what and, if it’s with them, when they need to get 
things done by. If a set of priority actions has been stuck with someone for 
months but non-priority actions are done or you don’t know what that 
person has done, then he or she either has too much work, doesn’t agree 
with the priorities, or doesn’t have the skills or resources to do the work. 
Either way, you can do something about it, and make sure things get done!
1	 Get the most from your organizational hierarchy and networks by 
ensuring responsibilities are clear and transparent.
2	 Use interactive lists to help teams and individuals allocate work 
between each other.
3	 Track progress to see where blockages are and which areas need 
focus or support.
4	 Make the most of the data-driven processes and outputs you have been 
applying throughout the book to drive effective ways of working.
5	 As a leader, set the example and tone. Be brave, and when office 
politics arise, tackle the situation as early as possible.
Remember this
Notes
1	 Gawande, A (2009) The Checklist Manifesto, Profile Books
2	 Allen, D (2001) Good to Great, Piatkus Books

“
4.8
Sustaining  
the edge
I’ve missed more than 9,000 shots in my career. I’ve lost 
almost 300 games. 26 times, I’ve been trusted to take the 
game-winning shot and missed. I’ve failed over and over and 
over again in my life. And that is why I succeed.
Michael Jordan
Introduction
This is the last chapter of a big journey. In this book I have mapped out a 
path to enable organizations to achieve the competitive edge through organ­
izational data and analytics. However, one of the greatest challenges still to 
come is sustaining that edge over the course of time. In reality, organization 
design is not and should not be thought of as a one-off. You will always 
need to improve ways of working, review and adjust plans and meet new 
targets if you are going to stay ahead of the competition and continue to 
fulfil your organizational potential. It is hard work. It requires constant 
discipline. It is a test of endurance.
In this final chapter I want to explore how you can sustain performance 
by continuously tracking your organization and performance against plans. 
While implementing each of the steps within Part Two (Macro design), 
Part Three (Micro design) and Part Four (Making it Real), you need to ask 
yourself: How well did we do? What are the areas that didn’t meet our 
expectations and why? What can we learn from those experiences? and 
How do we know we have actually learnt the right lessons? Equally, you need 
to know when and where you have succeeded so you can celebrate, reflect 
on your achievements and take a well-earned rest. Throughout this final 
chapter I revisit the key themes in the book, and finish with a note on what 
the future may hold and how you can prepare to make the most of it.
335

Part Four: Making It Real
336
Tracking the system
In Chapter 4.7 I talked about getting things done. But how do you know 
when you have actually achieved something? How do you know if you  
won or lost? How do you know when all the small day-to-day things you do 
add up to something bigger, something worth talking about and something 
worth celebrating? Your vision should be inspirational, it should get you 
out of bed every day and motivate your work. However, if you never feel like 
you are getting closer to your vision, it can be demoralizing and can start  
to lose its value. Unfortunately, organizational success isn’t always simple to 
define. Unlike in sport there is no single score, no level playing field, and no 
referee to call time. It is up to you to know when you have scored a goal,  
or won an important battle.
So, have you got any closer to your vision? Have you achieved the goals 
and high-level objectives you set yourself? If you are off track, by how 
much and where? I find it remarkable how much effort goes into developing 
detailed business plans. Having heated arguments as to what should or 
shouldn’t be done. Or making commitments, in many cases to investors, and 
then just leaving the outcome to the team without much, if any, control as 
to whether those plans have been achieved or not. The reason for this can  
be a simple case of getting bogged down in the detail and the day-to-day 
issues. But you have to take a step back and track against high-level targets, 
otherwise there’s just no point in them. This is why the combination of 
high-level ambition and detailed plans is so important. The business plan in 
Part Two is connected to the detailed plans in Part Three, which are then 
fulfilled in Part Four, Making it Real. You need to bring everything back to 
the macro level so you can see your overall direction of travel.
Target versus actuals versus forecast
The world is constantly moving. No matter how thorough the budgeting 
process, assumptions made will turn out to be wrong. There will be changes 
to the organization. These changes need to be controlled and understood. 
But as priorities and facts move so do the numbers and sometimes structures. 
Sales in one area may lead to a bigger team or a new technology may change 
a set of processes. No matter what the reason, it has to be possible for the 
team to tweak the to-be design, for that to go through an approval process 
and then be accepted by the powers that be. What happens over time is 
typically an increasing divergence between the target and forecast. Questions 
will always be raised as to ‘why’ and ‘where’. Why are they different, what 

Sustaining the Edge
337
has changed and how? Where are they different? Is it a particular function 
or location? To know the answers you have to track the system.
Tracking the organizational system and connecting it to your high-level 
objectives and plans mean understanding your organizational inputs in the 
context of business outputs. For example, tracking headcount reveals an 
input to the system, while organizational objectives are a specific output 
against which to measure the inputs. It is these outputs that, when rolled up, 
will help you identify how close you are to fulfilling your high-level objec-
tives and goals as a business. As discussed in detail throughout the book, 
this means collecting the data, visualizing that data, understanding what is 
happening and where to facilitate a conversation. Figure 4.8.1 is an example 
of tracking the actual headcount versus both the target and forecast numbers. 
The target is the original target laid out in the final business case. The board 
members will have these numbers firmly in their minds. The forecast is the 
view of what the headcount will be, given everything that is known at the 
time of producing the report. Knowing how, where and why the forecast 
deviates from the target is crucial to keeping everyone informed as to how 
the organization is evolving. Answering the question of where the change is 
requires the ability to slice the data by geography, function, job levels and 
workforce planning groups. Knowing where will then help to answer the 
‘why’ question.
Beyond headcount tracking
Tracking should be deeper than just monitoring headcount or cost. Those 
are just inputs, not outcomes. You could track your headcount and cost 
targets perfectly, but dramatically miss all the key outcomes like profit, 
revenue growth, customer satisfaction, or employee retention. Using the 
methods explored in Chapter 3.2 I showed how you can visualize the goal 
and objectives hierarchy using the BRAG colouring scheme. However, that 
just shows a static view. Figure 4.8.2 shows the tracking of the BRAG status 
over time with the percentage in each BRAG category. The ability to see 
performance over time combined with the ability to drill quickly into where 
you are ahead or behind brings the whole picture to life. These sorts of 
reports stimulate conversations about how to get even better or how the 
team can close the gap if there is one.
The limitation of this type of analysis is that it shows the aggregate score. 
So what does performance look like for each person? Figure 4.8.3 shows 
four objectives and how they are progressing over time. The first two have 
consistently been on or over the target in the blue-green zones. However,  

Part Four: Making It Real
338
Figure 4.8.1 
Headcount tracking of target versus actual versus 
forecast
actual
target
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
2013
2014
2015
2016
actual
59
58
64
61
58
54
56
53
54
54
53
target
65
66
74
78
71
74
70
67
61
62
57
Gap
–6
–8
–10
–17
–13
–20
–14
–14
–7
–8
–4
actual
forecast
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
2013
2014
2015
2016
actual
59
58
64
61
58
54
56
53
54
54
53
forecast
66
67
66
56
58
62
63
59
61
62
63
Gap
–7
–9
–2
5
0
–8
–7
–6
–7
–8
–10
target
forecast
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
2013
2014
2015
2016
target
65
66
74
78
71
74
70
67
61
62
57
forecast
66
67
66
56
58
62
63
59
61
62
63
Gap
–1
–1
8
22
13
12
7
8
0
0
–6
actual
target
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
2013
2014
2015
2016
actual
87
79
80
78
76
75
74
74
71
72
70
target
59
58
63
61
51
49
47
49
46
48
44
Gap
28
21
17
17
25
26
27
25
25
24
26
actual
forecast
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
2013
2014
2015
2016
actual
87
79
80
78
76
75
74
74
71
72
70
forecast
17
24
23
31
26
33
46
43
50
47
53
Gap
70
55
57
47
50
42
28
31
21
25
17
target
forecast
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
2013
2014
2015
2016
target
59
58
63
61
51
49
47
49
46
48
44
forecast
17
24
23
31
26
33
46
43
50
47
53
Gap
42
34
40
30
25
16
1
6
–4
1
–9
Key
Actual 
Target
Forecast
Difference
HEADCOUNT: USA
ACTUAL vs 
TARGET
ACTUAL vs 
FORECAST
TARGET vs 
FORECAST
TOTAL HEADCOUNT

Sustaining the Edge
339
Figure 4.8.2 
Summary objectives BRAG status
55
Q1 2014
55
56
56
56
53
Q2 2014
Q3 2014
Q4 2014
Q1 2015
Q2 2015
23.6%
40%
5.45%
30.9%
23.6%
30.9%
12.7%
32.7%
19.6%
23.2%
12.5%
44.6%
17.9%
39.9%
16.1%
26.8%
17.9%
10.7%
42.9%
28.6%
9.43%
43.4%
28.4%
20.8%
Figure 4.8.3 
Individual objectives BRAG status
Q1 2014
Q2 2014
Q3 2014
Q4 2014
Q1 2015
Q2 2015

Part Four: Making It Real
340
the third objective, having been on target, has suddenly deteriorated and  
the final objective is completely volatile.
This analysis gives you the basis to start really digging and asking in-depth 
questions to uncover correlations. Go back to the objectives tree and find the 
relevant numbers linked to employees. For example, is there a relationship 
between the tenure of their roles? If you look at your inputs in headcount, 
where are the high performers coming from? Where do they sit in the  
organization? Are they reporting to a manager who has others in the team 
who are behind? Has their absence suddenly increased? Are they overloaded 
with objectives? All of these questions uncover correlations so that you can 
find the root causes for high or low performance. By knowing how far off 
plan you are, who is responsible for what, and by doing root cause analysis 
as to why, then it should be possible to learn lessons for future planning 
exercises and to rectify the underlying issues moving forward. This analysis 
facilitates conversations to find out the reasons for where the problem areas 
are, and if there are any lessons to take away from those high-performing 
objectives that can be applied to other areas.
This brings me back to many of the key themes already explored in this 
book. You need to be sure of your plans and what targets you want to hit. 
You then need to capture the actuals; make the human process of entering 
data and the effort to produce analysis as close to effortless as possible to 
make this happen. The goal is to make sure these routines are as automated 
as possible. Take away the friction so that the extra effort adds exponential 
value. This type of capability should be organization wide. Then make the 
time to sit back and analyse, to have relevant conversations and come out 
with practical, sensible actions. The act of tracking will lead to business 
improvements. Instead of the famous saying, ‘What gets measured gets 
done,’ I prefer ‘What gets tracked gets improved.’ The good thing is that the 
more you improve your data and reporting, the better your understanding 
of the as-is and the easier it is understand and show where the change  
is needed.
Celebrating, reflecting and resting
Along the journey, one of the most important things is to take time to cele-
brate. I love how sportsmen and women celebrate. Sporting celebrations 
are iconic. The classic dropping to the knees of the Wimbledon champion, 
the crying gold medallist at the Olympics, the pile-up after a football team 
has won a penalty shootout. The reaction is instinctive and automatic. So 
why can it be so rare for the majority of us at work? I believe that if you 

Sustaining the Edge
341
achieve something remarkable, you should celebrate that fact. If someone 
else achieves something, celebrate that too. Not all moments are equal. It is 
those special moments that we remember most. However, it is those little 
moments where you achieve a small victory that can be the most important. 
A great organization has to be one that knows how to celebrate. It builds 
relationships and trust. Celebrating completes the feedback loop, giving  
deserved recognition to someone for a job well done.
Data and analytics are at the heart of this book. So I couldn’t help but 
advocate a data-driven approach to celebrating! One of the best company 
away days I ever attended began with communicating the company’s year in 
numbers through a dynamic data visualization. We collected the numbers 
for the year from across functions, and where appropriate added a percent-
age change from the number the year before. Everyone could see all the 
numbers in one place and each function leader stood up in turn to talk 
through what the numbers meant as the visualization rotated through each 
number. It was uplifting, transparent and, given we are an analytics company, 
was a great way of bringing the year’s report to life for everyone. Figure 4.8.4 
shows the visualization we used.
Figure 4.8.4 
Organization-wide results by numbers
3
+200%
6.49K
+9.02%
13
+85.7%
1.67K
+109%
335
73.6K
+30.2%
560
+211%
6.4K
+7.24%
48
+300%
6K
26.8K
+13.9%
75
+13.6%
218K
+16.9%
18
+260%
3K
-100%
2
2.25M
+200%
51.9K
+9.01%
22
+57.1%
100K
34
+467%
300
113K
314
+70.7%
100K
71
8.7M
+33.8%
1.84K
+21.4%
12
+363%
11.9K
479
+107%
2
256
+11.3%
517K
+53%
150M
28
+40%
35
17
+30.8%
62
+121%
20
1.47M
+59.6%
40
166
+6.41%
8.4M
+1.07K%
700M
26
+225%
403
57
+3.64%
23
+130%
15
19.5
11
+83.3%
1.44K
1.25K
+150%
100
368K
+115%
10.9K
+110%
15
+66.7%
229
+90.8%
1M
328K
19
+850%
113K
+12.2%
2.4K
+220%
6M
1.26M
+168%
29.8K
+81.5%
500
147K
+147%
50
3.39M
+23.3%
1.11K
+89.9%
26.4K
+4.02%
59
+127%
50
+525%
9.4K
704
+13.7%
4.27K
-20.1%
54
+8%
25
+66.7%
7.11M
+19.5%
Category
Finance
Marketing
Sales
OrgVue
People
Clients

Part Four: Making It Real
342
Alongside celebration, you need a chance to rest and reflect on what you 
have done and achieved. As Margaret J Wheatley, an author on organ­
izational behaviour, sums up beautifully: ‘Without reflection, we go blindly 
on our way, creating more unintended consequences, and failing to achieve 
anything useful.’1 Rest and reflection are integral to keeping the human  
psychology system working well and I believe the organizational system is 
no different. The American actress Helen Hayes said, ‘If you rest you rust.’ 
With all due respect, I think this is nonsense. I am all for hard work, but 
without rest you simply burn out. I have seen it happen many times and it  
is terrible to witness. We are all human. We are all fallible. That means we 
can’t perform at our peak performance indefinitely. You have to take time 
out, not only to recharge your batteries but also to give you the chance to 
learn. Mull over what has happened, internalizing it and absorbing the 
lessons. Without reflection, we just continue as we were, repeating the same 
old mistakes. As the University of Washington advises in their tips with  
respect to HR benefits: ‘Rest is an important part of a healthy lifestyle for all 
ages. It rejuvenates your body and mind, regulates your mood, and is linked 
to learning and memory function. On the other hand, not getting enough 
rest can negatively affect your mood, immune system, memory, and stress 
level.’2 In these 21 chapters, I have extolled the virtues of data, analytics, 
discipline, hard work and ambition; but only to a point. People are not 
robots and cannot physically or emotionally keep going indefinitely. You 
have to find your balance.
Final thoughts
At the beginning of this book I said that I am writing for ambitious people: 
those who want to do something remarkable and create organizations that 
do truly remarkable things. To do this requires the mastery of a broad range 
of skills and knowledge: from analytical systems thinking and modelling to 
communication and the ability to get things done. It requires thinking on 
multiple levels: from the vision, linking that right through to each person’s 
role and the competencies required for that role. It requires the right ap-
proach: hard work, discipline and the ability to embrace a challenge.
Looking to the future, organizations will continue to become more com-
plex and organizational change will continue to accelerate. Those who do 
not change their approach to how they design and manage the organization 
are going to feel the cost. It will become increasingly difficult to know what 
everyone is doing, who is good at what, how many people you need, and 

Sustaining the Edge
343
what the impact of your organization design and people is on the business. 
Organizations have to act to face the challenge of being unable to under-
stand their complexity.
The information is there, and data-driven techniques offer an opportu-
nity to cut through that complexity. Data and analytics are new sources of 
competitive advantage for any businesses. Mapping, connecting and track-
ing the organizational system are increasingly going to be the difference 
between success and failure. Those businesses that can make all the connec-
tions across their system, from their vision to the value chain, to ensuring 
the right people do the right things so that customers can best be served, will 
come out on top. Those organizations that continue to follow this approach 
will stay at the top and thoroughly enjoy the experience.
Notes
1	 Wheatley, M [accessed 14 March 2015] It’s An Interconnected World 
Shambhala Sun, April 2002 [Online] http://www.margaretwheatley.com/ 
articles/interconnected.html 
2	 University of Washington [accessed 14 March 2015] The Importance of Rest 
and Relaxation [Online] https://www.washington.edu/admin/hr/benefits/
publications/carelink/tipsheets/rest-relax.pdf

344
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Appendix
 Data Warehouse 
A database specifically designed to support data analysis and
reporting (Business Intelligence). A data warehouse typically
integrates data from multiple sources and may aggregate historical data 
to support fast analytical queries.
 Transactional Database 
A transactional database captures, modifies or deletes data in
real time. Typically a business application or website connects 
directly to a transactional database. Unlike a data warehouse which is 
structured for reporting purposes, a transactional database is structured 
to allow for quick modification, addition or deletion of individual data 
records and to guarantee data integrity. An example of a transactional 
database is a standard HR payroll system.
 Relational Database
A database made up from a series of tables, typically having 
a formal relationship between each other. An example of a 
relational database is Microsoft SQL Server.
 Relational Database 
Management system (RDBMS) 
Software System to manage databases, allowing users to interact
with the system to create, modify, update and administer the database, 
An example of a RDBMS is Microsoft SQL Server.
 Graph Database
 A type of NoSQL database (see below) that uses graph 
structures with nodes, edges and properties to represent and 
store data. It is particularly useful for associative queries - people who 
know X also know Y. An example of a graph database is Neo4J.
è Node: An entity or item such as people, objectives or projects.
è  
Property: Information connected to each node. Example  
properties for a people dataset may include age, role,  
department and salary.
345

346
Appendix
è  
Edge: The connection/relationship between nodes or nodes and 
properties. Edges are the key to graph databases as they allow you 
to explore and uncover relationships in the data.
 Measure 
Data which represent numeric values, which may be used as 
business metrics and key performance indicators. For instance,
number of FTEs, salary, age, etc.
 Dimension  
Data which categorize data in order to enable users to answer
business questions. Dimensions spell out the who, what, 
where, when, why and how of the situation. They add context and 
meaning to measures. Commonly used dimensions are customers, 
products and time periods.
 Cube 
A cube is a set of organized and summarized data in the form 
of a multidimensional structure defined by dimensions and 
measures. It is built on top of a data warehouse and intends to speed up 
reports by storing precalculated aggregates of data.
 Dimensional Modelling
Performed to design and structure the measures and 
dimensions collected in a data warehouse required to answer 
business questions. Measures are structured into what are known 
as Facts and are joined to Dimensions in a so-called Star schema 
to support easy and rapid reporting. For example, you would look at 
Headcount (Fact) By Location (Dimension) By Date (Dimension).
 Schema 
A database schema is a way to logically and formally group 
database objects such as tables (a collection of data fields of 
formalized types), views and indexes. One can think of a schema as a 
rigid container of objects with explicit relationships. Both transactional 
and warehousing databases use schemas to hold data.

347
Appendix
 Query 
Queries are the primary mechanism for retrieving information 
from a database and consist of questions presented to the 
database in a common, formal language format. Many database 
management systems use the Structured Query Language (SQL) 
standard query format.
 SQL
SQL Stands for Structured Query Language, used to query 
and manipulate databases
 NoSQL  
Stands for Not Only SQL and is used to encompass a wide
range of different database technologies that differ from the 
traditional relational databases that are based upon SQL. Examples of 
these databases include Graph, Document, Key-Value and Column. Often 
these types of database have less formal schemas than SQL databases, 
and thus better support semi-structured rather than highly structured data.
 View 
A view in database systems is simply the representation of a 
query (SQL) statement that is stored in memory so that it can 
easily be re-used. The main benefits of using views are:
è  Improved security: by allowing access to only the information  
 that is relevant.
è  
Improved usability: by presenting users and application developers 
with data in a more easily understood form than in the base tables.
è  Improved consistency: by centralizing the definition of common 
queries in the database.
 ETL  
Stands for Extract, Transform and Load. This is the typical 
process that data go through when being loaded into
a data storage system such as a data warehouse. Data are extracted from 
multiple data sources, transformed into the correct structure, aggregation 
and calculated values before being loaded into the data warehouse.

348
THIS PAGE IS INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK

Index
Page numbers in italic indicate figures or tables
@risk  246
7 Habits of Highly Effective People, The   
282
Aberdeen Group  296
activity analysis  223, 230–36
dimensional analysis  232–33
headcount reduction  236
Individual Activity Analysis (IAA)   
46, 161–63, 278
performance variances  233–36, 234, 
235
process costs  230–31, 231
Allen, David  325
Amazon  4, 32
Apple  4, 317
Aristotle  153
authenticity  281
backlogs  326–27, 327, 332–33
Bain  44
balloon tree layout  52
Ballou, Hosea  251
baseline data set, building a  113–22, 114
data cleaning  119, 119–20
data visualization  118
ease of providing data  121
existing data  116–18
incentivizing data providers  116
questions, which to ask  114, 115
slicing and dicing data  121–22
‘big data’  33–34
Bird & Bird  290
Blockbuster  4
Bonaparte, Napoleon  3
Book of Trees, The  51
Borders  4
box grid  51, 54
box plot diagram  127–28, 128
Box, George E P  195
Bradford index  123–26, 124, 125, 126
Bush, George W  123
Business Analysis Techniques  163
Cadle, J, Paul, D and Turner, P  163
Capelle, Ronald  318
Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy  4
case for change, the  71–74, 99–100
change criteria  73–74
competition, analysing the  73
information gathering  72
one big vs many small changes  74
celebrating  340–42
resting and reflecting  342
challenges, common  17–23
change, complexity and  18
data transparency  20–22
design processes  22–23
people and politics  19–20
stress  22
Chandler, Alfred  66
Checklist Manifesto, The  325
checklists  325
collateral  293
Collins, Jim  312
communication  259, 281–85
authenticity  281
communication mapping  284–85
‘dumbing down’  283
empathy  281, 282
generosity  283
listening  285
trust  283
WIFM and WAMI analysis  282
competency management  203–19, 313
business case for  206–10
career progression  210
consistency  206–07
employee engagement  207–09
gaps, identifying  207
success, promoting  209–10
talent management  207
common implementation problems   
204
competencies vs objectives  205, 206
competency gaps, identifying  216
current competencies, auditing  214–15, 
215
framework, creating a  211, 211–12
hard vs soft competencies  205–06
improving competencies  216–18, 217
nine-box grid  203–04
targets, creating  212–14, 213
Competitive Advantage  156
349

Index
350
corporate performance management  see 
objectives management (OM)
Corporate Research Forum (CRF)  6, 312
correlation vs causation  126–27
cost-to-serve model  36
Covey, Stephen  282
‘creative destruction’  4
Csikszentmihalyi, Mihaly  207, 208–09
cube  346
Customer Relationship Management  
systems (CRM)  118
Cut-e  109
CUWIE tests  172–74, 173
data blockers
data relevance  112–13
fear of technology/data  110–11
‘one system fits all’  111–12
processing  111
data cleaning  119, 119–20
‘data mashing’  46
data relevance  112–13
data transparency  20–22
data visualization  46–56, 118, 146–48, 
147, 148
analytics  46–47
box grid  51, 54
heat map  51, 54
business case for  47
data tables, limitations of  47–49, 48
future decisions and scenarios  55
hierarchical layouts  51
balloon tree  52
icicle  53
scaled balloon  53
infographics  49
interactivity  55
stacked bar graph  49, 50
sunburst visualization  48, 49
sunflower visualization  49, 50
data warehouse  345
Decision Analysis for Management 
Judgement  91
decision-making process  80–99
analysis  89–97
cost-benefit analysis  95–97, 96
qualitative weightings  90, 91
Simple Multi-Attribute Rating 
Technique (SMART)  91–95,  
92, 93, 94
business case, developing the  97–99
structure  98
design options, developing  82–88
against common criteria  85
‘Disney Method’  87–88
hybrid options  86
mapping processes to options  88–89, 89
summary processes, defining  82, 83
value chain  82, 83
Designing Organizations  87
Dholakia, Sanjay  109
Dilts, Robert  87
dimension  346
dimensional modelling  346
‘Disney Method’  87–88
Dixon, Alison  290
Dooks, Kathryn  290, 291–92
Drive  252
driver analysis  223, 236–43
across multiple locations  241–43, 242
calculating FTEs needed  240, 240–41, 
241
drivers, listing  239, 239
roles, fixed and variable  238, 238
Drucker, Peter  80, 133, 185, 323
‘dumbing down’  283
‘Dutch Disease’  26
dynamic process design  185–202
drivers, variable  185, 186, 187
methodologies  186–88
procurement  198–99
project-driven organizations  188–96
action plan  192
integrated plan  190–92, 191
milestone map and project summary   
190
resourcing and cost  193–94
risk, understanding and managing   
194–95
risk management  196–97
sales  197–98, 198
software development  199–200
ecological fallacy  123–26, 124, 125, 126
Elkjøp  109
Emerson, Ralph Waldo  203
empathy  281, 282
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP)   
112, 117, 136, 159
Epstein, David  18
Essentials of Social Statistics for a Diverse 
Society  130
ETL (Extract, Transform and Load)  347
correlations  234
and data visualization  47–49, 48, 118
fear of technology/data  110
limitations of  35, 111–12, 136
mathematical modelling  245–46
metadata  244
and siloed data  34, 111, 117, 194
team, working in a  326
workforce planning  296
Excel  3, 18
Experian  5

Index
351
Facebook  4, 108
Few, Stephen  49
fishbone diagram  314, 315
fixed process design  153–84
current situation, understanding   
159–63
dimensional analysis  165–70
Individual Activity Analysis (IAA)   
161–63
resource use  163–64, 164
segmentation  164–65, 165
linking processes to roles  178–83, 179, 
180, 181, 182
new processes, designing  170–78
decision-making process  174–68, 
175, 176, 177, 178
improvements, defining  170
templates  171
process maps  154–59, 155
Level 0  156, 156–57
Level 1  157, 157–58, 159
Level 2  154, 158–59
Flow  207
‘flow’  207–09, 208, 209
Flyvbjerg, Bent  188
Fowke, Donald  317
Fuller, Buckminster  108
Galbraith, Jay  5, 33, 87
Gantt chart  190–92, 191
Gantt, Henry  190
Gartner  110
Gawande, Atul  325, 326
General Electric  317
Getting Things Done  325
Give and Get matrix  271–73, 272
Gladwell, Malcolm  153
Global Organization Design Society  316
Goldsmith, Marshall  310, 319
Good to Great  312
Goodwin, Paul and Wright, George  91
Google  4, 108, 144
Objectives and Key Results (OKR) 
method  134, 143
Google Ventures  134
graph database  345
Hard Thing About Hard Things, The  17
Harvard Business Review  319
Hayes, Helen  342
hierarchies, organizational data and  31–32
connecting  40–46, 42
Individual Activity Analysis 
(IAA)  46
RACI accountability framework   
43–44
RAS method  44–46, 45
creating  37–40
Mutually Exclusive and Collectively 
Exhaustible (MECE) methodology  
39–40, 40
org charts  37, 39
process charts  40, 41
terminology  38
organization chart  31
taxonomies, creating  32
Hinssen, Peter  80
Honda  188
Hope, H A  153
Horowitz, Ben  17
HOWWIP  264–74
cards, using  268–69
Give and Get matrix  271–73, 272
interface ball game  269–70
issues log  266, 266
process descriptors  266
round robin interface conversations   
270–71
swim lane  267, 267–68
Hubbard, Henry D  25
human resource information systems 
(HRIS)  34
icicle layout  53
impact assessment  276–80
individual analysis  276, 276
for other dimensions  279–80, 280
planning groups  277
for roles  278, 278–79, 279
Individual Activity Analysis (IAA)   
46, 161–63, 278
infographics  49
‘initiative fatigue’  258
initiative overload  259, 260–61
Ishikawa, Kaori  314
Jaques, Elliott  316, 320
Jobs, Steve  317
Johns Hopkins Hospital  325
Jordan, Michael  335
Kanban  192, 327
Kanban system  327
Kawasaki, Guy  275
Kemp Little  290
Kerry, John  123
key performance measures (KPIs)  148–49
Klau, Rick  134
Knowledge is Beautiful  49
Kodak  4
Kotter, John  66
KPMG  312
Kronos  300

Index
352
Lima, Manuel  51
LinkedIn  134
listening  285
lists, using  324–26
checklists  325
macro design criteria, setting  76–77
Management By Objectives (MBOs)  136
Management Information Systems (HRIS)   
117
Marketo  109
Marks & Spencer  291
mash up data  112
Match Attax  160
mathematical modelling  223, 243–46
bespoke tools  246
Excel  245–46
modules  244–45
risks of  243–44
simulation packages  246
McCandless, David  49
McKinsey  39, 203
McLellan, Laura  110
measure  346
meetings, getting more from  330–31
‘meeting mania’  258
Microsoft
Microsoft Project  189
Microsoft SQL Server  345
milestone map  190
Minto, Barbara  39
Monte Carlo simulation  195, 246
Moore, Gordon  108
Moschella, David  61
multi-criteria decision analysis (MCDA)  99
Murphy’s Law  262
Mutually Exclusive and Collectively 
Exhaustible (MECE) methodology  
39–40, 40, 145, 172
Neilson, G and Wulf, J  226
Neo4J  345
.Net  246
Network Always Wins, The  80
nine-box grid  203–04
Nordstrom  187
NoSQL  347
Now You See It  49
Nutt, Paul  81
objectives management (OM)  133–52
business performance vs individual 
objectives  137
communication of objectives  135
data, use of  136
definition of  133
individual performance reviews  135
key performance measures (KPIs)   
148–49
maintenance of  148–50, 151
process, of objective setting   
138, 138–48, 140
accountability linking  145
cascading objectives  141, 141–42, 
142
data visualization  146–48, 147, 148
goals, setting  139
measures and targets  143–44
sanity check  145–46
SMART objectives  139–41
top-down vs bottom-up  138–39
weighting  143–45
tech, use of  136–37
value added by  135
‘office politics’  19–20, 331–32
Ohno, Tajichi  327
Ommae, Kenichi  188
organizational data, complexities of  33–35
and graph databases  35
and relational databases  35
organizational system, the  27–31, 29
customers  28
employees  28
gaps and feedback loops  28
as a job description  28, 30
vision, goals, objectives and strategy  27
outlier analysis  126
Patton, George S  13
Perlis, Alan  103
Pink, Daniel  252
Porter, Michael  156
PowerPoint  3, 18, 294
limitations of  111, 293
Primavera  300
purpose, autonomy and mastery  252
‘Pyramid Principle’  39, 98
Python  246
Quandl  118
query  347
Quintiq  300
RACI framework  43–44
RAPID framework  44
RAS method  44–46, 45
RASIC framework  44
ratio analysis  223, 223–30
benchmarking  224–25
generic ratios  225–26
sales  224
span of control  226–30, 228

Index
353
redundancies  282–83, 288–93
across jurisdictions  290–91
constructive dismissal  292
legal consultation  288–90
union consultation  288
when growing other functions  291–92
relational database management system 
(RDBMS)  345
rightsizing  106, 220–48
activity analysis  223, 230–36
dimensional analysis  232–33
headcount reduction  236
performance variances  233–36, 234, 
235
process costs  230–31, 231
driver analysis  223, 236–43
across multiple locations  241–43, 
242
calculating FTEs needed  240, 
240–41, 241
drivers, listing  239, 239
roles, fixed and variable  238, 238
mathematical modelling  223, 243–46
bespoke tools  246
Excel  245–46
modules  244–45
risks of  243–44
simulation packages  246
methods, current  221, 221–22
ratio analysis  223, 223–30
benchmarking  224–25
generic ratios  225–26
sales  224
span of control  226–30, 228
vs downsizing  220
Ringelmann, Maximilien  220
Rumsfeld, Donald  329
Saint-Exupéry, Antoine  296
sanity check  145–46
SAP  300
Scala  246
scaled balloon layout  53
schema  346
Schumpeter, Joseph  4, 19
Scrum  192
Shepard, Ken  316
Simon, Bernard  220
Simple Multi-Attribute Rating Technique 
(SMART)  91–95, 92, 93, 94
Simul8  246
SMART objectives  139–41
‘social loafing’  220
SpaceX  68–70
span of control  226–30, 228
Sports Gene, The  18
SQL  246, 347
stacked bar graph  49, 50
State of Denial  329
statistical significance  127–30, 128, 129
Statistics for People Who (Think They) Hate 
Statistics  130
Steinbeck, John  257
stratified systems theory  316–18, 317
stress  22, 324, 342
succession planning  307, 310–22
competency management  313
implementing  319–20
frameworks for  319–20
risks and opportunities  320
training and development  320–21
importance of  311–13
priority- and risk-driven  314–15
talent-driven  314–19
stratified systems theory  316–18, 317
sunburst visualization  48, 49
sunflower visualization  49, 50
Target Operating Model (TOM)  77–78
taxonomies, creating  32
teams, working in  326–30
backlogs  326–27, 327, 332–33
burndown tracking  328, 329
instructions from above  329–30
Kanban system  327
waterfall method  328
terminology, strategic
barriers, to macro design  66, 67
behaviours  70
goals  27, 66, 68, 70
mission  70
objectives  27, 66, 70
strategy  27, 66, 68
values  70
vision  27, 66, 68
Thinking About Organization Strategically  317
Top Trumps  160
tracking progress  336–40
individual objectives  337, 339, 340
summary objectives  337, 339
target vs actual vs forecast  336–37, 338
transactional database  345
transition, of employees  285–93, 289
assessment and selection  285, 287
fairness of  292–93
redundancies  282–83, 288–93
across jurisdictions  290–91
constructive dismissal  292
legal consultation  288–90
union consultation  288
when growing other functions   
291–92

Index
354
traps, common  257–62
basics, forgetting  261–62
communication  259
data use  259
emotions  259
initiative overload  259, 260–61
processes  259
signs of derailment  257–58
under-resourcing  258, 260
unknowns  259
t-test  129
Tzu, Sun  65
unions, consulting  288
University of Washington  342
value chain  82, 83
view  347
Visio  18
WAMI analysis  282
‘war for talent’  203
Welch, Jack  317
Wheatley, Margaret  342
Why Decisions Fail  81
WIFM analysis  282
Woodward, Bob  329
workforce planning (WFP)   
296–309
definition of  297
operational  297, 299–300, 305,  
305–07
resource demand and supply   
303–07, 307
role vs position  301
scenario modelling  302
strategic  297, 298–99, 300, 303–05
succession planning  307
tactical  297, 300

