Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
 
 
 
Data Protection and the 
Cloud 
 
Are the risks too great? 
 
 
www.Ebook777.com

 
 
Data Protection 
and the Cloud 
 
Are the risks too great? 
 
 
 
PAUL TICHER 
 
 
 
 
 

Every possible effort has been made to ensure that the 
information contained in this book is accurate at the time 
of going to press, and the publisher and the author cannot 
accept responsibility for any errors or omissions, 
however caused. Any opinions expressed in this book are 
those of the author, not the publisher. Websites identified 
are for reference only, not endorsement, and any website 
visits are at the reader's own risk. No responsibility for 
loss or damage occasioned to any person acting, or 
refraining from action, as a result of the material in this 
publication can be accepted by the publisher or the 
author. 
 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research 
or private study, or criticism or review, as permitted 
under the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, this 
publication may only be reproduced, stored or 
transmitted, in any form, or by any means, with the prior 
permission in writing of the publisher or, in the case of 
reprographic reproduction, in accordance with the terms 
of licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency. 
Enquiries concerning reproduction outside those terms 
should be sent to the publisher at the following address: 
 
IT Governance Publishing 
IT Governance Limited 
Unit 3, Clive Court 
Bartholomew’s Walk 
Cambridgeshire Business Park 
Ely, Cambridgeshire 
CB7 4EA 
United Kingdom 
www.itgovernance.co.uk 
 
© Paul Ticher 2015 
The author has asserted the rights of the author under the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988, to be 
identified as the author of this work. 
 
First published in the United Kingdom in 2015  
by IT Governance Publishing. 
ISBN 978-1-84928-713-5  
 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
 
PREFACE 
One of the most dramatic recent developments in 
computing has been the rapid take-up of cloud 
applications. There is no sign of this diminishing, 
with the increasing proliferation of small, mobile 
devices which presuppose always-on internet 
connections and rely heavily on the cloud. 
The business advantages of the cloud are clear, 
both for the provider and the user. The provider 
can move to a subscription model for small users 
as well as large. The user gets the flexibility of 
being able to access both data and applications 
from any location, avoids much of the burden of 
applying security or productivity upgrades to their 
software and has the option of multi-platform 
access to an integrated set of data. 
Cloud usage is continuing to expand. It is 
suggested1, for example, that the market has 
grown at least three-fold between 2008 and 2014, 
and that over 86% of businesses are already using 
some type of cloud computing. This is no longer 
just a toe in the water. Highly confidential and 
business-critical data is routinely placed in the 
cloud. There are predictions that over 50% of all 
information technology will be in the cloud within 
ten years. 
Since May 2013, central government departments 
have been subject to a 'cloud first' policy that 
requires them to consider cloud-based IT solutions 
1 Figures are being constantly produced. Any references 
given here would be quickly out of date. 
5 
                                                                 
www.Ebook777.com

Preface 
before other options. These departments can only 
deviate from using cloud-based IT solutions when 
they can show that alternative offerings provide 
better value for money than products and services 
available through the central platform.  
The range of applications provided in the cloud is 
still growing. Data exchange, collaboration tools 
and backup have now been joined by services that 
provide the full range of desktop packages, 
including 
databases, 
word 
processing 
and 
spreadsheets, by communication tools for bulk 
email, surveys, event bookings and the like, and of 
course by social media. 
As with all technologies, the legal and practical 
implications are not always immediately apparent, 
and unexpected problems can be thrown up. Cloud 
computing does not sit easily with our current data 
protection law – hardly surprising when we 
consider that the World Wide Web itself was in its 
infancy when EU Directive 95/46/EC was agreed 
in 1995. The UK’s Data Protection Act 1998 is 
based directly on 95/46/EC. 
The consequences of a data protection failure can 
be considerable. Firstly, of course, to the 
individuals 
affected: 
cases 
have 
occurred, 
thankfully rarely, where serious physical harm has 
been directly caused through a failure to prevent 
data falling into the wrong hands, while other 
damage, including financial, is more common. For 
the organisation responsible, the consequences 
include not just enforcement action – including 
financial penalties – but also the loss of reputation 
and the impact on brand integrity and customer 
6 

Preface 
loyalty that follow from the publicity given to 
serious breaches. 
The ease with which data can be moved around the 
Web and the user’s day-to-day (in fact second-to-
second) reliance on the performance of cloud 
providers, does make data protection compliance 
more challenging than it might be when data is 
sitting firmly under control on an in-house server. 
Some of the challenges may be addressed if, and 
when, the EU has completed its overhaul of its 
data protection regime. At the time of writing it is 
not clear when this will be concluded, or how 
much of the current draft will make it through to 
the final version. The proposed changes are 
discussed in Chapter 9, but it is unlikely that they 
will remove the risks inherent in the fundamental 
nature of cloud computing. 
If these risks are managed properly they need not 
be 
show-stoppers. 
The 
benefits 
of 
cloud 
computing are certainly tempting. The important 
thing is to be fully aware of the risks and to take 
appropriate action before deciding to put valuable, 
confidential data into the cloud. 
7 

 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
 
With a background in IT, focused on CRM and 
other information management applications, Paul 
has worked on data protection for over 20 years.  
He is now a well-known consultant on the topic, 
mainly to non-profit organisations, and specialises 
in 
work 
with 
charities 
and 
voluntary 
organisations.   
Paul is the author of the standard work Data 
Protection for Voluntary Organisations (now in its 
third edition) as well as materials for ITGP and 
other publishers. He also carries out data 
protection reviews and delivers training and 
webinars on the topic. 
 
8 

 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank Chris Evans, ITSM 
Specialist; Christopher Wright, Wright-CandA 
Consulting Ltd; author of Agile Governance and 
Audit, and ir. H.L. (Maarten) Souw RE, Enterprise 
Risk and QA Manager, UWV, for their helpful 
comments during the review process. 
 
9 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
 
CONTENTS 
 
Introduction ...................................................... 12 
Chapter 1: Background – The Data Protection 
Principles ........................................................... 14 
Data protection principles ............................... 15 
Chapter 2: The Data Controller/Data Processor 
Relationship ....................................................... 21 
Data Controller/Data Processor contracts ....... 23 
Chapter 3: Security (Seventh Data Protection 
Principle) ........................................................... 27 
Confidentiality, integrity and availability ....... 27 
Data in transit and at rest ................................ 29 
Security in the cloud ....................................... 30 
Chapter 4: Mitigating Security Risks in the 
Cloud.................................................................. 34 
Cyber Essentials ............................................. 37 
Access controls ............................................... 38 
Other guidance and recommendations ............ 40 
Chapter 5: Transfers Abroad (Eighth Data 
Protection Principle) ......................................... 50 
Safe Harbor ..................................................... 54 
Chapter 6: Other Data Protection Principles . 57 
First Data Protection Principle (Fairness, 
Transparency and Choice) .............................. 57 
Second Data Protection Principle (Specified and 
limited purposes) ............................................ 58 
Third Data Protection Principle (Adequate, 
Relevant and not Excessive) ........................... 58 
Fourth Data Protection Principle (Accuracy) .. 59 
Fifth Data Protection Principle (Limited 
retention)......................................................... 59 
Sixth Data Protection Principle (Data Subject 
rights) .............................................................. 60 
10 
www.Ebook777.com

Contents 
Chapter 7: Other legal and technical 
implications for cloud contracts ...................... 63 
Overriding jurisdictions .................................. 65 
Responding to breaches .................................. 66 
Chapter 8: Enforcement ................................... 68 
Chapter 9: The proposed new EU Regulation 
and other measures ........................................... 71 
Chapter 10: Checklist ....................................... 75 
References ......................................................... 78 
ITG Resources................................................... 79 
 
11 

 
INTRODUCTION 
 
This book is intended to be an introduction to the 
risks involved in cloud sourcing, and to enable 
managers to ask the right questions. Suggestions 
are offered for the kind of risks an organisation’s 
use of the cloud might generate, and the kind of 
remedial measures that might be taken. These are 
given as examples only and are not intended to be 
a substitute for qualified legal or technical advice. 
Other publications from ITGP, listed at the end of 
this book, address security in more detail. 
Cloud security has to be a joint effort between the 
provider and the customer. The customer must 
select a provider with adequate security and other 
provisions; many of the topics discussed here will 
therefore be of equal interest to cloud providers. 
However, the customer’s responsibilities go 
further. Without a well-functioning information 
security process in place, selection of a secure 
cloud provider is only a half-measure. 
In order to emphasise where the responsibility for 
data protection compliance normally lies, the 
customer for cloud services is more-or-less 
interchangeably referred to in this publication as 
the Data Controller. 
The Data Protection Act 1998 is generally referred 
to as ‘the Act’ in this publication. 
This is a UK-focused title, based on UK legislation 
and experience, and will therefore be of relevance 
to any organisations that need to operate under the 
UK Data Protection Act. 
12 

Introduction 
Since the web addresses of individual documents 
can change, references are generally given to the 
parent website, with suggestions on how to locate 
the specific document. 
13 

 
CHAPTER 1: BACKGROUND – THE DATA 
PROTECTION PRINCIPLES 
As most readers probably know, the Data 
Protection Act is based on eight legally-binding 
principles. Being principles rather than precise 
stipulations, these describe the outcome that must 
be achieved, not the means of doing so. Every 
organisation has a significant degree of flexibility 
in deciding how to comply. 
The Act applies to the whole lifecycle of 
information, from its original collection to its final 
destruction. See the definition of ‘processing’ 
below. 
It is usually necessary to be able to demonstrate, 
through policies and procedures, staff training and 
other measures, how an organisation ensures that 
all of its actions comply with the principles. A 
failure to comply with the principles is a breach of 
the Act. Any harm suffered by individuals as a 
result of a breach could lead to a claim for 
compensation and the Information Commissioner 
has powers to impose a financial penalty of up to 
£500,000 or to take other enforcement action in 
respect of serious breaches of the Act. 
Familiarity with the principles is therefore an 
essential element in assessing the risks that might 
be posed by the use of cloud services and the 
mitigating actions that might be necessary. 
14 

1: Background – The Data Protection Principles 
Data protection principles 
These are quoted from the Data Protection Act 
1998, Schedule 1, Part I. 
1. Personal data shall be processed fairly and 
lawfully and, in particular, shall not be 
processed unless – 
 a) at least one of the conditions in Schedule 
2 [see below] is met 
  
and 
 (b) in the case of sensitive personal data, at 
least one of the conditions in Schedule 3 is 
also met. [Schedule 3, as subsequently 
amended by Statutory Instrument, contains 
around 20 conditions, more restrictive than 
those in Schedule 2. For the purposes of this 
publication it is sufficient to assume that 
particularly great care should be taken with 
records that include ‘sensitive personal 
data’ – defined below.] 
2. Personal data shall be obtained only for one 
or more specified and lawful purposes, and 
shall not be further processed in any manner 
incompatible with that purpose or those 
purposes. 
3. Personal data shall be adequate, relevant and 
not excessive in relation to the purpose or 
purposes for which they are processed. 
4. Personal data shall be accurate and, where 
necessary, kept up to date. 
5. Personal data processed for any purpose or 
purposes shall not be kept for longer than is 
necessary for that purpose or those purposes. 
15 

1: Background – The Data Protection Principles 
6. Personal 
data 
shall 
be 
processed 
in 
accordance with the rights of data subjects 
under this Act. 
7. Appropriate technical and organisational 
measures shall be taken against unauthorised 
or unlawful processing of personal data and 
against accidental loss or destruction of, or 
damage to, personal data. 
8. Personal data shall not be transferred to a 
country or territory outside the European 
Economic Area unless that country or 
territory ensures an adequate level of 
protection for the rights and freedoms of 
data subjects in relation to the processing of 
personal data. 
Implications of the data protection principles for 
cloud computing 
All the data protection principles are aimed firstly 
at preventing harm to individuals, and secondly at 
ensuring that they are treated fairly whenever their 
data is used. 
Two of the principles are particularly relevant to 
cloud computing: 
• 
Principle 7, which says you must have 
appropriate security, and 
• 
Principle 8, which controls the transfer of 
data abroad. 
Subsequent chapters look at all of the principles in 
the context of cloud computing. The table below 
indicates their relative risk profile in relation to 
cloud computing. This does not imply that these 
16 

1: Background – The Data Protection Principles 
risks would have the same ranking in other 
contexts. Principles 7 and 8 are considered first 
and in detail; the remaining principles are 
discussed in Chapter 6. 
 
Principle 
Risk rank 
Comment 
1. Fairness 
Low 
(Medium) 
No different from  
in-house 
considerations unless 
cloud provider also 
captures personal data 
for own purposes 
2. Limited 
purposes 
3. Adequacy 
Medium 
Minor implications if 
the design of the 
cloud application does 
not support good data 
quality 
4. Accuracy 
5. Retention 
Low 
No different from  
in-house 
considerations 
6. Data 
subject rights 
Medium 
Possible minor 
implications for 
subject access 
7. Security 
Very high 
Significant additional 
risks from cloud 
computing 
8. Transfers 
abroad 
High 
Cloud applications 
may (without making 
this obvious) locate 
data outside ‘safe’ 
jurisdictions 
 
17 

1: Background – The Data Protection Principles 
Other relevant definitions 
This publication is not a treatise on the Act as a 
whole. It may, however, be useful to clarify a few 
other relevant definitions from the Act. 
Processing: This is defined very broadly, to 
include effectively any activity involving personal 
data. The Act defines processing as ‘obtaining, 
recording or holding’ the data, or ‘carrying out any 
operation [on it]’ including (but not limited to) 
‘organisation’, 
‘alteration’, 
‘retrieval’, 
‘consultation’, ‘use’, ‘disclosure’, ‘erasure’ and 
‘destruction’. It is hard to see how a cloud 
application could operate without ‘processing’ 
data within the terms of the Act. 
Personal data: Information in electronic form that 
relates in some way to a living individual who can 
be identified from the data (plus, if relevant, any 
other available information), falls clearly within 
the definition of personal data. Non-electronic data 
is obviously outside the scope of this publication. 
Data subject: The individual about whom 
personal data is held, wherever they are located. 
Sensitive personal data: Information about an 
individual’s racial or ethnic origin, political 
beliefs, religious beliefs, trade union membership, 
mental or physical health, sex life (including 
sexuality), offences, alleged offences and court 
appearances. This information requires special 
treatment – and often consent for its use. In terms 
of cloud computing, the loss or compromise of 
sensitive personal data would be a very serious 
matter. 
18 

1: Background – The Data Protection Principles 
Schedule 2 Conditions (at least one of which 
must be met) 
1. The data subject has given his consent to the 
processing. 
2. The processing is necessary –  
(a) for the performance of a contract to which 
the data subject is a party, or 
(b) for the taking of steps at the request of the 
data subject with a view to entering into a 
contract. 
3. The processing is necessary for compliance 
with any legal obligation to which the data 
controller 
is 
subject, 
other 
than 
an 
obligation imposed by contract. 
4. The processing is necessary in order to 
protect the vital interests of the data subject. 
5. The processing is necessary –   
(a)  for the administration of justice, 
(b) for the exercise of any functions conferred 
on any person by or under any enactment, 
(c) for the exercise of any functions of the 
Crown, a Minister of the Crown or a 
government department, or 
(d)  for the exercise of any other functions of a 
public nature exercised in the public 
interest by any person. 
6. (1)  The processing is necessary for the 
purposes of legitimate interests pursued by 
the data controller or by the third party or 
parties to whom the data are disclosed, 
except where the processing is unwarranted 
in any particular case by reason of prejudice 
19 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
1: Background – The Data Protection Principles 
to the rights and freedoms or legitimate 
interests of the data subject. 
(2) The Secretary of State may by order specify 
particular circumstances in which this 
condition is, or is not, to be taken to be 
satisfied. 
20 
www.Ebook777.com

 
CHAPTER 2: THE DATA 
CONTROLLER/DATA PROCESSOR 
RELATIONSHIP 
Responsibility for compliance with the data 
protection principles and other aspects of the Act 
lies with the ‘Data Controller’.  
The Data Controller is defined in the Act as “a 
person who (either alone or jointly or in common 
with other persons) determines the purposes for 
which and the manner in which any personal data 
are … processed”. ‘Person’ in this context very 
rarely means an individual (or ‘natural person’). 
Instead, in most cases the Data Controller will be 
an organisation, although individuals who are in 
business on their own account can also be Data 
Controllers. It is important to note that group-level 
responsibility for data protection compliance is not 
an option. Each legal entity – company, public 
body, 
institution, 
partnership, 
or 
even 
an 
unincorporated charity – carries its own separate 
responsibility. 
The cloud provider in many cases will be a Data 
Processor. A Data Processor is defined as “any 
person (other than an employee of the Data 
Controller) who processes the data on behalf of the 
Data Controller”. Bear in mind the definition of 
‘processing’ discussed above, and it will be clear 
that almost every cloud provider could indeed be 
processing personal data in some way or another 
on behalf of the customer, and would therefore be 
a Data Processor. 
21 

2: The Data Controller/Data Processor 
Relationship 
Guidance2 
issued 
by 
the 
Information 
Commissioner in May 2014, however, suggests 
that in some cases the cloud provider might 
exercise sufficient control over the ‘manner’ in 
which data is processed to become a Data 
Controller in its own right, and may even 
determine to some extent the ‘purposes’. One 
example in the guidance is where the cloud 
provider is processing payments on behalf of an 
online retailer. The Information Commissioner 
finds that in the example given, the payment 
company is a Data Controller because it (quoting 
from the guidance): 
• 
“decides which information it needs from 
customers in order to process their payments 
correctly; 
• 
exercises control over the other purposes the 
customer’s data is used for, for example 
direct marketing; 
• 
has legal requirements of its own to meet, 
for example relating to the use and retention 
of payment card data; and 
• 
has its own terms and conditions that apply 
directly to the retailer’s customers.” 
Although it would ultimately be for the courts to 
determine whether a cloud provider was a Data 
Controller or a Data Processor, it is always useful 
to establish a common view between the customer 
2 Data controllers and data processors: what the 
difference is and what the governance implications are, 
available on the Information Commissioner’s website. 
22 
                                                                 

2: The Data Controller/Data Processor 
Relationship 
and the cloud provider on what the relationship 
appears to be, as a basis for clarifying their 
respective responsibilities. 
Where a Data Controller employs the services of a 
Data Processor, full responsibility for data 
protection compliance remains with the Data 
Controller. If data is lost in the cloud, or if security 
is breached, the Data Controller is responsible for 
any harm caused to the individuals whose data it 
caused to be placed in the cloud, and could be the 
subject of enforcement action taken by the 
Information Commissioner. 
Data Controller/Data Processor contracts 
The Act is quite specific in its approach to the 
relationship between the organisation that carries 
the responsibility – the Data Controller – and any 
organisation to which work is outsourced – the 
Data Processor. 
The Act requires there to be a contract, ‘evidenced 
in writing’, between the Data Controller and the 
Data Processor, setting out the relationship and 
imposing security obligations on the Data 
Processor. The Data Controller is also given a 
specific responsibility to assess the adequacy of 
the Data Processor’s security, and take steps to 
verify it. 
If there is any possibility, therefore, that the cloud 
provider is a Data Processor, it would be very 
unwise for the customer to proceed without a 
written contract that meets at least the minimum 
provisions in the Data Protection Act. 
23 

2: The Data Controller/Data Processor 
Relationship 
Where cloud services are provided on a bespoke 
basis, they may be the subject of contractual 
negotiations between the Data Controller and Data 
Processor. In such instances a contract can be 
drawn 
up 
that 
unequivocally 
meets 
the 
requirements of the Act. 
However, in many cases – even for quite large 
business deals – the contract for cloud services is 
set out in non-negotiable terms and conditions, or 
with very little scope for variation. If the cloud 
provider doesn’t offer terms and conditions that 
meet the Act’s requirements, there is little that can 
be done to get them added in. 
Ideally, a Data Processor contract should also 
provide indemnity for the Data Controller against 
any costs resulting from the Data Processor’s 
failure to deliver. This isn’t a legal requirement, 
but makes sound commercial sense. The standard 
terms and conditions for cloud services almost 
inevitably exclude any indemnity for a failure of 
the service, of course. 
This does not mean, however, that the Data 
Controller should accept the Data Processor’s 
terms uncritically. They should be examined 
carefully to ensure that no unacceptable risks are 
being taken. If there are gaps, it may be necessary 
to consider additional measures that should be 
taken on the customer side to compensate for any 
deficiencies in the terms and conditions on offer 
from the supplier. 
One particular concern should be the likelihood 
that the cloud provider will subcontract delivery of 
parts of its service. The customer must be able to 
24 

2: The Data Controller/Data Processor 
Relationship 
rely on the whole chain providing the necessary 
quality of service. Some of these links may be 
outside the UK or, more pertinently, outside the 
European Economic Area, which brings additional 
data protection considerations. 
The following provides a quick checklist for issues 
that a Data Processor contract (or terms and 
conditions) with a cloud provider should, ideally, 
address if the application makes, or could make, 
any use of personal data. Please note that the list is 
not intended to be a complete or accurate 
description of the provisions that should be in a 
contract between a Data Controller and a cloud-
based Data Processor, and some of the points may 
not be relevant in every case. 
1) Is it clear that the customer is a Data 
Controller and the cloud provider is a Data 
Processor? 
2) Is it clear what processing the cloud provider 
is expected, or entitled, to carry out on the 
Data Controller’s data?  
3) Is it explicit that all the customer’s data 
supplied is confidential (unless it is 
legitimately in the public domain), and that 
the cloud provider is not to misuse the data 
or disclose it without the Data Controller’s 
consent, or retain it after the contract ends or 
the Data Controller stops using the service?  
4) Does the cloud provider have effective 
security (including technical measures, and 
measures to underwrite the probity of staff), 
and can the Data Controller audit this 
effectively? 
25 

2: The Data Controller/Data Processor 
Relationship 
7) Is there a requirement for the cloud provider 
to inform the Data Controller immediately of 
any security breach they become aware of 
(whether they caused it or not)? 
8) Does the cloud provider indemnify the Data 
Controller for any costs incurred in putting 
right breaches of data protection brought 
about deliberately or negligently by the 
cloud provider (ideally including costs of 
reassuring affecting individuals, even if this 
is not legally required)? 
9) Is the cloud provider required not to do 
anything that would put the Data Controller 
in breach of the Data Protection Act 1998? 
10) Is the cloud provider required to promptly 
forward to the Data Controller all subject 
access requests and complaints about any of 
the processing that they may receive in 
error? 
11) Is the cloud provider required not to process 
the data, or allow it to be processed, outside 
the European Economic Area (alternatively 
not to do so without the Data Controller’s 
prior consent)? 
12) Is the cloud provider required not to 
subcontract any processing (alternatively not 
to do so without the Data Controller’s prior 
consent)? 
 
 
 
26 

 
CHAPTER 3: SECURITY (SEVENTH DATA 
PROTECTION PRINCIPLE) 
Security is one of the most important safeguards in 
preventing harm to individuals. The seventh 
principle says that you must take steps to prevent: 
• 
Unauthorised access 
• 
Accidental loss or damage. 
These steps must be ‘technical and organisational’, 
and they must be ‘appropriate’ in terms of the 
technical options available, and also in terms of 
the harm that would result in the event of 
unauthorised access, or loss, or damage. 
‘Organisational’ security measures should always 
include attention to human factors. In any security 
breach, at least part of the chain of causation is 
likely to be an individual taking, or failing to take, 
appropriate action. The Data Protection liability, 
however, rests with the organisation. Many of the 
Information 
Commissioner’s 
penalty 
notices 
highlight failures on the part of the organisation to 
provide sufficient guidance and training to the 
individual(s) who were the immediate or partial 
cause of the breach. 
Confidentiality, integrity and availability 
The requirements in the seventh principle to 
prevent unauthorised access, accidental loss or 
damage, closely mirror the three standard aims of 
information security: confidentiality, integrity and 
availability. 
27 

3: Security (Seventh Data Protection Principle) 
Confidentiality is concerned with setting limits on 
who may have access to specified information, 
based on their need to know. A key feature of 
confidentiality in UK law is that it applies to 
information 
‘given 
in 
confidence’. 
The 
individual(s) who are given access to the 
information must be left in no doubt that it is 
confidential. Any breach of confidentiality in 
respect of personal data is likely to be 
‘unauthorised access’ which the seventh principle 
aims to prevent. 
In maintaining confidentiality, it is unwise to rely 
on the probity, conscientiousness or common 
sense of all those who may handle or have access 
to data, even if they know the confidentiality 
boundaries. 
Technical 
security 
measures 
to 
prevent unauthorised access should therefore be 
concerned not merely to prevent deliberate 
external intrusion. They should also aim to limit 
access by authorised users to just that information 
they ‘need to know’. Segmentation of data 
supported by a robust system of access credentials 
is one of the key controls in this respect. 
Data integrity implies that once data has been 
entered into the system, it should not be modified 
in an unintended or unauthorised way. This is 
related to the seventh Principle’s requirement to 
prevent damage. 
Availability relates to accidental loss. The concept, 
however, goes beyond the permanent non-
availability that would result from loss of data, to 
include the requirement for the information to be 
available whenever it is needed. 
28 

3: Security (Seventh Data Protection Principle) 
Data in transit and at rest 
Data ‘in transit’ is always more vulnerable than 
data ‘at rest’. It is inherent in cloud computing that 
data will spend more time in transit than it would 
if it were being processed on an in-house system. 
Processing personal data in the cloud therefore 
automatically exposes it to greater risks than it 
would face behind securely-run perimeter defences 
of an on-site installation. 
That is not to say that the data faces no risks if 
held on site. It would still be vulnerable to misuse 
by authorised users, to loss or damage if the 
backup regime is inadequate, or to external 
intrusion. In some respects the cloud provider may 
actually offer greater protection against a backup 
failure or a poorly-implemented firewall. 
However, a survey by BT in July 2014 found that 
a quarter of respondents that were using cloud 
services had suffered a data breach where the fault 
lay with the cloud provider. 
There are also regular reports of large amounts of 
personal data being stolen from online locations. 
Websites are likely to be particularly vulnerable 
because, by their very nature, they are designed to 
have at least an element of public exposure. A 
website is often the gateway to a large online 
database of site users, and an integral part of an 
organisation’s relationship with its customers or 
service users. 
Cloud applications that are not intended to be 
publicly accessible avoid one obvious avenue for 
compromise but are not immune from security 
risks. Intrusion is still a possibility. Technical 
29 

3: Security (Seventh Data Protection Principle) 
problems could also cause a loss of integrity if the 
interruption occurs while data is in transit, and any 
loss or corruption of data is not detected and 
rectified. 
Security in the cloud 
Security has to run right the way through, from the 
device through which the user accesses the 
application, to the depths of the cloud provider’s 
system, and responsibility for security, end to end, 
lies with the Data Controller. Normally, as 
discussed above, the Data Controller is the 
customer, with the cloud provider acting as a Data 
Processor. 
It is emphatically not enough for the Data 
Controller to make assumptions about the security 
measures that may, or may not, be taken by the 
cloud provider. One clear example of this is the 
case of the British Pregnancy Advisory Service 
(BPAS). In February 2014, BPAS was fined3 
£200,000 by the Information Commissioner after 
its website was hacked into. Highly confidential 
messages from about 9,700 people, sent via the 
website to BPAS were stolen, a task made 
relatively easy by basic security weaknesses on the 
website. This exploit was intended to undermine 
BPAS, but could also have placed many of the 
individuals at considerable personal risk if, as was 
threatened, the messages had been made public by 
the hacker. In imposing the penalty, the 
Information Commissioner made it clear that it 
3 This is a civil monetary penalty. The maximum that can 
be levied is £500,000 and the penalty can be appealed at 
tribunal. 
30 
                                                                 

3: Security (Seventh Data Protection Principle) 
was the responsibility of BPAS to instruct the web 
designers and web hosts to implement adequate 
security, and check that they did so, not just to rely 
on the assumption that it would be done. 
The full monetary penalty notice can be found on 
the enforcement pages of the Information 
Commissioner’s website. 
Additional risks from ‘Bring Your Own Device’ – 
or ‘Bring Your Own Application’ 
One of the clear benefits of cloud computing is the 
possibility of easy (and cheap) access from 
wherever there is an internet connection. This is 
often an ideal solution for mobile workers, remote 
offices and home working. However, users may 
find reasons for wanting to gain access from 
personal devices rather than company ones, and 
the number of devices capable of gaining access 
has increased rapidly. Desktop computers, laptops, 
tablets and smartphones all bring their own risks. 
This is not the place to give a full description of 
the issues that need to be addressed in a Bring 
Your Own Device (BYOD) policy, but those 
particularly relevant to cloud computing include: 
• 
Controlling access to the device 
• 
Users other than the owner 
• 
Vulnerabilities 
introduced 
by 
other 
applications on the device 
• 
Opportunities to download data onto the 
device 
• 
Action to be taken in the event that the 
device is compromised  
31 

3: Security (Seventh Data Protection Principle) 
• 
Use of insecure cloud applications to transfer 
data to or from the device. 
Action that can be taken to mitigate each of these 
risks is discussed in the following chapter. 
Even where the Data Controller officially makes 
no use of cloud applications, a BYOD policy must 
address the issue of whether the device owner is 
permitted to use personal cloud-based accounts to 
transfer data to and from the device, or to work on 
material that is held on the device. Personal 
accounts, especially if they can be signed up to at 
no charge, may well not provide the same levels of 
security or service availability that business-
oriented and paid-for accounts offer. Surveys 
regularly suggest that this type of ‘shadow’ cloud 
use is widespread. Where the Data Controller has 
corporate accounts with more secure applications, 
these should be used in preference. 
The experience of Aberdeen City Council is 
instructive. A social worker was permitted to work 
from home. She had attended a case conference 
and was typing up the report on her home 
computer. Apparently she was unaware that the 
folder in which she stored the document on her 
computer was set up to synchronise automatically 
with a cloud-based location. A colleague who had 
attended the same case conference happened to 
search for his name on the Web, only to find that 
the document appeared. There was no security in 
place to prevent anyone accessing this highly 
confidential material. The council received a 
monetary penalty of £100,000, even though 
neither the computer nor the cloud service was 
directly under their control. When their employee 
32 

3: Security (Seventh Data Protection Principle) 
was authorised to work on confidential material at 
home, the council should have ensured that 
appropriate security was in place. 
 
 
33 

 
CHAPTER 4: MITIGATING SECURITY 
RISKS IN THE CLOUD 
 
Mitigating security risks requires a range of 
measures to be used in combination, in order to 
provide the end-to-end security discussed above. 
This publication is not intended to give a detailed 
description of the technical measures available, 
and readers with more technical expertise may 
well be aware of other measures that are 
appropriate in their particular situation. 
Security – like other aspects of data protection – is 
not something that should be added on as an 
afterthought. Security should be built into an 
organisation’s infrastructure and become part of 
how the organisation does business in every 
respect. Moving to the cloud does not solve the 
problem if an organisation’s existing security 
architecture and infrastructure is not up to 
standard; it just adds another element that must be 
addressed. 
Most cloud providers are acutely aware that 
security has to be a high priority, both for them 
and their customers. They typically stress the 
degree to which they take security seriously, and it 
is often claimed that their security is likely to be 
considerably 
better 
than 
in 
most 
small 
organisations and some larger ones. This is quite 
possibly true, but cloud providers may also be a 
more tempting target, and breaches leading to 
unauthorised access, as we have seen, undoubtedly 
do occur. 
34 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
4: Mitigating Security Risks in the Cloud 
Cloud security must cover all the elements of the 
seventh data protection principle, not just 
preventing unauthorised access but also preventing 
accidental loss of, or damage to, personal data. 
Many cloud providers offer indications of the level 
of service they aim to provide – and may 
historically have provided – but few are likely to 
offer unequivocal guarantees. The risk of service 
non-availability, its potential consequences, and 
the options for mitigating any damage, must 
therefore be assessed. 
Given that most cloud providers are likely to be 
Data Processors, the requirement of Schedule 1, 
Part II, Paragraph 11 of the Data Protection Act 
must be taken into account. This states that: 
Where processing of personal data is 
carried out by a data processor on 
behalf of a data controller, the data 
controller must, in order to comply with 
the seventh principle – 
(a) choose a data processor providing 
sufficient guarantees in respect of 
the technical and organisational 
security measures governing the 
processing to be carried out, and 
(b) take reasonable steps to ensure 
compliance with those measures. 
 
While physical inspection of a cloud provider’s 
security measures is unlikely to be practical, all 
reasonable steps must be taken to verify that the 
provider’s security measures up. This should be 
done by someone with an appropriate level of 
technical expertise, who is able to ask the right 
35 
www.Ebook777.com

4: Mitigating Security Risks in the Cloud 
questions and understand the implications of the 
answers. Without that, it is much more likely that a 
Data Controller would be penalised should a 
breach occur. 
Areas to assess include checking how access rights 
are authorised and how users are authenticated, 
background checks and segregation of duties for 
the cloud provider's personnel, physical access 
monitoring and segregation of data. 
While the security offered by providers is of 
course crucial, security of cloud-based systems 
must start at the customer or Data Controller end, 
and there is a range of support and advice 
available at different technical levels. Having got 
its own house in order, the Data Controller should 
then carry out due diligence on the security 
provisions made by the cloud provider. 
It is worth pointing out that, in the cloud, security 
must be managed differently. On an internal server 
it may be possible to rely heavily on perimeter 
defences. However, many security products cannot 
be deployed in a shared environment, and other 
organisations 
may 
be 
using 
less 
secure 
applications that are within the perimeter of the 
cloud provider and endanger valuable data. 
Application-level and 'instance' security should 
therefore be considered. This could include: 
firewall or antivirus software that operates within 
each instance; ensuring that system services are 
run 
only 
where 
necessary; 
intrusion 
detection/prevention 
systems; 
and 
integrity 
checking or change monitoring software. 
Where data is stored partly in the cloud and partly 
in-house, proper classification of data is vitally 
36 

4: Mitigating Security Risks in the Cloud 
important to determine what can safely be stored 
where, in accordance with legislation, standards, 
security concerns and the value of the asset. 
Cyber Essentials 
In June 2014 the UK Government introduced its 
Cyber Essentials4 scheme. This sets out the basic 
controls that all organisations of any size should 
implement 
to 
counter 
the 
most 
common  
internet-based security threats. It concentrates on 
five key areas: 
• 
Firewalls & gateways 
• 
Secure configuration 
• 
Access control 
• 
Malware protection 
• 
Patch management 
Many organisations will, of course, have already 
identified these as being necessary and taken steps 
to address them. None of them are new or 
surprising issues, so there is no real excuse for 
failing to implement appropriate measures. What 
the Cyber Essentials scheme does offer is a means 
of proving that the necessary steps have been 
taken, through external assessment. 
The scheme is intended to be affordable, even for 
small organisations. There are two levels of 
assessment. 
The 
basic 
certificate 
involves 
completion of a questionnaire which is externally 
reviewed before the certificate is awarded. The 
more advanced Cyber Essentials Plus is based on 
4 Information on this was available, at the time of 
writing, at www.cyberstreetwise.com/cyberessentials/ 
37 
                                                                 

4: Mitigating Security Risks in the Cloud 
more costly external testing. In each case the 
certificate – which must be renewed annually – 
entitles the organisation to display a logo. 
Access controls 
It is worth bearing in mind that the seventh data 
protection principle requires security measures to 
be technical and organisational. While most of the 
basic controls in Cyber Essentials are at the 
technical end, access control clearly has a large 
organisational component. 
Access controls must apply both to the systems 
that allow users to access cloud applications and to 
the cloud applications themselves. The seventh 
data protection principle requires protection 
against unauthorised access. There are many ways 
of authorising access, but the allocation of logon 
credentials that then determine the information the 
user can view or manipulate, has to be a key 
element. Access privileges should be carefully 
thought out, so that users see no more information 
than they need to, and do not have access to 
functions that are not relevant to them. 
This is especially true in the cloud, where the 
user’s location may be less well controlled. It is 
often worth considering additional precautions – if 
these are available – such as two-factor 
authentication, rigorous processes that require 
good authentication for password recovery or 
modification, restrictions on the IP addresses from 
which the application may be accessed, and/or 
restrictions on the times of day at which any given 
user is permitted to log-in. 
38 

4: Mitigating Security Risks in the Cloud 
Good segmentation of the data in the cloud 
system, so that users are restricted in what they 
can view or modify – and especially what they can 
download, print or export – also helps to reduce 
risks. Access to administrative functions must, of 
course, receive particular attention, and live 
monitoring of activity in order to flag up unusual 
behaviour before it is too late, should also be 
considered. (The key security weakness in the 
BPAS case described above was a failure to 
replace the default administrator password.) 
Controlling access via personal devices, through a 
BYOD policy, is particularly important if there is 
any possibility that confidential personal data may 
be taken from the cloud and stored on the device. 
This could be, for example, in the form of emails 
or information in attachments. Spreadsheets used 
as informal small databases are a particular hazard. 
Strict access controls to the device are also 
essential if the cloud application requires a logon 
which can be ‘remembered’ by the device. A 
BYOD policy should prohibit access to such cloud 
services by any personal devices that are not 
secured by the most appropriate access controls 
available. The Data Controller should also reserve 
the right to verify the presence of access controls 
at reasonable opportunities. 
This is not just a hypothetical risk. A survey5 in 
June 2014 found that 75% of consumers that use 
social media on mobile devices are automatically 
logged into their accounts, and even 23% of 
mobile banking users are automatically logged in. 
These risks may be acceptable for individuals to 
5 Commissioned by the software company Intercede. 
39 
                                                                 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
4: Mitigating Security Risks in the Cloud 
choose to take with their own data, but the figures 
emphasise that employers cannot assume that 
individuals have taken an appropriate approach to 
the security of personal devices on which 
corporate data may be held or accessed. 
It is quite likely that personal devices may 
occasionally, or regularly, be used by others with 
the permission of the owner. In this case it is 
essential that these additional users are unable to 
access any data derived from, or held by, cloud 
applications. Ideally the device should provide for 
individual logons and allow only authorised users 
to access confidential data and associated 
applications. Again, reservation of the right to 
verify that these conditions are met may be a 
reasonable condition of permitting access from the 
device to corporate cloud data. 
Other guidance and recommendations 
There are, of course, many sources of security 
guidance. Two that are pitched at a more detailed 
technical level than Cyber Essentials are from the 
Information Commissioner and the Open Web 
Application Security Project (OWASP). 
The Information Commissioner produced a report 
in May 2014 – Protecting personal data in online 
services: learning from the mistakes of others6. 
6 This can be difficult to locate on the Information 
Commissioner’s website. At the time of writing it could 
be found via a news release dated 12 May 2014 at: 
https://ico.org.uk/media/for-
organisations/documents/1042221/protecting-personal-
data-in-online-services-learning-from-the-mistakes-of-
others.pdf 
40 
                                                                 
www.Ebook777.com

4: Mitigating Security Risks in the Cloud 
The report analyses the root causes of security 
breaches in online systems that have been 
investigated by the ICO. It identifies eight 
common vulnerabilities that should, as a matter of 
course, be addressed. The issues it covers are: 
• 
Software updates 
• 
SQL injection 
• 
Unnecessary services 
• 
Decommissioning of software or services 
• 
Password storage 
• 
Configuration of SSL and TLS 
• 
Inappropriate locations for processing data 
• 
Default credentials. 
The OWASP Top Ten is an analysis, updated 
every three years, of the current most important 
vulnerabilities in web-based systems and the 
measures that should be taken to prevent them. 
The 2013 Top Ten covers: 
• 
Injection 
• 
Broken 
Authentication 
and 
Session 
Management 
• 
Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) 
• 
Insecure Direct Object References 
• 
Security Misconfiguration 
• 
Sensitive Data Exposure 
• 
Missing Function Level Access Control 
• 
Cross-Site Request Forgery (CSRF) 
• 
Using 
Components 
with 
Known 
Vulnerabilities 
41 

4: Mitigating Security Risks in the Cloud 
• 
Unvalidated Redirects and Forwards. 
There is clear overlap between this list and the 
Information Commissioner’s, and many of the 
points are also relevant to the Cyber Essentials 
controls. It is worth taking a broad view, rather 
than relying on just one source to identify the 
security areas that should be given attention. 
Regular independent vulnerability assessments and 
intrusion testing to ensure that applications are 
protected – from well-documented threats as a 
minimum – is worth considering. 
ISO27001: Information security management 
The key international standard on information 
security is the ISO27000 series, available in the 
UK from the British Standards Institute. 
ISO27001 
is 
the 
overall 
framework 
for 
information security management, and can be 
externally certified. It sets out a number of 
controls that should be in place. Many are directly 
relevant to cloud computing, including for 
example: 
• 
System 
acquisition, 
development 
and 
maintenance (control A.14) 
• 
Access control (control A.9) 
• 
Information transfer (control A.13.2) 
• 
Information security in supplier relationships 
(control A.15.1) 
• 
Privacy 
and 
protection 
of 
personally 
identifiable information (control A.18.1.4) 
42 

4: Mitigating Security Risks in the Cloud 
ISO27001 accreditation is available both to the 
Data Controller and any cloud suppliers it uses. 
Many suppliers claim to be ISO27001 compliant, 
but it is important to check a number of points: 
• 
Has the cloud provider been externally 
certified, or just self-assessed as compliant? 
• 
Are the credentials of the certifying 
company satisfactory? 
• 
Does the ISO27001 certificate apply to the 
issues that concern the data that is intended 
to be placed in the cloud application, as set 
out in the supplier’s ISO27001 Statement of 
Applicability? 
Data ‘in transit’ 
Data is almost inevitably more at risk when it is 
‘in transit’ rather than ‘at rest’, which is why 
information transfer merits a specific control in 
ISO27001. 
Many 
of 
the 
Information 
Commissioner’s monetary penalties have involved 
data going astray in transit (in a range of 
situations, not always in the context of cloud 
computing). 
When considering a cloud provider’s security 
claims, it is important to check whether these 
apply equally to data at rest (i.e. while stored on 
the provider’s servers) and data in transit, both 
between the customer and the cloud provider, and 
between the cloud provider and any subcontractors 
that may provide part of the service. 
43 

4: Mitigating Security Risks in the Cloud 
HMG Security Framework 
Government agencies, or organisations that have 
close dealings with government, may also want to 
review the cloud provider’s offering against the 
HMG Security Framework7, as well as taking into 
account the 'cloud first' policy. 
The 
security 
framework 
mandates 
clear 
accountability for the management of risk, and 
specifically in relation to information: 
• 
“Staff who are well trained to exercise good 
judgement, take responsibility and be 
accountable for the information they handle, 
including all partner information. 
• 
“Mechanisms and processes to ensure assets 
are properly classified and appropriately 
protected. 
• 
“Confidence that security controls are 
effective and that systems and services can 
protect the information they carry. There 
will be an overarching programme of 
information assurance driven by the Board.” 
 
In August 2014, CESG (the National Technical 
Authority for Information Assurance) published 
draft guidance on cloud security risk management, 
listing 14 cloud security principles and setting out 
in some detail how they should be implemented.  
 
7 This, and the CESG guidance, are available – 
unrestricted – on the main government website (.gov.uk). 
44 
                                                                 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
4: Mitigating Security Risks in the Cloud 
These are: 
• 
Principle 1: Data in transit protection 
• 
Principle 2: Asset protection and resilience 
• 
Principle 3: Separation between consumers 
• 
Principle 4: Governance framework 
• 
Principle 5: Operational security 
• 
Principle 6: Personnel security 
• 
Principle 7: Secure development 
• 
Principle 8: Supply chain security 
• 
Principle 9: Secure consumer management 
• 
Principle 10: Identity and authentication 
• 
Principle 11: External interface protection 
• 
Principle 12: Secure service administration 
• 
Principle 13: Audit information provision to 
consumers 
• 
Principle 14: Secure use of the service by the 
consumer 
Many of these principles will by now look 
familiar, as they appear in other schemes we have 
already referred to. In addition, the CESG 
guidance gives a useful summary of common 
approaches 
to 
implementing 
cloud 
security 
principles. These are not mutually exclusive and 
can – indeed often should – be used in 
combination. They are: 
• 
Service provider assertion: The service 
provider 
describes 
how 
their 
service 
complies 
with 
the 
implementation 
objectives, but is unwilling (or unable) to 
45 
www.Ebook777.com

4: Mitigating Security Risks in the Cloud 
provide 
independent 
validation 
of 
compliance. 
• 
Contractual commitment: The service 
provider contractually commits to meet the 
implementation objectives. 
• 
Independent validation of assertions: An 
independent 
third 
party 
reviews 
and 
confirms the service provider’s assertions. 
Service provider [should hold] certificate of 
compliance with a recognised standard. 
Certification and implementation of controls 
[should be] reviewed by a qualified 
individual. 
• 
Independent testing of implementation: 
Independent testers demonstrate that controls 
are correctly implemented and objectives are 
met in practice. A suitably qualified 
individual [should review] the scope of 
testing. 
• 
Assurance in the service design: A 
qualified security architect is involved in the 
design or review of the service architecture. 
• 
Assurance in the service components: 
Independent assurance in the components of 
a service (such as the products, services, and 
individuals which a service uses). 
In the government G-Cloud programme “cloud 
security principles [are] a fundamental part of G-
Cloud security assurance to help buyers make 
pragmatic decisions based on relevant, transparent 
and available information”, according to a 
46 

4: Mitigating Security Risks in the Cloud 
September 2014 announcement. Suppliers have to 
provide information about how their products’ 
security maps to the revised government security 
classification scheme. 
COBIT® 
COBIT is another framework for information 
technology management and governance. It is seen 
as a way to fulfil the requirements of regulatory 
regimes (such as the US Sarbanes-Oxley Act) for 
risk mitigation, monitoring and control. COBIT 5 
was released in June 2012. It is published by 
ISACA (originally the Information Systems Audit 
and Control Association) and its components 
include: 
• 
Framework, 
linking 
IT 
to 
business 
requirements 
• 
Organisation-wide process descriptions that 
map to responsibility for different aspects of 
the process 
• 
High-level control objectives 
• 
Management 
guidelines 
that 
include 
measuring performance 
• 
Maturity models to assess systems and 
address gaps. 
ISAE3402 and SSAE16 (previously SAS70) 
Many US organisations mention compliance with 
SSAE16 which replaced SAS70 (Statement on 
Auditing Standards: 70) in 2011. SSAE16 
(Statement 
on 
Standards 
for 
Attestation 
Engagements (SSAE) No. 16, Reporting on 
47 

4: Mitigating Security Risks in the Cloud 
Controls at a Service Organization) is intended to 
provide a US standard that is compatible with the 
International 
Service 
Organisation 
Reporting 
Standard ISAE3402. 
These are not security standards but are part of an 
auditing process for financial information. They 
do, however, examine risk management and 
clients can ask for additional issues, such as Data 
Protection Act compliance, to be taken into 
account. 
The statement implies that the service organisation 
has been audited by an independent auditor and 
this audit may have examined issues relevant to 
Data Protection Act compliance. 
Additional BYOD considerations 
The Data Controller will not usually be able to 
control which other applications are installed on 
the device. There is therefore a risk that malicious 
or 
ill-behaved 
applications 
could 
introduce 
security vulnerabilities. Strict data and application 
segregation can mitigate these risks. 
If data can be downloaded from the cloud to the 
device this is vulnerable to access by other users – 
with or without permission. Unwise behaviour by 
the device owner could result, for example, in the 
device being disposed of while still containing 
recoverable confidential information. It is also less 
likely that information that is updated on the 
device will be reliably backed up. 
It is commonplace for devices – especially 
smartphones that are particularly vulnerable to loss 
or theft – to allow remote locking and wiping of 
48 

4: Mitigating Security Risks in the Cloud 
all data. A device owner may be reluctant to 
provide the Data Controller with the codes 
necessary to carry out these operations, or to 
inform the Data Controller as soon as the device’s 
whereabouts are unknown. This is especially true 
if data is not segregated, so that the owner’s 
personal information would be wiped at the same 
time. This would argue for the use of company-
issue phones wherever possible. An alternative is 
to require the device to use an application that 
ring-fences data acquired from the company’s 
systems, preventing it from being stored on the 
device, exported from it, or interfered with by 
other applications on the device. 
Again, human factors must be taken into account. 
For example, a user who finds it onerous to enter a 
PIN or other security requirement each time they 
access the device, may be inclined to disengage 
the access controls after they have been authorised 
to use the device for accessing their employer’s 
data. 
 
49 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
 
CHAPTER 5: TRANSFERS ABROAD 
(EIGHTH DATA PROTECTION 
PRINCIPLE) 
 
If personal data is transferred outside certain 
European countries, the provisions of the eighth 
Principle come into play. Storing data on a cloud 
provider’s system abroad counts as a transfer, even 
if the data is not intended to be used anywhere 
outside the UK. 
As discussed above, it is quite common for a cloud 
application to be provided by a chain of 
subcontractors. It is necessary to examine the 
entire chain in order to assess whether the eighth 
Principle is engaged. 
The eighth Principle aims to achieve an equivalent 
level of protection for data transferred abroad to 
that it would receive within the UK. 
This level of protection is automatically provided 
if the jurisdiction to which the data is transferred is 
within the European Economic Area, because each 
of those countries has legislation based on the 
same 
European 
Directive 
(95/46/EC). 
The 
European Economic Area comprises the European 
Union plus Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway. 
Beyond that, a slowly-increasing number of 
territories have legislation that has been assessed 
by the European Commission as providing an 
acceptable level of protection and, as a special 
case, the US has negotiated the ‘Safe Harbor’ 
scheme – discussed in detail below. 
50 
www.Ebook777.com

5: Transfers Abroad (Eighth Data Protection 
Principle) 
This means that, at the time of writing, transfers to 
anywhere in the table below are treated no 
differently from a data protection perspective than 
a transfer within the UK. 
Jurisdictions where the requirements of the eighth 
data protection principle are automatically met (as 
of October 2014) are shown below: 
 
European 
Union 
Austria, Belgium, Bulgaria, 
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, 
Denmark, Estonia, Finland, 
France, Germany, Greece, 
Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, 
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, 
Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, 
Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia, 
Spain, Sweden, UK 
EEA, 
outside EU 
Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway 
Approved 
by EC 
Andorra, Argentina, Canada, 
Faroe Islands, Guernsey, Isle of 
Man, Israel, Jersey, New Zealand, 
Switzerland, Uruguay 
Special 
case 
US, but only where the Safe 
Harbor scheme applies 
 
Transfers to almost all of Europe are therefore 
automatically compliant with the eighth Principle, 
one way or another, but very few others. A few 
countries, including Australia, Hong Kong and 
Singapore, for example, have their own data 
protection laws but these have not been approved 
by the EC. 
51 

5: Transfers Abroad (Eighth Data Protection 
Principle) 
Transfers outside the locations in the table above 
are only permitted if they meet one of the 
exemptions set out in Schedule 4 of the Act. These 
include: 
• 
Consent of the Data Subject. 
• 
Necessity in connection with a contract (or 
prospective contract) between the Data 
Subject and the Data Controller or a contract 
with another party at the request of the Data 
Subject or in their interests. 
• 
Necessity for reasons of substantial public 
interest. 
• 
Terms “of a kind approved by the 
Commissioner 
as 
ensuring 
adequate 
safeguards for the rights and freedoms of 
data subjects”. 
• 
When “authorised by the Commissioner as 
being made in such a manner as to ensure 
adequate safeguards for the rights and 
freedoms of data subjects”. 
“Adequate safeguards” can be provided through 
the use of one of the four sets of model contract 
clauses that have been approved by the EC8. Two 
of these are designed for use when a Data 
Controller is transferring data to a Data Processor 
(one of which is no longer acceptable for new 
contracts). However, most cloud services are not 
8 Explained in detail on the Information Commissioner’s 
website. 
52 
                                                                 

5: Transfers Abroad (Eighth Data Protection 
Principle) 
offered on terms that incorporate the EC model 
clauses. 
Intra-company transfers can be protected through 
binding corporate rules (BCRs) that have been 
approved by the Information Commissioner. These 
would not, of course, be relevant to cloud 
computing where the recipient overseas is a Data 
Processor, but they could apply where a company 
has a private cloud located wholly or partially 
overseas. 
Other contractual arrangements may also suffice to 
provide adequate safeguards, and in the case of 
cloud services based on standard terms and 
conditions, this may be one of the few options 
available. The onus, as ever, is on the Data 
Controller to demonstrate that appropriate steps 
have been taken and that the terms and conditions 
do provide adequate safeguards. 
If you are relying on Data Subject consent you 
must make your Data Subjects fully aware that 
you intend to transfer their data abroad, so that 
they can make their own decision on whether the 
risk is acceptable. In most cloud computing 
situations consent is unlikely to be a practicable 
option. 
Necessity in relation to the performance of a 
contract is unlikely to be an acceptable claim in 
respect of cloud computing, because it can always 
be argued that equivalent cloud services could 
have been obtained from providers within the 
EEA. 
53 

5: Transfers Abroad (Eighth Data Protection 
Principle) 
Safe Harbor 
Some commentators would seriously question 
whether the Safe Harbor scheme in the US 
provides an adequate basis for data protection 
compliance when using cloud services. The 
scheme was designed to provide a basis for 
transferring data between the US and Europe that 
did not require the US government to put a data 
protection regime in place. Among its claimed 
drawbacks are: 
• 
It is largely self-assessed and self-policed; it 
has no statutory backing. 
• 
The 
mechanisms 
for 
redress 
can 
be 
cumbersome and expensive. 
• 
It only covers data types that are subject to 
Federal Trade Commission or Department of 
Transportation oversight. HR data, for 
example, is not covered. 
• 
Most entries in the Safe Harbor register9 – 
with a few notable exceptions – refer to data 
that the US company holds about individuals 
abroad who are direct customers, but do not 
refer explicitly to any personal data held on 
behalf of customer organisations as part of a 
cloud service or to the cloud provider’s role 
as a Data Processor. 
• 
Some 
investigations 
have 
uncovered 
companies claiming to be signed up to Safe 
Harbor when, in fact, they are not, while 
other complaints suggest that US companies 
make use of personal data in ways that are 
9 The register can be consulted at 
https://safeharbor.export.gov/list.aspx 
54 
                                                                 

5: Transfers Abroad (Eighth Data Protection 
Principle) 
not covered by their Safe Harbor statements. 
In 2014 the then European Union justice 
minister said that the Safe Harbor agreement 
“may not be so safe after all” and would be 
reviewed. 
Despite this, the agreement is accepted by the EU 
as providing an acceptable level of protection, and 
few people worry about the finer points. If a cloud 
provider based in the US is signed up to Safe 
Harbor, therefore, the risk of being found in 
breach of the eighth data protection principle 
appears to be very small. 
Some government data, however, is required to be 
held within the EEA, or even just within the UK, 
and some Data Controllers prefer not to rely on 
Safe Harbor. In these cases, a cloud service where 
the data is guaranteed to be held only within 
Europe would be preferable.  
Until recently this was easier said than done. Many 
of the big providers either refused to say where 
their data was held (for ‘security’ reasons), or 
explicitly stated that it would be held in the US. 
Now, though, many have accepted that there is a 
commercial advantage in providing at least the 
option for data to be held only within the EEA, 
and it is rare to find a service that holds all its data 
in the US, come what may. 
It is also worth pointing out that data comes under 
the protection of the EU Data Protection regime as 
soon as it is held within Europe, even if it 
originates outside Europe, relates to Data Subjects 
55 

5: Transfers Abroad (Eighth Data Protection 
Principle) 
outside Europe, and is essentially used only 
outside Europe.  
 
56 

 
CHAPTER 6: OTHER DATA PROTECTION 
PRINCIPLES 
Although the seventh and eighth data protection 
principles are those with the greatest relevance to 
cloud computing, it is worth looking briefly at the 
other six. 
First Data Protection Principle (Fairness, 
Transparency and Choice) 
This principle, as well as making a general 
requirement of fairness, specifies that Data 
Subjects must have ready access to information 
about who is using their data and what for – the 
Transparency requirement – and that they must, in 
some cases, give consent for this. 
There is also a requirement to indicate who – 
either in general or specifically – the data may be 
disclosed to or shared with. Transferring data to a 
cloud provider does not count as a disclosure, 
since the Data Controller takes full responsibility 
for restricting what the Data Processor may do 
with the data and for security. There is therefore 
no obligation to inform the Data Subject when a 
Data Processor is used. 
The situation is different, however, in cases where 
the cloud provider is a Data Controller in their 
own right. This might occur, for example, where 
the cloud provider is dealing directly with the Data 
Subject through an ancillary activity – such as the 
situation with a payment processor described on 
page 22. In some cases the cloud provider may 
even reserve the right to use data about their 
57 

6: Other Data Protection Principles 
customer’s Data Subjects for the cloud provider’s 
own purposes. In both these cases the Data Subject 
must be informed that their data will be shared 
with the secondary Data Controller. 
In addition to providing information, the Data 
Controller must consider whether Data Subjects 
should be given a choice over the use of their data. 
In many cases choice is not appropriate, because 
of the sixth Schedule 2 Condition, ‘legitimate 
interests’ (see page 19). Where a choice is offered, 
it should be a genuine choice; there is rarely much 
benefit in placing mandatory consent – for 
example for a transfer abroad – deep in the terms 
and conditions to which a Data Subject has to 
agree. It is far better to provide the information 
clearly and indicate that the transfer will take place 
if the Data Subject goes ahead with whatever 
transaction is being provided. 
Second Data Protection Principle (Specified 
and limited purposes) 
This Principle has no specific implications for 
cloud computing. 
Third Data Protection Principle (Adequate, 
Relevant and not Excessive) 
The main concern with this Principle would be if a 
cloud application is designed in such a way that it 
requires the collection of more data than is 
required for the purpose, or does not permit the 
collection of sufficient data. 
Where the Data Controller has complete control 
over the design of the application this should not 
58 

6: Other Data Protection Principles 
arise, but there may be cases where, for cost 
reasons, an off-the-shelf application is preferred. It 
would not be acceptable from a data protection 
point of view to make use of a cloud application 
that was not flexible enough to match the data 
collected to the purpose of the application. 
Fourth Data Protection Principle (Accuracy) 
Again, the main concern with this Principle is 
likely to be the flexibility of the application. To 
take a simple and perhaps rare example, if an 
application were designed, or set up, to use only 
the American format for short dates (MM/DD/YY) 
instead of the European format (DD/MM/YY) it 
would be more than likely that a significant 
proportion of users from the UK would enter dates 
incorrectly. 
Fifth Data Protection Principle (Limited 
retention) 
It is increasingly difficult to ensure that data is 
erased entirely once there is no longer any 
necessity to retain it. Backup and archive copies 
may well exist, even when the live version of the 
data is deleted – especially when a cloud provider 
takes responsibility for backing up, and may also 
keep data at multiple locations to improve 
resilience. One of the drawbacks of cloud 
computing is that the Data Controller may often be 
unaware of where the data is physically held, or by 
whom. It is, nevertheless, the Data Controller’s 
responsibility to ensure that data is not retained 
longer than necessary, in relation to the purpose 
for which it is held. 
59 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
6: Other Data Protection Principles 
Concerns about the proliferation and persistence of 
personal data are growing. The European Court of 
Justice (ECJ) ruling in May 2014 on what is 
erroneously referred to as the ‘right to be 
forgotten’, 
is 
just 
one 
indication 
of 
this 
development. 
It is worth clarifying that the ECJ ruling did not 
create a right to be forgotten. It required Google to 
remove its links to data that was inaccurate, 
inadequate, irrelevant or excessive for the 
purposes for which Google itself was processing 
the data. (The third and fourth data protection 
principles can be clearly recognised in that list.) 
The information being linked to could remain on 
the public record where it had always been. 
The proposed new European Regulation (see 
below) includes a version of the ‘right to be 
forgotten’ – the final extent of which remains to be 
seen. However, the immediate impact on most 
Data Controllers will be minimal. The only really 
surprising thing about the ECJ ruling is how 
emphatically it brings search engines within the 
rules of data protection. The rest of the decision 
was based firmly on Principles that had already 
been in force for nearly 15 years. 
Sixth Data Protection Principle (Data Subject 
rights) 
The key Data Subject rights protected by the sixth 
principle are: 
• 
The right to prevent their data being used for 
direct marketing of any kind. 
• 
The right of Subject Access. 
60 
www.Ebook777.com

6: Other Data Protection Principles 
• 
The right, in certain cases, to prevent 
processing 
likely 
to 
cause 
substantial 
damage or substantial address to that 
individual or another. 
• 
The right to have incorrect data corrected 
and excessive data removed. 
It is worth looking briefly at the cloud computing 
implications of these rights. 
When data on the same person is held in more than 
one place, synchronisation becomes an issue. A 
‘no marketing’ flag in one system may not be 
implemented across the board. For example, 
individuals’ details may be held on a CRM system 
which is used for occasional mailings and for 
recording transactions, while email marketing is 
carried out through a cloud application. If 
someone uses the automatic ‘unsubscribe’ option 
in an email they may expect to receive no more 
contact from the organisation, only to find that 
some marketing is also being sent from the CRM 
system. Standalone cloud applications therefore 
pose the same issues as standalone systems on site, 
but the options for integration between systems 
may be limited, and may have to be carried out 
manually. 
Data held in multiple systems also makes 
responding properly to a Subject Access Request 
more onerous. Unless the Data Subject explicitly 
limits their request, the Data Controller is obliged 
to provide a copy of all the data held on that 
individual (apart from any that may legitimately be 
redacted to protect third parties), regardless of 
where it is held. 
61 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
6: Other Data Protection Principles 
Cloud computing is less likely to cause distinct 
problems with the remaining two Data Subject 
rights in the list. 
 
62 
www.Ebook777.com

 
CHAPTER 
7: 
OTHER 
LEGAL 
AND 
TECHNICAL IMPLICATIONS FOR CLOUD 
CONTRACTS 
The requirements for a contract between a Data 
Controller and a Data Processor have been 
discussed on page 23, while the contractual 
implications when cloud processors are based 
outside the EEA are discussed on page 52 
onwards. 
This chapter looks briefly at other legal and 
technical issues with data protection implications. 
A major consideration is the requirement in the 
seventh 
data 
protection 
principle 
to 
take 
appropriate steps against accidental loss or damage 
to data, and the wider question of the data being 
available when required. Problems could arise 
from: 
• 
Loss of service –  
o at the provider’s end, if their system 
goes down. 
o at the customer’s end, if the Internet 
connection is impaired. 
• 
Possible obstacles to a change of provider if 
the service proves unsatisfactory, caused by 
the data being held in a proprietary format. 
• 
Possible difficulty retrieving the data if the 
service ceases, or in case of a dispute with 
the provider. 
• 
Difficulty 
in 
making 
a 
usable 
and 
comprehensive 
backup 
of 
the 
data 
63 

7: Other Legal and Technical Implications for 
Cloud Contracts 
independently from the provider’s system, as 
additional security in case of problems. 
It is rare for cloud providers to offer guaranteed 
levels of service, and failures do happen from time 
to time. These risks cannot be ignored, and 
contingency plans should be in place. 
Retrieving data in the event of a breakdown in the 
commercial relationship may be less easy to 
provide for, which is why a readily usable backup, 
independent of the cloud provider’s systems, is 
likely to be essential. Not only may the format in 
which data is stored make retrieval of useful data 
awkward, there is also the question of precisely 
where it is stored and how to access it. 
Few cloud providers control all the assets involved 
in providing their service. Frequently, there are 
several links in the chain: the service provider may 
be a reseller of another company’s product; the 
data storage may be subcontracted out, and the 
subcontractor may not own the physical hardware 
on which the data is stored. Should any of these 
links break, there is no direct contract between the 
Data Controller and the ultimate holder of the data. 
To complicate matters further, the different 
companies in the chain may be based in different 
legal jurisdictions. 
Other points to watch out for in standard terms and 
conditions include: 
• 
Contract terms which make the supplier a 
Data Controller in their own right (for 
example, if they reserve the right to make 
64 

7: Other Legal and Technical Implications for 
Cloud Contracts 
use of the customer’s data, or some of it, for 
their own purposes). 
• 
Unilateral changes in terms and conditions 
by the provider. 
These concerns all indicate that it is very 
important to study carefully the legal and technical 
underpinning 
of 
any 
cloud 
service 
before 
entrusting personal data to it, or basing critical 
processes on cloud applications. It is not always 
easy 
to 
piece 
together 
all 
the 
necessary 
information, and some providers are better than 
others at making it all readily available in a 
comprehensible form. A cursory review is not 
enough, and those entrusted with the review 
should have the necessary legal or technical 
expertise to understand the implications of the 
information they obtain. 
The concerns also contribute to an essential 
requirement in any cloud application: ensuring that 
there is a reliable way to continue business if the 
relationship with the cloud provider breaks down 
in any way. An escrow or recovery procedure 
should not just be put in place, but should also be 
tested and documented so that it can be reliably 
and promptly brought into action if required. 
Overriding jurisdictions 
Since many cloud applications involve data being 
processed outside of the UK, this could mean that 
different laws – sometimes very different laws – 
could apply to all, or part, of the operation. Again, 
this is something that must be taken into account 
65 

7: Other Legal and Technical Implications for 
Cloud Contracts 
as a potential risk, if the supplier claims to be 
bound by the laws of a different jurisdiction. 
Most countries have laws allowing the authorities 
to access data in what they deem to be the public 
interest, but the one which is most often talked 
about is the US Patriot Act. This is ostensibly anti-
terrorist, but has also been used in non-terrorist 
cases. It requires any US-based company to 
provide any information it holds to the US 
Government, on demand (even if the data is not in 
the US). Some suppliers undertake to inform their 
customers before passing on data, but they may 
not offer this and – in some cases – may not even 
be allowed to inform the customer of access. 
The revelations in 2013 on the extent to which the 
Prism programme allowed US (and other) 
authorities to by-pass legislative restrictions on 
accessing data on the Internet, merely reinforced 
these concerns. 
Most organisations are probably reasonably 
sanguine about the fairly remote possibility of 
their data becoming of interest to the authorities, 
but the possibility should still be included in any 
risk assessment. 
Responding to breaches 
The Information Commissioner provides guidance 
on data security breach management that sets out a 
four-stage process: 
• 
Containment and recovery 
• 
Assessment of ongoing risk 
66 

7: Other Legal and Technical Implications for 
Cloud Contracts 
• 
Notification of breach 
• 
Evaluation and response. 
In addition to this, most organisations will be 
concerned at the reputational damage that a serious 
breach would be likely to bring. It is common 
practice to have a prepared statement in place that 
can be adapted to the specific circumstances, and 
to allocate responsibility for communications with 
the media and with regulators. It may be worth 
considering whether arrangements should also be 
made to involve the cloud provider in the 
response, if the breach takes place as a result of a 
failure for which they are partly or wholly 
responsible. 
 
67 

 
CHAPTER 8: ENFORCEMENT 
The potential costs of a data protection breach are 
incalculable, although many breaches do not in 
fact lead to seriously adverse outcomes. The three 
main risks are: 
• 
A fine (civil monetary penalty) from the 
Information Commissioner. 
• 
Compensation to affected individuals for 
damage and associated distress. 
• 
Reputational damage to the Data Controller 
responsible. 
The maximum fine is £500,000 (but see following 
chapter). 
The 
Information 
Commissioner’s 
strategy is to identify particularly serious breaches 
and impose sufficiently large penalties as to attract 
attention and encourage others to take steps to 
avoid ending up in the same situation. Research 
carried out for the Commissioner in 2014 found 
evidence that this approach was having the desired 
effect. 
Examples have been given above of fines imposed 
for security breaches associated with cloud 
activities. Although a fine could be imposed for a 
serious breach of any of the eight data protection 
principles, in fact almost all have been imposed for 
breaches of the seventh principle – security. Note 
that in order to attract a fine, there does not have to 
be any evidence that actual harm has resulted from 
the breach. Fines have been imposed in cases 
where the data has either been recovered before it 
68 

8: Enforcement 
could be misused, or has disappeared without trace 
and does not appear to have fallen into the wrong 
hands. 
Another feature to note is that the Information 
Commissioner’s justification for imposing a fine 
frequently cites the lack of effective policies and 
procedures, either because they were not specific 
and detailed enough to address the risks, or 
because the staff involved were not given 
sufficient training to be aware of the course of 
action they were expected to take. 
This suggests strongly that all users of cloud-based 
applications should be given clear guidance and 
training on how these should be used (or even not 
used, in the case of personal cloud accounts). 
Compensation to individuals is less well reported. 
Claims must be based on tangible damage. 
All enforcement action by the Information 
Commissioner is published on his website. Action 
short of a fine can include Enforcement Notices – 
setting out action to be taken, where failure to 
comply is a criminal offence – and binding 
undertakings committing the Data Controller to 
remedial action. Any of these could, as a result of 
their publication, lead to reputational damage. 
Other costs associated with a breach could include: 
• 
Notifying potentially affected individuals, if 
this is appropriate. 
• 
Assistance 
to 
potentially 
affected 
individuals, such as, for example, providing 
them with credit reference support where 
69 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
8: Enforcement 
there is a danger of ID theft, or other damage 
to their credit rating. 
• 
Data restoration, where the breach involves 
loss or damage of important information. 
 
70 
www.Ebook777.com

 
CHAPTER 9: THE PROPOSED NEW EU 
REGULATION AND OTHER MEASURES 
The EU Directive (95/46/EC) on which the Data 
Protection Act 1998 is based, was first mooted in 
1993 and agreed in 1995. The intervening 20 years 
have seen dramatic technical changes which could 
not have been foreseen at the time. Cloud 
computing is one of these. 
Many would say that the Directive has actually 
coped quite well with these changes, as it was 
couched largely in terms of general principles and 
could therefore be seen as technologically neutral. 
Cloud computing and other developments have, 
however, started to raise issues that the existing 
data protection regime does not really have 
answers to. In addition, a review would also allow 
some modification to be made in the light of 
experience. 
The process began with the publication of a 
proposed Regulation by the European Commission 
in late 2011. After a great deal of discussion and 
negotiation, the European Parliament approved a 
revised version in October 2013. The next stage is 
agreement by the Council of Ministers, where 
national preferences and viewpoints are likely to 
come into play. The European elections in 2014 
brought about significant changes, both in the 
Parliament and subsequently in the Commission, 
so that, at the time of writing, it is hard to predict 
the final form in which the Regulation will 
emerge. 
71 

9: The Proposed New EU Regulation and Other 
Measures 
Once the Regulation is approved, there is a lead-in 
period, but after that it takes effect immediately. A 
Regulation is in effect an EU-wide law; it doesn’t 
depend on individual countries bringing in their 
own legislation. Even in the event of the UK 
leaving the EU it is unlikely that free trade 
arrangements would be able to continue without 
the UK adopting legislation compatible with the 
Regulation. 
Many of the issues addressed in the draft 
Regulation are not specific to cloud applications. 
However, it is worth being aware of some possible 
changes that the new Regulation might bring 
about. These include: 
• 
Security: 
There 
are 
more 
specific 
obligations on the security measures to be 
taken. 
• 
Data and Data Processors: There is more 
clarity on how the responsibility is shared 
out when two or more organisations work 
together, either as joint Data Controllers or 
as Data Controller and Data Processor. 
• 
Data Protection management: The rules on 
how organisations must manage Data 
Protection are much more specific, including 
provision for every Data Controller (possibly 
excluding small ones) to have a suitably 
qualified Data Protection Officer. 
• 
Breach notification: All (or at least many 
more than at present) data breaches would 
72 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
9: The Proposed New EU Regulation and Other 
Measures 
have to be notified to the Information 
Commissioner. 
• 
Penalties: Far higher maximum penalties for 
breaches are a possibility, based on the size 
of the organisation. The proposal is for 
penalties to be up to 2% of global turnover. 
• 
Basis of processing: There are minor 
changes, 
such 
as 
requiring 
‘data 
minimisation’. 
• 
Erasure: Data Subjects would have the 
right, in some circumstances, to require data 
to be erased. This has been erroneously 
described as a ‘right to be forgotten’. 
The EU Commission has also said that it may 
establish standards for terms and conditions for 
cloud computing services. Progress towards this 
appears to have been made with the establishment 
of the Cloud Select Industry Group, under whose 
auspices an industry group (largely appearing to 
comprise US companies) produced draft standard 
guidelines10 in June 2014. The guidelines set out a 
process for ensuring that cloud computing terms 
and conditions are clear and comparable between 
providers. They do not, however, appear to redress 
the balance between the provider and the customer 
in terms of the negotiability of cloud terms and 
conditions, or to provide mandatory minimum 
standards. 
10 At the time of writing these can be found at: 
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/newsroom/cf/dae
/document.cfm?action=display&doc_id=6138 
73 
                                                                 
www.Ebook777.com

9: The Proposed New EU Regulation and Other 
Measures 
The next step is for these guidelines to be tested 
with cloud users. 
 
74 

 
CHAPTER 10: CHECKLIST 
Throughout 
this 
publication 
various 
recommendations have been made. They are 
summarised here for convenience. 
 
Before embarking on a cloud computing 
development 
ensure 
that 
your 
organisation’s information (and especially 
IT) security framework is sound, and that 
responsibility for information security is 
clearly allocated. 
 
Ensure that your organisation’s approach 
to data protection compliance is well 
thought out, and that responsibility is 
clearly allocated. 
 
Before selecting a cloud provider, consider 
whether your data needs to be retained in 
the European Economic Area, and if so, 
make this a key selection criterion. 
 
For 
all 
cloud 
providers 
under 
consideration, check the contract (or 
standard terms and conditions) very 
carefully, especially for: 
• 
ownership of the data 
• 
security undertakings, and certified 
security standards 
• 
location of data (UK?, EEA?, etc.), 
and whether you have any control 
over this 
• 
any mention of liability the provider 
accepts or excludes 
75 

10: Checklist 
• 
any mention of whether the provider 
uses subcontractors 
• 
arrangements for you to make your 
own backups, in addition to those 
made automatically by the provider 
• 
how you obtain access to your data 
in the case of wanting to change 
provider 
• 
what happens to your data if the 
provider 
(or 
one 
of 
its 
subcontractors) goes out of business, 
or if you get into a dispute with the 
provider 
• 
any provision for the supplier to use 
your data for its own purposes 
• 
mechanisms by which you can 
verify, for example, where the data is 
held. 
 
Verify any claims made by the providers 
for compliance with, for example: 
• 
ISO27001 
• 
Safe Harbor, in the case of a  
US-based company. 
 
It is impossible to eliminate all risks. 
Assess the risks and prepare a risk 
assessment so that the appropriate people 
in your organisation can make an informed 
decision. 
 
Ensure that any contractors assisting in 
setting up the cloud application are given 
76 

10: Checklist 
clear instructions about the security 
measures they should be implementing. 
 
Once the cloud service is in place, 
consider commissioning external testing to 
ensure that it has been configured correctly 
and is not vulnerable to any of the well-
documented security threats. 
 
Ensure that access to the cloud application 
and the data it holds is adequately 
controlled, especially if it may be accessed 
by users working at home, or on their own 
devices. 
 
Provide adequate training and guidance for 
all users, so that they know both how to 
use the system, and how to ensure that 
personal data placed in it is appropriately 
handled. 
 
77 

 
REFERENCES 
Cloud Security and Governance: Who's on your 
Cloud? by Sumner Blount and Rob Zanella  
Securing Cloud Services: A pragmatic approach 
to security architecture in the Cloud by Lee 
Newcombe 
Cloud Computing: Assessing the risks by Jared 
Carstensen, JP Morgenthal and Bernard Golden 
Above the Clouds: Managing Risk in the World of 
Cloud Computing by Kevin T McDonald 
From a legal perspective: Cloud Computing a 
practical introduction to the legal issues, by 
Renzo Marchini 
 
See also the Cloud Security Alliance or CSA 
(www.cloudsecurityalliance.org) which provides a 
security 
framework 
developed 
with 
cloud 
considerations in mind - the Cloud Controls 
Matrix (CCM).  
 
78 

 
ITG RESOURCES 
IT Governance Ltd sources, creates and delivers 
products and services to meet the real-world, 
evolving 
IT 
governance 
needs 
of 
today’s 
organisations, 
directors, 
managers 
and 
practitioners.  
The 
IT 
Governance 
website 
(www.itgovernance.co.uk) is the international one-
stop-shop for corporate and IT governance 
information, advice, guidance, books, tools, 
training and consultancy. On the website you will 
find the following pages related to the subject 
matter of this book:  
www.itgovernance.co.uk/data-protection.aspx  
www.itgovernance.co.uk/cloud-computing.aspx.  
Publishing Services 
IT Governance Publishing (ITGP) is the world’s 
leading IT-GRC publishing imprint that is wholly 
owned by IT Governance Ltd.  
With books and tools covering all IT governance, 
risk and compliance frameworks, we are the 
publisher of choice for authors and distributors 
alike, producing unique and practical publications 
of the highest quality, in the latest formats 
available, which readers will find invaluable.  
www.itgovernancepublishing.co.uk is the website 
dedicated to ITGP. Other titles published by ITGP 
that may be of interest include: 
• 
Data Protection Compliance in the UK 
79 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
ITG Resources 
www.itgovernance.co.uk/shop/p-515-data-
protection-compliance-in-the-uk.aspx   
• 
Cloud Computing: Assessing the Risks 
www.itgovernance.co.uk/shop/p-465-cloud-
computing-assessing-the-risks.aspx   
• 
Securing Cloud Services 
www.itgovernance.co.uk/shop/p-1098-
securing-cloud-services-a-pragmatic-
approach-to-security-architecture-in-the-
cloud.aspx.   
We also offer a range of off-the-shelf toolkits that 
give comprehensive, customisable documents to 
help users create the specific documentation they 
need to properly implement a management system 
or standard. Written by experienced practitioners 
and based on the latest best practice, ITGP toolkits 
can save months of work for organisations 
working towards compliance with a given 
standard. 
To see the full range of toolkits available please 
visit:  
www.itgovernance.co.uk/shop/c-129-toolkits.aspx.  
Books and tools published by IT Governance 
Publishing (ITGP) are available from all business 
booksellers and the following websites: 
www.itgovernance.eu    www.itgovernanceusa.com  
www.itgovernance.in    www.itgovernancesa.co.za  
www.itgovernance.asia. 
80 
www.Ebook777.com

ITG Resources 
Training Services 
IT Governance provides a range of data 
protection training and staff awareness courses to 
suit your corporate needs. 
Our public DPA Foundation Course is a one-day 
introduction to Data Protection Act (DPA) 
compliance, and is delivered by a data protection 
practitioner who is experienced in applying the 
DPA’s principles to real-life situations. This 
course offers advice about, and a thorough 
understanding of, the DPA’s requirements. 
For 
more 
information, 
visit 
our 
website: 
www.itgovernance.co.uk/shop/p-525-dpa-
foundation-course.aspx. 
 
In-house 
training 
courses 
may 
be 
more  
cost-effective if you have a number of staff who 
wish to understand the requirements of the DPA. 
At IT Governance we are experienced providers of 
customised staff awareness courses. 
 
For more information see:  
www.itgovernance.co.uk/shop/p-521-dpa-staff-
awareness-e-learning-course.aspx. 
If you are a data protection officer/practitioner 
yourself, you may want a formal qualification and 
an advanced level of knowledge to best advise 
your organisation. IT Governance offers the BCS 
ISEB in Data Protection, a five-day practical 
course with a written examination, successful 
completion of which will demonstrate an advanced 
level of knowledge and ability. 
81 

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
ITG Resources 
For 
more 
information, 
visit 
our 
website: 
www.itgovernance.co.uk/shop/p-422-certificate-in-
data-protection-training-course.aspx. 
Professional Services and Consultancy 
As a compliance specialist, IT Governance has 
been helping organisations achieve and maintain 
DPA compliance for over ten years. 
The IT Governance DPA gap analysis service can 
help you assess your organisation’s current level 
of compliance with the DPA, including the exact 
standing of your current legal situation, security 
practices and operating procedures in relation to 
DPA compliance. 
By examining procedures such as direct marketing 
practices, fair processing notices, and retention 
and deletion procedures, our expert data protection 
consultants can identify any gaps, and then create 
and implement a remedial plan that will not only 
enable you to bring your business into full 
compliance with the DPA, but also will ensure that 
you maintain your compliance in the future. 
We will tell you what you need to know quickly 
and effectively; then, if you need our help to 
achieve DPA compliance, we can assist with 
remediation, including ISO27001 and ISO22301 
implementation.  
For more information, see  
www.itgovernance.co.uk/dpa-compliance-
consultancy.aspx. 
82 
www.Ebook777.com

Free ebooks ==>   www.Ebook777.com
ITG Resources 
Newsletter 
IT governance is one of the hottest topics in 
business today, not least because it is also the 
fastest moving. 
You can stay up to date with the latest 
developments across the whole spectrum of IT 
governance 
subject 
matter, 
including; 
risk 
management, information security, ITIL and IT 
service 
management, 
project 
governance, 
compliance and so much more, by subscribing to 
ITG’s core publications and topic alert emails.  
Simply visit our subscription centre and select 
your preferences:  
www.itgovernance.co.uk/newsletter.aspx. 
 
 
83 
www.Ebook777.com

