Multimedia Systems and Applications
Shalin Hai-Jew   Editor
Data 
Analytics 
in Digital 
Humanities

Multimedia Systems and Applications
Series editor
Borko Furht, Florida Atlantic University, Boca Raton, USA

More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/6298

Shalin Hai-Jew
Editor
Data Analytics in Digital
Humanities
123

Editor
Shalin Hai-Jew
Kansas State University
Manhattan, KS, USA
Multimedia Systems and Applications
ISBN 978-3-319-54498-4
ISBN 978-3-319-54499-1
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54499-1
Library of Congress Control Number: 2017935738
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of
the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information
storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology
now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or
the editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional
claims in published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Printed on acid-free paper
This Springer imprint is published by Springer Nature
The registered company is Springer International Publishing AG
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

This book is for R. Max.

Preface
The digital humanities, putatively the intersection between the humanities disci-
plines and computation, was popularized in the early 1990s. In the intervening
decades, the “digital humanities” has not yet settled on a deﬁned self-identity. One
indicator of this is that of the dozens of “DH” manifestos on the Web; they all have
differing and competing visions for the ﬁeld. Another indicator is the rich variety
of work being done under these auspices that does not fall into simple summaries
and descriptions. The Digital Humanities Manifesto 2.0, which originated from nine
seminars co-taught by Jeffrey Schnapp and Todd Presner, and was released by the
UCLA Mellon Seminar in Digital Humanities, reads in part:
Digital Humanities is not a uniﬁed ﬁeld but an array of convergent practices that explore
a universe in which: (a) print is no longer the exclusive or the normative medium in
which knowledge is produced and/or disseminated; instead, print ﬁnds itself absorbed into
new, multimedia conﬁgurations; and (b) digital tools, techniques, and media have altered
the production and dissemination of knowledge in the arts, human and social sciences.
The Digital Humanities seeks to play an inaugural role with respect to a world in which
universities—no longer the sole producers, stewards, and disseminators of knowledge or
culture—are called upon to shape natively digital models of scholarly discourse for the
newly emergent public spheres of the present era (the www, the blogosphere, digital
libraries, etc.), to model excellence and innovation in these domains, and to facilitate the
formation of networks of knowledge production, exchange, and dissemination that are, at
once, global and local” (“The Digital Humanities Manifesto 2.0,” 2009).
DH work is additive and contributes to learning and methods in a range of extant
ﬁelds. It is about hybrid mash-ups that pull from analog and digital sources and
that give back digitally. There are combinations of research and analytical methods,
drawing from quantitative and qualitative methods, going Web scale and small scale,
employing a range of frameworks, and combining various disciplines, often through
collaborative and distributed teams.
vii

viii
Preface
Deconstructing “DH”
The “digital” part of the “digital humanities” involves a range of technologies:
the Web and Internet, mobile devices, social media, databases, digital curation
platforms, geographical mapping tools, social mapping tools, linguistic analysis
software programs, data analytics tools, and others. The “humanities” focus points
to a combination of ﬁelds: the classics, literature, philosophy, religious studies,
psychology, modern and ancient languages, culture studies, art, history, music, phi-
losophy, theater, ﬁlm, political science, geography, anthropology, linguistics, social
work, communications, and others. For all the technological focuses, the DH work is
about people and for people through the ages and for the ages. Every work, no matter
how technological, contains the human touch and is conceptualized for human
beneﬁt. The works are human-readable, in general, and are packaged as stories
and understandings. The works are often aesthetically dazzling: think interactive
webscapes, data visualizations, 3D virtual immersive spaces, and network diagrams.
Likewise, one can ask what “data” in the digital humanities is. Well, the general
opinion is that everything has some informational value. The world is informatized,
and DH researchers themselves are not only researchers and elicitors of insights, but
they are in-world participants making the world and information simultaneously.
The information is viewed through a subjective and interpretive lens, but that
interpretation is backed up by more traditionally quantitative (statistical) and
computational (machine learning) methods. The work is not seen as neutral nor
theory-free not independent of its contributors.
The challenge is in how to turn a “thing” in the world into something with infor-
mational and social value. This data may seem at once a range of contradictions:
ephemeral and fragile and yet permanent and perpetual, subjective and objective,
created for the local but also the global, inclusive of machine-scale distant reading
methods as well as close human reading.
The Spirit of DH
Often, the spirit of the digital humanities is countercultural; it ﬁghts against extant
power structures and norms. The DH is often value-informed and socially active, in
the pursuit of social justice. DH practitioners take a questioning stance because the
world is never quite as it seems. There are elusive and latent interpreted truths to be
discovered or (co)created.
While its core spirit is of changing the current order, at the same time, DH work
requires ever higher levels of expertise in content ﬁelds and technological methods.
The work is anti-Establishment but requires some of the expertise of Establishment
and accrued skills from years of development. Virtuosity in the digital humanities
simultaneously requires the ﬁery rebel spirit and the iciness of acquired expertise.
The work is often inclusive of nonexperts and the online crowds, who are sourced

Preface
ix
for their contributions and voices and concerns in rich ways. It seems ﬁtting that in
this hypersocial age that such broadscale collaborations exist.
The spirit of DH is of experimentation along the entire work chain: theorizing and
conceptualization, research, data collection, content curation, data processing, data
analytics, and often open publishing (of digital corpora and collections, of virtual-
ized experiences, of publications, and of multimedial presentations). The order of
the work is not necessarily linear but recursive; for some projects, conceptually and
somewhat practically, the work is continuous, ongoing, and perpetual. While some
methods and technologies are borrowed from a range of ﬁelds, digital humanists
have applied experimental means to every step of the process as well, with new
technological platforms and tools and fresh methods. Problem-solving is achieved
on-the-ﬂy, often with the direct support and help of Web developers, coders, server
administrators, data scientists, computer scientists, and librarians. This is about an
artist and artisan sensibility with code.
If one asks practitioners what the digital humanities is, there is a range of
answers. A common response is to go to the work, to explore it in depth, and
to acquire a more inductive sense of the answer. Certainly, as DH rose from a
groundswell of practice and self-deﬁnition, it may be best to understand it from a
bottom-up instead of a top-down way. While practitioners are aware of each other’s
work, the focus is not on conformance to common practice but rather diversity. The
general consensus is that DH is still emerging as an approach. The feeling is that the
work is exploratory and provisional and open to re-interpretations and re-visionings.
About This Book
Data Analytics in Digital Humanities was over a year in the making, with various
individuals and authoring teams conducting their research and writing it up, going
through double-blind peer reviews, revising, and ﬁnalizing their work. Here, the
respective authors describe their data analytics work in the digital humanities.
The book is comprised of six parts:
Part I: Design of Representational Systems
Part II: Text Capture and Textual Exploration
Part III: Engaging Social Data
Part IV: Applied Technologies for Data Analytics
Part V: Sense-Making in the World
Part VI: Support for Digital Humanities Work
The book is not comprehensive by any means. There are so many live projects
and endeavors that each author and team really only have a limited perspective on
the whole.
In Part I, “Design of Representational Systems,” there are two works that
describe data labeling. In “Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorization,” a
research team proposes a set of ontology modules (Cultural-ON) to model the

x
Preface
classiﬁcation of cultural heritage data, given the heterogeneous nature of cultural
artifacts, both analog and digital, tangible and intangible. The authors of Chap. 1
include Dr. Giorgia Lodi, Luigi Asprino, Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese, Dr. Valentina
Presutti, Dr. Aldo Gangemi, Dr. Diego Reforgiato Recupero, Chiara Veninata, and
Annarita Orsini.
Dr. Gian Piero Zarri offers an in-depth description of Narrative Knowledge
Representation Language (NKRL) and its use to describe narratives as logical
associations based on “elementary events.” The careful speciﬁcations enable its
use conceptually and computationally to capture and represent the elements that
comprise narratives. Zarri’s chapter is titled “Using the Formal Representations
of ‘Elementary Events’ to Set Up Computational Models of Full ‘Narratives’”
(Chap. 2).
The second part, “Text Capture and Textual Exploration,” features two works
related to text analytics. Joshua L. Weese, Dr. William H. Hsu, Dr. Jessica C.
Murphy, and Dr. Kim Brillante Knight describe a machine learning-based classiﬁer
they developed to identify parody, an elusive challenge. Their work is titled “Parody
Detection: An Annotation, Feature Construction, and Classiﬁcation Approach to the
Web of Parody” (Chap. 3).
Dr. Michael Percillier, in Chap. 4 “Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora,”
describes a methodical process using Python and other tools to collect and process
literary corpora based around a particular topic. He includes Python code to
demonstrate efﬁcient automated means to build text corpora.
Part III, “Engaging Social Data,” offers two works summarizing “social” data.
The ﬁrst is about information from online social networks, and the second about the
social aspects of learning.
Davide Di Fatta and Roberto Musotto apply integrated sentiment analysis (iSA)
to online social networks in Chap. 5, “Content and Sentiment Analysis on Online
Social Networks (OSNs).” They consider various ways to apply their research
insights to practical applications, like marketing through social media.
In Chap. 6: “The Role of Data in Evaluating the Effectiveness of Networked
Learning: An Auto-Ethnographic Evaluation of Four Experiential Learning
Projects,” Jonathan Bishop employs a light auto-ethnographic approach to study the
role of data in evaluating networked learning across four experiential learning
projects. One central question is whether there are more effective designed
electronic stand-ins for educator-learner interactions to promote learning.
In the fourth part, “Applied Technologies for Data Analytics,” one work focuses
on computational linguistic analysis based on psychological features in texts.
Another focuses on capturing research insights from related tags networks.
In Chap. 7, “Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities,” Ryan L.
Boyd describes insightful uses of the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC)
tool for text analysis. His long-term uses of LIWC and direct contributions to the
tool’s co-development (in LIWC2015) make him a singularly appropriate author
for this excellent work. Boyd argues that computational linguistic exploration of
psychological aspects in language is an untapped and highly promising area of
research.

Preface
xi
In “Parsing Related Tags Networks from Flickr to Explore Crowd-Sourced
Keyword Associations” (Chap. 8), Dr. Shalin Hai-Jew describes how crowd-based
folk tags applied to digital imagery on a content-sharing site may be used for
creating collective mental models of large-scale phenomena.
Part V is about “Sense-Making in the World.” In this part, Dr. Cobi Smith
describes the use of technological methods to harness crowd-sourced imagery
during natural disasters. The methods and tools described in this chapter, “A Case
Study of Crowdsourcing Imagery Coding in Natural Disasters” (Chap. 9), may have
broad applications in the digital humanities.
Dr. Glenda Alicia Leung’s “YouTube Comments as Metalanguage Data on
Non-standard Languages: The Case of Trinidadian Creole English in Soca Music”
(Chap. 10) suggests new analytical applications of interaction comment data related
to shared, social videos. This work captures the energy and power of nonstandard
lived language in connecting people on Google’s global video-sharing platform.
Chapter 11 is about “Creating Inheritable Digital Codebooks for Qualitative
Research Data Analysis.” Here, Dr. Hai-Jew describes the research importance
of sharing digital codebooks, particularly with the popularization of Computer
Assisted Qualitative Data AnalysiS (CAQDAS) tools, and she offers ﬁrsthand
insights on effective processes for developing and sharing such digital codebooks.
If researchers are to leave a legacy of their unique coding “ﬁsts,” then computational
means may offer a more convenient and efﬁcient way of transfer.
In Part VI, “Support for Digital Humanities Work,” one author highlights
supports for DH work. Hannah Lee, in “Is it Worth It? The Library and Information
Science Degree in the Digital Humanities” (Chap. 12), argues for the importance of
library and information sciences (LIS) to practically support the work in the digital
humanities.
So what is the state of data analytics in the digital humanities? Based on these
collected works, it is a rich and evolving one, driven by local research needs
and some global ones. DH practitioners harness technologies to complement and
augment the human abilities of perception, expression, analysis, and memory. The
technologies used range from open-source and free to closed-source and proprietary,
and these tools are cobbled in creative and complex sequences for understanding and
analysis. The skill comes not only in the applied techniques but also in the insights
surfaced and the sharing of the applied and innovative techniques. While some data
analytics results are “reproducible” and “repeatable” based on computational means,
the assumptions underlying the DH research and data analytics are very much drawn
from qualitative data analytics:
that all human phenomena have potential informational value, depending on
researcher perspective and context (and vision and skill);
that human researchers are wrapped in their own subjectivities, for better and for
worse, and beneﬁt from deeper self-understandings through practiced reﬂection;
that all data are ﬁltered through subjective lenses and self-informed understandings;
that data “measures” are limited, imprecise, conditional, and contested (and yet still
are insightful);

xii
Preface
that the researchers are part and parcel of the research and inform the research and
the data ﬁndings and their applications;
that the communal context for the humanities is a critical part of the work (as
research participants, data consumers, and researchers);
that DH research is subsumed to human needs, interests, and values;
and that social justice and practitioner ethics apply to every context.
There are inherent digital humanities truisms about data as well. For example,
writings considered classically “ﬁctional” contain the seeds of truth, and tradition-
ally non-ﬁctional works may not have as much truth as advertised. In this light, there
are critical interrogations to be made, to understand the multihued shades between
truths. Data are extracted in fresh ways, with manuscripts tagged and mapped for
patterns (linguistic, spatial, psychological, cultural, and others), dialogs mined for
insights, genders explored, and cultural practices probed, across and through time.
All human residua contain substance that may be interpreted and informatized for
new ways of seeing, feeling, and being.
DH cartographers describing data analytics in the digital humanities are in the
early phases of deﬁning and mapping this space. In theory and in practice, there are
numerous other potentials that have yet to be explored, applied, and shared.
Data Analytics in Digital Humanities offers an early look at this topic, with hand-
sketched DH data analytics “maps” of ﬁne granular detail for particular deﬁned
needs but which does not yet have the cardinal directions deﬁned or accepted
compass roses.
Manhattan, KS, USA
Shalin Hai-Jew

Acknowledgments
Data Analytics in Digital Humanities would not exist were it not for the work of
the respective authors. I owe each one a deep debt of gratitude. Also, thanks to
Joelle Pitts, Dr. Brian Rosenblum, Nancy Hays, Dr. Bryan Alexander, Dr. Glenda
Alicia Leung, and others for their help in publicizing the original “call for chapters”
through their respective professional and social networks. There is a lot to be
said for sharing social networks, especially for such a “big ask” as writing a
chapter. At Springer, Susan Lagerstrom-Fife was seminal in the acceptance of the
initial book proposal, and Jennifer Malat and others on the Springer team were
critical in ensuring that this work came together. Thanks to all! Their support has
enhanced the quality of the text and ultimately made this work possible. Mr. Dinesh
Shanmugam and Ms. Sarumathi Hemachandirane both provided very important
support in bringing the book to ﬁnal published form.
xiii

Contents
Part I
Design of Representational Systems
Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation ...........................
3
Giorgia Lodi, Luigi Asprino, Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese,
Valentina Presutti, Aldo Gangemi, Diego Reforgiato Recupero,
Chiara Veninata, and Annarita Orsini
Using the Formal Representations of “Elementary Events” to Set
Up Computational Models of Full “Narratives”..............................
39
Gian Piero Zarri
Part II
Text Capture and Textual Exploration
Parody Detection: An Annotation, Feature Construction,
and Classiﬁcation Approach to the Web of Parody ..........................
67
Joshua L. Weese, William H. Hsu, Jessica C. Murphy,
and Kim Brillante Knight
Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora....................................
91
Michael Percillier
Part III
Engaging Social Data
Content and Sentiment Analysis on Online Social Networks (OSNs) ...... 121
Davide Di Fatta and Roberto Musotto
The Role of Data in the Evaluation of Networked Learning
Effectiveness: An Auto-Ethnographic Evaluation of Four
Experiential Learning Projects ................................................. 135
Jonathan Bishop
Part IV
Applied Technologies for Data Analytics
Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities....................... 161
Ryan L. Boyd
xv

xvi
Contents
Parsing Related Tags Networks from Flickr® to Explore
Crowd-Sourced Keyword Associations ........................................ 191
Shalin Hai-Jew
Part V
Sense-Making in the World
A Case Study of Crowdsourcing Imagery Coding in Natural Disasters ... 217
Cobi Smith
YouTube Comments as Metalanguage Data on Non-standardized
Languages: The Case of Trinidadian Creole English in Soca Music ....... 231
Glenda Alicia Leung
Creating Inheritable Digital Codebooks for Qualitative Research
Data Analysis ..................................................................... 251
Shalin Hai-Jew
Part VI
Support for Digital Humanities Work
Is It Worth It? The Library and Information Science Degree
in the Digital Humanities........................................................ 275
Hannah Lee

Authors’ Biographies
Luigi Asprino is a Ph.D. student in computer science and engineering at the
University of Bologna under the supervision of Prof. Paolo Ciancarini and Dr.
Valentina Presutti. He is also a research assistant at the Semantic Technology
Laboratory (STLab) of the National Research Council (CNR), in Rome. In October
2014, he earned a master’s degree in computer engineering from Sapienza—
University of Rome. In January 2015, he joined STLab. During his period in STLab
he actively contributed to the following Italian and European projects: FOOD,
MARE, MiBACT, MARIO. His research interests include knowledge integration,
web service composition, ontology design, and semantic web.
Jonathan Bishop is an information technology executive, researcher, and writer.
He founded the Centre for Research into Online Communities and E-Learning
Systems in 2005, now part of the Crocels Community Media Group. Bishop’s
research and development work generally falls within human-computer interaction.
He has over 75 publications in this area, including on Internet trolling, cyber-
stalking, gamiﬁcation, cyberlaw, multimedia forensics, Classroom 2.0, and Digital
Teens. In addition to his B.Sc. (Hons) in Multimedia Studies and various postgrad-
uate degrees, including in law, economics, and computing, Bishop serves in local
government as a councilor and has been a school governor and contested numerous
elections, including to the UK Parliament and Welsh Assembly. He is a fellow of
BCS, CILIP, the InstAM, the RAI, the RSS, and the RSA, senior member of IEEE,
and a member of the IMarEST with MarTech. Bishop has won prizes for his literary
skills and been a ﬁnalist in national and local competitions for his environmental,
community, and equality work, which often form part of action research studies. In
his spare time, he enjoys listening to music, swimming, and playing chess.
Ryan L. Boyd is a Ph.D. candidate in social/personality psychology at the
University of Texas at Austin. His cross-disciplinary research revolves around using
computational techniques to explore and understand cognitive-behavioral links,
primarily the link between a person’s language and their mental worlds. Speciﬁcally,
Ryan’s work on the psychology of language includes high-dimensional personality
assessment, values, psychological forensics, motivations, and health, among other
xvii

xviii
Authors’ Biographies
topics. Ryan has taught multiple workshops on machine learning, data mining, and
language analytics and is considered a leading expert on the psychology of language.
He is the chief data scientist at Receptiviti and is the creator of several language
analysis programs, including the Meaning Extraction Helper. Ryan is also the co-
creator of LIWC2015, one of the most widely used psychological language analysis
tools in the ﬁeld of text analysis.
Davide Di Fatta is a Ph.D. student in economics and management at the University
of Messina (Italy). He collaborates with the SEAS Department at the Polytechnic
School of the University of Palermo (Italy). His main research ﬁelds are, on the one
hand, e-commerce, e-marketing, digital marketing, and social media marketing; on
the other hand, business systems, systems thinking, and social networks. Davide is
editorial assistant for many international journals such as Kybernetes and IJMABS
(in systemic ﬁeld); IJEMR and IJMS (in marketing ﬁeld). He is also Junior Member
Manager for the Business System Laboratory (BS Lab), a nonproﬁt organization
for the promotion of research and collaboration between the universities and the
enterprise systems.
Aldo Gangemi is professor at Paris 13 University, and researcher at CNR, Rome.
He has founded and directed the Semantic Technology Lab (STLab) of ISTC-CNR.
His research focuses on Semantic Technologies as an integration of methods from
Knowledge Engineering, the Semantic Web, Linked Data, Natural Language Pro-
cessing, and Cognitive Science. Publications: https://scholar.google.com/citations?
user=-iVGcoAAAAAJ. Software: http://wit.istc.cnr.it/stlab-tools.
Shalin Hai-Jew has worked on a number of digital humanities projects over the
years, each harnessing a variety of methods and technologies. She has B.A.s in
English and psychology and an M.A. in English from the University of Washington
(Seattle), and an Ed.D. from Seattle University (2005). At the University of
Washington, she received the Hugh Paradise Scholarship; at Seattle University, she
was a Morford Scholar. She worked for The Boeing Company as a Faculty Fellow
for two summers. She lived and worked in the People’s Republic of China from
1988 to 1990 and 1992 to 1994, the latter 2 years with the United Nations Volunteer
Programme of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). She works
as an instructional designer at Kansas State University. She has published several
authored texts and edited a number of technology-related texts. She reviews for
a half-dozen academic publishers. Her research interests include online learning,
computational research methods, and social media.
William H. Hsu is an associate professor of Computer Science at Kansas State
University. He received a B.S. in mathematical sciences and computer science and
an M.S. Eng. in computer science from Johns Hopkins University in 1993, and a
Ph.D. in computer science from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
in 1998. He has conducted research in digital humanities since 1998, where at the
National Center for Supercomputing Applications (NCSA) he was a co-recipient
of an Industrial Grand Challenge Award for visual analytics of text corpora and
unsupervised learning for topic modeling. His research interests include machine

Authors’ Biographies
xix
learning, probabilistic reasoning, and information visualization, with applications to
digital humanities, cybersecurity, education, geoinformatics, health informatics, and
medical informatics. Published applications of his research include spatiotemporal
event detection for veterinary epidemiology, crime mapping, and opinion mining;
structured information extraction; and analysis of heterogeneous information net-
works. Current work in his lab deals with geospatial data science and analytics, data
mining, and visualization in education research; graphical models of probability and
utility for information security; and domain-adaptive models of natural language
corpora and social media for text mining, link mining, sentiment analysis, and
recommender systems. Dr. Hsu has over 100 publications in conferences, journals,
and books.
Kim Brillante Knight is an associate professor of emerging media and com-
munication at the University of Texas at Dallas. Her research focuses on digital
culture, negotiations of power and the formation of identity, particularly in relation
to marginalized groups. In her book, Viral Structures in Literature and Digital
Media: Networked Counterpublics and Participatory Capitalism (forthcoming from
Routledge), Dr. Knight addresses the role of digital media as it circulates outside of
broadcast paradigms and empowers or oppresses subjects in network society. Her
latest book, Fashioning Makers and Counterpublics: Critical Making and Public
Humanities, is under advance contract with the University of Iowa Press. Her
public work can be found at kimknight.com, thespiraldance.wordpress.com, and
fashioningcircuits.com. More information may be accessed at: https://www.utdallas.
edu/ah/events/detail.html?id=1220419626
Hannah Lee is a double alumni of UCLA, obtaining her B.A. in English and
MLIS. A doctoral student at Fielding Graduate University in Santa Barbara, the
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), she is focusing on specializing in
the future developments of information systems and technology in the library and
information sciences ﬁeld. Her dissertation examines an organizational approach to
the book publishing industry in the United States. She works as a librarian, research
analyst, and informationist in the Los Angeles area. Some of her interests include
copyright, intellectual property, book arts, mentoring, and volunteering for nonproﬁt
organizations.
Glenda Alicia Leung is an independent researcher and sociolinguist from Trinidad
and Tobago. She received her B.A. in English from the University of Florida
and her M.A. in applied linguistics from Ball State University before earning her
doctorate in English linguistics at the University of Freiburg, Germany, in 2013. Her
doctoral thesis “A Synchronic Study of Monophthongs in Trinidadian English” was
a quantitative acoustic and sociophonetic study that reported on vowel distribution in
contemporary Trinidadian English. Her articles have appeared in World Englishes,
Multilingua, and Journal of Bilingual Education Research and Instruction, as well
as in the Varieties of English Around the World Series from John Benjamins.
Her research interests include creole language in performance, English language
learning, and language acquisition.

xx
Authors’ Biographies
Giorgia Lodi is currently a research assistant at the Institute of Cognitive
Sciences and Technologies (ISTC) of the National Council of Research (CNR)—
Semantic Technology Laboratory (STLab) and a consultant at “Agenzia per l’Italia
Digitale”—AgID. She works in such areas as open government data, Linked
Open Data, Semantic Web Technologies, Distributed Systems, Big Data, and smart
communities. She received a Ph.D. in computer science from the University of
Bologna (Italy) in 2006. Publications: https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=
W6gWCGUAAAAJ
Jessica C. Murphy is Associate Professor of Literary Studies at the University of
Texas at Dallas. Her research focuses on early modern literature, culture, gender
studies, and digital humanities. Murphy’s publications include a book, Virtuous
Necessity: Conduct Literature and the Making of the Virtuous Woman in Early
Modern England, published by the University of Michigan Press in 2015; journal
articles; solo-authored and co-written book chapters; and a co-edited collection.
Roberto Musotto is an Italian Barrister who works on commercial and property
law, trusts, and organized crime. He is a Ph.D. student in economics at the University
of Messina and a research and teaching assistant at the University of Palermo in
Political Economy. His ﬁelds of research interest include spatial and social network
analysis, organized crime, commercial law, and game theory.
Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese is a Postdoctoral Researcher at the Semantic Tech-
nology Laboratory (STLab) of the National Research Council (CNR) in Rome, Italy.
He received a Ph.D. in computer science in 2014 from the University of Bologna
(Italy). His research interests include Knowledge Extraction, Ontology Design
Patterns, Linked Data, and Semantic Web. He has been a researcher in the EU-
funded project IKS (Interactive Knowledge Stack) and a main developer of Apache
Stanbol software stack (reusable components for semantic content management).
He has published scientiﬁc papers in international journals and conferences.
Annarita Orsini with a master’s degree in law, is an employee of the Italian
Ministry for Heritage and Cultural Activities and Tourism currently working in
the speciﬁc domain of the tourism for the deﬁnition of common standard data
models for key data such as point of interests, accommodations, and tourist guides.
In recent years she was head of unit of the Directorate General Organization of
the Italian Ministry for Heritage and Cultural Activities and Tourism working in
such domains as Open Data, Linked Open Data, technical interoperability for public
administrations, to cite a few.
Michael Percillier is a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Mannheim,
Germany. His areas of specialization include corpus linguistics, World Englishes,
literary linguistics, and historical linguistics. His research has covered the compar-
ative study of institutionalized and learner varieties of English in Southeast Asia,
the representation of nonstandardized varieties of English in literary texts, and the
contact effects of Old French on Middle English in the medieval period.

Authors’ Biographies
xxi
Valentina Presutti is a researcher at the Semantic Technology Laboratory of the
National Research Council (CNR) in Rome, and she is associated with LIPN
(University Paris 13 and CNRS). She received her Ph.D. in computer science in
2006 at the University of Bologna (Italy). She has been the scientiﬁc coordinator for
CNR in the EU-funded project IKS (Interactive Knowledge Stack—A framework
for Semantic CMS that bring semantics at the interaction level), and she has
been one of the main researchers in the EU-funded projects NeOn (Networked
Ontologies—methods and tool for design of networked ontologies). She has more
than 50 publications in international journals/conferences/workshops on topics such
as Semantic Web, knowledge extraction, and ontology design.
Diego Reforgiato Recupero has been an Associate Professor at the Department
of Mathematics and Computer Science of the University of Cagliari, Italy, since
December 2015. He is a programmer, software developer, automation and ICT
expert. He holds a double bachelor from the University of Catania in computer
science and a doctoral degree from the Department of Computer Science of the
University of Naples Federico II. In 2013 he won a Postdoctoral Researcher position
within the Semantic Technology Laboratory (STLAB) of the Institute of Cognitive
Sciences and Technologies (ISTC) of the National Research Council (CNR) where
he worked on Semantic Web and Linked Open Data; he is still an associated
researcher at STLAB where he collaborates. He is co-founder of R2M Solution
S.R.L. (Italian company), R2M Solution Ltd. (UK company), and Sentimetrix Inc.
(US company).
Cobi Smith has a doctorate in science communication at Australian National
University. She worked as a UN consultant based inside CERN on the EU-funded
Citizen Cyberlab project. She currently works in state government in Australia, in
emergency services information management and disaster risk reduction. After a
degree in Cultural Heritage Preservation, she took a master’s degree for qualiﬁed
researcher in archival/documental analysis through the use of information tech-
nology and formal model (XML, XSL, XSLT, RDF). For more than 10 years she
worked at the Rome Research Consortium and she gained expertise in the ﬁeld
of formal languages, markup languages, and ontologies. From 2010 to 2014 she
worked at “Archivio Centrale dello Stato” in Rome. Since November 2014 she
works at Directorate General Organization of the Italian Ministry for Heritage and
Cultural Activities and Tourism.
Chiara Veninata after a degree in Cultural Heritage Preservation, took a master’s
degree for qualiﬁed researcher in archival/documental analysis through the use of
information technology and formal model (XML, XSL, XSLT, RDF). For more than
10 years she worked at the Rome Research Consortium, and she gained expertise
in the ﬁeld of formal languages, markup languages, and ontologies. From 2010 to
2014 she worked at “Archivio Centrale dello Stato” in Rome. Since November 2014
she works at Directorate General Organization of the Italian Ministry for Heritage
and Cultural Activities and Tourism.

xxii
Authors’ Biographies
Joshua L. Weese is a Ph.D. candidate focusing on CS education research. His
education experience comes from work as a graduate teaching assistant as well as
time spent as a NSF GK-12 fellow. Josh’s research focuses on operationalizing
computational thinking as well as assessing computational thinking, in outreach
programs aimed toward enriching K-12 students’ experience in STEM. Apart from
CS education, Josh is highly active in developing data analytic tools for the physics
education research community.
Gian Piero Zarri has been awarded an M.Sc. in electronic engineering (University
of Bologna, Italy) and a Ph.D. in computer science (University of Paris XI-Orsay,
France). After more than 30 years spent as Research Director at the French National
Centre for Scientiﬁc Research (CNRS), he cooperates now with the STIH Labora-
tory of the Paris-Sorbonne University as a senior associated researcher. Professor
Zarri is known internationally for having deﬁned and developed NKRL (“Narrative
Knowledge Representation Language”), a representation tool used in several EC-
funded projects and characterized by the addition of an “ontology of events” to the
usual “ontology of concepts.” He is the author of about 200 refereed papers con-
cerning Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Computational Linguistics, Information Retrieval,
Intelligence and Global Security, etc., and is the editor, co-author, and author of
several books on Expert Systems, Intelligent Databases, and Representation and
Management of Narrative Information. Professor Zarri has co-operated intensively
with industry and has worked with international organizations like the European
Commission, UNESCO, and Eureka-Eurostar and with national research-funding
agencies in France, Italy, Austria, Portugal, the Netherlands, etc.

Part I
Design of Representational Systems

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage
Valorisation
Giorgia Lodi, Luigi Asprino, Andrea Giovanni Nuzzolese, Valentina Presutti,
Aldo Gangemi, Diego Reforgiato Recupero, Chiara Veninata,
and Annarita Orsini
Abstract Cultural heritage consists of heterogeneous resources: archaeological
artefacts, monuments, sites, landscapes, paintings, photos, books and expressions
of human creativity, often enjoyed in different forms: tangible, intangible or digital.
Each resource is usually documented, conserved and managed by cultural institutes
like museums, libraries or holders of archives. These institutes make available a
detailed description of the objects as catalog records. In this context, the chapter
proposes both a classiﬁcation of cultural heritage data types and a process for
cultural heritage valorisation through the well-known Linked Open Data paradigm.
The classiﬁcation and process have been deﬁned in the context of a collaboration
between the Semantic Technology Laboratory of the National Research Council
(STLab) and the Italian Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Activities and Tourism
(MIBACT) that the chapter describes, although we claim they are sufﬁciently
general to be adopted in every cultural heritage scenario. In particular, the chapter
introduces both a suite of ontology modules named Cultural-ON to model the
principal elements identiﬁed in the cultural heritage data type classiﬁcation, and
the process we employed for data valorisation purposes. To this end, semantic
technologies are exploited; that is, technologies that allow us to conceptualise
and describe the meaning of data forming the cultural heritage and including
such entities as places, institutions, cultural heritage events, availability, etc. These
entities have special characteristics and are connected with each other in a profound
way. The result is a knowledge base consisting of semantic interconnections with
also other data available in the Web to be exploited according to different tasks
G. Lodi () • L. Asprino • A.G. Nuzzolese • D. Reforgiato Recupero
STLab, ISTC-CNR, Via San Martino della Battaglia 44, Rome, Italy
e-mail: giorgia.lodi@istc.cnr.it; giorgia.lodi@gmail.com; luigi.asprino@istc.cnr.it;
andrea.nuzzolese@istc.cnr.it; diego.reforgiato@istc.cnr.it
V. Presutti • A. Gangemi
STLab, ISTC-CNR, Via Gaifami 18, Catania, Italy
e-mail: valentina.presutti@cnr.it; aldo.gangemi@cnr.it
C. Veninata • A. Orsini
Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Activities and Tourism, Via del Collegio Romano 27,
Rome, Italy
e-mail: chiara.veninata@beniculturali.it; aorsini@beniculturali.it
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
S. Hai-Jew (ed.), Data Analytics in Digital Humanities, Multimedia Systems
and Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54499-1_1
3

4
G. Lodi et al.
and users preferences. By navigating the semantic relationships between the various
objects of the knowledge base, new semantic paths can be revealed and utilised with
the aim to develop innovative services and applications. The process is compliant
with Linked Open Data and W3C Semantic Web best practices so that to enable a
wider promotion of cultural heritage, and of sharing and reuse of cultural heritage
data in the Web. The chapter concludes presenting a number of methodological
principles and lessons learnt from the STLab/MIBACT collaboration that are
applicable to any cultural heritage context and, in some cases, also to other domains.
Introduction and Motivation
Cultural heritage—both tangible and intangible—is a driving force for economic
growth and societal development, an irreplaceable means for building a population’s
identity and culture, an inspiration for creative industry, and a primary reference for
the touristic market. It has been formed by a multitude of local cultures and stories
determined by the inhabitants of countries and different territories. This entailed
that, over time, cultural heritage has been enriched with a highly heterogeneous set
of resources that are diverse in their nature and in the way they are managed by each
local culture.
Despite this diversity, cultural heritage’s elements are semantically intercon-
nected with each other as the result of contaminations of the different cultures.
However, these elements are still mostly managed separately like silos, typically
by different organisations (e.g., museums, libraries, holders of archives, etc.) that
may also use various classiﬁcations, deﬁnitions and approaches to describe the same
elements. An example is the Italian case where, within the same Ministry of Cultural
Heritage and Activities and Tourism (MIBACT), two separate institutes deﬁne the
concept of “cultural site” in two different ways within the data bases they own,
respectively. Overall, this led to a scenario of dispersed data, both at national and
international level, that cannot be fully and smartly exploited for such an economic
growth and development of the touristic market that cultural heritage can potentially
boost.
In the last two decades, web technologies and social networks became perva-
sively present in our daily life, providing a powerful means for sharing personal
knowledge and experiences. Potentially, these technologies are the perfect tools
for creating a vast interconnected digital cultural heritage that could be open to
anyone so as to promote and improve the social cohesion and economic growth.
The advent of new paradigms for data management based on these technologies
can also support the involvement of citizens for identifying what is relevant as
territorial cultural heritage, enhancing its distinctiveness, and cross-border sharing
of local traditions and knowledge. This is key for supporting social integration and
recognition, and sense of belonging. In particular, in the cultural domain the Open
Data movement and the application of Linked Open Data (LOD) as the main data
integration paradigm are emerging as new frontiers to valorise a vast amount of

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
5
public cultural heritage. However, a diversiﬁed scenario where isolated islands of
data are available on the Web is still observable. This is the case for instance of the
Italian scenario: a number of LOD projects carried out by MIBACT were born but
they still struggle to be part of an overall strategy that can guide towards a signiﬁcant
valorisation of one of the largest heritage of the cultural sector.
This chapter describes the work conducted in the context of a collaboration
between STLab and MIBACT. The work aims at deﬁning an overall framework for
cultural data analysis and valorisation, this latter pursued through the construction
of an open knowledge base of Italian cultural data. The knowledge base is meant to
be publicly available on the Web, using semantic web standards and technologies,
for the reuse by anyone willing to exploit it for the development of innovative and
creative applications and services. In computer science, the term “semantic web”
refers to W3C’s vision of an extension of the Web for dealing with interconnected
data that is stored, modelled and handled using so-called semantic web standards
and technologies (e.g., Resource Description Framework (RDF), SPARQL query
language for RDF (SPARQL), Ontology Web Language (OWL), etc.) The frame-
work we present provides a classiﬁcation of the cultural data landscape, identiﬁed
within the collaboration, and a common and standard-based data model that can be
used as shared interoperability proﬁle for interconnecting different, even available
LOD, datasets managed by various institutes of the Ministry. The model consists of
a suite of ontology modules for the cultural domain named Cultural-ON, which are
deﬁned following a speciﬁc methodology. The methodology has been delineated so
as to guarantee sustainability, usability and semantic interoperability requirements,
with the application of ontology design patterns. The chapter focuses on the module
of the suite that represents “cultural institutes and sites” and “cultural events”, which
are connected to each other. The process we employed to create LOD datasets of the
cultural institutes and of the events, aligned with the deﬁned ontology module, is
introduced. In particular, we highlight how to integrate it in a real business process
and information system managed by the Ministry, and how to link the datasets to
others available in the Web of Data. We claim that our model is sufﬁciently general
to be applied in any organisation working in the cultural sector with such data types
as cultural sites and events. We then highlight general methodology principles and
best practices that can be replicated in other cultural data management processes
and, in some cases, also in other domains.
This chapter is structured as follows. Section “State of the Art” provides a state of
the art on projects, ontologies and LOD approaches in the cultural heritage domain.
Section “A Cultural Heritage Data Framework: The Case of the Italian Ministry of
Cultural Heritage” introduces a cultural data landscape analysis and the objectives of
the collaboration we carried out with MIBACT. Section “Cultural-ON: The Cultural
ONtologies” describes the methodology we followed to deﬁne an ontology for
cultural institutes and sites and cultural events, detailing the main modelling choices
and the design patterns that we reused for supporting semantic interoperability.
Section “The Produced Linked Open Data” provides a detailed description of
the process we employed for producing LOD datasets, aligned with the ontology
and linked to other data in the Web, and a running example with real data

6
G. Lodi et al.
coming from an information system available at MIBACT. Additional methodology
principles we learnt from this experience are discussed in section “Lesson Learnt
(On Methodological Principles)”. Finally, section “Concluding Remark” provides
concluding remarks and future directions of the work.
State of the Art
Semantic technologies, and in particular Linked Open Data, have been widely and
successfully exploited within the cultural heritage ﬁeld to improve the access to
cultural assets, to enhance the experience of citizens in exploring cultural heritage,
to facilitate artworks discoverability, to integrate and enrich data about cultural
heritage (Isaac and Haslhofer 2013; de Boer et al. 2013; Szekely et al. 2013;
Ruotsalo et al. 2013; Aart et al. 2010). Semantic Web technologies have been used
to disclose, in a scalable way, the vast amount of interesting and useful information
on cultural heritage. In recent years, several institutions put considerable effort
into developing and standardising methods and vocabularies for indexing objects.
Semantic Web technologies have given the opportunity of easing these processes
and achieving results in a collaborative environment. The collaborative development
of ontologies [e.g. CIDOC-CRM (Doerr 2003)] has strengthened the collaboration
between organisations so that semantic interoperability requirements could be met
within their systems. In addition, the use of common ontologies facilitated the data
exchange and the creation of huge digital libraries [e.g. (Isaac and Haslhofer 2013)].
In the context of Semantic Web technologies, the Linked Open Data (LOD)
paradigm paved the way to the valorisation of cultural assets. In fact, the LOD
paradigm has been used to connect data from different cultural institutions, thus
increasing the possibility of reaching cultural data available in the Web of Data. The
interlinking of contents of collaborating organisations also contributed to enrich
the information in a cost effective manner (Hyvönen 2009). The result has been
the creation of a knowledge base that can be reused in different applications.
Semantic annotation of cultural objects has been employed to support indexing
and searching within large virtual collections (Schreiber et al. 2008). The indexing
of collections has beneﬁted of crowdsourcing techniques where large community
of users were invited to assist in the selection, cataloguing, contextualisation,
and curation of collections (Oomen and Aroyo 2011; Ridge 2013). Furthermore,
semantic technologies allowed going beyond traditional free text search (e.g.
Google), providing users with “intelligent” facilities based on ontological reasoning
such as semantic search, semantic autocompletion or semantic recommendation of
contents (Hyvönen 2009; Ruotsalo et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2007).

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
7
Ontologies and Other Knowledge Organisation Systems
In the context of cultural heritage and Semantic Web technologies a lot of ontologies
and knowledge organisation systems (KOS) have been developed. We describe
here a representative sample of them, which have inﬂuenced the design and the
methodology we propose in this chapter. In general, we noticed that the most
important and used ontologies of the cultural sector are principally focused on
modelling cultural heritage objects; that is, movable objects hosted/located in
cultural sites.
CIDOC-CRM
CIDOC-CRM (Conceptual Reference Model)1 (Doerr 2003) is a formal and
standard ontology intended to enable information integration for cultural heritage
data. Its shared usage can contribute to meet semantic interoperability requirements
among heterogeneous sources of cultural heritage information. CIDOC-CRM is
the result of a long-term interdisciplinary work and an agreement between the
International Committee for Documentation (CIDOC) of the International Council
of Museums (ICOM) and a non-governmental organism. Since September 2006
it has been considered for standardisation by the ISO standard body that deﬁned
the ISO 21127. CIDOC-CRM has a rich taxonomy of classes and properties that
describe Space-Time, Events, Material and Immaterial Things for the cultural
domain. This makes the model very useful for building query services (queries can
be formulated at various granularities) and eases the extension of the model to other
domains, reducing the risk of over-generalisation.
The ontology proposed in this paper has points of convergence and divergence
with CIDOC-CRM. On the one hand, the convergences between the models
can be found in the way of modelling the material things (such as places and
physical objects), collections and catalogues (in CIDOC, E31 Document). Both the
ontologies model information about places, such as place names, addresses, spatial
coordinates, geometries. In fact, the classes representing places in our proposal
aligned to CIDOC-CRM’s (cf. section “Methodology”). Since the intent of CIDOC
is to document objects collected and displayed by museums and related institutions,
it provides a ﬁner description of individual items and collections than Cultural-ON.
However, the Cultural Heritage Objects deﬁned in Cultural-ON can be used as a
hook to vocabularies more focusing on the description of artworks (such as CIDOC).
On the other hand, CIDOC lacks of a ﬁner conceptualisation of the access
to cultural sites (e.g. opening hours speciﬁcations, ticketing information, access
conditions) and about organisational structures behind a cultural site, which is
addressed by Cultural-ON.
1http://cidoc-crm.org/.

8
G. Lodi et al.
Europeana Data Model (EDM)
The Europeana Data Model (EDM)2 (Isaac and Haslhofer 2013) is a data model
used in the Europeana project3 for integrating, collecting and enriching data on
cultural heritage provided by the different and distributed content providers. EDM
reuses and extends a set of well-known vocabularies: OAI ORE (Open Archives
Initiative Object Reuse and Exchange) for organising objects’ metadata and digital
representation(s); Dublin Core for descriptive metadata; SKOS (Simple Knowledge
Organisation System) for conceptual vocabulary representation and CIDOC-CRM
for the representation of events and relationships between objects. The model
distinguishes between cultural heritage objects, web resources and aggregations.
Aggregations are used to model a data provider’s contribution to Europeana on a
cultural heritage object. A contribution, in turn, consists of more web resources
(i.e., metadata) provided for the object.
As well as CIDOC-CRM, the main focus of the Europeana Data Model is on
the description of Cultural Heritage Objects. The information modelled by EDM
is orthogonal to the conceptualisation provided by Cultural-ON. Therefore, the
data modelled with Cultural-ON enriches the information about Cultural Heritage
Objects, collected by Europeana.
Getty Vocabularies
The Getty vocabularies4 is a suite of KOS developed by the Getty Research Institute,
consisting in four controlled vocabularies, i.e. The Art and Architecture Thesaurus
(AAT) containing generic terms used for describing items of art, architecture
and cultural heritage objects; The Getty Thesaurus of Geographic Names (TGN)
including names descriptions of historical cities, empires and archaeological sites;
The Cultural Objects Name Authority (CONA) containing titles, attributions,
depicted subjects about works of several art, architecture, and other elements of the
cultural heritage; The Union List of Artist Names (ULAN) including information
about artists. AAT, CONA and ULAN are orthogonal to Cultural-ON. They can
be exploited by data providers for enriching their datasets with information about
authoritative research institutes. Users of Cultural-ON can take advantage of TGN
by reusing its terms to provide a site with its historical nomenclature. Besides
providing coordinates of places (also modelled in Cultural-ON), CONA provides a
ﬁner conceptualisation of the name attribute by modelling different name types (e.g.
Ofﬁcial, Vernacular, Provisional, etc.). Cultural-ON models three types of names:
institutional, preferred and alternative.
2http://pro.europeana.eu/edm-documentation.
3http://pro.europeana.eu/.
4http://www.getty.edu/research/tools/vocabularies/index.html.

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
9
Projects
The above mentioned ontologies and KOS were successfully used in a number of
projects, carried out by cultural public organisations. In this section we report some
of them, which we have reused as guidelines for our work.
Europeana
Europeana3(Isaac and Haslhofer 2013) is a project co-funded by the European
Union with the ambition of “unifying” Europe through culture and making cultural
heritage available for all. Europeana Foundation promotes and co-founds within
it several projects, such as Europeana Vx, Europeana Creative, Europeana Space,
Europeana Food and Drink. Among these, Europeana Vx (the last project of the
series is Europeana V3.0) aims at both creating and coordinating a network of
contributing institutions that act as data providers, and managing the collected
data through the development of a service infrastructure that enables an ease data
discoverability and access. In October 2012, a subset of the Europeana dataset was
released in linked open data, under the license Creative Commons CC0. The dataset
was modelled using the earlier mentioned Europeana Data Model (EDM) and then
made available in data.europeana.eu. The overall repository currently contains over
40 millions of RDF (Resource Description Framework) cultural data. The data
that will be modelled through Cultural-ON will be able to enrich the Europeana
knowledge base. In fact, Europeana mainly focuses on description and aggregation
of metadata about cultural objects, whereas Cultural-ON is able to model the
information for accessing them.
Smartmuseum
SMARTMUSEUM5 (Ruotsalo et al. 2013) is a research project funded under
the European Commission’s 7th Framework Programme. The project aims at
developing a mobile ubiquitous recommender system that uses the Web of Data to
provide tourists with recommendations for cultural heritage. The system delivers
the right content to the users by taking as input users’ informational needs
and contextual information (such as sensors data captured from mobile devices).
Semantic technologies are employed to deal with the heterogeneity of data, which
may include content descriptions, sensor inputs and user proﬁles. For modelling
users, the project relies on the General User Model Ontology (GUMO). The
content are annotated using the Dublin Core metadata standard which is properly
extended for the cultural heritage domain including such metadata as material,
5http://www.smartmuseum.eu.

10
G. Lodi et al.
object type, and place of creation of the object. The geographical information is
modelled using the W3C Geo Vocabulary6, whereas the objects are indexed with
the Getty Vocabularies7 [i.e., The Art and Architecture Thesaurus (AAT), The Getty
Thesaurus of Geographic Names (TGN), The Union List of Artist Names (ULAN)].
The applications developed within SMARTMUSEUM can beneﬁt of the data that
will be modelled through Cultural-ON. In fact, the description and the localisation
of the Cultural Entities modelled by Cultural-ON can help for providing users with
more appropriate context information.
Museums and Linked Data
A growing number of museums are relying on semantic technologies for multiple
purposes: for providing Internet access to their collections and artworks, for making
their assets easily discoverable, for facilitating the integration and enrichment of
their data.
In 2011 the British Museum8 released its database of nearly 2 millions of records
in linked open data, becoming the ﬁrst UK art organism to use semantic technologies
for making available in the Web its cultural assets. Today the dataset contains over
100 millions of records and is integrated with other data that are present in the Web
of Data. The data have been modelled using CIDOC-CRM1.
In order to make its artworks easily discoverable, in 2014 the Smithsonian
American Art Museum9 began to publish authoritative records about American
artworks in linked open data. As in the other cases, the records, that have been
collected since 1829, are currently modelled using CIDOC-CRM.
To open up and improve the access to its collection of 1 million objects, in
2011 the Rijksmuseum10 in Amsterdam made parts of its collection available online.
The Linked Data version of the collection is modelled according to the Europeana
Data Model and comprises over 20 millions of RDF data describing almost 600
thousands cultural objects. Furthermore, the collection objects is linked to the Art
and Architecture Thesaurus of the Getty Vocabularies. The vocabularies provides
a structured terminology for art, architecture, decorative arts, archival materials,
visual surrogates, conservation, and bibliographic materials.
All these museums can beneﬁt from using Cultural-ON for modelling informa-
tion (such as addresses, contact points, opening hours, ticketing, etc.) for accessing
their cultural assets, information about their organisational structure, the services
they provide to the public and the events they host.
6http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/.
7http://www.getty.edu/research/conducting_research/vocabularies/.
8http://collection.britishmuseum.org/.
9http://americanart.si.edu/collections/search/lod/about/.
10http://rijksmuseum.sealinc.eculture.labs.vu.nl/home.

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
11
A Cultural Heritage Data Framework: The Case of the Italian
Ministry of Cultural Heritage
The Italian Cultural Heritage is one of the richest in the world, as it is also evidenced
by the fact that Italy includes the greatest number of UNESCO World Heritage Sites
(i.e., 50, including 46 cultural sites).
The Ministry of Heritage, Cultural Activities and Tourism (referred to as
MIBACT from now on) is responsible for supervising, preserving and promoting
this huge patrimony. It also produces and manages a vast amount of information
regarding the institutions and organisations operating for the promotion of the
cultural heritage. In order to understand the characteristics of this large patrimony,
a general assessment of the cultural data landscape becomes crucial.
Analysis of the Cultural Heritage Data Landscape
The cultural heritage domain is characterised by a highly heterogeneous data land-
scape that embraces a variety of resource types. According to the different objectives
and priorities in treating those resources, different classiﬁcation proposals for them
are possible. In the context of this chapter, we propose a general classiﬁcation of
data types we encountered when we dealt with the data owned by MIBACT. In
particular, we distinguish between the following principal data categories:
•
Cultural property—this category includes all types of data regarding the cultural
heritage and landscape that belong to the State, territorial government bodies,
as well as any other public body and institution, and to private non-proﬁt
associations.
•
Cultural events and exhibitions—this category includes events that are related to
cultural properties.
•
Restrictions—this category embodies all those types of data that are related to
legal constraints or restrictions deﬁned on cultural properties for conservation
and safeguarding purposes.
•
Statistical data—this category includes statistical data that can be collected about
the exploitation of, and access to, cultural properties.
Each category can be further specialised in additional subcategories. In the
context of this work we focus on the cultural property and cultural events and
exhibitions categories, only, and we provide in the following a more detailed
characterisation of them.
Cultural Property Cultural properties can be classiﬁed in (1) cultural institutes
and sites and (2) cultural heritage collections and objects. The cultural institutes
and sites are assets that encompass immovable objects and their organisations, these
latter referred to as the set of people and procedures governing the immovable

12
G. Lodi et al.
objects. A taxonomy for these objects can be identiﬁed. In particular, in the Italian
context, the legal framework for the cultural heritage domain deﬁnes six main types
of immovable objects that must be safeguarded and preserved:
1. Museum; that is a permanent structure or institution that acquires, conserves
and makes available to the public cultural objects (see below) for educational
purposes;
2. Library; that is a permanent structure or institution that collects and conserves
an organised collection of books and any other published and editorial work
available on any media type; a library also ensures the consultation of those
works for study purposes;
3. Holder of Archive; that is a permanent structure or institution that collects, makes
an inventory and preserves documents that own an historical value, ensuring the
consultation of those documents for research and study purposes;
4. Archaeological Area; that is a site (or a group of physical sites) consisting of
natural ruins or historical or prehistoric artefacts and structures;
5. Archaeological Park; that is an environment characterised by the presence of
important archaeological evidence; it can be considered as an outdoor museum;
6. Monumental Area or Complex; that is a set of different buildings built in different
eras that acquired over time, and as a whole, a relevant and autonomous artistic,
religious, historic and ethno-anthropological value.
In addition to the above typologies, Cinemas and Theatres, Cultural Landscape
Assets; i.e., buildings and areas which are the expression of historical, cultural,
natural, morphological and aesthetic values of the land (e.g., villas, gardens, vantage
points, belvederes, etc.) and Cultural Research and Promotion Center fall into the
cultural institutes and sites category.
The cultural heritage collections and objects can be referred to as the movable
cultural objects. The objects are created or collected by people and form an
important part of a nation’s identity. They can be artistic, historical, technological
or natural in origin and located within immovable objects. Examples include for
instance paintings, sculptures, amphoras, manuscripts, photographs, books, ﬁlms,
and any other tangible or intangible work with a notable public and cultural interest.
Cultural Events and Exhibitions Cultural events and exhibitions are events that
may take place within immovable objects and may be related to speciﬁc movable
objects. They are typically organised by public bodies or institutions or by private
organisations operating for the public interest, with the aim to promote the culture
and traditions of a nation. There might exist large scale cultural events that consist
in turn of smaller events usually held at local level. An example can be the large
scale event created to celebrate the ﬁrst world war centenary that consists of single
dispersed events hosted within cultural institutes or sites available on the territory.
Transversal Data All earlier described data are connected to transversal data
types; that is, data that are independent of the speciﬁc cultural heritage domain.
Examples of these data include, among the others, people, organisations (public or
private bodies), location and addresses. Although these types of data may appear less

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
13
important than the previously deﬁned ones when describing the cultural heritage,
they however represent important conjunction points towards other data bases and
domains.
Objectives
Traditionally, all these data have been managed separately, thus contributing to the
creation of isolated data bases that rarely fully interoperate and that include, in
some cases, replication of the same data. In the light of this scenario, the following
objectives were identiﬁed as crucial for the cultural heritage valorisation process.
•
Cultural heritage unique knowledge—deﬁnition of a general methodology for
data integration capable of re-establishing the unicum nature of the cultural
heritage knowledge. The methodology ensures that technical and semantic
interoperability requirements are met when data exchanged among data bases
on cultural properties is enabled;
•
Openness—valorisation of the cultural properties by exploiting novel Open Data
paradigms. In particular, the Linked Open Data (LOD) approach, based on the
use of standards of the Semantic Web, can be used to create a large open and
interconnected knowledge base, This can be offered to anyone, without any
legal restrictions, in order to enable the development of innovative services and
applications. In the Italian context, there already exist LOD initiatives in the
cultural heritage domain11 promoted by different internal institutes of the main
Ministry. These initiatives have the merit to use standard ontologies and thesaurus
for data deﬁnition and classiﬁcation (see section State of the Art). However, they
all still suffer from the dispersed nature of the cultural properties management.
The objective is then to use the LOD paradigm for creating interoperable cultural
properties data, linkable among each other and with other data available on the
Web. These links can facilitate the integration of data in a distributed manner and
can be explored so as to reveal unexpected semantic paths.
•
Common data models—deﬁnition of common and standard data models for
cultural heritage domain to be re-used by all stakeholders operating at national
and local level. In particular, from the assessment of the data landscape as
previously introduced, it turns out that the cultural institutes and sites are
recurring data with respect to the other data types. Thus, they can be considered
as the basis or nucleus of a unique LOD knowledge base of cultural properties
that can be used for starting the data integration and valorisation process.
11http://dati.culturaitalia.it/?locale=en,
http://dati.acs.beniculturali.it/,
http://san.beniculturali.it/
web/san/dati-san-lod.

14
G. Lodi et al.
Fig. 1 An example of possible real data on cultural heritage data and their possible relationships
Figure 1 shows an example of real data related to an Italian museum,
i.e., “Museo di Capodimonte”, which is use as real running example in this
chapter, The ﬁgure illustrates the real data associated to the principal objects
that characterise the museum and the possible relationships among those objects.
Cultural-ON: The Cultural ONtologies
Cultural-ON (Cultural ONtologies)12 is a suite of ontology modules that provide
concepts and relations for modelling knowledge in the cultural heritage domain. At
the time of this writing, Cultural-ON embodies one module that allows us to rep-
resent cultural institutes and sites and cultural events. In the following sections we
provide details about the adopted design methodology (cf. section “Methodology”),
the design requirements (cf. section “Design Requirements”) and the resulting
ontology module (cf. section “Resulting Ontology”).
12The ontology and its documentation can be retrieved on-line at http://stlab.istc.cnr.it/documents/
mibact/cultural-ON_xml.owl and http://goo.gl/2lqj0w.

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
15
Methodology
Cultural-ON is designed by following best design practices and pattern-based
ontology engineering aimed at extensively re-using Ontology Design Patterns
(ODPs)13 (Gangemi and Presutti 2009) for modeling ontologies. According
to Gangemi and Presutti (2009), ODPs are modeling solutions that can be re-used
in order to solve recurrent ontology design problems. Hence, they enable design
by-reuse methodologies. For example, ODPs can be reused by means of their
specialisation or composition according to their types and to the scope of the new
ontology that is going to be modelled. The design methodology that we followed is
based on the eXtreme Design (XD) (Blomqvist et al. 2010). XD is an agile approach
to ontology engineering that adopts competency questions (CQs) (Grüninger and
Fox 1995) as a reference source for the requirement analysis. In fact, XD associates
ODPs with generic use cases that are used to match the design requirements. Both
the generic use cases and the requirements are expressed by means of competency
questions.
Based on this methodology, we modelled Cultural-ON by following these
steps:
•
Design requirements elicitation. The result of this step is a set of requirements
expressed in terms of CQs;
•
Key entities extraction. The result of this step is a set of concepts and relations
that provide the basic building blocks for dealing with knowledge within the
domain of cultural heritage. The key entities are extracted by analysing the CQs;
•
ODPs identiﬁcation. This step is aimed at identifying the most appropriate
ODPs. The ODPs are identiﬁed by applying the XD methodology and come from
the on-line repository ontologydesignpatterns.org;
•
ODPs re-use. The ODPs resulting from the previous step are modelled in
Cultural-ON by means of specialisation. However, we do not directly import any
speciﬁc implementation of ODPs in our ontology, in order to be completely inde-
pendent of them (see section “Lesson Learnt (On Methodological Principles)” for
a detailed discussion on reuse);
•
Ontology alignment. Finally, the ontology is aligned to other existing ontologies
in the Semantic Web that provide similar conceptualisations.
Design Requirements
The design requirements that we identiﬁed are expressed as competency questions.
These CQs were extracted by analysing a set of scenarios and real use cases
provided us by domain experts, i.e., the Italian Ministry of Cultural Heritage and
13http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org.

16
G. Lodi et al.
Table 1 Design requirements expressed as CQs and identiﬁed target ODPs.
ID
Competency question
ODPs
CQ1
What are the cultural institutes or sites of a given type?
Classiﬁcation
CQ2
What is the name used in a speciﬁc period of time for
identifying a certain cultural institute or site?
TimeIndexedSituation
CQ3
What are the contacts that can provide information (e.g.,
opening hours, ticket fares, etc.) about a cultural institute
or site?
–
CQ4
What are the opening schedule of a cultural institute or
site?
TimeIndexedSituation
CQ5
When can a person contact a reference agent in order ask
her information about a cultural institute or site?
TimeIndexedSituation
CQ6
Who is the agent holding a juridical role in a certain
period of time for a cultural institute or site?
TimeIndexedPersonRole
CQ7
What is the physical location of a cultural institute or
site?
Place
CQ8
Where is a cultural heritage object preserved ?
Place
CQ9
What is the collection of cultural heritage objects
preserved by a cultural institute?
Collection
CQ10
What is the description of a certain entity (e.g., a cultural
institute)?
Description
CQ11
What are the events organised by a cultural institute or
site?
TimeIndexedSituation
CQ12
What are the events associated with cultural heritage
objects
TimeIndexedSituation
CQ13
What is the price of the ticket for entering a cultural
institute or an event?
Price
CQ14
What is the validity of a ticket for entering a cultural
institute or an event?
TimeIndexedSituation
CQ15
What is the cultural institute that another cultural
institute belongs to?
PartOf
Activities and Tourism (MIBACT)14, the italian Central Institute for Cataloguing
and Documentation (ICCD)15 and other internal institutes of MIBACT. The CQs
extracted are reported in Table 1 and are associated with the ODPs that address them
by providing a re-usable modelling solution. Thus, Table 1 reports the results of the
steps 1 and 3 of our ontology design methodology (cf. section “Methodology”).
14http://www.beniculturali.it/.
15http://www.iccd.beniculturali.it.

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
17
Resulting Ontology
Cultural-ON is modelled as an OWL ontology. The classes of the ontology that
represent the core entities (cf. step 2 of our methodology) are the following:
•
cis:CulturalInstituteOrSite16 for representing cultural heritage
institutes or sites. An individual of this class is, for example, the Ufﬁzi Gallery
or Museum of Capodimonte (see next section);
•
cis:CulturalHeritageObject for representing cultural heritage mov-
able objects. An individual of this class is any cultural asset (even intangible)
of the cultural heritage;
•
cis:Agent for representing any agentive object, either physical, or social.
Individuals of this class can be, for example, people, organisations or any
juridical entity;
•
cis:Site for representing physical places. An individual of this class is, for
example, the Ufﬁzi in Florence, Italy. In fact, it is the physical site where the
Ufﬁzi Gallery is located in;
•
cis:Collection for representing collections of cultural heritage objects. For
example, the Collections of the Ufﬁzi Gallery are individuals of this class;
•
cis:Event for representing any kind of event that can be hosted by a cultural
institutes and can involve cultural heritage objects;
•
cis:Ticket for representing tickets. An individual of this class can be any
token that grants the entrance to a cultural institute or site or the participation to
an event.
These core classes are modelled and organised according to the selected ODPs in
order to address the list of requirements presented in Table 1. Figure 2 shows the
class diagram of the current version of Cultural-ON represented by using the UML
notation.
The requirement CQ1 is addressed by re-using the Classiﬁcation ODP17 that
in our context allows to represent the category that a certain cultural institute or
site belongs to. The category is represented by the class cis:CISType whose
individuals express actual types of cultural institutes or sites, e.g., museum, library,
etc. A cis:CulturalInstituteOrSite is related to cis:CISType by
means of the object property cis:hasCISType that in our context plays the role
of the object property classification:isClassifiedBy18 as deﬁned in
the source Classiﬁcation ODP.
We did not identify a ODP that could be directly reused for addressing CQ3.
However, the class schema.org:ContactPoint19 provides a reference
16The preﬁx cis: stands for the namespace http://dati.beniculturali.it/cis/.
17http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/classiﬁcation.owl.
18The preﬁx classification: stands for the namespace http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.
org/cp/owl/classiﬁcation.owl#.
19http://schema.org/ContactPoint.

18
G. Lodi et al.
Fig. 2 UML diagram about the core classes and properties deﬁned for modelling Cultural-ON

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
19
schema for describing contact points in terms of email addresses, fax numbers,
telephone numbers, web sites, opening hours, etc. It is worth mentioning that
Schema.org is a collaborative effort aimed at fostering vocabulary sharing over the
Web. Hence, Schema.org, similarly to ODP, is a valid source for vocabulary re-use.
The fact the cultural institutes or sites have a name that might change over time
(cf. CQ2) is modelled by re-using the TimeIndexedSituation ODP.20 For example,
the Colosseum in Rome was originally known as Amphitheatrum Flavium, while
the name further evolved to Coliseum during the Middle Ages. This situations are
modelled in Cultural-ON by deﬁning the class cis:NameInTime that represents
a time indexed situation and allows expressing the temporal validity of the name
of a cultural institutes or sites. In fact, a cis:NameInTime is associated with
(1) a cis:TimeInterval by the object property cis:isValidDuring
and
(2)
a
cis:CulturalInstituteOrSite
by
the
object
property
cis:hasNameInTime.21
The
class
cis:TimeInterval
provides
the
temporal span in terms of a starting and an ending date (i.e., the datatype properties
cis:startDate and cis:endDate, respectively).
The TimeIndexedSituation ODP is also used for addressing the requirements
CQ4, CQ5, CQ11, CQ12 and CQ14. For addressing CQ4 and CQ5 we deﬁned
the class cis:OpeningHoursSpecification that specialises a time
indexed
situation.
Individuals
of
cis:OpeningHoursSpecification
can be linked to individuals of cis:CulturalInstituteOrSite or
cis:ContactPoint by the object properties cis:hasAccessCondtion
and cis:available, respectively. In this case the time is represented by an
xsd:time that is the range of the datatype property cis:opens. The property
cis:opens has the class cis:OpeningHoursSpecification as domain.
For addressing CQ11 and CQ12 we deﬁned the class cis:Event as a time
indexed situation. In fact, the temporal dimension is provided by the object
property cis:takesPlaceDuring whose domain and range are the classes
cis:Event and cis:TimeIntervall, respectively. Instead, the location
hosting the event is expressed by the object property cis:isHostedBy22 whose
domain and range are the classes cis:Event and cis:Site, respectively.
Finally, in the case of the requirement CQ14, the time indexed situation is
represented by the class cis:Validity. This class is associated with a
cis:TimeInterval by means of the object property cis:hasDuration.
Additionally, it is the range of the object property cis:hasValidity. The
property cis:hasValidity accepts cis:Ticket or cis:Offer as domain.
20http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/timeindexedsituation.owl.
21The object property cis:hasNameInTime has cis:CulturalInstituteOrSite
and cis:NameInTime as domain and range, respectively. Thus, the association of a
cis:NameInTime with a cis:CulturalInstituteOrSite is expressed by the inverse
of cis:hasNameInTime.
22Its inverse property is cis:Hosts.

20
G. Lodi et al.
The ticket pricing (cf. CQ13) is modelled by re-using the Price ODP.23
In fact, we deﬁned a class cis:Offer that is associated with (1) a
cis:Ticket by the object property cis:includes; (2) a cis:Prices
Specification by the object property cis:hasPriceSpecification.
The
class
cis:PricesSpecification
specialises
the
original
class
price:Price24 from the Price ODP and allows to describe a price in terms of an
amount and a given currency. The amount can be speciﬁed by using the datatype
property cis:amount whose range is xsd:double, while the currency can
be speciﬁed by using the object property cis:hasCurrency whose range are
individuals of the class cis:Currency.
The approach adopted for modelling the physical site where (1) a cultural
institution is located in (cf. CQ7) or (2) a cultural heritage object is preserved in
(CQ8), beneﬁts from the re-use of the Place ODP.25 The physical locations are
represented as individuals of cis:Site. The object property cis:hasSite is
designed to associate a cis:CulturalInstituteOrSite with a cis:Site.
In our domain this representation provides a best practice for disambiguating
between a cultural institute and its physical place. For example, it allows to represent
the “Ufﬁzi” both as an institution (i.e., the “Ufﬁzi Gallery”) and a building.
A cis:Collection allows modelling collections of cultural heritage objects
included in a cultural institute or site and to refer to them as cultural heritage
entities. A cis:Collection is designed by reusing the Collection Entity
ODP.26 This ODP provides a reference schema for identifying a collection as
a whole (i.e., an individual of the class cis:Collection) and for asso-
ciating such a collection with its members by means of the object property
cis:hasMember.27 The property cis:hasMember has individuals of the
class cis:Collection as domain while its range can be any individual of
cis:CulturalHeritageObject or cis:Collection. It is worth saying
that the class cis:CulturalHeritageObject is designed to identify and
provide references to cultural heritage objects. Thus, the description of cultural
heritage objects with peculiar properties and classes is out of the scope of this
ontology. These properties and classes might be deﬁned in other ontologies and,
to this respect, the class cis:CulturalHeritageObject works as a hook to
foster data linking from other linked datasets that provide peculiar knowledge about
cultural heritage objects.
23http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/price.owl.
24The preﬁx price: stands for the namespace http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/
price.owl#.
25http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/place.owl.
26http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/collectionentity.owl.
27The inverse property is cis:isMemberOf.

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
21
Cultural-ON reuses the PartOf ODP28 for describing part-of relations among
cultural institutes or sites (cf. CQ15). Namely, the object property cis:partOf
allows to model an individual of cis:CulturalInstituteOrSite to be
part of another cis:CulturalInstituteOrSite, either administratively or
juridically.
The requirement CQ6 is addressed by re-using the TimeIndexedPersonRole
ODP.29 This ODP is a specialisation of the AgentRole ODP. In fact, it allows adding
the temporal dimension in order to specify when a given role is held by a certain
person. In our ontology this ODP is represented by the class cis:RoleInTime
that represents an n-ary relation whose arguments are a cis:Role, a cis:Agent
and a cis:TimeInterval.
The requirement CQ10 is addressed by re-using the Description ODP.30 This
ODP is specialised by deﬁning the datatype property cis:description whose
range is any value of xsd:Literal and can be used for providing textual
description about cis:CulturalInstituteOrSite.
Finally, the ontology alignment step introduced in section “Methodology”
allowed us to map our ontology to other ontologies or vocabularies available
in the Semantic Web. The alignments are provided in a separate OWL ﬁle31
by means of owl:equivalentClass/ owl:equivalentProperty and
rdfs:subClassOf/rdfs:subPropertyOf axioms. In particular, Cultural-
ON is aligned with Dublin Core,32 FOAF, 33 GoodRelations, 34 the Organisation
ontology, 35 LODE, 36 DOLCE37 and PRO.38 For example, the class cis:Agent is
declared owl:equivalentClass to foaf:Agent or cis:Event is declared
rdfs:subClassOf lode:Event. Interested readers can refer to section “Les-
son Learnt (On Methodological Principles)” for a detailed description of the
methodological principles that guided us in the external ontologies alignment
process.
28http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/partof.owl.
29http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/timeindexedpersonrole.owl.
30http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/timeindexedpersonrole.owl.
31The ﬁle containing ontology alignments is available at http://stlab.istc.cnr.it/documents/mibact/
alignment_xml.owl.
32http://dublincore.org.
33http://xmlns.com/foaf/spec/20070524.html.
34http://purl.org/goodrelations/v1.
35http://www.w3.org/ns/org.
36http://linkedevents.org/ontology.
37http://www.loa-cnr.it/ontologies/DUL.owl.
38http://purl.org/spar/pro.

22
G. Lodi et al.
The Produced Linked Open Data
MiBACT stores records about the Italian cultural institutes or sites (i.e. addresses,
opening hours, managing authorities, contacts, etc.) in a database called “DB Unico
2.0”.39 The database also contains information about cultural events40 (e.g., as
exhibitions, seminars, conferences, etc.) hosted in cultural institutes or sites and
organised by the MIBACT or by other institutions. A MIBACT’s editorial board is
responsible for the maintenance of the database.
In the “Governmental Agenda for the valorisation of the public sector informa-
tion”, the Italian Digital Agency (Agenzia per l’Italia Digitale—AgID) classiﬁed the
data included in DB Unico 2.0 as high-value data to be released to anyone, and for
any reuse, through the Linked Open Data paradigm. It was in fact recognised that
publishing data on cultural properties using the LOD paradigm can signiﬁcantly
contribute to valorising cultural assets and promoting cultural events, thanks to the
possibility granted to anyone to develop new services and applications using those
data. Since cultural institutes or sites can be seen as containers of artworks and
events, the cultural institutes or sites dataset can serve as the hub of the Linked
Open Data cloud of the Italian cultural heritage: users can start discovering the
Italian patrimony by exploring the interlinks that this dataset may enable towards
other datasets of the cultural domain.
Figure 3 shows the process we employed in order to produce the Linked
Open datasets of cultural institutes or sites and cultural events, by means of an
activity diagram. The process in this ﬁgure is illustrated by highlighting the ﬂow
of the information, the actors and the used tools/technologies. Five types of actors
participate in the process; namely, qualiﬁed editors, an editorial board, Linked Open
Data engineers, ontology designers and other domain experts.
The process consists of a number of phases. The ﬁrst phase regards the feeding
of the database of cultural institutes or sites and events and it is carried out by
qualiﬁed editors. This phase is currently foreseen in a speciﬁc regulation that confers
to MIBACT the obligation to manage and maintain such a traditional relational
database. Qualiﬁed editors are typically members of a variety of public institutions,
national and local, operating in the cultural sector. Although the existence of
guidelines for database feeding purposes, they can introduce heterogeneity in the
data they document within DB Unico. To address this problem, a data cleansing
and data harmonisation phase is executed by MIBACT’s editorial board. For this
activity, several state of the art tools can be used. In the context of our collaboration
with MIBACT, the editorial board decided to take advantage of OpenReﬁne41 i.e., a
tool for cleaning data and for transforming data from a format into another format.
39http://goo.gl/srh6op.
40http://goo.gl/3C5orD.
41http://openreﬁne.org/.

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
23
Fig. 3 The process for releasing the information in DB Unico 2.0 as Linked Open Data
As shown in Fig. 3, in parallel to these activities, the creation of the ontology,
following the methodology introduced in the previous section, can be carried out
by ontology designers. It is worth noticing that the ontology creation phase requires
a strict interaction and collaboration between ontology and domain experts. These
latter are the only ones capable of clearly deﬁning the requirements as previously
represented, since they know precisely the peculiarities of the data, the legislation
that applies, and their everyday working experience.
Once the ontology is deﬁned, it can be published on the Web. To this end, a
stable URI for it is selected, human-readable documentation and basic metadata
for the ontology are speciﬁed, labels and comments are deﬁned in more languages
(currently in Italian and English), and the content negotiation is implemented. In this
phase, we leveraged LODE (Peroni et al. 2013), i.e., a tool that, used in conjunction
with content negotiation, allows us to make available the ontology as a human-
readable and browsable HTML page with embedded links. Additional tools such as
WebVOWL42 can be used to graphically visualise on the Web the elements of the
ontology.
42http://vowl.visualdataweb.org/webvowl.html.

24
G. Lodi et al.
Once the data cleansing and ontology creation activities are completed, LOD
engineers can be involved in the process phases devoted to the generation, linking
and publication of Linked Open datasets. For these phases we used the D2RQ43
platform; that is, a system for accessing relational databases as RDF graphs. The
platform provides two ways of working: d2r-serv and dump-rdf. The former queries
a relational database as a virtual RDF graph; the latter dumps the content of the
whole database into a single RDF ﬁle. Both ways need a customisable mapping
ﬁle as input where rules specifying how to transform the relational data in RDF are
deﬁned (the activity DB to RDF mapping design in Fig. 3). The mapping ﬁle can be
deﬁned using a declarative mapping language through which describing the relation
between an ontology and a relational data model. In this case, LOD engineers need
the ontology and database schema as inputs in order to execute this phase of the
process.
Once the RDF dump is produced, the data it includes can be linked (data linking
in Fig. 3) to other well-known datasets available on the Web of Data (e.g., DBpedia,
GeoNames, and any other of the cultural sector). In order to carry out this activity,
we used Silk,44 a linked data integration framework that enables the integration of
heterogenous data sources. As D2RQ, Silk requires a mapping conﬁguration for
specifying how to discover links between datasets.
A data validation phase is then required in order to verify whether the produced
datasets match the desired data quality. If the validation is positive, the datasets can
be published: otherwise, the mapping phase has to be re-iterated applying proper
mapping reﬁnements.
The ﬁnal phase of the process involves the Linked Open datasets publication.
Data are uploaded in a triple store; that is, a data base capable of storing RDF
graphs and enabling SPARQL interrogations on the data. SPARQL is the W3C
standard protocol, similar to SQL, that allows to query RDF triples. In our work, we
used Virtuoso SPARQL endpoint with its open source version.45 Finally, in order
to favour a better end-users experience, we deployed LodView46; that is a Java Web
application based on Spring and Jena that implements URI dereferencing and allows
users to browse RDF resources in a user-friendly way, as HTML pages.
The described process ensures that the following principles are met: (1) the
published information is created and managed within a real business process of
a public body; (2) database updates are reﬂected in the Linked Open datasets by
conﬁguring the above process in such a way to be run periodically when changes
to the main authoritative sources are applied; (3) the dataset is linked to broadly-
known datasets available on the Web, e.g. DBpedia, GeoNames; (4) the data and
the ontology are easily accessible through user-friendly interfaces (e.g., LodLive,
LODE, WebVOWL) that allow non-expert users to explore the model and the
datasets.
43http://d2rq.org/.
44http://silkframework.org/.
45https://github.com/openlink/virtuoso-opensource.
46http://lodview.it/.

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
25
Example of Linked Open Data Aligned to Cultural-ON
In the following we provide an example of usage of the ontology Cultural-ON for
exporting in RDF the data stored in DB Unico 2.0. The example is based on data
regarding the National Museum of Capodimonte and an event it hosted. We provide
some crucial code snippets; interested readers can refer to the complete example
available in TURTLE and in RDF/XML formats at.47 The example can be explored
through LODView by accessing any URI deﬁned in the RDF ﬁle, e.g.48
Frame 1 provides the deﬁnition of the museum as “Cultural Institute or
Site”.
The
resource
cissite:Museo_di_Capodimonte
represents
the
National Museum of Capodimonte. The resource is of type cis:Museum, i.e.
a Cultural Institute or Site of type Museum. A Cultural Institute or Site has a
name cis:institutionalName and a description cis:description.
The values of these properties are also speciﬁed in the RDF schema properties
rdfs:label and rdfs:comment, respectively, in order to improve the
readability of the data when using semantic web browsers and visualizers. Every
Cultural Institute or Site is associated with a unique identiﬁer named ISIL, i.e.,
International Standard Identiﬁer for Libraries and Related Organizations. In the
example of Frame 1 the ISIL identiﬁer is ﬁctive since in Italy it is currently
available only for libraries and holders of archives, not for museums (the Ministry
is planning to assign an ISIL identiﬁer to all cultural institutes or sites in the near
future).
c i s s i t e : Museo_di_Capodimonte a
c i s : Museum ;
r d f s : l a b e l
"Museo di
Capodimonte " @it
;
r d f s : comment " Nel 1738
Carlo
di
Borbone
. . .
" @it
;
c i s : i n s t i t u t i o n a l N a m e
"Museo di
Capodimonte " @it
;
c i s : d e s c r i p t i o n
" Nel 1738
Carlo
di
Borbone
. . .
" @it
;
c i s : I S I L I d e n t i f i e r
" ITNA00001"
;
c i s : h a s S i t e
s i t e : Sede_del_Museo_di_Capodimonte
;
c i s : hasNameInTime
n i t : Museo_di_Capodimonte
;
c i s : h a s C o l l e c t i o n
c o l l e c t i o n : Collezione_Farnese
;
c i s : c a t a l o g u e
c a t : Catologo_Collezione_Farnese
;
. . .
Frame 1 The code snippet for the deﬁnition of the Cultural Institute or Site “Museo di
Capodimonte”
The ‘National Museum of Capodimonte’, intended as Cultural Institute, is
located in a building commonly known with the name ‘National Museum of Capodi-
monte’ represented by the resource site:Sede_del_Museo_di_Capodimonte.
The deﬁnition of the Site is provided by Frame 2.
The separation of cis:CulturalInstituteOrSite, i.e. a complex entity
that involves an organisation of people and a physical site, from cis:Site, i.e. a
47https://w3id.org/cis/example/.
48https://w3id.org/cis/resource/CulturalInstituteOrSite/Museo_di_Capodimonte.

26
G. Lodi et al.
place where a cultural institute or site is physically located, is required to describe
situations where multiple institutes or sites are located in the same building or where
a single cultural institute or site is dislocated in several buildings. Furthermore,
Frame 2 shows an example of usage of the ODPs “Description” and “Place”. The
sd:Sede_del_Museo_di_Capodimonte is the description of the building
regarding the attribute “Area”.
s i t e : Sede_del_Museo_di_Capodimonte a
c i s : S i t e
;
c i s : name " Sede
del
’Museo di
Capodimonte ’ " @it
;
c i s : h a s S i t e D e s c r i p t i o n
sd : Sede_del_Museo_di_Capodimonte
;
c i s : h o s t s
event : Vincenzo_Gemito_dal_salotto_Minozzi_
al_Museo_di_Capodimonte
;
c i s : i s S i t e O f
c i s s i t e : Museo_di_Capodimonte
;
. . .
sd : Sede_del_Museo_di_Capodimonte a
c i s : S i t e D e s c r i p t i o n
;
c i s : d e s c r i p t i o n
" The Museum has
an
area
of
1000
square
meter "@en ;
c i s : h a s A t t r i b u t e
a t t r i b u t e : Area
.
a t t r i b u t e : Area a
c i s : A t t r i b u t e
;
r d f s : l a b e l
" Area "@en ;
c i s : d e s c r i p t i o n
" The
e x t e n t
in
square
meter
of
a
S i t e "@en .
Frame 2 A code snippet deﬁning the site of the National Museum of Capodimonte
Frame 3 provides an example of usage of the class cis:NameInTime.
cis:NameInTime (as well as cis:RoleInTime) implements a special-
isation of the ODP called Time Indexed Situation. The situation deﬁned by
nit:Museo_di_Capodimonte describes the names assigned to the museum
since it was founded. Since 1957 the museum has been ofﬁcially called “Museo di
Capodimonte”; it also has “Museo Nazionale di Capodimonte” as alternative name.
n i t : Museo_di_Capodimonte a
c i s : NameInTime
;
c i s : i n s t i t u t i o n a l N a m e
"Museo di
Capodimonte " @it
;
c i s : a l t L a b e l
"Museo Nazionale
di
Capodimonte " @it
;
c i s : isValidDuring
t i : Intervallo_di_tempo_per_denominazione_
nel_tempo_Museo_di_Capodimonte
.
t i : Intervallo_di_tempo_per_denominazione_nel_
tempo_Museo_di_Capodimonte a
c i s : T i m e I n t e r v a l
;
c i s : s t a r t D a t e
"1957"
.
Frame 3 A code snippet showing an example of usage of the class cis:NameInTime
Frame 4 shows an example of the classes cis:Collection and cis:
Catalogue. The resource collection:Collezione_Farnese represents
the “Farnese” collection that has been managed by Museum of Capodimonte during
a speciﬁc time interval ti:Collezione_Farnese_a_Museo_di_Capodi
monte. In this example, the collection contains only one Cultural Heritage Object;
cho:Giambologna_Ratto_di_una_sabina. It is worth noting that the
property cis:hasMember of the class Collection allows including in a collection
any resource deﬁned in other datasets (e.g. Cultura Italia). In other words, this

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
27
property allows us to link the dataset generated from the data contained in DB
Unico 2.0 to other datasets related to the descriptions of artworks. The resource
cat:Catologo_Collezione_Farnese of type cis:Catalogue is used
to describe collections.
c o l l e c t i o n : C ollezione_Farnese
a
c i s : C o l l e c t i o n
;
c i s : name " C o l l e z i o n e
Farnese " @it
;
c i s : d e s c r i p t i o n
" T r a s f e r i t a
a
Napoli . . .
" @it
;
c i s : atTime
t i : Collezione_Farnese_a_Museo_di_Capodimonte
;
c i s : hasMember cho : Giambologna_Ratto_di_una_sabina
.
cho : Giambologna_Ratto_di_una_sabina
a
c i s : C u l t u r a l H e r i t a g e O b j e c t
;
c i s : name " Giambologna  Ratto
di
una
Sabina "
;
c i s : isMemberOf
c o l l e c t i o n : Collezione_Farnese
;
c i s : i s I n S i t e
s i t e : Sede_del_Museo_di_Capodimonte
.
c a t : Catologo_Collezione_Farnese
a
c i s : Catalogue
;
c i s : d e s c r i b e s
c o l l e c t i o n : Collezione_Farnese
;
c i s : isCatalogueOf
c i s s i t e : Museo_di_Capodimonte
;
. . .
Frame 4 An example of usage of the classes cis:Collection and cis:Catalogue
The resource event:Vincenzo_Gemito_dal_salotto_Minozzi_-
al_Museo_di_Capodimonte, illustrated in Frame 5, deﬁnes an event hosted
by Museum of Capodimonte. The event was an exhibition of Vincenzo Gemito’s
artworks. In particular, the event involved the Cultural Heritage Object “Il giocatore
di carte” represented by the resource cho:Il_giocatore_di_carte.
event : Vincenzo_Gemito_dal_salotto_Minozzi_al_Museo_di_Capodimonte
a
c i s : Event ;
c i s : name " Vincenzo Gemito ,
dal
s a l o t t o
Minozzi
a l
Museo di
Capodimonte "
;
c i s : d e s c r i p t i o n
" Apre
a l
pubblico
a l
Museo di
. . .
"
;
c i s : isHostedBy
s i t e : Sede_del_Museo_di_Capodimonte ;
c i s : i n v o l v e s
cho : I l _ g i o c a t o r e _ d i _ c a r t e
;
. . .
Frame 5 An example of event hosted by the museum
Lesson Learnt (On Methodological Principles)
Besides the results described in the previous sections, this experience allowed us to
reﬂect on how to improve our ontology development methodology, in particular as
far as collaboration with domain experts and ontology reuse are concerned.

28
G. Lodi et al.
Communicating with Domain Experts
Domain experts are always present as one of the main actors in ontology engineering
methodologies (Simperl et al. 2010). Their contribution to the process is crucial,
especially in deﬁning the domain and task requirements, which drive the ontol-
ogy design and testing phases. Similarly, in software engineering methodologies,
domain experts are the main actor and input source of software and database
requirements deﬁnition, which determine the corresponding software modelling
choices. Nevertheless, there is a difference in how software and databases are
perceived by domain experts, as compared to how they perceive ontologies.
Software and databases are expected to be black boxes able, respectively, to do what
was expressed in form of requirements and to provide, when queried, the data they
are expected to store.
Ontologies provide a data model for building knowledge bases, however they are
also expected to reﬂect a shared understanding of a knowledge domain and, in some
cases, to be evolved and maintained by domain experts without the help of ontology
experts. This important commitment of ontologies is often wrongly interpreted
as if the communication between domain experts and ontology experts should be
mediated by sharing the ontology implementation (e.g. its OWL representation) and
by discussing the modelling choices, applied during its implementation. In other
words, the ontology itself is often used as the reference document for discussing
domain requirements. Based on our experience, this is a wrong practice.
The good practice, as suggested in most methodological guidelines (Simperl
et al. 2010; Suárez-Figueroa et al. 2015; Blomqvist et al. 2010), is to focus the
communication on ontological requirements. It is important though to identify a
common communication code. In the case of the Cultural-ON project, we used
user stories (extracted from normative documents and discussions with domain
experts) and competency questions, as shown in section “Cultural-ON: The Cultural
ONtologies”.
Although we acknowledge that keeping the domain experts focused on require-
ments is a good practice, we also have to recognise the importance of sharing
with them the ontology, at some level of detail. It is important that they have
an understanding of the ontology main concepts and usage, in order to facilitate
reuse, and favour technological transfer to the domain experts, who may want to
maintain and evolve the ontology. This need is not properly addressed, currently:
the only way to share ontology details with domain experts is to explain them
the OWL representation. Considering that most of them do not have a knowledge
representation background, this practice slows down the process signiﬁcantly and
forces ontology and domain experts to perform training sessions in logics and
ontology design.
Our experience (not limited to the Cultural-ON project) suggests the need to
identify an intermediate ontology representation, able to provide, at the same
time, both a clear understanding and a simpliﬁed view of the ontology, which
shows the essential modelling components, and hides such technical details as

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
29
complex axiomatisation and logical sugar. Ontology design patterns (ODP) may
be a practical means for sharing a view of the ontology with domain experts,
addressing this idea. A proposal, which we are currently investigating, is to use
UML component diagrams as intermediate ontology representation (by deﬁning
an appropriate UML proﬁle), where each component represents an ODP, or more
in general an ontology module, and its interfaces show the ODP’s most important
concepts. The interfaces of an ontology module can be either classes or properties.
Their role is twofold: (1) to show the points of interaction with the ontology
component, and (2) to provide details on the most important concepts covered
by the ontology module. Interacting with an ontology component means both
communication between two ontology modules, and communication between an
ontology module and an external client (for example, a user that wants to instantiate
that component).
As a proof of concept, we show in Fig. 4 an example UML component
diagram describing Cultural-ON as a set of interconnected ODPs. Grey components
represent more general ODPs, which could be omitted depending on the level
of detail that one wants to have. The white components show the core parts
of the ontology and highlight their main concepts. For example, the component
CulturalInstituteOrSite shows the class CIS49 and the fact that one of its
main characteristics is the composition (i.e. the partOf relation). The component
RoleInTime shows its three main concepts, providing the intuition of a n-ary
relation which models the role of an agent during a certain time period. Such
component is linked to the component CulturalInstituteOrSite by means
of the concept roleAt, indicating that an agent has a role at a certain CIS. For
example, this notation allows to hide the OWL-speciﬁc modelling of an n-ary
relation, which requires reiﬁcation, while still conveying the conceptual semantics
of this part of the ontology.
The choice of what concepts to show as interfaces and which ones to visualise as
links between components can change, depending on the intention of the designer.
The aim of this example is to show a possible direction of research, more than
providing a deﬁnitive solution, which is still under analysis.
Practices and Methods for Ontology Reuse
An important reﬂection that is worth sharing is related to the practice of ontology
reuse. The Cultural-ON project was meant to favour the principle of reusing existing
resources as much as possible, in order to facilitate interoperability. At the same
time the Ministry had the need of having complete control on the evolution and
maintenance of Cultural-ON, for ensuring its sustainability. In this section, we
49Short for CulturalInstituteOrSite.

30
G. Lodi et al.
Fig. 4 Example of UML Component Diagram used for sharing the main concept modules of Cultural-ON with domain experts. This example provides the
intuition of an ongoing work on deﬁning an intermediate notation for sharing ontology modelling details with domain experts without exposing them to
language-speciﬁc modelling details

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
31
discuss our choices in this respect, by generalising their principles, after a brief
survey on the different practices in ontology reuse and their impact on the resulting
ontologies.
Ontology reuse is a recommended practice both in scientiﬁc (Simperl et al.
2010) and in standardisation (W3C, ISO, ANSI, OASIS) literature. It is considered
a good practice as it favours semantic interoperability among diverse knowledge
bases, especially in the Semantic Web and Linked Data context. Nevertheless,
a standardisation of ontology reuse practices is still missing because ontology
design had a non-linear evolution and because modelling requirements may vary
signiﬁcantly depending on the domain, the availability of existing ontologies, the
sustainability constraints within a given organisation, the speciﬁc requirements of an
ontology project, the trends, and ﬁnally the personal taste of the ontology developer.
In the light of these considerations, it is possible to highlight a number of
ontology reuse models, emerging from the current practices in the Semantic Web
and Linked Data community, that can be classiﬁed based on the type of ontology
that is reused:
•
Reuse of foundational ontologies or top-level ontologies, for example when
DOLCE50 or the DBpedia ontology51 are specialised for modelling events and
participation to events, such as the case of the institutes that are involved in an
exhibition;
•
Reuse of ontology patterns,52 for example when the “participation” pattern53 is
applied for modelling the participation to events;
•
Reuse of domain ontologies, for example when the Music Ontology54 is reused
in another ontology project for modelling musical events.
Reuse models can also be classiﬁed based on the type of reused ontology
fragments:
•
Reuse of individual entities (classes, relations, individuals), for example when
an element such as dolce:hasParticipant or dbpedia-owl:Event is
reused as a speciﬁc entity;
•
Reuse of groups of entities (modules, patterns, arbitrary fragments), for example
when the pattern “participation”, or dolce:hasParticipant together with
all relevant related entities (dolce:Object, dolce:hasParticipant,
dolce:Event, etc.), or the Event Ontology55 are reused.
50http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/ont/dul/DUL.owl.
51http://dbpedia-org/ontology.
52http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org.
53http://www.ontologydesignpatterns.org/cp/owl/participation.owl.
54http://musicontology.com.
55Event Ontology http://motools.sourceforge.net/event/event.html.

32
G. Lodi et al.
or they can be classiﬁed based on the amount of reused axioms (an axiom in an
ontology is a rule that restricts or extends the possible inferences that can be done
on the data):
•
Reuse of ontologies by importing all their axioms, for example the whole Music
Ontology;
•
Reuse of ontologies by importing only the axioms within a given “neighbour-
hood” of certain entities or fragments, for example dolce:hasParticipant
with all relevant entities and axioms that link them up to a certain “graph
distance” (such neighbourhood is named “module”);
•
reuse of ontologies without importing axioms, that is by importing only entities
(the URI of those entities), for example dolce:Event.
Finally, reuse can be classiﬁed based on the alignment policy:
•
Reuse of ontologies as the source of entities and axioms for the new ontology
project, for example when an entity such as dolce:Event is directly reused as
the type of cultural events;
•
Reuse of ontologies through alignments of entities of the ontology under devel-
opment to the existing ones, for example when the axiom rdfs:subClassOf
is used for aligning a class of Cultural-On to a class of DOLCE (e.g.
dolce:Event).
The only characteristic that all reuse models share is to reuse entities with
the same logical type as they were deﬁned. For example, an entity deﬁned as
owl:Class in an ontology, is commonly reused as such, and not as, e.g.
owl:DatatypeProperty. Besides this shared characteristic, reuse practices
can be as diverse as 36 different alternatives (as described above). Possibly, even
more than one adopted at the same time in an ontology project. Independently of
the personal taste and current trends, a certain choice of reuse practice impacts
signiﬁcantly on the semantics of an ontology, on its sustainability, and on its
potential interoperability.
Semantics of Reuse
It spans from maximum reuse, when a whole ontology is reused, by importing all
axioms and by specialising them for concepts that are not already addressed; to
minimum reuse, when only some entities are reused, by aligning them to entities
deﬁned in the local ontology, and without importing their related axioms. The safest
and most complete semantics is obtained with the maximum reuse approach.
Sustainability of Reuse
In the case of maximum reuse, the usability of the ontology decreases, because
the imported ontologies introduce entities and axioms that may be unnecessary

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
33
(or sometimes undesired) in the local ontology. Furthermore, maximum reuse
creates a strong dependency on the reused ontologies; for example, if the local
ontology imports the whole Event Ontology, and the latter has some axioms
changed, the local ontology might become incoherent with respect to its original
requirements.
Interoperability and Reuse
In the case of minimum reuse, interoperability is simpliﬁed as there is no constraint
caused by the semantics of the reused ontology (its axioms).
In summary, aspects related to the quality of semantics are better addressed
by a maximum reuse, while sustainability and interoperability are better satisﬁed
by a minimum reuse. For this reason, the attitude of designers, the scope of the
project and the nature of the data to be modelled inﬂuence the decision on the reuse
approach.
Direct Versus Indirect Reuse of Ontology Elements
Based on the general discussion of the previous sections, we summarise three possi-
ble approaches to ontology reuse that have been considered during the development
of the Cultural-ON project. Afterwords, we report our choice and the principles and
requirements that motivated it.
Minimal Reuse of Individual Entities
This approach seems to be advised by the Linked Data community, however it is a
routine, not a good practice, at all. In fact, this practice of reuse is essentially driven
by the intuition of the semantics of concepts (which can be relations or classes)
based on their names, instead of their deﬁning axioms. In addition to this problem
related to the formal semantics of the reused entities, that may be incompatible
with the intended semantics to be represented, there is the problem of creating a
dependency of the local ontology with all ontologies whose parts are reused. This
dependency may put at risk the sustainability and stability of the ontology and its
associated knowledge bases.
PROS:
Sharing of Linked Data community praxis.
CONS:
Semantic ambiguity, difﬁculty in verifying the consistency among the
diverse reused concepts, dependency on external ontologies, risk of instability
and unsustainability of the ontology.

34
G. Lodi et al.
Direct Reuse of Ontology Design Patterns and Alignments
Main concepts and relations of the ontology are deﬁned in the local names-
pace
(e.g.
cis:CulturalInsituteOrSite).
They
are
aligned,
when
possible and appropriate, to existing ontologies by means of logical relations
(e.g. owl:equivalentTo rdfs:subClassOf). The modelling of some
concepts and relations, which are relevant for the domain but applicable
to more general scopes, is delegated to external ontologies, by means of
ontology design pattern (ODP) reuse. For example, an instance of the class
cis:CulturalInsituteOrSite can be involved in an event. Such event
can be modelled as an instance of the class ex:Event, deﬁned in an external
ontology. The class ex:Event can be directly reused as the range of a property
that expresses such a relation. In this example, the pattern “Event” associated
with the class ex:Event in the external ontology, is directly reused. When third
parties will reuse the Cultural-ON ontology for modelling their data, they will
represent information about events by using the relations deﬁned in the “Event”
pattern, according to their needs. With this approach, the ontology shows a modular
architecture, with a core component that deﬁnes the main domain entities and other
components that identify relevant ODPs that model other concepts, needed for
addressing the ontology requirements.
PROS:
Stability and sustainability of domain relations and concepts, modularity,
interoperability.
CONS:
Possible heterogeneity in the ODPs usage, risk of instability and unsus-
tainability limited to external modules.
Indirect Reuse of Ontology Design Patterns and Alignments
ODPs are used in this case as templates. This approach is an extension of the
previous one. It keeps all PROS and decreases the CONS. The ontology is
designed by identifying relevant ODPs from external ontologies to be reused,
and by reproducing them in the local ontology. At the same time, the ontol-
ogy guarantees interoperability by keeping the appropriate alignments to the
external ODPs, and provides extensions that satisfy more speciﬁc requirements.
For example, following this approach the class cis:Event and the relation
cis:isInvolvedInEvent are locally deﬁned and then aligned to ex:Event
and ex:isInvolvedInEvent by means of equivalent (or other logical) rela-
tions. The alignment axioms may be published separately from the core of the
ontology. If the ontology will need further extensions, the same approach must be
followed, in order to avoid the introduction of dependencies.
PROS:
Stability and sustainability of the ontology, modularity, interoperability,
minimisation of dependencies from external ontologies, identiﬁcation of external
ontologies that can be used for more speciﬁc and extended requirements.

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
35
In all the three approaches described, the alignments must be maintained
following the evolution of the reused ontologies. However, in the situation of
incoherence raised by a change in an external reused ontology, the third approach
guarantees the easiest maintenance, as it will be enough to revise the affected
alignment relations.
In the context of the Cultural-ON project, we decided to adopt the third approach,
i.e. indirect reuse of ODPs and alignments. This choice is motivated by requirements
of the project that can be summarised as follows:
•
to favour interoperability;
•
to remove and minimise the dependency on external ontologies, in favour of the
sustainability of the ontology;
•
to provide to potential users of Cultural-ON a “self-contained” ontology, which
reuses external ontologies by means of alignments;
•
to deﬁne a sufﬁcient number of axioms to address both competency questions
and the legacy data (i.e. DB Unico);
•
to ﬁnd the best tradeoff in terms of number of reused entities, ODPs and ontology
fragments that guarantee coherence among the axioms of the reused ontologies
and of the local one. The coherence is tested and checked at design time, by using
query engines and reasoners, according to Blomqvist et al. (2012).
Concluding Remark
This Chapter described a work conducted in the context of a collaboration estab-
lished with the Italian Ministry of Cultural Heritage and Activities and Tourism.
The work consisted in two important phases: (1) a cultural data landscape analysis,
which allowed us to understand the peculiarities of part of the large Italian cultural
patrimony; and (2) the deﬁnition of a common and standard-based data model
capable of representing cultural property resources, The model has been deﬁned
so as to pave the way to the construction of a large open interconnected knowledge
base which can, among others, guarantee that different organisations operating in
the cultural sector could agree on the precise meaning of common and exchanged
information on cultural properties, preserving that meaning throughout the data
exchange.
The data model is actually a suite of ontology modules we named Cultural-
ON (Cultural ONtologies), where the module related to “cultural institutes and
sites” and “cultural events”, we presented in this Chapter, is expressed using OWL
(Ontology Web Language), a semantic markup language for publishing and sharing
ontologies on the Web. The module has been designed by applying a methodology
that, starting from a clear deﬁnition of requirements to meet, makes extensively re-
use of ontology design patterns. Together with ontology design patterns, CulturalON
has been structured so as to be linked to other ontologies available on the Web. In
doing so, sustainability and semantic interoperability requirements were considered.

36
G. Lodi et al.
Based on the data model, the chapter proposes a process that allows us to
produce linked open datasets on cultural institutes and sites and cultural events
that can be maintained up-to-date over time. This was realised by integrating the
proposed process into the real business process of data management employed by
the Ministry.
The chapter also discusses a number of lessons learnt and recommendations that
can be sufﬁciently general to be applied in analogous cultural projects and in other
domains.
Future Works
We are planning to extend the Cultural-ON suite with a module for the represen-
tation of cultural objects and collections. Currently, the cultural institutes and sites
ontology offers a preliminary representation of objects and collections as “hooks”
for future extensions, which will capture the peculiarities of those objects and
collections. In this sense, standard ontologies such as CIDOC-CRM (as described
in the state of the art) can be investigated.
Finally, we are evaluating the reuse of the data model and produced linked open
datasets to support the valorisation of less known cultural properties, thus fostering
both their fruition by a wide audience of users and the creation of a richer shared
culture and a wealthy touristic market.
References
C. Aart, B. Wielinga, W. Robert Hage, Mobile cultural heritage guide: location-aware semantic
search, in Proceedings of the 17th International Conference of Knowledge Engineering and
Management by the Masses (EKAW-2010). ed. By P. Cimiano, H. Soﬁa Pinto (Springer, Lisbon,
2010), pp. 257–271
E. Blomqvist et al., Experimenting with eXtreme Design, in the Proceeding of 17th International
Conference of (EKAW-2010), ed. By P. Cimiano, H. Soﬁa Pinto. Lisbon. Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 6317 (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Lisbon, Portugal, 2010), pp. 120–
134. Doi:10.1007/978-3-642-16438-5_9
E. Blomqvist, A. Seil Sepour, V. Presutti, Ontology testing - methodology and tool, in Knowledge
Engineering and Knowledge Management - the Proceeding of 18th International Confer-
ence (EKAW-2012), ed. By A. ten Teije et al., Galway City. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, vol. 7603 (Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Galway City, Ireland, 2012), pp. 216–226.
Doi:10.1007/978-3-642-33876-2_20
V. de Boer et al., Amsterdam museum linked open data. Semantic Web 4(3), 237–243 (2013)
M. Doerr, The CIDOC conceptual reference module: an ontological approach to semantic
interoperability of metadata. AI Magazine 24(3), 75–92 (2003)
A. Gangemi, V. Presutti, Ontology design patterns, in Handbook on Ontologies, 2nd edn., ed. By
S. Staab, R. Studer. International Handbooks on Information Systems (Springer, Berlin, 2009),
pp. 221–243. Doi:10.1007/978-3-540-92673-3_10

Semantic Web for Cultural Heritage Valorisation
37
M. Grüninger, M.S. Fox, The role of competency questions in enterprise engineering, in
Benchmarking – Theory and Practice, ed. by A. Rolstadås. IFIP Advances in Infor-
mation and Communication Technology (Springer, Boston, MA, 1995), pp. 22–31.
Doi:10.1007/978-0-387-34847-6_3
E. Hyvönen, Semantic portals for cultural heritage, in Handbook on Ontologies, 2nd edn., ed. By
S. Staab, R. Studer (Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2009), pp. 757–778
A. Isaac, B. Haslhofer, Europeana Linked Open Data - data.europeana.eu. Semantic Web 4(3),
291–297 (2013)
J. Oomen, L. Aroyo, Crowdsourcing in the cultural heritage domain: opportunities and challenges,
in Proceedings of 5th International Conference on Communities & Technologies (C&T-2011)
(ACM, Brisbane, 2011), pp. 138–149
S. Peroni, D. Shotton, F. Vitali, Tools for the automatic generation of ontology documentation: a
task-based evaluation. Int. J. Semantic Web Inf. Syst. 9(1), 21–44 (2013)
M. Ridge, From tagging to theorizing: deepening engagement with cultural heritage through
crowdsourcing. Curator: Museum J. 56(4), 435–450 (2013)
T. Ruotsalo et al., SMARTMUSEUM: a mobile recommender system for the Web of Data. Web
Semantics: Sci. Serv. Agents World Wide Web 20, 50–67 (2013)
G. Schreiber et al., Semantic annotation and search of cultural-heritage collections: the Multi-
mediaN E-Culture demonstrator. Web Semantics: Sci. Serv. Agents World Wide Web 6(4),
243–249 (2008)
E.P.B. Simperl, M. Mochol, T. Bürger, Achieving maturity: the state of practice in ontology
engineering in 2009. Int. J. Comput. Sci. Appl. (IJCSA) 7(1), 45–65 (2010). ISSN: 0972-9038
M.C. Suárez-Figueroa, A. Gómez-Pérez, M. Fernández-López, The NeOn methodology frame-
work: a scenario-based methodology for ontology development. Appl. Ontol. 10(2), 107–145
(2015). Doi:10.3233/AO-150145
P. Szekely et al., Connecting the Smithsonian American Art Museum to the linked data cloud, in
Proceedings of the 10th Extended Semantic Web Conference (ESWC-2013), ed. By P. Cimiano
et al. (Springer, Montpellier, 2013), pp. 593–607
Y. Wang et al., Interactive user modeling for personalized access to museum collections: the
Rijksmuseum case study, in Proceedings of the 11th International Conference of User
Modeling (UM-2007), ed. By C. Conati, K. McCoy, G. Paliouras (Springer, Corfu, 2007),
pp. 385–389

Using the Formal Representations
of “Elementary Events” to Set Up
Computational Models of Full “Narratives”
Gian Piero Zarri
Abstract In this chapter, we describe the conceptual tools that, in an NKRL
context (NKRL D Narrative Knowledge Representation Language), allow us to
obtain a (computer-usable) description of full “narratives” as logically structured
associations of the constituting (and duly formalized) “elementary events.” Dealing
with this problem means, in practice, being able to formalize those “connectivity
phenomena”—denoted, at “surface level,” by logico-semantic coherence links like
causality, goal, co-ordination, subordination, indirect speech, etc.—that assure the
conceptual unity of a whole narrative. The second-order, uniﬁcation based solutions
adopted by NKRL in this context, “completive construction” and “binding occur-
rences,” allow us to take into account the connectivity phenomena by “reifying”
the formal representations used to model the constitutive elementary events. These
solutions, which are of interest from a general digital humanities point of view, are
explained in some depth making use of several illustrating examples.
Introduction
NKRL, the “Narrative Knowledge Representation Language,” is both a conceptual
modeling tool (Zarri 2009) and a (fully implemented) computer science environment
(Zarri 2009: Appendix A, 2010), created for dealing with “narratives” in an
innovative way. In a nutshell a narrative—see, e.g., Bal (1997), Jahn (2005)—is
a general unifying framework used for relating real-life or ﬁctional stories involving
concrete or imaginary characters and their relationships. A narrative materializes
actually as (multimedia) work of speech, writing, song, ﬁlm, television, video game,
photography, theater, etc.
Even if the conceptual structures and the procedures used in NKRL for dealing
with narratives are quite general, the concrete applications of this language have
concerned mainly non-ﬁctional narratives. While ﬁctional narratives have prin-
G.P. Zarri ()
Sorbonne University, STIH Laboratory, Maison de la Recherche – 28, rue Serpente,
75006 Paris, France
e-mail: zarri@noos.fr
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
S. Hai-Jew (ed.), Data Analytics in Digital Humanities, Multimedia Systems
and Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54499-1_2
39

40
G.P. Zarri
cipally an entertainment value and represent a narrator’s account of a story that
happened in an imaginary world (a novel is a typical example of ﬁctional narrative),
non-ﬁctional narratives are deeply rooted in the everyday world. They are conveyed,
e.g., by NL supports under the form of news stories, corporate memory documents
(memos, reports, minutes, etc.), normative and legal texts, medical records, etc.
But they can also be represented by multimedia documents like audio and video
records, surveillance videos, actuality photos for newspapers and magazines, etc.
A photo representing President Obama addressing the Congress, or a short video
showing three nice girls on a beach, can be considered as “non-ﬁctional narrative”
documents even if they are not, of course, NL documents. We can note immediately
the ubiquitous character of this sort of (non-ﬁctional) narrative resources and their
general economic importance.
In agreement with the most recent theoretical developments in the “narratology”
domain, NKRL understands a (ﬁctional or non-ﬁctional) “narrative” under the form
of a “coherent” (i.e., logically connected) stream of spatio-temporally constrained
“elementary events.” It is then evident that, in an NKRL context, a fundamental step
for the modeling of (whole) narratives concerns the possibility of ﬁnding a complete,
logically correct, and computer-exploitable formal representation of the different
elementary events that makes up the stream. This topic has been dealt with in-depth
in several recent publications, see Zarri (2009, 2010, 2011a, 2015) for example,
and will only be alluded to in passing in this paper.1 This last focuses, instead, on
the description of two speciﬁc mechanisms used in NKRL for formalizing some
relational phenomena that are particularly relevant in the context of the logical
coherence of the narrative stream evoked above—and that are of interest, in general,
from a cognitive point of view. They are (1) the need to refer to an elementary
event (or a full narrative) as an argument of another event (see, e.g., an event X
where someone speaks about Y, where Y is itself an elementary event or a logically
coherent set of events), and (2) the need for associating together through some
sort of logico-semantic relationships elementary events or narratives that could
also be regarded as independent entities (as an elementary event or full narrative
X being linked to another event or narrative Y by causality, goal, coordination,
1We will only mention that, in an NKRL context, each elementary event is recognized—as usual,
see Matsuyoshi et al. (2010) for example—thanks to the detection of “generalized predicates”
within the natural language (NL) formulation of the whole stream. These predicates correspond
then to the usual tensed/untensed “verbs,” but also to “adjectives” (“ : : : worth several dollars : : : ”,
“ : : : a dormant volcano : : : ”), nouns (“ : : : Jane’s amble along the park : : : ”, “ : : : a possible
attack : : : ”), etc., when they have a predicative function. Let us look, e.g., at two simple narratives
proper to a recent NKRL application concerning the conceptual analysis of accident messages in
an industrial context, see Zarri (2011b), like: “The control room operator recognizes an alarm”
and “The control room operator presses a button to initialize a new start-up sequence.” In the ﬁrst
example, the whole narrative is formed of a unique elementary event, detected via the presence
of the predicate “recognize.” In the second, the narrative is formed of two elementary events,
identiﬁed thanks to the occurrence of the two predicates “press” and “initialize.” The whole
narrative is eventually fully formalized by using a “second order operator” in the GOAL style
to link together the formal expressions of the two elementary events, see later in this chapter.

Using the Formal Representations of “Elementary Events” to Set Up. . .
41
alternative, etc. relationships). In an NKRL context, the ﬁrst relational phenomenon
is called “completive construction” and the second “binding occurrences”; the
two are collectively denoted as “connectivity phenomena.” Passing from the deep,
conceptual level proper to NKRL to a surface, linguistic level, they can then evoke
the classical “textual cohesion” aspects described, among many others, by Halliday
and Hasan (1976) and Morris and Hirst (1991) and the “contingency phenomena”
recently analyzed, e.g., by Hu et al. (2013) in a ﬁlm scene descriptions context.
At surface level, the presence of connectivity phenomena is recognized through
the existence of “cues,” i.e., syntactic/semantic features like causality, goal, co-
ordination, subordination, indirect speech, etc.
In the following, we will present ﬁrst, section “Basic Notions About NKRL”,
a quick recall of some fundamental principles about NKRL, and the associate
terminology. Section “Linking Elementary Events” is the central component of
the paper, showing how the basic building blocks corresponding to the ele-
mentary events can be associated within wider structures in order to take the
“connectivity phenomena” into account. Section “Querying/Inference Procedures”
mentions brieﬂy the querying/inference mechanisms of NKRL, referring the reader
to other NKRL publications for additional details. Section “Related Work” concerns
some comparisons with work related to the speciﬁc NKRL’s approach; section
“Conclusion” supplies, eventually, a short “Conclusion.”
Basic Notions About NKRL
NKRL innovates with respect to the current ontological paradigms—e.g., those
developed in a Semantic Web (SW) context, see Bechhofer et al. (2004), W3C OWL
Working Group (2012)—by adding an “ontology of elementary events” to the usual
“ontology of concepts.”
The ontology of concepts is called HClass (“hierarchy of classes”) in an
NKRL context and includes presently (February 2016) more than 7500 “standard”
concepts—“standard” meaning here that the “properties” or “attributes” used to
deﬁne a given concept are simply expressed as binary (i.e., linking only two
arguments) relationships of the “property/value” type. From a purely “formal”
point of view HClass—see Zarri (2009, pp. 43–55, 123–137)—is not fundamentally
different, then, from the ontologies that we can build up by using the frame version
of Protégé (Noy et al. 2000).
The ontology of elementary events is, by contrast, a new sort of hierarchical
organization where the nodes correspond to n-ary structures called “templates,”
represented schematically according to the syntax of Eq. (1) below. This ontology is
then denoted as HTemp (hierarchy of templates) in NKRL. Templates, in opposition
to the “static/basic” notions (like “human being,” “amount,” “color,” “artefact,”
“control room,” “valve,” “level of temperature,” etc.) denoted by the HClass
concepts, take into account the “dynamic/structured” component of the narrative
information. They can be conceived, in fact, as the canonical, formal representation

42
G.P. Zarri
of generic classes of spatio-temporally characterized elementary events like “move
a physical object,” “be present in a place,” “having a speciﬁc attitude towards
someone/something,” “produce a service,” “asking/receiving an advice,” etc.

Li

Pj .R1 a1/ .R2 a2/ : : : .Rn an/

(1)
In Eq. (1), Li is the “symbolic label” identifying (reifying) the particular n-ary
structure corresponding to a speciﬁc template—as we will see in the following,
these reiﬁcation operations are of a fundamental importance in the context of the
association of (formalized) elementary events. Pj is a “conceptual predicate.” Rk is a
generic “functional role” (Zarri 2011a) used to specify the logico-semantic function
of its “ﬁller” ak with respect to the predicate. ak is then a “predicate argument”
introduced by the role Rk.
When a template following the general syntax of Eq. (1) and denoted as
Move:TransferMaterialThingsToSomeone in NKRL is instantiated to provide the
representation of a simple elementary event like “Bill gives a book to Mary,”
the predicate Pj (MOVE) will introduce its three arguments ak, JOHN_, MARY_,
and BOOK_1 (“individuals,” i.e., instances of HClass concepts) through the three
functional relationships (Rk roles) SUBJ(ect), BEN(e)F(iciary), and OBJECT. The
global n-ary construction is then reiﬁed through the symbolic label Li and neces-
sarily managed as a coherent block at the same time. The instances of templates
are called “predicative occurrences” and correspond then to the representation of
speciﬁc elementary events, see the examples in the following section.
Note that, to avoid the ambiguities of natural language and any possible com-
binatorial explosion problem—see Zarri (2009, pp. 56–61)—both the conceptual
predicate of Eq. (1) and the associated functional roles are “primitives.” Predicates
Pj pertain then to the set fBEHAVE, EXIST, EXPERIENCE, MOVE, OWN, PRO-
DUCE, RECEIVEg, and the roles Rk to the set fSUBJ(ect), OBJ(ect), SOURCE,
BEN(e)F(iciary), MODAL(ity), TOPIC, CONTEXTg. Figure 1 reproduces a frag-
ment of the HTemp hierarchy that displays, in particular, the conceptual labels of
some off-springs of the Move: (and Produce:) sub-hierarchies. As it appears from
this ﬁgure, HTemp is structured into seven branches, where each branch includes
only the templates created—according to the general syntax of Eq. (1)—around one
of the seven predicates (Pj) admitted by the NKRL language.
For the sake of clarity, we reproduce in Table 1 the full formalism corresponding
to the template Move:TransferMaterialThingsToSomeone (see also Fig. 1) used to
produce the predicative occurrence formalizing the elementary event “Bill gives a
book to Mary” of the above example. The constituents (as SOURCE, MODAL,
(var2), etc. in Table 1) included in square brackets are optional. HTemp includes
presently (February 2016) more than 150 templates, very easy to specialize and
customize, see, e.g., Zarri (2009, pp. 137–177, 2014).
As we can see from Table 1, the arguments of the predicate (the ak terms in
Eq. 1) are actually represented by variables (vari) with associated constraints.
These are expressed as concepts or combinations of concepts, i.e., using the
terms of the NKRL standard ontology of concepts (HClass). When creating a

Using the Formal Representations of “Elementary Events” to Set Up. . .
43
Fig. 1 Partial image of
HTemp, with the Produce:
and Move: branches partly
unfolded
predicative occurrence as an instance of a given template, the constraints linked
to the variables are used to specify the legal sets of HClass terms (concepts or
individuals) that can be substituted for these variables within the occurrence. In the
predicative occurrence corresponding to the above example, we must then verify
that JOHN_ and MARY_ are real HClass instances of individual_person, a speciﬁc
term of human_being_or_social_body, see the constraints on the SUBJ and BENF
functional roles of the template in Table 1. BOOK_1, as an instance of the HClass
concept book_, veriﬁes in turn the constraint artefact_ associated with the ﬁller of
the OBJ role. book_ is, in fact, a speciﬁc term of artefact_ through intermediate
HClass concepts like, e.g., information_support.2
2We can also note that “determiners” (or “attributes”) can be added to templates or predicative
occurrences to introduce further details about the basic core, “symbolic label/predicate/functional
roles/arguments of the predicate,” see Eq. (1), of their formal representation (Zarri 2009, pp.

44
G.P. Zarri
Table 1 A template of the Move: branch of HTemp
name: Move:TransferMaterialThingToSomeone
father: Move: TransferToSomeone
position: 4.21
NL description: ‘Transfer a Material Thing (e.g., a Product, a Letter…) to Someone’ 
MOVE
SUBJ
var1: [(var2)]
OBJ
var3
[SOURCE
var4: [(var5)]]
BENF
var6: [(var7)]
[MODAL
var8]
[TOPIC
var9]
[CONTEXT 
var10]
{ [ modulators ], ¹abs }
var1
=
human_being_or_social_body
var3
=
artefact_  
var4
=
human_being_or_social_body
var6
=
human_being_or_social_body
var8
=
sector_specific_activity, service_
var9
=
sortal_concept  
var10
=
situation_, symbolic_label
var2, var5, var7
=    location_
Linking Elementary Events
In section “Introduction”, we have mentioned those “connectivity phenomena”—
signaled, at “surface linguistic level,” by the presence of NL syntactic/semantic
features like causality, goal, indirect speech, co-ordination, subordination, etc.—
that assure the logical coherence among the components (elementary events) of a
speciﬁc narrative.
In NKRL, the connectivity phenomena are dealt with making use of Higher
Order Logic (HOL) structures—according to HOL, a predicate can take one or more
other predicates as arguments—obtained from the reiﬁcation of generic (i.e., not
only predicative, see below) occurrences. Concretely, the reiﬁcation is based on the
use of the symbolic labels denoted by the Li terms in Eq. (1) above. “Reiﬁcation” is
intended here—as usual in a Knowledge Representation context—as the possibility
70–86). In particular, determiners/attributes of the “location” type—represented in general by
lists of instances of the HClass location_ concept and of its specialization terms—can be
associated through the “colon” operator, “:”, with the arguments of the predicate (i.e., the ﬁllers)
introduced by the SUBJ, OBJ, SOURCE, and BENF functional roles of a template, see Table 1.
Another important category of determiners/attributes associated, in this case, to a full, well-formed
template or predicative occurrence to particularize its meaning are constants of the “modulator”
type. Modulators are classed into three categories: temporal (begin, end, obs(erve)), deontic
(oblig(ation), fac(ulty), interd(iction), perm(ission)), and modal modulators (for, against, wish,
ment(al), etc.). See the examples in the sections below for some additional information about the
determiners/attributes.

Using the Formal Representations of “Elementary Events” to Set Up. . .
45
of creating new objects (“ﬁrst class citizens”) out of already existing entities and
to “say something” about them without making explicit reference to the original
entities.
Completive Construction
A ﬁrst example of HOL connection between elementary events is represented by
the “completive construction.” This consists in using as ﬁller of a functional role in
a predicative occurrence pci the symbolic label Lj of another (generic) occurrence
cj. We can note immediately that the cj (indirectly) used as ﬁllers can correspond
not only to predicative occurrences pci, but also to those “binding occurrences” bci
we will introduce in the next sub-section. Constraints proper to the “completive
construction” category of NKRL HOL constructions are:
•
Only the OBJ, MODAL, TOPIC, and CONTEXT functional roles of pci can
accept as ﬁller the symbolic label Lj of a cj, and only one of these four roles can
be utilized in the context of a speciﬁc instantiation of the completive construction
mechanism.
•
Lj must denote a single symbolic label, i.e., any “structured ﬁller” represented
under the form of an association of labels cannot be used in a completive
construction framework.
•
For (software) implementation reasons, this single label Lj is preﬁxed, in the
“external” NKRL format used in the examples of this chapter, by a “sharp,” “#”,
code. The general format of a completive construction ﬁller corresponds then,
actually, to #symbolic_label, see the examples below. Note that symbolic_label
is a regular concept of HClass, the standard NKRL ontology of concepts.
This concept has then as speciﬁc instances all the actual labels used to denote
(predicative and binding) occurrences in a speciﬁc NKRL application.
As a ﬁrst example, we reproduce in Table 2 a fragment of a scenario concerning
a recent Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) application of NKRL. In this fragment,
a robot reminds John, an ageing person, of the obligation to lock the front door.
The modulator oblig(ation), see Note 2, has been used in aal9.c12 to denote the
absolute necessity of locking the front door. The “temporal determiners/attributes”
date-1/date-2 are used in association with predicative occurrences to introduce the
temporal information proper to the original elementary event, see, e.g., Zarri (2009,
pp. 80–86, 194–201).3
3With respect to the (semi-)automatic synthesis of predicative occurrences like aal9.c11 and
aal9.c12 in Table 2 and all the others mentioned in this paper—more in general, with respect to
the (semi-)automatic “translation” from Natural Language (NL) into NKRL—several prototypes
exist. All of them derive, basically, from the algorithms developed in the eighties in the framework
of the RESEDA (in French, Reseau Sémantique Documentaire) project, an NKRL’s ancestor, see
Zarri (1983). Very in short, an up-to-date syntactic parser in the style of the well-known Stanford

46
G.P. Zarri
Table 2 An example of completive construction
aal9.c11)
MOVE
SUBJ
ROBOT_1
OBJ
#aal9.c12
BENF
JOHN_
MODAL
audio_warning
date-1:
11/4/2011/17:35
date-2:
Move:StructuredInformation (4.42)
On 11/4/2011, at 17h35, the robot reminds John through an audio message of what is 
described in the predicative occurrence aal9.c12.
aal9.c12)
MOVE
SUBJ
JOHN_
OBJ
FRONT_DOOR_1: (unlocked_, locked_)
{ oblig }
date-1:
11/4/2011/17:35
date-2:
Move:ForcedChangeOfState (4.12)
On 11/4/2011, at 17h35, John must necessarily, modulator “oblig(ation)”, lock the front door.
We can note, in the formal encoding of Table 2, the use of predicative
occurrences corresponding to two different types of Move: templates. The ﬁrst,
Move:StructuredInformation (a specialization of the Move:TransmitInformation
template) is necessarily used in NKRL to represent, according to the “completive
construction” modalities, the transmission of some complex information whose
content is described by one or more predicative occurrences. The second,
Move:ForcedChangeOfState, a specialization of Move:ForcedChange, is used when
an agent (SUBJ) moves an entity (OBJ D physical object, animate entity, process,
etc.) from an initial state to a ﬁnal one. In this case, the initial state is represented by
the ﬁrst position of the location list associated (through the “:” operator, see again
Note 2 above) with the ﬁller of the OBJ role in the predicative occurrence (aal9.c12
in Table 2) that represents the moving. The ﬁnal state is represented by the second
position of the same list. Possible intermediary states can be symbolized as the
ordered sequence of locations included between the ﬁrst and last position of the list.
Note also that the procedure used in aal9.c12 to denote a forced change of location
parser (Klein and Manning 2003) is used for a preliminary syntactic analysis of the NL text
corresponding to the NKRL structures to be generated. A set of generalized “if-then” rules is
then activated, where the “antecedents” of the rules denote fragments of the syntactic analysis
able to “trigger” NKRL template-like structures (represented by the “consequents” of the rules)
if some speciﬁc lexico-syntactic conditions are recognized. HClass and lexico-semantic resources
like WordNet, VerbNet, Roget Thesaurus, etc. are used to complete the “translation” operations. A
recent system in this style is described, e.g., in Ayari et al. (2013).

Using the Formal Representations of “Elementary Events” to Set Up. . .
47
is valid in general, i.e., also when the elements of the vector associated with the
OBJ ﬁller correspond to concrete “physical” locations and not to “abstract” states.
Binding Occurrences
A second, more general way of linking together NKRL elementary events within
the scope of a full narrative consists in making use of “binding occurrences.”
These are lists labelled with speciﬁc “binding operators” Bni whose arguments argi
are represented (reiﬁcation) by symbolic labels Lj of (predicative or binding) cj
occurrences. The general expression of a binding occurrence bci is then:
.Lbk .Bni L1 L2 : : : Ln// ;
(2)
where Lbk is now the symbolic label identifying the whole (autonomous) binding
structure. Unlike templates and predicative occurrences, binding occurrences are
then characterized by the absence of any predicate or functional role. The eight
binding operators are listed (and deﬁned) in Table 3.
The binding occurrences bci must necessarily conform to the following manda-
tory restrictions to be considered as well formed:
•
Each term (argument) Lj that, in a binding list, is associated with one of the
operators of Table 3, denotes exactly a single predicative or binding occurrence
cj described externally to the list. Therefore, the arguments Lj are always single
terms and cannot consist of lists of symbolic labels associated in turn with
binding operators.
•
In the binding occurrences of the ALTERN, COORD, and ENUM type, no
restriction is imposed on the cardinality of the list, i.e., on the possible number
of terms (arguments) Lj.
•
In the binding occurrences labelled with CAUSE, REFER, GOAL, MOTIV, and
COND, on the contrary, only two arguments Lm and Ln are admitted, see Table
3. The binding occurrences labelled with these ﬁve binding operators are then
simply of the form: (Lbk (Bni Lm Ln)). In these lists, the arguments Lm and Ln
can denote, in general, either a predicative or a binding occurrence: an exception
is represented by the COND binding occurrences, where the ﬁrst argument, Lm,
must correspond necessarily to a predicative occurrence pci, see again Table 3.
To supply now a ﬁrst idea of the modalities of use of the “binding occurrences”
tools let us suppose, see Table 4, we would like to formalize in NKRL terms
the following situation: “From the main control room of the GP1Z plant, the
production activities leader pushes the SEQ1 button in order to start the auxiliary
lubrication pump M202.” According to what was explained in Note 1 above,
recognizing the presence of two surface predicates like “push” and “start” implies
the creation, at “deep level,” of two different elementary events (two predicative
occurrences). Moreover, the presence of “in order of” denotes the existence of some

48
G.P. Zarri
Table 3 Binding operators of NKRL
Operator
Acronym
Mnemonic description
Alternative
ALTERN
The “disjunctive” operator. Only a speciﬁc elementary event
corresponding to one of the terms included in the list of the
associated Lj labels must be taken into account, but this term is
not known a priori.
Co-ordination
COORD
The “collective” operator. All the elementary events
corresponding to all the Lj terms of the list must necessarily be
considered together.
Enumeration
ENUM
The “distributive” operator. Each elementary event corresponding
to each Lj term of the list must be taken into account, but they are
dealt with in a separate way.
Cause
CAUSE
Only two Lj terms can appear in a CAUSE binding occurrence
(and in all the binding occurrences designated by one of the
following binding operators of this Table). CAUSE is the “strict
causality” operator, introducing a necessary and sufﬁcient causal
relationship between the elementary events denoted by the ﬁrst,
Lm, and the second, Ln, arguments of the list, the latter event
explaining the former.
Reference
REFER
The “weak causality” operator, introducing a necessary but not
sufﬁcient causal relationship between the elementary events
denoted by the ﬁrst, Lm, and the second, Ln, arguments of the list.
Goal
GOAL
The “strict intentionality” operator: the elementary event denoted
by the ﬁrst argument Lm is necessary to bring about the event
denoted by the second argument, Ln, and this second event is
sufﬁcient to explain the ﬁrst. The predicative occurrence(s)
corresponding to the second argument is/are marked as
“uncertain,” operator “*”, see Zarri (2009, p. 71).
Motivation
MOTIV
The “weak intentionality” operator: the event denoted by the ﬁrst
argument Lm is not necessary to bring about the event denoted by
Ln, but this last is sufﬁcient to explain the ﬁrst. The predicative
occurrence(s) denoted by the second argument is/are marked as
“uncertain,” operator “*”.
Condition
COND
The (single) predicative occurrence pci denoted by Lm represents
an event that could occur if the predicative or binding occurrence
cj denoted by Ln should take place. pci is necessarily associated
with a modal modulator “poss(ibility)”; the (single or multiple)
predicative occurrence(s) corresponding to Ln is/are necessarily
marked as “uncertain.”
connectivity phenomena that brings together the two events. The ﬁrst occurrence
of Table 4, virt2.c32, corresponds then to the action of “pushing”: button_pushing
is an HClass concept, specialization of another (high level) concept, activity_,
through device_use and other HClass terms. Note that the TOPIC role has the
general meaning of “apropos of,” “concerning,” “with reference to,” etc. The second
occurrence, virt2.c33, represents the (possible) result of the action of “pushing,” i.e.,
the shift of the auxiliary lubrication pump from an “idle” to a “running” state. Note,
in this case, the assimilation of the two states to “locations,” with the original state

Using the Formal Representations of “Elementary Events” to Set Up. . .
49
Table 4 Binding and predicative occurrences
virt2.c32) PRODUCE
SUBJ
INDIVIDUAL_PERSON_102: (GP1Z_MAIN_CONTROL_ROOM)
OBJ
button_pushing
TOPIC SEQ1_BUTTON
date-1:  16/10/2008/08:26
date-2:
Produce:PerformTask/Activity (6.3)
*virt2.c33) MOVE
SUBJ
AUXILIARY_LUBRICATION_PUMP_M202: (idle_)
OBJ
AUXILIARY_LUBRICATION_PUMP_M202: (running_)
date-1:  16/10/2008/08:26
date-2:
Move:AutonomousChangeofState (4.32)
virt2.c30)  (GOAL virt2.c32  virt2.c33)
occupying the ﬁrst place of the location list associated with the SUBJ’s ﬁller and
the ﬁnal state occupying the second position of this list (see also the location list
associated with the OBJ’s ﬁller in the occurrence aal9.c12 of Table 2 above).
To encode now the “connectivity phenomena” information, we must introduce
a binding occurrence virt2.c30 to link together the conceptual labels virt2.c32
(denoting the planning activity) and virt2.c33 (denoting the intended result). This
binding occurrence will be labelled using the GOAL operator introduced in Table
3 and involving, as already stated, only two arguments. The global meaning of
virt2.c30 is then: “The activity described in virt2.c32 is focalized towards (GOAL)
the realization of virt2.c33.” In agreement with the semantics of the GOAL
operator (see Table 3) virt2.c33, the “result,” is characterized by the presence of an
uncertainty attribute code, “*”, to indicate that, at the moment of “pushing,” the real
instantiation of a situation corresponding to “pump running” cannot be categorically
afﬁrmed (Zarri 2009, p. 71).
Note that, in Table 4, we have used a Move:AutonomousChangeOfState template
instead of the template Move:ForcedChangeOfState that appears in Table 2. In
NKRL, each elementary event is, in fact, autonomously modelled. Should virt2.c33
really take place, we will see the pump starting to move without any apparent human
participation. In contrast, in Table 2, John must explicitly step in to carry out the
locking of the door.
NKRL Modelling of Full Narratives
The second order (HOL) structures of NKRL, completive construction and binding
occurrences, allow us to take correctly into account the connectivity phenomena;
accordingly, they play also a crucial role in the modelling of full narratives (or
scenarios, complex events, knotty circumstances, etc.). As an example, we supply

50
G.P. Zarri
in Table 5 the NKRL representation of a full narrative proper to the context of the
“accident messages” application already mentioned: “On November 1st, 2008, at
10h15, the start-up procedure of the GP1Z turbine was stopped by the production
activities leader, given that he had been informed by a ﬁeld operator of the presence
of an oil leakage concerning an auxiliary lubrication pump.”
The (mandatory) starting point for the creation of the NKRL formal repre-
sentation of any sort of complete narrative consists in the set-up of a binding
occurrence listing the main topics dealt within this narrative. This “upper level”
occurrence corresponds frequently, as in the present case (see virt3.c1), to a binding
occurrence of the COORD(ination) type (COORD is one of the “binding operators”
listed in Table 3 above). We have then assumed here that the narrative was formed
of three independent but strictly connected items, relating the ﬁrst (virt3.c2) the
narrative’s core, i.e., the speciﬁc causes of the turbine’s stop, and giving the second
(virt3.c3) and the third (virt3.c4) auxiliary information about the jobs of the two
involved people. But the upper level binding occurrence could also consist, e.g.,
of an ENUM(eration) relationship, of a CAUSE binding occurrence, etc.: all the
operators listed in Table 3 can then be used in this role. Having set-up the top
level of the conceptual representation, the different blocks listed in this binding
occurrence are successively expanded and the corresponding elementary events
separately encoded.
Let us consider, e.g., the binding occurrence virt3.c6 that illustrates the
two (strictly associated, COORD) precise reasons of the stop. The ﬁrst is
described in the completive construction formed by the indirect inclusion of
virt3.c8, the “message” signaling the leakage, as OBJ(ect) of the transmission
of information between the two individuals INDIVIDUAL_PERSON_104 and
INDIVIDUAL_PERSON_106 represented by the predicative occurrence virt3.c7.
Note that, thanks to the completive construction mechanism, the two occurrences
virt3.c7/virt3.c8 perform actually as a unique conceptual unit. Note also that the
insertion of the symbolic label #virt3.c8 within the arguments of the binding
occurrence virt3.c6 concerns only, once again, some coherence controls proper to
the NKRL software, and does not alter at all the actual cardinality (two) of the
COORD’s arguments in virt3.c6. The second reason of the stop is described in
virt3.c9: when the leakage is detected we can note, temporal modulator obs(serve),
that the auxiliary pump is linked to the turbine (coupled_with is an HClass concept,
specialization of binary_relational_property). “obs”—see Note 2 and Zarri (2009,
pp. 71–75)—is a “temporal modulator,” used to indicate that the situation described
in the associated predicative occurrence is certainly true at the speciﬁc date stored in
the date-1 temporal attribute of the occurrence (see also the two “status” occurrences
virt3.c3 and virt3.c4). We do not care then, for lack of interest, lack of information
or for the sake of conformity with the original wording of the narrative, about the
real duration of this situation, which surely extends in time before and after the
given date.

Using the Formal Representations of “Elementary Events” to Set Up. . .
51
Table 5 NKRL modelling of a full narrative
virt3.c1)
(COORD  virt3.c2 virt3.c3 virt3.c4)
The conceptual model ofthe narrative is formed of three components.
virt3.c2)
(CAUSE  virt3.c5 virt3.c6)
The first component consists of a CAUSE binding relationship.
virt3.c5)
PRODUCE
SUBJ
INDIVIDUAL_PERSON_102: (GP1Z_MAIN_CONTROL_ROOM)
OBJ
activity_stop
TOPIC
(SPECIF turbine_startup GP1Z_TURBINE)             
date-1:
1/11/2008/10:15, (1/11/2008/10:30)
date-2:
Produce:PerformTask/Activity (6.3)
On November 1st, 2008, INDIVIDUAL_PERSON_102 ends the start-up of the GP1Z_TURBINE.
virt3.c6)
(COORD  virt3.c7  #virt3.c8 virt3.c9)
The second term of the CAUSE relationship consists of a COORD binding occurrence. 
virt3.c7)
MOVE
SUBJ
INDIVIDUAL_PERSON_104: (GP1Z_COMPLEX)
OBJ
#virt3.c8
BENF
INDIVIDUAL_PERSON_102: (GP1Z_MAIN_CONTROL_ROOM)
MODAL
vhf_audio_transmitter   
date-1:
1/11/2008/10:15
date-2:
Move:StructuredInformation ( 4.42)
INDIVIDUAL_PERSON_104 sends to INDIVIDUAL_PERSON_102 the virt3.c8 message.
virt3.c8)
PRODUCE
SUBJ
INDIVIDUAL_PERSON_104: (GP1Z_COMPLEX)
OBJ
detection_ 
TOPIC
(SPECIF lubrication_oil_leakage (SPECIF around_
AUXILIARY_LUBRICATION_PUMP_M202))             
date-1: 1/11/2008/10:02
date-2: 1/11/2008/10:15
Produce:PerformTask/Activity (6.3)
INDIVIDUAL_PERSON_104 has discovered the presence of an oil leakage around the lubrication pump M202.
virt3.c9)
OWN
SUBJ
AUXILIARY_LUBRICATION_PUMP_M202
OBJ
property_
TOPIC
(SPECIF coupled_with GP1Z_TURBINE)
{ obs }
date-1:
1/11/2008/10:02
date-2:
Own:CompoundProperty (5.42)
On November 1st, 2008, at 10h02, we can observe that the lubrication pump is related to the GP1Z_TURBINE.
virt3.c3)
BEHAVE
SUBJ
INDIVIDUAL_PERSON_102: (GP1Z_MAIN_CONTROL_ROOM)
MODAL
production_activities_leader 
{ obs }
date-1:
1/11/2008/10:15
date-2:
Behave:Role (1.11)
We can remark that INDIVIDUAL_PERSON_102 fulfils the function of production activities leader.
We can remark that INDIVIDUAL_PERSON_104 fulfils the function of field operator at the GPIZ complex.
virt3.c4)
BEHAVE
SUBJ
INDIVIDUAL_PERSON_104: (GP1Z_COMPLEX)
MODAL
field_operator 
{ obs }
date-1:
1/11/2008/10:15
date-2:
Behave:Role (1.11)

52
G.P. Zarri
Fig. 2 Tree structure
corresponding to the narrative
of Table 5
Eventually, we can note that the logical arrangement of a narrative (like that of
Table 5) can always be represented as some sort of complex tree structure, see Fig.
2. This remark is not new, and can be considered as valid in general independently
from the formalization adopted, see, e.g., the “story trees” of Mani and Pustejovsky
(2004).
Querying/Inference Procedures
Reasoning in NKRL ranges from the direct questioning of a knowledge base of
NKRL formal structures to the execution of high-level inference procedures. These
issues have been dealt with in some detail in Zarri (2005, 2009, pp. 183–243, 2013).
We will then limit us, here, to supply some essential information about these topics.
Search Patterns
Direct questioning of NKRL knowledge bases is implemented by means of search
patterns pj (formal queries) that unify information in the base thanks to the use of a
Filtering Uniﬁcation Module (Fum).
Formally, search patterns correspond to specialized/partially instantiated tem-
plates where the “explicit variables” that characterize the templates (vari, see
Table 1 above) have been replaced by concepts/individuals compatible with the
constraints imposed on these variables in the original HTemp structures. In a search
pattern, the concepts are used then as “implicit variables.” When trying to unify a
search pattern pj, manually built up from the user or automatically created by an
InferenceEngine (see below) with the predicative occurrences pci of the knowledge
base, a pj concept can match (1) the individuals included in pci that represent its
own instances, and (2) all its pci subsumed concepts (according to the HClass’
structure) along with their own instances. This, inheritance-based, way of operating
corresponds then to a sort of semantic/conceptual expansion of the original pattern.

Using the Formal Representations of “Elementary Events” to Set Up. . .
53
“Transformation” Inference Rules
A ﬁrst class of NKRL high-level inference procedures is implemented through the
use of the so-called transformation rules. These rules try to “adapt,” from a semantic
point of view, a search pattern pj that “failed” (that was unable to ﬁnd a uniﬁcation
within the knowledge base) to the real contents of this base making use of a sort of
analogical reasoning. Transformations attempt then to automatically “transform” pj
into one or more different p1, p2 : : : pn that are not strictly “equivalent” but only
“semantically close” (analogical reasoning) to the original one.
A transformation rule is composed of a left-hand side, the “antecedent,” and of
one or more right-hand sides, the “consequent(s).” The antecedent corresponds to
the formulation, in search pattern format, of the “query” to be transformed, while
the consequent(s) denote(s) the representation(s) of one or more search patterns to
be substituted for the given one. Indicating with A the antecedent and with Csi all
the possible consequents, these rules can be expressed as:
A .vari/ ) Csi

varj

;
vari  varj
(3)
The restriction vari  varj corresponds to the usual “safety condition” constraint
that assures the logical congruence of the rules, stating that a transformation rule is
well-formed when all the variables declared in the antecedent A appear also in the
consequent Csi accompanied, in case, by additional variables.
Let us now see a concrete example: we want to ask whether, within the particular
knowledge base where are stored all the NKRL-encoded events concerning the
activation of a gas turbine, we can retrieve the information that a given oil extractor
is running. In the absence of a direct answer we can reply by supplying, thanks to
a rule like t11 of Table 6, other related information stating, e.g., that the site leader
has heard the working noise of the oil extractor. Expressed in natural language, this
last result could be paraphrased as: “The system cannot assert that the oil extractor
is running, but it can certify that the site leader has heard the working noise of this
extractor.”
From Table 6 we can note that the atoms of the NKRL rules are expressed
using the usual NKRL knowledge representation tools, i.e., as n-ary complex data
structures centered on the notion of “functional role” (Zarri 2011a). This implies
the possibility to implement and manage highly expressive inference rules whose
atoms can directly represent complex situations, actions, etc. In the context of the
NKRL’s rule system we are no more restricted, then, to the set-up of rules under the
form of ordinary (and scarcely expressive) binary clauses. An exhaustive paper on
this topic is Zarri (2013).

54
G.P. Zarri
Table 6 An example of transformation rule
t11: “working noise/condition” transformation
antecedent:
OWN
SUBJ
var1
OBJ
property_
TOPIC
running_
var1   =  consumer_electronics, hardware_, surgical_tool, diagnostic_tool/system,
small_portable_equipment, technical/industrial_tool
first consequent schema (conseq1):
EXPERIENCE
SUBJ
var2
OBJ
evidence_
TOPIC
(SPECIF var3 var1)
var2
=  individual_person
var3
=  working_noise, working_condition
second consequent schema (conseq2):
BEHAVE
SUBJ
var2
MODAL
industrial_site_operator
Being unable to demonstrate directly that an industrial apparatus is running, the fact that an 
operator hears its working noise or notes its working aspect can be considered as a proof of 
its running status.
“Hypothesis” Inference Rules
The “hypothesis” rules represent a second important class of NKRL inference rules.
They allow us to build up automatically a sort of “causal explanation” for an
elementary event (a predicative occurrence) retrieved by direct query within an
NKRL knowledge base. These rules can be expressed as biconditionals of the type:
X iff Y1 and Y2 : : : and Yn;
(4)
where the head X of the rule corresponds to a predicative occurrence pci to be
“explained” and the reasoning steps Yi must all be satisﬁed; Yi are called “condition
schemata” in a hypothesis context. This means that, for each of them, at least a
search patterns pj must be (automatically in this case) built up by InferenceEngine
in order to ﬁnd, using Fum (see section “Search Patterns”), a successful uniﬁcation
with some information of the base. In this case, the set of pc1, pc2 : : : pcn
predicative occurrences retrieved by the condition schemata Yi, thanks to their
conversion into pj, can be interpreted as a context/causal explanation of the original
occurrence pci (X). A generalization of the safety condition introduced above is used
in a hypothesis rules context.

Using the Formal Representations of “Elementary Events” to Set Up. . .
55
To mention now a well-known NKRL example, let us suppose we have directly
retrieved, in a querying-answering mode, the information: “Pharmacopeia, a USA
biotechnology company, has received 64,000,000 dollars from the German company
Schering in the context of its R&D activities”; this information corresponds then
to pci (X). We can then be able to automatically construct, using a “hypothesis”
rule, a sort of “causal explanation” for this event by retrieving in the knowledge
base information like: (1) “Pharmacopeia and Schering have signed an agreement
concerning the production by Pharmacopeia of a new compound,” pc1 (Y1) and (2)
“in the framework of this agreement, Pharmacopeia has actually produced the new
compound,” pc2 (Y2). Of course, as usual in a “hypothesis” context, the explication
proposed by this rule corresponds to only one of all the possible reasons that can be
interpreted as the “cause” of the original event. A particular hypothesis rule must
always be conceived as a member of a “family” of possible explication statements.
Note, moreover, that an interesting feature of the NKRL rule system concerns
the possibility of making use of “transformations” when working in a “hypothesis”
context—i.e., of utilizing these two modalities of inference in an “integrated” way.
This means in practice that, whenever a search pattern pj is derived from a condition
schema Yi of a hypothesis to implement a step of the reasoning process, we can
use this pattern as it has been automatically built up by InferenceEngine from its
“father” condition schema, but also in a “transformed” form if the appropriate
transformation rules exist. In this way, a hypothesis that was deemed to fail because
of the impossibility of deriving a “successful” pj from one of its condition schemata
Yi can now continue if a new pj, obtained using a transformation rule, will ﬁnd a
successful uniﬁcation within the base, getting then new values for the hypothesis
variables. Moreover, this strategy can also be used to discover all the possible
implicit relationships among the stored data, see Zarri (2005) for further details.
Related Work
In this section, we will mention some approaches to the solution of the “connectivity
phenomena” problems that have been suggested in an Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI)
and Computational Linguistics (CL) context and that have some relationships with
the NKRL’s procedures described in section “Linking Elementary Events”.
Proposals Derived from an “Artiﬁcial Intelligence” Context
An n-ary knowledge representation model used to encode narrative-like structures
that was very popular in the seventies is the “Conceptual Dependency” theory of
Roger Schank (Schank 1973, Schank and Abelson 1977). In this, the underlying
meaning (“conceptualization”) of a given narrative was expressed as the association
of semantic predicates chosen from a set of twelve formal “primitive actions”

56
G.P. Zarri
(like INGEST, MOVE, ATRANS, abstract relationship transfer, PTRANS, physical
transfer, etc.) with seven role relationships (“deep cases”) in the Case Grammar
style (Fillmore 1968). The seven roles were Object (in a state), Object (of a
change of state), Object (of an action), Actor, Recipient/Donor, From/To, and
Instrument. Unfortunately, Schank’s theory was, on the one hand, insufﬁciently
speciﬁed and, on the other, unnecessarily complicated because of the inﬂuence of
“psychological” (introspective) considerations according to a characteristic trend of
AI in those years. Nevertheless, Schank’s work had a particularly strong inﬂuence
on the development of formalized (and at least partly computerized) systems for the
representation and management of storylines and connectivity phenomena making
use of all sorts of scripts, scenarios, TAUs (Thematic Abstraction Units), MOPs
(Memory Organization Packets), etc., see, e.g., (Dyer 1983; Kolodner 1984).
The SnePS (Semantic Network Processing System) proposal of Stuart Shapiro
(1979) belongs roughly to the same period and allows us, e.g., to annotate
“narrative” situations like “Sue thinks that Bob believes that a dog is eating a
bone” by associating labeled graphs in a way not too different from the NKRL’s
“completive construction” approach, see section “Completive Construction”. Inter-
estingly, solutions of this type have been re-discovered recently in the framework
of the “Interoperable Knowledge Representation for Intelligence Support” (IKRIS)
project, ﬁnanced between in 2005–2006 by the US DTO (Disruptive Technology
Ofﬁce). IKRIS’ main result is represented by the speciﬁcations of IKL, the “IKRIS
Knowledge Language” (Hayes 2006; Hayes and Menzel 2006). IKL is an extension
of Common Logic (ISO 2007) that, although still dealing with, fundamentally,
ﬁrst-order logic structures, includes some HOL improvements in the NKRL style.
For example, IKL’s formal structures called “proposition name” and introduced
by the reserved symbol “that” allows us to “reify” the content of a sentence that
can then be freely referred to from inside different contexts—the similarity with
the completive construction approach is then evident. Going back in time to the
ﬁfties-sixties we can also note that, among the “correlators” introduced by Silvio
Ceccato in a Mechanical Translation (MT) context to represent “narratives” as
recursive networks of triadic structures (Ceccato 1961, 1964), some concerned the
representation of “connectivity phenomena” like coordination and subordination,
apposition, subject–predicate relationships, etc.
Among the recent suggestions for representing phenomena of this kind, we
must discuss in particular some mechanisms used in a Conceptual Graph’s envi-
ronment for dealing with “contexts.” John Sowa’s Conceptual Graphs (CGs), see
(Sowa 1984, 1999), are based on a powerful graph-based representation scheme.
A conceptual graph is a ﬁnite, connected, bipartite graph that makes use of two
kinds of nodes, “concepts” and “conceptual relations” (these last corresponding to
NKRL’s functional roles). For example, a CG corresponding to the narrative “John
is going to Boston by bus” is represented by a conceptual structure where a “concept
node,” “Go” (having a function similar to that of an NKRL conceptual predicate,
but denoted by an NL term) is associated with three “relation nodes” (roles)
like Ag(e)nt, Dest(ination), and Instr(ument). These relations introduce the three
arguments of the predicate, i.e., three new concept nodes representing, respectively,

Using the Formal Representations of “Elementary Events” to Set Up. . .
57
the constant John (the “agent”) as an instance of the concept Person, the constant
Boston (the “destination”) as an instance of the concept City, and the concept Bus
(the “instrument”). The resemblance to HTemp and to the NKRL representation
of elementary events is evident. Moreover, for any CGs system, it is assumed that
there exists a pre-deﬁned type hierarchy of “concept-types,” different according to
the domain to formalize and similar then to HClass.
Contexts in CGs are dealt with making use of the second order (nested graphs)
extensions that bear some resemblance to NKRL’s constructs like completive
construction and binding occurrences, as we can see from Sowa’s analysis (1999,
pp. 485–486) of the complex narrative “Tom believes that Mary wants to marry a
sailor.” This last is decomposed, as in NKRL, in two parts. In a ﬁrst one, “Tom
believes that : : : ” Tom is modeled as an “experiencer” (Expr role) that Believe(s)
a “proposition” (an OBJ(ect) ﬁller according to the NKRL’s formalism). The
second part corresponds to the representation of the proposition/ﬁller “ : : : Mary
wants to marry : : : ”, where the two elementary events signaled by the presence
of the two predicates “want” and “marry” are linked together by the fact that the
“situation” corresponding to the marriage is the Th(e)me of Mary’s wishes. Other
similarities between CGs and NKRL concern some speciﬁc algorithmic aspects of
the querying/inference procedures, see, e.g., (Ellis 1995, Corbett 2003).
We can also ﬁnd, however, some important differences between the NKRL and
the CGs approaches. They are related, e.g., to the organization of the “standard”
hierarchy of concepts (quite simple in a CGs context with respect to the sophisti-
cation of the HClass hierarchy in NKRL), the choice of the deep cases (functional
roles in NKRL terms) or the general theoretical background proper to the inference
procedures. But the central point of any discussion about the relationships between
CGs and NKRL concerns John Sowa’s choice of leaving completely free, for the
sake of generality, the selection of those “predicates” that, in CGs as in NKRL,
represents the focal element of the formal representation of an elementary event. In
the CGs representation of the “John is going to Boston : : : ” event, see above, the
predicate can then be simply represented by the surface element “Go”—it would be
a primitive like MOVE in NKRL. Note that Sowa emphasizes (1984, p. 14) that a
CGs’ predicate can be either a primitive or an NL term, but it is normally the second
(simpler) solution that is chosen. As a consequence, it is practically impossible to
create an exhaustive and authoritative list of CGs “canonical graphs,” roughly
equivalent to NKRL’s “templates,” for evident reasons of combinatorial explosion
(e.g., 3100 English verbs are included in the well-known Levin’s classiﬁcation
(1993), which is notoriously incomplete). A tool like HTemp—extremely important
for the set-up of concrete NKRL applications and, in practice, part and parcel of the
deﬁnition of the NKRL language—is not really conceivable, then, in a CGs context.
Other general knowledge representation systems that share with CGs some
ambitions of “universality” are CYC (Lenat and Guha 1990; Lenat et al. 1990) and
Topic Maps (Pepper 2000).
CYC concerns one of the most controversial endeavors in the history of Artiﬁcial
Intelligence. Started in the early 1980, the project ended about 15 years later with
the set-up of an enormous knowledge base containing about a million of hand-

58
G.P. Zarri
entered “logical assertions” including both simple statements of facts and rules
about what conclusions could be inferred if certain statements of facts were satisﬁed.
The “upper level” of the CYC ontology is now freely accessible on the Web,
see http://www.cyc.com/cyc/opencyc. A criticism often addressed to CycL—the
n-ary knowledge representation language of CYC—concerns its uniform use of
the same representation model (substantially, a frame system rewritten in logical
form) to represent phenomena conceptually very different (the “one and only
syndrome”). In NKRL, on the contrary, concepts are represented in the (usual)
binary way, elementary events/situations (and general classes of events/situations)
like n-ary predicate/roles-based structures, connectivity phenomena as labelled lists
with reiﬁed arguments, special conceptual structures have been conceived to take
the temporal phenomena into account, etc.
With respect now to Topic Maps (TMs), a TMs “topic” is used to represent
any possible speciﬁc notion that could be interesting to speak about, like the play
Hamlet, the playwright William Shakespeare, or the “authorship” relationship. A
topic reiﬁes then a subject, making it “real” for a computer system. Topics can have
“names,” and each individual topic is an instance of one or more classes of topics
(“topic types”). They can also have “occurrences,” that is, information resources,
speciﬁed as a text string that is part of the Topic Map itself, or as a link to an external
resource, which are considered as relevant to the subjects the topic reify. Topics can
participate in relationships with other topics, called “associations”: an association
consists in a number of “association roles” each of which has a topic attached as a
“role player.” In spite of the introduction of associations, Topic Maps do not seem to
present really new insights into the connectivity phenomena issues. More in general,
it must be noticed that TMs have been often considered as a downgraded version of
other (more structured and powerful) conceptual proposals, like Semantic Networks
(Lehmann 1992), Conceptual Graphs, or NKRL.
Eventually, we can note that the now popular “Semantic Web” (SW) tools
and languages (see http://semanticweb.org/wiki/Tools for an overview) cannot
represent a viable alternative for an effective management of the “connectivity
phenomena” and the related, high-level knowledge representation problems. This
is linked to the difﬁculties that concern the set-up of complete and effective formal
description of complex information structures like spatio-temporal data, contexts,
reiﬁed situations, human intentions and behaviors, etc. making use only of the quite
limited “binary” knowledge representation tools proper to the SW languages. As
already stated, properties in the binary model are simply expressed, in fact, as a
binary (i.e., accepting only two arguments) relationship linking two individuals or
an individual and a value. The resulting, well-known lack of expressiveness of the
SW languages is described, to give only few examples, in papers like Mizoguchi
et al. (2007), Salguero et al. (2009), and Liu et al. (2010). Dealing with the above
high-level representation problems requires, on the contrary, to make use of high-
level knowledge representation tools in the NKRL, CGs, CycL, etc. style, able then
too take care of higher arity relations. Note also, in this context, some perplexities
in the knowledge representation milieus about recent proposals of SW origin
suggesting to deal with all sort of very complex problems—from the representation

Using the Formal Representations of “Elementary Events” to Set Up. . .
59
of temporal data (Scherp et al. 2009) to the modelling of the user context—by
exploiting fragments of existing SW ontologies under the form of “Ontology Design
Patterns” (ODPs) that, at least in principle, we could freely compose, specialize,
and reutilize. Unfortunately, existing ODPs—see, e.g., those collected within the
ODP portal (http://ontologydesignpatterns.org/wiki/Ontology_Design_Patterns_._
org_%28ODP%29)—are characterized by a high level of heterogeneity and the lack
of shared theoretical principles for their construction and use. They are not without
evoking, then, those “idiosyncratic patterns” whose development, according to
Kozaki et al. (2007), can lead “ : : : to a decrease of the semantic interoperability
of ontologies because : : : such patterns will lack compatibility with others.”
Proposals Derived from a “Linguistics/Computational
Linguistics” Context
Looking now at a broad Computational Linguistics/Natural Language Processing
(NLP) context, we can note immediately that interesting similarities can be found
between the use of NKRL for the modelling of the inner meaning of narrative
documents and the use of tools as VerbNet, PropBank, and FrameNet for the surface
semantic/thematic role labeling of NL texts in a “post-case grammars” framework
(Palmer et al. 2010).
However, the main objectives of any possible kind of NLP procedures concern,
ﬁrstly, the implementation of linguistically motivated, surface analyses of NL
documents aiming at discovering syntactic/semantic relationships between NL items
expressed in a speciﬁc language. Therefore, these objectives coincide only in part
with those concerning the execution of deep “conceptual” procedures in an NKRL’
style. Look, e.g., at the NKRL’s “functional roles”: even if they are labelled with
terms borrowed from research on case grammar (Fillmore 1968) and thematic roles,
they are in fact “deep cases,” used to link together “conceptual entities” (concepts,
concept instances, semantic predicates, spatio-temporal abstractions, etc.) instead of
“words.” Pure surface phenomena like the idiosyncrasies in the lexical choices, the
active/passive alternation, the morphology, etc. are then totally ignored. This means
that the formal expressions dealt with in an NKRL context are independent from
any particular natural language formulation—even if they are drafted in a sort of
“basic English” for human understanding in their “external” formulation, a choice
shared with other conceptual approaches like CGs, Schank’s Conceptual Depen-
dency, etc.—and that NKRL follows then a sort of “interlingua” (i.e., language
independent) approach. All the above can be summed up by saying that NKRL, as
all the formal systems mentioned in the previous sub-section, addresses the problem
of encoding the “meaning” of generic (not only NL) multimedia documents through
the development of an a priori formal notation for expressing conceptual contents
that is independent from the search for an optimal form of correspondence—
see Jackendoff’s (1990) “-Criterion”—with the “surface” (syntactic) form these

60
G.P. Zarri
contents can assume. Obviously, in an NKRL, etc. approach, the correspondence
problem still exists, but can be tackled a posteriori in a very pragmatic way, see,
e.g., Note 3 above.
We brieﬂy mention below, nevertheless, some linguistic/NLP systems/theories
that can be considered as particularly signiﬁcant from a “semantic/conceptual”
point of view.
Episodic Logic (EL) (Schubert and Hwang 2000) is an NL-like, highly formalized
logical representation for narrative understanding allowing, among other things, the
expression of sentence and predicate reiﬁcation, of intensional predicates (corre-
sponding to wanting, believing, making, etc.) of episodes, events, states of affairs,
etc. “Episodes” can be explicitly related in terms of part-whole, temporal, and
causal relations. Interesting solutions for the connectivity phenomena management
can also be found in the Discourse Representation Theory, DRT (Kamp and Reyle
1993), a semantic theory developed for representing and computing trans-sentential
anaphora and other forms of text cohesion. See, for example, the speciﬁc DRT
procedures—that make use, among other things, of “embedding functions” similar,
at the surface level, to the context solutions proposed by Sowa, etc., see above—
that have been suggested for managing all sort of context-related problems. The
Text Meaning Representation model (TRM) is part of the OntoSem environment
(Nirenburg and Raskin 2004). It consists of an (at least partially) implemented
theory of natural language processing that aims at automatically deriving structured
meaning (in TMR terms) from unstructured texts. The central piece of TMR is a
language-independent single ontology structured as a DAG (Direct Acyclic Graph)
where the arcs represent IsA relationships. The ontology includes about 8500
concepts represented according to a plain frame-like format. Detailed analyses of
the advantages and weaknesses of TRM are presented in Sowa (2005) and Zarri
(2009, pp. 146–149).
Conclusion
This chapter focuses on the problem of ﬁnding a complete and coherent way of rep-
resenting the “global meaning” of complex (multimedia) “narratives” by properly
associating its constituent basic entities represented as a set of formalized “elemen-
tary events.” Solving this problem means, in practice, being able to formalize those
“connectivity phenomena”—denoted, at linguistic surface level, by logico-semantic
cohesion links like causality, goal, co-ordination, subordination, indirect speech,
etc.—that assure the conceptual unity of the narratives, scenarios, situations, etc.
Note that the problem of ﬁnding reasonable solutions for dealing with this sort of
phenomena is, at the same time, far from being trivial from a Computer Science
point of view (see also the “State of the Art” in the previous section) and of a strong
interest from a general Cognitive Science/Digital Humanities perspective. It is part,
in fact, of a wider problem that concerns ﬁnding reasonable solutions for dealing
with “contexts”; representing contexts in full is still a largely unsettled problem. See

Using the Formal Representations of “Elementary Events” to Set Up. . .
61
McCarthy (1993) for the most cited formal theory about representing contexts as
abstract mathematical, ﬁrst class objects,4 a theory that goes back to more than 20
years ago.
Speciﬁcally, the solutions adopted by NKRL, “completive construction” and
“binding occurrences,” allow us to model the connectivity phenomena by “reifying”
the formal representations associated with the constitutive elementary events;
these solutions have been explained making use of several illustrating examples.
In particular, the NKRL representation of a complex, structured narrative that
involves the occurrence of several elementary events has been presented in full and
commented in some detail.
We can conclude the chapter by noticing that, apart from being a knowledge
representation language, NKRL is also a fully operational computer science envi-
ronment, implemented in Java and built up, thanks, at least partly, to the support
of several European projects; a detailed description of the NKRL software can
be found in Zarri (2009: Appendix A). The environment exists in two versions, a
(standard) SQL-based version and a (lighter) ﬁle-oriented one, to be used mainly
as a “demonstration” version. The environment includes also powerful “inference
engines” able to carry out complex inference procedures based, e.g., on “analogical”
and “causal” reasoning principles, see again Zarri (2005, 2013) in this context.
References
N. Ayari, A. Chibani, Y. Amirat, in Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). Semantic Management of Human-Robot Interaction in
Ambient Intelligence Environments Using N-Ary Ontologies (IEEEXplore, Piscataway, 2013),
pp. 1164–1171
M. Bal, Narratology: Introduction to the Theory of Narrative, 2nd edn. (University Press, Toronto,
1997)
S. Bechhofer, F. van Harmelen, J. Hendler, I. Horrocks, D.L. McGuinness, P.F. Patel-Schneider,
L.A. Stein (eds.), OWL Web Ontology Language Reference (W3C Recommendation 10
February 2004). W3C (2004), http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-ref/. Accessed 28 Feb 2016
S. Ceccato (ed.), Linguistic Analysis and Programming for Mechanical Translation (Technical
Report RADC-TR-60-18) (Feltrinelli, Milano, 1961)
S. Ceccato, Automatic translation of languages. Inf. Storage Retr. 2, 105–158 (1964)
D. Corbett, Reasoning and Uniﬁcation Over Conceptual Graphs (Kluwer Academic/Plenum
Publishers, New York, 2003)
M.G. Dyer, In-Depth Understanding (The MIT Press, Cambridge, 1983)
G. Ellis, Compiling conceptual graph. IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng. 7, 68–81 (1995)
4In McCarthy’s theory, the main formulas are sentences of the form ist(c, p), which are to be
taken as assertions that the proposition p is true in (ist) the context c, itself asserted in an outer
context c’. A well-known concrete implementation of McCarthy’s theory is represented by the
“microtheories,” introduced by Ramanathan V. Guha and largely used in a CYC framework (Guha
and Lenat 1994); a recent re-interpretation of McCarthy’s ideas in Description Logics terms is
(Klarman and Gutiérrez-Basulto 2011).

62
G.P. Zarri
C.J. Fillmore, in Universals in Linguistic Theory, ed. by E. Bach, R.T. Harms. The Case for Case
(Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, 1968), pp. 1–88
R.V. Guha, D.B. Lenat, Enabling agents to work together. Commun. ACM 37(7), 127–142 (1994)
M.A.K. Halliday, R. Hasan, Cohesion in English (Longman, London, 1976)
P. Hayes, IKL Guide (Florida Institute for Human & Machine Cognition (IHMC), Pensacola, 2006),
http://www.ihmc.us/users/phayes/IKL/GUIDE/GUIDE.html. Accessed 28 Feb 2016
P. Hayes, C. Menzel, IKL Speciﬁcation Document (Florida Institute for Human & Machine Cog-
nition (IHMC), Pensacola, 2006), http://www.ihmc.us/users/phayes/IKL/SPEC/SPEC.html.
Accessed 28 Feb 2016
Z. Hu, E. Rahimtoroghi, L. Munishkina, R. Swanson, M.A. Walker, in Proceedings of the
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP ‘13), ed. by T.
Baldwin, A. Korhonen. Unsupervised Induction of Contingent Event Pairs from Film Scenes
(ACL, Stroudsburg, 2013), pp. 369–379
International Organization for Standardization, ISO, Information Technology-Common Logic (CL):
A Framework for a Family of Logic-based Languages (ISO/IEC 24707:2007) (ISO, Geneva,
2007)
R. Jackendoff, Semantic Structures (The MIT Press, Cambridge, 1990)
M. Jahn, Narratology: A Guide to the Theory of Narrative (version 1.8) (English Department of
the University, Cologne, 2005), http://www.uni-koeln.de/~ame02/pppn.htm. Accessed 28 Feb
2016
H. Kamp, U. Reyle, From Discourse to Logic. Introduction to Modeltheoretic Semantics of Natural
Language, Formal Logic and Discourse Representation (Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1993)
S. Klarman, V. Gutiérrez-Basulto, in Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth AAAI Conference on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, ed. by W. Burgard, D. Roth. Two-Dimensional Description Logics for
Context-Based Semantic Interoperability (AAAI Press, Menlo Park, 2011), pp. 215–220
D. Klein, C.D. Manning, in Proceedings of the 41st Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, ed. by E. W. Hinrichs, D. Roth. Accurate Unlexicalized Parsing
(ACL, Stroudsburg, 2003), pp. 423–430
J.L. Kolodner, Retrieval and Organizational Strategies in Conceptual Memory: A Computer Model
(Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Hillsdale, 1984)
K. Kozaki, E. Sunagawa, Y. Kitamura, R. Mizoguchi, in Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Roles
and Relationships in Object Oriented Programming, Multiagent Systems and Ontologies, co-
located with ECOOP 2007 (Technical Report 2007-9), ed. by G. Boella, S. Goebel, F. Steimann,
S. Zschaler, M. Cebulla. Role Representation Model Using OWL and SWRL (Technische
Universität Berlin, Berlin, 2007), pp. 39–46
F. Lehmann (ed.), Semantic Networks in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1992)
D.B. Lenat, R.V. Guha, Building Large Knowledge Based Systems (Addison-Wesley, Reading,
1990)
D.B. Lenat, R.V. Guha, K. Pittman, D. Pratt, M. Shepherd, CYC: toward programs with common
sense. Commun. ACM 33(8), 30–49 (1990)
B. Levin, English Verb Classes and Alternation, A Preliminary Investigation (University Press,
Chicago, 1993)
W. Liu, Z. Liu, J. Fu, R. Hu, Z. Zhong, in Proceedings of the 2010 International Conference on
Complex, Intelligent and Software Intensive Systems, ed. by L. Barolli, F. Xhafa, S. Vitabile,
H.-H. Hsu. Extending OWL for Modeling Event-Oriented Ontology (IEEE Computer Society
Press, Los Alamitos, 2010), pp. 581–586
I. Mani, J. Pustejovsky, in Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Discourse Annotation, ed. by
B. Webber, D. Byron. Temporal Discourse Models for Narrative Structure (Stroudsburg, ACL,
2004), pp. 57–64
S. Matsuyoshi, M. Eguchi, C. Sao, K. Murakami, K. Inui, Y. Matsumoto, in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC 2010, ed. by N.
Calzolari, K. Choukri, B. Maegaard, J. Mariani, J. Odijk, S. Piperidis, M. Rosner, D. Tapias.
Annotating Event Mentions in Text with Modality, Focus, and Source Information (European
Language Resources Association (ELRA), Paris, 2010), pp. 1456–1463

Using the Formal Representations of “Elementary Events” to Set Up. . .
63
J. McCarthy, in Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Joint Conference on Artiﬁcial
Intelligence – IJCAI/93, ed. by R. Bajcsy. Notes on Formalizing Context (Morgan Kaufmann,
San Francisco, 1993), pp. 555–562
R. Mizoguchi, E. Sunagawa, K. Kozaki, Y. Kitamura, A model of roles within an ontology
development tool: Hozo. J. Appl. Ontol. 2, 159–179 (2007)
Morris, J. and G. Hirst, G. (1991). Lexical cohesion computed by Thesaural relations as an
indicator of the structure of text. Comput. Linguist. 17: 21-48.
S. Nirenburg, V. Raskin, Ontological Semantics (The MIT Press, Cambridge, 2004)
N.F. Noy, R.W. Fergerson, M.A. Musen, in Knowledge Acquisition, Modeling, and Management –
Proceedings of EKAW 2000, ed. by R. Dieng, O. Corby. The Knowledge Model of Protégé-
2000: Combining Interoperability and Flexibility, vol 1937 (Springer LNCS, Berlin, 2000), pp.
17–32
M. Palmer, G. Gildea, N. Xue, Semantic Role Labeling (Morgan and Claypool Publishers, San
Rafael, 2010)
S. Pepper, The TAO of Topic Maps: Finding the Way in the Age of Infoglut (Ontopia AS, Oslo,
2000), http://www.ontopia.net/topicmaps/materials/tao.html. Accessed 28 Feb 2016
A.G. Salguero, C. Delgado, F. Araque, in Computer Aided Systems Theory, 12th International
Conference, EUROCAST 2009, ed. by R. Moreno Díaz, F. Pichler, A. Quesada Arencibia.
Easing the Deﬁnition of N-Ary Relations for Supporting Spatio-Temporal Models in OWL,
vol 5717 (Springer LNCS, Berlin, 2009), pp. 271–278
R.C. Schank, in Computer Models of Thought and Language, ed. by R. C. Schank, K. M. Colby.
Identiﬁcation of Conceptualizations Underlying Natural Language (W.H. Freeman and Co.,
San Francisco, 1973), pp. 187–247
R.C. Schank, R.P. Abelson, Scripts, Plans, Goals and Understanding: An Inquiry into Human
Knowledge Structures (Lawrence Erlbaum, Oxford, 1977)
A. Scherp, T. Franz, C. Saathoff, S. Staab, in Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on
Knowledge Capture, K-CAP ’09, ed. by Y. Gil, N. Noy. F – A Model of Events Based on the
Foundational Ontology DOLCECDnS Ultralite (ACM, New York, 2009), pp. 137–144
L.K. Schubert, C.H. Hwang, in Natural Language Processing and Knowledge Representation:
Language for Knowledge and Knowledge for Language, ed. by L. Iwanska, S. C. Shapiro.
Episodic Logic Meets Little Red Riding Hood: A Comprehensive, Natural Representation for
Language Understanding (MIT/AAAI Press, Cambridge & Menlo Park, 2000), pp. 111–174
S.C. Shapiro, in Associative Networks: Representation and Use of Knowledge by Computers, ed.
by N. V. Findler. The SNePS Semantic Network Processing System (Academic Press, New
York, 1979), pp. 179–203
J.F. Sowa, Conceptual Structures: Information Processing in Mind and Machine (Addison-Wesley,
Reading, 1984)
J.F. Sowa, Knowledge Representation: Logical, Philosophical, and Computational Foundations
(Brooks Cole Publishing Co., Paciﬁc Grove, 1999)
J.F. Sowa, Review of “Computational Semantics” by Sergei Niremburg and Victor Raskin.
Comput. Linguist. 31, 147–152 (2005)
W3C OWL Working Group (eds.), OWL 2 Web Ontology Language Document Overview, 2nd
edn (W3C Recommendation 11 December 2012). W3C (2012), http://www.w3.org/TR/owl2-
overview/. Accessed 28 Feb 2016
G.P. Zarri, in Proceedings of the First International Conference on Applied Natural Language
Processing, ed. by I. M. Kameny, B. T. Oshika. Automatic Representation of the Semantic
Relationships Corresponding to a French Surface Expression (ACL, Stroudsburg, 1983), pp.
143–147
G.P. Zarri, Integrating the two main inference modes of NKRL, transformations and hypotheses. J.
Data Semant. (JoDS) 4, 304–340 (2005)
G.P. Zarri, Representation and Management of Narrative Information, Theoretical Principles and
Implementation (Springer, London, 2009)

64
G.P. Zarri
G.P. Zarri, in Computational Models of Narratives – Papers from the AAAI 2010 Fall Symposium
(Technical Report FS-10-04), ed. by M. A. Finlayson, P. Gervás, E. Mueller, S. Narayanan, P.
Winston. Representing and Managing Narratives in a Computer-Suitable Form (AAAI Press,
Menlo Park, 2010), pp. 73–80
G.P. Zarri, in Proceedings of the 24th International Florida AI Research Society Conference,
FLAIRS-24, ed. by R. C. Murray, P. M. McCarthy. Differentiating Between “Functional” and
“Semantic” Roles in a High-Level Conceptual Data Modeling Language (AAAI Press, Menlo
Park, 2011a), pp. 75–80
G.P. Zarri, Knowledge representation and inference techniques to improve the management of gas
and oil facilities. Knowl.-Based Syst. (KNOSYS) 24, 989–1003 (2011b)
G.P. Zarri, Advanced computational reasoning based on the NKRL conceptual model. Expert Syst.
Appl. (ESWA) 40, 2872–2888 (2013)
G.P. Zarri, in Special Issue on Affective Neural Networks and Cognitive Learning Systems for Big
Data Analysis, ed. by A. Hussain, E. Cambria, B. Schuller, N. Howard. Sentiments Analysis at
Conceptual Level Making Use of the Narrative Knowledge Representation Language, vol 58
(Neural Networks (NEUNET), 2014), pp. 82–97
G.P. Zarri, in Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth International Florida Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Research Society Conference, FLAIRS-28, ed. by I. Russell, W. Eberle. The “Qua-Entities”
Paradigm versus the Notion of “Role” in NKRL (Narrative Knowledge Representation
Language) (AAAI Press, Menlo Park, 2015), pp. 97–102

Part II
Text Capture and Textual Exploration

Parody Detection: An Annotation, Feature
Construction, and Classiﬁcation Approach
to the Web of Parody
Joshua L. Weese, William H. Hsu, Jessica C. Murphy,
and Kim Brillante Knight
Abstract In this chapter, we discuss the problem of how to discover when works in
a social media site are related to one another by artistic appropriation, particularly
parodies. The goal of this work is to discover concrete link information from texts
expressing how this may entail derivative relationships between works, authors,
and topics. In the domain of music video parodies, this has general applicability
to titles, lyrics, musical style, and content features, but the emphasis in this work
is on descriptive text, comments, and quantitative features of songs. We ﬁrst
derive a classiﬁcation task for discovering the “Web of Parody.” Furthermore, we
describe the problems of how to generate song/parody candidates, collect user
annotations, and apply machine learning approaches comprising of feature analysis,
construction, and selection for this classiﬁcation task. Finally, we report results from
applying this framework to data collected from YouTube and explore how the basic
classiﬁcation task relates to the general problem of reconstructing the web of parody
and other networks of inﬂuence. This points toward further empirical study of how
social media collections can statistically reﬂect derivative relationships and what
can be understood about the propagation of concepts across texts that are deemed
interrelated.
J.L. Weese • W.H. Hsu ()
Department of Computer Science, Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA
e-mail: weeser@k-state.edu; bhsu@k-state.edu; banazir@gmail.com
J.C. Murphy
School of Arts and Humanities, University of Texas at Dallas, Richardson, TX 75080, USA
e-mail: jessica.c.murphy@utdallas.edu
K.B. Knight
School of Arts, Technology, and Emerging Communication, University of Texas at Dallas,
Richardson, TX 75080, USA
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
S. Hai-Jew (ed.), Data Analytics in Digital Humanities, Multimedia Systems
and Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54499-1_3
67

68
J.L. Weese et al.
Toward a Web of Derivative Works
We consider the problem of reconstructing networks of inﬂuence in creative
works—speciﬁcally, those consisting of sources, derivative works, and topics that
are interrelated by relations that represent different modes of inﬂuence. In the
domain of artistic appropriation, these include such relationships as “B is a parody
of A.” Other examples of “derivative work” relationships include expanding a short
story into a novel, novelization of a screenplay, or the inverse (adapting a novel into a
screenplay). Still more general forms of appropriation include quotations, mashups
from one medium into another (e.g., song videos), and artistic imitations. In general,
derivative work refers to any expressive creation that includes major elements of an
original, previously created (underlying) work.
The task studied in this paper is detection of source/parody pairs among pairs of
candidate videos on YouTube, where the parody is a derivative work of the source.
Classifying an arbitrary pair of candidate videos as a source and its parody is a
straightforward task for a human annotator, given a concrete and sufﬁciently detailed
speciﬁcation of the criteria for being a parody. However, solving the same problem
by automated analysis of content is much more challenging, due to the complexity
of ﬁnding applicable features. These are multimodal in origin (i.e., may come from
the video, audio, metadata, comments, etc.); admit a combinatorially large number
of feature extraction mechanisms, some of which have an unrestricted range of
parameters; and may be irrelevant, necessitating some feature selection criteria.
Our preliminary work shows that by analyzing only video information and
statistics, identifying correct source/parody pairs can be done with an ROC area of
65–75%. This can be improved by doing analysis directly on the video itself, such
as Fourier analysis and extraction of lyrics (from closed captioning, or from audio
when this is not available). However, this analysis is computationally intensive and
introduces error at every stage. Other information can be gained by studying the
social aspect of YouTube, particularly how users interact by commenting on videos.
By introducing social responses to videos, we are able to identify source/parody
pairs with an f-measure upwards to 93%.
The novel contribution of this research is that, to our knowledge, parody detection
has not been applied in the YouTube domain, nor by analyzing user comments.
The central hypothesis of this study is that by extracting features from YouTube
comments, performance in identifying correct source/parody pairs will improve over
using only information about the video itself. Our experimental approach is to gather
source/parody pairs from YouTube, annotating the data, and constructing features
using analytical component libraries, especially natural language toolkits. This
demonstrates the feasibility of detecting source/parody video pairs from enumerated
candidates.

Parody Detection: An Annotation, Feature Construction, and Classiﬁcation. . .
69
Context: Digital Humanities and Derivative Works
The framing contexts for the problem of parody detection are the web of inﬂuence
as deﬁned by Koller (2001): graph-based models of relationships, particularly
ﬁrst-order relational extensions of probabilistic graphical models that include a
representation for universal quantiﬁcation. In the domain of digital humanities,
a network of inﬂuence consists of creative works, authors, and topics that are
interrelated by relations that represent different modes of inﬂuence. The term
“creative works” includes texts and also products of other creative domains, and
includes musical compositions and videos as discussed in this chapter. In the domain
of artistic appropriation, these include such relationships as “B is a parody of A.”
Other examples of “derivative work” relationships include expanding a short story
into a novel, novelization of a screenplay, or the inverse (adapting a novel into a
screenplay). Still more general forms of appropriation include quotations, mashups
from one medium into another (e.g., song videos), and artistic imitations.
The technical objectives of this line of research are to establish representations
for learning and reasoning about the following tasks:
1. how to discover when works are related to one another by artistic appropriation
2. how this may entail relationships between works, authors, and topics
3. how large collections (including text corpora) can statistically reﬂect these
relationships
4. what can be understood about the propagation of concepts across works that are
deemed interrelated.
The above open-ended questions in the humanities pose the following method-
ological research challenges in informatics: speciﬁcally, how to use machine
learning, information extraction, data science, and visualization techniques to reveal
the network of inﬂuence for a text collection.
1. (Problem) How can relationships between documents be detected? For example,
does one document extend another in the sense of textual entailment? If statement
A extends statement B, then B entails A. For example, if A is the assertion “F is
a ﬂower” and B is the assertion “F is a rose,” then A extends B. Such extension
(or appropriation) relationships serve as building blocks for constructing a web
of inﬂuence.
2. (Problem) What entities and features of text are relevant to the extension
relationship, and which of these features transfer to other domains?
3. (Technology) What are algorithms that support relationship extraction from text
and how do these ﬁt into information extraction (IE) tools for reconstructing
entity-relational models of documents, authors, and inspirational topics?
4. (Technology) How can information extraction be integrated with search tasks in
the domain of derivative works? How can creative works, and their supporting
data and metadata, support free-text user queries in portals for accessing
collections of these works?

70
J.L. Weese et al.
5. (Technology) How can newly captured relationships be incorporated and
accounted for using ontologies and systems of reasoning that can capture
semantic entailment in the above domain.
6. (System) How can a system be developed that maps out the spatiotemporal
trajectory of an entity from the web of inﬂuence? For example, how can the
propagation of an epithet, meme, or individual writing style from a domain of
origin (geographic, time-dependent, or memetic) be visualized?
The central thesis of this work is that this combined approach will enable link
identiﬁcation toward discovering networks of inﬂuence in the digital humanities,
such as among song parody videos and their authors and original songs. The need
for such information extraction tools arises from the following present issues in
text analytics for relationship extraction, which we seek to generalize beyond text.
System components are needed for:
1. expanding the set of known entities
2. predicting the existence of a link between two entities
3. inferring which of two similar works is primary and which is derivative
4. classifying relationships by type
5. identifying features and examples that are relevant to a speciﬁed relationship
extraction task.
These are general challenges for information extraction, not limited to the
domain of modern English text, contemporary media studies, or even digital
humanities.
Problem Statement: The Web of Parody
Goal: To automatically analyze the metadata and comments of music videos on
a social video site (YouTube) and extract features to develop a machine learning-
based classiﬁcation system that can identify source/parody music videos from a set
of arbitrary pairs of candidates.
The metadata we collected consists of quantitative features (descriptive statistics
of videos, such as playing time) and natural language features. In addition to this
metadata, the video contents can be analyzed using acoustical analysis to recognize
song lyrics (Mesaros and Virtanen 2010) or image recognition to recognize human
actions in music videos (Liu et al. 2008). Such sophisticated multimedia processing
is, however, computationally intensive, meaning data analysis takes orders of
magnitude longer and requires sophisticated hardware. Moreover, while the residual
error is in generally excess of 25%, the potential reduction using natural language
features is hypothesized to be signiﬁcant. As our experiments show, this is indeed
the case, using topic modeling features derived from descriptor text and comments
had far lower computational costs than those of extracting audiovisual features from
video. The remaining residual error makes any achievable marginal improvement
from multimedia analyses too small to be cost effective, and so we deem them to be
beyond the scope of this work.

Parody Detection: An Annotation, Feature Construction, and Classiﬁcation. . .
71
Fig. 1 Literary devices used
in derivative works
Irony
Satire
Parody
The Need for Natural Language Features
The relative tractability of natural language analyses makes the language of
derivative works the focus of this research. More importantly, we narrow the scope
to discover whether the social response to a derivative work reﬂects its unique
linguistic features. Derivative works employ different literary devices, such as irony,
satire, and parody. As seen in Fig. 1, irony, satire, and parody are interrelated. Irony
can be described as appearance versus reality. In other words, the intended meaning
is different from the actual deﬁnition of the words (LiteraryDevices Editor 2014).
For example, the sentence “We named our new Great Dane ‘Tiny’” is ironic because
Great Dane dogs are quite large. Satire is generally used to expose and criticize
weakness, foolishness, corruption, etc., of a work, individual, or society by using
irony, exaggeration, or ridicule. Parody has the core concepts of satire; however,
parodies are direct imitations of a particular work, usually to produce a comic effect.
Background and Related Work: Detecting Appropriated
Works
Irony, Satire, and Parody Detection
Detecting derivative works can be a technically challenging task and is relatively
novel beyond the older problems of plagiarism detection and authorship attribution.
Burfoot and Baldwin (2009) introduce methodology in classifying satirical news
articles as being either true (the real or original news article) or satirical. In a variety
of cases, satire can be subtle and difﬁcult to detect. Features focused on were mainly
lexical, for example, the use of profanity and slang and similarity in article titles. In
most cases, the headlines are good indications of satires, but so are profanity and
slang since satires are meant for ridicule. Semantic validity was also introduced by

72
J.L. Weese et al.
using named entity recognition. This refers to detecting whether or not a named
entity is out of place or used in the correct context.
Similar features can also be found in parodies. Bull (2010) focused on an
empirical analysis on non-serious news, which includes sarcastic and parody news
articles. Semantic validity was studied by calculating the edit distance of common
sayings. This expands beyond just parody as many writings use “common phrases
with new spins.” Unusual juxtapositions and out of place language were also shown
to be common in parody text, for example, “Pedophile of the Year” is phrase that
is not uttered often in a serious context. This also leads to a comparison of the
type of language used in parody and satirical articles. Non-serious text tends to
use informal language with frequent use of adjectives, adverbs, contractions, slang,
and profanity, where serious text has more professional qualities of style, diction,
tone, and voice. In contrast to serious text, parodies can also be personalized (use
of personal pronouns). Punctuation was also seen an indicator as serious text rarely
use punctuation like exclamation marks (Tsur et al. 2010; Bull 2010).
As seen in Fig. 1, irony encompasses both satire and parody, but can also be
more problematic to detect without a tonal reference or situational awareness. It is
“unrealistic to seek a computational silver bullet for irony” (Reyes et al. 2012). In an
effort to detect verbal irony in text, Reyes et al. (2012) focus on four main properties:
signatures (typographical elements), unexpectedness, style (textual sequences), and
emotional scenarios. Properties of irony detection clearly cascade down to the
subdomains of parody and satire.
Music Video Domain
YouTube as a Data Source
YouTube has become one of the most popular user driven-video sharing platforms
on the Web. In a study on the impact of social network structure on content
propagation, Yoganarasimhan (2012) measured how YouTube propagated based on
the social network to which a video was connected (i.e., subscribers). He shed light
on the trafﬁc YouTube receives such that “In April 2010 alone, YouTube received
97 million unique visitors and streamed 4.9 billion videos” (Yoganarasimhan 2012).
Per recent reports from the popular video streaming service, YouTube’s trafﬁc and
content has exploded. YouTube, in 2016, had over a billion users, streamed hundreds
of millions of hours of video each day, and spanned over 88 countries (Google
2016). YouTube videos are also ﬁnding their way to social sites like Facebook
(500 years of YouTube video watched every day) and Twitter (over 700 YouTube
videos shared each minute). This leads to many research opportunities such as the
goal of reconstructing a web of derivative works. With over 100 million people that
like/dislike, favorite, rate, comment, and share YouTube videos, YouTube is a perfect
platform to study social networks and relations.

Parody Detection: An Annotation, Feature Construction, and Classiﬁcation. . .
73
The YouTube Social Network
YouTube is a large, content-driven social network, interfacing with many social
networking giants like Facebook and Twitter (Wattenhofer et al. 2012). Considering
the size of the YouTube network, there are numerous research areas, such as
content propagation, virality, sentiment analysis, and content tagging. Recently,
Google published work on classifying YouTube channels based on Freebase topics
(Simmonet 2013). Their classiﬁcation system worked on mapping Freebase topics
to various categories for the YouTube channel browser. Other works focus on
categorizing videos with a series of tags using computer vision (Yang and Toderici
2011). However, analyzing video content can be computationally intensive.
To expand from classifying videos based on content, this study looks at classify-
ing YouTube videos based on social aspects like user comments. Wattenhofer et al.
(2012) performed large scale experiments on the YouTube social network to study
popularity in YouTube, how users interact, and how YouTube’s social network relates
to other social networks. By looking at user comments, subscriptions, ratings, and
other related features, they found that YouTube differs from other social networks
in terms of user interaction (Wattenhofer et al. 2012). This shows that methodology
in analyzing social networks such as Twitter may not be directly transferable to
the YouTube platform. Diving further into the YouTube social network, Siersdorfer
(2010) studied the community acceptance of user comments by looking at comment
ratings and sentiment (Murphy et al. 2014; Trindade et al. 2014). Further analysis of
user comments can be made over the life of the video by discovering polarity trends
(Krishna et al. 2013).
Machine Learning Task: Classiﬁcation
Machine learning, the problem of improving problem solving ability at a speciﬁed
task given some experience (Mitchell 1997), is divided by practitioners into several
broad categories: supervised learning, which involves data for which a target
prediction or classiﬁcation is already provided by past observation or by a human
annotator, and unsupervised learning, where the aim is to formulate categories or
descriptors based on measures of similarity between objects, and these categories
are not provided as part of input data (Mitchell 1997; Murphy 2012; Alpaydin
2014). Classifying previously unseen items based on known categories by training
them on labeled texts is an instance of supervised learning (Mitchell 1997), while
topic modeling, the problem of forming as-yet unnamed categories by comparing
members of a collection of items based on their similarities and differences, is a
typical application of unsupervised learning (McCallum 2002; Blei and Ng 2003;
Elshamy and Hsu 2014). In text analytics, the items are text documents; however,
we seek in this work and future work to extend the items being classiﬁed and
categorized as derivative of others. That is, we seek to generalize to a broader range
of creative works, including musical instruments or singers (Weese 2014), musical

74
J.L. Weese et al.
compositions, videos, viral images and other memes, social media posts, users, and
communities (Yang et al. 2014), etc.
Over the last decade, researchers have focused on the use of the formulation
of kernel-based methods with the purpose of determining similarity and indexing
documents for such machine learning tasks as classiﬁcation (Trindade et al. 2011)
and clustering (Bloehdorn and Moschitti 2007). The use of kernels allows a
complex data space to be mapped to a compact feature space, where the level
of similarity between documents can be easily and efﬁciently calculated using
dynamic programming methods based on a kernel function (Doddington et al. 2004;
Shawe-Taylor and Cristianini 2004). Such a kernel function forms the basis to
a kernel machine such as support vector machine or online perception that can
be applied for classiﬁcation. The approach has been demonstrated to be effective
for various representations of documents in NLP from sequence kernels for POS
tagging (Bunescu and Mooney 2005; Lodhi et al. 2002) to tree kernels based on
parse trees (Cancedda et al. 2003). Moschitti has explored on the use of kernels for
a number a specialized NLP tasks such as relation extraction (Nguyen et al. 2009),
semantic role labelling (Moschitti 2006; Moschitti et al. 2008), and question and
answer classiﬁcation (Moschitti 2008).
Relation extraction (RE), as deﬁned by the Automatic Context Extraction (ACE)
evaluation (Doddington et al. 2004), is the task of ﬁnding semantic relations between
pairs of named entities in text, e.g., organization, location, part, role, etc. ACE
systems use a wide range of lexical, syntactic, and semantic features to determine the
relation mention between two entities. Supervised, semi-supervised, and unsuper-
vised machine learning methods have been applied to relation extraction. Supervised
methods are generally the most accurate, however, with the proviso that there are
only few relationship identiﬁed types and the corpus is domain-speciﬁc (Mintz
et al. 2009). There has been extensive work in the latter direction with regard to
the use of kernel methods. A number of kernel-based approaches have been derived
either through the use of one or more the following structural representations for a
sentence: its constituent parse tree and its dependency-based representation which
encode the grammatical dependencies between words. The approach of kernels over
parse trees was pioneered by Collins and Duffy (2002), where the kernel function
counts the number of common subtrees with appropriate weighting as the measure
of similarity between two parse trees. Zelenko et al. (2003) considered such use
of parse trees for the purpose of relation extraction. Culotta and Sorensen (2004)
extended this work to consider kernels between augmented dependency trees. Zhang
et al. (2006) proposed the use of convolution kernels which provide a recursive
deﬁnition over the structure (Moschitti 2004). Nguyen et al. (2009) consider the use
of a novel composite convolution kernels not just based on constituent parse trees
but also for dependency and sequential structure for RE. A relation is represented by
using the path-enclosed tree (which is the smallest subtree containing both entities)
of the constituent parse tree or the path linking two entities of the dependency
tree. Bunescu and Mooney (2005) proposed shortest path dependency kernel by
stipulating that the only information to model a relationship between two entities
can be captured by the shortest path between them in the dependency structure.

Parody Detection: An Annotation, Feature Construction, and Classiﬁcation. . .
75
The latter is represented as a form of subsequence kernel (Doddington et al. 2004).
Wang (2008) evaluated the latter structure in comparison to other subsequence
kernels.
Kernels have been applied not only for relation extraction between named
entities but also more complex relationship learning discovery tasks between whole
sentences such as question and answering and textual entailment. Moschitti et al.
(2008) propose a kernel mechanism for text fragment similarity based on the
syntactic parse trees.
Methodology: Using Machine Learning to Detect Parody
Feature Analysis and Selection
We treat the problem of parody detection over candidate source video pairs as a
classiﬁcation task given computable ground features. Similar task deﬁnitions are
used for prediction of friends in social networks: e.g., classiﬁcation of a proposed
direct friendship link as extant or not (Hsu et al. 2007; Caragea et al. 2009).
This supervised inductive learning thus presents a simultaneous feature analysis
(extraction) and selection task.
Finding quantitative ground features is in many instances a straightforward
matter of interrogating the YouTube data model (API Overview Guide 2014) to
extract ﬁelds of interest. In some social media analytics domains, this produces
attributes that are irrelevant to some inductive learning algorithms (Hsu et al. 2007);
in this domain, however, we found the effects of feature selection wrappers to
be relatively negligible. By contrast, natural language features generally require
crawling and parsing free text to extract sentiment, keywords of interest (including
suppressed stop words), and ultimately named entities.
Annotation for Supervised Learning
Ground truth for the supervised learning task is obtained by developing a user
interface that presents candidate pairs of videos to an annotator, renders the metadata
as it appears in YouTube, allows the annotator to view the video, and having him or
her provide a Boolean-valued judgment as to whether the pair consists of a source
and parody. No special expertise is required; no explanations are elicited; and this
approach admits validation via annotator agreement (cf. Hovy and Lavid 2010).
Addressing the Class Imbalance Problem
Class imbalance occurs when there is a signiﬁcantly large number of examples of
a certain class (such as positive or negative) over another. Drummond and Holte

76
J.L. Weese et al.
(2012) discuss the class imbalance problem as cost in misclassiﬁcation. As the
imbalance increases, algorithms like Naïve Bayes that are somewhat resistant to the
class imbalance problem suffer performance. Instead of using different algorithms
to overcome class imbalance, the authors suggest generalizing the data to create
a more uniform distribution to help overcome class imbalance. There are various
methods to create a more uniform distribution of classes in a dataset. YouTube has
millions of videos with a fraction of those being source/parody pairs. In order to
keep the dataset in this study from becoming imbalanced, candidate source/parody
pairs were ﬁltered to give improved representation.
Data Acquisition and Preparation
Data Collection and Preprocessing
Criteria for Generation of Candidates
One challenge to overcome was that there is no parody dataset for YouTube and no
concrete way of collecting such data. Our initial dataset included only information
about the YouTube video (video statistics), rather than the video itself. The search for
videos was quite limited (search bias in which videos were chosen). Given a well-
known or popular parody video, the corresponding known source was found. The
problem of multiple renditions of the same source arose and to solve it, only those
deemed “ofﬁcial” sources were collected (another search bias). The term “ofﬁcial”
refers to the video being published (uploaded) by the artistic work’s artist or sponsor
YouTube channel or account. The collection of known sources and parodies (28
of each) were retrieved using Google’s YouTube API and stored into an XML ﬁle
format for easy access.
The ﬁnal experimentation greatly expanded the preliminary dataset. Kimono
Labs, an API for generating crawling templates, was used to generate seeds for
crawling YouTube for source and parody videos (Kimono Labs 2014). The Kimono
API allowed quick and easy access to the top 100 songs from billboard.com (the
week of November 3rd was used). The song titles were collected and used to retrieve
the top two hits from YouTube using the YouTube Data API (API Overview Guide
2014). Parodies were retrieved in a similar fashion, except the keyword “parody”
was added to the YouTube query which was limited to the top ﬁve search results. This
helped reduce the class imbalance problem. Pairs were generated by taking the cross
product of the two source videos and the ﬁve parody videos, making 1474 videos
after ﬁltering invalid videos and videos that were not in English. The cross product
was used to generate candidate pairs since source videos spawn multiple parodies as
well as other fan made source videos. Information retrieved with the videos included
the video statistics (view count, likes, etc.) and up to 2000 comments.

Parody Detection: An Annotation, Feature Construction, and Classiﬁcation. . .
77
Annotation
A custom annotator was built to allow users to label candidate source/parody pairs as
valid or invalid. This was a crucial step in removing pairs that were not true parodies
(false positive hits in the YouTube search results) of source videos. Naively, videos
could be tagged based on whether the candidate parody video title contains parody
keywords like “parody” or “spoof,” but this generates several incorrect matches
with sources. Likewise, if a parody video is popular enough, it also appears in the
search results for the corresponding source video. It is also important to note that
source lyric videos and other fan made videos were included in the dataset, so as
to extend preliminary data beyond “ofﬁcial” videos. Having only two annotators
available, pairs that were marked as valid by both annotators were considered to
be valid source/parody pairs. In future works, more annotators will be needed and
as such, inter-annotator agreement can be veriﬁed by kappa statistics and other
means. Annotation left only 571 valid pairs (38.74%), which shows the importance
of annotating the data versus taking the naïve approach to class labels. The number
of pairs used in the ﬁnal dataset was reduced to 162 valid pairs (about 11%) and 353
invalid pairs (23.95%) after removing videos that did not have a minimum of 100
comments available for crawling.
Feature Analysis
Preliminary experiments included four different feature sets:
1. The ﬁrst used only ratios of video statistics (rating, number of times favorited,
number of likes/dislikes, etc.) between the candidate source and parody.
2. The second used video statistic ratios plus a feature which indicated whether or
not the second video in the pair was published after the ﬁrst.
3. The third experiment used only the raw data collected (no ratios) plus the
“published after” feature; this experiment was used as the baseline and used for
comparison.
4. The fourth experiment included all features from the ﬁrst three experiment
designs.
The best performance was achieved as a result of the fourth feature set. The
dataset was also oversampled to reduce the class imbalance. This gave a 98% ROC
area; however, using the raw data as features, along with the oversampling caused
overﬁtting. A better representative of the preliminary results was an average ROC
area of 65–75%. Note that this is only with features generated from the video
statistics.

78
J.L. Weese et al.
Table 1 Features of the ﬁnal experiment
Feature
Description
SentenceCount
Number of sentences from comments
Stanford NLP sentiment
Sentiment of comment sentences which range from very negative to
very positive (a ﬁve value system)
AvgCommentSentiment
Average word sentiment from TwitIE
BadWordCount
Percentage of words that are profanity
Penn treebank NLP
The parts of speech tags in the penn treebank (Liberman 2003) as
generated by stanford NLP
Penn treebank TwitIE
The parts of speech tags in the penn treebank generated by TwitIE
Punctuation
Punctuation marks
WordCount
Number of words in comments
AverageWordLength
Average length of words in comments
Top 20 mallet topics
The top 20 topics generated by mallet for source videos and for
parody videos
Views
Number of views the video received
Likes
Number of likes for the video
Dislikes
Number of dislikes for the video
FavCount
Number of times the video was favorited
CommentCount
Number of comments the video has
TitleSimilarity
The edit distance of the parody and source video titles
Note that each is unique to the source video and the parody video except TitleSimilarity which is
for both
Feature Extraction from Text
Extracting features from video content can come with a high computational
overhead. Even though some natural language processing (NLP) tasks can be costly
(depending on the size of text), this study focuses on using only features extracted
from video information, statistics, and comments as shown in Table 1. One area of
focus were lexical features extracted from user comments per video. Parts of speech
tags were generated by two different toolkits: Stanford NLP (Manning et al. 2014)
and GATE’s TwitIE (Bontcheva et al. 2013). This allows the evaluation of a short-
text tagger (TwitIE) and a multipurpose tagger (Stanford NLP). Both were also used
to analyze sentiment of user comments. TwitIE was used to produce an average
word sentiment, where Stanford NLP was used for sentence level sentiment. Other
features include statistical lexical and structural features like punctuation, average
word length, and number of sentences. A profanity ﬁlter was used to calculate the
number of bad words in each set of comments. The number of unrecognizable
tokens by the parts of speech taggers was also added as a feature. This hints at the
unique language of the user comments where nontraditional English spelling and
internet slang is used. All counts (sentiment, parts of speech, etc.) were normalized
to percentages to take into account the difference in the number of comments

Parody Detection: An Annotation, Feature Construction, and Classiﬁcation. . .
79
Song Seeds
Annotation
YouTube Video
Collection
Comment Collection
Feature Construction
Candidate Pair
Generation
Fig. 2 Workﬂow model of a system for collecting and classifying YouTube video source/parody
pairs
available between videos. Another large portion of features generated were by using
Mallet (McCallum 2002), a machine learning toolkit for natural language. The built
in stop word removal and stemming was used before collecting the top 20 topics
for all parodies and sources for each training dataset. The summary of the process
described in this section can be seen in Fig. 2.
Experimental Results
Statistical Validation Approach
Experiments were conducted using a ten fold cross validation with 90% of the
data used for training and 10% used for testing. All features were generated per
video automatically with the exception of a few features like title similarity, which
requires both videos to construct the feature. Topic features were constructed by
training the topic model in Mallet using the training datasets, and then using that
model to infer the topics for the test datasets. Two data conﬁgurations were used
to test whether or not the occurrence of the word “parody” would introduce a bias
to classiﬁcation. A synset was created for removing these occurrences: fparody,
parodies, spoof, spoofsg. The data conﬁgurations were then combined with different
feature arraignments to test the impact of using Stanford NLP, TwitIE, and video
statistics.

80
J.L. Weese et al.
Results Using Different Feature Sets
This section describes results on the parody-or-not classiﬁcation task: learn-
ing the concept of a parody/original song pair by classifying a candidate pair
(Song1, Song2) as being a parody paired with the original song it is based on. All
classiﬁcation tasks were done using the machine learning tool WEKA (Hall et al.
2009a, b). The supervised inductive learning algorithms (inducers) used included:
Naïve Bayesian (NaiveBayes), instance-based (IB1), rule-based (JRip), decision
tree (J48), artiﬁcial neural network (MLP), and logistic regression (Logistic).
Results were averaged across all ten folds. The f-measure (Powers 2011),
standard deviation, and standard error can be found for each feature conﬁguration
in Tables 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7. On average, the best performing inducers were MLP
and IB1 at 90–93% f-measure. J48 performed well, but after looking at the pruned
tree, the model tended to overﬁt. With the addition of features from user comments,
performance increased signiﬁcantly when compared to the preliminary work which
used only video statistics. Stanford NLP (Tables 4 and 5) is shown to overall produce
more relevant features than the TwitIE parts of speech tagger (Tables 2 and 3). When
the TwitIE features were removed, performance was relatively unaffected (1–2% at
most). Logistic is an exception to this analysis as it dropped 6.59%; however, this is
taken as an intrinsic property of the inducer and requires further investigation. The
removal of the video statistic features, however, did reduce performance for most
Table 2 Results for the stanford NLP, TwitIE, and video statistics feature set that include parody
synsets
Average F-measure: Stanford NLP, TwitIE, and video statistics with parody synsets
Inducers
AVG F measure (%)
STD (%)
STD-ERR (%)
IB1
91.01
2.87
0.91
J48
90.78
4.11
1.30
JRip
86.60
5.06
1.60
Logistic
87.95
2.87
0.91
MLP
91.35
3.36
1.06
NaiveBayes
82.37
4.21
1.33
Table 3 Results for the stanford NLP, TwitIE, and video statistics feature set that exclude parody
synsets
Average F-measure: Stanford NLP, TwitIE, and video statistics without parody synset
Inducer
AVG F measure (%)
STD (%)
STD-ERR (%)
IB1
91.39
3.17
1.00
J48
85.67
5.99
1.89
JRip
82.14
5.58
1.76
Logistic
88.29
3.72
1.18
MLP
90.44
2.64
0.83
NaiveBayes
80.18
3.87
1.22

Parody Detection: An Annotation, Feature Construction, and Classiﬁcation. . .
81
Table 4 Results for the stanford NLP and video statistics feature set that include parody synsets
Average F-measure: Stanford NLP and video statistics with parody synset
Inducer
AVG F measure (%)
STD (%)
STD-ERR (%)
IB1
92.59
2.96
0.94
J48
90.70
4.21
1.33
JRip
85.80
4.57
1.45
Logistic
86.80
4.65
1.47
MLP
90.28
3.65
1.16
NaiveBayes
82.55
4.50
1.42
Table 5 Results for the stanford NLP and video statistics feature set that exclude parody synsets
Average F-measure: Stanford NLP and video statistics without parody synset
Inducer
AVG F measure (%)
STD (%)
STD-ERR (%)
IB1
93.15
3.19
1.01
J48
85.05
4.88
1.54
JRip
86.16
4.96
1.57
Logistic
81.73
5.10
1.61
MLP
90.09
3.06
0.97
NaiveBayes
78.50
3.69
1.17
Table 6 Results for the stanford NLP feature set that include parody synsets
Average F-measure: Stanford NLP with parody synset
Inducer
AVG F measure (%)
STD (%)
STD-ERR (%)
IB1
92.39
2.87
0.91
J48
88.50
3.41
1.08
JRip
84.06
3.83
1.21
Logistic
82.94
6.41
2.03
MLP
88.73
2.87
0.91
NaiveBayes
78.51
4.70
1.48
Table 7 Results for the stanford NLP feature set that exclude parody synsets
Average F-measure: Stanford NLP without parody synset
Inducer
AVG F measure (%)
STD (%)
STD-ERR (%)
IB1
92.94
3.19
1.01
J48
86.87
4.25
1.34
JRip
81.63
4.80
1.52
Logistic
81.73
5.03
1.59
MLP
87.71
3.08
0.97
NaiveBayes
75.14
4.11
1.30

82
J.L. Weese et al.
inducers, showing that the popularity of a video helps indicate the relation between
a parody and its source. Removing the parody synset did not have a heavy impact
on performance. This is an important ﬁnd, such that the word “parody” does not
degrade classiﬁcation of source/parody pairs.
Interpretation of Results: Topic and Feature Analysis
The most inﬂuential features were seen by using feature subset selection within
WEKA. This showed that source and parody topics were most inﬂuential in the
classiﬁcation task. However, some topics clusters tend to overﬁt to popular videos
or artist, especially for source videos. Generic clusters were also formed for things
like music, humor, appraisal (users liked the song), and hate. A few unexpected
topics also appeared, which show that current events also make it into the trending
topics of the videos, for example: Obama, Ebola, and religion. Other feature analysis
concluded that personal nouns were not relevant. This contradicts related work.
Lexical features that were relevant included verbs, symbols, periods, adjectives,
average word length in parody comments, and undeﬁned or unrecognized tokens.
Sentiment also showed promise during feature selection, though further experiments
and dataset expansion will be needed to achieve more insightful feature selection.
The original hypothesis of this study is supported by the results. After introducing
features extracted from comments, classiﬁcation of source/parody pairs improved.
The hypothesis also held after removing the parody synset. This generalizes the
approach and makes it applicable to other domains, such as improving search,
classifying news articles, plagiarism, and other derivative work domains. The
proof of concept in this study leaves many possible directions for future research,
including domain adaptation and feature expansion. Features left for future work
include named entity recognition (this can help detect original authors of works),
unusual juxtapositions and out of place language (Bull 2010), sentence structure
beyond punctuation (Reyes et al. 2012), and community acceptance of comments to
supplement sentiment analysis (Siersdorfer 2010).

Parody Detection: An Annotation, Feature Construction, and Classiﬁcation. . .
83
Summary and Future Work
The results reported in Tables 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 of this paper support the original
hypothesis of this study: after introducing features extracted from comments,
classiﬁcation of source/parody pairs improved. More signiﬁcantly, results obtained
with the parody synset removed also support the hypothesis. This generalizes the
approach and makes it applicable to other domains, such as improving search, clas-
sifying news articles, plagiarism, and other derivative work domains. The proof of
concept in this study leaves many possible directions for future research, including
domain adaptation, feature expansion, and community detection. Features left for
future work include named entity recognition (this can help detect original authors
of works), unusual juxtapositions and out of place language (Bull 2010), sentence
structure beyond punctuation (Reyes et al. 2012), and community acceptance of
comments to supplement sentiment analysis (Siersdorfer 2010).
As mentioned in the introduction, a central goal of this work is to develop
techniques and representations for heterogeneous information network analysis
(HINA) to better support the discovery of webs of inﬂuence in derivation of creative
works and the recognition of these and other instances of cultural appropriation.
Figure 3 illustrates one such use case using early modern English ballads from
the English Broadside Ballad Archive (EBBA); Fig. 4 illustrates another based on
the meme Sí, se puede (“Yes, one can,” popularly rendered “Yes, we can”). These
are hand-constructed examples of the types of “network of inﬂuence” diagrams that
we aim to produce in continuing research.
Figure 5 depicts the data ﬂow and workﬂow model for our system for Extracting
the Network of Inﬂuence in the Digital Humanities (ENIDH), as a block diagram.
The system described in this book chapter implements a simpliﬁed variant of this
workﬂow. On the left side, the input consists of candidate items to be compared—in
this case, digital documents such as song videos bearing metadata. Named entity
(NE) recognition and discovery plus terminology discovery are preliminary steps to
relation discovery. As described in Section “Results using Different Feature Sets”,
supervised learning to predict parody/original song pairs was conducted using a
variety of inducers, but not using support vector machines (SVM) and other kernel-
based methods. The desired web of inﬂuence (Koller 2001) is represented by a
heterogeneous information network (containing multiple types of entities such as
“original song” and “parody video” or “original video” and “parody lyrics”) as
illustrated in Figs. 3 and 4.

84
J.L. Weese et al.
Fig. 3 Example of a network of derivative works based on the English Broadside Ballad Archive
(EBBA)

Parody Detection: An Annotation, Feature Construction, and Classiﬁcation. . .
85
Fig. 4 Example of a heterogeneous information network of derivative works based on the meme
Sí, se puede/Yes, We Can

86
J.L. Weese et al.
Fig. 5 System block diagram: Extracting the Network of Inﬂuence in the Digital Humanities
(ENIDH)
Acknowledgements We thank the anonymous reviewers for helpful comments, and Hui Wang
and Niall Rooney for the survey of kernel methods for clustering and classiﬁcation of text
documents in Section “Machine Learning Task: Classiﬁcation”.
References
Kimono Labs, (2014). Retrieved from Kimono Labs: https://www.kimonolabs.com/
E. Alpaydin, Introduction to Machine Learning, 3rd edn. (MIT Press, Cambridge, 2014)
API Overview Guide, (2014). Retrieved from Google Developers: https://developers.google.com/
youtube/
D.M. Blei, A.Y. Ng, Latent dirichlet allocation. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 2003(3), 993–1022 (2003)
S. Bloehdorn, A. Moschitti, Combined syntactic and semantic kernels for text classiﬁcation. Adv.
Inf. Retr. 4425, 307–318 (2007)
K. Bontcheva, L. Derczynski, A. Funk, M. A. Greenwood, D. Maynard, N. Aswani, TwitIE:
an open-source information extraction pipeline for microblog text, in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing (2013)
S. Bull, Automatic Parody Detection in Sentiment Analysis (2010)
R. Bunescu, R. Mooney, A shortest path dependency kernel for relation extraction. in Proceedings
of the Conference on Human Language Technology and Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing(2005), pp. 724–731
C. Burfoot, T. Baldwin, in ACL-IJCNLP, Automatic Satire Detection: Are You Having A Laugh?
(Suntec, Singapore, 2009), pp. 161–164
I. Cadez, D. Heckerman, C. Meek, P. Smyth, S. White, Visualization of Navigation Patterns
on a Web Site Using Model-Based Clustering, in Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (KDD 2000), ed. by R.
Ramakrishnan, S. J. Stolfo, R. J. Bayardo, I. Parsa (Boston 2000), pp. 280–284
N. Cancedda, E. Gaussier, C. Goutte, J. Renders, Word sequence kernels. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 3,
1059–1082 (2003)
D. Caragea, V. Bahirwani, W. Aljandal, W. H. Hsu, Ontology-Based Link Prediction in the Live-
journal Social Network, in Proceedings of the 8th Symposium on Abstraction, Reformulation
and Approximation (SARA 2009), ed. by V. Bulitko, J. C. Beck, (Lake Arrowhead, CA, 2009)
S. Choudury, J. G. Breslin, User Sentiment Detection: A Youtube Use Case, (2010)

Parody Detection: An Annotation, Feature Construction, and Classiﬁcation. . .
87
M. Collins, N. Duffy, Convolution kernels for natural language. Adv. Neural Inf. Proces. Syst. 1,
625–632 (2002)
A. Culotta, J. Sorensen, Dependency tree kernels for relation extraction, in Proceedings of the 42nd
Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics, (2004), p. 423-es
A. Cuzzocrea, I.-Y. Song, K. C. Davis, Analytics over large-scale multidimensional data: the big
data revolution!, in Proceedings of the ACM 14th International Workshop on Data Warehousing
and On-Line Analytical Processing (DOLAP 2011), ed. by A. Cuzzocrea, I.-Y. Song, K. C.
Davis, (ACM Press, Glasgow, 2011) pp. 101–104
R. Dawkins, in The Meme Machine, ed. by S. Blackmore, Foreword, (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 2000). pp. i–xvii
R. Dawkins, The Selﬁish Gene, 30th edn. (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2006)
G. Doddington, A. Mitchell, M. Przybocki, L. Ramshaw, S. Strassel, R. Weischedel, The automatic
content extraction (ace) program–tasks, data, and evaluation. Proc. LREC 4, 837–840 (2004)
C. Drummond, R. E. Holte, Severe Class Imbalance: Why Better Algorithms aren’t the Answer
(2012). Retrieved from http://www.csi.uottawa.ca/~cdrummon/pubs/ECML05.pdf
C.E. Elger, K. Lehnertz, Seizure prediction by non-linear time series analysis of brain electrical
activity. Eur. J. Neurosci. 10(2), 786–789 (1998)
W. Elshamy, W. H. Hsu, in Continuous-time inﬁnite dynamic topic models: the dim sum process
for simultaneous topic enumeration and formation, ed. by W. H. Hsu, Emerging Methods in
Predictive Analytics: Risk Management and Decision-Making (Hershey, IGI Global, 2014),
pp. 187–222
U. Gargi, W. Lu, V. Mirrokni, S. Yoon, Large-scale community detection on youtube for topic
discovery and exploration, in Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Weblogs and
Social Media, ed. by L. A. Adamic, R. A. Baeza-Yates, S. Counts (Barcelona, Catalonia, 17–21
July 2011)
P. Gill, M. Arlitt, Z. Li, A. Mahanti, YouTube trafﬁc characterization: a view from the edge, in
IMC’07: Proceedings of the 7th ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet Measurement (ACM,
New York, 2007), pp. 15–28
J. Gleick, The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood (Pantheon Books, New York, 2011)
J. Goldstein, S. F. Roth, Using aggregation and dynamic queries for exploring large data sets, in
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2004),
ed. by E. Dykstra-Erickson, M. Tscheligi (ACM Press, Boston, MA, 1994), pp. 23–29
Google. Statistics. (2012). Retrieved from YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/t/press_statistics
M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, The WEKA Data Mining Software: An Update. ACM
SIGKDD Explorations Newsletter 11(1), 10–18 (2009b)
M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, I.H. Witten, The WEKA Data Mining
Software: An Update. SIGKDD Explorations 11(1), 10–18 (2009a)
J. Heer, N. Kong, M. Agrawala, Sizing the horizon: the effects of chart size and layering on the
graphical perception of time series visualizations, in Proceedings of the 27th International
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 2009) (ACM Press, Boston, 2009),
pp. 1303–1312
E. Hovy, J. Lavid, Towards a ‘Science’ of corpus annotation: a new methodological challenge for
corpus linguistics. Int. J. Translat. 22(1), 13–36 (2010). doi:10.1075/target.22.1
W. H. Hsu, J. P. Lancaster, M. S. Paradesi, T. Weninger, Structural link analysis from user proﬁles
and friends networks: a feature construction approach, in Proceedings of the 1st International
Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (ICWSM 2007), ed. by N. S. Glance, N. Nicolov, E.
Adar, M. Hurst, M. Liberman, F. Salvetti (Boulder, CO, 2007), pp. 75–80
H. Jenkins. If it Doesn’t Spread, it’s Dead. (2009). Retrieved 06 16, 2011, from Confessions
of an Aca-Fan: The Ofﬁcial Weblog of Henry Jenkins: http://www.henryjenkins.org/2009/02/
if_it_doesnt_spread_its_dead_p.html
D. A. Keim, Challenges in visual data analysis, in 10th International Conference on Information
Visualisation (IV 2006), ed. by E. Banissi, K. Börner, C. Chen, G. Clapworthy, C. Maple, A.
Lobben, : : : J. Zhang (IEEE Press, London, 2006), pp. 9–16

88
J.L. Weese et al.
D. Koller (2001). Representation, reasoning, learning: IJCAI 2001 computers and thought award
lecture. Retrieved from Daphne Koller: http://stanford.io/TFV7qH
A. Krishna, J. Zambreno, S. Krishnan, Polarity trend analysis of public sentiment on Youtube, in
The 19Tth International Conference on Management of Data (Ahmedabad, 2013)
N. Kumar, E. Keogh, S. Lonardi, C. A. Ratanamahatana, Time-series bitmaps: a practical
visualization tool for working with large time series databases, in Proceedings of the 5th SIAM
International Conference on Data Mining (SDM 2005) (Newport Beach, CA, 2005), pp. 531–
535
M. Liberman. Penn Treebank POS, (2003). Retrieved 2014, from Penn Arts and Sciences: https://
www.ling.upenn.edu/courses/Fall_2003/ling001/penn_treebank_pos.html
LiteraryDevices Editors, (2014). Retrieved from Literary Devices: http://literarydevices.net
J. Liu, S. Ali, M. Shah, Recognizing human actions using multiple features, in IEEE Computer
Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR 2008) (2008), pp.
1–8. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2008.4587527
H. Lodhi, C. Saunders, J. Shawe-Taylor, N. Cristianini, C. Watkins, Text classiﬁcation using string
kernels. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 2, 419–444 (2002)
C. D. Manning, M. Surdeanu, J. Bauer, J. Finkel, S. J. Bethard, D. McClosky, The Stanford
CoreNLP Natural Language Processing Toolkit, in Proceedings of 52nd Annual Meeting of
the Association for Computational Linguistics: System Demonstrations (2014), pp. 55–60
C. Mario, D. Talia, The knowledge grid. Commun. ACM 46(1), 89–93 (2003)
A. K. McCallum (2002). Retrieved from MALLET: A Machine Learning for Language Toolkit:
http://mallet.cs.umass.edu
A. Mesaros, T. Virtanen, Automatic recognition of lyrics in singing. EURASIP J. Audio, Speech,
and Music Processing 2010 (2010). doi:10.1155/2010/546047
M. Mintz, S. Bills, R. Snow, D. Jurafsky, Distant supervision for relation extraction without labeled
data, in Proceedings of the Joint Conference of the 47th Annual Meeting of the ACL and the
4th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing of the AFNLP: Volume 2
(2009), pp. 1003–1011
T.M. Mitchell, Machine learning (McGraw Hill, New York, 1997)
M. Monmonier, Strategies for the visualization of geographic time-series data. Cartographica: Int.
J. Geogr. Inf. Geovisualization 27(1), 30–45 (1990)
A. Moschitti, A study on convolution kernels for shallow semantic parsing, in Proceedings of the
42nd Annual Meeting on Association for Computational Linguistics (2004), p. 335-es
A. Moschitti, Syntactic kernels for natural language learning: the semantic role labeling case,
in Proceedings of the Human Language Technology Conference of the NAACL, Companion
Volume: Short Papers on XX (2006). (pp. 97–100)
A. Moschitti, Kernel methods, syntax and semantics for relational text categorization, in Pro-
ceeding of the 17th ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (2008),
pp. 253–262
A. Moschitti, D. Pighin, R. Basili, Tree kernels for semantic role labeling. Comput. Linguist. 34(2),
193–224 (2008)
J. C. Murphy, W. H. Hsu, W. Elshamy, S. Kallumadi, S. Volkova, Greensickness and HPV: a
comparative analysis?, in New Technologies in Renaissance Studies II, ed. by T. Gniady, K.
McAbee, J. C. Murphy, vol. 4 (Toronto and Tempe, AZ, USA: Iter and Arizona Center for
Medieval and Renaissance Studies, 2014), pp. 171–197
K.P. Murphy, Machine Learning: A Probabilistic Perspective (MIT Press, Cambridge, 2012)
T. Nguyen, A. Moschitti, G. Riccardi, Convolution kernels on constituent, dependency and
sequential structures for relation extraction, in Proceedings of the 2009 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: volume 3 (2009), pp. 1378–1387
T. O’reilly, What Is Web 2.0 (O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, 2009)
A. Reyes, P. Rosso, T. Veale, A multidemensional approach for detecting irony in twitter. Lang.
Resour. Eval. 47(1), 239–268 (2012)
J. Selden, Table Talk: Being the Discourses of John Selden. London: Printed for E. Smith (1689)

Parody Detection: An Annotation, Feature Construction, and Classiﬁcation. . .
89
J. Shawe-Taylor, N. Cristianini, An Introduction to Support Vector Machines: And Other Kernel-
Based Learning Methods (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2004)
S. C. Siersdorfer, How useful are your comments?-Analyzing and predicting Youtube comments
and comment ratings, in Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on World Wide Web,
vol. 15 (2010), pp. 897–900
V. Simmonet, Classifying Youtube channels: a practical system, in Proceedings of the 22nd
International Conference on World Wibe Web Companion (2013), pp. 1295–1303
J. Steele, N. Iliinsky (eds.), Beautiful Visualization: Looking at Data Through the Eyes of Experts
(O’Reilly Media, Cambridge, 2010)
L. A. Trindade, H. Wang, W. Blackburn, N. Rooney, Text classiﬁcation using word sequence kernel
methods, in Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning and Cybernetics
(ICMLC 2011) (Guilin, 2011), pp. 1532–1537
L. A. Trindade, H. Wang, W. Blackburn, P. S. Taylor, Enhanced factored sequence kernel
for sentiment classiﬁcation, in Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Joint
Conferences on Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technologies (WI-IAT 2014) (2014), pp.
519–525
O. Tsur, D. Davidov, A. Rappoport, in ICWSN—A Great Catchy Name: Semi-Supervised Recogni-
tion of Sarcastic Sentences in Online Product Reviews, AAAI (2010)
M. Wang, A re-examination of dependency path kernels for relation extraction, in Proceedings of
IJCNLP (2008), 8
H.J. Watson, B.H. Wixom, The current state of business intelligence. IEEE Comput. 40(9), 96–99
(2007)
T. Watt, Cheap Print and Popular Piety, 1550–1640 (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
1991)
M. Wattenhofer, R. Wattenhofer, Z. Zhu, The YouTube Social Network, in Sixth International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media (2012), pp. 354–361
J. L. Weese, in Emerging Methods in Predictive Analytics: Risk Management and Decision-
Making, ed. by W. H. Hsu, Predictive analytics in digital signal processing: a convolutive model
for polyphonic instrument identiﬁcation and pitch detection using combined classiﬁcation.
(Hershey: IGI Global, 2014), pp. 223–253
M. Yang, W. H. Hsu, S. Kallumadi, in Emerging Methods in Predictive Analytics: Risk Manage-
ment and Decision-Making, ed. by W. H. Hsu, Predictive analytics of social networks: a survey
of tasks and techniques (Hershey: IGI Global, 2014), pp. 297–333
W. Yang, G. Toderici, Discriminative tag learning on Youtube videos with latent sub-tags. CVPR,
(2011), pp. 3217–3224
H. Yoganarasimhan. (2012). Impact of Social Network Structure on Content Propagation: A Study
Using Youtube Data. Retrieved from: http://faculty.gsm.ucdavis.edu/~hema/youtube.pdf
D. Zelenko, C. Aone, A. Richardella, Kernel methods for relation extraction. J. Mach. Learn. Res.
3, 1083–1106 (2003)
M. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Su, G. Zhou, A composite kernel to extract relations between entities
with both ﬂat and structured features, in Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on
Computational Linguistics and the 44th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational
Linguistics (2006), pp. 825–832

Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora
Michael Percillier
Abstract Using a study of non-standardized linguistic features in literary texts
as a working example, the chapter describes the creation of a digital corpus from
printed source texts, as well as its subsequent annotation and analysis. The sections
detailing the process of corpus creation take readers through the steps of document
scanning, Optical Character Recognition, proofreading, and conversion of plain text
to XML, while offering advice on best practices and overviews of existing tools. The
presented corpus annotation method introduces the programming language Python
as a tool for automated basic annotation, and showcases methods for facilitating
thorough manual annotation. The data analysis covers both qualitative analysis,
facilitated by CSS styling of XML data, and quantitative analysis, performed with
the statistical software package R and showcasing a number of sample analyses.
Introduction
The present chapter provides a detailed description of the methodology used in
the research project Representations of oral varieties of language in the literature
of the English-speaking world (Paulin and Percillier 2015; Percillier and Paulin
2016). The aim of the project is to compile and subsequently analyze a corpus of
literary prose texts, placing an emphasis on non-standardized linguistic features.
The chapter addresses three topics of interest to the ﬁeld of Digital Humanities:
1. The creation of a digital corpus from printed source texts
2. Corpus annotation
3. Qualitative and quantitative data analysis.
Using the project’s corpus of literary texts as a working example, the three
aforementioned topics are explained in turn. Section “Corpus Creation” describes
the process of creating a corpus from a printed text to a digital corpus, providing
details on scanning practices (Scanning), methods for converting images of scanned
M. Percillier ()
University of Mannheim, Mannheim, Germany
e-mail: percillier@uni-mannheim.de
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
S. Hai-Jew (ed.), Data Analytics in Digital Humanities, Multimedia Systems
and Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54499-1_4
91

92
M. Percillier
text into digital text (Optical Character Recognition), and advice on proofreading
said digital text (Proofreading). Section “Basic Corpus Annotation” deals with basic
annotation of the corpus, which is performed automatically using Python. After har-
monizing quotation marks throughout the corpus (Harmonizing Quotation Marks),
the plain text ﬁles are converted to the XML format (From Plain Text to XML),
and basic automatic annotation such as paragraph numbering and character passage
recognition is added (Applying Automatic Basic Annotation). Section “Applying
Manual Annotation” describes the method used to apply the actual linguistic
annotation to the corpus. The annotation can then be used to facilitate a qualitative
analysis of the data, as described in section “Enabling Qualitative Analysis,” as
well as a quantitative analysis, described in section “Quantitative Analysis,” which
outlines a number of sample analyses using R.
Corpus Creation
A corpus is deﬁned as a large collection of texts. The deﬁnition also implies that
said texts should be in a digital format in order to be analyzed by computers
in automatic and interactive ways (Biber et al. 1998, p.4). For this reason, any
research project aiming to effectively analyze texts not readily available in a digital
format should ﬁrst convert them from a printed medium to a digital medium. The
present section describes best scanning practices, the use of Optical Character
Recognition (henceforth OCR) to render the scanned text machine-readable, and
provides recommendations for proofreading the OCR output.
An ever increasing number of texts, including literary texts, are available in
digital format as so-called e-books. This applies to older texts, which enter the
public domain 70 or 100 years after their author(s)’s death (depending on the local
jurisdiction) and can be made freely available on platforms such as the Project
Gutenberg (Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation 2015), as well as recent
texts sold as digital versions and readable on computers, mobile devices, and
dedicated e-book devices. Readers intending to create a corpus based on digitally
available texts may skip sections “Scanning,” “Optical Character Recognition,”
and “Proofreading,” and proceed directly to section “Basic Corpus Annotation,”
while readers planning to base their corpus on printed texts are advised to follow the
recommendations offered in sections “Scanning,” “Optical Character Recognition,”
and “Proofreading.”
Scanning
The process of scanning refers to the conversion of a physical object, in our context
a printed page, to a digital image. Ordinary ﬂatbed scanners are usually sufﬁcient
for the scanning of book excerpts on a moderate scale. When scanning, a minimum

Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora
93
resolution of 300 pixels per inch (PPI) should be selected to ensure that the OCR
process [cf. section “Optical Character Recognition”] is as reliable as possible. As
long as this minimum resolution is set, the ﬁle format under which the scan is saved
can be chosen by the user, e.g., PDF, TIFF, JPEG, etc.
Optical Character Recognition
A scanned page is not yet a digital text, but merely a digital image, a picture of the
text. While it can be read on screen by a user, its contents cannot be searched for
speciﬁc character sequences, copied, transformed, or undergo any other operations
that can be done with a digital text. OCR is a process that analyzes the picture of a
text and converts it to a digital text.
There are a multitude of software titles capable of OCR, consisting of commer-
cial as well as free titles, as summarized in Table 1.
The OCR output is usually saved as a plain text ﬁle (with a .txt ﬁle ending). It
is recommended to choose Unicode, speciﬁcally UTF-8, as the text encoding, as this
will avoid encoding problems due to the presence of accented characters on Latin
characters (e.g., in the word ﬁancée) or non-Latin characters.
Proofreading
While OCR software can be quite accurate, even commercial titles rarely achieve
100% accuracy. OCR output should therefore be proofread whenever possible. As
the digitization process described aims to create a corpus and not an e-book similar
to the original printed version, the main interest when proofreading the OCR output
lies in the “pure” text, i.e., the content, and not on the formatting of the original print
edition. For this reason, the use of a text editor (cf. suggestions in Table 2) rather
than a word processor is strongly recommended. The only formatting unit to be
maintained is the paragraph. A paragraph in the printed volume corresponds to a line
in the digitized text. To clarify, one should not hit the Enter key at each line break
Table 1 Selection of OCR software titles
Title
License
Acrobat (Adobe 2016)
Commercial
FineReader (ABBYY 2016)
Commercial
OneNote (Microsoft 2016)
Proprietary freeware
ReadIris (IRIS 2015)
Commercial
Tesseract (Smith 2015)
Open source (Apache)
VueScan Professional Edition (Hamrick and Hamrick 2016)
Commercial

94
M. Percillier
Table 2 Selection of suitable text editors
Title
Operating system
License
gedit (Maggi et al. 2015)
Linux/Mac OS X/Windows
Open source (GNU GPL)
NotepadCC (Ho 2016)
Windows
Open source (GNU GPL)
TextWrangler (Bare Bones
Software 2015)
Mac OS X
Proprietary freeware
Table 3 Comparison of
typefaces
Preview
Typeface family
Typeface name
rnm cld 0O 1lI
Roman/serif
Times New Roman
rnm cld 0O 1lI
Sans serif
Helvetica
rnm cld 0O 1lI
Monospaced
Courier
found in the printed edition, but only at paragraph breaks. A blank line between
paragraphs is recommended for maximum clarity, as well as for later automatic
processing (cf. section “Applying Automatic Basic Annotation”).
Typefaces for Proofreading
Many errors in OCR are due to the fact that many print editions use roman/
serif typefaces, which means that some characters are narrower than others, and
adjacent character combinations may look like a different character altogether. A
contrast of various typefaces showing characters or character combinations that
can be easily confused is given in Table 3. Character sequences such as <rn>
and <cl> look like <m> and <d>, respectively, in serif typefaces, but are easier
to distinguish in monospaced typefaces. Additionally, individual characters may
be hard to distinguish in serif typefaces, e.g., <0, O> (zero, uppercase o) and
<1, l, I> (one, lowercase l, uppercase i). Specialized proofreading typefaces
featuring even more distinctive character shapes than monospaced typefaces are also
available, e.g. DPCustomMono2 (Distributed Proofreaders Foundation 2015).
Additional Measures in the Proofreading Process
OCR software is generally unable to discern italics, or distinguish hyphens from
dashes. As such, these aspects should be veriﬁed and marked during the proofread-
ing process should they be relevant for the project. Further issues such as obvious
errors in the print edition can also be addressed at this stage. Suggestions on how to
handle such cases are shown in Table 4. The structure used for marking print errors
will be explained when the XML data format is discussed in section “From Plain
Text to XML.” The digital ﬁles, once proofread, actually meet the requirements of a
corpus, albeit not a very useful one, given that it consists of nothing but plain text.
While simple queries for speciﬁc keywords could be performed, the potential of a
digital corpus greatly increases with annotation.

Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora
95
Table 4 Suggestions for handling special cases in the proofreading process
Case
Print appearance
Proofread digitized text
Italics
Text in italics
Text in _italics_
Hyphens and dashes
- Hyphen – Dash
- Hyphen -- Dash
Print errors
to he reminded
to <correction orig=‘he’>be</correction>reminded
Basic Corpus Annotation
The present section will describe a way to automatically add basic annotation to
the corpus. Speciﬁcally, paragraphs will be numbered, italics will be marked as
such, as will direct discourse. This will result in a new version of the corpus in
the XML (Extensible Markup Language) format annotated with the aforementioned
information. The automatic annotation will be performed using Python (Python
Software Foundation 2015), a general purpose programming language with a
comparatively simple syntax. The Python code used is displayed and commented
in the Appendix section and on the companion website.
Installing and Running Python
Although Python comes pre-installed with most versions of Mac OS X and Linux, it
is recommended for all users to install the newest available version from the ofﬁcial
Python website.1 The present chapter uses Version 2.7.11. Once installed, Python
scripts can be entered in a text editor and saved with the ﬁle extension .py. To run
a script, open the operating system’s command-line interface (Terminal on Mac OS
X and Linux, Command Prompt on Windows). Within the command-line interface,
use the cd command to change to the directory in which the Python script is located,
e.g.: cd Home/Documents/Scripts, and hit the Enter key (Windows users
will need to use backslashes rather than regular slashes between folder names). To
run a Python script, type python followed by the name of the script ﬁle, e.g.,
python test.py, then hit Enter.2
Additional functionality can be added to Python by external modules. Most
modules used in the present chapter are included in the standard Python installation,
with the exception of Beautiful Soup (Richardson 2015), an HTML and XML parser.
The simplest way to install Beautiful Soup is to enter the following command in the
command-line interface: pip install beautifulsoup4, then hit Enter. As
Beautiful Soup relies on lxml (Behnel 2015) for parsing XML, this module should
be installed as well using the following command: pip install lxml.
1https://www.python.org.
2Windows users may have to add Python to the Environment Variables, see https://docs.python.
org/2/using/windows.html.

96
M. Percillier
Harmonizing Quotation Marks
One of the aims of the basic annotation process is to automatically detect text
passages in direct discourse and mark them as such. However, this task is made
difﬁcult by the fact that printed texts may use different sets of quotation marks
to indicate direct discourse. For English, this is usually either “double quotation
marks” or ‘single quotation marks.’ A preliminary task is to harmonize the texts
to use “double quotation marks” only, not only for consistency, but ﬁrst and
foremost to enable the automatic detection of direct character discourse later on
(cf. section “Applying Automatic Basic Annotation”). Double quotation marks are
reliable, whereas single quotation marks use the same character as the apostrophe.
The ﬁrst Python script performs the task of harmonizing all quotation marks to
double quotation marks. Needless to say, it only has to be used on texts with single
quotation marks. The strategy used to differentiate between quotation marks and
apostrophes is to consider their usual position in relation to other characters: opening
quotation marks usually precede capital letters (as they contain a new sentence),
and closing quotation marks usually follow punctuation marks (as the sentence ends
when the quotation does). These two principles are used in the short Python script
given in Appendix 1.
However, the substitution rule described does not capture all cases. For example,
direct discourse after inserted quotatives, as shown in example (1), are not detected
by the script.
(1)
“You can thank your stars that I am not a wicked man,” he continued as
though I had said nothing, “otherwise I would have told him. . . ” (Achebe
1966, p. 17)
The character’s quote in example (1) is interrupted by a quotative construction. The
resumption of the quote is therefore not a new sentence, and does not begin with a
capital letter. Because of such cases, it is recommended to run the script before the
proofreading process, so that such exceptions can be corrected manually.
From Plain Text to XML
The preferred format for a corpus is XML, as it is a standard that allows for a clear
distinction between data and metadata. The main feature of XML is the use of tags
in angle brackets. XML distinguishes three types of tags:
1. start-tags, e.g., <tag> or <tag attribute="value">
2. end-tags, e.g., </tag>
3. empty-element-tags, e.g., <tag/> or <tag attribute="value"/>
Start-tags and end-tags operate in concord and mark the beginning and end of an
annotated stretch of data. Empty-set tags appear on their own and do not mark a
stretch of data, but rather a speciﬁc point in the data. Start-tags and empty-set tags
may also contain attributes, which specify additional information.

Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora
97
The beneﬁts of XML lie in its ﬂexibility and consistency. Readers familiar with
HTML may have noticed similarities in the tag structure of both formats. The main
differences between them is that XML allows the creation of new tags, while HTML
is limited to a ﬁxed set of tags with predetermined functions, e.g., <h1> for a main
heading. XML is also stricter, as any start-tag needs to be closed by a corresponding
end-tag. The leniency of HTML allowing start-tags with no closing equivalent,
leading to so-called tag soup, does not exist in XML.
To convert the plain text version into XML, the content of the plain text ﬁle can
be pasted into an XML template ﬁle, e.g. as shown below.
<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<?xml-stylesheet type="text/css" href="./corpus_style.css"?>
<text>
<header>
<region></region>
<country></country>
<author></author>
<title></title>
<year></year>
<source></source>
</header>
<body>
</body>
</text>
The ﬁrst line speciﬁes the XML version and the encoding, while the second
line links to a stylesheet ﬁle (cf. section “Enabling Qualitative Analysis”).3 The
remainder of the template is enclosed in a set of start-tag and end-tag named
<text>.4 The content of this block is divided into two sections: a header, meant
to contain metadata about the text, such as author, title, etc., and a body, where the
content of the plain text ﬁle should be pasted. The sets of tags within the header are
meant to surround information about the text, e.g., the author’s name can be entered
between the tags <author> and </author>. Once the template is ﬁlled out, it
can be saved under a ﬁle with the ending .xml.
3The link ./corpus_style.css refers to a ﬁle named corpus_style.css located in the
same folder as the XML ﬁle. The sequence ./ refers to the current folder. It may occasionally be
useful to link to a stylesheet ﬁle in the parent folder, so that a common style may apply to ﬁles in
multiple folders. For such a case, the reference to the parent folder can be speciﬁed with the ../
sequence.
4NB: The indentation used is not mandatory, but highly recommended to make the tag hierarchy
clearly visible.

98
M. Percillier
Applying Automatic Basic Annotation
At the current stage, the corpus ﬁle is in a valid XML format, but apart from the
metadata in the header and the markers for errors found in the printed editions, it
contains no annotation whatsoever. The aim of the current section is to automatically
annotate the text with the following:
1. Paragraph numbering
2. Marking of passages in italics
3. Marking of direct character discourse
The Python script used to perform this annotation is shown in Appendix 2.
Following this preliminary annotation process, the actual annotation process
can take place, which depending on the project goals and the features to be
marked can be undertaken automatically or manually. Automatic annotation can
be grammatical, such as part-of-speech tagging and syntactic parsing, or semantic,
such as named-entity recognition or sentiment analysis. An overview of tools for
automatic annotation, by no means exhaustive, is shown in Table 5. The research
project for which the methodology described in the present chapter was developed
requires the annotation of speciﬁc items rather than a word-by-word annotation, and
therefore requires manual annotation, described in the following section.
Applying Manual Annotation
The focus of the research project for which the methodology described in the present
chapter was developed lies on non-standardized linguistic features, which are to
be annotated manually. To do this, a custom tag scheme distinguishing ﬁve main
Table 5 Overview of tools for automatic annotation
Name
Annotation capabilities
License
CLAWSa (Garside 1987,
1996; Garside and Smith
1997; Leech et al. 1994)
Part-of-speech tagging
Academic/commercial
GATEb (Cunningham
et al. 2011, 2013)
Part-of-speech-tagging, semantic
annotation, named-entity recognition
Open source (GNU LPGL)
PythonCNLTKc (Bird
et al. 2009)
Part-of-speech tagging, syntactic parsing,
named-entity recognition
Open source (Apache)
TreeTaggerd (Schmid
1994, 1995)
Part-of-speech annotation, syntactic
parsing
Non-commercial
aAvailable via http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/claws
bAvailable via https://gate.ac.uk
cAvailable via http://www.nltk.org
dAvailable via http://www.cis.uni-muenchen.de/~schmid/tools/TreeTagger

Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora
99
Table 6 Overview of custom annotation scheme
Category
Raw example
Annotated example
Code
They were kampung
colors
They were <code feature="switch" meaning=
"village" language="Malay">kampung</code>
colors
Grammar
He want to sign on
another ﬁreman
He <grammar feature="VP_person" observed=
"BASE" standard="3SG">want</grammar> to sign
on another ﬁreman
Lexical
You got handphone? You got
<lexical feature="lexeme" standard=
"mobile phone">handphone</lexical>?
Phonology In de street
In <phonology feature="consonant_place"
observed="d" standard="D">d</phonology>e
street
Spelling
But lissen
But <spelling observed="lissen" standard=
"listen">lissen</spelling>
categories is applied to the corpus. The categories are deﬁned below, while Table 6
illustrates each category with an example.
code
Code-switching or code-mixing to a language other than English.
grammar
Instances of non-standardized grammar.
lexical
Lexical innovations, or lexical items bearing different meanings than
in standardized varieties.
phonology
Non-standardized spelling that affects pronunciation. Sounds are
represented by SAMPA rather than IPA for easier data entry.
spelling
Non-standardized spelling that does not affect pronunciation, so-
called eye dialect.
The non-standardized linguistic features are enclosed in a set of start-tag and
end-tag corresponding to the appropriate category. In addition to said linguistic
features, textual features are also annotated: the <character> tags previously
inserted automatically are edited to contain additional information such as character
identity, discourse type (direct, free indirect, free indirect), and medium (speech,
writing, thought). The characteristics of a text’s narrator or narrators are tagged as
well, with a <narrator> tag that includes attributes such as identity, diegetic level
(extradiegetic, intradiegetic), level of participation (heterodiegetic, homodiegetic),
and person (1st, 3rd).5 Finally, information relating to the overt marking of non-
standardized features and commentary on language are marked with a <meta> tag.
These XML tags could be entered manually in a text editor. However, given
the potential for typing errors,6 a computer-assisted manual annotation process is
5Cf. Prince (2003), Rimmon-Kenan (1983) for deﬁnitions of these terms.
6One could unwittingly deﬁne multiple categories such as phonology, phnology, or phonlogy rather
than a unique phonology category.

100
M. Percillier
recommended rather than a purely manual equivalent. For this reason, a custom
XML editor called XmlCat (Percillier 2015) (short for XML Corpus Annotation
Tool) was designed for the purpose of the study. The software allows the user
to insert pairs of start-tag and end-tag from a predetermined annotation scheme
by selecting the stretch of text to be annotated, then selecting the appropriate tag
and attributes by clicking through radio buttons. Although originally developed as
an in-house tool, XmlCat and the current methodology can in principle be used
in any project requiring manual annotation, given that the annotation is deﬁned
in a separate ﬁle. The data format of the tag set ﬁle is YAML (Evans 2009), a
format simple enough to be easily read by people, yet consistent enough to be
machine-readable. A simpliﬁed example of such an external tag set ﬁle is shown
and commented in Appendix 3.
An example sentence from a Scottish text (Spence 2002, p. 1001) with basic
annotation contrasted with its fully annotated equivalent is given in example (2). A
sample text at various annotation stages is available on the companion website.
(2)
a. <p id=’52’>Robert nudged him. “<character>Wher’s yer proddy
god noo!</character>”</p>
b. <p id=’52’>Robert
nudged
him.
“<character discourse=
"direct" medium="speech" name="Robert"><spelling
observed="wher" standard="where">Wher</spelling>’s
y<phonology feature="vowel_place" observed="e"
standard="u">e</phonology>r <lexical feature=
"lexeme" standard="Protestant">proddy</lexical> god
n<phonology feature="vowel_monophthongisation"
observed="u" standard="aU">oo</phonology>!
</character>”</p>
Enabling Qualitative Analysis
As can be seen in example (2), a fully annotated corpus contains a wealth of
information, but is difﬁcult to read. In order to make the corpus readable while
maintaining access to the annotation data contained in the tags, the display of a
corpus can be modiﬁed using CSS (Cascading Style Sheets). CSS are generally used
to deﬁne the layout of HTML websites, but also work with XML ﬁles.7 When a link
to a CSS ﬁle is speciﬁed in the XML ﬁle (as is done in the second line of the XML
template shown in section “From Plain Text to XML”), the XML ﬁle can be viewed
in a web browser in such a way that tags do not impede readability. By default,
XML tags are hidden so that only the plain text is displayed. By specifying a style
7Another method for styling XML is XSL (Extensible Stylesheet Language), which is more
powerful but also more complex. The recommendation by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)
is “Use CSS when you can, use XSL when you must” (Bos 2015).

Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora
101
in a CSS ﬁle, this default behavior can be changed, e.g., stretches of text marked by
a tag can be highlighted in color, or the name of a character can be displayed in the
margin. A simpliﬁed example of such a CSS ﬁle is shown below, while an expanded
example is available on the companion website.
header {border: 2px solid black; background-color: lightgrey;
display: block; margin-left: 10%; margin-right: 10%;}
region,country,year,author,title {display: block;}
region:before{content: "Region: "}
country:before{content: "Country: "}
year:before {content: "Year: "}
author:before {content: "Author: "}
title:before {content: "Title: "}
p {display: block; margin-left: 10%;
margin-right: 10%; line-height: 1.5;}
p:before {content: "P. " attr(id) " "; color: lightgrey;}
italic {font-style: italic;}
character {border: 2px solid red;}
character:before {position: absolute; left: 1%; width: 8%;
border-style: solid; border-width: thin; font-size: 50%;
content: attr(name) "\A(" attr(discourse) " "
attr(medium) ")";
text-align: center; white-space: pre-wrap;
color: white; background: red;}
grammar {background: orange;}
grammar:hover:after {
content: " feature: " attr(feature) ", observed:
" attr(observed) ", standard: " attr(standard);
color: white; background: black;}
The CSS ﬁle deﬁnes how tags should be displayed in a web browser. The format
requires the name of the tag, followed by a set of curly brackets in which the
display instructions are given. Individual display options have to be followed by
a semicolon, even when only one such option is given.8 For example, the ﬁrst two
lines provide instructions for the header to be surrounded by a black border that
is solid and two pixels wide, to have a light grey background, to be displayed in
block,9 and to have margins on the left and right side that make up ten percent of the
8Only the semicolon is relevant, which means that users can specify all display options in one line
for brevity, or give one option per line for greater clarity.
9A block display means that the element in question should not share horizontal space. In other
words, preceding and following material will be on separate lines.

102
M. Percillier
browser window width. The border and background color are to make the header
visibly distinct from the main text. Multiple tags can share a set of instructions, as
seen in the following line, where ﬁve tags are each to be displayed on separate
lines. The following lines declare that an explanatory label should stand before
individual items in the header. The display of paragraphs and italics is then deﬁned,
with paragraphs preceded by their running number in light grey.
The instructions concerning the tags <character> and <grammar> are the
main point of interest, as they deﬁne how character passages and annotated features
should be displayed. First, sequences of character speech are to be surrounded by a
red frame. Following this, character labels are to be placed in the left-hand margin
(which is the reason why a ten per cent margin was deﬁned for the tags <header>
and <p>). The character labels should be placed in the left margin, with smaller
white text on a red background. The content of the labels is deﬁned as the name
of the character, and on a second line the attributes discourse and medium
written in parentheses.10 The following instructions highlight text tagged with the
<grammar> tag.11 Highlighting the tagged passages in color already provides
helpful information without compromising readability, but the tag attributes can
also be made accessible from within the browser view. The last set of instructions
display the tag attributes after the tagged passage only when the mouse cursor is
positioned over it, which is achieved with the :hover sequence. The attributes are
to be displayed, separated by commas, in white text over a black background, each
preceded by an explanatory label. Once the mouse cursor leaves the tagged area, the
attributes are hidden again, leaving only the color highlighting.
The method of styling the display of XML ﬁles using CSS makes it possible
to read an annotated corpus text, while seeing tagged areas as highlights, and
having access to the tag contents “on demand” by dragging the mouse cursor over
highlighted areas.
Quantitative Analysis
The practice of highlighting annotated text, as discussed in the previous section,
can be of great help in any qualitative analysis. However, the full potential of
annotation is achieved in a quantitative approach. The present section describes how
an annotated corpus can be analyzed in R (R Core Team 2015), a programming
language and software environment for statistics and graphics, in order to reveal
empirical patterns that may have remained unnoticed in a qualitative analysis. R is
10The line break to place the two latter attributes on a separate line is marked by \A, which is a
special sequence for line breaks in CSS.
11Only instructions for the grammar category are given in this example to avoid repetition, as the
other tags require the exact same instructions, save for a different highlight color. An expanded
version of the CSS ﬁle can be found on the companion website.

Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora
103
Table 7 Selection of statistical software
Title
License
R (R Core Team 2015)
Open source (GNU GPL)
SAS (SAS Institute 2013)
Commercial
SPSS (IBM 2015)
Commercial
Stata (StataCorp 2015)
Commercial
PythonCSciPya (Millman and Aivazis 2011; Oliphant 2007)
Open source (BSD-new)
aAvailable via http://www.scipy.org
an emerging standard for statistics and graphics in the ﬁeld of linguistics, judging
by the fact that a number of introductions to quantitative linguistics based on R
have appeared in recent years (Baayen 2008; Gries 2009, 2013; Levshina 2015).
However, other academic ﬁelds may use other tools for statistical analysis, some of
which are listed in Table 7.
Preparing the Data
In order to analyze the corpus in R, it must ﬁrst be converted in a format that R can
easily work with, ideally CSV (Comma-Separated Values). The CSV format stores
tabular data in plain text, so that such a conversion is recommended even if readers
choose to work with a spreadsheet application rather than R. The aim is to have a
CSV ﬁle in which each row corresponds to a non-standardized feature observed in
the corpus, with columns specifying metadata about the text and attributes about the
feature. The Python script used to perform this conversion is shown in Appendix 4.
The script not only collects information contained in XML tags, but also performs
word counts of narrators and individual characters, which is of crucial importance
to the subsequent analysis.
Installing and Running R
R is available for download from the ofﬁcial website.12 Optionally, readers can also
install RStudio,13 a software environment for R which groups all display windows
as panes in a uniﬁed window, rather than individual windows in the standard R
application.
The R interface consists of a console window and a script editor. Commands
entered in the console are carried out as soon as the Enter key is pressed. In
contrast, commands spanning multiple lines can be entered in the script editor. Code
12Available via https://www.r-project.org.
13Available via https://www.rstudio.com.

104
M. Percillier
in the editor can be selected, and executed with the key combinations Control-R
(Windows) or Command-Enter (Mac OS X). Code entered in the script editor can
be saved as a ﬁle with the ending .R.
A Sample Quantitative Analysis
In the following sample quantitative analysis, the frequency of non-standardized
linguistic features in literary works is investigated, contrasted by region. The code
used for this analysis is shown and discussed below. It should be noted that unlike
in Python, the code in R scripts can be run interactively line by line rather than all
at once. Therefore, the R code can be executed bit by bit, and the content of every
variable can be examined individually.
The ﬁrst step in the R script is to import the CSV ﬁle previously created. The
function read.csv() imports a CSV ﬁle as a data frame, in this case under the
variable name features. The function contains two arguments, the ﬁrst of which
is the path to the ﬁle to be imported. An alternative, shown in the example below, is
to use the file.choose() function, which opens a dialog window prompting the
user to select the ﬁle. The second argument indicates that the semicolon character
is to be used as a column separator. The following line creates a table, or matrix,
by using the xtabs() function (short for cross tabulation). The ﬁrst argument
in the function is a formula specifying the names of the columns to be cross-
tabulated, the second argument speciﬁes the data frame from which these columns
originate. The matrix is saved as the variable cXr (chosen as shorthand for category
 region). Users can see the table by executing the variable as a command. The
differences between feature categories across regions are tested statistically using
Pearson’s 2 test in the third line, which is achieved by executing the function
chisq.test() on the matrix created in the preceding line. The differences are
statistically signiﬁcant (2 D 3230:7, df D 8, p < 2:2  1016).
features <- read.csv(file.choose(),sep=";")
cXr <- xtabs(~Category+Region,features)
chisq.test(cXr)
The raw frequencies used for the 2 test above should not be used for visual
comparisons, as the possibility of varying sample sizes is not taken into account.
To remedy this, a process called normalization [cf. (Gries 2010, pp. 270–271)] is
described below, by which a common sample size is set, and the actual frequencies
are transformed accordingly for purposes of comparison. In the present example, a
common sample size of 10,000 words is used. To calculate normalized frequencies,
the actual sample sizes for each region have to be obtained. To avoid repeating the
same code block three times to obtain the sample size for each of the regions, the
relevant code is deﬁned once as a custom function called getRegionSize().
The function ﬁrst isolates a subset of rows related to the region being treated from
the original data frame. The square brackets serve to access a subset of the data

Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora
105
frame. Given that a data frame is a two-dimensional object (rows and columns), two
dimensions must be speciﬁed in the square brackets, separated by a comma. The
ﬁrst dimension of the subset selects only those rows whose value in the Region
column is equal to the speciﬁed value. If, for example, “Europe” is supplied as a
value, only the rows from European texts will be selected as part of the subset.
The second dimension, referring to columns, is left blank, meaning that all columns
of the selected rows are to be kept in the subset. The subset is enclosed by the
droplevels() function to remove any unused categories from the subset. The
next command in the function retrieves the word counts for every text in the subset.
The function tapply() takes a vector of values given as the ﬁrst argument, in this
case the column containing the size of each text, and groups these values according
to the categories in the vector speciﬁed as the second argument, in this case the titles
of the texts. The third argument speciﬁes a function to be applied to each group. As
each entry in the Size column contains the word count for the entire text, only one
entry per title is needed, and therefore any duplicates should be removed, which the
unique() function achieves. The last command of the function sums the counts
of all titles to obtain the word count for the region, which is the value to be returned
by the function.
Now that the function is deﬁned, it can be applied for the three regions under
investigation in the corpus to obtain the sample size for each region. The normalized
frequencies can now be calculated. A copy of the matrix containing the raw values
is created under the name cXr.norm, to be edited without overwriting the original
values. The columns of the copied matrix are changed one by one by dividing the
values in each column by the sample size of the respective region, then multiplying
the result by the normalization value. The resulting table contains normalized
values, and can be visualized with the barplot() function (shown in the top-
left pane of Fig. 1). The results suggest clear differences in terms of feature density,
with European texts displaying the highest feature density by far.
getRegionSize <- function(region) {
regionFeatures <- droplevels(
features[features$Region==region,])
regionWordCounts <- tapply(regionFeatures$Size,
regionFeatures$Title,unique)
return(sum(regionWordCounts))
}
EURsize <- getRegionSize("Europe")
SEAsize <- getRegionSize("Southeast Asia")
WAFsize <- getRegionSize("West Africa")
cXr.norm <- cXr
normValue <- 10000
cXr.norm[,1] <- cXr.norm[,1]/EURsize * normValue
cXr.norm[,2] <- cXr.norm[,2]/SEAsize * normValue
cXr.norm[,3] <- cXr.norm[,3]/WAFsize * normValue
barplot(cXr.norm,legend=TRUE,
main="Categories by region per 10,000 words")
A proportional comparison, for example in per cent, can be obtained with relative
ease. The function prop.table() turns raw values of a table into proportional

106
M. Percillier
Europe
Southeast Asia
West Africa
spelling
phonology
lexical
grammar
code
Categories by region per 10,000 words
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Europe
Southeast Asia
West Africa
Categories by region in per cent
0
20
40
60
80
100
EUR
Character
EUR
Narrator
SEA
Character
SEA
Narrator
WAF
Character
WAF
Narrator
Category proportions by narrators/characters
0
20
40
60
80
100
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
Feature density VS character importance
Character proportion
Character feature density
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
Fig. 1 Sample quantitative R plots
values. By default, values are changed so that the sum of the entire table equals one.
The ﬁrst argument is the table with the raw values. The second argument speciﬁes
whether the sum of one should apply to each row (1) or column (2) rather than
the entire table. As columns correspond to regions, the latter option is chosen.
The function calculates new values to achieve a sum of one per column. As per
cent values are desired rather than “per one,” the resulting table is multiplied by
100. The results, shown in the top-right pane of Fig. 1, clearly indicate that each
region emphasizes a dominant feature category, which differs from region to region:
phonology for European texts, code-switching/code-mixing for Southeast Asian
texts, and grammar for West African texts.
cXr.perc <- prop.table(cXr,2) * 100
barplot(cXr.perc,main="Categories by region in per cent")
More ﬁne-grained analyses are possible, for example, a contrast between feature
proportions for characters and narrators. In order to produce such a comparison
of narrators and characters, the information contained in the column Character
is used, which provides the character name, or “NA” in case the feature is used
by a narrator. As the current analysis does not distinguish individual characters,
a broader division with only two levels, narrator and character, should be made.
The code excerpt below does this by ﬁrst creating a new empty column in the
data frame, then by using a for-loop to process every row of the data frame. If
the value in the Character column of the current row has the value “NA,”
then the value “Narrator” is written in the row’s CharacterStatus column,
otherwise the value “Character” is written. The values thus entered in the new
column are cross-tabulated with the Category column for each region. The three

Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora
107
individual tables are united to form one table, whose columns are then renamed. A
conversion to percentage values is performed before plotting the results (as shown
in the bottom-left pane of Fig. 1). The results show that narrators and characters use
non-standardized linguistic features differently in Southeast Asian and West African
texts, which suggests a certain reluctance to attribute non-standardized forms, accent
features in particular, to narrators, which does not apply to European texts.
features$CharacterStatus <- ""
for (i in 1:nrow(features)){
features$CharacterStatus[i] <- ifelse(
is.na(features$Character[i]),"Narrator","Character")
}
EURnc <- xtabs(~Category+CharacterStatus,features,
Region=="Europe")
SEAnc <- xtabs(~Category+CharacterStatus,features,
Region=="Southeast Asia")
WAFnc <- xtabs(~Category+CharacterStatus,features,
Region=="West Africa")
nc <- cbind(EURnc,SEAnc,WAFnc)
colnames(nc) <- c("EUR\nCharacter","EUR\nNarrator",
"SEA\nCharacter","SEA\nNarrator",
"WAF\nCharacter","WAF\nNarrator")
nc.perc <- prop.table(nc,2)*100
barplot(nc.perc,
main="Category proportions by narrators/characters")
Analyses can also be performed at the level of individual texts. For example,
a correlation between characters’ importance and the density of their use of non-
standardized linguistic features is investigated in the Scottish short story The Orange
and the Green (Hanley 2002), as shown below. The ﬁrst step in such an analysis is
to isolate rows pertaining to the text from the original data frame. In this case, it
is saved under the variable toatg, chosen as an abbreviation for the title of the
text. The correlation test requires two vectors: one containing a relative measure
of non-standardized linguistic features produced by each character, the other listing
each character’s relative importance in the text, measured as the number of words
for each character divided by the total word count for characters. The number of
features per character is obtained by counting the number of rows for each character,
as each row stands for an observation of non-standardized linguistic feature in the
text. The word count for each character is obtained using the tapply() function,
in a similar manner to the estimation of regional word counts described earlier. The
feature densities of each character are determined by dividing the vector containing
the number of features per character by the vector containing the word count of
each character. The relative character importance is obtained by dividing each
element of the vector containing the character word counts by its sum, i.e., the total
character word count. By using the plot() function, the correlation between the
two measures can be visualized as a scatterplot. A regression line can be added
to the graph by ﬁrst calculating a linear model using the lm() function, which is
then passed on to the abline() function, which uses the linear model to draw
a regression line in the graph (cf. the bottom-right pane of Fig. 1). A correlation

108
M. Percillier
test, for example, Spearman’s rank-sum correlation test, can be performed using the
cor.test() function, which returns a statistically signiﬁcant negative correlation
(rs D 0:8809524, p D 0:007242). As such, the story’s main characters present
a low feature density in comparison to marginal characters. By using this pattern,
marginal characters can quickly be given contours by their dense use of non-
standardized features without taking additional space in the text.14
toatg <- droplevels(
features[features$Title=="The Orange and the Green",])
characterFeatures <- xtabs(~Character,toatg)
characterSizes <- tapply(
toatg$CharacterSize,toatg$Character,unique)
characterFeatureDensities <- characterFeatures/characterSizes
characterImportance <- characterSizes/sum(characterSizes)
plot(characterImportance,characterFeatureDensities,
xlab="Character proportion",
ylab="Character feature density",
main="Feature density VS character importance")
abline(lm(characterFeatureDensities~characterImportance))
cor.test(characterImportance,characterFeatureDensities,
method="spearman")
Conclusion
The methodology outlined in the present chapter describes the creation of a
literary corpus, starting from a printed text to produce an annotated XML corpus,
and showcases options for qualitative and quantitative analyses of the data. The
individual steps of the process are summarized as a ﬂowchart in Fig. 2.
The annotation used in the present chapter is geared towards a linguistic analysis
of literary texts, more speciﬁcally the analysis of non-standardized linguistic
features. However, the methodological principles put forward in the present chapter
are not limited to linguistic analyses. For example, a quantitative literary analysis of
texts may tag character passages, and optionally place individual chapters in tags,
to objectively track which characters utter how many words in which part of the
text, which can yield insights into character development and changes in character
importance. Regarding the tagging of narrators, varying narratorial techniques
throughout a text or an author’s work can be investigated empirically. Given the
ﬂexibility of the XML format, researchers can add any number of new tags or
attributes, e.g., a focalization attribute in a narrator tag, to annotate information
14A more thorough analysis of this correlation, found in Percillier and Paulin (2016), also includes
characters that do not produce any non-standardized linguistic features. The results of both analyses
are comparable as both point to a statistically signiﬁcant negative correlation.

Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora
109
Start
Printed text
or
e-book?
Scanning
(section “Scanning”)
OCR
(section “Optical
Character Recognition”)
Single or
double
quotations
marks?
Harmonization of
quotation marks
(section “Harmonizing
Quotation Marks”)
Printed text
or
e-book?
Proofreading
(section “Proofreading”)
Basic annotation
(section “Applying
Automatic Basic
Annotation”)
Manual annotation
(section “Applying
Manual Annotation”)
CSS styling
(section “Enabling
Qualitative Analysis”)
Conversion to CSV
(section “Preparing
the Data”)
Analysis in R
(section “A Sample
Quantitative Analysis”)
Printed
E-book
Single
Double
Printed
E-book
Qualitative analysis
Quantitative analysis
Fig. 2 Methodology ﬂowchart
relevant to their research program. Beyond the ﬁelds of linguistics and literature,
the methodology can be applied to any study requiring manual annotation so as to
enable both qualitative and quantitative analyses.

110
M. Percillier
Suggestions for Further Reading
The current chapter introduced a number of data formats and programming lan-
guages used in the research project for which the methodology was developed.
Admittedly, following the code examples may be challenging for readers unfamiliar
with programming in general. Moreover, the examples given may not necessarily
be ﬁt as user guides for readers who recognize the usefulness of the methods
shown, but who have research projects of a different nature. To these readers, I
can recommend some general introductions to Python (Shaw 2013; Sweigart 2015).
Readers interested in R may consult general introductions (Kabacoff 2015; Teetor
2011), or introductions to R with an emphasis on linguistic analysis (Baayen 2008;
Gries 2009, 2013; Levshina 2015), which may also be relevant to other ﬁelds in
Digital Humanities.
Appendix 1: Python Script to Harmonize Quotations Marks
The ﬁrst lines load necessary modules, i.e., components with additional features.
Speciﬁcally, codecs adds the ability to read and write ﬁles in the Unicode format (cf.
the recommendation in section “Optical Character Recognition”), and re enables the
use of regular expressions.
import codecs
import re
The next step is to ask the user for the name of the ﬁle to be treated. The ﬁle name
provided by the user is then used to open the ﬁle with this name. The ﬁle content is
then read and saved as a variable called text.
iFileName = raw_input("Enter file name: ")
iFile = codecs.open(iFileName, encoding="utf-8",mode="r")
text = iFile.read()
The following two lines open an output ﬁle, whose name is the same as the input
ﬁle save for the ending -harmonized. Note that the dot character in the .txt
ﬁle ending has to be escaped with a backslash, as it would otherwise be treated as a
wild card that stands for any character.
oFileName = re.sub("\.txt","-harmonized.txt",iFileName)
oFile = codecs.open(oFileName, encoding="utf-8",mode="w")
The harmonization of quotation is undertaken in two steps:
1. the replacement of closing single quotation marks by double quotation marks.
In regular expressions, square brackets indicate a range of characters, so that the
search term consists of one character from the set .,;!?- followed by a single
quotation mark character. Some of these punctuation marks are preceded by a
backslash character because they are special characters, and therefore need to

Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora
111
be escaped. The range of punctuation characters enclosed in square brackets is
surrounded by a set of round brackets. The reason for this is that we want to
keep the punctuation mark when substituting the quotation mark character. The
punctuation mark is solely used to detect the closing quotation mark and should
not be deleted, which would happen without the round brackets. The second
argument given to the function re.sub() is the replacement for the search
term speciﬁed in the ﬁrst argument. The \\1 sequence refers to the content of
the round brackets in the ﬁrst argument, which is then reproduced.
2. The opening quotation marks are handled in a similar fashion. The range [A-Z]
refers to all uppercase letters from A to Z. The square brackets are preceded
by _?, which means that the capital letter may or may not be preceded by an
underscore, as one may have been placed as an italics marker in the proofreading
process (cf. Table 4).
text = re.sub("([\.,;!\?\-])’",’\\1"’,text)
text = re.sub("’(_?[A-Z])",’"\\1’,text)
The last three lines of the script write the modiﬁed text to the output ﬁle, then close
the input and output ﬁles.
oFile.write(text)
iFile.close()
oFile.close()
Appendix 2: Python Script for Basic Automatic Annotation
After importing the required modules, as already discussed in the previous script, the
script deﬁnes a custom function, which avoids repeating the block of code speciﬁed
therein.15 The instructions given in said block of code replace plain text markers
with XML tags: underscores will be replaced with a set of <italic> tags, and
double quotation marks will be marked with a set of <character> tags. As the
start-tag and end-tag do not share the same format, simply replacing all underscores
or double quotation marks with <italic> or <character> will not sufﬁce.
The strategy used instead is to number occurrences of underscore/double quotation
marks, and replace odd instances with a start-tag, and even instances with an end-
tag. To achieve this, a counter variable is deﬁned, which will be used to keep track
of the number of underscores or double quotations marks encountered.
import codecs
import re
def replaceMarker(marker,tag,text):
counter = 0
while re.search(marker,text):
15NB: The indentation shown is mandatory in Python, and is achieved by maintaining a consistent
amount of spaces for each indentation level.

112
M. Percillier
counter += 1
if counter % 2 == 1:
text = re.sub(marker,"<"+tag+">",text,count=1)
else:
text = re.sub(marker,"</"+tag+">",text,count=1)
return text
The next lines ask the user for an input ﬁle, which is then opened, and then proceeds
to create an output ﬁle, in a similar fashion to the script in Appendix 1. In addition,
two counter variables are created: one to determine the boundaries of the XML
header, the other to keep a running count of paragraph numbers.
iFileName = raw_input("Enter file name: ")
iFile = codecs.open(iFileName,encoding="utf-8",mode="r")
oFileName = re.sub("\.xml","-basic.xml",iFileName)
oFile = codecs.open(oFileName,encoding="utf-8",mode="w")
headerStatus = 0
parCounter = 0
The lines of the input ﬁle are now read one by one in a for-loop. Lines occurring
before the header, as well as the header itself, are to be copied to the output ﬁle
without any modiﬁcation. The headerStatus variable keeps track of the number
of times a header tag has been encountered. The header ends once two such tags
have occurred. Other lines to be copied without modiﬁcation are the two <body>
tags, as well as the </text> end-tag. All other lines are subject to basic automatic
annotation before being written to the output ﬁle. First, the line is enclosed with
a <p> tag (short for paragraph), which speciﬁes the running paragraph number
stored in the parCounter variable that has just been incremented. Subsequently,
the custom function replaceMarker() deﬁned above is used to replace plain
text markers with XML tags, speciﬁcally underscores with <italic> tags, and
double quotation marks with <character> tags. For the latter substitution, the
quotation marks are reintroduced as they are part of the actual text. The modiﬁed
line is then written to the output ﬁle. Once the for-loop has treated all lines of the
input ﬁle, the input and output ﬁles are closed.
for line in iFile:
if headerStatus < 2:
oFile.write(line)
if re.search("header>",line):
headerStatus += 1
else:
if re.match("\n",line) == None:
if re.search("<body>|</body>|</text>",line):
oFile.write(line)
else:
parCounter += 1
line = line.rstrip("\n")
line = "<p id=’"+str(parCounter)+"’>"+line+"</p>\n"
line = replaceMarker("_","italic",line)
line = replaceMarker(’"’,"character",line)
line = re.sub("<character>",’"<character>’,line)

Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora
113
line = re.sub("</character>",’</character>"’,line)
oFile.write(line)
iFile.close()
oFile.close()
Appendix 3: Simpliﬁed Example of a Tag Set File
in the YAML Format
The YAML ﬁle shown is divided into two parts, each beginning with ---, and
the sequence ... acting as a separator. The ﬁrst part deﬁnes the tag inventory
and the possible attributes of each tag.16 Hierarchy is marked by indentation.17
Elements followed by a colon contain a list. Lists can be nested, as can be seen
for the category code. Elements preceded by hyphens have no subordinate items.
Tags are represented by elements at the top of the hierarchy. The elements at the
bottom of the hierarchy are to be treated as tag attributes by XmlCat. Intermediate
elements, such as mixing and switching in the code category, represent distinct
features within their category and will be listed under a feature attribute by
XmlCat. The second part of the YAML ﬁle speciﬁes a color proﬁle for the tags to be
displayed. Highlighting tagged sequences makes it easier to read an annotated text.
The practice is discussed in further detail in section “Enabling Qualitative Analysis.”
---
character:
- discourse
- medium
- name
narrator:
- identity
- level
- participation
- person
code:
mixing:
- language
- meaning
switching:
- language
- meaning
spelling:
- observed
16The actual YAML ﬁle used for the project is over 200 lines long. The attributes for the categories
phonology, grammar, and lexical have been left out in the present appendix due to their length,
which would have made the example overly repetitive. Consult the companion website for a full
example.
17Tab indents are not permitted. A consistent number of spaces, e.g., 4 spaces, should be used
instead.

114
M. Percillier
- standard
...
---
header: gray
character: red
code: magenta
spelling: rosybrown
Appendix 4: Python Script to Convert XML
Annotation to CSV
The ﬁrst four lines import the required modules. The modules codecs and re
are already known. The module os, speciﬁcally its subset listdir, allows to
obtain a list of all ﬁles in a given folder. The module bs4, speciﬁcally its subset
BeautifulSoup, makes it possible to parse XML data with relative ease.
Two custom functions that will be used on multiple occasions later on are
then deﬁned. The ﬁrst function, getCount(), calculates the word counts of text
marked by a speciﬁc tag. It will be used speciﬁcally to obtain word counts of
individual characters. The purpose of the second function, getAttribute(),
is to extract speciﬁc attributes from tags. In the ﬁrst two lines of the function, the
speciﬁc attribute is queried from the tag. Querying a non-existing attribute from a
tag would produce a so-called key error, which would result in the program quitting
immediately. To avoid this, the query is ﬁrst tried, and an exception is deﬁned, which
states that the query should return “NA” in case the attribute cannot be found in the
tag. Once the two custom functions have been deﬁned, an output ﬁle is created and
a header line with column names is written, with semicolons serving as column
separators. The last character written in the CSV header line is a line break (\n),
which corresponds to a new row in the tabular data.
import codecs
import re
from os import listdir
from bs4 import BeautifulSoup
def getCount(tag,attribute,sample):
tags = sample.find_all(tag)
tagCount = {}
for tag in tags:
currentTagSize = len(tag.text.split())
if tag[attribute] in tagCount.keys():
tagCount[tag[attribute]] += currentTagSize
else:
tagCount[tag[attribute]] = currentTagSize
return tagCount
def getAttribute(tag,attribute):
try:
value = tag[attribute]
except KeyError:

Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora
115
value = "NA"
return value
outp = codecs.open("features.csv",encoding="utf-8",mode="w")
outp.write("Region;Country;Year;Author;Title;Size;")
outp.write("Paragraph;NarratorID;NarratorSize;")
outp.write("NarratorLevel;NarratorParticipation;")
outp.write("NarratorPerson;Character;CharacterSize;")
outp.write("Discourse;Medium;Category;Feature;Observed;")
outp.write("Standard;Language;Meaning\n")
A list of all ﬁles in the current directory is created, but only ﬁles with the ending
.xml are considered in the for-loop. Each XML ﬁle is treated in turn. It is ﬁrst
parsed, and the metadata contained in the header is read and stored as variables. The
textual body is then isolated from the header, and the word count of the entire text is
accessed and stored. The function getCount(), deﬁned earlier, is used to obtain
a word count for each individual character. An “NA” key with a matching value is
added to prevent key errors when a character word count is queried outside of a
character tag.
fileList = listdir(".")
for file in fileList:
if re.search("\.xml$",file):
xmlFile = codecs.open(file,encoding="utf-8",mode="r")
parsedXml = BeautifulSoup(xmlFile,"xml")
xmlFile.close()
region = parsedXml.find("region").text
country = parsedXml.find("country").text
year = parsedXml.find("year").text
author = parsedXml.find("author").text
title = parsedXml.find("title").text
body = parsedXml.find("body")
textSize = len(body.text.split())
charCount = getCount("character","name",parsedXml)
charCount["NA"] = "NA"
A list of all feature tags in the corpus ﬁle is queried. Given that several tags ﬁt into
this category, they are all queried at once using the pipe character, which stands for
“or.” The query is placed in the re.compile() function as regular expressions
are not directly supported by the .find_all() method. The list of tags thus
obtained is then treated item by item in a for-loop. Before handling the tag attributes
themselves, data from superordinate tags are gathered, i.e., paragraph, narrator, and
character information. Every parent tag is checked, and if it belongs to the relevant
category, its contents are processed. Character attributes are assigned “NA” defaults
beforehand. These are to be replaced if a parent <character> is encountered,
i.e., if the feature tag occurs in character discourse as opposed to narrator discourse.
To obtain a word count for a <narrator> tag, it is not sufﬁcient to count the plain
text enclosed. Rather, the word counts for character passages within the narrator
sequence should be excluded. For this reason, a character word count is calculated
for the current narrator passage, which is then subtracted from the total word count

116
M. Percillier
of the narrator passage. Once the attributes of the parent tags have been processed,
the attributes of the actual tag are accessed.
tagList = parsedXml.find_all(re.compile(
"code|grammar|lexical|phonology|spelling"))
for tag in tagList:
charName,charDiscourse,charMedium = "NA","NA","NA"
for parent in tag.parents:
if parent.name == "p":
para = getAttribute(parent,"id")
elif parent.name == "narrator":
narID = getAttribute(parent,"identity")
narLevel = getAttribute(parent,"level")
narPart = getAttribute(parent,"participation")
narPerson = getAttribute(parent,"person")
charsInNar = getCount("character","name",parent)
charsInNar = sum(charsInNar.values())
narCount = len(parent.text.split()) - charsInNar
elif parent.name == "character":
charName = getAttribute(parent,"name")
charDiscourse = getAttribute(parent,"discourse")
charMedium = getAttribute(parent,"medium")
tagCategory = tag.name
tagFeature = getAttribute(tag,"feature")
tagObserved = getAttribute(tag,"observed")
tagStandard = getAttribute(tag,"standard")
tagLanguage = getAttribute(tag,"language")
tagMeaning = getAttribute(tag,"meaning")
The remainder of the script mainly shows the writing of the collected data to the
output ﬁle. In a similar vein to the header line, this process is shown in multiple
lines rather than one very long line for reasons of clarity. As already mentioned,
semicolons serve as columns separators and therefore occur between every data
item. The last item is followed by a line break, which corresponds to a new row
in the tabular data. Once the indented code block has been reiterated for every ﬁle,
the program proceeds to the last line, which closes the output ﬁle, after which the
program quits. The resulting output ﬁle is a CSV ﬁle listing every feature tag row
by row, and can be opened in any spreadsheet application or imported into R.
outp.write(region+";"+country+";"+year+";"+author+";")
outp.write(title+";"+str(textSize)+";"+str(para)+";")
outp.write(narID+";"+str(narCount)+";")
outp.write(narLevel+";"+narPart+";"+narPerson+";")
outp.write(charName+";"+str(charCount[charName])+";")
outp.write(charDiscourse+";"+charMedium+";")
outp.write(tagCategory+";"+tagFeature+";")
outp.write(tagObserved+";"+tagStandard+";")
outp.write(tagLanguage+";"+tagMeaning+"\n")
outp.close()

Creating and Analyzing Literary Corpora
117
References
ABBYY, FineReader (2016). Available via http://www.abbyy.com/ﬁnereader. Cited 30 January
2016
C. Achebe, A Man of the People (Penguin, London, 1966)
Adobe, Acrobat (2016). Available via https://acrobat.adobe.com. Cited 30 January 2016
R.H. Baayen, Analyzing Linguistic Data (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2008)
Bare
Bones
Software,
TextWrangler.
Available
via
http://www.barebones.com/products/
textwrangler. Cited 19 March 2016
S. Behnel, lxml (2015). Available via http://lxml.de. Cited 26 January 2016
D. Biber, S. Conrad, R. Reppen, Corpus Linguistics: Investigating Language Structure and Use
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1998)
S. Bird, E. Loper, E. Klein, Natural Language Processing with Python (O’Reilly Media Inc.,
Sebastopol, CA, 2009)
B. Bos, CSS & XSL (2015). Available via http://www.w3.org/Style/CSS-vs-XSL. Cited 1 April
2016
H. Cunningham, D. Maynard, K. Bontcheva, V. Tablan, N. Aswani, I. Roberts, G. Gorrell, A. Funk,
A. Roberts, D. Damljanovic, T. Heitz, M.A. Greenwood, H. Saggion, J. Petrak, Y. Li, W. Peters,
Text Processing with GATE (Version 6) (GATE, Shefﬁeld, 2011)
H. Cunningham, V. Tablan, A. Roberts, K. Bontcheva, Getting more out of biomedical documents
with GATE’s full lifecycle open source text analytics. PLoS Comput. Biol. 9(2) (2013).
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002854
Distributed Proofreaders Foundation, DPCustomMono2 (2015). Available via http://www.pgdp.
net/wiki/DPCustomMono2. Cited 16 January 2016
C.C. Evans, YAML (2009). Available via http://yaml.org. Cited 21 January 2016
R. Garside, The CLAWS word-tagging system, in The Computational Analysis of English: A
Corpus-based Approach, ed. by R. Garside, G. Leech, G. Sampson (Longman, London, 1987),
pp. 30–41
R. Garside, The robust tagging of unrestricted text: the BNC experience, in Using Corpora for
Language Research: Studies in the Honour of Geoffrey Leech, ed. by J. Thomas, M. Short
(Longman, London, 1996), pp. 167–180
R. Garside, N. Smith, A hybrid grammatical tagger: CLAWS 4, in Corpus Annotation: Linguistic
Information from Computer Text Corpora, ed. by R. Garside, G. Leech, T. McEnery (Longman,
London, 1997), pp. 102–121
S.Th. Gries, Quantitative Corpus Linguistics with R: A Practical Introduction. (Routledge,
London, 2009)
S.Th. Gries, Useful statistics for corpus linguistics, in A Mosaic of Corpus Linguistics: Selected
Approaches, ed. by A. Sánchez, M. Almela (Peter Lang, Frankfurt, 2010), pp. 269–291
S.Th. Gries, Statistics for Linguistics with R: A Practical Introduction (de Gruyter, Berlin, 2013)
E. Hamrick, D. Hamrick, VueScan (2016). Available via https://www.hamrick.com. Cited 30
January 2016
C. Hanley, The Orange and the Green, in Scottish Literature in the Twentieth Century. An
Anthology, ed. by D. McCordick (Scottish Cultural Press, Dalkeith, 2002), pp. 765–767
D. Ho, NotepadCC (2016). Available via https://notepad-plus-plus.org. Cited 19 March 2016
IBM, SPSS (2015). Available via http://www.ibm.com/software/analytics/spss. Cited 21 March
2016
IRIS, Readiris (2015). Available via http://www.irislink.com/readiris. Cited 30 January 2016
R.I. Kabacoff, R in Action: Data Analysis and Graphics with R (Manning Publications, Greenwich,
CT, 2015)
G. Leech, R. Garside, M. Bryant, CLAWS4: the tagging of the British National Corpus, in
Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Computational Linguistics (COLING 94),
Kyoto (1994), pp. 622–628
N. Levshina, How to do Linguistics with R (John Benjamins, Amsterdam, 2015). doi:10.1075/z.195

118
M. Percillier
P. Maggi, P. Borelli, S. Frécinaux, J. van den Kieboom, J. Willcox, C. Celorio, F. Mena Quintero,
gedit (2015). Available via https://wiki.gnome.org/Apps/Gedit. Cited 19 March 2016
Microsoft, OneNote (2016). Available via http://onenote.com. Cited 30 January 2016
K.J. Millman, M. Aivazis, Python for scientists and engineers. Comput. Sci. Eng. 13, 9–12 (2011).
doi:10.1109/MCSE.2011.36
T.E. Oliphant, Python for scientiﬁc computing. Comput. Sci. Eng. 9, 10–20 (2007). doi:10.1109/
MCSE.2007.58
C. Paulin, M. Percillier, Oral varieties of English in a literary corpus of West African and South
East Asian prose (1954–2013): commitment to local identities and catering for foreign readers.
Etudes de stylistique anglaise 59–79 (2015)
M. Percillier, XmlCat (2015). Available via http://lilpa.unistra.fr/fdt/ressources. Cited 29 March
2016
M. Percillier, C. Paulin, A corpus linguistic investigation of world Englishes in literature. World
Englishes (2016). doi:10.1111/weng.12208
Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, Project Gutenberg (2015). Available via http://
www.gutenberg.org/wiki/Main_Page. Cited 11 January 2016
G. Prince, A Dictionary of Narratology (University of Nebraska Press, Lincoln, 2003)
Python Software Foundation, Python. Available via https://www.python.org. Cited 15 January
2016
R Core Team, R: A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing (R Foundation for
Statistical Computing, Vienna, 2015). Available via https://www.R-project.org. Cited 26
January 2016
L.
Richardson,
Beautiful
Soup
(2015).
Available
via
http://www.crummy.com/software/
BeautifulSoup. Cited 26 January 2016
S. Rimmon-Kenan, Narrative Fiction: Contemporary Poetics (Routledge, London, 1983)
SAS Institute, SAS (2013). Available via http://www.sas.com. Cited 21 March 2016
H. Schmid, Probabilistic part-of-speech tagging using decision trees, in Proceedings of Interna-
tional Conference on New Methods in Language Processing, Manchester (1994)
H. Schmid, Improvements in part-of-speech tagging with an application to German, in Proceedings
of the ACL SIGDAT-Workshop, Dublin (1995)
Z.A. Shaw, Learn Python the Hard Way (2013). Available via http://learnpythonthehardway.org/
book. Cited 1 April 2016
R. Smith, Tesseract (2015). Available via https://github.com/tesseract-ocr. Cited 30 January 2016
A. Spence, Its colours they are ﬁne, in Scottish Literature in the Twentieth Century. An Anthology,
ed. by D. McCordick (Scottish Cultural Press, Dalkeith, 2002), pp. 998–1005
StataCorp, Stata (2015). Available via http://www.stata.com. Cited 21 March 2016
A.
Sweigart,
Automate
the
boring
stuff
with
Python
(2015).
Available
via
https://
automatetheboringstuff.com. Cited 1 April 2016
P. Teetor, R Cookbook (O’Reilly Media, Sebastopol, CA, 2011)

Part III
Engaging Social Data

Content and Sentiment Analysis on Online
Social Networks (OSNs)
Davide Di Fatta and Roberto Musotto
Abstract The growing importance of the internet and online social networks
(OSNs) has opened new doors to the digital humanities. Researchers have started
to explore approaches and strategies available through social media and particularly
through OSNs, but this ﬁeld is still little unexplored and it requires further study.
OSNs include social components, such as comment ﬁelds for users and evalua-
tion form that are a great source of information about users’ opinion, sentiment, and
feelings. These data could be very attractive for the ﬁrm, therefore, how to exploit
this information?
This theoretical study aims to shine a light over the application of content and
sentiment analysis to the new ﬁeld of OSNs, passing from opinion mining to
integrated sentiment analysis (iSA). iSA is the contact point between sentiment
analysis and opinion mining, held together in order to create a new method in order
to capture not only the opinion, but also the polarity (positive or negative) of the
sentiment.
Our conclusions rely on the following areas: the ﬁrst is related to the importance
of using content and sentiment analysis on the OSNs; the second conclusion is about
the need to introduce appropriate new human resources able to manage social media
marketing (SMM) instruments; the third is the ability to estimate the online activities
performance through speciﬁc indicators; the last conclusion deals with the so-called
social media return on investment, which is much debated in the literature and,
therefore, represents a challenge for further study.
Introduction
Recently, scholars have increased attention on internet issues (Hanna et al. 2011;
Kaplan and Haenlein 2011; Kietzmann et al. 2011; Leamer and Storper 2014).
D. Di Fatta, PhD () • R. Musotto, PhD
University of Messina, Messina, Italy
e-mail: davide.difatta@unime.it; roberto.musotto@unime.it; robertomusotto@gmail.com
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
S. Hai-Jew (ed.), Data Analytics in Digital Humanities, Multimedia Systems
and Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54499-1_5
121

122
D. Di Fatta and R. Musotto
The engagement between the humanities and social media could help the under-
standing of the digital humanities issue. Particularly, in recent years, researchers
have focused on exploring the marketing approaches and strategies now available
through social media (Ashley and Tuten 2015; Di Fatta et al. 2016) and the
online social network (OSNs): many authors (Pak and Paroubek 2010; Kumar and
Sebastian 2012; Takahashi et al. 2016) studied Twitter using sentiment and content
analysis.
Social networks such as Twitter and Facebook have caused a revolution in our
way of life: they are becoming an integral part of our life. From the economic
point of view, OSNs are also a business opportunity. Most traditional online media
include social components, such as comment ﬁelds for users and evaluation forms.
Social network sites also provide rich sources of behavioral data. Proﬁle and linkage
data from ONSs can be gathered either through the use of automated collection
techniques or through datasets provided directly from the social network owner
(Ellison 2007). In other words, all these factors are a big source of data about users’
feelings. How to exploit this communicational potential?
Our aim is to apply content analysis (Krippendorff 1980a), opinion mining, and
sentiment analysis to OSNs in order to derive the economic implications helpful
to the full understanding of the internet economy. All these methods can work
together dealing with the computational treatment of opinion (i.e., sentiment) and
subjectivity in text: this is the so-called iSA (Hopkins and King 2010), meaning
integrated sentiment analysis, which will be explained later.
The work is structured as follows: ﬁrstly, we will propose the content analysis
theoretical framework, dealing subsequently with the transition from opinion
mining to the iSA. The next section is about application of content and sentiment
analysis of the OSNs. Then we will discuss the problem of measuring online
activities performance. Finally, a brief summary and conclusions will follow.
Content Analysis Theoretical Framework
“Content analysis involves replicable and valid methods for making inferences
from observed communications to their context” (Krippendorff 1980a, p. 69).
However, its deﬁnition has been various extensions for a large bundle of methods
and approaches that study information from any kind of document. Rather than
being a single method, Hsieh and Shannon (2002) show three distinct approaches to
content analysis: conventional, directed, or summative. In the ﬁrst (conventional
content analysis), coding categories are derived directly from the text data. In
the second (directed approach), analysis begin with a theory or relevant research
ﬁndings as guidance for initial codes. The third (summative content analysis) is
based on counting and comparisons, usually of keywords or content, followed by
the interpretation of the underlying context.

Content and Sentiment Analysis on Online Social Networks (OSNs)
123
Once the content analysis has been deﬁned, what about the purpose? It aims to
reach a broad and concise description of a document (Cavanagh, 1997) and it allows
the researcher to better understand the data.
Content analysis requires valid methods. Any valid method requires internal and
external validity. The ﬁrst one consists of stable, reproducible, and accurate results.
The second one is the ability to extent the results of a study, generalizing to other
situations and data, such as other place, people, and time. External validity is the
proper validity. It is the speciﬁc kind of information employed in the process of
validation (Krippendorff 1980b).
According to this point of view, validity can be also product or process oriented.
Product oriented validity (or pragmatical validity) focuses on the outcome and it
evaluates the robustness of a method from the result obtained. Process oriented
validity (or construct validity) is the degree to which a method is able to measure
speciﬁc information.
Validity can be also correlational or predictive. The ﬁrst is the degree to which
ﬁndings obtained by one method correlate with ﬁndings obtained by another. The
predictive validity is the degree to which predictions obtained by a method agree
with directly observable facts. Correlational and predictive validity can also be
distinguished by being direct or indirect. Direct methods of validation show the
results of a content analysis for what they aim to describe. Indirect ones correlate the
observable information with a not observable meaning or perception (Krippendorff
2004).
Before Krippendorf, other scholars were interested in content analysis. Indeed,
another widely used deﬁnition of content analysis is that of Berelson (1952) who
described it as a: “research technique for the objective, systematic and quantitative
description of the manifest content of communication” (p. 18).
This deﬁnition has been confuted by Berger and Luckman (1966): they suggested
that it is not possible to produce totally objective results, because the analysis will
be always inﬂuenced by the interpreter of data. However, according to Sandelowski
(1995), Berelson’s argument has the great advantage of summing up every issue of
content analysis: validity, manifest data, and accuracy. Nevertheless, Krippendorf’s
conceptualization is the most widely accepted in the literature.
However, some quantitative researchers are skeptical, because this method is not
univocal and it is likely to remain a vague set of un-coded ideas (Rourke et al. 2001).
Other authors consider content analysis a simple technique that does not reach a
detailed statistical analysis (Hsieh and Shannon 2002).
The major problem of content analysis could be the absence of strict guidelines,
but, on the other hand, this is also an advantage: it is a more ﬂexible instrument that
allows the identifying of critical processes inside documents (Lederman 1991). This
in fact makes it a very versatile technique that can be adapted in various areas. The
next sections will show in more detail how to analyze media messages using content
analysis (Riff et al. 2014).

124
D. Di Fatta and R. Musotto
From Opinion Mining to Integrated Sentiment Analysis
The growing number of blogs and social networks has generated a large availability
and popularity of opinion-rich resources. Therefore new opportunities and chal-
lenges arise by using information technologies to seek out and understand peoples’
opinions and sentiments: some authors suggested Twitter as a corpus for opinion
mining and sentiment analysis (Pak and Paroubek 2011). Recently Takahashi et al.
(2016) used Twitter for the analysis of Coffee Service Quality and Customer Value
and they found that opinions inﬂuence our behaviors, and perceptions of reality are
ﬁltered through sentiments, evaluations, and emotions.
Although sentiment analysis and opinion mining mostly refer to the same ﬁeld,
there are some differences between them: usually sentiment analysis refers more to
the polarity (positive or negative) of a sentiment, while opinion mining relates to the
motivations behind the sentiment (Dave et al. 2003; Pang and Lee 2008; Liu 2012).
Therefore, a better understanding of these concepts is required. More in depth,
opinion mining is a discipline at the crossroads of information retrieval and
computational linguistics, which concerns with the opinion expressed in a text (Esui
and Sebastiani 2006). Opinion mining is used in a wide set of applications, ranging
from tracking users’ opinions about products or services, to customer relationship
management.
Sentiment analysis is a method for evaluating the polarity of speciﬁc information
in a document, i.e., through scoring or tagging (Nasukawa and Yi 2003). Scoring
aligns a text along a systematic scale: thus, the scoring models are the best response
to the need to create classiﬁcations, to proﬁle and to predict behavior. The tagging
technique evaluates sets of terms and categorized into macro semantic categories.
In other words, a tag is a keyword (something like a label), which is associated with
selected information.
Sentiment analysis is founded on four principles taken from Grimmer and
Stewart (2013):
1. All quantitative models of language are wrong, but some are useful.
2. Quantitative methods augment humans, not replace them.
3. There is no globally best method for automated text analysis.
4. Validate, validate, validate (We must always validate the analysis).
Although they are different, opinion mining and sentiment analysis can work
together in dealing with the computational treatment of opinion and subjectivity in
text (Pang and Lee 2008). Hopkins and King (2010) proposed a new method to esti-
mate the primary quantity of interest in many social science applications. Sentiment
analysis and opinion mining are held together in order to create something new: this
is the so-called integrated sentiment analysis (iSA), where individual and aggregate
classiﬁcations of feelings and motivations are translated into statistics.
Integrated sentiment analysis gives approximately unbiased estimates of category
proportions even when the optimal classiﬁer performs poorly. The main advantage
of iSA is ﬂexibility: on the one hand, it gets on well with qualitative and quantitative

Content and Sentiment Analysis on Online Social Networks (OSNs)
125
methods (McDonald et al. 2007). On the other hand, it is possible to apply iSA
in different ﬁelds: from the theoretical point of view, Lai and To (2015) proposed
a grounded theory approach; from the practical point of view, Li and Wu (2010)
applied iSA for online forums hotspot detection and forecast. Kuo et al. (2015) for
users’ social interaction patterns in micro-blogs. Menner et al. (2016) used iSA to
identify relevant topics in tourism review. The common feature in all these studies
is the iSA’s versatility, which emerges as a ﬂexible and multidisciplinary method.
Therefore, why do not apply these intuitions on the new social media and social
network websites (i.e., Facebook and Twitter)? In the next section, we will show
some insights about Content and Sentiment Analysis on OSNs.
Content and Sentiment Analysis to OSNs
The growing relevance of sentiment analysis coincides with the growth of social
media and social networks (Liu and Zhang 2012). Online social networks (OSN)
have attracted millions of users since their introduction, many of whom have
integrated these sites into their daily practices. According to Faloutsos et al. (2010)
OSNs have transformed the way users communicate. Therefore, in recent years,
OSNs have also attracted the attention of academic researchers, intrigued by their
affordances and reach. However, what are online social networks?
Although there are many differences, it is possible to outline some common
characteristics among all the OSNs: (1) constructing a public or semi-public proﬁle
within a bounded system, (2) articulating a list of other users with whom they share
a connection, and (3) viewing and traversing their list of connections and those made
by others within the system (Boyd and Ellison 2007).
What makes social network sites unique is not that they allow individuals to meet
strangers, but rather that they enable users to articulate and make visible their social
networks.
Dealing with OSN, the reference point in the sector is Facebook, which was
object of the ﬁrst world-scale social network graph-distance computations (Ugander
et al. 2011).
Before entering into results details, it might be useful to clarify the concept
of network analysis: it was deﬁned as a methodology for analysis of social and
interpersonal relations by Burt (1984). Then, Wasserman and Faust (1994) theorized
social network analysis (SNA) methods and applications.
For what concerns the purposes of this manuscript, the crucial point is to
understand the concept of degrees of separation. Let us start from the analysis of
an ordered theoretical network, meaning that each node of the network is connected
to the next. Therefore, to move from point 1 to point 3, you must necessarily pass
through point 2. In this case, there are two degrees of separation. Generally, we
realize that there are many degrees of separation that combine elements are spatially
distant.

126
D. Di Fatta and R. Musotto
Furthermore, for studying network connections, it is also useful to consider graph
theory, which is a branch of mathematics. Graph theory studies the various ways in
which certain points in the network are connected1.
Coming back to Facebook, the results by Ugander et al. (2011) rely on three main
observations: (a) this online social network is nearly fully connected, with 99.91%
of individuals belonging to a single large connection. (b) The neighborhoods
users graph2 contains a dense structure. (c) There is a strong effect of age on
friendship preferences, as well as a globally modular community structure driven by
nationality, but there is not any strong gender effect. In other words, these ﬁndings
means that Facebook is a compact network in which users are interconnected with
each other in a dense way.
Other authors studied Facebook users (Backstrom et al. 2012) discovering that,
at the time of research, there were 721 million users with 69 billion friendship
links. They found an average distance of 4.74, corresponding to 3.74 intermediaries
between the each node. These ﬁndings are also consistent with Barnett (2012), who
found about four degrees of separation on Facebook.
Quite similar results arrived from studies carried out on Twitter (Cheng 2010).
Analyzing more than 5.2 billion Twitter friendships and followers, it was discovered
that Twitter is a social network site in which the average distance is 4.67,
corresponding to 3.32 intermediaries between each node.
In other words, after visiting an average of 3.32 people within the friend network,
Twitter users can expect to ﬁnd one of their followers with a standard deviation of
1.25 (Cheng 2010).
These data serve to illustrate the relevance of the OSNs, but why they are so
relevant for the ﬁrm?
There are at least two reasons: the ﬁrst is that they are a virtual network that
conveys the exchange of information between users. OSNs have a relevant role
because they are an extraordinary source of data: many authors (Pak and Paroubek,
2010; Kumar and Sebastian 2012; Takahashi et al. 2016) suggested Twitter as a
corpus for opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Similarly, Ortigosa et al. (2014)
proposed the use of sentiment analysis on Facebook. They studied how adaptive e-
learning systems support personalized learning, by considering the user’s emotional
state when recommending him/her the most suitable activities to be tackled at each
time. On the other hand, the students’ sentiments towards a course can serve as
feedback for teachers, especially in the case of online learning, where face-to-face
contact is less frequent (Ortigosa et al. 2014).
The second reason is that OSNs can provide an expression of sentiment.
Therefore, sentiment analysis on the OSNs could be a very powerful tool. Indeed,
1From a graphical point of view, a graph consists of two sets, the so-called vertices and edges, and
an incidence relation between them (Gross and Yellen 2005).
2The neighborhoods user graph is the graph with the set of all the vertices (i.e., users) adjacent to
selected starting point. More generally, the ith neighborhood of v is the set of all vertices that lie at
the distance i from v (Brouwer et al. 1989).

Content and Sentiment Analysis on Online Social Networks (OSNs)
127
OSNs are not only sources of big data, but above all, they provide emotional
reactions, generated by the various market players and social network users, which
can be measurable.
How is it possible to be able to exploit this communicational potential? Yet, in the
2000s the ﬁrst research path began (Goldenberg et al. 2001; Henning-Thurau et al.
2004) about the effect of word-of-mouth (WOM3) marketing on member growth
within OSN.
For what concerns this study, the crucial point is the ability to analyze media
messages, using quantitative content analysis. In this way, quantitative content anal-
ysis identiﬁes the systematic assignment of communication content to categories
according to some rules, and then the analysis of relationships involving those
categories using certain statistical methods (Riff et al. 2014).
This deﬁnition lacks any speciﬁcation of appropriate types of communication to
be examined (e.g., newspaper, books, web sites, or blogs) or the types of content
qualities explored: therefore why do not apply this method on the OSNs?
Through speciﬁc software systems, it is possible to classify documents, which
deals with certain topics, in: instinctive-positive (e.g., love, fun, joy, excitement);
rational-positive (e.g., gratitude, friendliness, satisfaction, surprise); instinctive-
negative (e.g., fear, sadness, hate, anger, nervousness, aggression, pity, disgust);
rational-negative (e.g., grief, shame, anxiety, disappointment, envy, humiliation,
boredom, dissatisfaction).
Let us suppose that we have to study the sentiment for a given brand. We must
consider the so-called instinctive sentiments, which identify the emotional reactions,
without speciﬁc reasons (opposed to the rational sentiment, which will be discussed
later).
Speciﬁcally the instinctive sentiments can be positive or negative: positive
instinctive sentiments measure attachment to the brand; negative instinctive senti-
ments show a prejudice that takes the user walks away from the brand.
Conversely, the so-called rational sentiments identify a reasoned response. The
positive ones are awards for the brand, while negative values are an expression of
dissatisfaction or disapproval.
Crossing these variables, we developed a model where it is possible to identify
six areas. At the extremes, we ﬁnd the positive sentiment area, resulting from
rational and instinctive (positive) sentiment; and the negative sentiment area,
resulting from rational and instinctive (negative) sentiment. The other two areas
can be divided into two other segments.
Users who express positive sentiment can be classiﬁed into an identiﬁcation
area (positive sentiment, without a clear motivation) and adhesion area (positive
sentiment because of rational and precise evidence).
3For a deﬁnition of word-of-mouth communication (WOM) the main reference is Dichter (1966).
The meaning involves the passing of information between a non-commercial communicator and a
receiver concerning a brand, a product, or a service.

128
D. Di Fatta and R. Musotto
Table 1 Sentiment classiﬁcation—authors’ elaboration
Areas
Positive rational
sentiment
Positive instinctive
sentiment
Negative rational
sentiment
Negative instinctive
sentiment
Positive
sentiment
x
X
Negative
sentiment
x
x
Identiﬁcation
X
Adhesion
x
Disapproval
x
Aversion
x
Users who express negative sentiment can be divided into a disapproval area
(negative sentiment because of precise and rational elements) and aversion area
(negative sentiment, without a clear motivation).
The above-deﬁned six areas are summarized in Table 1.
This methodology could be very useful in order to capture customer preferences
and feelings. Another advantage is that this model emphasizes not only quantitative
aspects, but also qualitative approach to human behavior.
Online Activities Performance and Social Media Return
on Investment
The previous section discussed the issue of determining the sentiment with a
qualitative approach. However, the world of OSNs cannot give up a quantitative
approach, especially with respect to results and performance. Therefore, a further
question arises: how to measure the performance of online activities?
This is one of the most critical points of OSNs topic: on the one hand, it could
be a limitation, on the other it can become a challenge for further research. The
performance of online activities is mostly indirect and therefore it is difﬁcult to
quantify: increased online visibility, growing numbers of followers, greater appeal
of the brand, product, or service (naming only a few examples).
This issue was raised by Hoffman and Fodor (2010), who wondered: is it possible
to measure the social media Return On Investment (ROI)? Some authors have
proposed a speciﬁc formulation of the ROI for online activities (Cosenza 2014).
Other authors (Kumar and Mirchandani 2012; Kumar et al. 2013) studied how social
media ROI affect general performance of the ﬁrm, focusing also on the indirect
effects: the return on engagement (ROE), the return on participation (ROP), and the
return on listening (ROL).
Instead, Blanchard (2009) suggested that it is impossible to quantify online
activities performance, while acknowledging the existence of an indirect effect.

Content and Sentiment Analysis on Online Social Networks (OSNs)
129
The debate is still open and there is no consensus in the literature (Fisher 2009).
Our suggestion is that, regardless of the acronyms, it is necessary to implement a sort
of measure of the performance for online activities. In other words, something must
be measured. It is, indeed, possible to develop a check list of measurable attributes:
web analytics (number of visitors, navigation time for each page, bounce rate),
velocity (page load time, server timeout), attention (duration on site), participation
(comments, trackbacks, citation), and social features (i.e., Facebook likes, Tweets,
Pinterest Pins, etc.). They are proxy variables for measuring online performance.
With respect to social media activities, it is also possible to suggest some speciﬁc
indicators. Murdough (2009) proposed a social media measurement process in
ﬁve steps: concept, deﬁnition, design, deployment, and optimization. The ﬁrst step
(concept) relies on the conceptualization of the object of the analysis. The second
step (deﬁnition) deals with the outline of the social media strategy, that is the way
in which the deﬁned goals are achieved; the third step is to develop social media
tactics; the fourth step (deploy) implements and launches the program; the ﬁnal
step (optimization) synthesizes social performance drivers and identiﬁes corrective
actions and adjustment. Then, this kind of process is circular and virtuous: after the
optimization phase, a new concept will arise and the process will re-restart.
As will be described in the conclusive section, there is a feel rouge that runs
through this manuscript: the need to manage these new tools. In order to approach
the OSNs, the presence within the company of speciﬁc professionals in the ﬁeld is
strictly required.
Conclusions
OSNs are becoming an integral part of our life: as discussed in the previous sections,
most traditional online media include social components, such as comment ﬁelds for
users and evaluation forms. Therefore, the growing of blogs and OSNs generated a
large availability and popularity of opinion-rich resources. The explosive growth
of sentiment analysis coincided with the proliferation of web related media. Firms
have taken away the potential of this phenomenon, but still a long road must be
traveled before coming to a full exploitation of these data. In light of this reasoning,
managing OSNs is a key factor to understand the multiplicity of information
surrounding us.
Concluding, our ﬁnal suggestions rely on four areas. The ﬁrst one is related to
the importance of applying content and sentiment analysis on the OSNs in order to
classify and to interpret the numerical data collected, for instance, on Facebook and
Twitter. Calabrese et al. (2015) show that it is feasible to perform sentiment analysis
on Facebook with high accuracy (83.27%): then it is possible to conclude that the
results have a good reliability level.
The second conclusion deals with the need to introduce appropriate new human
resources especially dedicated to organizing the activities on the web: indeed,

130
D. Di Fatta and R. Musotto
according to Baye et al. (2016), new ﬁgures are emerging such as social media
managers, web strategists, SEO (search engine optimization), or SEM (search
engine marketing) consultants.
Social media marketing (SMM) considers all these aspects and takes advantage
of social networking to help a company increase brand exposure and broaden
customer reach. The SMM goal is usually to create content compelling enough
that users will share it with their social networks. In other words, social media
marketing is the professional use of social media in order to facilitate information
or product/service exchanges between consumers and organizations (Tuten and
Solomon 2014). The SMM, therefore, requires the use of qualiﬁed and speciﬁcally
trained ﬁgures in order to handle social media in all its facets: the previous point
is strictly related with this second suggestion. While recognizing the importance
of OSNs, ﬁrms would risk nullifying their effort by entrusting the management of
these aspects to people, who are inadequately qualiﬁed.
The third conclusion relies on the debate about how to estimate online activities
performance. Planning marketing initiatives through social media clashes daily with
the lack of universally accepted metrics. The debate still remains open (Fisher 2009).
Our suggestion is that not only a performance measure is strictly necessary, but it
also possible using the above-mentioned proxy variables. This is consistent with
Murdough (2009) and Cosenza (2014).
Going to the fourth conclusion, as subspecies of the traditional ROI, we are going
to propose some drivers useful for capturing online performance. These drivers are
brand health and marketing optimization (measured by social signals such as the
number of likes, tweets, and comments), revenue generator (conversions of visitors
in buyers), operational efﬁciency (social networks are cost free), and customer
experience (through rating and review systems). These metrics are not unanimously
accepted in the literature; therefore, this point is also a challenge for further study.
Concluding, the common denominator to the above-mentioned conclusions is a
necessary change of perspective towards OSNs. Managers and practitioners have to
consider OSNs as sources of valuable information and, consequently, as a business
opportunity.
References
B. Aljaber, N. Stokes, J. Bailey, J. Pei, Document clustering of scientiﬁc texts using citation
contexts. Inf. Retr. 13, 101–131 (2010)
N. Amblee, The impact of eWOM density on sales of travel insurance. Ann. Tour. Res. 56(C),
137–140 (2016)
C. Ashley, T. Tuten, Creative strategies in social media marketing: an exploratory study of branded
social content and consumer engagement. Psychol. Mark. 32(1), 15–27 (2015)
L. Backstrom, P. Boldi, M. Rosa J. Ugander, S. Vigna, in Four Degrees of Separation. Proceedings
of the 4th Annual ACM Web Science Conference, Web Science, 2012 (ACM, New York, 2012),
pp. 33–42

Content and Sentiment Analysis on Online Social Networks (OSNs)
131
E. Barnett, Facebook cuts six degrees of separation to four, Telegraph, 22 November, retrieved/May
2012, 2011
A. Barua, J. Pinnel, J. Shutter, A.B. Whinston, Measuring the Internet Economy, Center for
Research in Electronic Commerce, (University of Texas, 1999)
M.R. Baye, B. De los Santos, M.R. Wildenbeest, Search engine optimization: what drives organic
trafﬁc to retail sites? J. Econ. Manage. Strategy 25(1), 6–31 (2016)
C. Boyce, P. Neale, Conducting In-Depth Interviews: A Guide for Designing and Conducting In-
Depth Interviews for Evaluation Input (Pathﬁnder International, Watertown, 2006), pp. 3–7
D.M. Boyd, N.B. Ellison, Social networks sites: deﬁnition, history, and scholarship. J Comp
Mediated Commun 13, 210–230 (2007)
L. Bjorneborn, P. Ingwerse, Toward a basic framework for webometrics. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci.
Technol. 55, 1216–1227 (2004)
A.E. Brouwer, A.M. Cohen, A. Neumaier, Distance-Regular Graphs (Springer-Verlag, New York,
1989)
D. Buhalis, E. Mamalakis, in Social Media Return on Investment and Performance Evaluation in
the Hotel Industry Context. Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2015.
(Springer International Publishing, 2015), pp. 241–253
P. Burnard, A method of analysing interview transcripts in qualitative research. Nurse Educ. Today
11(6), 461–466 (1991)
R.S. Burt, Network items and the general social survey. Soc. Netw. 6(4), 293–339 (1984)
B. Calabrese, M. Cannataro, N. Ielpo, in Using Social Networks Data for Behavior and Sentiment
Analysis. Internet and Distributed Computing Systems (Springer International Publishing,
2015), pp. 285–293
K.R. Callahan, G.S. Stetz, L.M. Brooks, Project Management Accounting, with Website: Budget-
ing, Tracking, and Reporting Costs and Proﬁtability, vol. 565 (Wiley, 2011)
M. Castells, Communication, power and counterpower in the network society. Int J Commun 1,
238–266 (2007)
A. Ceron, L. Curini, S.M. Iacus, Social Media e Sentiment Analysis: L’evoluzione dei fenomeni
sociali attraverso la Rete, vol. 9 (Springer Science & Business Media, 2014)
A. Cheng, Six Degrees of Separation Twitter Style, Sysomos Inc (University of Toronto, 2010)
R. Cohen, K. Erez, D. Ben-Avraham, S. Havlin, Resilience of the internet to random breakdowns.
Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 4628 (2000)
D.J. Cooper, M. Rege, Social Interaction Effects and Choice Under Uncertainty: An Experimental
Study (No. 2009/24) (University of Stavanger, 2008)
V. Cosenza, Social media ROI: seconda edizione aggiornata (Apogeo Editore, 2014)
I. Demirkan, D.L. Leeds, S. Demirkan, Exploring the role of network characteristics, knowledge
quality and inertia on the evolution of scientiﬁc networks. J. Manag. 39, 1462–1489 (2012)
D. Di Fatta, F. Caputo, F. Evangelista, G. Dominici, Small world theory and the World Wide Web:
linking small world properties and website centrality. Int. J. Mark. Bus. Syst. 2(2), 126–140
(2016)
E. Dichter, How word-of-mouth advertising works. Harv. Bus. Rev. 44(6), 147–160 (1966)
P.S. Dodds, R. Muhamad, D.J. Watts, An experimental study of search in global social networks.
Science 8, 827–829 (2003)
G. Dominici, E-business model: a content based taxonomy of literature. Int J Manag Adm. Sci. 1,
10–20 (2012)
P.T. Eugster, R. Guerraoui, A.M. Kermarrec, L. Massoulié, Epidemic information dissemination in
distributed systems. Computer 37(5), 60–67 (2004)
N.B. Ellison, Social network sites: deﬁnition, history, and scholarship. J. Comput. Mediated
Commun. 13(1), 210–230 (2007)
N.B. Ellison, C. Lampe, Social, capital, self-esteem and use of online social network sites: a
longitudinal analysis. J. Appl. Dev. Psychol. 29, 434–445 (2008)
A. Esuli, F. Sebastiani, in Sentiwordnet: A publicly available lexical resource for opinion mining.
Proceedings of LREC vol. 6 (2006, May), pp. 417–422
M. Faloutsos, P. Faloutsos, C. Faloutsos, On power-law relationship of the internet topology.
Comput. Commun. Rev. 29, 251–262 (1999)

132
D. Di Fatta and R. Musotto
M. Faloutsos, T. Karagiannis, S.H. Moon, Online social networks. Netw. IEEE 24(5), 4–5 (2010)
C. Fass, B. Turtle, M. Ginelli, Six degrees of Kevin Bacon (Plume Penguin Group, New York, 1996)
T. Fisher, ROI in social media: a look at the arguments. J. Datab. Mark. Cust. Strateg. Manag.
16(3), 189–195 (2009)
L. Freeman, A set of measures of centrality based on betweeness. Sociometry 40, 35–41 (1997)
J. Goldenberg, B. Libai, E. Muller, Tale of the network: a complex systems look at the underlying
process of word-of-mouth. Mark. Lett. 12, 211–223 (2001)
J.L. Gross, J. Yellen, Graph theory and its applications (CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group,
London, 2005)
T.W. Gruen, T. Osmonbekov, A.J. Czaplewski, eWOM: the impact of customer-to-customer online
know-how exchange on customer value and loyalty. J. Bus. Res. 59(4), 449–456 (2006)
R. Hanna, A. Rohm, V.L. Crittenden, We’re all connected: the power of the social media ecosystem.
Bus. Horiz. 54(3), 265–273 (2011)
T. Henning-Thurau, K.P. Gwinner, G. Walsh, D.D. Gramler, Electronic word-of-mouth via con-
sumer opinion platforms: what motivates consumers to articulate themselves on the internet? J.
Interact. Mark. 18, 38–52 (2004)
D.L. Hoffman, M. Fodor, Can you measure the ROI of your social media marketing. MIT Sloan
Manage. Rev. 52(1), 41–49 (2010)
S. Hollensen, Marketing Management: A Relationship Approach (Pearson Education, 2015)
D.J. Hopkins, G. King, A method of automated nonparametric content analysis for social science.
Am. J. Polit. Sci. 54(1), 229–247 (2010)
A.M. Kaplan, M. Haenlein, Two hearts in three-quarter time: how to waltz the social media/viral
marketing dance. Bus. Horiz. 54(3), 253–263 (2011)
J. Kietzmann, K. Hermkens, I. McCarthy, B. Silvestre, Social media? Get serious! Understanding
the functional building blocks of social media. Bus. Horiz. 54(3), 241–251 (2011)
J.H. Kietzmann, A. Canhoto, Bittersweet! Understanding and managing electronic word of mouth.
J. Public Aff. 13, 146–159 (2013)
J. Kleinfeld, Six Degrees: Urban Myth?, Psychology Today, vol.15 (Sussex Publishers LLC, 2002)
K. Krippendorff, Content Analysis: An Introduction to Its Methodology (Sage Publications, Beverly
Hills, 1980a)
K. Krippendorff, in Validity in Content Analysis, ed. by E. Mochmann (Frankfurt, Germany,
1980b), pp. 69–112
K. Krippendorff, Reliability in content analysis. Hum. Commun. Res. 30(3), 411–433 (2004)
R.A. Krueger, Analyzing and Reporting Focus Group Results, vol. 6 (Sage Publications, 1997)
V. Kulshreshtha, J. Boardman, D. Verma, Requirements dependencies: the emergence of a
requirements network. Int. J. Comput. Appl. Technol. 45(1), 42–56 (2012)
V. Kumar, V. Bhaskaran, R. Mirchandani, M. Shah, Practice prize winner-creating a measurable
social media marketing strategy: increasing the value and ROI of intangibles and tangibles for
hokey pokey. Mark. Sci. 32(2), 194–212 (2013)
V. Kumar, R. Mirchandani, Increasing the ROI of social media marketing. MIT Sloan Manag. Rev.
54(1), 55 (2012)
A. Kumar, T.M. Sebastian, Sentiment analysis on twitter. IJCSI Int. J. Comput. Sci. Issues 9(4),
372–373 (2012)
Y.H. Kuo, M.H. Fu, W.H. Tsai, K.R. Lee, L.Y. Chen, Integrated microblog sentiment analysis from
users’ social interaction patterns and textual opinions. Appl. Intell. 1–15 (2015)
H. Kwak, C. Lee, H. Park, S. Moon, in What is Twitter, a Social Network or a News Media?
Proceedings of the 19th International Conference on World Wide Web (ACM, New York, 2010,
April), pp. 591–600
L.S. Lai, W.M. To, Content analysis of social media: a grounded theory approach. J. Electron.
Commer. Res. 16(2), 138 (2015)
E.E. Leamer, M. Storper, The Economic Geography of the Internet Age (Palgrave Macmillan UK,
Springer, 2014) pp. 63–93
N. Li, D.D. Wu, Using text mining and sentiment analysis for online forums hotspot detection and
forecast. Decis. Support. Syst. 48(2), 354–368 (2010)

Content and Sentiment Analysis on Online Social Networks (OSNs)
133
B. Liu, Sentiment analysis and opinion mining. Synth. Lect. Hum. Lang. Technol. 5(1), 1–167
(2012)
B. Liu, L. Zhang, A survey of opinion mining and sentiment analysis. In Mining Text Data
(Springer US, 2012), pp. 415–463
R. McDonald, K. Hannan, T. Neylon, M. Wells, J. Reynar, in Structured Models for Fine-to-Coarse
Sentiment Analysis. Annual Meeting-Association for Computational Linguistics, vol. 45(1),
p. 432 (2007, June)
R. Menner, W. Höpken, M. Fuchs, M. Lexhagen, in Topic Detection: Identifying Relevant Topics
in Tourism Reviews. Information and Communication Technologies in Tourism 2016 (Springer
International Publishing, 2016), pp. 411–423
C. Murdough, Social media measurement: It’s not impossible. J. Interact. Advert. 10(1), 94–99
(2009)
T. Nasukawa, J. Yi, in Sentiment Analysis: Capturing Favorability Using Natural Language
Processing. Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Knowledge Capture (ACM,
New York, 2003), pp. 70–77
G. Norris, J.D. Balls, K.M. Hartley, E-business and ERP: Transforming the Enterprise (Wiley,
2000)
A. Okafor, P. Pardalos, M. Ragle, in Data Mining via Entropy and Graph Clustering. Data Mining
in Biomedicine (Springer US, 2007), pp. 117–131
T. Opsahl, F. Agneessens, J. Skoretz, Node centrality in weighted networks: generalizing degree
and shortest paths. Soc. Netw. 32, 245–251 (2010)
A. Ortigosa, J.M. Martín, R.M. Carro, Sentiment analysis in Facebook and its application to
e-learning. Comput. Hum. Behav. 31, 527–541 (2014)
B. Pang, L. Lee, Opinion mining and sentiment analysis. Found. Trends Inf. Retr. 2(1–2), 1–135
(2008)
A. Pak, P. Paroubek, in Text Representation Using Dependency Tree Subgraphs for Sentiment
Analysis. Database Systems for Advanced Applications. (Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 2011),
pp. 323–332
R.L. Paquin, J. Howard-Grenville, Blind dates and arranged marriages: longitudinal process of
network orchestration. Organ. Stud. 34, 1623–1653 (2013)
R. Ramanathan, L.S. Ganesh, Group preference aggregation methods employed in AHP: an
evaluation and an intrinsic process for deriving members’ weightages. Eur. J. Oper. Res. 79(2),
249–265 (1994)
D. Riff, S. Lacy, F. Fico, Analyzing Media Messages: Using Quantitative Content Analysis in
Research (Routledge, 2014)
L. Rourke, T. Anderson, D.R. Garrison, W. Archer, Methodological issues in the content analysis
of computer conference transcripts. Int. J. Artif. Intell. Educ. (IJAIED) 12, 8–22 (2001)
J. Shim, Social networking sites: a brief comparison of usage in the US and Korea. Decis. Line
39(5), 16–18 (2008)
S. Takahashi, A. Sugiyama, Y. Kohda, in A Method for Opinion Mining of Coffee Service Quality
and Customer Value by Mining Twitter. Knowledge, Information and Creativity Support
Systems (Springer International Publishing, 2016), pp. 521–528
M. Trusov, R.E. Bucklin, K. Pauwels, Effects of word of mouth versus traditional marketing:
ﬁndings from an internet social networking site. J. Mark. 73, 90–102 (2009)
J. Ugander, B. Karrer, L. Backstrom, C. Marlow, The Anatomy of the Facebook Social Graph
(Cornell University Library, Ithaca, 2011)
A. Van Looy, in Search Engine Optimization. Social Media Management (Springer International
Publishing, 2016), pp. 113–132
S. Wasserman, K. Faust, Social Network Analysis: Methods and Applications, vol 8 (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, 1994)
D.J. Watts, S.H. Strogatz, Collective dynamics of small-world networks. Nature 393, 440–442
(1998)
M. Zirngibl, C.H. Joyner, L.W. Stulz, C. Dragone, H.M. Presby, I.P. Kaminow, LARNet, a local
access router network. Photonics Technol. Lett. IEEE 7(2), 215–217 (1995)

The Role of Data in the Evaluation of Networked
Learning Effectiveness: An Auto-Ethnographic
Evaluation of Four Experiential Learning
Projects
Jonathan Bishop
Abstract Educator–learner interaction has been a key factor in the advantage
traditional learning environments have had over electronic ones. This chapter
explores four projects that have challenged this premise. The Young Enterprise
Project showed that computers can play an important part of youth entrepreneurship,
and subsequently the Emotivate Project showed how they can be an essential part
of blending electronic learning with community activism and arts. The Digital
Classroom of Tomorrow Project showed that it is possible to use eTwinning of the
schools through networked learning. Finally, the Free Digital Project is discussed,
which is an initiative that brought all the other projects together to show how through
the Cloud young and disabled people can become Internet entrepreneurs.
Abbreviations
Blended Learning
Blended learning refers to the approach of merging ofﬂine
and ofﬂine approaches to learning so as to combat the
broadcasted approach to teaching
Classroom 2.0
Classroom 2.0 is an approach to networked learning that
involves the partnering of learners from different schools
or environments
Coasting School
A coasting school is one where the management is happy
to have business as usual and where any ideas on how to
improve that school might be rejected as to accept them
would require accepting the school is coasting rather than
improving
E-Learning
E-Learning refers to the use of digital technologies for
learning and knowledge transformation
J. Bishop ()
Director of Centre for Research into Online Communities and E-Learning Systems (CROCELS)
e-mail: jbishop@crocels.com; bishop@crocels.ac.uk
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
S. Hai-Jew (ed.), Data Analytics in Digital Humanities, Multimedia Systems
and Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54499-1_6
135

136
J. Bishop
Experiential Learning
Experiential learning refers to learning through doing
learning activities rather than being expected to learn from
listening to a teacher lecture in a broadcasted manner
Immediate Learning
Immediate learning is an approach to teaching and learning
where the learning objectives of students are instanta-
neously paired with those of the educator, such as through
guided inquiry or the ﬂipped classroom
Networked Learning
Networked learning is a form of e-learning that involves
using networked learning environments, such as multiple
websites rather than one managed learning environment
Introduction
The term ‘big data’ has become a major buzzword for describing the harvesting and
analysis of data from various sources for analysis in ways that were not intended
(Bishop 2015; Brown et al. 2011; Labrinidis and Jagadish, 2012; Malgonde and
Bhattacherjee, 2014; Woerner and Wixom, 2015). In educational environments data
should be important for evaluating the effectiveness of learning and teaching. This
is nowhere more important—and more possible—than in the case of networking
learning, which is learning carried out online in networked learning environments.
The use of website metrics in such situations is often overlooked but is nevertheless
important in generating big data that can then be triangulated with observational
data from video, such as in experiential or immediate learning contexts (Bishop and
Goode 2014; Bishop, 2017).
Background
In looking at the role of big data in educational settings one must consider the
different approaches to learning that data can be collected on and what the impacts
of that data might be, such as whether educational establishments might not want to
accept it when the data shows they are failing their students.
Approaches to Learning
Educator–learner interaction is an important part of any learning experience,
regardless of whether the teachers and learners are communicating in-person or at
a distance. Even where the computer is taking the place of a person, such as via
CD-ROMs, Web-based learning or tablet apps, the engagement of a person with

The Role of Data in the Evaluation of Networked Learning Effectiveness...
137
the system and trust in it is still important. The learning experience, whether or not
enhanced by technology, is crucial to whether a teaching activity is successful or not.
Experiential Learning
Experiential learning is a process that is designed to link cognitive, social and
emotional processes (Kolb, 1981). Every learner has different styles of learning and
it is an important part of experiential learning to accommodate these (Eickmann et
al. 2004). It is argued that conversation is an important part of constructing meaning
from an experience (Baker et al. 2005). It follows therefore that communication
between learner and educator needs to be a two-way process, where both are
learning from one another.
Networked Learning
Networked learning is the concept that learning can occur collaboratively over
the Internet, with educators and learners playing active roles not possible with
traditional forms of computer-based learning (Goodyear et al. 2006). An example
of networked learning that makes use of experiential learning is the eTwinning ini-
tiative. The eTwinning concept promotes the development of educators and learners
through pairing their school with others at a distance (Vuorikari et al. 2011). It is
based on the premise that collaboration between schools is and must be easy, demo-
cratic and the use of ICTs should be easily accessible by all (Scimeca et al. 2009).
Examples include document sharing, and sharing of resources in general (Holmes
and Sime 2012). With the focus of networked learning being on the social aspects
of e-learning, it is easy to see how the approach can support cross-border activities
that involve many different styles of teaching and learning (Hanraets et al. 2011).
Immediate Learning
Experiential learning and immediate learning often go hand in hand, as immediate
learning allows learners to have concrete experiences in the moment, which are
then reﬂected on Schuster et al. (2003). In terms e-learning, immediate learning has
important implications for motivation, learning and course attrition (Hutchins and
Hutchison 2008). Technologies like podcasting have made it easier for immediate
learning to exist in a contemporary setting (Hendrickson et al. 2010).
Immediate learning often depends on verbal and non-verbal communication in
classroom contexts (Turman 2008). E-Learning environments can therefore be seen
as the perfect context for immediate learning, especially where it is possible for
the user interface to be adapted based on the abilities and interests of the learners
(Bishop 2012a, 2004). Some, however, argue that immediate learning can stiﬂe
creativity and reduce attention focus (DeHart 1975).

138
J. Bishop
Blended Learning
Blended learning is a term typically used to describe the use of network learning
technologies with traditional classroom approaches (Valiathan 2002). Blended
learning can be the alternative to single instances of immediate learning, by having
several stages where immediate learning is not just in the classroom, but can be on
location at a speciﬁc point in the learning process. Blended learning is known to be
able to allow for the facilitation of meaningful learning experiences not otherwise
possible (Garrison and Kanuka 2004). This is possible because blended learning
combines various forms of delivery, including teaching and learning styles (Heinze
and Procter 2004).
Using Big Data to Evaluate the Effectiveness of Educational
Projects
The evaluation of education projects is something that often results in politicians
producing the so-called strategies that educational establishments do not follow as
they do not take them seriously. Where opportunities exist for data analysis concerns
of education establishment personnel is often about massaging it, such as taking out
of the ﬁgures students with disabilities or those from minority backgrounds who the
establishment are failing and want to avoid coming to terms with the fact that it is
their management style that is failing and not the students that failed management
style is holding back.
Investigation of the Projects
This section provides background information on three projects that made strong
use of experiential learning, blended learning and networked learning. This includes
the Young Enterprise Project, the Digital Classroom of Tomorrow Project and the
Emotivate Project.
The Young Enterprise Project
The Young Enterprise Project, also known simply as the enterprise project, was an
experiential learning initiative run at South Devon College between 1994 and 1996,
which was available to students studying its GNVQ in Business Foundation course.
South Devon College was one of the ﬁrst colleges in the UK to have Internet access,
which formed a core part of how students participated in the programme, including

The Role of Data in the Evaluation of Networked Learning Effectiveness...
139
Table 1 Objectives and outcomes of the Young Enterprise Project
Objective
Outcome
World of work
Provide young people with an exciting, imaginative and practical business
experience
Personal skills
Enable young people to develop their personal skills
Life skills
Enable young people to develop knowledge and understanding of the
processes of business and wealth creation
using it for market research. It is known that experiential learning in business studies
can positively impact on a student’s self-efﬁcacy and self-conﬁdence.
Table 1 shows the skills developed by the Young Enterprise Project (Ralph,
1996), which some of the participants used to gain certiﬁcates from the Associated
Examining Board (i.e. AEB Basic Tests). The ﬁrst stage of the enterprise project
involved students market testing their ideas prior to being formally involved in the
Young Enterprise programme. During this stage of the enterprise project they would
come together as a group, decide what product they wanted to sell, and form a name
and brand to sell the product. The important part of this enterprise project was that
while technology was important, it was more important to develop ideas for making
sales, pitching to customers and developing the product range in the ﬁrst place. In
one instance the project involved running a stall at the site of South Devon College
and on another occasion attending a market. Software including Aldus PageMaker,
Home Accounts 2, HyperPaint, among others were used to support the project’s
activities, being used as part of the project so much so they were not seen as out
of the ordinary. The importance of developing the enterprise skills of students and
the teaching and mentoring skills of education and business partners fed into the
later projects discussed. The immediate learning in the project was perhaps more
evident in the physical environment than through computer software, but it has direct
relevance for online learning environments.
The Digital Classroom of Tomorrow Project
The Digital Classroom of Tomorrow (DCOT) Project in Wales started what became
the Classroom 2.0 initiative (Bishop, 2007; Taddeo and Tirocchi, 2012). The aims
of the Welsh DCOT Project were based on the Welsh Government’s 2001 Learning
Country initiative (Davidson, 2001). DCOT was adopted as Classi 2.0 in Italy,
Escuela 2.0 in Spain and CAPITAL (Curriculum and Pedagogy in Technology
Assisted Learning) in England (Bishop, 2007; Taddeo and Tirocchi, 2012). In
Italy they were based on the Italian Ministry of Education’s 2009 University and
Research initiative (Cornali and Tirocchi, 2010). Both are set out in Table 2.
Immediate learning can be seen to be at the centre of the DCOT Project. Using
advanced ICT techniques to tailor online learning environments to the students was
an essential part of its scope. The importance of distance learning to the DCOT

140
J. Bishop
Table 2 Comparing the objectives of classroom 2.0 in Wales and Italy
Factor
DCOT (Wales)
Classi 2.0 (Italy)
Persuasive
Encourage the development of bilingual
educational and training materials
relevant to Wales
To implement innovative teaching and
learning methods
Adaptive
Develop ﬂexible modes of provision
tailored to the needs of the individual
learner
Support the personalisation of the
teaching process
Sociable
Strengthen distance learning and use
ICT to move away from rigid timetables
and classroom-based teaching
To re-organise school space and time
management
Sustainable
Encourage the development of essential
ICT skills throughout local
communities
Develop close relationships with the
local environment (other schools,
companies, associations, parents and
families, and so on)
Project allowed for self-directed immediate learning, as it is possible for education
to be not based on set timetables, but accessed in an asynchronous fashion. The
development of ICT skills in communities will increase the likelihood of informal
immediate learning, such as in terms of accessing the Internet.
The Emotivate Project
The Emotivate Project is a community arts project where young people from a
range of backgrounds and localities come together to improve their digital literacy,
improve their understanding of the area and design murals reﬂecting the aspects of
their community they think important to its past and what they’d like it to be like
in the future. The project implemented many of the ﬁndings of the DCOT Project
and Young Enterprise Project, and can be seen to embody immediate learning. For
instance, the aim of the project was not just to transform the learning of the young
people involved, but the teachers also. This could only be possible at the time
through the experiential learning occurring in a physical setting where the social
proof of the social change was immediately obvious. Equally, at the start of the
project, the art teacher was sceptical that the social change would occur and then as
part of the process saw that community regeneration through the arts was possible.
Table 3 shows the objectives and outcomes of the project.
The Emotivate Project was the ﬁrst to be grant-funded, requiring £15,261.59
start-up funding, which was made up of £2000 (13%) from local government,
£8275 (54%) from grant-giving bodies, £786.79 (5%) from co-operatives and £4200
(28%) work in kind (Bishop, 2012b). This money went towards the paint and other
materials the young people and artist needed, and was used in a way where the
young people decided what the design was. There was no competition, such as who
was the ‘best’ or anything like picking a ‘winner’. The ethos of the project was
that each participant could point at the mural and say ‘I did that’. The credit was

The Role of Data in the Evaluation of Networked Learning Effectiveness...
141
Table 3 Objectives and outcomes of the Emotivate Project
Objective
Outcome
Visibility
Educating young people about the arts and make a visible contribution to
the community by improving the local environment
Virtuality
Encouraging the use of electronic learning methods
Vitality
Improving cultural, economic and environmental development of the
local communities
Viability
Increasing the social cohesion between the local communities
Environmentalism
Engaging with local community members and encourage participation in
improving the local environment and the local community
Restitution
Engaging with socially excluded people within the community including
young offenders and people on probation
therefore shared with no one taking more than the other, and importantly for no one
part of the project to be singled out as belonging to one person or another.
Review and Consolidation of the Projects
The projects discussed above together provide many important insights into the
design of experiential learning programmes, such as those which use blended
learning and/or networked learning. It created a three-part instructional design
model, namely ‘Learn, Create, and Communicate.’
Aspect 1: The Learn Stage
The learn stage is an aspect of a learning activity where an educator imparts and
develops knowledge. In the case of the Young Enterprise Project this involved
a college lecturer and business mentor imparting knowledge and experience to
participants. In the case of the DCOT Project this involved designing online
instructional materials that put transferring information as the ﬁrst stage. In the
case of the Emotivate Project this involved the participants learning about the area’s
history and how to use digital technologies like Photoshop. This part of the learning
process is probably least open to the experiential aspects of immediate education,
but most suited to the asynchronous aspects of immediate education where distance
learning provides for education to be conducted at a time of the learner’s choosing.
Aspect 2: The Create Stage
The create stage is an aspect of a learning activity where learners are given the
chance to put the knowledge they have gained into practice in order to develop
through experiential learning. It is thus most suited to immediate learning, as

142
J. Bishop
workshops and ﬁeldtrips are some of the best activities to enable this stage to
happen. In the case of the Young Enterprise Project using software like HyperPaint
and Aldus PageMaker allow for the design of marketing materials. It also involved
deciding on a product range. In the case of the DCOT Project, examples of the create
stage included online activities, such as registering for an employment website,
providing instant access to current employment opportunities, providing immediate
learning scenarios, that can be assessed for their relevance by participants. In the
case of the Emotivate Project the create stage involved the creation of collages in
Photoshop by drawing images from the Internet about the area’s part and what they
would like it to be like in the future, and the painting of those ideas onto boards
that were then installed as a mural in the underpass. Applications used with a web
browser, included Moodle and Google, and Photoshop was used alongside these.
Aspect 3: The Communicate Stage
The communicate stage is an aspect of a learning activity where the learners speak
about their learning. In the case of the Young Enterprise Project this involved the
participants making a speech at an end of year exhibition and speaking to others
about the project at a stall. In the Digital Classroom of Tomorrow Project this has
involved the use of weblogs as learning journals, the customisation of hand-outs
and user data entry on sequential screens. In the Emotivate Project the communicate
stage involved participants speaking to the media. The aspects of immediate learning
that are suited to this stage are therefore, spontaneous opportunities for reﬂection.
Conclusions
There are a number of things to learn from the three projects referred to. This
includes that technology works best when it is embedded into a programme of
learning, rather than being seen as ancillary to it, as instant learning is more possible.
Policies like ‘bring your own device’ could become essential to budgeting the cost
of ICT into each lesson, especially at a point in time where there is pressure to
slash public spending. This may improve instant learning through learners being
more likely to engage in a state of ﬂow, aiding experiential learning. The structured
approach to designing instruction in the LCC model could be made available on all
devices, such as using responsive programming. Figure 1 shows the revised Digital
Classroom of Tomorrow Project conceptual framework, which takes account of the
fact that a classroom should make use of a bring-your-own-device policy, even if the
networked learning environment being used is controlled by an educator using their
device.

The Role of Data in the Evaluation of Networked Learning Effectiveness...
143
Fig. 1 The revised Digital Classroom of Tomorrow Project model
An Auto-Ethnographic Evaluation of the Three Experiential
Learning Projects Into a Social Enterprise and a Coasting
School
This section evaluates the success of three experiential learning projects and then
applies them to two organisations to show instant learning can and/or should be
implemented.
Methodology
The methodology behind the project is based on auto-ethnography. This is where
the researcher is activity participating in a lead role in the setting being research
and whom documents the project from the perspective they observe it through.
Describing and deﬁning auto-ethnography is a challenging task (Hayano, 1979).
However, it has been argued that auto-ethnography is a more authentic approach
because it relies on conveying the actual thoughts of the researcher rather than
simply attempting to interpret the behaviours of others (Dyson, 2007). It is normal
for auto-ethnographies to be written in the ﬁrst-person rather than the third-person
but the author, even as a Fellow of the Royal Anthropological Institute, prefers the
third-person tense as it sounds more typical of academic texts where the aim is to
be objective, even if it is impossible for humans to be objective because they are
naturally subjective beings (Bochner, 2012).

144
J. Bishop
Participants and Location
The participants and location of the project are the management, support staff and
others relating to the organisations being studied.
Parc Lewis County Primary School
Parc Lewis County Primary School is a primary school based in South Wales. Its
head teacher is Alun Roberts, the Chair of Governors is Geoff Herbert, a member
of the support staff is Esther Thomas and the school’s inspector is Merfyn Lloyd
Jones. In the organisation, the researcher was a school governor, with responsibility
for ICT and religious studies.
Crocels Community Media Group
The Crocels Community Media Group is the name given to a group of companies
which cooperate to improve the West Wales and The Valleys region of Wales
through multimedia education and community regeneration. The current and former
directors include the researcher, Mark Beech, Tim Mazur and Gethin Rhys. The
current contingent workers include Jason Barratt and Jeremy McDonagh.
Results
The results section sets out what was learned from the attempt to implement the
lessons learned from the three projects into two organisations.
Parc Lewis County Primary School
Parc Lewis County Primary School is a school for children at primary school age,
which is in Treforest, within the Pontypridd community. The make-up of the school
includes students and travellers who are not in the area for long. This has caused
the school challenges in terms of how it achieves adequate outcomes because of
this. This section discussed the efforts by the researcher to implement Classroom
2.0 into the school during their role as school governor. In schools such as this, the
individualistic approach can ensure that even with the steady ﬂow of pupils through
the school that each can be catered for and develop their own learning even if the
classroom make-up changes.

The Role of Data in the Evaluation of Networked Learning Effectiveness...
145
Phase 1: Battling for Change (2008–2013)
During this stage the researcher had great difﬁculties in encouraging change to the
school’s IT policy. The head teacher presided over the greatest fall in performance
seen at the school, with their key performance indicators set by governors not
reﬂecting the fall in standards. The Chairman of the school, Geoff Herbert used
all manner of methods to prevent the researcher from having inﬂuence on the
school, including not passing his change of addresses on to the local authority.
Geoff Herbert was then able to have the researcher excluded from the governing
body, without giving him the chance to attend a meeting—through having the
correspondence sent to his old address. On behalf of the Chairman, Esther Thomas
defended Geoff Herbert not informing the council or school of the researcher’s new
address, saying: ‘It is the responsibility of the school governor to formally notify the
Clerk of the Governing Body of any changes to their personal details’.
As can be seen in Fig. 2 below, the years at which the researcher was able to make
interventions were the one in which the school had the highest performance. These
were 2008 and 2012 to 2014. At the end of each intervention by the researcher the
school’s results were in the 80% are (81.8% in 2008 and 84.6% in 2012). When the
researcher re-joined the school in 2012, the school’s performance increases nearly
5% each year, before falling by over 10% in the year that he was no longer present
(i.e. 2015).
Fig. 2 School performance between 2008 and 2015

146
J. Bishop
Table 4 Use of ICT resources
Local education authority
School inspector
There is a strong emphasis on meeting
national priorities, particularly improving
literacy, where the school’s current
self-evaluation has accurately identiﬁed that
a signiﬁcant minority of pupils have poorly
developed reading skills.
Teachers’ planning identiﬁes appropriate
opportunities for pupils to develop the key
skills of numeracy, literacy and information and
communication technology (ICT), but there are
inconsistencies in some subjects when planning
for these skills across the curriculum.
Robust systems have been introduced in this
academic year to improve the school’s focus
on a skills-based curriculum, assessment for
learning and improving literacy.
Most (pupils) say that they have enough books,
equipment and computers to do their work.
During the year appointment of a new head teacher in 2011, the researcher
was reappointed to the school governing body, and provided ‘challenge’ to the
head teacher. In one instance the head teacher said to the researcher they were
making changes. ‘In school we have recently purchased 10 iPads for children’s
use initially in years 2 and 6, where our staff expertise in ICT is based’, he said.
‘We are particularly interested in targeting boys writing through various apps that
are available’, he continued. ‘Our teachers have visited other schools that are
successfully using them and we are aware that many schools are now ‘dipping their
toe’ in this avenue (of adopting Classroom 2.0 principles)’.
Table 4 presents the use of ICT resources from the point of view of the local
education authority following the researcher disclosing his observations and that of
the school inspector. As can be seen, whilst the LEA says that teachers are able
to identify issues with pupils’ learning, the school inspector, Merfyn Lloyd Jones,
points out there is inconsistency across the curriculum. The school inspector also
stated that the learners felt they had enough resources, but as Classroom 2.0 had not
been introduced at this point, it is likely this was based on their acceptance of the
status quo, rather than be said from the point of view what they could have.
Table 5 shows what the school inspector has said about differs from what the
local education authority’s own investigation showed. Under the current education
arrangements in Wales, unlike many parts of England, local authorities still control
many aspects of the education system. This creates a conﬂict of interest, as what the
case at the school explored. For instance, the local education authority was so close
to the head teacher and chair of governors that even though it was responsible for
carrying out the investigation independent of the school, it still leaked information
to the chair of governors, knowing that it would cause offense due to its ‘derogatory’
nature.
Phase 2: Winning the argument (2012–2013)
The school inspection by the statutory school inspectorate showed other key
differences between what the local authority said in its investigation compared to

The Role of Data in the Evaluation of Networked Learning Effectiveness...
147
Table 5 Differentiation and behaviour management
Local education authority
School inspector
Throughout the school, pupils show a
positive attitude and enjoyment of learning.
They are helpful and co-operative and
willing to talk about what they are doing in
lessons.
The school has correctly identiﬁed those pupils
who are more able and talented, but its
provision does not always fully meet the needs
of these pupils in order to challenge them
appropriately.
All children spoke to agree that the school
has effective ways of addressing issues such
as bullying, and that their teachers help to
ensure that all children behave well in class
so that they can get on with their work.
Many say that the school deals with bullying
well. Only a minority say that other children do
not behave well so that they can get on with
their work and do not behave well at playtime
and lunchtime.
Table 6 Staff pupil development
Local authority
School inspector
‘Nearly all children can describe how
teachers use feedback and targets to help
them to know how well they ate doing in
class and what they need to do to improve,
for example by referring to individual
targets and feedback from teachers’.
‘However, on a few occasions where the teaching
is less effective, teachers do not always provide
suitable tasks for the range of abilities in a class
and do not provide enough opportunities to enable
pupils to write extensively across the curriculum’.
‘Continuing professional development
(CPD) for all staff is now informed by
more accurate self-evaluation and
focussed on improving their ability to
meet identiﬁed needs in the school’.
‘Clear, speciﬁc actions have been identiﬁed to
improve the school environment and to develop
skills-based learning. These are now being put
into practice and are incorporated into the
school’s monitoring and evaluation cycle’.
what was happening in practice. Table 6 shows this in the case of staff and pupil
development. It can be seen that whilst the local authority investigation found that
differentiation was the norm, the school inspector found it was lacking. The local
authority said that staff development was a core part of the school’s management,
but the inspector said that it was only just being introduced.
The school had access to the Moodle e-learning system provided by the local
university. However, the head teacher was focussed around his personal belief
the use of this was limited because he thought the young people would not have
access to technology at home. This was raised with the local authority, but again it
turned out that what the local education authority found was different from that of
the school inspector. Table 7 provides the comments on school performance. The
researcher told the local education authority that the school was one of the worst
performing, and the school inspector agreed. The researcher told the local education
authority that the other governors were not playing an active role in ensuring the
head teacher took tough decisions and the school inspector agreed that not enough
challenge was being provided to the head teacher. The researcher told the local
education authority that teachers were not willing to update their skills to help pupils
and the school inspector agreed that the learning activities did not always meet the
needs and abilities of learners. It was clear to both the researcher and the school

148
J. Bishop
Table 7 School performance
ICT link governor (Researcher)
School inspector
‘Parc Lewis is one of the worst performing
schools in the county and needs to
modernise’.
‘In comparison with schools with similar
proportions of pupils entitled to free school meals,
the school’s performance at the expected outcome
or better placed it in the bottom 25% in all
learning areas’.
‘As a new headteacher you should be
looking to reform the way the school works
and not stick to old ways of doing things
which clearly aren’t working!’
‘If you do not have what it takes to make
tough decision why are you doing your
job?’
‘The Governors at Parc Lewis Primary
School playing no active Role’.
‘The members of the governing body are very
supportive of the school. They receive regular
reports from the headteacher and are aware of the
school’s strengths and areas for improvement.
They visit the school regularly and receive
appropriate information about the school’s
performance. However, their role as critical
friends is limited and they do not challenge the
school enough about its performance’.
‘If teachers can’t keep up with the times
then they should be asked to leave!’‘If the
teachers are not willing to learn new skills
to do something about this then they
should be sacked!’
‘learning activities do not always meet the needs
and abilities of all pupils well enough’.
‘Performance management procedures are in
place for all members of staff’.
‘Alun (the head-teacher) says that our
area isn’t an afﬂuent one, so people
probably don’t have these ICTs. If Alun
went to near-by Pontypridd on market day,
he would see that many of the things being
sold are mobile phone accessories and
most of the people buying them are on
beneﬁts!’
‘The school describes the overall socio-economic
background of the area as economically and
socially disadvantaged’.
inspector that the head teacher focused on the fact the school was in a disadvantaged
area, which the researcher saw as an excuse not to improve standards.
It was quite clear that after the school inspector reported that the researcher
had won the argument, even if the local authority did not agree. At one meeting
following the inspection the researcher proposed a cyber-bullying ofﬁcer and the
chair of governors said one should not be in place because he and other governors
did ‘not know enough about it’. And at the same meeting when the researcher made
reference to the school system in England the local education authority’s secretary
said even though she was not entitled to speak, ‘We are not in England’. The degree
of conservatism in the school was perhaps behind its poor performance.
Phase 3: Outcomes of Interventions and Lack of Intervention (2013–2015)
Subsequent to that meeting, many of the policies suggested by the researcher were
put into practice. This included a set of policies where the teachers would be
subjected to disciplinary proceedings if they did not update their skills, and also

The Role of Data in the Evaluation of Networked Learning Effectiveness...
149
Table 8 Performance of Parc Lewis Primary School (2008–2015)
Group
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013
2014
2015
School
81.8%
62.1%
61.5%
73.9%
75.0%
80.0%
84.6%
71.4%
Family
75.9%
78.9%
80.4%
77.1%
80.2%
83.4%
84.6%
87.5%
LEA
73.1%
74.1%
76.3%
77.1%
80.2%
83.4%
84.6%
85.8%
Wales
75.5%
77.0%
78.2%
80.0%
82.6%
84.3%
86.1%
87.7%
the school introduced more ICT into its set up. Table 8 sets out the performance
of the school between 2008 and 2015. As can be seen from this table, when the
researcher was present in 2008 and then 2012–2014 the school was performing
better, perhaps because he was single handily providing challenge to the head
teacher. The year following the researcher leaving the school, namely 2015, the
school’s performance had fallen again. This perhaps shows what can happen in
schools where the management can escape scrutiny and carry on allowing the forces
of conservatism to go unchallenged.
Crocels Community Media Group
The Crocels Community Media Group is the name given to a multimedia education
and community regeneration partnership in the West Wales and the Valleys region
of Wales. Its formation and transformation took place over 10 years, starting with
the founding of the Centre for Research into Online Communities and E-Learning
Systems in 2005 through to the incorporation of the partnership as a charitable
incorporated organisation in 2015.
Phase 1: The Creation of the Digital Classroom of Tomorrow Project
The Digital Classroom of Tomorrow Project was founded in 2002 as an initiative
to further the use of digital technologies in schools to provide an education to
learners that is persuasive, adaptable, sociable and sustainable (Bishop, 2004). The
DCOT Project grew out of an inspirational combination of the ACE initiative that
used networking learning through web-cams (Reddy, 1997a, b) and the drive of
the Welsh Government to transform Wales into ‘The Learning Country’ (Davidson,
2001). The DCOT Project caught on in England, Spain and Italy, transforming into
the Classroom 2.0 initiative, which went in a slightly different direction to that
envisaged by the DCOT Project.

150
J. Bishop
Phase 2: The Incorporation of Glamorgan Blended Learning Ltd (GBL)
The creation of Glamorgan Blended Learning Ltd. (GBL) signalled the start of a
project to bring together the communities in the East Glamorgan area, speciﬁcally
the South Wales Central region. GBL could be seen to embody the enterprise
project—the participants in the form of the company’s directors (one having
participated in the Young Enterprise Project) were developing enterprise skills that
they have not previously gained. GBL was the ﬁrst of several companies to be
created, which was part of a vision to get dozens of students involved in work
experience opportunities working through glocalisation, where they are both locally
and globally minded. The skills of two of the directors (Jonathan Bishop was around
Web development, so this formed an important part of the company’s fund-raising
offerings. Through the Emotivate Project, discussed above, GBL got together young
people across several schools who would otherwise not meet. The idea being that
due to the small world phenomenon, the same young people would bump into each
other in the future and talk about their participation in the project, making the social
change that much more meaningful.
Phase 3: The Incorporation of Jonathan Bishop Limited (JBL)
It became apparent that a signiﬁcant amount of investment would be needed for
Crocels to expand its product offerings to increase income for the community
projects. On that basis, Jonathan Bishop Limited (JBL) was formed so that the
risk could be shared between GBL and JBL where the director, Jonathan Bishop,
would invest a lot of time into the project and with the ﬁnancial support of GBL, he
could then develop and market new products and processes that both he and the two
companies would beneﬁt from.
Part of this involved working with a team of programmers in India called
iFlair. This was done collaboratively using tools like NetMeeting, Skype and email.
Involving the programmers included paying amounts upfront as little as £90, but
the value of these product development projects varied. The innovative products
from JBL inspired the programmers. ‘Because this is the real experience that we
experienced while working with,’ is what they said about one project. ‘It does make
it better the way you incorporate yourself within’, they said about their buy-in to
their vision.
Phase 4: The Creation of the Crocels Community Media Group
The creation of the Crocels Community Media Group (CMG) was an attempt to link
and internationalise several companies. The increased collaboration between the
companies occurred via the Cloud. In the ﬁrst instance, it involved the renaming of
Glamorgan Blended Learning Ltd. to Crocels CMG CYF, and this company became
the lead company for the Group. The new mission of the Group was not easily

The Role of Data in the Evaluation of Networked Learning Effectiveness...
151
Fig. 3 Corporate structure of Crocels (2011–2014)
accessible to all, however. For instance, former director Tim Mazur said: ‘I (he) was
not aware ’world peace’ featured in Crocels mission’.
As can be seen from Fig. 3, the corporate structure of Crocels had expanded well
beyond GBL at this stage.
Tim was a member of the company before the change, but Jason Barratt who
joined the company after the change was more complimentary. ‘Working for Crocels
gives me everything I could want from working for the company’, he said. ‘The
work is relaxed, but always done in time, and aside from one person being late
with time sheets, everything is satisfactory’. Tim joined the company on a speciﬁc
project—Assisting Human Interaction, or Vois—and his interest in the bigger
picture therefore was not evident. ‘Since my reduction in my hours worked for
Crocels has very little effect on my life beyond my research interests into EI & ERD’,
he said. ‘My general experiences when discussing the VOIS system were demanding,
interesting & frustrating’, he continued. ‘However, the design of VOIS clearly lacks
features and considerations needed to achieve what it set out to do’. This shows the
overall problem with learning organisations like CMG, where change is ongoing.
With people joining at different times, and not always meeting face-to-face, the
transitions can be difﬁcult if people are not fully aware of them, or would rather
things stay as they are.

152
J. Bishop
Table 9 Aspects of the Free Digital Project
Aspect
Description and Examples
Freedom for digital teens
from autocratic learning
The current education system is usually based on the ‘sage on the
stage model’ where someone professing knowledge lectures to a
class on what they should believe. The project gives young people
the chance to developing themselves as individuals that work as
part of a wider networked team.
Freedom for digital teens
from autocratic leaders
The current employment system is not suited to the current
generation of young people. The Free Digital Project gives them
experience so they can go on to become self-employed and be
their own boss.
Freedom for digital teens
from abusive losers
The Free Digital Project gives young people an awareness of their
abilities so that when they are criticised or bullied they know in
themselves their true abilities.
Phase 5: The Realisation Through the Free Digital Project
The Free Digital Project was founded in 2012 as a way to take all the learning from
the Emotivate Project and the Crocels companies to provide work opportunities to
young people who have been let down by the system. Free Digital has derived its
name from the beginning ‘Freedom for Digital Teens from’ then terms starting ‘AA’
followed by a word starting ‘L’ (Table 9).
The point of the Free Digital Project when it comes to the development of young
people has been to help them develop a proﬁtable business and by harnessing the
Internet and the Cloud, it will mean that eventually state and grant funding will not
be needed.
Phase 6: The Incorporation of the Crocels Community Media Group
The start of the incorporation of the Crocels Community Media Group singled what
should be the ﬁnal reform of the organisational structure. Whilst each company
within CMG is independent and not a subsidiary of if, CMG will become the
corporate director of all the companies within the Group. In terms of The Crocels
Press Limited (CPL), it will have subsidiaries in the main territories covered by
the Group’s patents. At present this is Australia and the USA. Crocels News, Inc.
currently covers the USA and a new company will be founded to cover Australia.
As can be seen from Fig. 4, the new corporate structure of Crocels is not so based
around a ﬁxed number of companies. It is focussed on the tasks those companies
perform, and the activities of the people operating within them. This should provide
a greater inter-professional context to the company. For instance, it can be seen in
the model that Crocels Press Limited is represented by the printer and the envelope
and is responsible for the ‘Production and Distribution’ side of CMG. In this lower
part of the model would be all the contingent and other workers who cooperate
to achieve the company’s goals. So whilst the companies are present, they should

The Role of Data in the Evaluation of Networked Learning Effectiveness...
153
Fig. 4 Corporate structure of the Crocels Community Media Group (2014–2016)
ideally be invisible so that people see themselves working for Crocels and not the
individual company with which they are associated.
An important aspect of the new corporate structure in Fig. 4 is the change in role
for the director who has become a facilitator. This facilitator is still responsible for
the day-to-day running of the company—as an ofﬁce holder—but the group and its
trustees are theoretically in control of the direction of the companies. A full working
agreement between the companies is under way and will set out the divisions of
labour between them and solidify the right for their members to veto a decision of
the Group and/or the facilitator. It is likely that the corporate structure will change
from that between 2014 and 2016 within 2017 as the outcomes of this study are
implemented.
As can be seen from Fig. 5, there management structure of CMG now follows
not a hierarchical one, but one based on the extent to which decisions are made by
the facilitator and other C-Level executives (i.e. trustees). These executives can be
seen to be the closest to the facilitator, sharing equal responsibility. It is the case that
all the powers of the management board will be delegated to a committee of which
the facilitator is the only member, making them the Chief Executive Ofﬁcer of each
company, but where there is a conﬂict of interest, such as where the facilitator is
presented with a problem of which they have a direct interest, then the other C-Level
executives must take the decision.
Next furthest from the facilitator are the technicians. These are people who have
joined the Group, such as through the Free Digital Project, who need the most
supervision from the facilitator or other C-Level executives. Furthest away are the

154
J. Bishop
Fig. 5 The management
structure of the Crocels
Community Media Group
(2016)
professionals, which are people who the facilitator has minimal control over, such
as patent attorneys or accountants. The aim is that technicians will go on to become
professionals through their professional development within Crocels.
Implications and Future Research Directions
This chapter has shown how there is the option of transforming educational
institutions to be more business-minded and to focus on the individual development
of their service users. There have been challenges in this regard with schools that
are still tied to local education authorities, where these are managed by volunteers
rather than experienced professionals. For instance, at Parc Lewis County Primary
School in Wales, it took years of effort to convince the school to adopt ICT into part
of the school’s ethos. There is still an embedded ‘forces of conservatism’ in school
governing bodies, which in the case of Parc Lewis led to the Chair of Governors
arranging for the researcher’s suspension when he voiced some home truths. Whilst
this research has shown it is possible for young people, especially those with
disabilities, to use the Tax Credits system in the UK to support themselves while
they are developing their business, UK Government policy towards cutting these
could mean the project would no longer be feasible outside of being a state-funded
back to work scheme. Future research could therefore look at how the apprenticeship
scheme run in the UK might be able to provide the skills development for Free
Digital participants so that afterwards they can become self-employed afterwards.
This would mean that the ethos of the Free Digital Project in terms of freeing digital
teens from the constraints of the system could be embedded through work-based
learning and realised afterwards.

The Role of Data in the Evaluation of Networked Learning Effectiveness...
155
Discussion
Educator–learner interaction has been a key factor in the advantage traditional
learning environments have had over electronic ones. But this is only true if one
considers that using technology in the teaching process makes the role of an in-
person teacher redundant. This chapter explored four projects that have challenged
this premise. The Young Enterprise Project showed that computers can play an
important part of youth entrepreneurship, and subsequently the Emotivate Project
showed how they can be an essential part of blending electronic learning with
community activism and arts. The Digital Classroom of Tomorrow Project showed
that it is possible to use eTwinning of the schools through networked learning. The
ﬁndings from these projects were then applied through an auto-ethnography to two
organisations—a social enterprise and a coasting school. Finally, the Free Digital
Project was discussed, which is an initiative that brought all the other projects
together to show how through the Cloud young and disabled people can become
Internet entrepreneurs.
The study also looked at an investigation of a government maintained school
between 2008 and 2015. It found that in the years that the researcher was present,
providing challenge to the head teacher and the chair of governors, that the
performance of the school was much greater. It found that the observations reported
to the local education authority about the school, which were rubbished by them,
were found to be supported by the school inspector. It can therefore be concluded
that for schools to perform well there needs to be strong management, including
through governors and similar taking the role of critical friends to ensure that the
head teacher is focused on improving standards rather than relying on factors such
as the local economy to justify an approach of ‘business as usual’.
References
A.C. Baker, P.J. Jensen, D.A. Kolb, Conversation as experiential learning. Manag. Learn. 36(4),
411–427 (2005)
J. Bishop, The potential of persuasive technology for educating heterogeneous user groups.
Unpublished MSc, University of Glamorgan, Pontypridd GB, (2004)
J. Bishop, in Evaluation-Centred Design of E-learning Communities: A Case Study and Review.
The 2nd International Conference on Internet Technologies and Applications (ITA’07), Wrex-
ham, GB, 2007, pp. 1–9
J. Bishop, in Didactic strategies and technologies for education: Incorporating advancements,
ed. by P. M. Pumilia-Gnarini, E. Favaron, E. Pacetti, J. Bishop, L. Guerra. Cooperative e-
learning in the multilingual and multicultural school: The role of ‘Classroom 2.0’ for increasing
participation in education (IGI Global, Hershey, PA, 2012a), pp. 137–150
J. Bishop, in Didactic Strategies and Technologies for Education: Incorporating Advancements,
ed. by P. M. Pumilia-Gnarini, E. Favaron, E. Pacetti, J. Bishop, L. Guerra. Lessons from the
Emotivate Project for Increasing Take-Up of Big Society and Responsible Capitalism Initiatives
(IGI Global, Hershey, PA, 2012b), pp. 208–217

156
J. Bishop
J. Bishop, in Geo-Intelligence and Visualization Through Big Data Trends. ed. by B. Bozkaya,
V. Singh, Geo-demographic Big Data for Assessing Effectiveness of Crowd-Funded Software
Projects: A Case Example of “QPress” (2015)
J. Bishop, in Social Media Data Extraction and Content Analysis, ed. by S. Hai-Jew. Devising
Parametric User Models for Processing and Analysing Social Media Data to Inﬂuence User
Behaviour: Using Quantitative and Qualitative Analysis of Social Media Data (IGI Global,
Hershey, PA, 2017), pp. 1–41
J. Bishop, M.M.H. Goode, in Gamiﬁcation for Human Factors Integration: Social, Educational,
and Psychological Issues, ed. by J. Bishop. Towards a Subjectively Devised Parametric User
Model for Analysing and Inﬂuencing Behaviour Online Using Gamiﬁcation: A Review and
Model (IGI Global, Hershey, PA, 2014), pp. 80–95
A.P. Bochner, On ﬁrst-person narrative scholarship: Autoethnography as acts of meaning. Narrat.
Inq. 22(1), 155–164 (2012)
B. Brown, M. Chui, J. Manyika, Are you ready for the era of ‘big data’. McKinsey Quart. 4, 24–35
(2011)
F. Cornali, S. Tirocchi, in Human Capital Formation and ICT: An Analysis of Education Policies.
International Conference on Teaching and Learning (IASK 2010), Siviglia, ES. pp. 201–214,
2010
J. Davidson, The Learning Country: A Comprehensive Education and Lifelong Learning Pro-
gramme to 2010 in Wales No. (G/128/01–02) (The National Assembly for Wales, Cardiff, GB,
2001)
F.E. DeHart, Learning styles today: Implications for graduate library education, 1975
M. Dyson, My story in a profession of stories: auto ethnography–an empowering methodology for
educators. Aust. J. Teach. Educ. 32(1), n1 (2007)
P. Eickmann, A. Kolb, D. Kolb, Designing learning. Manag. Des., 241–247 (2004)
D.R. Garrison, H. Kanuka, Blended learning: uncovering its transformative potential in higher
education. Internet High. Educ. 7(2), 95–105 (2004)
P. Goodyear, M. de Laat, V. Lally, Using pattern languages to mediate theory-praxis conversations
in design for networked learning. ALT-J Res. Learn. Technol. 14(3), 211–223 (2006)
I. Hanraets, J. Hulsebosch, M. de Laat, Experiences of pioneers facilitating teacher networks for
professional development. Educ. Media Int. 48(2), 85–99 (2011)
D. Hayano, Auto-ethnography: paradigms, problems, and prospects. Hum. Organ. 38(1), 99–104
(1979)
A. Heinze, C.T. Procter, Reﬂections on the use of blended learning. Paper presented at the
Education in a Changing Environment, Manchester, GB, 2004
L. Hendrickson, R.H. Jokela, J. Gilman, S. Croymans, M. Marczak, V. Zuiker, et al., The viability
of podcasts in extension education: Financial education for college students. J. Ext. 48(4),
4FEA7 (2010)
B. Holmes, J. Sime, Online learning communities for teachers’ continuous professional develop-
ment: case study of an eTwinning learning event. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 8th
International Conference on Networked Learning, 2012
H.M. Hutchins, D. Hutchison, Cross-disciplinary contributions to e-learning design: a tripartite
design model. J. Work. Learn. 20(5), 364–380 (2008)
D.A. Kolb, Learning styles and disciplinary differences. The Modern American College, 232–255
(1981)
A. Labrinidis, H. Jagadish, Challenges and opportunities with big data. Proceedings of the VLDB
Endowment 5(12), 2032–2033 (2012)
O. Malgonde, A. Bhattacherjee, Innovating using big data: A social capital perspective. Paper
presented at the Twentieth Americas Conference on Information Systems (Savannah, GA, 2014)
J.T. Ralph, Annual report No. 1996 (Foster’s Brewing Group Limited, Southbank, AU, 1996)
M. Reddy, Using CU-seeme video conferening via the information superhighway to support
distance learning of the ACE initiative at level 12 (Technical) (University of Glamorgan,
Treforest, GB, 1997a)

The Role of Data in the Evaluation of Networked Learning Effectiveness...
157
M. Reddy, in The 2nd BP International Conference on Students as Tutors and Mentors. Using the
information superhighway to support the ACE initiative at level 12 (GB, London, 1997b)
D.T. Schuster, L.D. Grant, N. Moskowitz, Teaching Jewish adults. Ultimate Jewish Teacher’s
Handbook, 140–163 (2003)
S. Scimeca, P. Dumitru, M. Durando, A. Gilleran, A. Joyce, R. Vuorikari, European schoolnet:
Enabling school networking. Eur. J. Educ. 44(4), 475–492 (2009)
G. Taddeo, S. Tirocchi, in Didactic strategies and technologies for education: Incorporating
advancements, ed. by P. M. Pumilia-Gnarini, E. Favaron, E. Pacetti, J. Bishop, L. Guerra.
Learning in a “Classi 2.0” classroom: First results from an empirical research in the italian
context (IGI Global, Hershey, PA, 2012), pp. 57–67
P.D. Turman, Coaches’ immediacy behaviors as predictors of athletes’ perceptions of satisfaction
and team cohesion. West. J. Commun. 72(2), 162–179 (2008)
P. Valiathan, Blended learning models. Learning Circuits, 2002
Vuorikari, R., Berlanga, A., Cachia, R., Cao, Y., Fetter, S., Gilleran, A., et al., in ICT-Based
School Collaboration, Teachers’ Networks and their Opportunities for Teachers’ Professional
Development-A Case Study on eTwinning. Advances in web-based learning-ICWL 2011
(Springer, 2011), pp. 112–121
S.L. Woerner, B.H. Wixom, Big data: extending the business strategy toolbox. J. Inf. Technol. 30,
60–62 (2015)

Part IV
Applied Technologies for Data Analytics

Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital
Humanities
Ryan L. Boyd
Abstract In the digital humanities, it has been particularly difﬁcult to establish
the psychological properties of a person or group of people in an objective,
reliable manner. Traditionally, the attempt to understand an author’s psychological
makeup has been primarily (if not exclusively) accomplished through subjective
interpretation, qualitative analysis, and speculation. In the world of empirical psy-
chological research, however, the past two decades have witnessed an explosion of
computerized language analysis techniques that objectively measure psychological
features of the individual. Indeed, by using modern text analysis methods, it is now
possible to quickly and accurately extract information about people—personalities,
individual differences, social processes, and even their mental health—all through
the words that people write and speak. This chapter serves as a primer for
researchers interested in learning about how language can provide powerful insights
into the minds of others via well-established and easy-to-use psychometric methods.
First, this chapter provides a general background on language analysis in the ﬁeld
of psychology, followed by an introduction to modern methods and developments
within the ﬁeld of psychological text analysis. Finally, a solid foundation to
psychological text analysis is provided in the form of an overview of research
spanning hundreds of studies from labs all over the world.
Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities
The digital revolution has transformed the way that we interact with virtually
everything. Televisions have built-in WIFI cards to stream media from sources all
over the world. New refrigerator models can take pictures of their own contents with
a digital camera and send them to your mobile phone. You can learn about world
events, connect with your friends, and buy groceries with a few lazy swipes of the
ﬁnger before you even get out of bed. For many of us, the technological shift has
happened so quickly that we are still diligently attempting to understand just how
R.L. Boyd ()
Department of Psychology, The University of Texas at Austin, 108 E. Dean Keeton St., Stop
A8000, Austin, TX 78712-1043, USA
e-mail: ryanboyd@utexas.edu
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
S. Hai-Jew (ed.), Data Analytics in Digital Humanities, Multimedia Systems
and Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54499-1_7
161

162
R.L. Boyd
drastically and diversely our world has changed in such a short amount of time. For
many of the science ﬁction fans out there, these changes have not happened nearly
fast enough (“Where are those hoverboards, anyway?”).
One of the most obvious ways that advances in technology have impacted our
daily lives is that we interact with information in completely new, unprecedented
ways. This is particularly clear when considering how we both create and consume
information. We are awash in human-created data 24/7, which can be seen as a great
liberation of information or a scourge to quiet minds, depending on your point of
view. People on both sides of the fence, however, generally agree that maximizing
the beneﬁt of our new abundance of information requires new ways of optimizing,
managing, and processing data.
A New World of Research
Rather than create a great divide between ﬁelds of inquiry, the modern technological
boom has instead helped to bring disparate areas of study closer together. The
introduction of computational techniques has been particularly useful in the social
sciences during this era of information. In the ﬁeld of Psychology, we are primarily
interested in the fundamentals of observable human thought, behaviors, and experi-
ence. Traditionally, psychology researchers have had to invite people into laboratory
settings and prod them with stimuli and experimental conditions, hoping to coax
real-world psychological processes out of them in a highly tedious, controlled
manner. Alternatively, we could engage in painstaking ﬁeld research by grabbing
our pencils and paper, venturing outside, and carefully documenting what we could
observe and survey from the population. These techniques are still incredibly useful
for (and, in fact, central to) the careful, empirical study of psychological phenomena.
However, with the proliferation of the internet and other digital technologies, we are
ﬁnding not only new opportunities to study ourselves, but new methods to do so.
One of the most fascinating psychological methods to arise from the merging
of disciplines has been the automated analysis of language. To many, this phrase
may conjure thoughts of intricate, computer-generated linguistic diagrams or highly
complex speech recognition programs. These are certainly triumphs of technology
and deserve praise in their own right. Potentially even more fascinating to readers
of this volume, however, are the scientiﬁc studies that have found that the common
words a person writes, speaks, and types can be deeply revealing of their underlying
psychology. Imagine a world where a few clicks on a computer can provide
profound insights into whether a person is being authentic, how someone orients
themselves socially, or even if a person is suicidal. You might be surprised to
ﬁnd that you are already living in this world. Decades of rigorous, empirical
psychological research has found that there are profound links between the both
content and style of a person’s language and how they think, behave, and feel.
The merging of psychology and computer science has been a driving force of such
discoveries.

Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities
163
The goal of this chapter is to introduce to you three broad ideas from psy-
chological research: (1) language analysis in the ﬁeld of psychology, (2) two
well-established techniques of automated psychological language analysis, and (3)
an overview of psychological research that has successfully used automated text
analysis. Some of the research that is introduced in this chapter has already been
explored in the context of the Digital Humanities, however, the opportunities for
future work are essentially limitless.
Importantly, the psychological analysis of text is conceptually quite different
from those provided by techniques often referred to as “distant reading” (e.g.,
Moretti 2013; Ross 2014) and other natural language processing methodologies.
The empirical methods and research discussed in this chapter are not necessarily
about understanding texts themselves, modeling language structure, or capturing
relationships between written works. Instead, these methods are emphatically
psychological in their nature and applications. The analysis of language from
this perspective allows us to understand the individual behind a given text—their
motivations, preoccupations, emotional states, and other facets of their mental
universe.
Language Analysis in Psychology
Language has been of long-standing intrigue in the ﬁeld of Psychology. Dewey
(1910) broadly philosophized about language as a vehicle for thought, and Freud
(e.g., Freud 1891) theorized that people’s words could provide insights into their
emotions and hidden, deep-seated motives. While many of the speciﬁc theories
from the psychodynamic movement have been modiﬁed or altogether abandoned,
the overarching ideas about links between language and psychology took hold in
empirical psychological research. In the middle of the twentieth century, researchers
began codifying word clusters into “dictionaries” that could be used to assess
people’s needs for things like afﬁliation, achievement, and power (e.g., Lasswell
et al. 1952). For example, people who used relatively high numbers of words like
“win,” “success,” and “goal” were thought to be generally motivated by a striving
for accomplishment. In fact, several lines of research often found such predictions
to be true (e.g., McClelland et al. 1953).
The dictionary-based approach to measuring meaningful psychological pro-
cesses continued to develop as mainframe computers were introduced in the 1960s.
The focus of psychological text analysis swayed between studying culture and mass
media versus individual motivations (e.g., Stone et al. 1966), but eventually returned
to a more idiographic approach that focused on clinically relevant topics such as
anxiety, schizophrenia, and coping in therapy (e.g., Martindale 1975; Mergenthaler
1996; Weintraub 1989).
A considerable drawback to most of the automated text analysis systems
designed in the latter half of the twentieth century is that they were often wholly
opaque. Many systems involved complicated rulesets that were difﬁcult to interpret,

164
R.L. Boyd
idiosyncratic systems that prioritized certain words over others, or dictionaries that
were rooted in highly speciﬁc theories of psychology that did not extend well outside
of speciﬁc use-cases. A system of analyzing texts for a speciﬁc neo-Freudian process
had little use when researching extraversion, for example, and an obtuse system
that involved weighting various words made it difﬁcult to evaluate the accuracy
of a language-based measure for something like self-esteem from a psychological
perspective. In effect, the ambitiousness of such systems proved to be a major
hindrance and point of fault rather than providing accessible techniques that could
be used to study human psychology broadly.
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count
The impact of realizing that language can be quantiﬁed to reveal clues about a
person’s underlying psychology is difﬁcult to overstate. The more that a person
used words from certain, veriﬁed categories of language (such as words about anger
or family), the more these concepts appeared to be a central dimension of that
person’s psychology.1 However, in the late 1990s, psychologists were starting to
discover that there was more to language than its content. Up to that point, virtually
every text analysis technique in psychology focused on what we call content words
(also referred to as “open class” words because they can take many different forms,
such as “run,” “running,” and “runs”). Content words convey some kind of meaning
(e.g., who, what, where, etc.) and constitute the majority of the words in a person’s
vocabulary. Consider the sentence:
Natalie drove to the store and bought some coffee.
The content words in this sentence give us the information of who (Natalie), what
(drove, bought, coffee), and where (store). By looking only at the content words in
the above sentence, we can get a fairly good sense of what is being said.
But what about the other words, like “to,” “the,” “and,” and “some”? These have
traditionally been treated as garbage words that convey no useful information—such
words were thought to exist merely as an artifact of language that joins together the
“important” words. If we look just at the grammatical words in the above sentence
(“to the and some”), we get no clues as to what the sentence is about, what is being
conveyed, etc.—virtually no useful information at all.
However, researchers such as George Miller (1995) were beginning to ﬁnd that
these small, meaningless words tend to be processed in different areas of the brain
than content words and appear to serve other psychological purposes. This type
1Note that while it may seem trivial to create new categories of words to measure a psychological
process, it can be an unspeakably difﬁcult task in practice. Determining how speciﬁc words are
often used out in the “real world,” establishing whether certain words are related to psychologically
meaningful processes, and creating dictionaries that possess adequate statistical properties is
deceptively tricky. Many researchers have spent years working on word dictionaries that have
ultimately proven to be meaningless.

Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities
165
of work hinted that there may be more to these function words (also called “closed
class” words) than what we had initially thought. Indeed, researchers began noticing
that the way that people used function words often signaled a person’s psychological
state as much as, and in some cases more than, their content words.
In essence, while we knew that what a person says can be important for inferring
psychological patterns, we were beginning to learn that how a person says something
can be just as telling. Additionally, because function words are generated in an
essentially automatic manner by the brain in order to link meaningful words
together, the way that function words are used is often unconscious. In other words,
we seldom stop to think about which function words to use when speaking or
writing—they are quietly generated from a very deep level of the mind.
At the same time as these realizations were being made, early versions of desktop
applications were being developed to automatically analyze text in a more user-
friendly manner. One of the ﬁrst mainstream examples of these applications was
named Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC, pronounced the same as “Luke”;
Pennebaker and Francis 1999). LIWC has gone through several iterations since its
creation, with the latest version being LIWC2015 (Pennebaker et al. 2015). At its
core, LIWC consists of two parts. The heart of the application is its dictionary that,
in many ways, is similar to the dictionaries of older text analysis paradigms.
The LIWC dictionary contains word-to-category mappings for around 80 cate-
gories of words, including both common content words (e.g., words about family,
emotions, biological processes) and function words (e.g., pronouns, conjunctions,
articles, etc.). For example, the “cognitive processes” category contains words
like “think,” “understand,” and “analyze,” and the “articles” category contains the
words “a,” “an,” and “the.” Additionally, similar techniques have been used to
translate various versions of the LIWC dictionary to multiple languages over the
years, allowing researchers to conduct parallel work across different languages and
cultures.2
The principal strength of the LIWC dictionary is bolstered by the fact that it was
carefully developed using established, standard psychometric approaches such as
validation on external psychological data, as well as techniques that ensure high
internal reliability from a statistical perspective (see Pennebaker et al. 2015).
If the dictionary is the heart of LIWC, the program itself is the brain of the
whole operation. The LIWC2015 software is, in a way, deceptively simple in how
it works. The program operates by reading in batches of text ﬁles (e.g., plain text
“.txt” ﬁles, MS Ofﬁce “.docx” ﬁles, etc.), then counts the percentage of words that
belong to each of the LIWC dictionary categories. For example, if 2 out of every
10 words in a text is a “social” word, and 1 out of every 10 words is a “cognitive
process” word, the text will be scored as 20% social and 10% cognitive in nature.
2At the time of this writing, various translations of the LIWC dictionary exist in Spanish,
Dutch, German, Italian, French, Korean, Chinese, Portuguese, and Turkish, among others. These
translations are typically available from their respective translators rather than the LIWC creators,
and most have accompanying peer-reviewed publications that evaluate the psychometric properties
of the translated dictionaries.

166
R.L. Boyd
Fig. 1 Example of output provided by the LIWC2015 application. Output is provided in a table
that shows ﬁlenames, summary measures (e.g., word count, average words per sentence), and
percentage of words that belong to each category (e.g., percent of words reﬂecting anxiety,
cognitive processing, tactile perception, etc.). LIWC output can be exported as one of many several
standard ﬁle formats (CSV, Excel spreadsheets, etc.) for use in statistical packages such as R or
SPSS
This task is done for each of the
80 categories in the LIWC dictionary (some
other summary measures are calculated as well, such as word count, punctuation
use, and so on), and output is produced in the form of a spreadsheet (see Fig. 1).
Additionally, the LIWC2015 application is fairly open-ended—users can create and
use their own custom dictionaries with the software to code for categories of words
that are relevant to their own research interests.
The very basic “word counting” approach has been found to work extremely
well across time and contexts for two primary reasons. First, as discussed earlier,
we repeatedly ﬁnd that when a person uses higher rates of certain topics/categories
of language, they tend to show psychological patterns that correspond to their
language. Second, the “word counting” approach of LIWC2015 takes advantage
of the probabilistic properties of how people naturally use language—that is, people
tend to use language in meaningful clusters. An angry person typically does not
just use one or two anger words, they use constellations of words that express
(or hint at) their anger. Someone who is actively working through a problem tends
to use multiple cognitive words together as they talk or write relative to someone
who is not working through a problem, and so on.
The word counting approach does occasionally miss or misclassify a word here
and there, however, a well-made dictionary will correctly categorize words most
of the time. If a person uses the word “sad” once, it is hard to determine with a
computer program the precise meaning of the word in a single instance. Was the

Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities
167
person being sarcastic? Were they relaying the fact that someone else looks sad?
Were they talking about being not sad?3 In extremely short texts (e.g., one or two
sentences), these are very real concerns that should not be dismissed when using any
form of automated text analysis. However, when aggregating across large amounts
of text by the same person (hundreds, thousands, or tens of thousands of words),
we almost always ﬁnd that these issues are rendered moot, despite the occasionally
misclassiﬁed word (see the section in Appendix “Preparing Texts for Analysis” for
additional considerations on text preparation/word detection). Generally speaking,
then, a word counting approach that ignores things like context and intended
audience can still provide surprisingly clear insights into a person’s psychology.
Meaning Extraction: A Complementary Approach
Over the years, an incredible amount of research from labs all over the world has
demonstrated that each of the LIWC word categories exhibits distinct and often
surprising relationships with speciﬁc social and psychological processes (for a fairly
contemporary review, see Tausczik and Pennebaker 2010). Indeed, most of the
research that is introduced later in this chapter relies directly on the LIWC dictionary
for understanding how people think, feel, and behave. The LIWC dictionary does
have one commonly cited drawback, however: it requires pre-deﬁned sets of words
to make psychological inferences. In the past decade, additional language analysis
techniques have been created that are useful for inferring psychological processes in
a more inductive, or “bottom-up,” manner. In psychology, one of the most accessible
techniques that have been created is called the Meaning Extraction Method (MEM;
Chung and Pennebaker 2008).
The MEM is a way of automatically inferring what words are being used
together, essentially resulting in a dictionary of word-to-category mappings from a
collection of texts. In simple terms, this is achieved by ﬁnding words that naturally
clump into “themes” using some basic statistical techniques. In practice, the MEM
can be considered a series of steps that a researcher takes—this procedure begins
with a collection of texts and results in psychologically meaningful word clusters:
1. Identify words in a corpus of texts that are relatively common.
2. Create a table that shows which texts use which common words.
3. Statistically identify words that tend to occur together throughout the corpus.
Conceptually, the MEM is fairly simple and straight-forward. However, in
practice, there are several sub-steps that have to be completed in order to get from
3Interestingly, the negation of an emotion (e.g., “not sad”) appears to be psychologically different
from expressing the opposite of an emotion (“happy”). Research has found that people who think
along a “sadness” dimension, even if they are repeatedly saying that they are “not sad” or talking
about someone else’s sadness, are psychologically different from those who are thinking along the
lines of a different emotion altogether (Pennebaker et al. 1997).

168
R.L. Boyd
the beginning of the process to the end. Recently, our lab has released free software
called the Meaning Extraction Helper (MEH; Boyd 2016) that can automate the
majority of the MEM process, making this approach readily accessible and easy to
perform with minimal effort.
1. Identify words in a corpus of texts that are relatively common. Unlike a
dictionary-based method that considers each document in isolation, the MEM
considers a whole collection of texts at once. Like other topic modeling methods,
the MEM works this way in order to determine how words are typically used within
a given sample. As a ﬁrst step, we need to identify those words that appear in
enough different texts in order to understand not just idiosyncratic word use by
one individual, but broader patterns across different people and texts. Moreover,
when performing the MEM, we tend to care less about speciﬁc variations of words
than the concepts reﬂected by each of the words—to account for this, we can do
something called “lemmatization,” which converts words to their most basic form
(e.g., “drive,” “driving,” and “drove” are all converted to “drive”). Lemmatization is
something that the MEH software is able to do this automatically for most English
words (in addition to roughly a dozen other languages).
Once words are lemmatized, we create a list of all words and determine what
percentage of texts use each word. Once all of this information has been collected,
we decide which words we would like to omit based on what percentage of texts
include each word, typically using a minimum of somewhere around 5%. This
prevents any single text from unduly inﬂuencing our results: a single text may
contain 500 instances of the word “enantiodromia,”4 but this is hardly useful in
understanding its broad psychological properties across different people. Lastly, we
typically omit function words from our master list—because function words are
so common, they tend to co-occur with all other words, making them difﬁcult to
statistically separate into meaningful themes (see Table 1 for an example of the
frequency list generated by MEH).
2. Create a table that shows which texts use which common words. Once the
commonly used words have been selected, we need to create a dataset with this
information—this will allow us to extract common themes using some basic statis-
tical procedures. The simplest way of doing this is to score each text using a “binary”
method—that is, each text either does or does not use each word (see Table 2).
Before discussing the statistical particulars, take a close look at Table 2. By
simply looking at the 1’s in each row, one can get a decent sense of what each story is
about. Story 1 clearly contains elements about school and social concepts, possibly
a story about a school-related memory involving close relationships. Stories 3
and 5 appear to both have strong elements of time—an instinctive guess would
suggest that the authors are focused on (or attentive to) time, order of events, or
temporal sequences. The next step, listed below, is comprised of running a statistical
4To spare the curious reader from having to seek out a dictionary, “enantiodromia” refers to a
tendency for something to convert into its opposite form.

Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities
169
Table 1 Example of a frequency list generated by MEH
Word
Raw Word Frequency
Across All Texts
Percentage of Texts 
that Contain Word
the
600
100.00
a
542
98.12
life
320
67.89
school
187
53.45
time
133
35.33
people
98
21.66
year
91
8.99
day
82
6.72
family
72
5.51
friend
63
5.30
book
31
1.36
plant
15
1.21
enantiodromia
500
0.10
Note that uncommon words (even if used in high amounts by a single person) are excluded from
subsequent steps. In this table words highlighted in black will be removed from subsequent steps
because they are function words and, as the right-most column shows, will co-occur with virtually
all other words in the sample (e.g., every single text includes the word “the,” so it co-occurs
with literally all other words). Words highlighted in gray will be excluded from subsequent steps
because they appear in a small percentage of texts, even if they are highly common in terms of
their raw frequency.
Table 2 An example of Step 2 in the Meaning Extraction Method: a binary table that reﬂects
which texts used common words in a corpus
Text
Life
School
Time
People
Year
Day
Family
Friend
Story 1
1
1
1
1
1
Story 2
1
1
Story 3
1
1
1
Story 4
1
1
1
Story 5
1
1
1
1
: : :
The left-most column shows which text is being considered, and each row highlights which words
were present in each text. Note that for particularly long texts, other scoring methods may be
preferable (e.g., percentage of text comprised of each word, known as a “verbose” score)
procedure that does a rather good job of extracting themes in a way that coincides
with our intuitive judgments, albeit in a fairly broad manner.
3. Statistically identify words that tend to occur together. Conceptually, one can
think of a Principal Components Analysis (PCA) as a method for ﬁnding groups
of correlations—in essence, ﬁnding groups of words that tend to be used together.
Fortunately, one does not have to be statistically savvy to run this analysis, as most
statistical packages (such as SPSS and R) have ways to run a PCA rather easily.
For our example above, a PCA would likely ﬁnd that the words “time,” “year,” and
“day” form a broader, meaningful theme about “time,” and the concepts of “school,”
“people,” and “friend” appear to be part of a broader social theme (see Table 3).

170
R.L. Boyd
Table 3 Example results
from a Principal Components
Analysis performed in
Table 2
Factor 1 (“time”)
Factor 2 (“social”)
Day
0.67
0.09
Year
0.58
0.02
Time
0.42
0.11
People
0.03
0.88
School
0.04
0.75
Friend
0.12
0.70
Life
0.16
0.00
Family
0.09
0.01
Technically, all words will have a ‘loading’ onto
each of the themes extracted from a corpus of texts.
Usually, a manually chosen cutoff is used (typically
around 0.10 for very large samples and 0.25 for
relatively small samples) to determine which words
belong to which themes. In this table, shaded values
indicate the theme onto which each word best loads
using a conservative cutoff value. Words may also
commonly load onto multiple themes.
What the PCA has done for us, then, is to identify 2 clusters of words that can be
thought of as new categories of language to measure for psychological purposes. If
we look back to Step 2, we ﬁnd that these word clusters converge with our previous
intuitions.
What Do We Do with these New Themes?
Ultimately, the steps that comprise the MEM are designed to help identify themes
across our texts that can then be measured using the LIWC-style word counting
approach. In some cases, identifying which common themes exist is telling in its
own right—perhaps we are looking to discover common themes across international
treaties to better understand the topics that they deal with, or what themes are most
prevalent in famous jazz lyrics. However, as we have learned, these themes are often
psychologically meaningful as well. By using a LIWC-style approach to quantifying
each theme across texts, we can search for psychological patterns within or between
individuals (e.g., did an author objectively ﬁxate more on nature in earlier versus
later works? How do time and culture inﬂuence the narrative of war?; see the section
in Appendix “Working with the MEM and MEM Results” for additional notes on
quantifying MEM themes in texts). In the coming sections, studies that have used
the MEM to better understand psychological proﬁles of individuals across several
types of research questions will be described.

Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities
171
The Statistical Analysis of LIWC and MEM Output
Once you have performed the above methods, you are left staring at spreadsheets full
of rows of text names and hundreds of columns containing numeric representations
of psychological dimensions. What does one do with all of those numbers? All of the
methods described above are inherently quantitative in some form or another. While
the quantiﬁed output of these procedures can still be used to facilitate qualitative
psychological insights, they are particularly well-suited to statistical modeling and
analyses. Given that each column of the LIWC and MEM datasets is numeric
vectors, language-based psychological measures can ﬁt into virtually any statistical
algorithm that someone would use for any other quantiﬁed metric. How language-
based measures of psychology are put to best use will vary widely depending on
your research, goals, and interests. Like other types of measures and analyses, it is
often important to understand the properties of your variables so that they may be
optimally beneﬁcial to your own work.
In terms of ensuring that your numerical data is of adequate quality, the primary
statistical considerations in psychological text analyses typically revolve around the
size of each text that you have processed—beyond this, most word counting methods
are rather forgiving. Because most word counting methods deal with percentages,
a minimum word count of 25 or 50 words per text is typically recommended.5
For example, the sentence “That was a good doughnut” contains positive emotion
words (good) and ingestion words (doughnut) both at the same rate: 1 out of 5,
or 20%. This is an extremely high number for both categories: positive emotion
words are typically in the 2–8% range, and ingestion words typically occur far
less frequently (less than 1% of words in most cases). In larger bodies of text,
the behaviors of language patterns tend to smooth out, resulting in more accurate
and useful distributions of psychological categories. Omitting texts with too few
words is equally important when running MEM analyses: if texts contain only 5
or 10 words on average, and half of these are function words, it becomes difﬁcult
to discover meaningful co-occurrence patterns unless you have an extremely large
number of observations (e.g., a few hundred thousand texts).
Once language has been quantiﬁed and texts containing too few words have
been dropped, an appropriate statistical model must be selected. The selection and
execution of statistical models is usually informed by the nature of one’s data and
research design, and a full consideration of model selection is far beyond the scope
of this chapter. However, it is important to note that the most actionable insights
from psychological text analysis usually require transparent statistical models. In
other words, if a statistical model is relatively easy to interpret (e.g., a simple
Pearson correlation or a between-groups ANOVA), understanding the meaningful
5The general rule of thumb is that more data is almost always better. Data quantity is the foundation
of both reliability and accuracy when quantifying psychological processes, which can be incredibly
difﬁcult to assess using any research method. The same holds true when using language to extract
psychological information.

172
R.L. Boyd
psychological patterns is far easier to come by than when using powerhouse
algorithms that are largely impenetrable (e.g., a support vector machine with radial
basis function kernels, deep-layer convolutional neural networks).
The use of powerful but opaque statistical techniques has rapidly become a seri-
ous problem for a number of studies that exist in the computational social sciences,
particularly when using language to model human psychology. Many published
studies are technically impressive from a Computer Science or Information Sciences
perspective, but are ultimately useless to social scientists who seek to understand
the nature of ﬁndings (e.g., “Did X cause Y?”; “How does X vary as a function of
Y?”). In other words, being able to predict a phenomenon with a statistical model
is conceptually quite different from being able to understand it and its implications.
For example, virtually all of the research described in the next section has been made
possible by the use of simple statistical models that are easily interpreted, resulting
in valuable theoretical insights into the human mind.
The predict-versus-understand tradeoff is a major one that delineates most
psychological text analysis techniques from those more frequently used in
computational linguistics, the information sciences, and related ﬁelds. Ultimately,
statistical decisions most often come down to properly understanding the intended
goals of a research project and ﬁeld-speciﬁc standards/traditions. A mismatch
between the stated goals of a study and the domain expertise required to understand
what types of decisions should be made during statistical analyses can too often
result in dazzling statistical models that offer no insights beyond “X plus 50 other
variables can predict Y”.6
Psychological Research Using LIWC and MEM
In the past two decades, an incredible amount of research using both LIWC and
MEM has been done that ﬁnds robust links between language use and psychological
patterns—far too much to cover in a single chapter. What is presented below should
not be taken as a comprehensive overview of this body of work. Instead, the goal
of this section is to introduce you to some of the broader areas of psychological
research that have been studied using automated language analysis, providing
speciﬁc studies and experiments as examples of this work.
6These comments are in no way intended to disparage or discourage the use of heavy-hitting
statistical algorithms and machine learning procedures. In fact, the author of this chapter uses
these analytic techniques with absolute regularity in his own work, and he enjoys few things in life
more than the intricacy of well-crafted, complex models (why yes, he is a huge hit at parties—how
did you know?). However, the importance of considering tradeoffs between prediction power and
being able to describe/understand one’s model in practical terms cannot be overstated.

Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities
173
Language and Individual Differences
When we read a text, we are often trying to get a sense of who the author is as a
person. How do they think? Are they young or old? What does their day-to-day life
look like? Are they nice, independent, quick to anger, or deviously calculating?
When asking these questions, we often have to rely upon our own subjective
experiences and feelings to make evaluations of other people; this is especially
true when all that we have to go on is a person’s language. The central question,
then, is “do different types of people talk in different ways?” Can we reliably infer
characteristics of a person based solely on the words they use? As is discussed in
this section, the answer turns out to be a resounding “yes.”
These types of evaluations fall under the broader umbrella of individual differ-
ences, a large area of research that tries to understand the various ways in which
people are psychologically different from one another, yet relatively consistent over
time. Individual differences not only include personality evaluations like neuroti-
cism and extraversion, but also include things such as gender, age, life experiences,
and so on—things that differ between individuals but are not necessarily caused by
internal psychology processes.
Language and Traditional Self-Report Personality Measures
In psychology, we generally refer to personality as collections of thoughts, behav-
iors, and emotions that are indicative of a person across time and situations.
When we say that an individual is neurotic, for example, we really mean to say
that they exhibit a cluster of speciﬁc, stable psychological patterns over time. A
neurotic person tends to have difﬁculty regulating their emotions, they typically
interpret ambiguous information as negative, and they consistently experience
anxiety at above-average levels on a day-to-day basis. Personality descriptors like
“neuroticism,” then, do not refer to “real” things, but instead act as a sort of a
shorthand term that we use to refer to these types of stable psychological patterns
and clusters.
Early work on the consistency of language found that a person’s language, like
their personality, showed reliable patterns between multiple time points (Pennebaker
and King 1999). Just as a person who is extroverted today is likely to be extroverted
next week, next month, and next year, so too does a person’s word use remain
relatively constant over time. If someone uses high rates of conjunctions relative
to other people today, they will most likely use high rates of conjunctions across
different times and situations. This proved to be an invaluable ﬁnding for language
research as it demonstrated that language use could be used to detect those stable
psychological patterns that broadly characterize a person. In practice, what this
means is that when we scientiﬁcally establish a link between a certain measure
of language (e.g., use of negations such as “isn’t” and “aren’t”) and personality
(e.g., impulsivity), we can infer certain stable aspects of a person indirectly based

174
R.L. Boyd
exclusively on how they write or talk. That is to say, by measuring the rate at which
someone uses negations, we can statistically estimate the degree to which they
are also impulsive. Much recent research has found that it is possible to estimate
a person’s personality using LIWC- and MEM-based measures, albeit with some
caveats.
An important point about studying personality is that psychologists typically
assess an individual’s personality using self-report questionnaires. In a standard
social science research setting, self-report questionnaires can be an ideal personality
assessment tool: they are easy to ﬁll out, rather fast to complete, and require no fuss
from the test-taker or the researcher.7 Unfortunately, the self-report paradigm is of
limited usefulness when conducting several other types of work. Until backwards
time travel is invented (presumably this will come shortly after the aforementioned
hoverboards), we cannot present questionnaires to historical ﬁgures such as Francis
Beaumont or Franklin Pierce and politely ask them to “ﬁll in the bubbles” at their
convenience. Other sources of personality information can be problematic: observer
reports of historical ﬁgures tend to be skewed, riddled with myth, and spotty,
particularly as we look further back in history. Fortunately, the very foundations
of personality (stable trends in thought, feeling, and behaviors) tend to be encoded
in human language, allowing us to establish personality—language links and,
subsequently, make scientiﬁcally grounded estimates of an individual’s general
psychological makeup.
When discussing personality, the most commonly used theoretical framework is
known as the “Big 5” of personality (neuroticism, extroversion, openness to expe-
rience, conscientiousness, and agreeableness; see John et al. 2008). Most language
research on personality that uses self-reports attempts to correlate language use with
peoples’ responses to Big 5 questionnaires, and the majority of these studies use the
psychological measures generated by LIWC. Pennebaker and King (1999) initially
found correlations between Big 5 personality measures and the language of students
writing different types of stories and narratives. For example, people scoring high
on self-reported neuroticism use fewer positive emotion words and high rates of
negative emotion words, as we would expect, and participants who score higher on
extroversion tend to use more social words. Since then, several other researchers
have found that LIWC measures of language can be used to estimate someone’s
personality (Yarkoni 2010; Komisin and Guinn 2012), and some research has even
been extended to automatically assessing the personality of ﬁctional characters
based on their language (e.g., Flekova and Gurevych 2015; Liberman 2015). Most
research has found that LIWC-based approaches to estimating personality perform
well above average, even when simple statistical models are used (e.g., Mairesse
et al. 2007).
7Note, however, that self-report measures of personality are not without their own drawbacks and
imperfections. In order to accurately answer a self-report question about yourself, you must have
both accurate information about yourself in a given domain and a willingness/ability to make
accurate self-reports. The literature on self-report biases and pitfalls is rather extensive but beyond
the scope of this chapter.

Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities
175
Other research using the MEM has also found patterns of word use that
can be used to understand personality as well. In a study that extracted themes
from individual writing samples, Chung and Pennebaker (2008) found common
social themes such as sociability (comprised of words like “independent,” “fun,”
and “conﬁdent”), maturity (“mature,” “successful,” “caring”), and psychological
stability (“satisﬁed,” “healthy,” “positive”). When quantifying these themes in
peoples’ writing, the researchers found that the degree to which each person invoked
these themes was related to how they scored on self-reports of the Big 5. For
example, people who used more words from the sociability theme tended to score
higher on agreeableness, and people who wrote using words from the maturity
theme tended to score higher on conscientiousness. This work revealed that even
the common themes people talk about (and the way that people talk about them)
can be telling of a person’s personality, sometimes counterintuitively. Because the
MEM extracts themes based on common content words, this approach can also be
used to establish relevant lists of words to watch for when manually trying to infer
personality based on an author’s texts.
It is important to note that, while a considerable amount of research has been
done attempting to link self-report questionnaires of personality to language use,
this approach often results in weaker ﬁndings than studies that use other types of
individual differences data. In the remaining portion of this section, the studies
presented will generally focus on language use and its link to other forms of data,
such as behavioral data (performance-based measures, such as test performance,
and reports of speciﬁc actions in which people engage) and objective self-reports
that are typically unbiased (e.g., age).
Language across the Lifespan
Pennebaker and Stone (2003) conducted two studies examining the effect of age
on how people write. The researchers analyzed the writings of authors who wrote
multiple works throughout their lifetime (e.g., Alcott, Austen, Shakespeare, Yeats)
and found several consistent patterns. As authors aged, they tended to use more
positive emotion words and future tense words. Aging was also found to be related
to the use of fewer negative emotion words, past-tense verbs, and self-references.
A second study of non-professional writing by psychology study participants found
the same patterns, and these results converge with other research on age-related
psychological changes (e.g., Watson 2000), as well as other studies of age-related
shifts in language use (e.g., Schler et al. 2006).
Language and Core Values
Recently, Boyd et al. (2015) conducted a large-scale analysis of how a person’s
values are expressed in the language that they use. Using the MEM, they ﬁrst asked
participants to write about their core values (those principles that guide their lives,

176
R.L. Boyd
decisions, and behaviors), as well as their common behaviors. In their work, they
found that they were able to extract word clusters that corresponded to distinct
values, such as religion, empathy, and personal growth. Importantly, they found
that the value-relevant themes that people used were strongly predictive of people’s
actual behaviors.
After establishing word-to-value mappings, the researchers conducted a large-
scale analysis of Facebook users to explore the degree to which value-relevant
language was present in unprompted writings by the general public. The results from
their second study supported those of their ﬁrst—greater use of value-related themes
was broadly predictive of what types of behaviors people engaged in (and reported
engaging in) online. People who invoked the religion core value theme were more
likely to attend church, and individuals who used words from the empathy theme
were more likely share messages in support of cancer awareness and friendship.
These types of language-based value—behavior links pave the way for assessing
the values that a person holds central in their lives from their writings and verbal
speech. Because the researchers established value-relevant themes using the MEM,
these word lists can be applied to new domains in novel ways. The fact that a
person’s casual, innocuous words can be used to predict speciﬁc, concrete day-to-
day behaviors may strike some readers as rather unnerving. Indeed, such ﬁndings
highlight the power of psychological text analysis methods.
Language and Thinking Styles
In judgment and decision-making research, decades of work has found that different
individuals tend to solve problems and make decisions in two broad ways: (1) slowly
and deliberately, or (2) quickly and intuitively (see Kahneman 2011; also sometimes
referred to as “rational” vs. “experiential” decision-making, respectively). These
“decision-making styles” tend to be fairly static over time; someone who is an
“intuitive” decision-maker today will tend to make decisions in the same way across
time and contexts (Fetterman and Robinson 2013). Rational decision-makers tend
to be highly analytic, do well in school, and can sometimes be perceived as socially
cold or distant (a relatively common television/movie cliché that, as it turns out,
has some basis in reality). On the other hand, experiential decision-makers tend to
rely more on their emotions, social events, and narratives to make decisions, and are
typically perceived as being more socially open and warm than rational decision-
makers.
By analyzing function words with LIWC, Pennebaker et al. (2014) were able
to develop a language-based measure of thinking styles named the Categorical-
Dynamic Index (CDI) that corresponds to how people make decisions and mentally
engage with the world. At the high end of the CDI are people who primarily use high
rates of articles and prepositions while, conversely, people on the other end of the
CDI tend to use lots of pronouns, negations, adverbs, and other types of function
words. Using the CDI, Pennebaker et al. (2014) were able to predict measures
pertaining to college performance, such as student GPA and pre-college SAT scores,

Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities
177
as a function of students’ admission essays. Using the same measure, Jordan and
Pennebaker (2016) found striking differences between the 2016 Democratic and
Republican US presidential candidates during debates, with Democratic candidates
generally scoring on the “rational” side of the CDI and Republican candidates
scoring on the “experiential” side.
Authorship Attribution Using Psychological Analyses
The LIWC application and dictionary are used regularly to help understand authors
precisely because of the stable nature of language use by individuals. By building
on the ﬁndings showing that a person’s linguistic patterns are markers of their
underlying psychology, and that both exhibit relatively static trends over time, it
is theoretically possible to aggregate several language-based measures of a person’s
psychology into a “psychological ﬁngerprint” that is unique to them. For example,
Petrie et al. (2008) used LIWC measures of the Beatles’ lyrics to identify the unique
psychology of each Beatles member, and also found which songwriter’s style was
predominant in Beatles songs that were written collaboratively.8
What do we do when the authorship of a work is unknown or disputed? Over
the years, several methods of automated stylometry have been developed to try
to establish authorship using word distributions (e.g., Juola 2006; Koppel et al.
2008). Many of these methods are rather effective, however, they can conceptually
oversimplify the individual by reducing them to single words rather than human
beings with complex mental lives. By combining several of the measures outlined
in this chapter (e.g., LIWC-based measures of personality, the CDI, MEM-derived
themes), Boyd and Pennebaker (2015) were able to statistically establish the
likelihood that Shakespeare authored the long-disputed play Double Falsehood.
In their study, Boyd and Pennebaker (2015) found that three possible authors—
William Shakespeare, John Fletcher, and Lewis Theobald—all had highly distinct
psychological patterns of language use across their respective solo works. In fact,
each author’s psychological ﬁngerprint was so unique that all three authors could be
reliably distinguished with near-100% accuracy using exclusively language-based
psychological measures. After establishing each author’s unique psychological
attributes, the researchers were able to automatically extract a new psychological
composite from the play Double Falsehood, then statistically compare the disputed
play to each author’s unique psychological ﬁngerprint. Their ﬁndings overwhelm-
8Another interesting analysis of the Beatles using LIWC was performed by Kasser (2013), who
explored the interpretation of the song Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds from a psychological
perspective. While the song is often cited as being overtly about drug use, Kasser (2013) found
that the psychological ﬁngerprint of the song was generally quite similar to other lyrics authored
by John Lennon. Kasser did ﬁnd linguistic markers consistent with drug experience descriptions,
however, Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds also scored relatively high on language measures that
pertain to distancing oneself from painful experiences, such as a lack of emotional content and
very few markers of “here and now” thinking (sometimes called “psychological distancing”).

178
R.L. Boyd
ingly supported the notion that Shakespeare was the primary author of the original
play, with modest contributions from John Fletcher and likely later editing on
the part of Lewis Theobald. Additionally, because the language-based measures
were principally revealing of the authors’ respective personalities, the researchers
were able to compare the psychological ﬁngerprints to historical accounts of each
author. Boyd and Pennebaker’s (2015) analysis largely converged with historical
and observer reports, such as Fletcher having been a highly social individual and
Theobald having been highly intelligent but cold and confrontational.
Language and Mental Health
Given that much of the early psychological interest in language dealt with disorders
and mental health issues, it is perhaps not surprising that much of the modern work
using automated text analysis also began in this area. By analyzing the language of
an individual, it is possible to uncover areas that are particularly problematic in their
lives. Depression, emotional upheavals, and childhood traumas can leave lasting
marks on the ways in which a person communicates that are nearly impossible to
detect with the naked eye. However, by using automated text analysis, the subtle
differences in function word use and thematic relationships can be quite striking
and powerfully telling of a person’s current and past emotional difﬁculties.
Depression and Suicide
One of the best-explored areas of mental health and language includes research
on depression and suicide. For example, Stirman and Pennebaker (2001) analyzed
300 poems by 18 poets (9 of whom committed suicide) with LIWC in order to
test for language patterns indicative of risk for depression/suicide. The researchers
found that the poets who committed suicide used language patterns consistent with
a social withdrawal, such as increased ﬁrst person singular pronouns (I, me, my) and
decreased ﬁrst person plural pronouns (we, us, our). These patterns were particularly
pronounced when poems were written close to the time of an author’s suicide. The
ﬁndings of this study revealed that those poets who committed suicide increasingly
suffered from an inability to extract themselves from their own mental worlds,
instead exhibiting an elevated focus on the self and decreased attention to their social
environments.
Other studies have found the same language patterns leading up to an author’s
suicide. An analysis of Marilyn Monroe’s personal writings published in Fragments
found similar ﬁrst person pronoun patterns leading up to her death (Fernández-
Cabana et al. 2013). Additionally, various cognitive and emotional patterns indica-
tive of suicide and depression, such as decreases in cognitive complexity, were
found in Fragments. While such patterns of language use are not proof of suicide,
they strongly suggest suicidal perturbations in Monroe’s psychological functioning.

Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities
179
Similar language patterns of self-focus and social isolation were found in the written
works of Henry Hellyer, a ninetieth century surveyor and explorer whose death was
ruled a suicide (Baddeley et al. 2011).
The work on links between language and depression/suicide has been extended
to other areas as well. Such work includes research on comparisons between
individuals who committed suicide versus spree killings (Egnoto and Grifﬁn 2016),
women suffering from post-partum depression (De Choudhury et al. 2013), and even
depression support forums (Ramirez-Esparza et al. 2008).
The Impact of Traumatic Events on Psychology and Language Use
A sizeable portion of psychological text analysis research has examined the links
between language and how people process and come to understand traumatic events.
Indeed, the original version of LIWC was initially created as a way to automatically
analyze narratives written by people coping with trauma in their own lives (known
as “expressive writing”; see Pennebaker and Evans 2014).
In a study of psychological changes in response to traumatic events, Gortner and
Pennebaker (2003) conducted an archival study of newspaper articles surrounding
the 1999 Aggie Bonﬁre collapse, an event that caused the death of 12 people
at Texas A&M University. Using a LIWC analysis of local newspaper articles
spanning a timeline of 1 month before to approximately a year after the event,
several psychological patterns mined from the articles’ language followed a “social
stages of coping” model that appeared to capture broader psychological trends in the
community. For example, social words and cognitive words showed an immediate
increase after the incident, suggesting a general increase in the need for social and
mental engagement with the world. Additionally, the linguistic shifts seen in the
newspaper articles were predictive of rates of illness in the affected community,
acutely reﬂecting the effects of stress on individual physical health (Sapolsky 1994).
Cohn et al. (2004) conducted a study of online journals kept by individuals living
in the USA by analyzing entries in the 2 months prior September 11, 2001 and the
2 months following; they found strikingly similar results regarding pre- and post-
trauma language patterns.9
Recently, psychological research on language and coping has begun to adopt
more of the “bottom-up” language analysis techniques such as the MEM. Stanton
et al. (2015) conducted an analysis of texts written by women who were survivors of
childhood sexual abuse (CSA) using the MEM. In their analysis, word patterns and
themes were identiﬁed that differentiated these individuals from women who had
experienced no sexual abuse (NSA) during their childhood. Stanton et al. found that
women who had experienced some form of sexual abuse during childhood showed
9Interestingly, this study and others suggest that higher use of both positive and negative emotion
words may generally reﬂect greater immersion a given writing topic (e.g., Holmes et al. 2007;
Tausczik and Pennebaker 2010).

180
R.L. Boyd
different thematic patterns when talking about sex than those women who had not.
For example, women who were CSA survivors tended to use less language related
to virginity and relationships and more language related to physical attraction than
their NSA counterparts; these results converge with other psychology research on
the relationship between a history of sexual abuse, physical attraction, and sexual
risk-taking behaviors (e.g., Senn et al. 2006).
In a follow-up study, Pulverman et al. (2016) found that as CSA women
underwent cognitive therapy for their experiences of abuse, their conceptualization
of sex (measured via their language) came to resemble those of women who had
never experienced sexual abuse. Similar studies of alcohol abuse (Lowe et al.
2013) and inpatient psychotherapy aftercare (Wolf et al. 2010) have found that the
themes invoked by individuals around certain topics allow us to both understand the
common ways that people think about their situations, but also help to infer whether
someone has experienced certain types of upheavals in their life.
Language and Social Processes
It may be something of an understatement, but language is, at its core, inherently
social. Up to this point, the research highlighted in this chapter shows an unspoken
awareness of the social nature of language, yet seldom touches upon this fact
directly. Nevertheless, the past few years have seen a growth in the automated psy-
chological analysis of social interactions as a way to extract and better understand
social processes. Multiple empirical studies by Molly Ireland and colleagues have
found that people not only coordinate what they talk about as conversations unfold
(i.e., content words), but how they talk as well (function word use).10
Ireland et al. (2011) explored the degree to which two peoples’ function words
synchronize in the context of romantic relationships. In a study of introductory
conversations in speed daters, the researchers found that those couples who engaged
in higher language style matching (LSM) showed increased mutual attraction to
each other, suggesting that they were keenly focused on each other to the point
where they even began to speak similarly. The researchers’ second study looked at
instant messages between partners in romantic relationships, ﬁnding that couples
with higher LSM tended to exhibit greater relationship stability. In fact, Ireland
et al. (2011) found that by calculating LSM in these brief conversations between
romantic partners, they were able to statistically predict relationship longevity more
accurately than the people who were actually in the relationships.
In another study, Ireland and Pennebaker (2010) conducted LSM analyses of
three pairs of famous writers across their relationships by analyzing function
10The degree to which people synchronize their function words is often not directly perceptible,
however, higher language style matching among individuals can foster perceptions of social
connectedness and support (Rains 2015).

Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities
181
.60
.70
.75
.80
.85
.65
1906-1908 1909 1910 1911 1912-
1838-
1845-
1846
1847-
1855
1856
1944-1955 1956-1960 1961-1963
1861
1913
1844
1907
Freud and Jung
Mean LSM
The Brownings
Plath and Hughes
Fig. 2 Language style matching across time for famous writers and their relationships with
close others (reprinted from Ireland and Pennebaker 2010; originally published by the American
Psychological Association)
word synchrony in poetry and personal letters using LIWC. In their analysis, the
researchers found that function word synchrony in the personal correspondence
between Sigmund Freud and Carl Jung, one of Freud’s students, mirrored their
relationship trajectory. Freud and Jung had a notoriously contentious relationship
as Jung gradually began to break away from the teachings of Freud, eventually
accusing Freud of arrogance and stubbornness. LSM successfully captured the
evolving (and later deteriorating) stages of the pair’s relationship over a 7-year
period (see Fig. 2).
Elizabeth Barrett Browning and Robert Browning’s relationship is also quite
infamous for its ups and downs. Points of interpersonal synchrony and asynchrony
are revealed in the couple’s poetry, with function word use being most similar during
times of harmony in their marriage. Similarly, the works of Sylvia Plath and Ted
Hughes, two inﬂuential poets who were married in 1956, exhibited LSM peaks
during times of harmony and a gradual decline up to the time of Plath’s suicide.
While still a relatively new measure, LSM has begun to see use in various forms
of psychological research that reveal much about the importance of synchrony
in understanding human interactions. Borelli et al. (2016) have found that higher
LSM is found in strong mother–child attachments, with securely attached children
exhibiting higher function word similarity to their mothers. Other research ﬁnds
that crime suspects are more likely to confess to a crime when their language style
coordinates with that of their interrogator (Richardson et al. 2014), and LSM during
US presidential debates is even related to public perceptions of US presidential
candidates (Romero et al. 2015).

182
R.L. Boyd
Conclusions
Psychological text analysis methods can be used to better understand the com-
plicated mental universes of people in nearly any research domain. Did articles
published in The London Times show greater psychological immediacy following
the proliferation of the electric telegraph? What are the psychological underpinnings
of different types of humor across cultures? Perhaps most importantly, was that
Facebook friend who sent you an amorous personal message at 3 am really “just
kidding,” or were they being authentic? Answers to these questions and others are
now just a few short clicks away. Having read this chapter, you possess a robust
and rather advanced knowledge set that allows you to perform psychological text
analysis in your own research.
Generally speaking, perhaps the strongest advantages of psychological text
analysis techniques include their wide availability, their extensive validation, and
their ease to use. If desired, you can begin using these techniques within minutes
of ﬁnishing this chapter. Texts that have been closely poured over for decades,
and even centuries, have hidden psychological information embedded within them
that is waiting to be revealed, and you could very well be the ﬁrst person to make
previously unimagined discoveries.
Each of the methods introduced in this chapter has its own strengths: LIWC is
extremely easy to use “out of the box,” whereas MEM (and the MEH software)
allows for more ﬁne-tuned analyses of text collections, albeit with a bit more
effort/analysis required. Both types of methods, and particularly LIWC, have seen
extensive use in psychological research and have been adopted by other ﬁelds as
well, including computer/information sciences, sociology, business, and medicine,
to name a few. Such methods are adaptable to virtually any ﬁeld of interest that
involves humans, and new discoveries are being made almost every day.
As technology pulls disparate ﬁelds closer together, unprecedented insights will
result from combining techniques and information hailing from different disciplines.
New techniques like automated psychological text analysis will not wholly replace
subjective readings of texts but, rather, these two approaches will strengthen and
complement each other. Various methods, including historical reports, psychologi-
cal text analysis, subjective interpretation, and automated methods of understanding
within- and between-text relationships, can all inform one another to create beneﬁts
that no single method in isolation could ever hope to achieve. As new techniques
emerge, they too will be integrated into systems of understanding the human
condition that are currently difﬁcult to imagine. The prospects for newer, faster,
and more accurate understandings of human experience are expanding every day. It
is a very exciting time for innovation.
Acknowledgments Preparation of this chapter was aided by grants from the National Institute
of Health (5R01GM112697-02), John Templeton Foundation (#48503), and the National Science
Foundation (IIS-1344257). The views, opinions, and ﬁndings contained in this chapter are those
of the author and should not be construed as position, policy, or decision of the aforementioned
agencies, unless so designated by other documents. The author would like to thank Elisavet

Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities
183
Makridis, Natalie M. Peluso, James W. Pennebaker, and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful
feedback on earlier versions of this chapter.
Appendix
When preparing and processing texts using psychological text analysis, there are
some widely accepted (but often unspoken) guidelines that are quite commonplace.
These guidelines serve to ensure accurate insights both while processing texts and
in subsequent statistical analyses. This appendix can be thought of as a basic
“need to know” reference and primer for technical considerations when performing
psychological text analysis. Feel free to treat this appendix as a “cheat sheet” for the
methods covered in this chapter—one that should help to give you a head start in
the world of research with language.
Preparing Texts for Analysis
One of the most common questions that people ask during their ﬁrst romp into
the world of psychological text analysis is this: “How should I prepare my texts?”
Ultimately, there is no answer to this question that will apply in all cases, as
guidelines will vary as a function of text source, research questions, and goals.
However, there are some basic considerations that apply to virtually all cases. As
a general rule when it comes to the psychological analysis of text, “good enough”
really is “good enough” for most purposes. One could literally spend years preparing
a collection of text ﬁles so that they are 100% perfect for analysis, however, the
conceptual (and, more importantly, statistical) gains from doing so are often nil.
Spelling and Spelling Variations
It is tempting to worry about correcting texts so that all words that could potentially
be captured by a dictionary are successfully recognized. Note, however, that word
distributions follow what is known as a Zipf distribution (see Piantadosi 2014),
wherein a relatively small number of words constitute the majority of words actually
seen in texts, verbalizations, and so on. Translated into practical terms, what this
means is that unless a very common word is misspelled with high frequency, it is
unlikely to have a measurable impact on LIWC-based and MEM-based measures
of psychological processes. For example, if a single text has the misspelling “teh”
two times, yet contains 750 uses of other articles in the whole text, the measured
percentage of articles in a text will differ from the actual occurrence of articles by
such a small amount as to be negligible.

184
R.L. Boyd
Texts with several high-frequency misspellings, however, may beneﬁt from
correction. Multiple software programs exist that allow users to automatically
batch-correct text ﬁles to avoid the tedious job of manual spelling correction
(e.g., GNU Aspell; http://aspell.net). While most of these applications are useful
only for the technically savvy, other options exist that allow users to ﬁnd speciﬁc
misspellings and replace them with corrections, such as Find and Replace (FAR;
http://ﬁndandreplace.sourceforge.net). Relatedly, regional spelling variants may
beneﬁt from standardization, depending on the nature of one’s research question.
For example, given that the MEM looks for co-occurrences of words, we might
expect the words “bloody,” “neighbor,” and “color” to co-occur more often than
“bloody,” “neighbor,” and “color.” Unless we are interested in identifying culture-
speciﬁc word co-occurrences, we would want to standardize regional variants
to have parallel spellings across all texts, ensuring more accurate psychological
insights.
Finally, certain special circumstances arise when analyzing transcribed verbal
exchanges, particularly when using software such as LIWC. Several categories of
“utterances” (such as nonﬂuency words like “uh” and “um,” and ﬁller words like
“like” and “y’know”) are psychologically meaningful (Laserna et al. 2014), but are
often transcribed idiosyncratically according to certain traditions. The word “like” is
particularly problematic given its various meanings as a result of homography (e.g.,
expressing evaluation—“I like him”—or ﬁlling spaces—“I, like, love sandwiches”).
Primarily in the case of verbal transcriptions, many utterances must be converted to
software-speciﬁc tokens that are recognized explicitly as ﬁller words to improve text
analysis accuracy (LIWC, for example, uses “rrlike” for ﬁller word recognition).
Working with the MEM and MEM Results
When performing any type of topic modeling procedure, including the MEM,
several decisions must be made by the researcher performing the analysis. These
typically include answering questions such as “What is the correct number of
themes to extract?” and “How do I know what label to give each of these themes?”
Topic modeling results are occasionally dismissed as purely subjective, however,
this is seldom the case. Indeed, while some steps occasionally require some
(arguably) arbitrary decisions, such decisions are typically made by relying on
domain expertise. The author’s recommendation is that, when in doubt, the best
course of action is to consult with experts familiar with the type of research being
conducted.
How to Extract/Understand Themes Using MEM
While the heart of the MEM is a statistical procedure known as a Principal
Components Analysis (PCA), most of the typical guidelines that are recommended

Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities
185
for a PCA do not extend to the modeling of language patterns. Instead, it may be
more useful to think of the MEM as co-opting a statistical procedure to reach an
end-goal, rather than the PCA being the goal itself.
When extracting themes using a PCA, a researcher must specify a k parameter,
with k being the number of themes for which a PCA must solve. What is the ideal
k parameter? In other words, how many themes should be extracted? Is it 10? 15?
50? This is a contentious issue in virtually every ﬁeld that uses some form of topic
modeling. The best answer at this time comes in the form of another question: “What
makes sense given your research question?”
When attempting to perform a psychological analysis of text, domain expertise
on psychological constructs is immensely helpful. The primary recommendation
for determining the optimal k parameter is to test multiple k’s, settling on the k
parameter that appears to best represent the problem space. The ideal k parameter is
also directly inﬂuenced by the amount of data that you are processing. If you have
an extremely large number of wordy texts, you will be able to extract many, many
more themes than if you are analyzing 100 posts made to Twitter.
Even with extremely large datasets, however, the smallest number of themes that
can be coherently extracted is typically the most optimal, particularly in cases of
psychological research. Whereas it is not uncommon to see sophisticated studies
that extract hundreds (or even thousands) of topics from a corpus, 95% of these
topics will end up being an uninterpretable and highly inter-correlated grab-bag
of words that does not represent anything in particular. Extracting large numbers
of topics may still be highly useful in predictive modeling, however, this practice
is often problematic from a social sciences/digital humanities perspective and also
leads to serious concerns about the replicability of one’s ﬁndings.
Finally, when it comes to labeling themes that have been extracted using MEM
or other topic models, there are no hard and fast rules. Labels assigned to word
clusters should primarily be treated as a shorthand for referring to word clusters and
should not treated as objective operationalizations during research in most cases.
For example, one researcher may see the words “happy,” “cry,” and “shout” cluster
together in a MEM analysis and label this as a broad “emotion” theme. Another
researcher may see the same word clusters and see a “joyous” theme, believing that
the words “cry” and “shout” are being used in a positive manner in conjunction with
happiness. Most of the time, the labels are fairly simply to agree upon (e.g., a word
cluster comprised of “college,” “study,” “test,” and “class” is unlikely to be anything
other than a broader “school” theme). However, when in doubt, one of the best ways
to understand or interpret a questionable theme is to look for texts that score high
for that theme, then read them closely to see how the theme-related words are used.
How to Score Texts for MEM Themes
We will typically want to score each text in our corpus for each theme that
has been extracted. Once themes have been extracted using the MEM, there
are two primary ways to make this information useful for subsequent statistical

186
R.L. Boyd
modeling. In the ﬁrst method, “factor scores” can be calculated using a statistical
approach, such as regression scoring. In this approach, each word is weighted
for its “representativeness” of a given theme—these weights correspond to the
“factor loadings” of each word to each theme. For example, if a theme is extracted
pertaining to animals, the word “cat” may have a factor loading of 0.5, the word
“bird” has a loading of 0.25, and so on. These scores can be used in a multiple
linear regression model:
y D (ax) C (bz) C : : : etc., or
Animal Theme D (0.5*cat) C (0.25*bird) : : : etc.
This procedure is used to score a text for the “animal” theme, and so on for all
other themes extracted during the MEM. Some statistical software, such as IBM’s
SPSS, have options that allow users to perform this scoring method automatically.
If using the regression approach to scoring texts for MEM themes, it is extremely
important to note that the MEM typically requires that one performs their PCA
with something called a VARIMAX rotation. Without going too far into the
details, an orthogonal axis rotation such as VARIMAX ensures that all themes are
mathematically 100% independent of each other. In practical terms, this means that
regression scores for themes will be perfectly uncorrelated, which is often not an
accurate reﬂection of psychological processes. This method is occasionally used in
the literature but is not recommended for most purposes unless you have a well-
articulated reason for doing so.
The second method for scoring MEM themes in texts is conceptually much sim-
pler and strongly recommended. Essentially, this alternative method uses the MEM
as a means of theme discovery or, in other words, simply determining what common
themes exist in a corpus, as well as which words are indicative of which themes.
Following this, a return to the word counting approach used by LIWC is used to
score texts for each theme. For example, imagine that your use of the MEM uncovers
two broad themes in your texts: a color theme (including the words “red,” “blue,”
“green,” and “brown”) and a clothing theme (including the words “dress,” “shirt,”
“shorts,” and “jeans”). The next step is to create a custom dictionary that places the
“color” and “clothing” words into separate categories. You would then rescan your
texts with software like LIWC to calculate the percentage of words pertaining to
color and clothing, respectively. Unlike with the regression method of scoring texts
(which would force a perfect zero correlation between the two themes), one would
likely ﬁnd that use of color words and clothing words shows modest bivariate corre-
lation, which makes sense from both and intuitive and psychological perspective.
References
J.L. Baddeley, G.R. Daniel, J.W. Pennebaker, How Henry Hellyer’s use of language foretold his
suicide. Crisis 32(5), 288–292 (2011)
Borelli, J. L., Ramsook, K. A., Smiley, P., Kyle Bond, D., West, J. L., K.H. Buttitta, Language
matching among mother-child dyads: associations with child attachment and emotion reactiv-
ity. Soc. Dev. (2016). doi:10.1111/sode.12200

Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities
187
R.L. Boyd, MEH: Meaning Extraction Helper (Version 1.4.13) [Software]. Available from http://
meh.ryanb.cc (2016)
R.L. Boyd, J.W. Pennebaker, Did Shakespeare write double falsehood? Identifying individuals by
creating psychological signatures with text analysis. Psychol. Sci. 26(5), 570–582 (2015)
R.L. Boyd, S.R. Wilson, J.W. Pennebaker, M. Kosinski, D.J. Stillwell, R. Mihalcea, Values in
words: using language to evaluate and understand personal values, in Proceedings of the Ninth
International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media (2015), pp. 31–40
C.K. Chung, J.W. Pennebaker, Revealing dimensions of thinking in open-ended self-descriptions:
an automated meaning extraction method for natural language. J. Res. Pers. 42(1), 96–132
(2008)
M.A. Cohn, M.R. Mehl, J.W. Pennebaker, Linguistic markers of psychological change surrounding
September 11, 2001. Psychol. Sci. 15(10), 687–693 (2004)
M. De Choudhury, M. Gamon, S. Counts, E. Horvitz, Predicting depression via social media, in
Annual Proceedings of the 2013 AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM) (2013)
J. Dewey, How we think (D.C. Heath, Boston, 1910)
M.J. Egnoto, D.J. Grifﬁn, Analyzing language in suicide notes and legacy tokens: investigating
clues to harm of self and harm to others in writing. Crisis 37(2), 140–147 (2016)
M. Fernández-Cabana, A. García-Caballero, M.T. Alves-Pérez, M.J. García-García, R. Mateos,
Suicidal traits in Marilyn Monroe’s fragments. Crisis 34(2), 124–130 (2013)
A.K. Fetterman, M.D. Robinson, Do you use your head or follow your heart? Self-location predicts
personality, emotion, decision making, and performance. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 105, 316–334
(2013)
L. Flekova, I. Gurevych, Personality proﬁling of ﬁctional characters using sense-level links
between lexical resources, in Proceedings of the 2015 Conference on Empirical Methods in
Natural Language Processing (EMNLP) (2015)
S. Freud, On Aphasia (International Universities Press, London, 1891)
E. Gortner, J.W. Pennebaker, The archival anatomy of a disaster: media coverage and community-
wide health effects of the Texas A&M bonﬁre tragedy. J. Soc. Clin. Psychol. 22(5), 580–603
(2003)
D. Holmes, G.W. Alpers, T. Ismailji, C. Classen, T. Wales, V. Cheasty, A. Miller, C. Koopman,
Cognitive and emotional processing in narratives of women abused by intimate partners.
Violence Against Women 13(11), 1192–1205 (2007)
M.E. Ireland, J.W. Pennebaker, Language style matching in writing: synchrony in essays,
correspondence, and poetry. J. Pers. Soc. Psychol. 99(3), 549–571 (2010)
M.E. Ireland, R.B. Slatcher, P.W. Eastwick, L.E. Scissors, E.J. Finkel, J.W. Pennebaker, Language
style matching predicts relationship initiation and stability. Psychol. Sci. 22(1), 39–44 (2011)
O.P. John, L.P. Naumann, C.J. Soto, in Handbook of Personality: Theory and Research, ed. by O.
P. John, R. W. Robins, L. A. Pervin. Paradigm shift to the integrative big-ﬁve trait taxonomy:
history, measurement, and conceptual issues (Guilford Press, New York, 2008), pp. 114–158
K. Jordan, J.W. Pennebaker, How the candidates are thinking: analytic versus narrative thinking
styles. Retrieved January 21, 2016, from https://wordwatchers.wordpress.com/2016/01/21/
how-the-candidates-are-thinking-analytic-versus-narrative-thinking-styles/ (2016)
P. Juola, Authorship attribution. Found. Trends Inf. Retr. 1(3), 233 (2006)
D. Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York, 2011)
T. Kasser, Lucy in the Mind of Lennon (Oxford University Press, New York, 2013)
M. Komisin, C. Guinn, Identifying personality types using document classiﬁcation methods, in
Proceedings of the Twenty-Fifth International Florida Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research Society
Conference (2012)
M. Koppel, J. Schler, S. Argamon, Computational methods in authorship attribution. J. Am. Soc.
Inf. Sci. Technol. 60(1), 9–26 (2008)
C.M. Laserna, Y. Seih, J.W. Pennebaker, J. Lang. Soc. Psychol. 33(3), 328–338 (2014)
H.D. Lasswell, D. Lerner, I. De Sola Pool, The Comparative Study of Symbols: An Introduction
(Stanford University Press, Stanford, 1952)

188
R.L. Boyd
M. Liberman, Linguistic dominance in house of cards. Retrieved March 12, 2015, from http://
languagelog.ldc.upenn.edu/nll/?p=18147 (2015)
R.D. Lowe, D. Heim, C.K. Chung, J.C. Duffy, J.B. Davies, J.W. Pennebaker, In verbis, vinum?
Relating themes in an open-ended writing task to alcohol behaviors. Appetite 68, 8–13 (2013)
F. Mairesse, M.A. Walker, M.R. Mehl, R.K. Moore, Using linguistic cues for the automatic
recognition of personality and conversation in text. J. Artif. Intell. Res. 30(1), 457–500 (2007)
C. Martindale, The grammar of altered states of consciousness: a semiotic reinterpretation of
aspects of psychoanalytic theory. Psychoanal. Contemp. Thought 4, 331–354 (1975)
D.C. McClelland, J.W. Atkinson, R.A. Clark, E.L. Lowell, The Achievement Motive (Irvington,
Oxford, 1953)
E. Mergenthaler, Emotion-abstraction patterns in verbatim protocols: a new way of describing
psychotherapeutic processes. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 64(6), 1306–1315 (1996)
G.A. Miller, The Science of Words (Scientiﬁc American Library, New York, 1995)
F. Moretti, Distant Reading (Verso, London, 2013)
J.W. Pennebaker, J.F. Evans, Expressive Writing: Words that Heal (Idyll Arbor, Enumclaw, 2014)
J.W. Pennebaker, M.E. Francis, Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC): A Computer-Based
Text Analysis Program (Erlbaum, Mahwah, NJ, 1999)
J.W. Pennebaker, L.A. King, Linguistic styles: language use as an individual difference. J. Pers.
Soc. Psychol. 77(6), 1296–1312 (1999)
J.W. Pennebaker, L.D. Stone, Words of wisdom: Language use over the life span. Pers. Processes
Individ. Differ. 85(2), 291–301 (2003)
J.W. Pennebaker, T.J. Mayne, M.E. Francis, Linguistic predictors of adaptive bereavement. J. Pers.
Soc. Psychol. 72, 863–871 (1997)
J.W. Pennebaker, C.K. Chung, J. Frazee, G.M. Lavergne, D.I. Beaver, When small words foretell
academic success: the case of college admissions essays. PLoS One 9(12), e115844 (2014)
J.W. Pennebaker, R.L. Boyd, K. Jordan, K. Blackburn, The Development and Psychometric
Properties of LIWC2015 (University of Texas, Austin, TX, 2015a)
J.W. Pennebaker, R.J. Booth, R.L. Boyd, M.E. Francis, Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count:
LIWC2015 (Pennebaker Conglomerates, Austin, TX, 2015b)
K.J. Petrie, J.W. Pennebaker, B. Sivertsen, Things we said today: a linguistic analysis of the
Beatles. Psychol. Aesthet. Creat. Arts 2(4), 197–202 (2008)
S.T. Piantadosi, Zipf’s word frequency law in natural language: a critical review and future
directions. Psychon. Bull. Rev. 21(5), 1112–1130 (2014)
C.S. Pulverman, R.L. Boyd, A.M. Stanton, C.M. Meston, Changes in the sexual self-schema
of women with a history of childhood sexual abuse following expressive writing treatment.
Psychol. Trauma. 9(2), 181–188 (2016). doi:10.1037/tra0000163
S.A. Rains, Language style matching as a predictor of perceived social support in computer-
mediated interaction among individuals coping with illness. Commun. Res. 43(5), 694–712
(2015)
N. Ramirez-Esparza, C.K. Chung, E. Kacewicz, J.W. Pennebaker, The psychology of word use in
depression forums in English and in Spanish: texting two text analytic approaches, in Annual
Proceedings of the 2008 AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media (ICWSM) (2008)
B.H. Richardson, P.J. Taylor, B. Snook, S.M. Conchi, C. Bennell, Language style matching and
police interrogation outcomes. Law Hum. Behav. 38(4), 357–366 (2014)
D.M. Romero, R.I. Swaab, B. Uzzi, A.D. Galinsky, Mimicry is presidential: Linguistic style
matching in presidential debates and improved polling numbers. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Bull.
41(10), 1311–1319 (2015)
S. Ross, In praise of overstating the case: a review of Franco Moretti, distant reading. Dig. Humanit.
Q. 8(1), 1 (2014)
R.M. Sapolsky, Why Zebras Don’t Get Ulcers: A Guide To Stress, Stress Related Diseases, and
Coping (W.H. Freeman, New York, 1994)
J. Schler, M. Koppel, S. Argamon, J.W. Pennebaker, Effects of age and gender on blogging, in
Proceedings of the 2005 AAAI Spring Symposium: Computational Approaches to Analyzing
Weblogs (2006)

Psychological Text Analysis in the Digital Humanities
189
T.E. Senn, M.P. Carey, P.A. Vanable, Childhood sexual abuse and sexual risk behavior among men
and women attending a sexually transmitted disease clinic. J. Consult. Clin. Psychol. 74(4),
720–731 (2006)
A.M. Stanton, R.L. Boyd, C.S. Pulverman, C.M. Meston, Determining women’s sexual self-
schemas through advanced computerized text analysis. Child Abuse Negl. 46, 78–88 (2015)
S.W. Stirman, J.W. Pennebaker, Word use in the poetry of suicidal and nonsuicidal poets.
Psychosom. Med. 63, 517–522 (2001)
P.J. Stone, D.C. Dunphy, M.S. Smith, D.M. Ogilvie, The General Inquirer: A Computer Approach
to Content Analysis (MIT, Cambridge, 1966)
Y.R. Tausczik, J.W. Pennebaker, The psychological meaning of words: LIWC and computerized
text analysis methods. J. Lang. Soc. Psychol. 29(1), 24–54 (2010)
D. Watson, Mood and Temperament (Guilford Press, New York, 2000)
W. Weintraub, Verbal Behavior in Everyday Life (Springer, New York, 1989)
M. Wolf, C.K. Chung, H. Kordy, Inpatient treatment to online aftercare: e-mailing themes as a
function of therapeutic outcomes. Psychother. Res. 20(1), 71–85 (2010)
T. Yarkoni, Personality in 100,000 words: a large-scale analysis of personality and word use among
bloggers. J. Res. Pers. 44(3), 363–373 (2010)

Parsing Related Tags Networks from Flickr®
to Explore Crowd-Sourced Keyword
Associations
Shalin Hai-Jew
Abstract With the broad popularization of content-sharing social media platforms,
researchers have developed methods to extract information from social related
metadata. One approach is to extract related tags networks from freeform “folk” tags
(keywords) used to describe imagery from Flickr®. These tag networks, graphed at
1, 1.5, and 2 degrees, show co-occurrence of related tags (above a certain threshold)
to a target seeding tag. This work describes how these networks may be acquired
and different ways that the extracted data may be used analytically in a digital
humanities context.
Introduction
In the digital humanities, there is a range of tools and methods that enable
researchers to tap into social media data for insight, whether it is to understand
trends, capture individual voices, listen in on group discussions, explore online
communities, and study user-generated multimedia. Some social media information
is content data or the information that is shared; other type of common social
information is from trace data, the recording of various types of interactions (such
as replies, likes, forwarding, follows and unfollows, and so on); and ﬁnally, there’s
metadata, labeling data about data (such as “folk” tags, descriptions, and so on).
Social tagging involves interactive distributed cognition, with large groups of
users co-tagging their own shared contents (and sometimes that of others), based on
shared understandings. For people to engage with others, their tags have to make
sense to others—and so are informative as social cues. Proper tagging is a sign of
topic-based savvy and belongingness in the social media platform and/or groups
within that platform.
For massive Web-scale collections of multimedia, such as imagery and video,
one less direct way for researchers to engage that information is through the study
S. Hai-Jew ()
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA
e-mail: shalin@k-state.edu
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
S. Hai-Jew (ed.), Data Analytics in Digital Humanities, Multimedia Systems
and Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54499-1_8
191

192
S. Hai-Jew
of related tags networks. (Those who want to engage the direct contents are limited
by human slowness against “big data” and/or the costs and complexity of engaging
machine vision and “big data” analytics on noisy data-rich contents.)
A related tag network, at core, shows a target seeding tag and its ties to other
tags with which it co-occurs in the description of particular user-generated contents.
In other words, when a user shares an image or a video, he or she will apply
keywords to describe that object. In the labeling, multiple tags are usually applied,
and some will co-occur more frequently because of their applicability to the content
and the mental associations of the sharer of the image. For example, a hiker shares
a photo of a cactus that has been partially burned during a controlled burn of
the prairie (to protect plant diversity). The hiker uploads the image to an image-
based content-sharing site with the tags “cactus,” “Konza_prairie,” “#Konza,” and
“controlled_burn.” She adds some personal tags, such as “day_hike,” “6_miles,”
“92_degrees.” Later, after some research to ﬁgure out what sort of cactus it was, she
updates the tags describing the image as well. When she runs a related tags network
with “konza” as the seeding tag for a 1.5 degree network, she ﬁnds a network with
17 vertices and 146 unique edges. The reciprocated vertex pair ratio is fairly high
at 0.280702, and the reciprocated edge ratio is 0.438356. The maximum geodesic
distance (graph diameter) is two, which is to be expected with related tags networks
at 1.5 degrees. The graph density is high at 0.536764. The other related tags are not
what she shared though but are more generic: tallgrass, prairie, tree, nature, grass,
landscape, path, summer, Kansas, ﬂinthills, hills, Nikon, sunset, Manhattan, and sky.
Two groups or clusters are identiﬁed with the Clauset–Newman–Moore clustering
algorithm. In Fig. 1, the group on the left seems to be focused around place and
the Konza’s relationship to other named locations; the one on the right seems more
generic and related to natural landscapes.
The related tags network consists of a core target tag and co-occurring tags
which occur above a certain threshold, for networks at one-degree, 1.5 degrees,
two degrees, and so on. The higher the degree of connectivity, the more diffuse the
apparent connections between the tags, and the more noise is mixed in with the
signal. For this particular work, related tags networks from Flickr® will be explored
at 1, 1.5, and 2 degrees: at 1 degree, the focal tag has direct ties to the include tags
(based on a certain threshold established in the software tool); at 1.5 degrees, the
network shows not only direct tag ties but also the transitivity between the alters
in the tag neighborhood (the likelihood that tags with direct ties to the target tag
also co-occur with other similar tags); at two degrees, the graph network captures
all the prior and the respective tag neighborhoods of the alters. (“Alters” are also
known as “ﬁrst neighbors” or those with direct ties to the focal node or “seeding
tag” in this case. “Second neighbors” are nodes without direct connection to the
focal node but are connected to each other through the same intermediary.) It helps
to note that while the graphs are directed ones (in which the edges or links have
arrows showing directionality), the association is usually only one direction, from
the target tag to the other tags. Just because a certain tag co-occurs with the target
tag does not mean that the converse is also true. In general, the directionality of tag
linkage is not reciprocated; in other words, the top co-occurring tags for the seeding

Parsing Related Tags Networks from Flickr® to Explore Crowd-Sourced. . .
193
Fig. 1 “konza” related tags network on Flickr® (1.5 deg.)
tag do not often also have the original seeding tag as a high-level co-occurring tag
(at the established threshold level to be selected as a co-occurring tag). The dyadic
tag connection is often only one-directional in a structural sense. Tags that tend to
co-occur commonly may have bidirectional reciprocal relationships (more on this
follows later).
Essentially, the study of related tags networks is one narrow method that enables
the exploration of relatedness between a focal “folk” tag and other tags with which
it often co-occurs. This analysis enables the identiﬁcation of the keywords which
the broader public uses in relation to a particular tag, so this is a way to tap the
collective subconscious or unconscious in understanding tag context. This can be a
rich endeavor when certain semantic words are used as tags, such as particular social
media-originated phrases, #hashtag tags, region names, proper nouns, context-
dependent words, related sets of words, and others. (The Flickr® API does not
enable the uses of certain function words like articles, prepositions, coordinate
conjunctions, and such, for populating a related tags network, and a perusal of some
of the images in the Flickr® collection show that many terms of semantic ones,
including nouns and adjectives.) Tag terms may be further ambiguated (with richer

194
S. Hai-Jew
senses of polysemy) in some senses and further disambiguated (with clariﬁcation
and delimitations of its uses) in others. In other words, while the method itself may
seem somewhat straightforward, it stands to add value as a data point, in a way that
is complementary to the research context.
On Flickr®
Flickr® was created in 2004 by Ludicorp and purchased by Yahoo in 2005. As of
June 2015, this platform boasted 122 million users in 63 countries, with a reported
million photos shared daily on the service; further, there were over two million
groups on Flickr® based around shared user interests (Smith 2016). While this
started out as a platform for image sharing, it has since broadened out to host short
videos as well.
Flickr® has a generous policy of sharing its contents and has created various
application programming interfaces (APIs) for developers to create applications to
access their contents and information. For users to access their data, they have to
apply with a veriﬁable email in order to acquire a “key” and “secret” from the
Flickr® App Garden (https://www.ﬂickr.com/services/). Using the key, a researcher
may access “raw” related tags network data (https://www.ﬂickr.com/services/api/
ﬂickr.tags.getRelated.html). (In NodeXL, users may ﬁre up the import feature to
access Flickr® related tags network data and access the App Garden application
from within the tool.)
There are built-in summary statistics about tags on the Flickr® site itself, to
encourage user exploration. The “Trending Tags–Now” feature showcases popular
tags in descending order. At the time of this capture, the tags were pretty general.
They read, in descending order: buildings, winter, españa, mar, stone, America,
and truck. The “Trending Tags—This Week” feature included the following:
macromondays, ﬂag, anythinggoes, holiday, and serene. A third feature was “Tags—
All Time Most Popular.” This list included the following, in descending order:
sunset, beach, water, sky, ﬂower, red, blue, nature, night, tree, white, green ﬂowers,
portrait, art, snow, light, dog, sun, clouds, cat, winter, park, street, landscape,
summer, trees, sea, city, yellow, Christmas, lake, family, bridge, people, bird, river,
pink, house, car, food, bw, old, macro, new, music, orange, garden, me, and baby.
The trending tags page is available at https://www.ﬂickr.com/photos/tags. The ﬁrst
two categories tend to be quite dynamic. As such, this page works like a summary
dashboard. The information is helpful for an overview, but these may not directly
answer the questions of researchers.
With the rollout of auto-tagging in 2015, Flickr®’s site offered a popup message
to describe the “TagsBETA”: “Tags are keywords that make photos easier to ﬁnd
in Flickr® search. The ones you add will show up in dark gray. Flickr®’s friendly
robots will try to help out by adding some for you; these will appear with just a
gray outline.” The added tags may describe type (“portrait”), subject or contents

Parsing Related Tags Networks from Flickr® to Explore Crowd-Sourced. . .
195
(“people,” “food,” “plant,” “vehicle,” “architecture”), space (“outdoor,” “indoor,”
“landscape,” “cloud,” “skyline,” “seaside,” “shore”), photographic features (“depth
of ﬁeld,” “black background,” “bright”), time of day (“dusk,” “sunrise,” “sunset”),
mood (“serene”), and other features. Some images only have human tagging. Some
images human-tagged as “sunrise” are contradicted by the auto-tagged “sunset” and
“dusk.” From a human point-of-view, it is unclear what the rules are for what is
tagged and how, although inferences may be made. The auto-added tags may be
removed by the users who shared the original photo or image. Also, users of the
site may opt-out of the auto-tagging feature (Perez 2015). Beyond auto-tagging,
there have been various ideas for tag reﬁnement to try to improve the quality
of human-assigned tags which are assigned on-the-ﬂy and in-the-moment in an
unstructured and emergent way, without a priori semantics. In order to compare
related tags networks across different content-sharing platforms, it will be important
to deﬁne how tagging is operationalized (by end user license agreement and policies
and policy enforcement, by technological practices, by deployed robots, and other
factors) within the socio-technical systems. The various social media services have
differing standards for inclusiveness of their social tagging features and none with
full inclusiveness based on the Inclusive Universal Access paradigm (Derntl et al.
2011).
Even more elusive is what the insider rules are for how Flickr® controls for
tagging contents. Most social media content providers have clauses against certain
types of information sharing—to prevent illegal, offensive, hateful, private, and
other contents. Video sharing services, for example, will block copyrighted video,
audio, and still imagery, from shared videos; they will enable blocks of content
sharing based on laws in certain countries, so as to prevent offense and to prevent
legal challenges. In the same way that search providers head off potential offense
by preventing certain autocompletion terms to be found in searches, social media
service providers also control for potential offense by blocking certain tag results.
The idea is to keep customers and to avoid bad press while maintaining a sense of
authenticity and credibility with users. As yet, there have not been apparent efforts
to harmonize user-applied tags to the image. Unless a social media corporation
encourages its staff to publish information broadly about what goes into their
algorithms and processes for returning certain results, it will be hard to deﬁnitively
deﬁne the rules from the outside except by using many queries and then applying
inferences. External to the organization, a number of research works have explored
Flickr® and its contents in rich ways (Spyrou and Mylonas 2016).
While this work only addresses extracting related tags networks from Flickr®,
such networks can be extracted from any system that enables tagging and which
enables data extraction through application programming interfaces or scraping
or other methods. To understand the types of tags extracted, it is important
to understand the demographics and geographies of the participants using the
particular social media platform, the cultural inﬂuences, the language inﬂuences,
and similar factors. It is also important to understand the platform and its underlying
affordances for users. For example, are those tagging shared contents only those

196
S. Hai-Jew
users who personally uploaded the contents, or can their social networks on the
social sharing platform also tag? Or can anyone who is interested tag, with or
without an account on the platform? How common is it to have batch uploads
of images with batch tagging? Is there an auto-tagging feature, and how does
it function? How are tags used by the users of the content-sharing social media
platform, and how does usage affect the types of tags used?
NodeXL
The software used to extract the Flickr® related tags networks is NodeXL Basic
(Network Overview, Discovery, and Exploration for Excel), a free add-on to
Microsoft Excel. This free tool is downloadable from the CodePlex platform
(https://www.codeplex.com/). The tool that enables extraction of Flickr® data
from the Yahoo Flickr® application programming interface (API) is a third-
party-created add-on to NodeXL. Using an add-on to Excel precludes the need
for programming skills or command line interactivity or knowledge of how to
handle JSON or XML. Also, the extracted data may be processed within NodeXL
with various clustering algorithms and motif algorithms. The three clustering
algorithms—Clauset–Newman–Moore, Wakita–Tsurumi, and Girvan–Newman—
offer fairly wide-ranging group counts and varying informative value of the
data. The motifs extractions show connections between smaller groups of nodes
(dyadically, triadically, and so on), but motifs are useful in more complex networks
and with higher degrees of connectivity and so are not as relevant here. There are
ways to extract the most giant component in the network, and that is also almost
redundant given that a related tag network at one degree is one giant component at
one degree is one giant component only (generally speaking), but this may be a little
more useful at 1.5 and 2 degrees.
The resulting related networks may be visualized as various types of node-link
diagrams based on various layout algorithms. In NodeXL, the various types of
layout algorithms include the following: Fruchterman–Reingold (force-based layout
algorithm), Harel–Koren Fast multiscale, circle (ring lattice), spiral, horizontal sine
wave, vertical sine wave, grid, polar, polar absolute, Sugiyama, random, and others.
While Excel is not a typical go-to for professional data scientists, it provides a rich
range of functions for data analytics and data visualizations for digital humanities
researchers. (All the graphs used in this work were with NodeXL 1.0.1.336.)
However, any intermediating software tool may have built-in limits in terms of the
amount of data that is extracted. Too much data will overwhelm the tool’s ability to
show coherent graphs in two-dimensional space, so artiﬁcial ceilings are emplaced
which limit the amount of information captured. Social media platform application
programming interfaces (APIs) that enable data access are also often rate-limited in
order to enable access for a broad range of users. While speciﬁcs may be elusive,
any extracted data has to be understood as a sampling, and likely very non-random
sampling at that.

Parsing Related Tags Networks from Flickr® to Explore Crowd-Sourced. . .
197
Other methods of data extraction, data processing, and data visualization may
produce larger graphs with more underlying data. Other methods may enable
the changing up of parameters for inclusion of a tag in a related tags network.
However, whatever information is available will depend on the limits of the Flickr®
API as well. For example, the thumbnail images that illustrate particular tags are
static (non-changing), and how they were selected to represent a particular tag
is unclear. For example, were they selected by a person, a team, at random by
computer, or some other way (at Flickr®)? Also, using NodeXL to create related tags
networks is somewhat “non-consumptive.” In other words, the underlying source
data is only partially accessible. The tags not included are not captured. The long
tail or tags are not captured. The only visual samples available are those thumbnail
images linked to a particular tag by Flickr®, but the underlying image set is not fully
capturable, and what may be captured is a very small percentage of the theoretically
available imagery. A related tags network captured in the way described here is
only a summary of the information with only a smattering of the underlying data.
This offers a light drive-by observation of related tags networks based on freeware
and open-source tools. (Employing other methods with a developer or with robots
that can engage the Flickr® API for more information will most certainly mean
more complex related tags networks and richer analytics. These approaches will also
require comfort with database and data queries and data visualization packages.)
This analysis of related tags enables inferentially exploring other types of
questions and answers beyond crowd-sourced tagging associations. Such networks
may be suggestive of research leads and other tags to explore to study a particular
phenomenon. The co-occurrence of tags used for particular image objects show
undeﬁned associations, and it is left to the researcher to explore what the related tags
networks mean. A related tags network may provide insights about the following:
the image holdings of one content-sharing platform over another, the differing
tagging habits of different people groups around certain tags, the differing tagging
habits of communities in different geographies or cultures, and so on. If the content-
sharing platforms are truly global, then it may be possible to use related tags
networks to understanding something of global collective thinking of particular
issues, based on implicit links of co-occurring tags used on the shared imagery.
In the digital humanities, related tags networks may serve as anything from a
“conversation starter” or “word art” or the “telling detail” to deeper analysis. The
study of social tagging goes well beyond related tags networks, with studies of “tag
streams, tagging models, tag semantics, generating recommendations using tags,
visualizations of tags, applications of tags, integration of different tagging systems
and problems associated with tagging usage” (Aggarwal 2011, p. 13), and other
approaches. Folksonomies relate to tag sets that show how online crowds classify
information in an unstructured way (without a controlled vocabulary or a formal
taxonomy), whether on social tagging systems (applied to Web and Internet data) or
in-system content-sharing sites. Folksonomies are created as multimodal networks,
consisting of tripartite networks of (1) users (actors), (2) contents (images, videos),
and (3) freeform open-ended tags (labeling metadata). By comparison, related tags
networks are single-mode networks with the nodes consisting of tags alone.

198
S. Hai-Jew
There are limitations to the approach described in this introductory chapter. As
mentioned earlier, the tag sampling is limited, so the set of co-occurring user-
generated tags related to a seeding tag is not the full set (no N D all) but only a
sampling with co-occurrences which reach a particular threshold. Ideally, it would
help to have a full set, so a wider range of data may be explored. (For example, it
would help to explore the long tail of tags—to look at those which are used rarely
in relation with a seed tag but which may still offer research insights.) There is not
external validation or invalidation of the tag ﬁndings. Ideally, it would be important
to cross-check the data using other software tools and other methods. As-yet, there
have not been baseline studies that show what related tags networks look like
typically in terms of terms used (Are there more nouns than other parts-of-speech?
Are there certain preferred types of adjectives? Are there certain preferred types
of emotion words? Are certain seeding tags more insightful for use in related tags
networks—like those with richer connotative meanings than denotative meanings?)
Finally, there is not much in the way of other research studies on related tags
networks and how to informatize such data extractions. Should researchers select a
seeding tag and hypothesize what they might ﬁnd in terms of related tags and base
research on those hypotheses vs. what they actually ﬁnd? Should researchers extract
related tags networks and make inferences about the millions of image holdings
related to that network? Should researchers use related tags networks to identify
large-scale trends and collective associations? Should researchers try to start tagging
movements to change the collective associations of one tag with another?
In the same way that surrounding text to multimedia may be used to understand
the contents of multimedia, tags may be mined (“tag mining”) for informational
value (Zha et al. 2012, p. 361). Related tags networks offer a way in to understanding
a small part of the massive collections of shared imagery and videos on social media
platforms. While these networks are built on labeling metadata, particularly noisy,
unstructured, and informal keyword labeling, these structures provide insights about
implicit links between the tags, and by extension, collective mental associations.
Such associations are often latent to the individual user and are only revealed
through computational processes that enable their visibility.
Review of The Literature
Based on the Konza tagging example above, several ﬁndings from tagging research
emerge. When people tag the image contents they share on social media, they tend
to think semantically and so choose words that carry meaning. They do not often
use function words or syntax words. Also, people tend to think egoistically, based
on their own local experiences; they use colloquial words which are comfortable to
them even if the words are uncommon and informal. People are situated socially
within particular social groups, and content-sharing sites are socio-technical spaces.
People’s selection of tag terms is inﬂuenced by their peer groups. People go online
to connect socially, with many posing to their imagined audiences of social peers,

Parsing Related Tags Networks from Flickr® to Explore Crowd-Sourced. . .
199
many of whom are in physically closer proximity. Researchers have found that
when people shared photos close in to their familiar spaces, they tagged more about
“time, space, and motion” and did not provide more informational words as would
someone unfamiliar with the area (such as a tourist) tends to; also, those familiar
to a place tend to share more emotional or affect words about that place than
informational ones because of the personal ties (Ahmed and Guha 2012, pp.1–2).
People think in terms of narratives and sequences, based on their own experi-
ences. “Folk” or amateur tagging tends to mix differing levels of granularity. The
freeform tags may refer to insider understandings among friends and family, in the
sense that shared imagery may be narrowcast to a small audience. For outsiders,
people’s tags may be unclear or incoherent or inaccessible. Sometimes, users tag
image-by-image, and other times, they tag en masse by applying the same tags to a
bulk upload of related images. Also, people tend to share in a way that is informative
of their native language(s) and culture(s), which may inform what is relevant.
A related tags network is one form of the so-called emergent self-organization. At
the individual levels, users do their own thing, but in their local choices, at the macro
levels, a pattern starts to form that describes group behavior. Collectively, though,
at a high level, tags that co-occur at a sufﬁcient threshold to be linked dyadically
to the seeding tag tend to be more generic and less individualistically ego-based.
They tend to be unigrams or one-grams instead of phrases. Individual patterns of
tagging do not necessarily repeat at the macro level. Also, tags seem to be related
linguistically to other tags, with little in the way of multilingual tags in a particular
related tags network. When seeded with a word in a particular language, many of the
other co-occurring tags are also in that original tag’s language. On Flickr®, singular
and plural forms of a tag are treated as separate tags.
Various studies on tagging have explored why people tag, initially to enable
future retrieval of the shared contents and also to make their contents available
to a broader audience. The colloquial features of tagging make images more
human-browsable; for example, colloquial labeling of regions is more effective for
human search than more formalist labeling (Thomee and Rae 2012). Researchers
have found that there are within-gender preferences for tagging (Popescu and
Grefenstette 2010), with males preferring how males tag, and females preferring
how females tag. Some researchers suggest that tagging is analogous to laying
down pheromone trails to serve as wayﬁnders (from source to source) to lead
others to discover their digital resources with tags acting as “a medium for social
collaboration, navigation and browsing” and further that there is “an overall stable
equilibrium : : : among tag patterns due to the social nature of the tagging process”
(Kannampallil and Fu 2009, p. 165). While related tags networks show tags that
occur at fairly high frequency, there is value in social media tags in the long tail.
As one research team has observed, even one co-occurrence of a tag with another
dyadically may be insightful, as is identifying the tags that constitute the long tail
of a target tag (Kordumova et al. 2016). The rarity of tags on the long tail frequency
distribution often means that such tags are “overlooked” (Kordumova et al. 2016,
p. 51).

200
S. Hai-Jew
Exploring “Usual” and “Unusual” Related Tags Networks
on Flickr®
This section contains a walk-through of six related tags networks, three using
“usual” as a seeding tag, and three using “unusual” as a seeding tag, to see how
this all works. These two seeding tags were selected because they are relativistic
terms. What is unusual for one may be wholly usual for the other. The related tags
networks may unearth some surprises.
To extract a related tags network from Flickr® using NodeXL (Network
Overview, Discovery, and Exploration for Excel), a user has to ensure that the
third-party data importer for Flickr® has been downloaded and installed. Also, he or
she should have acquired a key from Flickr® in order to access the data. The general
sequence of extracting a related tags network using NodeXL goes like this:
1. Open NodeXL. Ensure that the third-party social media data extraction for the
Flickr® platform is downloaded and enabled.
2. In the ribbon, go to the NodeXL tab. In the Data area, select Import. In the
dropdown menu, select “From Flickr® Related Tags Network.”
3. Type in the desired tag as the seeding term.
4. Place the API key.
5. Select whether the network should be at 1, 1.5, or 2 degrees.
6. Select whether or not to capture sample image ﬁles.
7. Click OK.
8. Once the data is collected, go to the Analysis area of the NodeXL tab on the
ribbon. Capture the Graph Metrics. These include number of vertices, number
of unique edges, self-loops, reciprocated vertices, reciprocated edges, con-
nected components, the maximum geodesic distance (graph diameter), average
geodesic distance, graph density, and other measures (including modularity).
9. Go to the Groups in the Analysis area of the NodeXL tab on the ribbon, and
choose the clustering method desired.
10. In the graph pane, create the respective data visualizations.
11. If labeling is desired for the graph, go to the Autoﬁll Columns feature in the
Visual Properties area of the NodeXL tab of the ribbon.
12. Likewise, if there is a desire to include the captured images related to the tags
in the network graph, there are several adjustments that need to be made in
multiple locations to enable this.
All the underlying related data is available in the worksheets labeled Edges,
Vertices, Groups, Group Vertices, Overall Metrics, and so on. It is valuable to
explore the underlying data. The vertices may be exported, for example, into a
linguistic analysis tool, in order to map linguistic patterns in the data.

Parsing Related Tags Networks from Flickr® to Explore Crowd-Sourced. . .
201
Fig. 2 “Usual” related tags network on Flickr® (1 deg.), with dyadic vertex relationships identiﬁed
Seeding Tag: “Usual”
For the related tags network seeded with “usual” as the tag for a one-degree network
(direct ties between ﬁrst neighbors and the target tag), there were 27 vertices and 26
unique edges. The maximum geodesic distance of this network was two. The graph
density was 0.037. In terms of non-reciprocated tags, a majority of the edges were
non-reciprocated (meaning that the other tags, when they were placed at the center
of their own respective related tags networks, did not include the “usual” tag as one
of the more common co-occurring ones) (Fig. 2).
The related tags network around the “usual” seeding tag at 1.5 degrees resulted
in a network with 27 vertices and 183 unique edges (Fig. 3). The reciprocated
vertex pair ratio was 0.196078, and the reciprocated edge ratio was 0.327868.
The maximum vertices in a connected component were 27, and the maximum
edges in a connected component were 183. The maximum graph diameter (or
maximum geodesic distance) was two, with an average geodesic distance of 1.5.
The graph density was 0.260684. Four clusters (subgroups) were identiﬁed from
this graph using the Clauset–Newman–Moore clustering algorithm (a community

202
S. Hai-Jew
Fig. 3 “Usual” related tags network from Flickr® (1.5 deg.), with labeled edges showing
(non)reciprocation
analysis algorithm). This may be seen in a layout using packed rectangles. In this
ﬁgure, the edges show some reciprocal tag ties: light-shadow, face-shadow, face-
eyes, cute-kitten, female-hair, and hair-eyes, which suggest deeper bidirectional tag
associations.
A two-degree related tags extraction of the “usual” tag on Flickr® resulted in
a graph with 453 vertices and 1376 edges. The reciprocated vertex pair ratio was
0.022288, and the reciprocated edge ratio was 0.043604. The maximum geodesic
distance or graph diameter was four, and the average geodesic distance was 3.2.
The graph density was 0.00672, so there was not a lot of density. In other words,
when people conceptualize “usual,” there were a wide range of tags used without
a lot of connectivity (cohesiveness of conceptualization?) between them. Using
the Clauset–Newman–Moore clustering algorithm, seven groups or clusters were
identiﬁed (Fig. 4). When the same data (at 2 deg.) was run for motifs, 52 motifs
were identiﬁed, which suggests complex small-scale interrelationships among the
diverse tags.
The next section contains related tags networks seeded with the “unusual” tag.

Parsing Related Tags Networks from Flickr® to Explore Crowd-Sourced. . .
203
Fig. 4 “Usual” related tags network from Flickr® (2 deg.), with treemap layout for groups
Seeding Tag: “Unusual”
For the “unusual” related tags network at 1 deg., the graph itself contained 55
vertices with 54 unique edges. There was only one connected component, and
the maximum geodesic distance (graph diameter) was two. The graph density
was 0.01818, which identiﬁes the actual presence of links divided by the possible
number of links, suggests disparate non-connectivity among the extracted tags.
With terms that are relativistic like “usual” and “unusual,” one might expect less
cohesion because there may be less collective agreement of what the tag may mean.
The extracted tags identify various nouns: wildlife, plant, art, architecture, sky,
nature, water, clouds, tree, and other tags. There are colloquial partial synonyms
to “unusual” like the following: weird, surreal, strange, unique, and odd. Various
descriptive color-based adjectives are included (Figs. 5 and 6).
At 1.5 degrees, the “unusual” related tags network on Flickr® resulted in 55
vertices (as of the one-degree network) but 1181 unique edges. The reciprocated
vertex pair ratio was 0.28649, and the reciprocated edge ratio was 0.445385. The
maximum geodesic distance (graph diameter) was two, and the graph density was

204
S. Hai-Jew
Fig. 5 “Unusual” related tags network on Flickr® (1 deg.), Clauset–Newman–Moore clustering
algorithm, laid out with Harel–Koren fast multiscale layout
0.397643. Using the Clauset–Newman–Moore cluster algorithm, two clusters were
identiﬁed. Clusters, by deﬁnition, have some deeper ties based on link density than
other parts of the network; how the groupings are labeled (the explanation for
the clustering) have to be done by the researcher. In Fig. 7, the top cluster shows
links to particular human-made phenomena like “architecture” and “building” and
“sculpture,” and synonymous adjectives but also objects that may be described as
“unusual”; the bottom cluster is full of adjectives and nouns related to nature. In
both groups, the inclusion of images linked to the respective tags provides deeper
understanding of the clusters.

Parsing Related Tags Networks from Flickr® to Explore Crowd-Sourced. . .
205
Fig. 6 “Unusual” related tags network from Flickr® (1 deg.), with labeled vertices indicating
(non)reciprocation
In Fig. 8, the same data as Fig. 7 is reprocessed using the Wakita–Tsurumi
clustering algorithm, which found three groups or clusters. The top group provides
nature-based contextual descriptors. The one on the bottom left refers to structure,
art, and signage. The one at the bottom right focuses around clouds and landscapes.
The groupings do not necessarily lend themselves to easy distinctions or separations.
In Fig. 9, the 1.5 degree “unusual” related tags network was reprocessed using
the Girvan–Newman clustering algorithm. This resulted in 11 extracted groups, with
some of the groups consisting of one tag only. In the ﬁgure, the main connected
component in the large group seems to tell a more complex story of what “unusual”
means than the smaller groups at the bottom (which may serve as a kind of “long
tail” frequency distribution within the related tags network).
It is important to note that users of NodeXL may apply a wide range of
adjustments to the graph visualizations. They may describe how the groupings are
portrayed (treemap diagram, packed rectangles, or force-directed group layout),
the nature of the borders between groups, and the presence/absence of connectors

206
S. Hai-Jew
Fig. 7 “Unusual” related tags network from Flickr® (1.5 deg.), Clauset–Newman–Moore cluster-
ing algorithm
between groups. In the Autoﬁll Columns, users may decide how the vertices and
edges are depicted visually and labeled. In the graph pane, other features of the
graph may be explored. Within that the Dynamic Filters may be used to select out
data in a non-destructive way in order to explore the related tags network in more
depth. In Fig. 10, reciprocation labels have been applied to the edges of a 1.5-degree
related tags network in two clusters (without the thumbnail images included).
At two degrees, the “unusual” related tags network on Flickr® resulted in a graph
with 455 vertices and 2670 edges. The reciprocated vertex pair ratio was 0.109265,
and the reciprocated edge ratio was 0.197003. The maximum geodesic distance
(graph diameter) was four, with the average geodesic distance at 2.89. The graph

Parsing Related Tags Networks from Flickr® to Explore Crowd-Sourced. . .
207
Fig. 8 “Unusual” related tags network from Flickr® (1.5 deg.), Wakita–Tsurumi clustering
algorithm
density was 0.012925. Using the Clauset–Newman–Moore clustering algorithm,
ﬁve groups were identiﬁed; the Wakita–Tsurumi clustering algorithm, 7 groups;
and the Girvan–Newman clustering algorithm, 122 groups. Analyzing the terms and
images related to each grouping gives a sense of how the clusters are organized.
For example, some are based around “unusual” images from certain locations, like
London, or there may be a topical organizing concept, like wildlife. The graphs
are more effective when engaged with interactively, such as by zooming in and out.
Fig. 11 shows how the one underlying dataset may vary greatly in terms of clustering
based on the clustering algorithms applied.

208
S. Hai-Jew
Fig. 9 “Unusual” related tags network from Flickr® (1.5 deg.) with Girvan–Newman clustering
algorithm
In none of the three clustering algorithms do users have to pre-deﬁne how many
clusters are required (unlike for k-means cluster algorithm). There is, however, a
need to analyze the outcomes to see which clustering algorithm is more informative
for the underlying related tags contents and the tag subgroups. In the research
literature, the Clauset–Newman–Moore measures groupness or modularity in a
network based on a “Q measure.” The authors write, “If the fraction of within-
community edges is no different from what we would expect for the randomized
network, then this quantity will be zero. Nonzero values represent deviations from
randomness, and in practice it is found that a value above about 0.3 is a good
indicator of signiﬁcant community structure in a network” (Clauset et al. 2004, p. 2).

Parsing Related Tags Networks from Flickr® to Explore Crowd-Sourced. . .
209
Fig. 10 “Unusual” related tags network on Flickr® (1.5 deg.) with dyadic ties noted
The Clauset–Newman–Moore clustering algorithm is a bottom-up “agglomerative
clustering” method to extract subgroups from a network by merging pairs of nodes
into clusters. Here, the algorithm is used to calculate the distances between the
most similar members for each pair of clusters and will merge the clusters with
the least distance (Clauset et al. 2004, p. 2). Other researchers suggest that the
CNM community detection algorithm is computationally expensive and does not
scale well beyond half a million nodes (Wakita and Tsurumi 2007a, p. 1275). To
address this, the Wakita–Tsurumi team built on the CNM algorithm by adding
heuristics that “merge community structures in a balanced manner” to “improve
community structure analysis” at larger scale (Wakita and Tsurumi 2007a, p. 1275).
This team introduced the idea of “modularity” in a network’s community structure

210
S. Hai-Jew
Fig. 11 Three different clustering algorithms applied to the related tags network data (at 2 deg.)
in a triptych
as “a quantitative measure of the quality of clusterings (i.e., a graph partitioned into
a set of subgraphs)” against which other clusterings of the same network may be
compared (Wakita and Tsurumi 2007b, p. 2).
The Girvan–Newman Algorithm begins with the entirety of the network and all
extant links among the nodes, and it detects communities by gradually removing
edges from the original network. The authors write, “The connected components
of the remaining network are the communities. Instead of trying to construct a
measure that tells us which edges are the most central to communities, the Girvan–
Newman Algorithm focuses on edges that are most likely ‘between’ communities”
(Girvan–Newman Algorithm 2015, p. 1). The nodes that have high betweenness
are bridging nodes that are highly centralized and connect various communities in
a network. Node betweenness is based on “the number of shortest paths between
pairs of nodes that run through it”; those that are most central will be the ones
used to move information and goods in a network (Girvan–Newman Algorithm
2015, p. 1). The Girvan–Newman Algorithm also explores “edge betweenness,”
deﬁned as “the number of shortest paths between pairs of nodes that run along it. If
there is more than one shortest path between a pair of nodes, each path is assigned
equal weight such that the total weight of all of the paths is equal to unity. If a
network contains communities or groups that are only loosely connected by a few
inter-group edges, then all shortest paths between different communities must go
along one of these few edges. Thus, the edges connecting communities will have
high edge betweenness (at least one of them). By removing these edges, the groups
are separated from one another and so the underlying community structure of the
network is revealed” (Girvan–Newman Algorithm 2015, p. 1). The Girvan–Newman
Algorithm is considered a top-down type of processing that begins with the entire
network ﬁrst, and the network breaks into different communities with the successive
removal of the links until what is left is a hierarchical dendrogram, with the leaves
as individual nodes (Girvan–Newman Algorithm 2015).

Parsing Related Tags Networks from Flickr® to Explore Crowd-Sourced. . .
211
Actual Image Sets from Seeding Tags
A perusal of the “usual” image set (1103 items) shows artworks, landscapes, people
in costumes and dress-up, screen grabs from videos, aircraft, a baby leaning forward
in his/her high chair to stuff a giant uncooked turkey which is larger than him/her,
a pair of feet in slippers, a new haircut from various angles, body art, a pet dog,
politician images, and others. A perusal of the “unusual” image set (791 thumbnail
images) shows cloud formations, second Life virtual world art, a man holding his
face in his hands like a removable mask while his own facial area is blurred, various
body art tattoos, a poolside seal lying on a lounge chair next to a guy—with both
sleeping, crystal formations, posed stuffed animals, a couple kissing, wildlife, a
birthday cake, ﬂowers, plants, shadows and light, a child with a snake around her
neck, and artworks. Some of the images are created ones, with clever image editing,
and others are “found” from-the-world. It would seem, without forcing the assertion,
that one person’s “unusual” might be another person’s “usual.”
In terms of comparisons with the actual scraped image set based on the seeding
tag, it was not possible to get any sort of a real match. At the level of abstraction of
a related tags network, that seemed to be done at a level of abstraction that was not
directly reﬂected at the level of the actual shared imagery for either the “usual” or
“unusual” image collections (Fig. 12).
Discussion
Content-sharing social media platforms are high dimensional spaces with complex
messaging in imagery, audio, and video. Related tags networks, which are built
from arbitrary “folk” tags applied to such contents, may be helpful in formulating
some early understanding of the contents and the crowd-sourced mental associations
linked to the contents.
This chapter introduced the creation of related tags networks from Flickr® using
NodeXL and an integrated third-party data exporter to access the Flickr® API for
related tags networks. This work showed how related tags may be explored at 1, 1.5,
and 2 degrees. Also, it showed how linked thumbnail images to the respective tags
may be viewed for a light image sense of the term. Also, this showed how subgroups
may be extracted from the various networks using three different algorithms, and
how meanings may be extracted from the respective clusterings. Finally, a scrape of
the images based on the target seeding tags were done with some observations of
the image sets.
Related tags networks tend to reach a certain equilibrium and may remain stable
for months and even years (based on data extractions by this author). This stability
may be due in part to the social inﬂuences of co-taggers; co-taggers share knowledge
based on how they tag, and they enhance the speciﬁcity and richness of tagging

212
S. Hai-Jew
Fig. 12 “Unusual” related tags network from Flickr® (2 deg.), as a connected component
sets based on mutual inﬂuence through distributed cognition (Ley and Seitlinger
2015). The shared labors of users on content-sharing sites contribute to crowd-
sourced semantic stabilization of tags around particular topics. The equilibrium of
related tags networks may also come from the difﬁculty of achieving the threshold
of co-occurrence given the massness of the social imagery and the applied tags.
Lesser-occurring tags—which are the majority—will exist in the long tail of the
frequency distribution curve and not even register as one of the top few that co-
occur with a target seeding tag-based graph/subgraph. These networks may reveal
tag associations that may suggest something of the underlying image sets. While
the seeding text co-occurs with the ﬁrst neighbors and second neighbors in the
related tags network, the reciprocation levels between nodes are not high; the ﬁrst

Parsing Related Tags Networks from Flickr® to Explore Crowd-Sourced. . .
213
and second neighbors may not relate back to the seeding tag if those tags were used
as the focal or seeding tag of their own related tags networks. While the relationships
between tags are implicit in related tags networks and may change over time, there
are ways to extract more explicit relationships between terms—such as by running
the tags through linguistic analysis for more formal parts of speech analysis.
Future Research Directions
The application of related tags networks to research in the digital humanities is
promising as a way to understand complex phenomena. As such, there is plenty
of space for researchers to build their own “use cases” based on this approach. It
would be helpful to have baseline understandings of related tags networks and how
they form and evolve over time. It would help to know if related tags networks
have a generic form and if different types (based on seeding tags) show different
characteristics. For example, are related tags networks different based on tags
which are concrete vs. abstract, single-meaninged vs. polysemic, commonly used
vs. uncommonly used, ambiguated vs. disambiguated, social-media-originated vs.
traditional dictionary denotated (semantically), material-based vs. ephemera-based,
or other sorts of comparatives? Do tag–tag relations emulate other relations in
formal word relationships? Other contexts?
It would be helpful to not only explore popular co-occurring tags in a related
tags network but also understand unrelated tags networks (such as those with total
mutual exclusion or which are never used in combination); it would be interesting to
understand the “long tail” distribution of tags used only once or twice with a target
focal tag and what insights may be available from such long tails.
Conclusion
With the change in Yahoo’s fortunes and the rise of Google Photos, Flickr® itself
may be “ﬂickr’d out” (Murabayashi 2016). Further, the age of human manual
and batch-tagging may be coming to an end. “Folk” tagging of mostly amateur-
created contents has long been seen as noisy and error-ridden, informed by users’
own mixed motives, both private and public. For many contexts, such as geo-
tagging, the preference has long been for going with locational data from apps and
equipment, which communicate exact degree coordinates and sea levels. With the
major advancements in machine vision and image object recognition, images shared
on the Web will all likely be auto-tagged. The value in human “folk” tagging may
be in their sharing of private narratives by providing information that would not
otherwise be machine-observable or known from the image itself.
Computational tagging and tag mining will likely affect researchers who engage
with Web-scale social imagery and related tags. The manual content analysis of

214
S. Hai-Jew
imagery has never been really scalable, except in the rare crowd-sourced project.
Related tags networks are capturable because of computational affordances, but
even before their full value as research tools has been exploited, even more complex
tag networks are enabled—with creative mixes of users, the shared contents, shared
commenting, and tagging, or mixes of these elements to address more complex
research questions.
References
C.C. Aggarwal, in C.C. Aggarwal’s Social Network Data Analytics. An introduction to social
network data analytics. Ch. 1 (Springer, New York, 2011), pp. 1–15
S.I. Ahmed, S. Guha, Distance matters: an exploratory analysis of the linguistic features of Flickr
photo tag metadata in relation to impression management, in The Proceedings of DBSocial ’12,
Scottsdale, Arizona, 2012, pp. 1–6
A. Clauset, M.E.J. Newman, C. Moore, Finding community structure in very large networks. Phys.
Rev. E70(6), 066111 (2004)
M. Derntl, T. Hampel, R. Motschnig-Pitrik, T. Pitner, Inclusive social tagging and its support in
web 2.0 services. Comput. Hum. Behav. 27(2011), 1460–1466 (2011)
Girvan–Newman
Algorithm,
(2015)
Wikipedia.
Retrieved
June
5,
2016,
from
https://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Girvan%E2%80%93Newman_algorithm
T.G. Kannampallil, W.-T. Fu, in Augmented Cognition. HCII 2009. LNAI 5638, ed. by D. D.
Schmorow et al.. Trail patterns in social tagging systems: role of tags as digital pheromones
(Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2009), pp. 165–174
S. Kordumova, J. van Gemert, C.G.M. Snoek, in MultiMedia Modeling, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, ed. by Q. Tian et al.. Exploring the long tail of social media tags, vol 9516 (Springer,
Cham, 2016), pp. 51–62
T. Ley, P. Seitlinger, Dynamics of human categorization in a collaborative tagging system: how
social processes of semantic stabilization shape individual sensemaking. Comput. Hum. Behav.
51(2015), 140–151 (2015)
A. Murabayashi, Flickr’d out: the rise and fall of a photo sharing service. PetaPixel. Retrieved
June 5, 2016, from http://petapixel.com/2016/03/22/ﬂickrd-rise-demise-photo-sharing-service/
, 2016, Mar. 22
S. Perez, After backlash over upgrade, Flickr considers letting users opt-out of auto-tagging. Tech
Crunch. Retrieved June 9, 2016, from http://techcrunch.com/2015/05/12/after-backlash-over-
upgrade-ﬂickr-considers-letting-users-opt-out-of-auto-tagging/, 2015, May 12
A. Popescu, G. Grefenstette, Image tagging and search—a gender oriented study, in The Proceed-
ings of WSM ’10. Oct. 25, 2010, Firenze, Italy, pp. 9–14
C. Smith, By the numbers: 14 interesting Flickr stats. DMR. Retrieved June 5, 2016, from http://
expandedramblings.com/index.php/ﬂickr-stats/, 2016, May 6
E. Spyrou, P. Mylonas, A survey on Flickr multimedia research challenges. Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell.
51, 71–91 (2016)
B. Thomee, A. Rae, in The Proceedings of MM ’12, Oct. 29–Nov. 2. Exploring and browsing
photos through characteristic geographic tag regions (Association of Computing Machinery,
Nara, Japan, 2012), pp. 1273–1274
K. Wakita, T. Tsurumi, Finding community structure in mega-scale social networks (extended
abstract), in The Proceedings of WWW 2007, May 8–12, 2007a, Banff, Alberta, Canada,
pp. 1275–1276
K. Wakita, T. Tsurumi, Finding community structure in mega-scale social networks, Preprint
arXiv:cs/0702048, pp. 1–9 (2007b).
Z.-J. Zha, M. Wang, S. Jialie, T.-S. Chua, in C.C. Aggarwal & C.X. Zhai’s Mining Text Data. Text
mining in multimedia (Springer, New York, 2012), pp. 361–384

Part V
Sense-Making in the World

A Case Study of Crowdsourcing Imagery
Coding in Natural Disasters
Cobi Smith
Abstract Crowdsourcing and open licensing allow more people to participate in
research and humanitarian activities. Open data, such as geographic information
shared through OpenStreetMap and image datasets from disasters, can be useful
for disaster response and recovery work. This chapter shares a real-world case
study of humanitarian-driven imagery analysis, using open-source crowdsourcing
technology. Shared philosophies in open technologies and digital humanities,
including remixing and the wisdom of the crowd, are reﬂected in this case study.
Introduction
Digital humanities research is characterized by values of transparency and col-
laboration through online networks (Spiro 2012, p. 17). This means that digital
humanities can contribute to ﬁelds of work beyond academia, such as in human-
itarian disaster responses. Visual media data shared during disasters are a source
of information for humanitarian responses and research. They can also be a
source of information for digital humanities researchers. This data can inform acute
emergency responses as well as longer term research to prevent and mitigate future
disasters. Given the time dependencies and short funding cycles of disaster response
work, the digital humanities can support humanitarian activities through longer
term research and analysis that may have academic and humanitarian outcomes.
This chapter shares a real-world case study of humanitarian-driven imagery analysis
using open-source crowdsourcing technology. Potential links to digital humanities
are emphasized, with the hope that in future, data analyses and academic work in
digital humanities may be able to support humanitarian goals.
Cobi Smith is a PhD candidate at Australian National University. She took leave from her PhD in
Australia to work in Geneva as a consultant for the United Nations. She worked on the GeoTag-
X project within the United Nations Institute for Training and Research Operational Statellite
Application Programme (UNITAT-UNOSAT). This research was part of the Citizen Cyberlab
project, funded through EU FP7.
C. Smith ()
Australian National University, Canberra, ACT, Australia
e-mail: cobi.smith@anu.edu.au
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
S. Hai-Jew (ed.), Data Analytics in Digital Humanities, Multimedia Systems
and Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54499-1_9
217

218
C. Smith
GeoTag-X was developed at the United Nations Institute for Training and
Research (UNITAR) Operational Satellite Applications Programme (UNOSAT) in
Geneva and built using the Pybossa open-source crowdsourcing platform. It was
funded through the European Commission 7th Framework Programme for Research
and Technological Development as part of Citizen Cyberlab. The broader Citizen
Cyberlab research project aimed to research and evaluate online collaborative
environments and software tools for creative learning. Most other applications
were focused on citizen science; GeoTag-X was unique in its humanitarian disaster
response focus.
GeoTag-X aims were aligned with best practices in humanitarian knowledge
management (King 2005; Cervigni and Smith 2014):
•
identify media relevant to a disaster or emergency that are not already being
categorized and geotagged;
•
analyze content to generate associated metadata for sharing, pooling, compari-
son, veriﬁcation and mapping;
•
establish a community of practice involving individuals in multiple organizations
to develop tacit knowledge associated with explicit knowledge generated through
the project and with the knowledge of other organizations;
•
focus on geotagging, to facilitate visualization and accessible representations of
complex data and information;
•
prototype humanitarian application of an open-source crowdsourcing platform
and use prototype data and information to answer questions and respond to
identiﬁed information needs;
•
recognize the value of tacit knowledge gained from ﬁeld experience, collabora-
tion, and learned expertise;
•
research if and how such knowledge can be passed on to new digital volunteers;
•
promote the use of GIS technologies and internet technologies, including
PyBossa for open-source crowdsourcing and GitHub for virtual collaboration and
version control.
These aims yielded data designed for use in humanitarian disaster response
contexts. The project’s open philosophy meant that outcomes could also contribute
to digital humanities projects, given open licensing supports uses unanticipated by
original users.
Aims of the project were drawn from the Information Systems for Crisis
Response and Management (ISCRAM) community (Van De Walle and Turoff
2006), through which related technologies have been documented. Existing research
anticipated system development needs, for example, challenges in data storage and
integrating new social media sources (Schram and Anderson 2012). Complementary
systems existed to support disaster responses, for example, an Australian system
developed in collaboration with ofﬁcial crisis coordination teams. This system
was motivated by a 2009 Australian Royal Commission on bushﬁres, which heard
evidence that ofﬁcial services lacked information reported in near-real-time on
social media (Yin et al. 2012, p. 54). Another system used mobile phone calling
data to inform emergency responses (Madey et al. 2006). GeoTag-X differed from

A Case Study of Crowdsourcing Imagery Coding in Natural Disasters
219
existing systems in focusing on crowdsourced imagery coding and analysis, as well
as having an explicitly open ethos, of relevance for digital humanities research.
ISCRAM research can be described as crisis informatics, which has been deﬁned
as the study of social, technical, and informational concerns in emergency response.
This includes interactions and concerns of formal responders as well as affected
citizens (Palen et al. 2010a; Starbird et al. 2012; Cervigni and Smith 2014, p. 8).
Discussion about the value of volunteer participation in disaster responses reﬂects
collaborative and crowdsourced values of digital humanities, as well as debates
about how to value expert knowledge (Spiro 2012, p. 20).
By viewing the citizenry as a powerful, self-organizing, and collectively intelligent force,
ICT has the potential to play a remarkable and transformational role in the way society
responds to mass emergencies and disaster. Furthermore, this view of a civil society that
can be augmented by ICT is based on social and behavioral knowledge about how people
truly respond in disaster, rather than on simpliﬁed and mythical portrayals of people unable
to help themselves. Research has shown that disaster victims themselves are the true ﬁrst
responders, frequently acting on the basis of knowledge not available to ofﬁcials (Palen et
al. 2010b, pp. 1–2).
Debates about the merits of expert and public contributions are shared across
digital humanities and humanitarian disaster response work.
Crowdsourcing is a form of volunteer participation. The speed and willingness
that digital volunteers have shown in collecting and compiling information in disas-
ter responses has already inﬂuenced the United Nations Ofﬁce for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA). Digital volunteers have helped to collect
information for relevant datasets much more rapidly than ofﬁcials could alone,
with huge potential impacts on ofﬁcials’ responsibilities in information management
(UNOCHA 2011). Crowdsourcing can involve people feeling a need to help (Lowe
and Fothergill 2003) who might not have opportunities to help in other ways.
However, crowdsourcing remains controversial. Research has questioned the
ethics of crowdsourcing from the perspective of employees’ rights (Felstiner 2011),
which is mitigated in humanitarian disaster response circumstances in which
people volunteer regardless of crowdsourcing (Finkelstein and Brannick 2007).
Crowdsourcing challenges the privileged role of individual experts (Spielman
2014). Research has indicated that unpaid crowds can produce results of high quality
regardless of the type of task (Borromeo et al. 2016). A systematic review of crowd-
sourcing in health and medicine found that it can improve the quality of a research
project, as well as increase speed and reduce cost—however, also called for stan-
dardized guidelines on crowdsourcing metrics and reporting methods for clarity and
comparability (Ranard et al. 2014). This call is consistent with principles of open
research, to which discussion of the GeoTag-X method is intended to contribute.
Method
The name GeoTag-X expressed key components of the system:
1. Geo: all media should be georeferenced as accurately as possible;

220
C. Smith
2. Tag: all media should have metadata relevant to the humanitarian and disaster
response community, compatible with existing disaster response methodologies;
3. X: the system should be adaptable for diverse disaster situations anywhere in the
world.
An early iteration of the platform in 2011 was called CyberMappr (Bromley
2012), which engaged volunteers in ﬁnding and georeferencing online photographs
depicting damage resulting from conﬂict.
Source code for the GeoTag-X project, which was adapted from the open-
source Pybossa code, is available at github.com/geotagx. This includes code for
the overall website as well as speciﬁc projects, modules, and tasks. A project
is typically a disaster event, such as the 2014 Ebola outbreak in West Africa or
ﬂooding of the Yamuna river in India in 2013. Modules are analyses of imagery that
forms a dataset associated with a project. For example, the Ebola outbreak project
included a module about analyzing images for responders’ use of personal protective
equipment. Another Ebola module was about geotagging the images. The Yamuna
project included modules about analyzing ﬂood waters and pollution, as well as
separate modules analyzing impacts on people and animals. Tasks were individual
analyses of images within modules. Task design reﬂected that of the underlying
Pybossa code.
GeoTag-X was designed so that new modules with different questions could
be ﬂexibly developed depending on human input in response to environmental
conditions, typically a new disaster event. This meant the system had potential to
reﬂect a diverse range of values and cultural perspectives. Rather than claiming
to be a neutral, anonymized data analysis platform, GeoTag-X transparently com-
municated humanitarian values and objectives through descriptive text. Participants
could consider for themselves the questions used in the system and could contact
developers to suggest new modules or projects asking different questions. This is
why GeoTag-X was framed as a citizen science project with learning objectives as
part of Citizen Cyberlab, as well as a technology platform for disaster response.
In GeoTag-X system design, data was collected in association with a particular
project and analyzed through modules associated with a project. A project was
typically a disaster event, for example, the 2013 Yamuna monsoonal ﬂoods, while a
module was a type of analysis, for example, geotagging or recording whether photos
feature shelter. Modules built using HTML and Javascript were a series of analysis
steps; the same code for modules could be applied in different projects. For example,
the same code for geotagging photos in a project about a ﬂood in India could be used
for a project about landslides in Peru. Volunteers could codesign a module with
a particular dataset in mind; media with which they frame their understanding of
potential questions for analysis and develop shared understanding. Once a module
was published within a project category, volunteers could add more media to the
initial dataset. The open nature of the module code as well as resulting data means
that digital humanities researchers could explore values and assumptions embedded
in the system, as well as resulting datasets.
A taxonomy of information management in disaster response (King 2005;
Tatham and Spens 2011) was adapted for the GeoTag-X project in a project report
(Cervigni and Smith 2014).

A Case Study of Crowdsourcing Imagery Coding in Natural Disasters
221
Data
A collection of related facts usually organized in a format such as a table or database
and gathered for a particular purpose. In this sense, GeoTag-X produced image
analyses as data tables associated with speciﬁc modules.
Information
Data that has been interpreted, verbalized, translated, or transformed to reveal
the underlying meaning or context. In this sense, the images shown on the
GeoTag-X platform represented raw data, while volunteers’ image analyses created
information that was saved as data tables.
Knowledge
Internalization of information, data, and experience. In this sense GeoTag-X was a
learning and training project building on data analyses. Knowledge can be further
sub-divided into two categories.
1. Tacit Knowledge
Personal knowledge resident within the mind, behavior, and perceptions of
individual members of the organization. Transforming the tacit knowledge of
core project participants into explicit knowledge for sharing happened through
project documentation.
2. Explicit Knowledge
Formal, recorded, or systematic knowledge that can easily be accessed trans-
mitted or stored in computer ﬁles or hard copy. Explicit knowledge was what
GeoTag-X aimed to generate for humanitarian disaster responses.
Research about citizen science and crowdsourcing indicates that volunteers
should be able to usefully contribute limited time to a project, supported by results
of usability studies (Jennet and Cox 2014) which found that the GeoTag-X website,
modules, and tutorials needed to be as simple as possible to avoid people becoming
frustrated and discontinuing analysis.
Steps within prototype learning modules were able to be categorized as one of
the three types: polar analyses, geotagging analyses, or multiple-choice analyses.
However in all cases, even polar analyses, participants were given the option of
choosing a “don’t know” option. The importance of actively labelling uncertainty
was noted in a review of the accuracy of OpenStreetMap digital volunteers’
assessments of damage (Westrope et al. 2014). Types of analysis questions are
explained from a technical perspective, followed by explanation of how each of
the modules was developed from a participatory perspective.

222
C. Smith
Binary or Polar Analyses
Binary or polar analyses focused on yes or no, absent or present analyses. Volunteers
were asked to consider a pair of alternatives and select which one to associate
with the media being analyzed. However, all questions included a “don’t know”
option, so participants could respond if they were not comfortable with the binary
options. Below is an example of how a binary question was coded in Javascript in
the system1:
The Javascript code above instructed the system to move on to another question if
the participant answered no. If they answered yes, they were asked further questions
about the water. If they responded saying they didn’t know, they were thanked for
their time and given a new analysis task. Every module began with the polar analysis
step of determining whether media is spam or not, so polar analyses were the base
step for all modules.
Geotagging Analyses
Another standard type of analysis is geotagging media on a map. Given the name
and focus of GeoTag-X, geotagging analyses were core to the project. Below is an
example of the typical code for geotagging tasks:
1Example from the project.json ﬁle available at: https://github.com/geotagx/geotagx-project-
yamuna-ﬂoodwaters-2013/.

A Case Study of Crowdsourcing Imagery Coding in Natural Disasters
223
Geotagging relied on OpenStreetMap instances embedded in the module. Users
viewed an image on the right of the screen, then on the left of the screen either
zoomed into a map area where they thought the image was located, or searched for
a speciﬁc place name, which the map then displayed.
Multiple-Choice Analyses
Some modules contained multiple-choice steps asking volunteers to identify, for
example, speciﬁc crops, animals, water, or landscape features. An example of
code for a single-answer multiple-choice question comes from a module analyzing
agricultural crops in Somalia during drought.2
There were two types of multiple-choice analyses: single-answer and multiple-
answer. These two sub-categories of multiple choice are different both from
technical and theoretical perspectives. These two types of multiple-choice categories
lead to different answers in surveys and so cannot be assumed to be interchangeable
in interpreting results.
Technically, single-answer analyses resulted in a single value associated with
a media URL, while multiple-answer resulted in several new associated values.
Single-answer values are studied in behavioral psychology and decision science
because it means volunteers must make a forced choice, even if that choice is “don’t
know.” Research suggests forced-choice analyses encourage deeper processing of
response options (Smyth et al. 2006). This is not practical, however, in situations
where multiple choices are relevant data. Furthermore, displaying several valid
values together as options may support learning in the form of pattern recognition,
valuable if learning is an intended outcome.
For data veriﬁcation, the PyBossa platform had a default value of 30 individual
user analyses, given this value is commonly used for statistical analysis. It is this
repeat analysis that makes PyBossa a crowdsourcing platform. Users (anonymous
and authenticated) only participated once per analysis. After completing an analysis
the system invited them to complete a different one. Developers could prioritize how
2Example from the project.json ﬁle available at: https://github.com/geotagx/geotagx-project-
somalia-crop-identiﬁcation/.

224
C. Smith
the system would serve users new analyses. For example, a particular emergency
response task could be prioritized to be presented to the next 30 users, quickly
yielding a crowdsourced dataset. This might have potential ethical implications
during simultaneous disasters and limited volunteer resources. So developers could
alternatively prioritize a random task to be assigned to the next 30 users.
Results
Given that development of GeoTag-X was a research project, results were not
only outputs as datasets but also development of the project modules themselves.
Thus the development of question module types described in the method above

A Case Study of Crowdsourcing Imagery Coding in Natural Disasters
225
were a project outcome. The outputs of modules were also results, as were their
development. How modules were structured reﬂected technological limitations of
the Pybossa open-source code, as well as what kind of questions for analysis were
valued.
Results were exportable as raw data in JSON or CSV format. A sample output of
data from a single task in a module displayed in the format below, with identifying
numbers replaced with x.
f
“info”: f
“isRelevant”: “Yes”,
“latlancoords”: “2.626953125, 41.7138671875”,
“img”:
“http://www.railnews.co.in/wp-content/uploads/2013/06/6171_3530_
yamu.jpg”,
“task_id”: 582
g,
“user_id”: xxxxx,
“task_id”: 582,
“created”: “2014-05-02T14:01:03.821552”,
“ﬁnish_time”: “2014-05-02T14:01:03.821572”,
“calibration”: null,
“app_id”: 27,
“user_ip”: xxxxx,
“timeout”: null,
“id”: 441
g,
This example data output from a geotagging task is reproduced from Cervigni
and Smith (2014, p. 31), in JSON format.
Analysis of data from the authenticated users (Cervigni and Smith 2014, p.
35) showed that GeoTag-X reﬂected the norm of online communities in which a
minority of participants engage heavily while the majority engage little (Wilkinson
2008). This was evidenced in the bounce rate showing that more than a third
of users of the website simply visited the front page without contributing any
analyses. Analysis in 2014 also showed that two-thirds of users were contributing
anonymously while one-third were authenticated users (Cervigni and Smith 2014,
p. 35).
Discussion
The Digital Humanities Manifesto (Schnapp and Presner 2009) promoted remixing,
openness, and the wisdom of the crowd (Spiro 2012, p. 22). The values of openness
and crowdsourcing were reﬂected in the GeoTag-X project, nonetheless the idea of
remixing was of concern to some in the disaster response community. Given that
disaster response imagery can include sensitive data, there are risks that such data

226
C. Smith
might be used inappropriately if analyses were invited from volunteers rather than
experts. This risk was mitigated by the GeoTag-X system not storing imagery data
or support uploading functions. Rather, the platform was designed to collate and
analyze images already available via citizen or professional journalism online. This
meant the GeoTag-X project itself was an example of remixing. GeoTag-X involved
volunteers collating imagery about a particular disaster spread across the internet
and collating it in a dataset for use in disaster response contexts. This was remixing
news and social media content into a dataset for explicitly humanitarian aims.
The ethics of exposing volunteers to disaster response imagery was discussed in a
2014 workshop at the University of Vienna during a Science in Society Catalyst (SiS
Catalyst) conference on science communication and social inclusion (Smith 2014).
A primary discussion in this workshop was whether a “walled garden” or closed
platform should be developed, allowing staged levels of participation, in contrast to
the entirely open platform in which users were randomly assigned tasks. A “walled
garden” would support, for example, restricting potentially gory disaster modules
to people of a certain age. Debates about how open or closed projects should be
also occur in digital humanities beyond this disaster response technology case study
(Berry 2011, p. 11).
There was no consensus but rather active debate among the group of conference
participants about whether a walled garden should replace the open platform. The
current open platform stores media URLs from a range of online news sources that
young people can access without restriction. The main argument against moving
youth participation to a closed platform was that young people see these news stories
and may face disasters in real life, so censoring this does not support their learning.
Development of technologies like GeoTag-X could teach participants to view such
media from a humanitarian perspective, rather than as a passive media consumer,
which may have psychological and social beneﬁts.
There was discussion about the potential for GeoTag-X to support learning about
potential careers in humanitarian ﬁelds and how to respond to potentially distressing
situations as a proactive and effective ﬁrst responder. At the same conference
Dawson (2012, 2014) experimented with GeoTag-X and shared perspectives about
engaging with migrant communities to geotag content from their home countries.
Considering impacts on volunteer users of the platform reﬂected the humanitarian
context of the project.
The implications of different analysis types used in the project have been
discussed. An untested type of analysis is one in which volunteers freely tag images
with metadata of their choice. Researchers have suggested that allowing volunteers
to freely tag images with metadata of their choice may be as productive for
generating useful information as developing prescribed modules. Stewart Buckﬁeld,
a creator of Flickr, one of the photo services used in GeoTag-X, discussed
classiﬁcation schemes:
I think the lack of hierarchy, synonym control, and semantic precision are precisely why it
works. Free typing loose associations is just a lot easier than making a decision about the
degree of match to a predeﬁned category (especially hierarchical ones). It’s like 90% of the
value of a proper taxonomy but 10 times simpler (Bishr and Kuhn 2007, p. 18).

A Case Study of Crowdsourcing Imagery Coding in Natural Disasters
227
Future research could explore information and learning outcomes comparing
step-by-step analytical approaches used in GeoTag-X modules with free tagging of
the same media. A hypothesis could be that modular analyses support greater learn-
ing, through volunteers questioning the reasons and values behind the programming
of module steps. The challenges and extra effort involved in decision making about
predeﬁned categories may be associated with more learning, in contrast with free
tagging that may generate useful information, but without learning outcomes for
those volunteering to crowdsource.
Imagery analysis differs from text analysis given linguistic barriers are removed.
While text can be understood only by those people or machines literate in the
given language, images can be interpreted by people from diverse cultural and
linguistic backgrounds. Images do not need to be translated for different societies,
though different people may consider different parts of an image signiﬁcant. This
diversity, while more challenging to manage within an information technology
system, can also be a strength. The algorithms and machine interpretations built into
any system design reﬂect certain values. Research has indicated that volunteer-based
crowdsourced sentiment analysis is more accurate than an automatic sentiment
analysis algorithm (Borromeo and Toyama 2015). Machine learning classiﬁers still
need training for different events as well as validation (Starbird et al. 2012; Cobb
et al. 2014), so expectations of greater responsiveness or accuracy from machines
alone may be unrealistic.
Designing a system for sharing information between organizations during com-
plex and time-dependent disaster situations is challenging (Comfort et al. 2004;
Kapucu 2006; Ren et al. 2008). Poor information sharing and coordination during
disaster responses negatively impact collective decision-making and resulting out-
comes, including resource allocation, delayed evacuations, and casualties (Bharosa
et al. 2010). Crowdsourced media analyses will not solve these broader challenges.
New challenges may be introduced; for example, researchers have called for
more critical analysis of content emerging from social media in disaster situations
given fake images may be shared (Gupta et al. 2013). Disaster responses remain
challenging scenarios given timeframes, however, crowdsourcing may alleviate
some challenges in information sharing. Digital humanities research typically has
longer time frames and less political pressure than disaster response work, so
digital humanities researchers have opportunities to contribute to humanitarian work
through engagement with open technology projects.
Conclusion
Digital humanities suggest not only the promise of collective intelligence but also
collective intellect (Berry 2011, p. 2011). Values in the digital humanities include
transparency and collaboration through online networks (Spiro 2012, p. 17). These
values are compatible with explicitly humanitarian values, particularly given the
emergence of open technology platforms driven by humanitarian organizations such

228
C. Smith
as the UN. Open-source crowdsourcing platform Geotag-X engaged volunteers
in analyzing media about disasters, to contribute information and knowledge to
disaster response agencies. Given the acute nature of disaster responses, digital
humanities researchers may have more capacity to contribute to long-term projects
for developing collective intellect than disaster response workers. Considering not
only the datasets resulting from projects but also the questions embedded in the
structures of crowdsourcing technologies could be a meaningful contribution of
digital humanities researchers to humanitarian projects.
References
D.M. Berry, The computational turn: thinking about the digital humanities. Cult. Mach. 12, 2
(2011)
N. Bharosa, J. Lee, M. Janssen, Challenges and obstacles in sharing and coordinating information
during multi-agency disaster response: propositions from ﬁeld exercises. Inf. Syst. Front. 12(1),
49–65 (2010)
M. Bishr, W. Kuhn, Geospatial Information Bottom-Up: A Matter of Trust and Semantics (The
European Information Society, Springer, Berlin, 2007), pp. 365–387
R.M. Borromeo, M. Toyama, Automatic vs. crowdsourced sentiment analysis, in Proceedings of
the 19th International Database Engineering and Applications Symposium, July 2015, ACM,
pp. 90–95
R.M. Borromeo, T. Laurent, M. Toyama, The inﬂuence of crowd type and task complexity on
crowdsourced work quality, in Proceedings of the 20th International Database Engineering and
Applications Symposium, July, 2016, ACM, pp. 70–76
L. Bromley, UNOSAT, open data, and the crowd. Proceedings of the Environmental
Systems Research Institute (ESRI). 4 April 2012. Accessed online 21/10/2016 at: https:/
/s3.amazonaws.com/webapps.esri.com/esri-proceedings/unic12/papers/unosat_open_data_and
_the_crowd.pdf
E. Cervigni, C. Smith, Learning modules on media interpretation and disaster response data genera-
tion. Report. Deliverable 4.4 in EU Citizen Cyberlab: Technology Enhanced Creative Learning
in the ﬁeld of Citizen Cyberscience: http://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/106216_en.html (2014)
C. Cobb, T. McCarthy, A. Perkins, A. Bharadwaj, J. Comis, B. Do, K. Starbird, Designing for the
deluge: understanding and supporting the distributed, collaborative work of crisis volunteers,
in Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and
Social Computing, February, 2014, ACM, pp. 888–899
L.K. Comfort, K. Ko, A. Zagorecki, Coordination in rapidly evolving disaster response systems
the role of information. Am. Behav. Sci. 48(3), 295–313 (2004)
E. Dawson, Non-participation in public engagement with science: a study of four socioeconom-
ically disadvantaged, minority ethnic groups, Doctoral dissertation, King’s College London,
2012
E. Dawson, Reframing social exclusion from science communication: moving away from ‘barriers’
towards a more complex perspective. JCOM 13(02), C02 (2014)
A. Felstiner, Working the crowd: employment and labor law in the crowdsourcing industry.
Berkeley J. Emp. Lab. L. 32, 143–569 (2011)
M.A. Finkelstein, M.T. Brannick, Applying theories of institutional helping to informal volun-
teering: motives, role identity, and prosocial personality. Soc. Behav. Personal. Int. J. 35(1),
101–114 (2007)

A Case Study of Crowdsourcing Imagery Coding in Natural Disasters
229
A. Gupta, H. Lamba, P. Kumaraguru, A. Joshi, Faking Sandy: characterizing and identifying fake
images on Twitter during Hurricane Sandy, in Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference
on World Wide Web Companion, May 2013, International World Wide Web Conferences
Steering Committee, pp. 729–736
C. Jennet, A.L. Cox, Report. Deliverable 6.1 evaluating the design of citizen Cyberlab pilot projects
and platforms in EU Citizen Cyberlab: technology enhanced creative learning in the ﬁeld of
citizen cyberscience: http://cordis.europa.eu/project/rcn/106216_en.html (2014)
N. Kapucu, Interagency communication networks during emergencies: boundary spanners in
multiagency coordination. Am. Rev. Public Admin. 36(2), 207–225 (2006)
D. King, Humanitarian knowledge management, in Proceedings of the Second International
ISCRAM Conference, Brussels, Belgium, 2005, vol. 1, pp. 1–6
S. Lowe, A. Fothergill, in Beyond September 11th: An Account of Post-Disaster Research, ed.
by M. F. Myers. A need to help: emergent volunteer behavior after September 11th (Natural
Hazards Research and Applications Information Center, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO,
2003), pp. 293–314
G.R. Madey, G. Szabo, A.L. Barabási, in Computational Science–ICCS 2006. WIPER: the inte-
grated wireless phone based emergency response system (Springer, Berlin, 2006), pp. 417–424
L. Palen, K.M. Anderson, G. Mark, J. Martin, D. Sicker, M. Palmer, D. Grunwald, A vision for
technology-mediated support for public participation & assistance in mass emergencies and
disasters, in Proceedings of the 2010 ACM-BCS Visions of Computer Science Conference,
April 2010a, British Computer Society, p. 8
L. Palen, S. Vieweg, K.M. Anderson, Supporting “everyday analysts” in safety-and time-critical
situations. Inf. Soc. 27(1), 52–62 (2010b)
B.L. Ranard, Y.P. Ha, Z.F. Meisel, D.A. Asch, S.S. Hill, L.B. Becker, A.K. Seymour, R.M. Mer-
chant, Crowdsourcing—harnessing the masses to advance health and medicine, a systematic
review. J. Gen. Intern. Med. 29(1), 187–203 (2014)
Y. Ren, S. Kiesler, S.R. Fussell, Multiple group coordination in complex and dynamic task
environments: Interruptions, coping mechansism, and technology recommendations. J. Manag.
Inf. Syst. 25(1), 105–130 (2008)
J. Schnapp, P. Presner, Digital Humanities Manifesto 2.0, accessed 14 October 2010 http://
www.humanitiesblast.com/manifesto/Manifesto_V2.pdf (2009)
A. Schram, K.M. Anderson, MySQL to NoSQL: data modeling challenges in supporting scalabil-
ity, in Proceedings of the 3rd Annual Conference on Systems, Programming, and Applications:
Software for Humanity, October 2012, ACM, pp. 191–202
C. Smith, GeoTag-X. Page 4–5 in SiS Catalyst Newsletter. October. Accessed online 5 December
2016 at: http://archive.siscatalyst.eu/sites/default/ﬁles/Newsletteroctober2014.pdf (2014)
J.D. Smyth, D.A. Dillman, L.M. Christian, M.J. Stern, Comparing check-all and forced-choice
question formats in web surveys. Public Opin. Q. 70(1), 66–77 (2006)
S.E. Spielman, Spatial collective intelligence? Credibility, accuracy, and volunteered geographic
information. Cartogr. Geogr. Inf. Sci. 41(2), 115–124 (2014)
L. Spiro, in Debates in The Digital Humanities. “This is why we ﬁght”: deﬁning the values of the
digital humanities, vol 16 (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012)
K. Starbird, G. Muzny, L. Palen, Learning from the crowd: collaborative ﬁltering techniques for
identifying on-the-ground twitterers during mass disruptions, in Proceedings of 9th Interna-
tional Conference on Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, ISCRAM,
Vancouver, Canada, 22–25 April 2012
P. Tatham, K. Spens, Towards a humanitarian logistics knowledge management system. Disaster
Prev Manag 20(1), 6–26 (2011)
UNOCHA,
OCHA
Lessons
Learned
[Publicly
Editable]–Collaboration
with
VTCs
in
Libya and Japan. Accessed online 26/08/2014 at: https://docs.google.com/document/d/
1wut8oDRo9BYSlc0hQ34Ng8qQ-pLVGlRO95WOvR3MN78/edit?hl=en_US (2011)
B. Van De Walle, M. Turoff, ISCRAM: growing a global R&D community on information systems
for crisis response and management. Int. J. Emerg. Manag. 3(4), 364–369 (2006)
C. Westrope, R. Banick, M. Levine, Groundtruthing OpenStreetMap building damage assessment.
Procedia Eng. 78, 29–39 (2014)

230
C. Smith
D.M. Wilkinson, Strong regularities in online peer production, in Proceedings of the 9th ACM
Conference on Electronic Commerce, July 2008, ACM, pp. 302–309
J. Yin, A. Lampert, M. Cameron, B. Robinson, R. Power, Using social media to enhance emergency
situation awareness. IEEE Intell. Syst. 27(6), 52–59 (2012)

YouTube Comments as Metalanguage Data
on Non-standardized Languages: The Case
of Trinidadian Creole English in Soca Music
Glenda Alicia Leung
Abstract This chapter takes an innovative look at YouTube comments as a source
of language attitudinal data, otherwise known as metalanguage. Social media
sites are linguistically emancipatory spaces where users of non-standardized/non-
codiﬁed languages are free to communicate, interact, and collaborate as they see
ﬁt, free from prescriptivism and censure. Within the framework of indexicality,
speciﬁc units of language (e.g., vocalic/consonantal sounds or words) may become
associated with multiple social correlates such as gender, socio-economic class, and
education. At higher levels of indexicality or indexical orders, the same unit of
language may index particular stances in speciﬁc contexts. In this analysis, YouTube
comments on soca music—a genre of party music popularized during Trinidadian
carnival and performed in non-standardized Trinidadian Creole English—are treated
as metalanguage data. A model of indexical orders associated with a particular
Trinidadian Creole English vowel is proposed, based on YouTube metalanguage
and data from other established empirical studies. The analysis highlights how
this particular Trinidadian Creole English vowel indexes oppositional stances
against respectability in a carnival context. Overall, the chapter positions computer-
mediated communication via social media as a powerful means through which users
of non-standardized/non-codiﬁed languages can display and exert their social and
linguistic agency.
Introduction
In this small data project, I use data from social media (Web 2.0) to gain insight
into the non-standard language variety Trinidadian Creole English (TCE)—which is
spoken in Trinidad, a former British colony and Caribbean island in the West Indies.
This case study relies on YouTube comments as a source of folk metalanguage
data to explore social meanings attached to the particularly salient phonetic vowel
variant/ 6/ in Trinidadian Creole English when enacted in the performance of soca
G.A. Leung ()
Independent Researcher, Manhattan, Kansas, USA
e-mail: glendaleung13@gmail.com
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
S. Hai-Jew (ed.), Data Analytics in Digital Humanities, Multimedia Systems
and Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54499-1_10
231

232
G.A. Leung
music—the party and carnival music of Trinidad. In these songs, the TCE vowel
/6/ occurs in the hook, “that part of a song’s musical and lyrical material through
which the song remains in popular memory and is instantly recognizable in popular
consciousness” (Shepherd and Horn 2003). Because of the saliency of the language
variant in the hook, rich folk metalanguage is found in YouTube comments.
The hook also has the call-response function (Smitherman 1977) of inviting the
listener to identify ideologically with a certain type of vagabondage that is licensed
during carnival, and to embody a response through louche, improvisational dance.
I hypothesize that the use of this vowel indexes jocularity and deﬁance and ruptures
the bounds of respectability. Additionally, this preliminary inquiry highlights the
richness of YouTube comments as a complementary data set and its utility in
hypothesis generation, especially when investigating non-standard or non-codiﬁed
languages.
Computer-Mediated Communication
The examination of language in digital communication started in the early 1990s,
giving rise to a research area known as Computer-Mediated Communication
(CMC). CMC research has made signiﬁcant incursions into linguistic areas such as
discourse analysis, pragmatics, and sociolinguistics. (See Androutsopoulos (2006)
for coverage on the various waves of CMC research.) Given the prominence of
digital humanities, CMC researchers have recognized the importance of carving out
their space into this evolving ﬁeld. (See Georgakopoulou and Spilioti (2016) and
Squires (2016) for recent collections on CMC.) As regards CMC inquiry into creole
languages, notable research has been done on codeswitching in Jamaican Creole
and English (Hinrichs 2006), orthography in Jamaican Creole, Bahamian English,
and Mauritian Creole (Moll 2015; Oenbring 2013; Rajah-Carrim 2009), and lexicon
in Nigerian Pidgin (Heyd 2014).
Early CMC research examined data from synchronous (e.g., e-chat and instant
messenger) and asynchronous communication (e.g., mailing lists and discussion
boards). However, the advent of the participatory web (Web 2.0) opened up
access to rich, socially situated discourse from sites such as Facebook, Twitter,
and YouTube (Schneider 2016). Interestingly, Androutsopoulos (2013) frames the
discourse structure of YouTube as a “vernacular spectacle” where a YouTube
video is like a “game,” whereas the webpage houses video and its comments
are comparable to a “spectacle” (Androutsopoulos and Tereick 2016, p. 356).
YouTube research typically belongs to one of two lines of inquiry: (a) discourse
structuring and sequencing of comments or (b) attitudes towards the video itself
and participation in the evolving discourse (Androutsopoulos and Tereick 2016).
This study is concerned with the latter thread since YouTube comments are taken as
attitudinal data (metalanguage) in response to language data, in this case lyrics sung
in Trinidadian Creole English.

YouTube Comments as Metalanguage Data on Non-standardized Languages...
233
Carnival Culture
Before delving into the intricacies of the data, let us examine the language complex
in Trinidad. In many post-colonial, West Indian territories, the language of the
former colonizer (a highly codiﬁed, standard language) coexists with a local
vernacular (typically a creole language that may or may not be codiﬁed). Diglossia,
where one variety is used in speciﬁc contexts or circumstances rather than another,
results in the functional compartmentalization of language usage (Ferguson 1959).
For example, the standard or high variety (H) is often the language of government,
education, and broadcast news, whereas the creole or low variety (L) may be used in
conversations with familiars or in folk performance (Wardhaugh and Fuller 2015).
In Trinidad, this diglossic situation is evident in the musical soundscape. Soca,
a musical genre indigenous to Trinidad, is exclusively written, sung, and performed
in the local vernacular: Trinidadian Creole English. While soca music may be
generated all year round, soca’s peak playtime is during the carnival season,
which is the period leading up to lent. The onset of the carnival season starts
right after Christmas on Boxing Day and culminates on Carnival Monday and
Carnival Tuesday (known as Fat Tuesday in New Orleans). Trinidadian carnival is
predominantly an outdoor affair. Festivities are characterized by outdoor fetes, soca
and calypso singing competitions, steel drum competitions in the open space of the
Queen’s Park Savannah, and various costume parades where masqueraders “go on
de road,” parading through the streets.
Notable pre-lenten carnivals in the Old World are the carnival of Venice and
Cologne carnival, held, respectively, in Italy and Germany. Famous carnivals in the
New World include Mardi Gras in New Orleans, Brazilian Carnival, and Trinidadian
Carnival. Pre-lenten New World carnivals ﬁnd their origination in colonialism. The
carnivals of New Orleans, Brazil, and Trinidad are syncretic, cultural by-products
of the Catholic plantocracy and the African chattel slave population.
Carnival practices and the carnivalesque have long been associated with subver-
sion and inversion (Bakhtin 1968). Within Bakhtin’s analysis of medieval carnivals,
there is the reversal of governing structures and hierarchies, manifest in the inversion
of the authority of Church and State. However, in the analysis of contemporary New
World carnivals, the added dimension of intensiﬁcation is explored, most notably in
Scheper-Hughes’ (1992) anthropological work on carnival in Brazil. For Scheper-
Hughes carnival is a ritual of reversal as much as it is a ritual of intensiﬁcation,
meaning that carnival has the capacity to “emphasize ordinary and everyday social
realities” (p. 482).
Scholars with an interest in West Indian carnivals treat and theorize it as a “dialect
of inside and outside and of private and public.” This “dualistic value system”
(Burton 1997, p. 162) reveals a tension between respectability and reputation that
underpins West Indian values and life (Abrahams 1983; Burton 1997; Riggio 1998;
Wilson 1973). The overarching tension between respectability and reputation has
been delineated through a number of binary oppositions, shown in Table 1.

234
G.A. Leung
Table 1 A delineation of the
respectability-reputation
duality in West Indian life
(Abrahams 1983; Burton
1997; Riggio 1998; Wilson
1973)
Respectability
Reputation
Christmas
Carnival
Home
Street
Private
Public
Order, Discipline
Chaos, Bacchanal
Decorum, Being behaved
Rudeness
Work, Job
Play, Liming
Self-restraint
Self-dissipation, Display
Quiet, Harmony
Noise to annoy
Standard English
Creole
Writing
Speech
Clock time
Trini-time
What I am concerned with here is the ideological opposition and resistance
to respectability that dominates carnival. I hypothesize that this stance is indexed
through speciﬁc linguistic resources within soca music. To contextualize this
hermeneutic process of how I used small data to generate this hypothesis, an
explanation of the various analytic frames that sociolinguists use to investigate
language variation is warranted here.
Indexicality
In sociolinguistics, language variation may be investigated with respect to social
correlates such as gender, socio-economic class, age, ethnicity, or geographical
region. At a more nuanced, interpretive level, how speakers construct social
meaning vis-à-vis language variation may also be examined, particularly in highly
contextualized scenarios where language variants are employed to perform stylistic
work (Coupland 2007). Social meaning is the ideological stance conveyed and
interpreted in the deployment of a particular linguistic form.
Indexicality is when an index or linguistic sign assumes nuanced meanings from
“the context of an utterance, with the context understood very broadly, including
aspects of the speaker, hearer, and speaking situation” (Jaffe 2009, p. 177). Coulon
(1995) deﬁnes indexicality as “all the contextual determinations that are implicitly
attached to a word” (p. 17). Simply put, a word contains linguistic as well as
indexical information within it. While a word can carry indexical information
(e.g., Kiesling 2004; Wong 2005), so too can smaller units of language such as a
phoneme (e.g., Johnstone and Kiesling 2008), which represents the single, “smallest
contrastive unit in the sound system of a language” (SIL 2004). Indexicality is an
approach which interrogates relationships between linguistic variation and multiple
layers of social meaning, by appealing to orders of indexicality (Silverstein 2003).
For instance, mapping linguistic variation to social categories (e.g., geographical
region, ethnicity, etc.) is an example of ﬁrst-order indexicality, whereas more
nuanced associations of a linguistic variant to local or context-speciﬁc ideologies are

YouTube Comments as Metalanguage Data on Non-standardized Languages...
235
Table 2 Summary of data
sets by Song and YouTube
metadata
Song
YouTube metadata
Wotless (Kes the Band 2011)
Canchozi
743 comments
1,900,147 views
Uploaded Dec 6 2010
Hard Wuk (Montano 2011)
JulianpromosTV
85 comments
227,940 views
Uploaded Jan 8 2011
Tusty (Blaxx 2009)
Back on de scene
168,907 views
87 comments
Uploaded Jan 16 2009
Ayinde Olatunji
208,985 views
135 comments
Uploaded Feb 19 2009
considered second- or third-order indexicality, and so forth. What follows here is my
proposed indexical orders for the vowel variant in question, which I have generated
using two types of data: (a) sociolinguistic studies on vowel variation in Trinidadian
English (Leung 2013; Wilson 2014; Winford 1978) to derive ﬁrst- and second-order
indexicals and (b) YouTube commentary data to generate my hypothesis on higher
order indexicals.
The linguistic detail I examine occurs in words such as work, dirty, worth,
and thirsty. These words are said to belong to the NURSE lexical set (Wells
1982) because they share the same vowel pronunciation in a particular variety of
English (e.g., nurse and work in several varieties of English: Standard American
English [nÄs], [wÄk]; British Received Pronunciation [n9:s], [w9:k]; Trinidadian
Standard English (TSE) [n3:s], [w3:k]; Trinidad Creole English /n6s/, /w6k/). Our
sociolinguistic understanding of Trinidadian English vowel variation comes from
three key empirical studies (Leung 2013; Winford 1978; Wilson 2014).
In a nutshell, here is what we know about the NURSE lexical set in Trinidadian
English (i.e., in the standard and creole varieties). From Winford’s (1978) ﬁrst
rigorous Labovian sociolinguistic inquiry into the vowel system, we know that
TSE NURSE /3:/ is a prestige norm and TCE NURSE /6/ is a vernacular variant.
This is consistent with contemporary attitudes towards these two variants (Leung
2013).1 Winford (1978) also found that TSE NURSE /3:/ was associated with
urban speakers, whereas TCE NURSE /6/ was used more frequently with rural
speakers. In Leung’s (2013) more recent sociophonetic analysis, both urban and
rural speakers preferred to use the /3:/ variant in interview settings and in elicitation
1It should be noted that Winford (1978) analyzed speech data collected in the 1970s so attitudes
and usage will likely have shifted over the last four decades for some variants.

236
G.A. Leung
Fig. 1 First- and
second-order indexicals for
TSE NURSE /3:/ and TCE
NURSE /6/ (Leung 2013;
Winford 1978)
tasks (with the exception of a few rural residents), a ﬁnding that is somewhat
different to Winford’s (1978). Leung (2013) also conducted a verbal guise task
to investigate language attitudes towards vowel variants. TSE NURSE /3:/ was
positively evaluated; survey respondents judged the speaker using this variant as
educated, intelligent, competent, successful, and wealthy. In contrast, TCE NURSE
/6/ was evaluated very poorly (and rated lowest across all the creole vowel variants
surveyed), revealing TCE NURSE /6/ is a highly stigmatized pronunciation in
Trinidadian English and is less likely to be used in formal contexts. In Wilson’s
(2014) innovative study on language ideology in Trinidad, she investigated attitudes
towards Trinidadian varieties in context of choral singing where British English
pronunciations are a favored target. In her analysis, she describes TSE NURSE /3:/
as a low order indexical, meaning that in the context of choral singing there was little
metalinguistic awareness around its usage (e.g., it was not problematic for singers
to produce or there were no strong attitudes, either favorable or prejudicial towards
it). Wilson does not report on TCE NURSE /6/ probably because since prestige
varieties such as Trinidadian Standard English and British English are targets for
choral singers, they would avoid a phonetic variant such as TCE NURSE /6/ that is
so prominently marked as a vernacular feature and stigmatized (cf. Leung 2013). On
the basis of the three aforementioned studies, I visualize the indexicals associated
with TSE NURSE /3:/ and TCE NURSE /6/ in Fig. 1, presenting them as binaries
relative to each language variety.
In the innermost oval are the core associations with each variety, which refer to
two dimensions: norms of usage, followed by geographical associations. The second
oval highlights more nuanced indexical meanings connected to the dimensions of
social status. Here we see how linguistic variables become imbued with social
meaning—whether that social meaning is reﬂective of social factors, stereotypes,
or social identities.
Another layer to consider is how the soundscape of carnival intersects with social
constructs:
Soundscapes are the totality of all sounds within a location with an emphasis in the
relationship between individual’s or society’s perception of, understanding of and the
interaction with the sonic environment. (Payne, Davies, and Adams 2009)

YouTube Comments as Metalanguage Data on Non-standardized Languages...
237
The relevance of Trinidad carnival in the construction of individual and national
identity cannot be understated; Trinidad carnival has been described as “the true
sinew” and “basic value system : : : that directly or indirectly sustains or holds the
society together” (Coomansingh 2011, p. 120). Furthermore, carnival potentially
impacts the psyche as evidenced in cultural behaviors such as carnival mentality.
Maharajh and Kalpoo (2012) note a duality in carnival mentality. During the
carnival, season, the carnival mentality manifests as a rupture to decorum or an
inversion to respectability as “it is a ‘time to free up’, ‘time to break away and get
on bad’ or take part in every carnival activity or event, and indulging in alcohol,
immoral, vulgar, and promiscuous activities without thinking of the consequences.”
In contrast, outside the carnival season, carnival mentality has the element of
intensiﬁcation as it references a “non-stop party mentality” where every opportunity
is an excuse “to lime or party” (Maharajh and Kalpoo 2012, p. 140). Elsewhere,
carnival mentality has been deﬁned as “An attitude towards work which makes
a person very energetic about carnival costumes and fetes, and very lazy the rest
of the year about anything else” (Winer 2009, p. 173). What interests me here is
the intersection and coalescence of language, social meaning, national identity, and
performativity.
Data
The data used to generate higher level indexicals come from YouTube comments
for three soca songs. These data were accessed in December 2014 for the following
songs: “Wotless” worthless /"w6t­l"s/ by Kes the Band (2011), “Hard Wuk” hard
work /ha:d w6k/ by Machel Montano (2011), and “Tusty” thirsty /"t6s­ti/ by Blaxx
(2009). However, I have elected to report primarily on the data for “Wotless,”
performed by Kes the Band (CanchozI 2010), since analysis of the YouTube
data from “Tusty” by Blaxx and “Hard Wuk” by Machel Montano yields similar
descriptions. See Appendices B and C for YouTube data samples from “Tusty”
(Back on de Scene 2009; Olatunji 2009) and “Hard Wuk” (JulianspromosTV 2011).
The linguistic variants being investigated are words belonging to the NURSE
lexical set, where the TCE NURSE /6/ variant occurs both in the title and in the hook
of the song. It is also important to note the creole orthography in the title of the
songs; because TCE NURSE /6/ is highly salient, it prompts a non-standard spelling
to index or reference the creole. YouTube comments about either TSE or TCE are
treated as folk metalanguage. Folk metalanguage, or conscious, overt commentary
about language by non-linguists (Niedzielski and Preston 2000), is one resource
which lends insight into ideologies associated with additive or higher orders of
indexicality (i.e., second-, third-, etc.).

238
G.A. Leung
Method
The analysis of the YouTube comments was conducted in two stages. First, any
metalanguage regarding the meaning of the creole word in question (e.g., wotless,
tusty, or wuk) was described using emergent codes that were developed during
the analysis (Strauss and Corbin 1998). Next, themes were identiﬁed in any other
metalanguage that was noted (i.e., metalanguage that did not address the meaning
of the creole word). Lyrics were also examined and described using the binaries of
respectability and reputation presented in Table 1 as a priori codes.
Analysis
Here I report on the overall patterns that emerged from the YouTube comments.
Generally speaking, the metalanguage observed in the soca YouTube comments
concerned: (a) questions and/or explanations about the semantics (e.g., meaning
or deﬁnition) of a creole word, primarily located in the title of the song or hook;
(b) questions and/or explanations surrounding the etymology of a creole word; and
(c) engaged responses in which commenters identiﬁed on an affective level with the
behavior expressed in the song title. Whenever a YouTube user posed a question
about the meaning of a creole word, various types of responses were observed in the
data. YouTubers employed a combination of strategies to deﬁne the creole term.
Some users simply offered explanations [general explanation/deﬁnition]. Others
deﬁned the creole word in context [contextualized explanation/deﬁnition]. Others
referenced or ﬁltered the meaning of the creole word through the standard (e.g.,
tutsy means thirsty; wuk is how we say work in Trinidad) [referenced explana-
tion/deﬁnition]. Through close interpretative reading of the YouTube comments,
two sets of dualities were evident: (a) linguistic duality between standard-creole
and (b) behavioral duality between respectability-reputation, both of which I will
illustrate below in the analysis of “Wotless,” performed by Kes.
Wotless
According to Lise Winer (2009), author of Dictionary of the English/Creole of
Trinidad and Tobago, the adjective wutless (also worthless) is deﬁned as “unreliable;
dishonest; bad; RUDE; Sometimes said affectionately, e.g. of a loveable rogue”
(p. 974). The noun wutlessness (also worthlessness) means “Rudeness; vulgarity;
rubbish” (p. 975). In the context of carnival, the act of being wotless describes a
speciﬁc kind of vagabondage.
In Kes’ soca song Wotless, the ﬁrst verse starts with Kes confessing that he
is dancing (known as wining in the Caribbean; also synonymous with getting on)

YouTube Comments as Metalanguage Data on Non-standardized Languages...
239
and enjoying it. Then he goes on to say if he wins a million dollars in the annual
Soca Monarch competition, he will be the “talk of the town.” He also boasts about
revelling without a care:
Verse 1
Ln 1
And ah feel like I just win a million dollars.
Everybody watching meh,
Wearing a million colors.
You wanna talk, talk ‘bout this.
Ln 5
Cuz when ah wine you go talk ‘bout dat.
When ah getting on you go talk ‘bout dis.
Call yuh friends and den talk ‘bout dat.
Down south dey go talk’ ‘bout dis.
Uptown dey done talk ‘bout dat.
This type of carefree, self-display, and being the center of attention is how Kes
envisions getting reputation. Additionally, Kes welcomes positioning himself in
public (e.g., down south and uptown, lines 8 and 9) for others to talk about his
less than respectable behavior. In the chorus that follows, it is clear that reputation
comes at the expense of respectability of which Kes is aware:
Chorus
Ln 1
I don’t care what you say
Cuz right now I just wotless.
And I don’t really care less.
Meh girlfriend she go get vex.
Ln 5
Meh family go send text.
But I don’t care I wotless.
They say I moving breathless.
But I don’t really care less.
This year I moving fearless.
In the chorus, Kes claims ownership of his behavior, declaring he is wotless,
which is his license to display himself and engage in rudeness. His declaration
of not “caring less” in lines 3 and 8 is an antithetical response to discipline and
respectability. Lines 4 and 5 capture an ultimate deﬁance: not caring what family
and loved ones think of his behavior during this carnival season.
In the YouTube comments, claudiabigail23 asks, “What does wotless mean?”
User happystar1000 gives this comprehensive explanation:
[W]otless is trini dialect and slang for saying “worthless” [referenced] and has many
meanings in this respect, as was rightly said like giving trouble. [O]ften when children
misbehave, parents would say. “yuh too damn wotless” meaning ur good for nothing but

240
G.A. Leung
giving trouble [general]. It [i]s a similar meaning in this song, him having a good time
dancing with other women would be seen as him being wotless or “worthless” by his
girlfriend and her family [contextualized].
Here happystar1000 deﬁnes wotless by referencing it through TSE worthless,
while acknowledging that wotless is a TCE word. Furthermore, happystar1000 gives
the general deﬁnition for the term, but also what wotless would mean in the song,
and by extension in a carnival context. Other users give similar explanations—some
more evaluative than others:
•
Jabari200666666@FirstGeneration2011 Multiple uses and meanings generally
it means carefree, lighthearted or most cases lackadaisical [general].
•
yizzlemanizzle@Jabari200666666 Wotless is the word Worthless [referenced].
You’re right about the connotation though, it’s been bastardized over the years to
mean slack, lascivious, or lecherous [general].
•
Christopher7708@ahoradamelomio It means “worthless” [referenced] which is
used to describe having no shame [general]... getting on bad (in a good way
: : : party atmosphere) [contextualized]. A word meaning to not care profoundly
about anything, and just having a hell of a time not caring what anyone says or
thinks of you [contextualized].
•
Kirwina@claudiabigail23 In trini slang, it means someone who is no good or
giving trouble [general] but in terms of the song, it may mean someone who is
having a wonderful time or grinding alot in a party [contextualized]. You would
really understand the unique Trinidad and Tobago culture to really comprehend.
Many users identiﬁed with being wotless, expressing this in different ways.
For some users, the affective identiﬁcation was captured in a simple reiteration
of the word wotless or of the hook (e.g., MrsMusic84 Rite Nw I Jus WOTLE-
SS!!! :D). Other users identiﬁed explicitly with being wotless and described its
psychosomatic effects and how this “wotlesssness” might manifest itself. YouTuber
HOTTGAL1989 comments, “i cah stop whinin fuh dis song omg : : : & dah beat
BEEESSSSSSSSS :))))) : : : AH WOTLESS,” while user wesley hamilton describes
a deeper tension between self-restraint and self-dissipation: “I shouldn’t listen to
this song, but oh gosh, it biting meh, look how meh head moving.....oh gosh, I fraid
to be wotless : : : my gosh, it biting meh : : : ”
The act of being wotless was also marked as happening in public spaces and in
the street parades for carnival. Acts of wotlessness were envisioned on Caribbean
soil as well as in North America metropoles where diasporic carnival celebrations
have taken root (e.g., Caribana in Toronto, Labor Day Carnival in Brooklyn, and
Miami Broward Carnival hosted around Columbus Day). This is best illustrated
in Jolene Smith’s comment in which she describes an urgency to display herself
dancing in the Baltimore/DC carnival:
Yuh really just have tuh wine reaaaal wotless when yuh hear this song, man i had to break
out on stage in DC when this played. I just keep listening to it over and over cah stop dance
man!!! Just have to drop hard, trini style.

YouTube Comments as Metalanguage Data on Non-standardized Languages...
241
Wotless behavior was also described as a trait that marked Trinidadian identity.
YouTuber buttercup535 declares, “all yuh trinis we wotless and we careless to[o]
so true.” Evenly more interestingly, the questioning of Trinidadian authenticity
was particularly noted in YouTubers’ responses to dislikes. YouTuber Daniel
Mitchell expresses his disgust at the dislikes: “The 6 people that dislike this video
deﬁnately not wotless....dey full ah shit and probably go be in dey bed monday
and tuesday.” Going out on the street on Carnival Monday and Tuesday is the
quintessential display of Trinidadianness. Here Daniel Mitchell condemns those
for not liking the song. By saying that they are “not wotless,” he implies that they
are proper, respectable folk who would probably avoid carnival altogether by being
“in dey bed monday and tuesday.” Another interesting dislike comment came from
relhardwine1 who surmises that the people who did not like the song could not have
been Trinidadians: “the 22 dat dislike this song is probably bajans : : : hahhahaha.”
Although wotlessness might index Trinidadian identity, YouTubers of West Indian
heritage or extraction also identiﬁed with wotless behavior. YouTube kingala, who
we can assume has barbadian roots, writes, “uptown dey gon talk bout dis!!! ah
doan care ah wotless!! *insert bajan wukup*”2 YouTubers representing St. Vincent,
Antigua, the Cayman Islands, Guyana, and other West Indian territories also claimed
to be wotless.
To summarize, the YouTube comments from Kes’ “Wotless” highlighted: affec-
tive identiﬁcation with vagabondage; indexing of Trinidadian and West Indian
authenticity and identity; and license for public dissipation. Using these ﬁndings,
I hypothesize higher order indexicals, which will be discussed in the following
section.
Discussion
Recall that diglossia, the functional compartmentalization of language usage, is
commonplace in the West Indies, because in many territories a standard language
coexists with a creole language. The tension between these two varieties is captured,
conceptualized, and explained via Allsopp’s (2003) hierarchy of formalness. In
the Dictionary of Caribbean English, lexicographer Richard Allsopp establishes
a four-level hierarchy of formalness in his codiﬁcation of Caribbean English:
formal, informal, anti-formal, and erroneous. Here, formal refers to language that
is “accepted as educated : : : [where] no personal familiarity is shown when such
[language] is used” (p. lvi). Informal is “accepted as familiar : : : [and is] usually
well-structured, casual, relaxed speech, but sometimes characterized by : : : features
of decreolization.” Note well that “neither inter-personal tenseness nor intimacy is
2Wukking up—a term used most notably in Barbados, Guyana, and the US Virgin Island—is
deﬁned as “to dance suggestively or erotically, with vigourous gyrations of the waist and hips”
(Allsopp 2003, p. 613). Wukking up is synonymous with wining (Springer 2008).

242
G.A. Leung
Fig. 2 Lower- and higher-order indexicals for TSE NURSE /3:/ and TCE NURSE /6/
shown when such items are used” (Allsopp 2003 p. lvi). The level of Allsopp’s
hierarchy of formalness that is most relevant to this case study is anti-formal, which
he deﬁnes as “Deliberately rejecting Formalness; consciously familiar and intimate;
part of a wide range from close and friendly through jocular to coarse and vulgar;
any Creolized or Creole form or structure surviving or conveniently borrowed to
suit context or situation” (p. lvii). Allsopp goes on to say that “when such items are
used an absence or a wilful closing of social distance [emphasis added] is signalled”
(Allsopp 2003, p. lvii). Allsopp’s hierarchy acknowledges the overall oppositional
stance that creole structures have the potential to index.
Partially inspired by Allsopp, I motivate and propose the following higher
indexicals, represented in the outermost oval of Fig. 2. As explained above, the
indexical orders in the inner and middle ovals were substantiated, drawing upon
empirical studies (Leung 2013; Wilson 2014; Winford 1978). What is known
from Trinidadian English sociolinguistic scholarship is the NURSE lexical is highly
sensitive to the indexing social information and meaning, most prominently the
norms of usage and geographic distribution, followed by characteristics of social
status, more so than other lexical sets. (See Leung (2013) on her coverage of
other lexical sets, e.g., STRUT, LOT, and BATH.) Eckert (2008) notes it is possible
that “variables that historically come to distinguish geographical dialects can take
on interactional meanings based on local ideology” (p. 462). It is precisely these
nuanced interactional meanings in context of local carnival ideology that I wish to
account for in hypothesizing higher order indexicals.
West Indian life is characterized by tensions between respectability and reputa-
tion. This is also true in Trinidadian society. These tensions come most prominently
to the fore during the Trinidadian carnival season where inversion and intensiﬁcation
are permissible. Through a close reading of the data on wotless, wuk, and tusty,
overtones of jocularity, deﬁance, and opposition to respectability imbue these terms
in context of carnival. Furthermore, these terms take on new interpretations which
are called to be enacted in dance. Thus, jocularity, deﬁance, and opposition are not

YouTube Comments as Metalanguage Data on Non-standardized Languages...
243
purely mental or emotional stances; these stances are physically portrayed through
improvised/spontaneous dance connected to carnival.
Whether it is the word itself or the vowel (phonetic variant TCE NURSE /6/) that
has indexical power is not entirely clear from these data. It may be argued that each
individual word (i.e., wotless, tusty, and wuk) has higher order indexical meaning
in context of carnival. This explanation is valid. However, because these words all
belong to the NURSE lexical set, then it begs the question whether the vowel is the
variable that is doing the indexical work. I take the latter position because of the
overall sensitivity of the TCE NURSE /6/ variant. To make a case for the markedness
of TCE NURSE /6/ variant in Trinidadian English, I rely on previous empirical work
(as explained above) as well as on linguistic intuition or introspective judgments
about language. While there is controversy surrounding the relevance and reliability
of linguistic intuition (cf. Devitt 2014; Maynes 2012; Wasow and Arnold 2005), I
take the position that examining linguistic intuition is a starting point for observation
of linguistic phenomena. Here, I do not subscribe to using linguistic intuition in
lieu of linguistic evidence or data. Rather, linguistic intuition can play a role in
hypothesis/theory construction and ultimately hypothesis/theory testing for which I
strongly advocate.
In each set below, there are three sentences of equivalent meaning in TSE,
TCE, and TCE with the most conservative creole pronunciation of NURSE /6/,
respectively. What is of interest is if there is any semantic difference between
sentences (b) and (c).
(1) a. The house burnt [b3:nt] down. (TSE)
b. The house burn [b3:n] down. (TCE)
c. The house burn [b6n] down. (TCE—conservative pronunciation)
(2) a. He cursed [k3:st] at the man. (TSE)
b. He curse [k3:s] at the man. (TCE)
c. He curse [k6s] at the man. (TCE—conservative pronunciation)
(3) a. The house is dirty [d3:ti]. (TSE)
b. The house dirty [d3:ti]. (TCE)
c. The house dirty [d6ti]. (TCE—conservative pronunciation)
(4) a. The child is thirsty [™3:sti]. (TSE)
b. The child thirsty [t3:sti]. (TCE)
c. The child thirsty [t6sti]. (TCE—conservative pronunciation)
The difference between TCE sentences (b) and (c) in the above sets is one of
degrees; sentence (c)—rendered with the most conservative creole pronunciation
/6/—differs by degree of extremity, intensity, or urgency. For example, sentence 1(c)
gives the impression that the house was completely destroyed. Sentence 2(c) implies
that the man who was cursed was the recipient of some extremely harsh words.
Sentence 3(c) suggests that the house was exceedingly unclean or untidy. Lastly,
sentence 4(c) indicates that the child was extremely thirsty. Since TCE NURSE /6/
has the potential to connote extremity, intensity, or urgency, then it is not implausible
that indexicality in the soca data is operating at a phonetic rather than a lexical level.
This line of reasoning relies on the triangulation of various information types:
extant empirical studies, close readings of YouTube metalanguage, and linguistic

244
G.A. Leung
intuition. Overall, because TCE NURSE /6/ is marked as a highly creole feature, it
can be harnessed for stylistic and stance work.
Conclusion
Considering folk metalanguage is particularly useful in investigating non-standard,
oftentimes stigmatized, language varieties such as creoles. Non-elicited folk meta-
language is challenging to source, especially if the language variety does not have
a standardized orthography. However, growing accessibility to the participatory
Web (Web 2.0) has resulted in social media technologies being instrumental in
generating communities. The broad-based participation that social media facilitates
makes posting or publishing on the internet a social act, giving speakers of non-
standardized languages social and linguistic agency as shown in this study. This
study also highlighted how social media can provide rich, complementary data
for linguistic analysis. From my perspective as a sociolinguist—who examines
language operating in social, societal, and cultural contexts—what makes the par-
ticipatory web groundbreaking is the proliferation of digital data, their accessibility,
and ways in which today’s technology shapes our communication, language, and
discourse. In short, today’s technology and digital world have opened up new spaces
for digital experiences and digital culture to ﬂourish.
Thematized YouTube Comments (CanchozI 2010)
for “Wotless” by Kes the Band (2011)
General identiﬁcation
•
KC Smoke wooooooooooooooooooooooooooooe wotless dis song bigg love it
bad bad
•
sweetbabypuppy right i just wotlesssssssssssssssssssssssssss : : : i dnt care what u
say : : : mad man!!!!!!!
Affective self-identiﬁcation
•
Msscpb@uncensoredreality Same dam thing i sayin! Music jus get inna me head,
creep unda me skin and me jus feel real wotless!
•
wesley hamilton I shouldn’t listen to this song, but oh gosh, it biting meh, look
how meh head moving : : : oh gosh, I fraid to be wotless : : : my gosh, it biting
meh : : :
•
fuckumlivinglife right now ii juss wotlesssssssssssss buss a winee;
•
HOTTGAL1989 i cah stop whinin fuh dis song omg.......& dah beat
BEEESSSSSSSSS: ))))) : : : AH WOTLESS;
•
Ursulav83 WOTLESS!!!!!!!!!!! WOOOOOOOO DANCING LOL.

YouTube Comments as Metalanguage Data on Non-standardized Languages...
245
Behavior in a place
•
cooyahfab Me wotless in the club : : :
•
MultiJ0rdan big tune boiiii WE WOTLESS for J’ouvert 2011!!
•
calypsoking23 ohh goshhhhh, rite now i juss wotless!!!!! ready for de parkway
already
•
Jolene Smith Yuh really just have tuh wine reaaaal wotless when yuh hear this
song, man i had to break out on stage in DC when this played. I just keep listening
to it over and over cah stop dance man!!! Just have to drop hard, trini style
Behavior and Trinidadian identity
•
nichelle hector WE TRINI PEOPLE REL WOTLESS : : : AN WE DOH
REALLY CARELESS YUH DONE KNOW!
•
buttercup535 all yuh trinis we wotless and we careless to so true
•
Stanley Grant Ah wotless Trini to the bone,wait yall check out a new artist by
the name of Dyce Man tune name Thicky Thicky it mad summer anthem yes we
wotless
•
trini1405 Gosh I cah decide between this and Benjai’s Trini tune for groovy!!
Both ah dem sweeeet. Iza Trini who make good company and ah wotlesss!
Behavior and national/regional identity
•
galfriend3 Vincy, Vincy, VINCY MAAAS!! WE WOTLESS!!
•
tyrone neale Antigua wotless
•
Beverley Yearwood Bajan and wotless wwooiii
•
Ashley Joseph I WOTLESS! I love being Carbbean!!
•
Myson Labor Day In Brooklyn Wotless!!
•
liltrina4 Miami Carnival I will wotless!!!
•
modelo81292 I was wotless today in brooklyn the parade was madd and when
they play this tune I was goin madd!
•
Sajeev Swarupan im wotless. TORONTO BIG UP!
•
LANI11433 I’m jamming to my cousin song WOTLESS! I’m gonna be WOT-
LESS for da next few days till LABOR DAY!
•
VINCYJEWEL BOY OH BOY I WAS JUS WOTLESSSSSSSSSSS FOR
CARIBANA LUV KES STR8888888 RIGHT NOW I JUS WOTLESSSSSSSS
DIS CHUNE CANT DONE
•
Gabrielle Gabby I am a happy to be a trini and half Jamacian we run tingz cuzz
RIGHT NOW WE JUST WOTLESSSS!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
•
Cherry Yadunno <<guyanese straiight wotlesss!!!!
•
kingala uptown dey gon talk bout dis!!! ah doan care ah wotless!! *insert bajan
wukup*
•
sexilika1 Iza vincy and ah wotlesssssssssssssssssssss, and i doh really careless
•
roni mitchell I luvv dis song to de fullest mann! Me need to go backk home to
Trinida and be WOTLESS! !
•
Tata Bus KES The Band in Cayman Islands right now!!!! Right now ah just
WOTLESS!

246
G.A. Leung
•
Ambryana Campbell Right Now I Just Wotless And I Dont Really Careless : : :
Mi Rep JA Buhh Dhiss Is The SHit
Responses to dislikes
•
Kirtzjacob only one person dis like dis? wam yuh wotless awa?
•
LinnDonn Adams who eva dislike dis is a raw ass : : : i go wotless fa weekz till i
bak to normal [Whoever disliked this is a raw ass. I’ll be wotless for weeks until
I’m back to normal]
•
Ragga Mufﬁn i think d 1 person who click “dislike” clicked the wrong one
•
riazman It have chree wotless people bout here.sen puncheon!
•
Daniel Mitchell The 6 people that dislike this video deﬁnately not wotless : : : dey
full ah shit and probably go be in dey bed monday and tuesday
•
mervstar Ack, I hit dislike by mistake : : : oh gosh nuh, I wotless.
•
MsLionheart29 11 people wotless but pretending
•
gizzerts 11 people are not wotless at the moment
•
spicey ryan 11 people are acting. Like they r NOT wotless
•
divababii1227 the 12 people that dislike this song is deff not Wotless and Dumb
like how can you dislike this songg this songg is thee best and pluss why would
you look up a songg and dislikee itt #verydumb
•
SempaiAlex Unlike those 13 people who are VERY wotless right now, I have a
sense of taste. Kes is besssssssst!
•
squeaknique1 13 people had wotless partners this carnival : : :
•
VTEC_LOL 13 people are not Trinidadians : : :
•
SuperAshleyrawr 14 chupid ...i izza trini && ah wotless : : : i doh biz wa pplz
say : : : woi woi trini tuh d bone yo: )
•
relhardwine1 the 22 dat dislike this song is probably bajans : : : hahhahaha
•
JUSTIIN JACKSON For the 22 dat dislike dis sng.u hear wah di man say.kall he
name lml
Deﬁnitions, Selected Lyrics, and Selected YouTube Comments
(Back on de Scene 2009; Olatunji 2009) for “Tusty” by Blaxx
(2009)
According to the Urban Dictionary, user sub27 deﬁnes tusty as “slang for ‘thirsty’
with speciﬁc reference to interaction with the opposite sex; see soca song ‘Tusty’ by
Blaxx (2009)” (Urban Dictionary 2009). It should be noted that a deﬁnition for this
term does not appear in either Winer’s (2009) or Allsopp’s (2003) dictionaries
Selected lyrics for “Tusty” by Blaxx (2009)
Sample deﬁnitions of tusty from YouTube comments (Olatunji 2009)
•
Huging banging song! So what exactly is a “TUSTY”???
•
cluckyclucky @ Huging Tusty is just the way we say “thirsty” [referenced]

YouTube Comments as Metalanguage Data on Non-standardized Languages...
247
Chorus
Ah tusty (repeated) : : :
Ah tusty for wine, mama
Ah tusty to grind, mama
Ah tusty for wave, mama
Ah tusty is ah pain, mama
Show me what you got.
Give me dat (repeated)
Verse 2
Doh feel no way if ah put a bump on you
Ah tus- tusty, ah tus- tusty.
Say pardon me if I take a jump with you
Ah tus- tusty, ah tus- tusty.
I grabbing anything I see
Right now I tusty tusty
Ah doh care who talking ‘bout me
Right now I tusty tusty
Bridge
Country people getting a beer
Social people get out of here
Put dem big ting up in de air
Right now I declare that we get on bad, bad, bad
Bad, bad, bad (repeated)
Get bad, bad, bad (repeated)
•
Dswanky @Huging tusty isnt something....its when u want someting very
bad : : : so wen u see a girl that u want badly : : : we would say, ur tusty!! [general]
•
Huging I see, I see: ) Up here we call that ‘horny’
•
Reddiamonds87 @ Huging cluckyclucky is right.he saying he thirsty meaning he
want 2 really have fun and dance with the woman [contextualized]
Sample deﬁnitions of tusty from YouTube comments (Back on de Scene 2009)
•
Akeliahsmusic89 @ tambienme4 its just broken english for thirsty : : : in this tune
blaxx is sayn hes cravin a gud wuk up or dance from a girl [contextualized]
•
IVEMER 5 Ain’t dat kool or wat? We west Indians have a unique language: D
•
SWANKS17@tambienme4 it means thirsty...WE TRINIS JUS SAT TUSTY : : : thas
how we speak: ) [referenced]

248
G.A. Leung
Deﬁnitions, Selected Lyrics, and Selected YouTube Comments
(JulianspromosTV 2011) for “Hard Wuk” by Machel
Montano (2011)
One of the meanings of the verb wuk is to “give strenuous sexual exercise” (Winer
2009, p. 971). Winer does not provide and deﬁnition of wuk connected to dancing.
Wuking and winning are synonymous. The verb wine (also wind) means “while
dancing, to gyrate the pelvis in a sexual manner” (Dalzell and Victor 2015, p. 842).
Selected lyrics for “Hard Wuk” by Machel Montano (2011)
Chorus
What dey want? Wuk! Hard wuk.
When we wining. Wuk! Hard wuk.
When we jamming. Wuk! Hard wuk.
When we grinding. Wuk! Hard wuk.
Verse 1
Ln1
She want me to take de time when ah wine
But ah only sharing hard wuk.
When she get de wuk, she change she mind
And decide she want the hard wuk
Ln 5
It does worry me when I cannot give it
Cuz I’m a man with plenty stamina
So this year any gyal out dere
Who want to come and get a taste of meh wuk
When I behind de truck on de road.
Ln 10
Better tick tock. It like a time bomb and make that mini bumper explode.
Anything you want me do, I want to do it for you
Once it have to do with the wining
Once it have to do with the sharing
Ln 15
I does more give more than I take
Make no mistake, I’m a hard worker, hard worker, hard worker
Sample deﬁnitions of wuk from YouTubers (JulianspromosTV 2011)
•
RRmanutd98 Wtf does wuk mean??!!
•
niquentae @ RRmanutd98 work [referenced]
•
JazzyBae97 @RRmanutd98 it means to dance. lik “wuk up on a girl” [contextu-
alized]
•
DigitalIslandboy Wuk was “Work” with a Caribbean accent [referenced] : : : As
in to “workup” (wukkup) your waistline. [contextualized]

YouTube Comments as Metalanguage Data on Non-standardized Languages...
249
References
R.D. Abrahams, The Man-of-Words in the West Indies: Performance and the Emergence of Creole
Culture (Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, 1983)
R. Allsopp, Dictionary of Caribbean English Usage (University of West Indies Press, Kingston,
2003)
J. Androutsopoulos, in Discourse 2.0: Language and new media, ed. by D. Tannen, A. M. Trester.
Participatory culture and metalinguistic discourse: Performing and negotiating German dialects
on YouTube (Georgetown University Press, Washington, DC, 2013), pp. 47–71
J. Androutsopoulos, Introduction: sociolinguistics and computer-mediated communication. J.
Sociolinguist. 10(4), 419–438 (2006)
J. Androutsopoulos, J. Tereick, in The Routledge handbook of language and digital communi-
cation, ed. by A. Georgakopoulou, T. Spilioti. YouTube: language and discourse practices in
participatory culture (Routledge, New York, 2016), pp. 354–370
Back on de Scene, Tusty – Blaxx (Trini soca 2009) [Video ﬁle] (2009), Retrieved from https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=9Qau6VxRoFU.
M. Bakhtin, Rabelais and His World (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1968)
Blaxx, Tusty, in Soca gold 2009 [CD] (VP Records, Jamaica, NY, 2009)
R.D. Burton, Afro-Creole: Power, Opposition, and Play in the Caribbean (Cornell University Press,
Ithaca, 1997)
CanchozI, Kes the Band – Wotless (soca 2011) [Video ﬁle] (2010), Retrieved from https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=n0DvbOk8rs4.
J. Coomansingh, in Island Tourism: Towards a Sustainable Perspective, ed. by J. Carlsen, R. Butler.
Social sustainability of tourism in a culture of sensuality, sexual freedom and violence: Trinidad
and Tobago (CAB International, Wallingford, 2011), pp. 118–128
A. Coulon, Ethnomethodology (Sage, Thousand Oaks, 1995)
N. Coupland, Style: Language Variation and Identity (CUP, Cambridge, 2007)
T. Dalzell, T. Victor, The Concise New Partridge Dictionary of Slang and Unconventional English
(Routledge, New York, 2015)
M. Devitt, Linguistic intuitions and cognitive penetrability. Balt. Int. Yearb. Cogn. Logic Commun.
9(1), 4 (2014)
P. Eckert, Variation and the indexical ﬁeld. J. Socioling. 12(4), 453–476 (2008)
C.A. Ferguson, Diglossia. Word 15(2), 325–340 (1959)
A. Georgakopoulou, T. Spilioti (eds.), The Routledge Handbook of Language and Digital
Communication (Routledge, New York, 2016)
T. Heyd, Doing race and ethnicity in a digital community: Lexical labels and narratives of
belonging in a Nigerian web forum. Discourse Context Media 4, 38–47 (2014)
L. Hinrichs, Codeswitching on the Web: English and Jamaican Creole in e-mail Communication
(John Benjamins Publishing, Amsterdam, 2006)
A. Jaffe, Stance: Sociolinguistic perspectives (OUP, New York, 2009)
B.
Johnstone,
S.F.
Kiesling,
Indexicality
and
experience:
Exploring
the
meanings
of/awmonophthongization in Pittsburgh. J. Socioling. 12(1), 5–33 (2008)
JulianspromosTV. Machel Montano: Hard wuk 2011 Trinidad Carnival (produced by Mr. Roots)
[Video ﬁle] (2011), Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vcAO5iMDT6g.
Kes the Band, Wotless, in Wotless: The carnival album [CD] (Kes the Band, Trinidad, 2011)
S.F. Kiesling, Dude. Am Speech 79(3), 281–305 (2004)
G. Leung, A synchronic sociophonetic study of monophthongs in Trinidadian English (Doctoral
dissertation), (2013), Retrieved from https://freidok.uni-freiburg.de/data/9015.
H.D. Maharajh, A. Kalpoo, in Perspectives in Caribbean Psychology, ed. by F.W. Hickling, B.K.
Matthies, K. Morgan, R.C. Gibson. Culture and behaviour: Recognition of cultural behaviours
in Trinidad and Tobago (Kingston, Caribbean Institute of Mental Health and Substance Abuse,
2012), pp. 131–160
J. Maynes, Linguistic intuition and calibration. Linguist. Philos. 35(5), 443–460 (2012)

250
G.A. Leung
A. Moll, Jamaican Creole goes web: Sociolinguistic styling and authenticity in a digital ‘Yaad’
(John Benjamins Publishing, Amsterdam, 2015)
M. Montano, Hard wuk, in The return [CD] (Ruf Rex Records/Xtatik Ltd., Trinidad, 2011)
N. Niedzielski, D. Preston, Folk linguistics (Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin, 2000)
S. R. Payne, W. J. Davies, M. D. Adams, Research into the practical policy applications of
soundscapes concepts and techniques in urban areas. DEFRA report NANR200, June 2009
R. Oenbring, Bey or bouy: Orthographic patterns in Bahamian Creole English on the web. Engl.
World-Wide 34(3), 341–364 (2013)
Olatunji, A. (2009, February 19). Blaxx-Tusty (ofﬁcal soca music video 2009) [Video ﬁle].
Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JvsZT2wo4PU
A. Rajah-Carrim, Use and standardisation of Mauritian Creole in electronically mediated commu-
nication. J. Comput. Mediat. Commun. 14(3), 484–508 (2009)
M.C. Riggio, Resistance and identity: carnival in Trinidad and Tobago. Drama Rev. 42(3), 7–23
(1998)
N. Scheper-Hughes, Death without weeping: Everyday violence in Brazil (University of California
Press, Berkeley, 1992)
E. Schneider, World Englishes on Youtube: treasure trove or nightmare? in World Englishes:
New Theoretical and Methodological Considerations, ed. by E. Seoane, C. Suárez-Gómez
(Benjamins, Amsterdam, 2016), p. 253–282
J. Shepherd, D. Horn (eds.), Continuum encyclopedia of popular music of the world: Performance
and Production, vol 2 (Continuum, New York, NY, 2003)
M. Silverstein, Indexical order and the dialectics of sociolinguistic life. Lang. Commun. 23(3),
193–229 (2003)
SIL International, What is a phoneme? (2004), Retrieved December 10, 2016, from http://www-
01.sil.org/linguistics/glossaryoﬂinguisticterms/whatisaphoneme.htm
G. Smitherman, Talkin and testifyin: The language of Black America (Wayne State University
Press, Detroit, MI, 1977)
J.T. Springer, “Roll it gal”: Alison Hinds, female empowerment, and calypso. Meridians 8(1),
93–129 (2008)
L. Squires (ed.), English in Computer-mediated Communication: Variation, Representation, and
Change (De Gruyter Mouton, Berlin, 2016)
A. Strauss, J. Corbin, Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Procedures for Developing
Grounded Theory (Sage Publications, Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA, 1998)
Urban
Dictionary,
Tusty
[Online
dictionary]
(2009),
Retrieved
from
http://
www.urbandictionary.com/deﬁne.php?term=tusty&deﬁd=3757629.
R. Wardhaugh, J. Fuller, An Introduction to Sociolinguistics (John Wiley & Sons, Malden, 2015)
T. Wasow, J. Arnold, Intuitions in linguistic argumentation. Lingua 115(11), 1481–1496 (2005)
J.C. Wells, Accents of English 3: Beyond the British Isles (CUP, Cambridge, 1982)
G. Wilson, The Sociolinguistics of Singing: Dialect and Style in Classical Choral Singing in
Trinidad (Verlag-Haus Monsenstein und Vannerdat, Monsenstein, 2014)
P.J. Wilson, Crab Antics: the Social Anthropology of English-Speaking Negro Societies of the
Caribbean (Yale University Press, New Haven, 1973)
L. Winer, Dictionary of the English/Creole of Trinidad & Tobago: On Historical Principles
(McGill-Queen’s Press, 2009)
D. Winford, Phonological hypercorrection in the process of decreolization: the case of Trinidadian
English. J. Linguist. 14(2), 277–291 (1978)
A.D. Wong, The reappropriation of tongzhi. Lang. Soc. 34(05), 763–793 (2005)

Creating Inheritable Digital Codebooks for
Qualitative Research Data Analysis
Shalin Hai-Jew
Abstract In qualitative, mixed methods, and multi-methodology research, a code-
book captures how research data may be analyzed for insight. Codebooks serve
multiple purposes: they enable researchers to explore data; identify patterns;
advance their research, and develop insights. Codebooks, also referred to as code
lists, may be created using emergent methods (based on researcher interaction with
the target data), a priori methods (based on theories, frameworks, models, and
other extant sources), and combined approaches (informed by a priori sources and
insights from the coding). With the affordances of Computer Assisted Qualitative
Data AnalysiS (CAQDAS) tools, contemporary codebooks may originate in more
ways than manual coding. NVivo 11 Plus enables the development of semi- and
fully autocoded codebooks based on three main methods: sentiment autocoding
(unsupervised), automated theme extraction (unsupervised), and coding by existing
pattern (supervised). The use of technologies fundamentally inﬂuences the evolution
of codebooks and the applied coding to the research data. This work introduces some
of these interaction effects between a researcher and a CAQDAS technology in the
development of a codebook from initial conceptualization through the evolution
and ﬁnalization of a digital codebook for qualitative research. Further, this work
suggests that contemporary digital codebooks may be designed to be inheritable or
transferable, which is an assumption more common in ﬁelds using mostly quan-
titative research approaches. If there are more common distribution channels for
qualitative, mixed methods, and multi-methodology research codebooks, research
may be advanced in many areas.
Introduction
A codebook in qualitative, mixed methods, and multi-methodology research essen-
tially describes how research data is analyzed for meaning and insight. Most such
codebooks are unique to the project and the data; in other words, by general practice,
S. Hai-Jew ()
Kansas State University, Manhattan, KS 66506, USA
e-mail: shalin@k-state.edu; haijes@gmail.com
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
S. Hai-Jew (ed.), Data Analytics in Digital Humanities, Multimedia Systems
and Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54499-1_11
251

252
S. Hai-Jew
the coding structures are not usually inherited from other researchers or research
projects. The codebooks are not usually pre-created in other research contexts, but
they may be informed by particular selected theories, models, frameworks, or other
concept-based sources (in a priori or pre-existing method coding). Some projects
involve “emergent coding,” in which a coding structure is grounded in fresh readings
of the data, with the data informing the development of the codebook, and the
emerging codebook informing the analysis of the data.
While codebooks stand to inform their respective research domains and other
arenas of study, qualitative methods codebooks are often a hidden aspect of modern
research, with many published works using these to scaffold the data analysis but
with codebooks considered something privy and even embargoed, like researcher
notes and journals, which are critical as working papers but are not thought to
be of archival value unless the researcher reaches a certain level of prominence.
Much time, effort, and expertise go into the development of codebooks, yet the
culmination of these efforts are often unshared and lost to history. In some cases,
when codebooks are shared, they are mentioned in passing in the methods sections
of publications, or snippets may be shared in the body of a paper or in the
appendices; in some rare occasions, codebooks may be included in their entirety
in the appendices. In even rarer cases, a few codebooks have been shared as stand-
alone publications, some with front matter, research source citations, and desired
bibliographic information. In this digital age, most of what is shared is preserved
for the future, but there are not dedicated efforts at codebook preservation per se.
The shared qualitative codebooks tend to be team-built objects related to evolving
datasets; as such, these are generally co-evolved over time, and new variables are
added by consensus [sometimes overseen by the originator(s) of the codebook or
committees/organizations] as a ﬁeld advances. (The few that the author has seen
have been from political science, and the codebooks and datasets tend to be more
aligned with quantitative research practices than qualitative ones.)
And yet, codebooks used in qualitative research stand to offer rich insights,
particularly in research contexts with low “N’s” and the need to approach research
precision in multiple ways, sometimes without statistical signiﬁcance or with
different types of statistical signiﬁcance for non-parametric data (such as chi-
square measures of non-parametric cross tabulation tables). Certainly, qualitative
researchers and theorists have created a wide range of methods for supporting
research rigor over the many prior decades. Shared codebooks may offer clarity
as to how data was approached and conclusions were reached in research. Ideally,
they could offer the following:
•
Tactics and strategies for research designs, data collection, data analysis, code-
book creation (and collaborative codebook co-creation), and other research work
related insights;
•
A meta-level and condensed perspective of the data analytics, with insights about
the research hypotheses and data discoveries in a research context and domain;
•
Efﬁcient and effective methods for codebook creation and evolution;

Creating Inheritable Digital Codebooks for Qualitative Research Data Analysis
253
– Discernments about how research insights relate to the applied research
methods and the raw primary data (with exemplars coded to each part of a
codebook, and also exemplars for what was not coded to particular codes;
coding frequency distributions across the codebooks, and other aspects of
coding and the underlying source data);
•
Applied methods for coding new data in different research contexts;
•
Entrée into understanding a particular domain or ﬁeld or professional practice;
•
Understanding of respective researchers’ coding “ﬁsts” (by reverse engineering
their codebooks to their unique insights, their “hidden hand” in the analytical
work, and their research gaze);
•
Understandings of ways to reapply these researcher coding “ﬁsts” to different
data through computational means
– This concept of a “ﬁst” comes from the unique ways that Morse code
operators handled their telegraph keys, communicating through dots and
dashes. A “good ﬁst” involves communicating the messages clearly and
efﬁciently, and a “poor ﬁst” involves being unclear and inefﬁcient. In coding,
a person’s “ﬁst” encapsulates what that researcher sees that others do not.
Coding is an extension of the researcher’s personality, intellect, skill, and
professional insight;
•
Ways to understand codebook inspiration, creation, and evolution through pro-
cess mining (of event logs, research journals, and the codebooks)
– Are there phases that codebooks go through? What important steps occur
when?
– Are there requisite steps that have to occur for a successful codebook? Are
these steps required to be in a particular order or not, and why or why not?
– Are there ways to enhance the process of creating effective codebooks through
process mining, in what van der Aalst (2011) calls “enhancement process
mining” (p. 45)?
Rethinking the sharing of qualitative codebooks has come about in part because
of the current state of the world. There is negligible cost to digital memory. Most
information may be digitized. Prior stored information on media may be transcoded
into a fairly easy-to-handle digital format, no matter what the original type of
data storage was, even cassette tapes, eight-track tapes, and vinyl (although the
transcoder consoles are more and more difﬁcult to acquire commercially). The
popularization of Computer Assisted Qualitative Data AnalysiS (CAQDAS) tools
has made it easier for researchers to create codebooks and apply them to various
types of data.
For many researchers using empirical data from the world for their studies, there
is a sentimental tie to embodied data analytics approaches. There is the charm of
using markers, butcher paper, tape, and sticky notes. There is charm to having
notepads and pencil and ink pens. Many will say that having physical objects
to engage with in a physical space can be freeing and relaxing for the difﬁcult

254
S. Hai-Jew
cognitive and thinking work. Such stances are valid based on research into the role
of proprioception in learning. One light rebuttal is that digital means can emulate
physical thinking processes. There are advances in widely available technologies
that enable the digital re-creation of some of these spaces, with touch screens, stylus
and tablet devices, digital audio recording devices, and others. A researcher and a
research team have to accept technologies to some degree for this approach to work.
To avoid CAQDAS technology, though, is to leave a lot of information unexploited
and latent.
This approach is not about forgoing effective methods for researchers, who may
feel that technologies are making incursions into human research. Technologies
are augmentations to human capabilities, and many technological affordances are
informed by human interests and are designed to serve people. Many computational
models are compared against expert insights when measuring the efﬁcacy of these
programs. Interestingly, qualitative research is about learning in depth from small
samples, but even here, there are computational means to extract insights from
even one exemplar, by extracting relevant features and applying logic methodically
and rigorously (Winston 2010). For many, computational supports for qualitative
research ﬁndings may bolster human researcher insights. “But for” the use of the
technology, some codes would not be extracted and observed because they would
not be observable to the unaided human eye.
Historically, codebooks in qualitative research have not been broadly shared
as any sort of stand-alone resource. Rather, if they are mentioned at all, they are
occasionally included in the Methods sections of a publication or placed in the
Appendices. These are almost never released with datasets, which are considered
proprietary and at-risk of data leakage and participant re-identiﬁcation. Historically,
most codebooks are applied to the unique research context, and only those which
are applied to continuing data collection are released broadly (to modify the dataset
and promote deeper researcher understandings of the data).
This paper describes some light research in qualitative codebooks or “CAQDAS
code lists” and some of the affordances of NVivo 11 Plus for the creation of
transferable codebooks.
Review of the Literature
At the simplest level, a codebook consists of a listing of codes and then descrip-
tive information about what ﬁts within each code category and what does not.
Codebooks may be built off of pre-deﬁned categories, based on theories, models,
constructs, frameworks, and other elements from a research domain; these are
known as a priori codebooks, and these are usually created prior to the actual usage
against a set of data or text corpus. Emergent codebooks, by contrast, are those
that are created from a researcher’s read-through of the collected data; emergent
codebooks do not have any prior structure but are an extraction from the raw data.
And then there are codebooks that have some initial early structure but which

Creating Inheritable Digital Codebooks for Qualitative Research Data Analysis
255
evolve based on researcher observations of the raw data. As a qualitative research
tool, codebooks generally are used to make summary and analytical sense of the
underlying raw data. Codebooks in qualitative research tend to be one-offs, except
in a situation where the researcher continues along the same line of research over
multiple years and multiple projects. Generally, these tend to be essentialist and
condensed, inspired by expertise and prior work but also partially derived from
analyses of the raw data.
A codebook “is an abstract of a collection of data items that have been assembled
for studying some topic of interest” (Bettinger 2012, Slide 3). The prior phrasing
suggests more of an emergent focus for this conceptualization of a codebook. Of
interest is how this author describes characteristics of the code and their respective
representations, with codebooks include both continuous and categorical variables.
For the ﬁrst, Bettinger suggests that basic descriptive statistics be included: “mean,
standard deviation, range, mode, median” and visualizations including “box-and-
whisker plots, contour plots, heat maps, and 3D surface diagrams.” For the latter,
he suggests “frequency histograms, mosaic plots, bubble plots” to represent the
categorical variables (Bettinger 2012, Slide 3). Like models, codebooks should be
parsimonious, with selected variables. Not everything deserves to be observed and
listed in a codebook.
In the research literature, codebooks may be used to set a level of rigor in
understanding particular in-world phenomena and events (Sullivan and Koch 2008).
They may be deeply integrated into the research design and take years to build and
evolve, some involving researchers from multiple countries (Treiman 1998).
In terms of formats, some new codebooks are seeded with the so-called start
lists, which enable researchers to begin their coding work and evolve a codebook
from there. Others pre-deﬁne the entire codebook (or code list) with a mix of
a priori details. Some codebooks come in tabular form (like a data table), and
these are referred to as tabular codebooks. There are some codebooks that take on
more complex forms, such as some emulating the periodic table (as an organizing
construct and visualization) (McGrew 2014). Researchers often set rules for the
coding, such as whether information coded to one “node” may also be coded to
others. In many contexts, there are multiple cycles of coding and subcoding and
reﬁnement of the codebook (Miles et al. 2014). The structure of codebooks into
layers suggests both an awareness of the unit of measure (granularity, level of
abstraction) and of hierarchical and network relationships in terms of data.
While a very basic codebook involves merely codes (“nodes”) and rules for
coding to that node, more detailed codebooks may include the following:
•
“Short description – the name of the code itself
•
Detailed description – a 1–3 sentence description of the coded datum’s qualities
or properties
•
Inclusion criteria – conditions of the datum or phenomenon that merit the code
•
Exclusion criteria – exceptions or particular instances of the datum or phe-
nomenon that do not merit the code
•
Typical exemplars – a few examples of data that best represent the code

256
S. Hai-Jew
•
Atypical exemplars – extreme or special examples of data that still represent the
code
•
“Close, but no” – data examples that could mistakenly be assigned this particular
code” (Saldaña 2013, p. 25).
In addition, it may be helpful to have even more information, particularly about
contexts from which the codebook is being released. This is especially so for stand-
alone contexts of codebooks, which will not be held in place in a particular research
sequence and context.
•
A disambiguated codebook name (with an apt acronym),
•
A history of the codebook development (and main decision junctures),
– The sequence of the codebook creation, data processing sequences (the
codes extracted from data are sensitive to sequential and methodological
processing), and related macros,
•
How intermediate or advanced the codebook is in the particular area of research
(is the codebook just an initial draft or something that has been used for decades
and has settled into a stable state or something else?),
•
Descriptions of applicable research and/or data analytics contexts (as conceptu-
alized by the developers of the codebook),
•
How the codes were created, particularly those extracted from theories, models,
frameworks, and other extant approaches and then from the data analytics (as
relevant), given the universe of possibilities and the high dimensionality of data
in qualitative research,
•
Any pilot testing of the codebook (methods, insights, and changes to the
codebook),
•
References to any related datasets, whether publicly available or not,
•
Known limitations to the use of the codebook tool,
•
A bibliographic listing of sources which informed the creation of the codebook,
•
Applied data pre-processing or data cleaning,
•
Sample coded data,
•
An authors’ listing (and direct contact information and terms of invited contact),
•
Sample citation for the usage of the codebook,
•
Linked prior published research (using the codebook),
•
Suggested methods for building onto the codebook,
•
Creative Commons licensure for intellectual property releases, and other relevant
information.
Meta-analytic applications of codebooks As noted earlier, codebooks created
for qualitative, mixed methods, and multi-methodology research could be applied
for various meta-aims: (1) coder exploration, (2) data exploration and pattern
identiﬁcation, (3) research advancement, and (4) domain and non-domain insight
creation. Meta aims are additional ambitions overlaid to the original usage of the
codebook. What do these four applied categories mean? Table 1: “Four Objectives
for Qualitative Research Codebook Analysis” summarizes some practical applica-
tions.

Creating Inheritable Digital Codebooks for Qualitative Research Data Analysis
257
Table 1 Four objectives for qualitative research codebook analysis
Digital codebook creation process. The creation of a digital codebook is thought to ﬁt into
a qualitative, mixed method, or multi-method research sequence, which goes something like
this:
conceptualization of the research < – > review of the literature < – > research design < – >
research design approval < – > data collection < – > data pre-processing and cleaning < – >
digital codebook development (informed by the prior elements and the following elements)
< – > data analysis (including data queries) < – > machine coding over the raw data < – >
coding queries based on coding in the project (such as matrix coding queries, and others)
< – > data visualizations < – > write-up < – > research publication/presentation <->
codebook preparation for sharing < – > codebook distribution <-> codebook archival < – >
codebook supports –>.
Each of the steps in the process includes complexities which have not been addressed here.
The process here is generally linear but includes recursive elements, therefore, the
two-ended processes arrow heads. It helps to note that a digital codebook is informed by
both upstream and downstream processes, and there is a degree of recursion in the steps, in
this conceptualization. Also, this process suggests that the researcher and research team go
through disciplined thinking and work in order to emerge with research insights. The value
in creating a codebook is in the process, which opens up discoveries to the researcher, and
not necessarily in the ﬁnalized product alone.
Early observations of codebook structures: The structure of codebook depends on a
number of factors:
• Underlying applied concepts (whether from theories, models, frameworks, or other
sources),
• Research domain,
• Researcher conceptual models, expertise, and education (whether consciously,
subconsciously, or unconsciously applied),
• Research question(s) and hypothesis(ses), including related sub-questions and
sub-hypotheses,
• Captured source data,
• Serendipity, and other factors.
The above factors will have interaction effects. For example, if an a priori coding structure
is applied, but there is no observation of a particular concept or phenomena, that coding
node will be left empty except for its name and description. An empty node in the software
tool will mean that if “coding by existing pattern” is applied as a supervised machine
learning tool, that node will not have any exemplars to lead, and nothing will be machine
coded to that particular node. (With supervised machine learning in NVivo 11 Plus, no new
nodes will be created based on a run over the data, but the machine will emulate the human
coder based on exemplars coded to the respective nodes.) This node without examples
coded to it will receive less attention than other nodes populated with text-based examples.
If a concept lies outside a research domain, it may be difﬁcult to ﬁnd references to it in
amounts that are meaningful. The research question(s) or hypothesis(ses) will affect the
contents of the codebook because these deﬁne certain observable phenomena of interest as
expressed in the data. Serendipity (beneﬁcial coincidences and chance) likely will play a
role, too, as it does in most contexts. Each of these elements will inﬂuence the ﬁnal
codebook to varying degrees. Said another way, no two codebooks will be exactly alike
because most if not all the input factors will vary.
(continued)

258
S. Hai-Jew
Table 1 continued
Making a codebook ready for public stand-alone release and inheritance. A codebook,
then, is designed for a local applied purpose of coding captured data, but it may also be used
for meta-purposes and fresh insights. It may be applied to other research contexts. It has an
inherent informational value. The prior realities beg the question of what additional work
may need to prepare a codebook for stand-alone release. Researchers who inherit a
codebook will not necessarily have direct background with that particular type of research
or the research data. They will need sufﬁcient contextual information to properly understand
the codebook and the related coded data and how to apply it.
For researchers who are thinking about sharing their codebooks broadly, this question of
how to make their stand-alone codebook more usable may arise earlier rather than after the
research and data coding has been completed. Given the cognitive load of managing
complex research, it may be better to keep the transferability of a codebook a somewhat
separate process either at the end of the main research and coding work (1), or as dedicated
periods of time throughout the research work (2), as may be seen in Fig. 1. In this latter
case, some additional steps have been added to the prior sequence:
conceptualization of the research(and what a codebook may look like; initial notetaking
for a conceptualized codebook) < - >
review of the literature(with theoretical and practical inputs into a codebook; initial
drafting of a digital codebook) < – >
research design(with anticipated coding deﬁned) < – >
research design approval < – >
data collection(with an eye for collecting sufﬁcient data to inform the potential categories
of a codebook) <–>
data pre-processing and cleaning < – >
digital codebook development (informed by the prior elements and the following
elements) (codebook building; documentation of the codebook development from various
data streams, including the research journal; citation of formal published sources and gray
literature used for the development of the coding structure; memo-ing at the level of each
node for documentation; automated event logging) < – >
data analysis (including data queries) (documentation of the macros and sequences for the
codebook documentation; selection of exemplars for each node category) < – > machine
coding over the raw data (documentation of macros and sequences for the codebook
documentation) < – >
coding queries based on coding in the project (such as matrix coding queries, and others)
(documentation of macros and sequences for the codebook documentation) < – >
data visualizations (consideration for inclusion of some data visualizations into the
codebook) <– >
pilot testing of the codebook for transferability (design of the pilot testing methods;
documentation of the pilot testing of the codebook)* < - >
revision of the codebook post pilot testing (responses to the ﬁndings of the codebook pilot
testing; documentation of the revisions)* < - >
write-up (analysis of the inﬂuence of the qualitative codebook to the research ﬁndings;
limited inclusion of the codebook in a formal publication and / or presentation; write-up of
the full stand-alone codebook with support information) < – >
research publication / presentation (rollout of the stand-alone codebook as well) < - >
codebook preparation for sharing (codebook ﬁnalization) < - >
codebook distribution < - > (formatting to align with the digital and / or analog platform)
codebook archival < - >
codebook supports -> (evolving design of strategy and tactics for codebook supports;
creation of digital or other objects)
The asterisk refers to two added steps in the semi-linear occasionally recursive sequence

Creating Inheritable Digital Codebooks for Qualitative Research Data Analysis
259
Fig. 1 Transferable/inheritable digital qualitative codebook development: (a) separate add-on
process or (b) distributed and integrated development process

260
S. Hai-Jew
Coder exploration:
•
What is the researcher (or research team) “hand” that may be seen in the
development and evolution of the particular codebook?
•
What are the built-in subjectivities and biases observable in the research data
coding?
Data exploration and pattern identiﬁcation:
•
What data and information are in the dataset?
•
What is seen and not seen in the raw data? The processed information?
– In terms of what is not seen, why isn’t a particular code category ﬁlled with
raw source information? How may that absence be interpreted?
•
What external (non-included) information may be analyzed with the particular
codebook for research value?
•
What apparent patterns exist in the data? (whether “inherent” or based on a pre-
determined model)
– What do these patterns suggest?
•
Based on grouping variables (of case nodes—or interview subjects, focus group
subjects, survey interviewees), are certain patterns seeable? If so, what would
these patterns suggest? (Grouping variables include basic demographic features
and other attribute data about the respective subjects.)
•
In terms of machine coding, what are observed sentiment patterns?
– Why might such sentiment patterns exist, and what do they mean in the
context?
•
In terms of machine coding, what are theme and subtheme patterns?
– How do these extracted themes and subthemes compare across similar text
sets?
•
What are some unexploited ways to explore the data through the codebook?
Research advancement:
•
What research discoveries were made in the data analytics?
– What are some inferences from these ﬁndings?
– In terms of deductive logic, what are some potential insights?
– What are various interpretation methods? Are there unexplored interpreta-
tions?
•
Are there other contexts in which this codebook may be used for research
insights?
•
What are some new methodologies of data analytics based on what may be
observed in the codebook?
– How transferable are these new research methodologies?
– How transferable are the new codebook design strategies and tactics?

Creating Inheritable Digital Codebooks for Qualitative Research Data Analysis
261
•
What research questions have not been addressed?
•
What are some important potential future research directions?
Domain and non-domain insight creation:
•
What does the codebook suggest about how researchers in a particular domain
conduct research? Collect information? Value information and insights? Practice
particular professional ethics, especially around data?
•
What are some possible domain-based and non-domain-based insights from the
coded research and data analytics?
•
What are some observed data insights not found in the codebook (and left
uncoded)? What do the gaps suggest?
Some additional points for the development of a transferable/inheritable digital
qualitative codebook include the following considerations:
•
Modularizing the digital codebook: Is it possible to modularize the codebook
for easier transferability? By having multiple sections that focus on particular
aspects of the topic, sections may be more heritable than the entirety.
•
Necessary sequencing: Does the codebook assume particular steps to the research
sequence, such as for data cleaning or for analysis/re-analysis or for machine
learning sequences? Are these sequences absolutely required or just preferred?
Are there value-added sequences that may beneﬁt the research and data analytics
work?
•
Standards setting: Do the creators of a codebook assume that there has to be a
certain level of data capture before data saturation is attained? Before some level
of validity or invalidity is reached? Are there assumed data ranges?
•
Versioning the codebook for various levels of tech access: Is it a good idea to
use proprietary software, or is it better to have an open-source version, too (but
without built-in analytics functionality)? Is it a good idea to version a codebook,
so it may be used by researchers with differing levels of technology access? If
there are different versions, are there different names for the respective versions?
•
Versioning protocols: If other researchers want to build off a released codebook,
what are the terms by which this may be done? Are there versioning protocols
(v. 1.0.1)? At what point does a codebook become one that is renamed wholly?
What happens to prior codebook developer rights as a codebook evolves?
•
Virtual communities: In some cases, if a tool becomes highly popular and if there
are interested parties, virtual communities of users will arise around the usage of
particular tools. They will share data and methods. They will often help co-evolve
a tool. This may occur around highly useful codebooks. Such communities do
need some support to maintain the social health and constructiveness of these
groups. What sort of effort should go into these?
Setting parameters for the application of the digital codebook Based on usage
and new insights, any used codebook will be changed and reﬁned over time.
Changes to the affordances of the CAQDAS tool will also affect any codebooks built
using that technology. How a codebook is applied in the tech tool—such as settings

262
S. Hai-Jew
for the aggressiveness of the coding, settings for the levels of language similarity
applied, such as the granularity of the coding (applied to sentences, paragraphs, or
cells, for example, in NVivo 11 Plus), will affect the efﬁcacy of the codebook.
What Makes for Effective and Transferable Digital Codebooks
for Qualitative, Mixed Methods, and Multi-Methods
Research?
Some CAQDAS software tools enable supports for virtually every phase of the
research work. For NVivo 11 Plus, this software may be used for the following
(and likely more than is listed here):
Data collection
•
Literature review (published data)
– Inclusion of metadata from third-party bibliographic tools for resources
from commercial subscription and open-source databases, repositories, and
referatories
•
Online survey data download
•
Social media data download (such as through the NCapture web browser add-on)
•
Inclusion of digitized gray literature
•
Inclusion of embed text to public videos on YouTube
•
Inclusion of multimedia data
•
Inclusion of multilingual data (anything that can be represented using the UTF-8
character set of Unicode).
Multimedia data curation
•
Ability to ingest a wide range of multimedia and text-based ﬁles (unstructured
data) and datasets (structured data)
– Function like a heterogeneous database (with easy application of metadata and
the easy ﬁndability of multimedia contents)
•
File management: ﬁle (re)naming, ﬁle movement, ﬁle inclusion, ﬁle deletion,
folder structures, and others
•
File export (in usable formats)
•
Autocoding of interview, focus group, survey, and other such data by style or
structure for ease of ingestion and the ability to create grouping variables (based
on linked classiﬁcation sheets).
Data annotation
•
Manual adding of transcripts to video and audio ﬁles
•
File-level memo-ing
•
Automatic capture of metadata (such as coder, day of annotation, and other
information)

Creating Inheritable Digital Codebooks for Qualitative Research Data Analysis
263
•
Event logging (at the project level)
•
The ability to maintain a catch-all folder of discarded insights, sources, and
coding (for later re-review and possible re-consideration, and ultimately for non-
destructive/non-lossy coding).
Research documentation
•
Maintenance of research journal
•
Memo-ing (at the source level)
•
Event logging.
Team coding
•
Ability to ingest and synthesize others’ projects to enable team coding (even with
a non-server version of the software), within the 10 GB project size limit
•
Real-time team coding with server version of the software.
Computer-assisted and fully automated data analytics
•
Structured queries of the text in the project (such as word frequency count, text
search, coding queries, matrix queries, coding comparisons, and other advanced
queries)
•
Capture of macros (or query sequences) for re-querying new data
•
Sentiment analysis (unsupervised machine learning based on a built-in and un-
editable sentiment dictionary)
•
Theme and subtheme extraction (unsupervised machine learning)
•
Coding by existing pattern (machine emulation of a human coding “ﬁst”).
Data visualizations
•
Ability to output a variety of data visualizations based on data ingestions (such
as from social media platforms), data queries, and machine learning
– Examples include bar charts, 2D and 3D cluster diagrams, dendrograms (both
vertical and horizontal), circle (ring lattice graphs) diagrams, tree maps (with
and without color overlays), word clouds, word tree maps, sunburst hierarchy
charts, geolocationally pinned maps, sociograms, and others
•
Ability to create 2D visual models (node-link diagrams) either manually or in an
automated way or in a combination of manual-automated drawing
•
Ability to use interactive functionality in the data visualizations to access
underlying data.
Codebook editing
•
The ability to build nodes in outlines and layers (parent, child, grandchild, and
other node layers)
•
The ability to code/uncode data to and from nodes
•
The ability to meld similar nodes; the ability to split dissimilar nodes
•
The ability to create, delete, and revise nodes.

264
S. Hai-Jew
Reportage and report export
•
Ability to create and export a codebook with selected elements (usually in an
alphabetized listing of nodes and their deﬁnitions, but may be editable outside of
the software)
•
Ability to export a text event log linked to a project
•
Ability to export memos
•
Ability to export data tables, and others.
Codebooks that are created using CAQDAS software are of a type that would not
have been possible before without the current computational capabilities. Modern
codebooks may be informed by much bigger and multi-modal data than before. They
may be informed by rich annotations and notetaking. They may be fairly easily co-
created with researchers. They may be informed by data visualizations. They may
be informed by autocoding or the use of various types of data mining and machine
learning. CAQDAS tools enable analysis of the amounts of code coded to each
node, to give a sense of frequency of coding based on the identiﬁed concepts and
phenomena. A researcher’s computer-mediated interactions with data affect what is
knowable and what is ultimately created. If a technology is sufﬁciently well deﬁned
to be research method “agnostic” and is sufﬁciently ﬂexible to include a broad range
of approaches and uses, it may be deployed for effective research data analytics
applications and codebook creation. (A codebook is a necessary byproduct of data
analytics in qualitative, mixed methods, and multi-methodology approaches.)
Multiple projects per research project. During the span of work for research, it
is possible (and even advisable) to use multiple projects for the research particularly
in different phases. For example, it may help to have one project for the review
of the literature, another for the analysis of interview or focus group or survey
data, another for ﬁeldwork videos and notes and imagery, another for related social
media channel, and so on. Likewise, for any qualitative, mixed method, and multi-
methodology project, it is possible to have several codebooks over the lifespan of
a project, and these may be stand-alone and not truly able to be integrated. For
example, the coding used in the review of the literature may be used to create a
codebook to apply to the raw primary-sourced data, but not every element of the
initial codebook from the review will be applicable to the next stage; further, as the
raw data is coded, there may be new nodes and insights that are a function of the
new collected data with features not found in the precursor literature review.
Coding for codebook transferability The affordances, of course, go beyond the
listings above. If codebooks are designed or retroﬁtted for transferability, these may
be broadly distributed for usage by others. There are implications to the sharing
of codebooks with other researchers and the broader public. In digital format,
codebooks
•
May be directly linked to the underlying data (and archived with the underlying
data);
•
May be much more than text, with integrations of visuals and other informative
content;

Creating Inheritable Digital Codebooks for Qualitative Research Data Analysis
265
•
May be easily transferred to other researchers (assuming fairly wide usage of and
familiarity with the CAQDAS software).
The ability to include important exemplars in each node is an important capabil-
ity, given the polysemic nature of language and the inherent ambiguity in terms of
its usage. The multimedia capabilities for a richer codebook than text is another
important digital capability. The ability to share codebooks through databases,
repositories, referatories, and registries is yet another new capability, which may
change research practices broadly. (It may not be a good idea to have publications
dedicate space to codebook publishing as that will mean more competition for
already limited reputable publishing spaces for academic research dissemination.)
Qualitative codebooks may not only be one-offs but may be abstracted, portioned
out, augmented, and otherwise applied to other research contexts.
Providing a venue for the publishing and dissemination of codebooks may beneﬁt
the codebook developers as well, by enabling them to identify other researchers with
shared interests and providing a distribution channel for extending their scholarship
to new audiences. Having a sense of audience may help researchers be more
self-aware of their research work. Having an audience may motivate codebook
developers to better explain and document the development of their codebook as
well, moving it from the realm of a private research aid to a publishable and polished
work. Shared codebooks do not have to be in a ﬁnalized state but may be provisional
and early draft versions—sufﬁcient for a research endeavor but not in ﬁnalized
format. In cases where others use a dedicated codebook in their own research work,
the codebook itself may have a more extended shelf life (through a wider range of
applied usage and application); in contexts where it is revised or augmented with
other code lists, the codebook may be strengthened for broader data coverage. Also,
codebooks which are instantiated into macros may serve as automated programs
to be run on new data, with expert human insights encoded into the program and
illuminated by the sample code (again, in reference to NVivo 11 Plus’s “coding by
existing pattern”).
This is not to say that codebooks are not related to the contexts from which
they emerge. Even codebooks which are released as stand-alone objects will have
a history, ties to its developers, ties to particular research designs and methods,
and ties to research conclusions. An assumption is that when decontextualized
codebooks are released, their histories will still follow them. A necessary condition
for a successful stand-alone codebook though is that it can transfer effectively to
other research and data analytic contexts.
Ability to enable consistency of understanding or practice in a ﬁeld in terms of
some approaches to particular types of data analytics.

266
S. Hai-Jew
How to Check the Quality of a Codebook for Possible
Heritance?
The selection of another researcher’s codebook is not one that is entered into lightly.
A codebook is an important part of research design, and its structure will affect
what insights are surfaced. One key requirement is that the codebook has to ﬁt
the research interests of the researcher or research team. It has to have sufﬁcient
comprehensiveness to address the issues of concern but also not be too unwieldy to
use; it has to be somewhat parsimonious. If there is excessive data residua that is not
addressed, then it is possible for the researchers to create their own module or other
parts to address what is missing in the original codebook? Or is this extraneous work
a disincentive to use the particular codebook? The codebook has to be sufﬁciently
developed and original to be useful; otherwise, other researchers may develop their
own (at a cost of time, effort, and money). Also, a codebook has to enable new
insights that were not discovered earlier in part because repeats of former ﬁndings
will often not result in publications or presentations. Some codebooks may involve
cost to use. Even if there is not a ﬁnancial cost though, there may be a reputational
one because a researcher or research team needs to credit the original developer(s)
of the codebook.
Another way to understand the value of a codebook may be by their meta-analytic
value. As cited in Table 1: “Four Objectives for Qualitative Research Codebook
Analysis,” there are at least four general insights from codebooks, related to coder
exploration, data exploration and pattern identiﬁcation, research advancement, and
domain and non-domain insight creation.
In addition, there are some other more general features of a codebook quality
to consider for heritance. These are described in ﬁve broad areas: (1) codebook
validity, (2) credibility of the coder-codebook developer, (3) practical usability, (4)
technical alignment with CAQDAS technologies, and (5) support for heritance.
1. Codebook Validity
•
Alignment to underlying concepts: If the codebook is designed around
particular identiﬁed theories, models, frameworks, and so on, are well aligned
are the codes to the underlying concepts? Are there important variables or
parts missing? Are aspects of the underlying theories : : : misconstrued?
•
Internal and external (in)validation: Does the codebook have a record of
effective usage? What is its track record of (in)validation?
2. Credibility of Coder-Codebook Developer
•
Coder-codebook developer “hand”: Is the coding “ﬁst” sufﬁciently transfer-
able and ﬂexible or too speciﬁc to the original researcher?
– Does the codebook creator allow room for others to use the codebook
without interference? Without political cruft? Are the stated and unstated
terms of use sufﬁcient for the inheriting researcher?
– Does/do the original creator(s) of the codebook have a positive earned
reputation in the ﬁeld?

Creating Inheritable Digital Codebooks for Qualitative Research Data Analysis
267
3. Practical Usability
•
Practical address of research challenges and applied problem-solving: Does
the codebook solve the stated research challenges it was designed to solve?
The applied problem-solving?
•
Applicability to other domain data: Does the codebook “overﬁt” to the
researcher’s original context, or is it sufﬁciently general to apply to other
domain data (without leaving too much uncoded residua)? (An overﬁt code-
book is suitable to analyze only the particular questions and speciﬁc data that
the researcher has captured in a particular research context. It does not have
code that can apply to other research situations.)
•
Novel approaches: Are there compelling and novel theories, approaches, or
insights related to a codebook and its usage? Does the inheriting researcher
want to build on that novelty with a fresh approach?
•
Sufﬁcient scope and ambition: Is the scope or ambition of the codebook
sufﬁcient for the research?
•
Suitability to engage a range of data types: Is the codebook applicable to a
wide range of data types? Data sources?
– Are there accommodations for coding multimedia? Textual data? Other
high dimensionality data types?
•
Details on data pre-processing/data cleaning: Does the codebook include
information on data pre-processing?
•
Sufﬁcient documentation and detail: Are all aspects of the codebook’s devel-
opment sufﬁciently described? Is its provenance clear?
4. Technical Alignment with CAQDAS Technologies
•
Alignment to CAQDAS tools: Is the digital codebook well aligned to the
underlying CAQDAS or other software tool and its functionalities?
– Does the digital codebook function as advertised?
– Is it clear how much the inheriting researcher is supposed to do and how
much he or she hands over to the computer for processing?
– If the codebook functions within custom software program, how well
does it function? Is the software program well designed? Is it secure and
trustworthy?
5. Support for Heritance
•
Codebook “how-to”: Is the codebook sufﬁciently detailed for application by
other researchers?
– Are the codes named clearly and with parallel construction?
– Do all the nodes have sufﬁcient descriptors for inclusion?
– Are there logical described standards for how raw source contents should
be coded?

268
S. Hai-Jew
– Can the source contents be coded to multiple nodes simultaneously? What
is the logic behind the advisement?
– Are there exemplars for each of the codes? Is the level of abstraction /unit
of analysis clear?
– Is the codebook correctly revised and edited?
•
Legality to use: Is the codebook released for public use without obvious
potential legal challenges?
•
Support for usage: How much developer support is there for codebook use? Is
there a community of users? Is the original codebook developer or codebook
development team available to support the usage of the tool?
Delimitations The above concepts may be difﬁcult to wield, particularly for
new researchers. This work has not provided examples of codebook “overﬁt” or
“novelty” or “validation.” To do so would require codebook samples that are
publicly available and easy-to-access and cite. Examples would also be somewhat
limiting to the generality of the ideas and potentially hinder transfer. What these
respective aspects of codebook quality mean will differ based on the research
contexts.
Discussion
The concept of shared codebooks is common in a number of ﬁelds with com-
mon quantitative research practices. In a qualitative, mixed methods, and multi-
methodology approach, the assumptions themselves would differ. One major differ-
ence is in the concept of reproducibility of research, which is not at all an assumption
in qualitative approaches. The researcher subjectivity is an important part of
qualitative understandings, but this is seen as both a strength and a weakness—
the strength being the power of researcher insights and the weakness being that
subjectivities may mean blind spots. CAQDAS tools have some adoption among
qualitative researchers, and their use for creating codebooks is widely known and
accepted. The concept of shared digital codebooks for qualitative, mixed methods,
and multi-methods research, though, is not so common. The contention is that there
can be wider beneﬁts to focus on codebook development not only for the local
research but also to a wider context. Computational means can be highly beneﬁcial
to a transferable codebook particularly if researchers have access to the same tools
and can engage autocoding, data querying, and data visualization capabilities within
the software tools.
This approach is not without risks. It will be important to be vigilant about
unintended and possibly negative effects to shared digital codebooks. In some
contexts, there may be “ﬁrst mover” advantage in the sense that an early shared
codebook may be adopted broadly and close out other contender codebooks. For
example, if certain codebooks are adopted and become dominant, these may mean
much less attention to fresh and original codebooks applied to unique research

Creating Inheritable Digital Codebooks for Qualitative Research Data Analysis
269
contexts. Shared codebooks may mean fewer innovations and less variety in the
particular domain ﬁeld. Also, anything released to the public may be mis-used with
some researchers taking undue credit or third-party publishers usurping copyrighted
works to drive trafﬁc to disreputable sites.
Also, per institutional review board (IRB) oversight, the data collected in human
subjects research has to be carefully protected against a wide range of potential
misuses. It is important to de-identify the data and to prevent re-identiﬁcation. As
such, codebooks may be a source of unintended data leakage, and as such, those
who would release these publicly should scrub the data and metadata of all related
ﬁles.
Future Research Directions
At heart, this work proposes a rethinking of qualitative, mixed methods, and
multi-methods codebooks (created with CAQDAS tools) as objects that may be
inherited for use by researchers in a domain and also for researchers who are
interested in pursuing meta-analytics of the codebooks themselves and what they
may suggest about coding, coders, and research domains. This work suggests fresh
value propositions to datafy and informatize codebooks.
This propositional work suggests a number of potential future research direc-
tions. If there are some who agree to share their inheritable digital codebooks, they
may wish to write up how they generated these and enhanced the heritability through
design and technological means. If this sharing becomes more common practice,
there may be works describing helpful principles, practices, and technologies that
optimize transferability.
If codebooks become common fare for sharing, it will be possible to cate-
gorize codebooks in various ways. The typologies would require categories and
descriptions of those respective categories. These typologies may help in codebook
distribution by increasing ﬁndability.
As researchers inherit codebooks, they may describe the process: how they
selected particular codebooks, how they made adjustments in order to adapt the
respective codebooks, how they created added modules, and what they learned about
codebook inheritance from the experience. There may be professional etiquette
issues for how to inherit codebooks effectively. If codebooks are inherited and
fundamentally updated or changed, how do they evolve, and on what variables
and dimensions? It may be that there are recognizable patterns for how code-
books evolve over time. If they do advance by punctuated equilibrium, what
could contribute to these forward motions and advancements: new data, new
research methods, new theories, adoptions by major funders, adoptions by leading
researchers?
Codebooks may be used to apply to past research and historical data. In those
cases, what are some fresh insights (made possible with more contemporary coding
methods)? Likewise, it may help to conceptualize codebooks as applying to the

270
S. Hai-Jew
future and to future-collected data. Of note would be NVivo 11 Plus’s “autocoding
by existing pattern,” which enables supervised machine learning of textual data
based on the code structure and example code by an individual researcher or
research team. Are there special considerations when trying to design a codebook
with future applicability (in an anticipatory way)?
How do research groups or teams inherit qualitative codebooks? Teams usually
train on how to effectively co-code, and is this different when the coding comes
from inherited codebooks? Is interrater reliability harder or easier to achieve?
Another approach to future research involves technological affordances. Some
CAQDAS tools may be found to be more effective than others for heritability and
transferability of digital codebooks. There may be uniquely coded codebooks that
are shared, say, through GitHub. Also, there may be different platforms for digital
codebook distribution with various types of affordances and constraints.
If digital codebooks are distributed through electronic means, capturing metrics
about codebook popularity and usage will be likely par-for-the-course. If the
codebooks are sufﬁciently documented, it will be possible to examine which
features of a codebook are associated with its popularity or lack-of-popularity.
Another way to come at this would be to analyze the references to particular
inherited codebooks in the published academic research literature, for yet another
data point.
Finally, future research in this area may include optimal ways to present and
distribute codebooks for usage among researchers.
Conclusion
Broadly sharing digital codebooks from qualitative, mixed methods, and multi-
method approaches may be highly disruptive to the status quo. What is traditionally
mysterious and hidden could well become part of common research understandings
and interchanges.
This early work suggests that the sharing of codebooks will enable researchers to
informatize what is already created as a “byproduct” of their work by forefronting
these tools as valuable and publishable and distributable—as it is in other non-
qualitative research approaches. This work summarized the application of NVivo
11 Plus capabilities to the development and design of codebooks, generally, and
has argued for the broader sharing of digital codebooks in the humanities and
more broadly, to advance data exploration, enhance pattern identiﬁcation, support
research, and expand data-based insights. If there are more common and democratic
distribution channels for digital codebooks, and more common practices of research
codebook and data sharing, deeper advances may be made in various domains.
Acknowledgment I am deeply grateful to the anonymous reviewers who provided feedback on
this work. It is hard to gain perspective when one is so deeply focused on a work. Thanks!

Creating Inheritable Digital Codebooks for Qualitative Research Data Analysis
271
References
R. Bettinger, SAS rule-based codebook generation for exploratory data analysis. Modern analytics
(2012), Retrieved on 29 Jun 2016, from http://www.slideshare.net/RossBettinger/sas-rule-
based-codebook-generation-for-exploratory-data-analysis-wuss-2012.
K. McGrew, The CHC periodic table of cognitive elements: ‘What are you made of?’ Now avail-
able on a t-shirt. IQ’s Corner, (2014), Retrieved 17 Jul 2016, from http://www.iqscorner.com/
2014/06/the-chc-periodic-table-oc-cognitive.html.
M.B. Miles, A.M. Huberman, J. Saldaña, Qualitative Data Analysis: A Methods Sourcebook, 3rd
edn. (2014)
J. Saldaña, The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers, 2nd edn. (SAGE Publications, Los
Angeles, 2013), pp. 24–25
P.L. Sullivan & M.T. Koch, Military Intervention by Powerful States (MIPS) Codebook (2008),
vol. 2, pp. 1–36, Retrieved 28 Jun 2016, from https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
228601442_Military_Intervention_by_Powerful_States_MIPS_Codebook.
D.J. Treiman, Life histories and social change in contemporary China provisional codebook
(1998), Retrieved 28 Jun 2016, from http://data-archive.library.ucla.edu/lhsccs/ccb_1.pdf.
W. Van der Aalst, Process mining: Making knowledge discovery process centric. ACM SIGKDD
Explor. Newsl. 13(2), 45–49 (2011)
C. Weston, T. Gandell, J. Beauchamp, L. McAlpine, C. Wiseman, C. Beauchamp, Analyzing
interview data: The development and evolution of a coding system. Qual. Sociol. 24(3),
381–400 (2001)
P.H Winston, Lecture 15: learning: near misses, felicity conditions. Artiﬁcial intelligence series.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. MIT OpenCourseWare YouTube Channel (2010),
Retrieved 17 Jul 2016, from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sh3EPjhhd40.

Part VI
Support for Digital Humanities Work

Is It Worth It? The Library and Information
Science Degree in the Digital Humanities
Hannah Lee
Abstract The last several years have seen a marked upturn in society’s use of
electronic information as the internet has greatly altered the very nature of informa-
tion access. Although academics and professionals in the library and information
sciences (LIS) seek ways of improving the connection between individuals and
information, public perceptions often question the importance of LIS-based work
in a world where everything is so freely and readily available online.
Therefore, the question becomes how relevant is the library and information
science degree today in the world of electronic information? Using the theoretical
framework of system theory and cybersemiotics, this chapter seeks to investigate
the importance of LIS in the growing discipline of the digital humanities (DH).
More speciﬁcally by focusing on data analytics, this chapter will demonstrate the
practicality of LIS in an online environment and its necessity in giving information
structure and meaning.
Introduction
The internet brought with it the ability for everyday people to ﬁnd information
on their own with near instantaneous results. Whereas the information-seeking
society before the internet required a better understanding of where and how to
ﬁnd information, searching for information now is as simple as typing in a few
keywords in a search engine. “Just Google it” has become the standard phrase
when referencing the search for information with the expectation that anything and
everything is available online. The complex algorithms that make up the everyday
mechanisms of online interaction makes the internet seem quite intuitive and easy.
In reality, the internet is anything but simple. The kind of information-seeking
society that has developed gives the illusion that average internet users are
expert searchers. If someone cannot ﬁnd their answers within the ﬁrst page of
a search result, then common attitude of internet users is that the information
H. Lee ()
Human and Organizational Development and Change Fielding Graduate University,
Santa Barbara, CA, USA
e-mail: 00HannahLee@gmail.com
© Springer International Publishing AG 2017
S. Hai-Jew (ed.), Data Analytics in Digital Humanities, Multimedia Systems
and Applications, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-54499-1_12
275

276
H. Lee
is notavailable at all. Because of modern society’s understanding of information
through the internet, the library and information sciences (LIS) is often seen by the
public as obsolete or utterly useless in an era of digital information.
Even though LIS professionals have been applying traditional library practices
online (Lynch 2003; Hong et al. 2002) and the ability to use a library’s resources
online becoming the norm rather than a novel exception (Tenopir 2003), the process
of translating traditional practices to the internet has been slow. However, it is often
the case that many within the digital landscape are not aware that the LIS degree
exists, much less the need for it as the internet and as information systems continue
to grow. Furthermore, despite its wide application in a variety of professional ﬁelds,
the assumption by the public is for LIS degree holders to work exclusively in
libraries as librarians. Much of what the public perceives as LIS work reﬂects an
outdated understanding of the degree or ignorance of the infrastructure needed for
today’s internet society.
Thus, the purpose of this chapter is to answer the question, “how relevant is the
library and information science degree in today’s electronic information world.” The
ﬁrst step is to brieﬂy explain some of the misconceptions of library and information
sciences. Then, this chapter argues for a theoretical framework of system theory
and cybersemiotics that gives a perspective of interconnectedness between ﬁeld
(LIS) and discipline (DH) in the USA. By focusing speciﬁcally on the challenge of
data analytics in an online information environment, this chapter seeks recognition
that the LIS degree contributes towards the information structures that make up the
foundation of modern, online information society.
Misconceptions about Library and Information Sciences
In general, perceptions of the library and information sciences ﬁeld are often at odds
with public perception. As a result, misconceptions of the ﬁeld severely devalue the
work of LIS academics and professional. However, as society becomes information
enriched, the work of those in the LIS ﬁeld becomes all the more important. The
following is a brief introduction to some of the public misconceptions of LIS.
First, there is strong evidence that the LIS degree is a severely undervalued
degree. Quite frequently, and annoyingly so for those within LIS degree-based
professions, the master’s degree in library and information sciences is described
as the following: “The low pay rank and estimated growth rank make library and
information science the worst master’s degree for jobs right now” (Dill 2015;
Smith 2012). The poor use data analytics of popular news sites notwithstanding,
it is disheartening when the value of an entire degree reduces down to a single
profession (librarians) with the focus being purely on pay and ignoring other factors
like job satisfaction. One recent survey of those with a Masters in Library and
Information Sciences (also known as MLIS, MLS, or MILS) found that even though
approximately 94% of respondents found intrinsic value in their degree, the same
survey concluded that there was an increase in overall negative comments regarding

Is It Worth It? The Library and Information Science Degree in the Digital Humanities
277
the MLIS degree from 3 years prior in 2008 (Teglovic et al. 2012). Therefore, it is
not only the public who question the value of an LIS degree but those holding the
degree as well.
In studies investigating those who do choose careers in LIS, the key fallacy that
endures over the history of LIS professionals is (1) lack of awareness of the LIS
profession and (2) misunderstandings of the LIS professionals’ roles (Moniarou-
Papaconstantinou et al. 2015; Newbutt 2008). Without simple awareness of an entire
professional and academic ﬁeld, of course it is difﬁcult to formulate opinions other
than ones presented through common media stereotypes like the “shusher” or the
“sexy librarian” (Vassilakaki and Moniarou-Papaconstantinou 2014).
These kinds of perceptions point towards a larger problem of not knowing exactly
LIS work involves. In an internet-dependent information society like the USA, the
common attitude is that “everything is available online” (Dougherty 2010; Herring
2014). However, everything is not available online. Even though the internet and
search engines are able to bring answer to easy question (NPR 2014), the internet is
not the Holy Grail of information.
And, despite its name, the library and information sciences is more than librarians
working in libraries. There are numerous subﬁelds/specialties found in the LIS ﬁeld
(Hjorland 2002) but the image of librarians is intrinsically linked to the degree. It
is difﬁcult for many to see beyond the seemingly hushed and dusty aisles of book
stacks where the only forms of life are dust motes or college students making out.
These stereotypes greatly misrepresent what it is that the LIS ﬁeld actually does that
is detrimental in an information era that is heavily dependent on the internet.
In other words, there is a great deal more LIS professionals, institutions, and work
has to offer to current information society than what the public believes is available.
This section is but a brief introduction to the some of the common stereotypes the
LIS ﬁeld and the LIS community face. In order to dispel this misconception, the
remainder of this chapter will work towards understanding the role of LIS in today’s
information-rich online environment.
Theoretical Frameworks of Interconnectedness
Two theories provide the basic framework for this chapter: system theory and
cybersemiotics. System theory (or general system theory), introduced by Ludwig
von Bertalanffy in the 1940s, examines the entirety of a system and its place
in an environment. This broad, general theoretical framework seeks inclusivity
that is important when addressing the wide range and reach of LIS and the
humanities. Cybersemiotics, developed more recently by Søren Brier, observes the
intersection of information, cognition, and communication by integrating systems
theory and cybernetics. This particular theory provides a framework that seeks better
understanding of the digital aspect of DH and the use of the internet in fostering
human understanding.

278
H. Lee
The following sections explore speciﬁc aspects of system theory and cybersemi-
otics in order to add to a broad discussion of LIS and data analytics in DH
by demonstrating how connected (and interconnected) information is in internet
society.
Thinking in Systems
Systems theory is composed of two basic concepts: systems and wholeness.
Together, these concepts produce a theory with characteristics that emphasize wider,
meta-level views rather than individual part.
First, the term “system” refers not to technological systems (e.g., computers),
systems of control (e.g., classiﬁcation schemes), or even abstract, grouped ideas
(e.g., “Fight the corrupt system”). Rather, system in this chapter means a “set of
elements or parts that is coherently organized and interconnected in a pattern or
structure that produces a characteristic set of behaviors” (Meadows 2008). In other
words, systems are groups of things that behave as one. If any given piece does not
behave with or moves against the rest of the system, then it is either (1) not part of
the system or (2) an indicator that there is something wrong within a system. As
this chapter progresses, any differences between understanding system as a theory
and other kinds of systems (especially the kinds of technological or control systems
listed above) will be made apparent.
Second, system theory in general advocates the perspective of viewing the
entirety of a given system rather than its parts; the wholeness of a system instead
of in minutiae. The beneﬁts from having a theory advocating wholeness are that
it is easier to see how an issue (like information) affects the system at large and
easier to see the connection to and from other systems. Alternatively, discarding
a wider system view and instead focusing on the individual details result in
professional specialization or academic silos. Although there are beneﬁts to being
an expert rather than a generalist (Berlin 2013), what is lost is when focusing on
the components rather than whole of the system is the perspective of how systems
connect with other systems existing within an environment.
The environment is one critical component when discussing system theory. The
term “environment” can mean anything that is not the system itself. This deﬁnition
does not mean that the scientiﬁc of environment is completely ignored. In fact,
von Bertalanffy was a biologist who developed system theory from his observation
of nature and his objections to the prevalent scientiﬁc theories of closed systems
during his time (von Bertalanffy 1968). An environment constitutes anything that
is not of the system itself. Therefore, environment encompasses that which is
out of the system including that natural world (i.e., The Environment), society,
physical space, and culture. There are also certainly environments that exist within
a system/organization and the differences between the two concepts will be made
apparent if necessary.

Is It Worth It? The Library and Information Science Degree in the Digital Humanities
279
While the way systems theory is explained above makes system theory seem like
the theory of everything, it is not without its ﬂaws. One of its major drawbacks is that
it is holistic by nature and because of its broader perspective; there are complexities
that can easily be overlooked or exaggerated. It is more of a way of thinking than
a hard theory with empirical processes. Also, the attempt to deﬁne or formalize
system theory will paradoxically “limit its generating power” (Mesarovic 1964).
Perhaps more so that other ﬁelds of research that creates its own, unique vocabulary,
systems theory also suffers from having a shared terminology with a non-speciﬁc,
generalized concept of systems and theories. Unlike medicine where speciﬁc terms
refer to a limited number of concepts, systems theory language reﬂects its inclusive
nature.
There are many other intricacies and issues surrounding systems theory but that
is beyond the scope of this chapter. Understanding that systems are interconnected
groups within an environment valuing the whole rather than the sum of its parts is
the necessary requirements for this discussion.
Cybersemiotics: Towards a Theory of Everything
Although von Bertalanffy’s system theory developed his background in the hard
sciences, its organic qualities or “cloudy metaphysics” is a criticism of some
scholars (Brier 2008, 39). In order to address the limitations of system theory and
similar theories around the theme of communication, cognition, and information,
Brier developed cybersemiotics as a way of unifying these separate theories.
Cybersemiotics offers a way of combining theories of information, computing,
semiotics, communication, and meaning into a single theory (Brier 2013). Specif-
ically, Brier approaches cybersemiotics in a two-pronged approach. On one hand,
he builds upon the theoretical frameworks of system theory and cybernetics. On the
other, he relies upon the semiotic work of Charles Sanders Peirce.
First, cybernetics closely relates to systems theory in that they developed
approximately the same time to explain systems but the theories take on different
perspectives. System theory focuses on the structure of systems while cybernetics
focuses on exploring system functions (Heylighen et al. 1999). Alternatively,
another way of viewing the cybernetics-system theory relationship is that system
theory focuses on the broader relationship between systems and systems within
an environment, resulting in a broader, myopic view of systems. In contrast,
cybernetics is the mechanics of systems including feedback loops, controls, and
communication capabilities that looks inward towards systems themselves as self-
reﬂective examination of its functions (Glanville 2014). Therefore, system theory is
an inter-system perspective while cybernetics is an intra-system perspective.
While it is important to have an understanding of system theory and cybernetics
for the connection and working of systems, semiotics is necessary for providing and
understanding to how individuals process information. To brieﬂy explain semiotics,
it is the study of signs and symbols as well as their use or interpretation. Peirce

280
H. Lee
theorized that the process of producing meaning of signs involved three categories:
Firstness, Secondness, and Thirdness. Without delving into the philosophical and
technical details of this particular theory, brieﬂy, these categories are, respectively,
described as the following. Firstness is a sign’s quality that is “accessed through
feeling,” meaning that it is the initial, responsive reaction without any thought
(Southern Semiotic Review 2013). Secondness is the reaction to a sign and how
individuals experience signs. Thirdness is the laws or other constraints (e.g., laws
of physics) that limit individuals’ ability to understand a sign (Southern Semiotic
Review 2013). For Peirce, this process reﬂects an interconnectedness of signs; every
sign is represented by this trio of categories and signs are not limited by the form
(Treaude 2011).
In turn, this triad of sign (i.e., information) processing allows Brier to have
framework for how internet users can understand information through individuals’
initial reaction to a sign, individuals’ experience of a sign, and the laws governing a
sign. Because systems theory and cybernetics do not adequately explain the role of
cognition in its theory, (Peirce) semiotics bridges the gap between the system and
understanding. The broad applicability of Peirce’s semiotics also lends to Brier’s
efforts in cybersemiotics in proposing a uniﬁed theory of information science.
Therefore, Brier combines the complementing qualities of universality and
interconnectedness found in system theory, cybernetics, and semiotics for a uniﬁed
theory of information. The theories are universal because of the broad perspective
of inter-systems relationships (system theory), intra-systems relationships (cyber-
netics), and individual-information relationships (semiotics) promoted inclusivity.
The argument for interconnectedness is based on the premise that the theories
cannot stand independent of or by itself: systems theory connects systems and the
environment; cybernetics connects systems and its inner mechanics; while semiotic
connects individuals and information.
Although Brier does examine other theories involving information and cog-
nition, he found theories contradicting one another when attempting to explain
cognition and information (Brier 2008). System theory provides the general view
of interconnected relationships of systems and environments, cybernetics provide
the machine-mind process of information, and semiotics provide the framework
of understanding sign (i.e., information) cognition. Combined, cybersemiotics is
a theory that brings together how individuals understanding information in an
electronic information age.
Theory Applied to Discussion
The two theories presented here, system theory and cybersemiotics, provide unique
perspectives when discussing LIS and DH. Through wider lenses, these theories
allow a basic framework for understanding how to connect information environ-
ments to the LIS system.

Is It Worth It? The Library and Information Science Degree in the Digital Humanities
281
Applying Theory to LIS
More than just the work of librarians within libraries, the LIS degree runs the gamut
of issues and concerns about information. It can, for example, cover philosophical
meta-questions of information (Furner 2010) to the mechanics of what is the
difference between data, information, and knowledge (Borgman 2015). The scholars
and practitioners utilizing an LIS degree usually work under narrow subﬁelds that
directly apply to their work: archivists handle subject-speciﬁc collections; scholars
hone in on one, narrow area of study; and user experience researchers work with
speciﬁc audiences. To reﬂect this state of specialization, much of the scholarly
literature reﬂects the understanding of individual areas of the library and information
sciences.
The issue at hand is not the lack of scholarly literature or active practice in the
individual LIS professions. Rather, the issue here is that there is a lack of discussion
of the library and information sciences as a whole. As explained earlier, the ability
to see systems as a whole and its relation to other systems within an environment
creates a better understanding of the state of a system. The LIS degree is in desperate
need of this wider lens because its very nature creates silos of specialization (Marty
and Twidale 2011; Chisita and Abdullahi 2012; Oliver 2010) as it encourages
specializations (Cox and Rasmussen 1997). While it is useful to have experts when
expertise is required, it is easy to lose sight of the larger picture of LIS in society
when having such a myopic focus.
The broader, system-level discussions currently found in the literature cover the
debate on governing LIS theories or debates on the nature information itself (Brier
2008; Hjørland 2000; Bates 1999) or even the very nature of LIS (Furner 2015).
However, the focus of these debates looks inward in the attempt to further deﬁne the
LIS ﬁeld for the LIS community.
In order to demonstrate the importance of LIS to those outside of the ﬁeld/com-
munity, a macro-level lens of LIS as a transdisciplinary metadiscipline is necessary.
This is achieved by examining LIS as a system (i.e., as a system according to system
theory) to investigate the components that make it a system.
Attempting to categorize LIS into a single ﬁeld is quite difﬁcult. Information
is prevalent in all facets of life with libraries and books dedicated to every single
topic imaginable. Much like systems theory, the attempt to clearly deﬁne the
boundaries of LIS creates a paradox; the attempt to delineate its characteristics in
precise applications limit what is part of the LIS system. Conversely, the attempt at
pigeonholing LIS as a subcategory of another ﬁeld based on select properties limits
the capabilities of LIS (Konrad 2007). Instead, having a better grasp of LIS involves
breaking down shared points of commonality.
One LIS scholar approaches LIS as an intellectual domain around the documents
produced through human activity (Bates 1999). With a systems theory perspective
in mind, Bates’ investigation into the need for better articulation of theories
and research in LIS reveal three reoccurring components of LIS: information;
individuals (or groups); and connections between the two (Bates 1999). Some

282
H. Lee
people dedicate their entire lives into the investigation of information including its
deﬁnition, its preservation, and the policies surrounding it. Others have focused on
the people using information, whether it is in the form of library users or internet
users. The remainder of the LIS population is concerned with ways of connecting
information and individuals along with the machines and software aiding them.
Consider how most academics dedicate years to studying a single aspect of the ﬁeld
then it becomes apparent how fragmented and non-systems thinking the LIS degree
can become.
Even though much of the literature, academics, and professional concentrations
focus on a component of LIS, these components behave in conjunction with each
other to form an LIS system. Understanding LIS as a system then allows for a
discussion on how it works within the social, cultural, and technical environment
of information.
Applying Theory to Data, Information, and Knowledge
on the Internet
The previous section discussed the components that make up an LIS system:
information (and data), individuals (or groups), and connections between the two.
This section applies theory to data, information, and knowledge within the digital
landscape of the internet.
The two methods of approaching data, information, and knowledge here are
through the concept of the environment in system theory and cybersemiotics. Before
beginning this discussion, it is important to know the difference between data,
information, and knowledge. Of over 130 deﬁnitions of data, information, and
knowledge that varies because of theoretical framework or ﬁelds of research (Zins
2007), the deﬁnition used here is limited within the context of how these terms are
applied in digital humanities and/or understood through the theoretical framework
of cybersemiotics (Brier 2008). As such, data as deﬁned by this paper is considered
facts without context; data is/are strings of symbols (numbers, letters, and other
signs) that represent this world. Information is data with context; it is data that
has been interpreted and analyzed. Knowledge is the cognitive understanding of
information by individuals. These deﬁnitions are important because from its name,
the focus of data analytics appears to be data. However, the purpose of data analytics
is to “derive insight” by creating information from data in order to add to human
knowledge (Ridge and Rogers 2015). For the sake of brevity, data, information, and
knowledge will be collectively referred as “information” unless otherwise stated.
A system theory approach to information here is an environmental approach.
In other words, the cultural, societal, and technological environment of data,
information, and knowledge currently are different from other non-internet or non-
digital time periods.

Is It Worth It? The Library and Information Science Degree in the Digital Humanities
283
The internet changed the information environment as it allowed for increased
connectedness and accessibility of information between individuals far beyond any
real-world limitations like distance or country borders. As internet users ﬁnd more
interesting and innovative ways to use the internet as a communication tool, the
data/information/knowledge environment has also changed (Newhagen and Rafaeli
1996; Papacharissi and Rubin 2000). The amount of information processed daily is
incredible; no longer is society measuring the internet in kilobytes and megabytes
but in petabytes and exabytes. One estimate puts annual global IP trafﬁc to surpass
1 zettabyte by the end of 2016 (Cisco 2015)—1 zettabyte is equal to 1 trillion
gigabytes. Entire libraries can now ﬁt their digital information onto devices smaller
than a ﬁngernail. Technology is getting smaller and faster with new advancements.
Even though there are many issues to resolve, the internet and the accompanying
technologies have become integral parts of daily life.
To complement this growth, recent years have seen an increasingly semantic and
interconnected internet. A semantic web is a concept that allows cross-platform data
sharing (Berners-Lee et al. 2001). Rather than replicating the same information over
and over and over again for different platforms, a semantic web takes those different
platforms and links towards the same data. As a result, there is less duplication of
effort as the initial input (i.e., the data) is the same and the only thing that changes
is the output (i.e., the platforms). This kind of internet creates the opportunity to
connect information in a dynamic manner that was not possible before. That is not
to say that these kinds of processes were not at all possible—it just takes a lot more
effort and duplication of data in order to achieve the same effect. However, what
this increasingly semantic web represents is the kind of interconnectedness found in
system theory not possible in pre-internet society.
The cybersemiotics of information is the difference of pre-internet society and
current internet society’s understandings of searching for information. Imagine the
internet as an ant farm with its users as ants. In the early years of the internet (i.e.,
dial-up), users have puttered around by digging through heaps of informational dirt
until they found the right information pocket. This method of internet navigation
was quite easy when there were a limited number of sites and literally everything
could be cataloged by Yahoo like numbers in a phone book.
Internet users quickly grew out of the ant farm. Now, internet ants can navigate
through entire worlds of information with very little guidance. The most popular
form of traversing the information environment is through keyword searching. This
type of information-seeking behavior helped foster an information society so used
to getting their answers within the ﬁrst page of Google that good enough has
become enough. When satisﬁcing (the acceptance of what is available versus the
best option) becomes the norm of current information and internet society, it is easy
to see how complacent internet society has become in understanding the support
that information needs in order for its users to make sense of it (Prabha et al. 2007).
Therefore, not only has the method in which access information has changed due
to the popularization of internet information society, the ubiquity of the internet
has made information universal to anyone with internet access. Certainly there
are those without the ability to participate within this digital landscape; a recent

284
H. Lee
Fig. 1 Breakdown of the components of Cybersemiotics including system theory, cybernetics,
semiotics, and their individual components
2015 study found approximately 80% of adult Americans without internet access
at home whether in the form of broadband or through smartphones (Horrigan and
Duggan 2015). There are many aspects to take into consideration when citing these
numbers; social, economic, and political environments are just some of the factors
inﬂuencing internet systems. However, the general trends of these report numbers
reveal a growing trend of internet users moving towards a digitally literate society.
Summary
Altogether, internet society shifted its use of data/information/knowledge according
to the cybersemiotic relationship between systems and cognition. The ways in
which information is sought by internet users expects immediacy in an informa-
tion deluge (Borgman 2015). Within this deluge, the increasingly semantic web
represents an interconnected digital information era that can lead to a truly global
information network. System theory and cybersemiotics are theoretical frameworks

Is It Worth It? The Library and Information Science Degree in the Digital Humanities
285
that provide the foundation for understanding precisely the shift in LIS and
data/information/knowledge in today’s internet society. It is the connection made
between users and systems in information environments (as well as the attempt to
better those connections) that is the heart of the discussion here. Even though the
work of LIS community members focus on one narrow aspect of an LIS system,
the behavior the system as a whole operate within an information environment to
create connections between individuals and information.
In Context: LIS and Data Analytics in DH
While the previous section connected theory with analogies to current literature and
practices, the following section will focus on applying theory within the practical
context of data analytics in the digital humanities. There are many challenges that
LIS face within the context of data analytics including the nature of data itself,
connecting users to data, and data governance for future use. The following section
addresses these challenges as well as how the library and information sciences meet
those challenges.
Data Analytics in the Digital Humanities
One of the clearest deﬁnitions for modern DH is that it is the “digital humanities
is the use of digital media and technology to advance the full range of thought and
practice in the humanities” (Cohen 2011). The early days of DH saw the “digital”
in “digital humanities” play an important but ultimately supporting role to the
humanities. Now, the internet has created the opportunity for the “digital” in DH
to become better integrated into the humanities. No longer are digital humanists
limited by the technology; instead, they are ﬁnding new ways of using them. Digital
society has even gone so far as to see examples of the humanities moving entirely
onto a digital landscape and new forms developing regularly.
For the digital humanities, the movement towards internet interconnectedness
means the ability to increase what can be investigated and how. The issues and
research arising in DH tackle the traditional humanities and apply it towards new
perspectives made possible by the internet.
Data analytics is “any activity that involves applying an analytical process
to data to derive insight from the data” (Ridge and Rogers 2015, 4). This is a
broad deﬁnition that reﬂects data analytics’ multi-faceted approach to techniques,
applications, domains, and purpose. As such, the multi-faceted approach of data
analytics well suites the equally multi-faceted approaching of the digital humanities
in its various theories, frameworks, ﬁelds, etc. Additionally, the application of
the data analytics to DH addresses the longstanding criticism of the wont for the
humanities and humanities research to be qualitative in nature (Brier 2008).

286
H. Lee
There are many more discussions possible from investigating only the relation-
ship between DH and data analytics but that is beyond the scope of this chapter.
In order to demonstrate the importance of LIS as it applies to data analytics in
the digital humanities, this section breaks down challenges in the life cycle of data
analytics as used by digital humanities from the perspective of LIS. In such a life
cycle, the ﬁrst step is the preparation of data long before its use. Next is the focus
on use; this is the process that involves connecting users with data. Finally, the last
part of this life cycles looks towards the future and the future use of data generated.
Challenge of Data
To reiterate, data refers to facts without context (Zins 2007). However, “without
context” does not mean that data are a series of numbers or combinations of ones
and zeroes. Instead, data are facts that lack subjective or objective interpretation
(the inclusion of interpretation would transform data into information). What this
means is that even though data are one of the rawest forms of facts, it still needs
descriptions, labels, and other forms of metadata in order to differentiate between X
and X.
Yet, one of the major challenges with being able to use data is that data often
lacks description (i.e., metadata). In turn, this makes individuals’ discovery of data
difﬁcult from the beginning. Part of this challenge involves making data searchable
through metadata is from the sheer amount of digital data. The size of digital
trafﬁc is now measured in exabytes and as such, there is an incredible backlog
of data that need descriptions from data created now (Hey and Trefethen 2003).
In addition to metadata for digitally born data, there is an even bigger backlog for
the digitized data. Although concrete numbers are sparse and very much dependent
on the institution, digitization, and the associated metadata needed to make data
discoverable is costly and time-consuming (Lee 2001).
Another challenge with metadata is interoperability. That is to say, the standards
governing metadata of a data object can change. Within libraries, classiﬁcation
systems like the Dewey Decimal System (DDS) or Library of Congress (LoC)
Classiﬁcation are metadata standards in the USA while some international metadata
standards include Dublin Core or digital object identiﬁes (DOI). However, these
standards can change (and have changed) in order to reﬂect changing society and
technologies: LoC recently changed the subject heading “Illegal Aliens” (Dechman
2016) while debates on international standards still endure (Baell 2006; Guenther
and McCallum 2003).
Additionally, digital data has a very limited lifespan. In comparison to written
texts that could last for centuries given optimal circumstances, digital data depends
upon the technology available at the time. This means that when data are created
(whether digitally born or digitally transferred), its longevity depends on the then-
current technology that may or may not be tested. When a product claims that
it will keep data stored on a DVD for 100 up to one hundred years (University
Products, Inc 2010), there is no way of guaranteeing such a claim. Moreover, the

Is It Worth It? The Library and Information Science Degree in the Digital Humanities
287
software and hardware that determines how data are read quickly change, affecting
interoperability. On average, technologies quickly become obsolete in 5–10 years
(Bellinger et al. 2002) as software and hardware evolve for the next generation.
One of the few ways to overcome this challenge is through emulators that simulate
outdated software and hardware or through digital migration. However, both of
these options pose issues: emulators will not always guarantee usable, readable data;
while data can be lost in migration (Bellinger et al. 2002).
To illustrate the challenges of data, one team of researchers dramatized their
ordeal in obtaining a data set from another researcher who was funded by the
National Science Foundation (NYU Health Sciences Library 2012). In addition
to only having one copy of the data on a USB drive using outdated, proprietary
software to read the data, the original researchers used vague data ﬁelds like
“Sam1” and “Sam2” without any indication on how to interpret the ﬁelds (NYU
Health Sciences Library 2012). This one example demonstrates how issues like
metadata (bad labeling) and storage/preservation data (one copy on a USB drive)
are challenges for LIS.
Listed here are only a few of the many more challenges of data. As internet/in-
formation society generates and utilizes data, the challenges researchers will face
will grow upon existing issues not discussed here (like issues of data privacy, data
quality, or data mining) while also ﬁnding new challenges.
Challenge of Connections
The next part in the challenges of data analytics is in connecting users with data.
Connecting users to data means not only having a place for data to exist, it means
that users need to know how access the data in order to use data that may or may
not be within their realm of expertise. The barriers that prevent researchers from
accessing information are the focus of this section.
Data repositories are, as the name suggests, digital spaces allowing researchers
to store their data. Some of the literature calls for better degrees of interoperability
between repositories (Park 2009), while other literature focus on data repositories
and its use is one method of data curation and sharing (McLure et al. 2014).
However, data repositories as they are currently used have not encountered many
issues yet but should be kept in mind for future discussions on the challenge of data
analytical research in DH.
Instead the kind of data storage discussed here is in terms of databases. While
open source databases exist with the operating principles of shared scholarly
knowledge, most scholarly knowledge is hidden behind paywalls that require
costly subscriptions (Montgomery and King 2002; Franklin 2005). When data
and information is only accessible with expensive per-article costs or even more
expensive yearly subscription costs, of course this issue is a challenge for data
analytical research. Unless a scholar is part of a major research university, then it
becomes difﬁcult to access the fundamental resources of academia. In turn, the cost
of databases and its publishers lead to issues of price gouging and authors taking on

288
H. Lee
the brunt of publishing their own work become issues of scholarly communication
and general affordability of knowledge (Van Noorden 2013).
But given the assumption that the accessibility of data is not an issue, the next
challenge is on what to do with that data. Having access to data does not mean that a
researcher automatically knows how to handle it. Unlike other ﬁelds of research that
has had decades to centuries of history, the digital humanities as it is known and used
now has not reached its full potential since it is still an expanding ﬁeld (Liu 2012).
As such, the tools for analyzing data are still being developed and, as discussed
earlier, under the threat of becoming obsolete within a few years as new technologies
develop. Software like IBM’s Many Eyes or the University College, London’s Pie-
Slice (Dombrowski 2014; Machlis 2015) are a couple of examples that have been
developed as data visualization software but now defunct. Additionally, popular
tools like Google Analytics that track data of websites can only collect data once
it has been implemented; the attempt for data collection before implementation is
lost.
Therefore, many of challenges surrounding connecting with data here investigate
not only the cost of accessing data itself but, once accessed, the tools used to analyze
data in a ﬁeld that is still developing the software.
Challenge of the Future
Some of the challenges the future of data analytics in the digital humanities hold
includes many of the challenges already discussed; access, storage, and other
challenges related to technology that will continue to be issues in the future.
However, one of the key challenges of the future is changing the way that researchers
manage their data in the present for use in the future.
Again, ﬁnding studies or hard data on the digital humanities itself (rather than
research under the DH banner) is difﬁcult since it is still a growing ﬁeld. A
small study on the effectiveness of data management of faculty members in higher
education found that several surprising results: nearly half of respondent reported
they have and will continue store/share data in data repositories (56.8%); the
remaining sample will not store and/or not store data (43.2%); but as many of 80%
of were unaware of institutions repositories (Diekama et al. 2014). Additionally,
only a small number of respondents had institutions with current or planned data
management plans (17 or 8.5%)—this included contractual obligations of funding
agencies (Diekama et al. 2014). What these numbers mean to this discussion on data
analytics in the digital humanities is the need for better understanding of the tools
and resources that is available by its users. In turn, creating a better understanding
means the researchers and other individuals working within the digital humanities
and using data analytics tools need instruction.
On one hand, the ability to analyze data in the digital humanities in the digital
setting of the internet is still quite a relatively recent development, and many of
the challenges of data analytics are largely theoretical. On the other hand, one of
the areas that can contribute to future challenges in the data analytics of digital

Is It Worth It? The Library and Information Science Degree in the Digital Humanities
289
humanities can be found in those who contribute data for future use like scholars
and faculty of higher education.
Overcoming Challenges
To sum, the challenges of data analytics in the digital humanities is one of the basic
challenges LIS face: the information, connecting users to information, and the users
themselves.
One of the easiest ways of imagining this issue is when a customer coming into
a bookstore and asking for a book with a blue cover. Without knowing anything else
about the book like the author, publisher, plot, or title, ﬁnding the book a customer
has in mind is going to be nearly impossible. The same is true with ﬁnding digital
information. LIS professionals (primarily those in the archives and library ﬁelds)
ascribe descriptions to digital objects. To achieve this, there are entire subﬁelds
of LIS addressing description: metadata, cataloging, archival descriptions, etc., are
limited by subject area (e.g., government data versus medical data) and area of
concentration (e.g., Library of Congress classiﬁcation, encoded archival description
(EAD), etc.).
Providing useful, rich descriptions is one of the major steps in making data
accessible. So, if a graduate student wants to ﬁnd the latest government data on the
Indian Ocean and its link in the global economy of South and East Asia (N.A. 2016),
having descriptive data makes the process so much easier than a random set of
numbers. It is through the work of LIS professional who give data descriptions and
the academics who work alongside them who determine standards. However, LIS
needed to develop data practices slowly in order to consider its use in the long term
rather than temporarily (Borgman 2015). If the LIS community immediately adopts
that latest practice as soon as it develops, then it falls into the trap of becoming
obsolete within a few years.
LIS also provides structure to the internet as it gives rules for data that categorizes
like properties together. There are rules that LIS academics and professionals
developed in order to ensure that X is different from X by assigning metadata or
classiﬁcation scheme. These methods of categorization have many different types of
standards in order to ensure the right metadata is attributed to a ﬁeld or object; titles
have designated spots/tags and images are labeled as such. Therefore, an elementary
school student constructing a report on Abraham Lincoln needs little more than
some images and a basic biography on the 16th US president. This can easily be
achieved with a quick search on Google with an even quicker click to the “Images”
link for images.
Although this is a very simple example to the kind of complex structure that
LIS provides, it demonstrates the kind of work utilized by individuals to better
connect with data/information. As the digital humanities continue to develop, these
kinds of infrastructure become all the more critical. Given the sheer amount of data
and information that is available, the ability to extract meaningful (and useful) data

290
H. Lee
and information is a matter of navigating uncharted lands with or without a guide.
Already LIS is present in many forms as scholarly databases demonstrate. While
databases like Web of Science or JSTOR require a small measure of skill, navigating
through these electronic places becomes easier when LIS infrastructures allow users
to reﬁne by source types, dates, or subject manner. Anyone who attempts to navigate
Google Scholar knows how limiting keyword searching can be or how unhelpful it
is to have only two sorting options (i.e., sort by relevance and sort by date).
However, as explained earlier, databases are expensive. Despite its cost, libraries
(academic libraries in particular) and archives take on the cost of subscriptions
to these expensive databases that can cost tens of thousands of dollars for a
single database (Montgomery and King 2002). But even beyond libraries and
archives, information architects investigating user experience design or human–
computer interaction (HCI) seek to better connect users to information within the
information environment of websites or software (Rosenfeld and Morville 2002).
These professionals research the best ways of presenting information through a
variety of qualitative and quantitative research methods for an informationally
connected society.
LIS also play a pivotal role in providing support to those who seek out data
analytical software. Once again, studies investigating data analytical software
instruction in the library and information sciences are sparse but most academic
libraries have research guides (e.g., LibGuides) that introduce scholars on the tools
and resources available in a given ﬁeld. Depending on the institution, librarians may
also include instruction on how to use data software which includes analysis and
visualization.
Furthermore, LIS professionals and academics are educating individuals in order
to have them become participants within the internet, not simply users. Just like
the example of the researcher inappropriately labeling his data as “Sam1” and
“Sam2,” LIS people working under the title of data management librarians or
project managers are demonstrating the need for the information rules (NYU Health
Sciences Library 2012). Digital humanists need not only consider the information
they are using, they must also take into consideration that information they are
generating. Many LIS people are already working towards making sure that the
information that is available makes sense by assigning information rules and making
sure that it is digitally available. However, there is a huge information backlog
problem; some have entire careers in cataloging and digitizing past records.
In order to ensure that future information seekers are able to ﬁnd information
digitally, there is a growing sector within LIS dedicated towards making sure that
researchers consider their research for future use. The digital humanities is an area
where such a harmonious working environment can exist. Since digital humanists
need information, create meaning through research, and make available their work,
LIS can provide the structure and the environment for meaning that is needed for all
these stages.
By giving rules to information, LIS individuals create meaning for individuals.
As a result, the connection between the two grows stronger. In short, LIS provides

Is It Worth It? The Library and Information Science Degree in the Digital Humanities
291
Fig. 2 Library and information sciences as intermediary between data/information/knowledge and
users
the digital data infrastructure that helps make much of data analytical research
possible.
It is through the desire to create better connections between individuals and
information that is the heart of the discussion here. The digital humanities is the
proving grounds where LIS work can truly shine. A small (but time-consuming)
part of this is the ability to have information digitally available along with the
accompanying politics and policies. The other, larger part is to make the available
information make sense. Keyword searching is wholly inadequate to the kind of
dynamic work being done in DH now. Some DH projects include three-dimensional
mapping of ancient civilizations, reverse engineering historical buildings, and
the translational networks of literature (University of California, Los Angeles
N.D.). All these projects could eventually be done through the use of keyword
searching or other simple information searching functions. However, the structure
and connection that LIS provides makes these projects not only easy to create but
also easier to use and reuse. With DH and data analytics, so much information
policies, procedures, and ethics must be taken into consideration when researching.
LIS degree holders become the ﬁrst line of defense who guides information users
towards information structures that accounts for efﬁciency as well as ethics.
In short, LIS provides better connections between information and its users in
order to create better interconnectedness between subjects in the digital humanities.
Taking on the view of LIS as a structural environment that DH as the systems that
operate within it, it becomes quite apparent just how interconnected everything is.
Failing to acknowledge and advocate for better ways of connecting, online society
falls to the trap of being internet ants stuck in the ant farm, blinding digging through
a seemingly endless source of informational dirt until society hopefully (maybe)
ﬁnd the connections it is looking for (Fig. 2).
Conclusion
To paraphrase one political commentator, infrastructure is not sexy (J. Oliver
2015). However, not only does information need infrastructure, it is required. The
internet provides a virtual landscape for today’s information environment to grow

292
H. Lee
exponentially beyond anything previously imagined. In a digital era where Google is
thought to provide all the answers, the internet brought with it many misconceptions
of the role of the library and information sciences.
In fact, LIS has not been sidelined by Google but made all the more important.
Because there is now so much information available in the digital landscape
that information infrastructure provided by LIS is incredibly important. Using
the theoretical framework of system theory and cybersemiotics that provide ways
of viewing the LIS system within an information environment, this chapter has
demonstrated the importance of having a broad view of interconnected systems and
environments.
The question posed here brings together the relevancy of LIS in a world of
electronic information within the context of data analytics in the digital humanities.
This chapter argues that the components working together to create the behavior of
the LIS system mirrors the very challenges of data analytics in DH: the information;
connecting users to information; and the users themselves. The challenges posed
by information itself questions are issues of description, interoperability between
technical systems, and its permanence. Not only are the databases that hold most
academic data held behind expensive paywalls, the ability to use data through soft-
ware is precarious. Data analytical tools as they are used by the digital humanities
are continually developing and constantly in danger of becoming obsolete. Finally,
although it is difﬁcult to anticipate challenges of the future, how digital humanists
and other researchers handle information now affects future practices.
In order to meet the challenges of data analytics in DH, LIS is a system that
attempts to resolve challenges of issues involved with information, its users, and
connecting the two in an overloaded information environment. Even when public
perceptions question its relevancy as outdated ideas of libraries dominate its image
and many are simply not aware of it as a ﬁeld, LIS provides for the digital humanities
and data analytics the infrastructure necessary in today’s information society.
References
J. Baell, Dublin core: An obituary. Library Hi Tech News 21(8), 40–41 (2006)
M.J. Bates, The invisible substrate of information science. J. Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. 50(12), 1043–1050
(1999)
M. Bellinger et al, The state of digital preservation: An international perspective. Council on
Library and Information Resources. (Documentation Abstraccts, Inc., Washington DC, 2002).
pp. 1–95.
I. Berlin, The Hedgehog and the Fox: An Essay on Tolstoy’s View of History (Princeton University
Press, Princeton, 2013)
T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler, O. Lassila, The Semantic Web (Scientiﬁc American, 2001), 284(5):
28–37
C. Borgman, Big Data, Little Data, No Data: Scholarship in The Networked World (MIT,
Cambridge, 2015)
S. Brier, Cybersemiotics: Why Information Is Not Enough (University of Toronto Press Inc.,
Toronto, 2008)

Is It Worth It? The Library and Information Science Degree in the Digital Humanities
293
S. Brier, in Theories of Information, Communication and Knowledge: A Multidisciplinary
Approach, ed. by F. Ibekwe-SanJuan, T. M. Dousa. The transdiciplinary view of information
theory from a cybersemiotic perspective (Springer, New York, 2013), pp. 23–50
C.T. Chisita, and I. Abdullahi. Rising Above the Grain Silo Mentality Through Collaboration:
Creating Opportunities Between the Lis Educators and Prationners in Developing Countries.
World Library and Information Congress: 78th IFLA General Conference and Assembly.
Helsinki: IFLA, 2012. 1–16.
Cisco, The Zettabyte Era: Trends and Analysis (Cisco Visual Networking Index, White Paper, San
Jose, 2015)
D. Cohen, Deﬁning the Digital Humanities. Deﬁning the Digital Humanities. Panel presentation at
Columbia University (2011).
R.J. Cox, E. Rasmussen, Reinventing the information professions and the argument for specializa-
tion in LIS education: Case studies in archives and information technology. J. Educ. Libr. Inf.
Sci. 38(4), 255–267 (1997)
L. Dechman, Library of Congress to Cancel the Subject Heading “Illegal Aliens” (Library of
Congress, Memo, Washington D.C., 2016)
A.R. Diekama, A. Wesolek, C. Walters, The NSF/NIH effect: Surveying the effect of data
management requirements on faculty, sponsored programs, and institutional repositories.
J. Acad. Librariansh. 40(3/4), 322–331 (2014)
K. Dill. The Best and Worst Master’s Degrees for Jobs in 2015. (Forbes, July 15, 2015).
Q. Dombrowski. Dirt: Digital Research Tools. 2014. http://dirtdirectory.org/resources/pie-slice
Accessed 4 Sept 2016
W.C. Dougherty, The Google books project: Will it make libraries obsolete? J. Acad. Librariansh.
36(1), 86–89 (2010)
B. Franklin, Managing the electronic collection with cost per use data. IFLA J. 31(3), 241–248
(2005)
J. Furner, Information science is neither. Library Trends 63(3), 362–377 (2015)
J. Furner, Philosophy and information studies. Annu. Rev. Inf. Sci. Technol. 44(1), 159–200 (2010)
R. Glanville Cybernetics: Thinking through the technology. In Traditions of Systems Theory:
Major Figures and Contemporary Developments, by A Darrell, 45–83. New York: Routledge,
2014.
R. Guenther, S. McCallum, New metadata standards for digital resources: MODS and METS. Bull.
Am. Soc. Inf. Sci. Technol. 29(2), 12–15 (2003)
M.Y. Herring, Are Libraries Obsolete? An Argument for Relevance in the Digital Age (McFarland
& Company, Inc., Jefferson, 2014)
T. Hey, and A. Trefethen. The data deluge: An E-science perspective. In Grid Computing: Making
the Global Infrastucture a Reality, by F. Berman, G. Fox and T. Hey, 809–924. New York:
Wiley, 2003.
F. Heylighen, C. Joslyn, V. Turchin, What are Cybernetics and Systems Science? (Principia
Cybernetica Web, 1999).
B. Hjorland, Domain analysis in information science: Eleven approaches – Traditional as well as
innovative. J. Doc. 58(4), 422 (2002)
B. Hjørland, Library and information science: Practice, theory, and philosophical basis. Inf.
Process. Manag. 36(3), 501–531 (2000)
W. Hong, J.Y.L. Thong, K.-Y. Tam, W.-M. Wong, Determinants of user acceptance of digital
libraries: An empirical examination of individual differences and system characteristics.
J. Manag. Inf. Syst. 18(3), 97–124 (2002)
J.B. Horrigan, M. Duggan, Home Broadband 2015. Washington D.C. (Pew Research Center, 2015)
A. Konrad. On Inquiry: Human concept formation and construction of meaning through library
and information science intermediation (Doctoral dissertation), 2007.
S.D. Lee, Digitization: Is it worth it? Comput. Libr. 21(5), 28–31 (2001)
A. Liu, The state of the digital humanities: A report and a critique. Arts Humanit. High. Educ.
11(1/2), 8–41 (2012)

294
H. Lee
C.A. Lynch, Institutional repositories: Essential infrastructure for scholarship in the digital age.
Portal Libr. Acad. 3(2), 327–336 (2003)
S. Machlis, IBM to shutter dataviz pioneer many eyes. (Computer World, 2015).
P.F. Marty, M.B. Twidale, Museum informatics across the curriculum: Ten years of preparing LIS
students for careers transcending libraries, archives, and museums. J. Educ. Libr. Inf. Sci. 52(1),
9–16 (2011)
M. McLure, A.V. Level, C.L. Cranston, B. Oehlerts, M. Culbertson, Data curation: A study of
researchers practices and needs. Portal: Libraries and the Academy 14(2), 139–164 (2014)
D. Meadows, Thinking in Systems: A Primer (Chelsea Green Publishing, White River Junction,
2008)
M.D. Mesarovic, Views on general systems theory, in Preface, By M.D. Mesarovic, D.P. Eckman,
(Wiley, New York, 1964), pp. xiii–xxvi.
V. Moniarou-Papaconstantinou, V. Evgenia, A. Tsatsaroni, Choice of library and information
science in a rapidly changing information landscape: A systematic literature review. Libr.
Manag. 36(8/9), 584–608 (2015)
C.H. Montgomery, D.W. King, Comparing library and user related costs of print and electronic
journal collections. D-Lib Mag. 8(10), 1–14 (2002)
N.A., Digital Humanities Lab (2016). http://as.tufts.edu/csaios/digitalHumanities/. Accessed 30
Mar 2016.
S. Newbutt. What impressions do young people have of librarianship as a career? Thesis,
Department of Information Studies, University of Shefﬁeld, 2008.
J.E. Newhagen, S. Rafaeli, Why communication researchers should study the internet: A dialogue.
J. Comput. Mediat. Commun. 1(4) (1996)
NPR, Before The Internet, Librarians Would ‘Answer Everything’—And Still Do (National Public
Radio, 2014).
NYU Health Sciences Library, Data sharing and management snafu in 3 short acts. YouTube Video
4, 40 (2012)
G. Oliver, in Seventh International Conference on Conceptions of Library and Information Science.
Transcending silos, developing synergies: Libraries and archives (Information Research,
London, 2010)
J. Oliver. Last Week Tonight with John Oliver: Infrastructure. New York, 2015.
Z. Papacharissi, A.M. Rubin, Predictors of internet use. J. Broadcast. Electron. Media 44(2),
175–196 (2000)
J.-R. Park, Metadata quality in digital repositories: A survey of the current state of the art. Cat.
Classif. Q. 47(3/4), 213–228 (2009)
C. Prabha, L.S. Connaway, L. Olszewski, L.R. Jenkins, What is enough? Satisﬁcing information
needs. J. Doc. 63(1), 74–89 (2007)
E. Ridge, M. Rogers, Guerilla Analytics: A Practical Approach to Working with Data (Morgan
Kaufmann, Massachusetts, 2015)
L. Rosenfeld, P. Morville, Information Architecture for the World Wide Web (O’Reilly, Cambridge,
2002)
J. Smith. The Best and Worst Master’s Degrees for Jobs. Forbes, 2012.
Southern Semiotic Review, Peirce’s Categories of Signs. (Lowell, Massachusetts, 2013).
J. Teglovic, C. Jordan-Makely, L. Boyd, L. Hofschire, What is the Value of an MLIS to You? Study
(Library Research Service, Denver, 2012)
C. Tenopir, Use and Users of Electronic Library Resources: An Overview and Analysis of Recent
Research Studis. White Paper (Council on Library and Information Resources, Washington,
DC, 2003)
L. Treaude, LIBREAS interview: Semiotics in information science. LIBREAS Libr. Ideas 19,
70–77 (2011)
University of California, Los Angeles, Projects. UCLA Digital Humanities (N.D.), http://
www.cdh.ucla.edu/projects/. Accessed 03 Feb 2016.
University Products, Inc, Archival Gold DVD-R: Lasts 100 Years! (02 Feb, 2010), http://
www.universityproducts.com/cart.php?m=product_list&c=261 Accessed 03 Apr 2016.

Is It Worth It? The Library and Information Science Degree in the Digital Humanities
295
R. Van Noorden, Open acess: The true cost of science publishing. Nature 495(7442) (2013)
E. Vassilakaki, V. Moniarou-Papaconstantinou, Identifying the prevailing images in library and
information science profession: Is the landscape changing? New Libr. World 115(7/8), 355–375
(2014)
L. von Bertalanffy. The meaning of general system theory. In General System Theory: Foundations,
Development, Application, by Ludwig von Bertalanffy, 30–53. New York: George Braziller,
1968.
C. Zins, Conceptual approaches for deﬁning data, information, and knowledge. J. Am. Soc. Inf.
Sci. Technol. 58(4), 479–493 (2007)

