THE ALIENS’
MIDWIFE
 
DAVID HAST
 
Scanned & Proofed By MadMaxAU
 
* * * *
 
Ben would walk for miles and not remember a thing. The sky would darken,
lightning pierce the veil, and he’d trudge on, oblivious. A man was stabbed
once right there as he passed under a bridge, and he’d missed it.
 
Then on other days, his senses would focus, and people’s faces and
lives jumped out at him with an almost intolerable clarity. He’d be reinstilled
with the grim sense of purpose. Adzemas. It would recede so far, the name
go foreign, only to return without warning, along with the messages.
 
When the Adzem first came to him, he thought he was losing his
mind. Because he lived alone, and had few friends, his instinct was to hide
his condition, rather than run for help. He managed to call in sick that day,
and lay in bed for a week - he must have eaten at some point, but he didn’t
remember it - watching pictures projected by them into his brain, learning
the contours of another green world, with a sulfurous yellow sky. And then,
at the end of the week they left him. Something seemed to crawl out of his
head.
 
When he regained his sense of place and time, the digital counter on
his telephone still glowed a red zero. No one had called. As far the people
at work knew, Ben was sick, he’d called in for the week, and they’d made
do. They had learned to leave him alone on the rare occasions when he
was unable or unwilling to work because for the better part of ten years he
had reported faith-fully and uncomplainingly to his dull desk job.
 
The only thing different about his apart-ment from the week before
had been a little anole reptile, rare this far north, that he found shaded by
the chunk of rose quartz in his windowsill cactus garden. He under-stood,
as the Adzem had instructed him during that week, that he would need to
safeguard this animal until they were ready.

 
“You puttin’ on some weight there, Ben,” said Lucky, the easy going,
Jamaican cashier at Steinman’s. Ben dug through his pocket for exact
change.
 
Gloria, the serious-minded, midwestern cashier, snapped at her
across the magazine rack “Lucky! Don’t say that! You want Ben to go and
shop at the Safeway?”
 
Lucky slid a loaf of bread carelessly across the scanner, and though it
failed to register the UPC label, she let it pass into the bagging area. She
made that mistake about once every other order, and Ben could never tell if
it was intentional, just another aspect of her laid-back personality, or both.
He knew she hated the automated cash register system, but he also knew
she was loyal to the old Jewish butcher and his manager brother that had
employed her for nearly twenty years. It was just the way things were done
around here. Lucky let loaves of bread slide by, and maybe Joe Steinman
made up for it once in a while with a big thumb on that old spring-weighted
meat scale. The books balanced each month, the Steinmans did well
enough to send their kids to out of town colleges, and Gloria and Lucky
scraped by. It made Ben feel human. If he could feel human all the time, he
might forget the Adzem.
 
Ben gathered in his change from Lucky and pocketed it without
counting it. He figured the change all evened out in the long run too.
 
“Paper or plastic?” Lucky asked. Ben began to answer automatically,
“P-” then stopped short and reflected Lucky’s ‘Gottcha!’ grin back at her.
No such choice at Steinman’s. As Lucky slowly bagged his groceries in the
same two-ply brown paper bags Steinman’s had been using for the last
forty years, Ben flipped through the morning paper. As he scanned an
article about recombinant DNA, sirens whined softly in the distance.
 
* * * *
 
Jane told people she’d gone to the University of Michigan, but she hadn’t.
On job applications where a college education was not necessary, she
omitted that lie, and listed her schooling as Central Valley High School in
Yuma, Colorado. Had the potential employers checked - which none of
them ever did - they would have discovered not only no high school by that
name, but no valley. Jane was no criminal, but she was on the lam from her
past, an abused and colorless childhood that had greyed her hair and
etched her face well past its twenty-four years.
 

Jane mistakenly considered Ben her one and only friend. Because
she lived in Ben’s building, the Adzem found her a convenient place to work
from and wait in. Ben had introduced the Adzem to Jane after they had
been in Morgan, a former coworker of Ben, now institutionalized, and Betsy,
a street person, now deceased. Ben didn’t much like Jane, so when the
transfer of Adzem consciousness from the lizard to Jane was over, his
regret was minimal.
 
Jane, like the others, now had trouble coping with the rare moments
when the Adzem relaxed their grip on her mind and the sensual immersion
in an un-peopled, alien landscape blanked out. She’d pace around her tiny
two room apartment, chain smoking, afraid to tell anyone about the visions
except some-times Ben. The old world grew increas-ingly false and
frightening with each return. Fortunately, the maddening wait would end
after a few hours and she could go back to the good place.
 
This time, though, it had been nearly four days. And this time, she
became convinced that Adzemas was her real home, that she was a
bodiless spirit who would float there in eternal peace, except that she was
periodically punished for some sin by being forced to inhabit a primitive
flesh creature in some kind of prison hell. She hadn’t eaten for the entire
four days, though one thing she normally did when back here was eat. She
had not slept. She’d smoked two cartons of ciga-rettes. And she was now
convinced that she would never be allowed to return so long as the body
into which she’d been projected lived.
 
* * * *
 
“I ain’t seen you with that girl lately,” Lucky said, setting a bottle of grapefruit
juice on top of the bread. Gloria glared at her.
 
“I know,” said Ben. He set the newspaper back on the rack “She’s not
around much anymore.”
 
“What’s her name again?” Lucky per-sisted.
 
“Jane.”
 
“Oh yeah, Jane. That’s right.”
 
Ben hoisted one paper sack into his left arm and Lucky helped him lift
the other to his right. The sirens from the street grew louder, a mixture of
fire, police, and ambulance. They seemed to be coming from several
directions.

 
Ben, opened to a sudden telepathic message from the Adzem, saw
the past five minutes inside his building replay in compressed time: Jane in
the basement, pouring gasoline on a pile of firewood stacked high in a
corner and lighting it. Jane lying on the floor in her apartment, as smoke
leaks in through the floor-boards and up along the radiator pipes. The
brown anole crawling out of hiding, then scurrying up onto her face and
latching onto her forehead, where it be-gins to redden, breathing and
throbbing a blood red, its toes kneeding her skin as it takes back the
impulses of Adzem con-sciousnesses. The anole then scurrying off into a
crack in the floorboard. The room oxygen flashing over and the Jane body,
motionless, consumed in fire.
 
As Ben reached the exit he saw through the glass that firetrucks were
stopping at the end of the block He could see flames shooting out the
lower win-dows of his apartment building. A voice spoke in his head: Save
it. The bags slipped out of his arms and groceries burst out onto the floor.
Lucky gasped at the sound of shattering glass. Ben rushed through the
door. Gloria ran out to watch. Lucky started methodically pick-ing out the
undamaged groceries from the ruined ones, and set them on the third,
rarely used checkout counter, so Ben could retrieve them later. She called
for a stock worker to mop up.
 
A police car blocked the intersection in front of Steinman’s corner
store. At the other end of the street, a firetruck was pulling around the
corner to a hydrant, while firefighters from the first truck on the scene
pumped water in a huge arc into Jane’s kitchen window. Flames shot
through the roof of the almost totally engulfed building.
 
The emergency workers were too star-tled to stop Ben as he ran by
them and bounded up the stairs into the hot smoke. He passed his own
second story apart-ment, fumbling for the covertly dupli-cated key to Jane’s
place on the floor above. He scrambled up the last flight of stairs into
thicker smoke. He unlocked her door, shakily, and began crawling along the
floor, down which ran little rivulets of firehose water as it emptied from the
street-facing room. He choked on a caustic mixture of smoke and steam.
 
The door to her bedroom was closed. He touched it with the back of
his hand and it was scalding. Leaning back on his hands he braced himself
against an op-posing doorjamb and kicked the door open. Flames shot out
and singed his hair and eyebrows off. Through the wall of heat he could
see a charred corpse, and paralysis seized him. His body wisely refused to
move into the deadly room, until he was again shown a mental pic-ture of
the anole crawling under the floor board. Half the floor was already burned

through, but he started crawling into the room anyway.
 
Two firemen came crawling after him into the apartment. Ben felt his
knees and palms burning on the bedroom floor and fell reflexively back into
the hallway. It was suddenly impossible to see anything - the smoke and
steam were too heavy. He gasped a huge gulp of air, like a man about to
plunge into water. Then the lead fireman reached out and dragged him from
the apartment.
 
He remembered strangely masked faces and oxygen-tanked backs
and a feeling of bouncing like they were run-ning him down the stairs. Then
he was dreaming, a horrible scenario of disaster and pain, mixed in with the
cool, desert night of Adzemas in an impossible, con-tradictory reality. He
knew it was a dream, and he knew that he’d awaken in one of the worlds.
And then he did wake, bitterly disappointed and in pain, in a hospital bed.
 
* * * *
 
Ben checked out of the hospital two days later. No one had visited him. The
only place he could stay now was Richard’s loft. Richard did not live in a
way to which Ben was accustomed. A nightclub owner, Richard had dozens
of friends, acquaintances, mystery business partners, understudies, and all
of the above prefaced by “former”, yet who still seemed to come around, or
to call. Mostly call, apparently, as almost anytime you knocked on Richard’s
(open) door (and then let yourself in), you’d find him pac-ing the barely
furnished, wall-to-wall carpeted living room talking into his cordless phone.
Ben had seen him do this, call after call, for hours at a time. Ben read most
of several books watching Richard pace, tuning him out for the most part,
but occasionally picking up on some fantastic new plans being laid - a
docu-mentary film on the mothers of serial killers, a lunch with the
punked-out daughter of the president of Japan’s big-gest steel company, a
woman (or poss-ibly a transvestite - Ben hadn’t absorbed all of this
conversation) threatening him with legal action over something having to do
with Richard’s disruption of her “performance art”. By the end of that
conversation, she had settled for an apo-logy and a fifth of Polish vodka.
 
 
And yet Richard was Ben’s only true friend. Though he was intensely
social, he communicated very personally. And Ben could be almost
anonymous around Richard, at his club especially, but even in his home,
through which numerous persons paraded every day. At either place you
could be politely ignored, sit in a corner, have beer and food, and wait.
 

Before he went to Richard’s, he walked back to the burned-out
apartment building. He moved slowly, wear-ing protective hospital scrubs
under his pants and coat, and keeping his gauze-wrapped arms close by
his body. The outer walls of the building were still standing. As Ben arrived,
an empty dumptruck, towing a rusty yellow bull-dozer, pulled up and parked
in front. Ben watched cautiously from across the street, but the workmen
stepped off the truck and immediately crossed over to his side and went
into the bar and grill for lunch. Ben crossed the street the other way. The
big dumptruck obstructed the view between the bar and the front door of
the building. Ben darted up the stairs he’d last seen from
semi-consciousness, upside down, draped over a fireman’s shoulder. The
stairway and parts of rooms on the second and third floors still clung to
unsound beams and brick.
 
It was Jane’s third story flat he was going to, and in her bedroom,
under the floorboard, he found it, still there. He picked up the anole and
stroked it. Brown now, like the dusty wood, it seemed not to be breathing,
and nothing moved save its big eyelids blinking down over green orbs. It
seemed okay. He held it up in his palm and tried looking right into its eyes.
It just sat there. Externally at least, it was a dumb lizard - what did he
expect? He dropped it into his shirt pocket, buttoned it closed, and
descend-ed the stairs carefully.
 
By the time he reached the charred ground, the workmen, having only
bought soft drinks, were stepping back onto the property. “Hey!” one of
them yelled, but Ben turned the corner.
 
* * * *
 
He took the little lizard back to Richard’s. Richard was there, on the phone
as usual. He spoke in his customary hushed tones, mystifying the
conversation for his newest dressed-in-black girlfriend, who pretended not
to listen, leafing through the pages of a music fanzine.
 
“I need a quarter. You got any?” Rich-ard was saying as Ben walked
by.
 
Drugs, as usual, Ben thought.
 
Ben sat down in an easy chair across from the girlfriend. She seemed
not to notice him, keeping her eyes fixed on the magazine. Ben closed his
eyes. The only sounds were the occasional swishing by of a car on the
rainy street, and the soft mumblings of Richard, now on a new call. After a
long while, Ben opened his eyes. The girlfriend was staring at the lizard,

which had crawled out of Ben’s pocket and was resting on his chest, pale
green against the pale green of the hospi-tal scrubs.
 
“What’s its name?” she asked.
 
“I dunno,” said Ben.
 
“It has to have a name.”
 
“Okay, how about Adam?”
 
The girlfriend snorted. “That’s a pretty dumb name for a lizard.”
 
“Oh, well,” answered Ben. “It just popped into my head.” He smiled to
himself. The girlfriend, unamused, went back to her magazine.
 
“Ben, what’s shakin’ dude?” Richard chuckled, rubbing him on the
head and messing his hair.
 
“Not much, Sean Penn.” Ben covered the lizard with his hand.
 
Richard rubbed his left ear, which was red from the telephone. “I hear
you had a close call. I woulda come to see you in the hospital, only -”
 
The phone rang again, and without excusing himself Richard punched
the button and launched into a new conver-sation.
 
Ben palmed the anole and went into a guest bedroom, where he
carefully placed the animal in the back of the closet. “Find someone quick,”
Ben said to it. “You’re liable to get squashed around here.” He had no idea
on what level it comprehended him, and in any case felt certain he didn’t
need to assist it in its operations. Communication with the Adzem had
always been one way, even when they were inside him.
 
As he left the apartment, he walked past Richard, who had actually
gotten off the phone and was putting some music on. “I’m going for a walk.
Gotta get some clothes. It all burned up.”
 
Ben walked around the neighborhood for an hour. There was a dark
corner grocery, with crowded shelves. Three blocks away was a Salvation
Army store, where he stocked up. There was a laun-dromat directly across
the street from Richard’s building. It was going to be easy to live here. Lots
of empty and de-molished lots, too - places he could think in.
 

When Ben returned to Richard’s apartment, the phone was ringing,
but no one was coming for it. Either Richard had gone to buy smokes, or
what Ben suspec-ted might happen had happened. He sighted a
black-shoed foot pointing at the ceiling, just inside the guest room.
 
Ben looked quickly over at the couch to see if the girlfriend was still
there. She wasn’t, so he called out, “Anybody home? Hello?” When no one
answered, he locked the door. The Adzem always knew not to make their
move when other people were around.
 
He went to Richard’s prone form and kneeled beside it. Richard was
on his back, arms folded across his chest like a man in a coffin, but with
eyes calmly open, blinking regularly. Instead of pressing itself to his
forehead like it had done with the others, this time the reptile had crawled
half its body into Richard’s mouth. Its long brown tail swished across his
chin once, and it slipped in all the way. Richard swallowed.
 
Ben shuddered. He was sorry it had chosen Richard, rather than one
of the people that hung out here, for now he had no one left on earth he
could talk with or trust. But the sense of mission instilled in him by the
Adzem made such personal concerns seem trivial. Richard’s body was
synonymous with that mission now. And Ben sensed that Richard might be
the last carrier he’d have to watch over. The direct entry of the lizard into
Richard’s body signalled a major change in the way the Adzem would now
oper-ate. Maybe Richard would take over for him as their caretaker. He
wondered if Richard would tell him about his visions, as Jane had.
 
Richard looked up at Ben. He was tak-ing it well. Except for showing a
faint question across his brow, Richard looked almost pleased. This
cheered Ben, who always felt mixed emotions about the transformation.
Soon, millions of Adzem minds would move around on the atomic circuitry
of Richard’s nerves. And as they did so, the essence of Richard would
expire in equal measure.
 
Ben helped Richard to a sitting posi-tion against his bedframe. He
had already forgotten the lizard, Ben knew, and though Richard would not
remember, Ben told him, “I’ll take care of you. I’ll always be here taking
care of you.” Richard smiled, the question on his face disappeared, and he
slipped into a light coma. “Only I’m lying, Richard,” Ben said to the oblivious
body. “I can’t protect you.”
 
Ben heard voices. His eyes glazed over, his mouth hung open, and
he con-centrated on the communication. This human body will be different
from the others, it was telling him. This human body is not a resting place,

or a place of study. This human body will take us to the desert. You will
take this body to the desert.
 
 
The next day Ben drove to the airport and, using two hundred dollars
from Richard’s wallet and the rest of his own checking account, purchased
two one- way plane tickets to Mexico, and ex-changed the rest of their cash
for pesos. He led Richard gingerly along the fold-ing hallway into the plane.
Richard needed to be regularly reminded how to walk. And though he was
generally com-prehensible in his speech, he frequently spoke in
non-sequiturs now. He greeted the flight attendant in front of the cockpit
with a bubbly, “Hello, Mother!” The Adzem process of reading and building
onto his cerebral processes was not per-fectly localized, and stray firings
were spilling into all sorts of other areas, dis-torting everything from
socialization to locomotion. His personal identity was also thoroughly
disturbed - he only occasionally recognized himself as ‘Rich-ard’ now. Ben
had taken to calling him Romero, as a joke, and because he thought it
would be a good name for him in Mexico.
 
Mexico City was just a blur of colonial architecture and soot to Ben,
and on the bus ride out, mile upon mile of almost shantytown living rolled
past, back-grounded by industry that seemed parti-cularly alien here,
pounded into this highland plain under blue. Only when they’d left behind
them the city, the des-titute suburbs, and a hundred miles or so of road, did
Ben relax into the rhythm and space of the Mexican landscape.
 
Suddenly Richard began to seize violently in his seat. Passengers on
the bus turned around when they heard his moaning and thrashing. Ben did
his best to restrain him, but Richard slammed his head into the metal seat
frame in front of them and started bleeding. The man in the seat across the
aisle said something in Spanish that Ben didn’t understand. Ben glanced at
him dumbly and then looked back to Richard. Blood was all over his white
shirtfront. Ben ripped off his shirt-tail and pressed it firmly against the gash
in Richard’s head while Richard con-tinued to buck in his seat.
 
The man across the aisle poked Ben’s shoulder, and gestured to Ben
to push something into Richard’s mouth. He pulled on his tongue and
mimicked biting it, shook his head no, then placed his own wallet into his
mouth and bit down on it. Ben waved him off, but tight-ened his grip on
Richard to hold him still. Richard was arching his back, as though trying to
lift himself to a standing posi-tion.
 
By now the bus had stopped. Before the driver and others could

come to help them, Richard’s body lurched forward into the aisle, and it was
all Ben could do to hold on to Richard’s body as it stum-bled involuntarily
toward the door. The driver opened it and they made it down the stairs
somehow.
 
The driver turned to the alarmed passengers and announced
something in Spanish. Ben caught “pueblo... delante... ayuda...” and then
the driver called after him, “In town doctor. We get.”
 
The door slammed and the first class cruiser bus accelerated off.
Ben sat on the dusty ground, holding Richard. The spasms were coming at
regular intervals now, but less intensely. Ben watched the white bus go until
it disappeared about six miles off on the long, straight road, blending with
the white splotched mountain range ahead. Ben had hoped they’d end up in
those cool mountains.
 
As for here - Ben scoped the land-scape. Across the road was just
dirt, with a few stray cactus and spindly weeds growing out of it. To the left
was the road back to Mexico City, to the right, the road to the mountains,
with a lot of green growing alongside it-some kind of crop. He swiveled
himself and Richard around in the dry dirt to see how far toward them the
crop ran. Right behind them was a field of cactus, which started about a
mile back down the road from Mexico City. In the bus, he’d been too
preoccupied with Richard to notice the appearance on the scene of this
unusual crop - huge prickly pear cactus, planted in neat rows like corn, for
almost as far as he could see to the south and east. Thousands of acres,
miles of it.
 
Richard’s body lurched forward again and he fell headlong between
two rows. His face hit the sand hard. Ben thought about rolling him over, but
before he could move he got the vision he’d been waiting for - the first one
since Richard’s apartment.
 
He saw the million cactus all suddenly change form. Still green, but
now needles on top turning to two eyes, and the bottoms narrowing to thin
bodies with long tails. A field of lizards to the hori-zon, millions of them.
 
“Here?” Richard asked out loud, sur-prised. “Now?”
 
Yes, came the reply, so emphatically and clearly that it seemed to be
spoken aloud, right next to him, or from the sky, rather than from inside his
head, which is where he knew it really was.
 
From inside Richard, he reminded himself, and transmitted to my

head.
 
Watch, the voice added - with relish, it seemed to Ben.
 
The soil began to darken in a growing circle around Richard’s head. A
liquid was pouring from him into the earth. Ben watched as the wetness
raced along the contours of Richard’s body, then spread rectangularly out
from his legs and torso like ink bleeding into a blotter. Then the body itself
began to dissolve. Ben could only watch, amazed at the process,
understanding what was to come, but not exactly why. I guess they just want
it, he figured.
 
A sea of maggot-like wriggling began in the wetness. Quickly the
larvae crea-tures sprouted tails and became more articulated, taking on the
clear shape of four-legged lizards. In a matter of minutes they were the size
of small igua-nas, and a liquid began to arc out of their mouths, which they
opened to the sky. Their bodies did not dissolve as Rich-ard’s had - they
simply spewed out the liquid onto the ground for a moment, then ran off in
all directions, radiating out into the cactus field, along the road, and across
the road into the unplanted desert field there. They kept growing as they
ran. More larvae began to wiggle in the patches of liquid that the lizards
vomited. A car rushed past, crushing a hundred lizards in a twenty meter
stretch of road, and instantly the white wrig-gling began in the road kills. In a
matter of seconds, thousands more tiny lizards scattered from that spot on
the road.
 
Ben sat in the dirt, as hundreds of tiny new creatures ran close past
him and over him. The firstborn, which Ben could see lumbering away in the
distance, were now the size of alligators, but with flipper-like buds growing
alongside their forlegs. Now Ben saw dragons rise up off the desert floor.
First just a few, then in flocks, like ducks flushed from a swamp, they
became so numerous that they dimmed the sun, and their beating wings
became a roar.
 
A car crept by, the driver afraid to move too fast on a road filled with
eight foot Komodo Monitors. Ben ran up to it and pulled the driver’s door
open. The little boy and girl in the back seat were hysterical, and their
mother, herself on the verge of screaming, reached back to try and calm
them.
 
“Los comprendo! Es importante!” shouted Ben over the din of
scrambling and flying animals. The flight of nearby dragons was also
causing a tremendous wind and dust storm. “Yo los compren-do, estes
animales!” he yelled.

 
Perhaps out of desperation, the father slid over and let Ben climb in.
Ben hit the accelerator hard, also perhaps out of des-peration. He struck a
few lizards, and the old Plymouth almost skidded off the road - the children
shrieking - as they deflected off a Komodo with nearly full, flapping wings.
But the creatures down the road began to scatter and lift off, and soon Ben
was speeding along. They approached a small cluster of buildings at the
intersection of another rural route.
 
The father pointed “ Acá.” Ben pulled the car off the road into the
gravel lot in front of a small café and fruitstand. The family ran inside.
 
They were out of range of the ground lizards, but dragons continued
to fly over by the hundreds. Looking back toward the cactus fields, they
could see a huge black swarming, a living cloud, from which thousands and
thousands of mon-sters diffused out across the sky.
 
The store owners stood in front of their building, watching the
spectacle. They seemed more amazed than afraid. The sky behind the
mountains began to glow red, as the village on the other side burned where
the first of the dragons had learned fire. With this last physical hurdle
passed, and cognition and mem-ory triggered, the dragons remembered
who they were and why they’d come. As they flew, they spewed their white,
wrig-gling spawn onto the earth, and fire onto the man-made structures.
 
To the woman shopkeeper, who had darker skin than her husband,
Ben said, “I’m sorry about the groceries, Lucky. I hope it wasn’t too much of
a mess.” Their invasion launched, the Adzem had no more need for Ben
and had released his mind - released it not only from them, but from its own
conscious control.
 
To the shopkeeper, Ben said, “Es el fin del mundo, senor, si. Pero un
dia nuevo para el planeta.” The shopkeeper nodded, neither no nor yes,
thinking, Loco.
 
“There’s one vision I had all by my-self,” Ben shouted to no one.
“They showed me the end, how they take it over. That was them. But this
place, this valley, that was me. I chose this place, not them. It’s mine. They
can have the rest, but this is mine.” He spoke again to the woman. “Tell
them this. Tell them that the lizards will take over everything, burn it all down,
but they forgot about right here, the source, where they’re too little to
breathe fire. This little valley will be where the resistance starts. This is
where people will survive. Tell them.” She looked to her husband nervously.
 

Ben jumped in front of her suddenly. “Stand behind me,” he said to
her. “We’ve got to clear the slate. Me and you, we’ll start it over. We don’t
need them.” He pointed hostilely at the husband, and at the family huddling
for shelter under the eaves of the fruit stand.
 
The woman tried to run to her hus-band, but Ben held her back. The
shop-keeper rushed at Ben, who kicked him and pushed him down. Ben
grabbed a shovel that was leaning against a beam and began swinging it
wildly. The shop-keeper got up and ran into the café.
 
“Coward, ha!” Ben shrieked, his eyes bulging. “Too weak Only I -” His
voice choked out. The storekeeper now stood in front of him with a
shotgun.
 
“Esta loco,” he shouted to his wife over the din of the low flying
airforce of dragon invaders, and cocked the rifle. With Ben momentarily
distracted, the woman ran behind her husband, whose eyes, and the gun,
remained fixed on Ben. He stood squarely and motionlessly, his face hard
Ben roared out and raised the shovel over his head, charging. The man
fired. Both barrels blasted Ben into a heap of death.
 
The shopkeeper went inside the café. With the help of the family, he
began to gather together provisions. Outside, the dust continued to whirl in
the roar of the dragons’ wings, but the dragons flew by, many of them at
great altitudes, as if setting off on long flights. They seemed uninterested in
the valley. Still, if they had to, the shopkeeper and his wife, and the family,
could live in the caves in the mountains. There’d be water there, and they
had plenty of food. For now, they’d just stay here and hope everything
would be alright.
 
The shopkeeper’s wife went into the fruitstand attached to the café.
She too gathered food, putting apples and pota-toes into a large sack She
walked to the back, to a big steel sink where they washed some of their
produce shipments. Lying in a shallow puddle of water at the bottom was a
small green snake. It was curled in a circle, head to tail, ringing the drain.
The woman reached in and placed her fingertips lightly on the serpent’s
head. She closed her eyes.
 
She saw a hundred million snakes rise like stalks out of the ground,
flop to earth, and begin slithering toward water. She saw them plunging into
the ocean, into lakes, ponds, and mud holes in the desert floor. Then she
saw huge sea serpents shoot out of the water into the sky, un-folding wet
new wings and catching the winds. She saw them begin to do battle with the
dragons - or were they joining with the dragons to do battle against the

armies of men? It was not clear. She wasn’t sure there were people there
at all. The planet in this vision barely resem-bled earth, with smokey yellow
skies and burned out forests and cities smothered in furious tropical
growth.
 
Soon, it would all happen. It was as inevitable as the sunrise. She felt
freed of a huge burden. The earth had never be-longed to human beings -
they came from it and returned to it, but it was never theirs. Es nuestra, la
tierra - it’s ours - the alien mind told her.
 
She felt suddenly overwhelmed by tiredness and stumbled into the
small room behind the shop. She unfolded one of the cots they kept there,
lay down, and immediately fell into a deep sleep. The serpent crawled up a
leg of the cot, across her face, and into her mouth. Acting much more
quickly than the lizard had, it began to dissolve inside her. It would use her
DNA to meet its accelerated physical demands, and to build mind centers.
The woman’s body rolled off the cot. In a matter of seconds, it liquified and
soaked into the dirt floor. The earth beneath the two tiny shops began to
rumble.                                              

