The Forlorn Hope
David Drake 
DEDICATION
to Susan Allison
considered as a person and as an editor
Forlorn hope ... 1: In early use, a picked body of men, detached to the
front to begin the attack. . . .
b. transf. and fig, chiefly of persons in a desperate condition.
c. pi. The men comprising such a body; hence, reckless bravos.
d. A perilous or desperate enter-prise. . . .
OXFORD ENGLISH DICTIONARY
CHAPTER ONE
The starship came out of its envelope just long enough to unload the
first rack of bombs. It flashed yellow, then it was gone—hypersonic and
untouch-able by anything not also in a star-drive envelope. The ship's hull,
heated by its microsecond exposure to atmospheric friction, left a lambent
afterimage above Smiricky #4.
The flash meant nothing to Lieutenant Albrecht Waldstejn, Supply
Officer of the 522nd Garrison Battalion. Above the western end of the
valley where the flash had appeared, the sky now danced with sparks that
grew as they tumbled closer. The sonic boom had not arrived. The bomb
clusters which shed velocity and their ablative shells in balls of fire were
only an unexpected light phenomenon to the young Federal officer.

His companion, Colonel Guido Fasolini, had seen thirty years of war on
almost as many planets. Bombing from a starship was a difficult
technique to master, but the mercenary colonel had seen it before. He did
not deny his senses by insisting that the Republicans here on Cecach could
not possibly be doing it also. In the long run, that meant that Fasolini had
probably hired his Company on with the wrong side again.
In the short run, it meant that he had about fifteen seconds to get his
ass under cover.
"Come on!" Fasolini roared to his companion. Waldstejn was still
staring in bemusement at the sky. The younger man turned to see the
mercenary sprinting for the nearest shelter as fast as his stumpy legs could
carry him. There would be time to get the details later, Waldstejn thought
as he ran after the Colonel.
They were at the lip of the shelter when the first shock hurled them in.
It was the sonic boom rather than the stick of bombs hitting. The
over-pressure of a three-kilo-tonne starship at Mach 5 was colossal. It
flattened everyone in the compound who had not already ducked. Dust
shuddered and rose among the dry grasses of the valley. The pall spread in
a broad wake to mark the spacer's track on the ground beneath.
"Are they shelling us?" Lieutenant Waldstejn demanded. "They can't
be—that's from the west!"
Colonel Fasolini snorted. "When you've lived as long as I have," he said,
"you'll learn your own artillery's just as dangerous as the other bastard's.
But that was a spacer, and it's bombing us."
The two men were a contrast in more than age. Waldstejn was well
above standard height, but he was willow thin. His brown hair was
cropped short enough that the blond roots were visible, and he was
inordinately proud of the narrow moustache which was within a hair's
margin of being the width of his upper lip. Waldstejn's uniform was
crisply new; he was Supply Officer, after all. He wore the garment with the
brown-beige-gray pattern out, as being more suitable for the present
surroundings than the brown-green-black camouflage to which it could be
reversed. In his belt were holstered a two-way radio and a small pistol
which he had never fired.
Waldstejn could have posed for a recruiting poster. Guido Fasolini, on
the other hand, looked as grim as a gun barrel, even in his present
rear-echelon billet. In the dim light seeping through the
beryllium-filament roof, the mercenary's uniform looked muddy black.
Under the direct sun it had been the same ragged mixture of buff and gray

as the dust and dry vegetation of the immediate landscape. On a glacier,
the fabric would have the hue of dirty ice. It would never look sharp, and it
would never call attention to the man or woman who wore it.
Fasolini himself was stocky. Middle age had brought him a paunch on
which only the harshest campaigning could make inroads. But the Colonel
did not—could not—look soft. His hair was black and greasy. It spilled
from beneath his armored cap. His radio was built into the fibers of that
helmet, leaving his crossbelt free for its load of grenades and a
pistol-stocked launcher which no one could mistake as being only for
show. Fasolini was clean-shaven, but his whiskers were a black shadow
against the swarthy skin of his jaw.
The siren above the 522nd's Headquarters began to howl. There was a
brief blat of sound as well from a klaxon on the Katyn Forest, the starship
which was loading pigs of copper at the far east end of the large
compound. The warning signals froze the civilians in the mining and
smelting operations above ground. They also did more harm than good to
the inexperienced garrison battalion. What frightened the mercenaries,
however, and caused them to bury their faces deeper in the floor of their
shelters was a simpler sound. Barely audible over the siren were the
pop-pop-pops of clusters bursting to rain tens of thousands of bomblets
across the target area.
"For what we are about to receive," Colonel Fasolini muttered, "Lord
make us thankful."
"What do you—" began Albrecht Waldstejn. Then the anti-personnel
bombs began to go off in a crackling rush that swept down the valley like a
crown fire.
"Yeah, coming along just fine," said Churchie Dwyer. He squinted at the
bed of coals with a brew-master's eye. The gangling mercenary patted the
reactor vessel. It was a proprietary gesture like that of a sailor introducing
a floozie to his companions.
Dwyer and Del Hoybrin were using a huge 500-liter fuel tank from an
ore-hauler. Probably the tank had been dismounted years before when the
broadcast power grid was extended to the mining complex in the valley
over the ridge. The tank was rusty and still had a varnish of fuel additives,
but that would not make a hell of a lot of difference to the quality of the
final product. The mash itself had been culled from what was available
which would ferment. When it came time to distill the result into
high-proof slash, it would be cooled in a radiator scrapped from a lithium

refrigeration system.
They were going to get rich from this one, they were. All those miners
without access even to the weak beer issued to the garrison
battalion—beautiful.
"Should I put on some more wood, Churchie?" the other mercenary
asked. Del Hoybrin was built on the same cylindrical lines as the fuel tank.
Alongside Churchie, he looked almost as big as the tank as well. For that
matter, he did not seem a great deal smarter than the vessel.
"Del, Del, don't be in such a hurry," Dwyer chided. He patted the
ground beside him. "Sit back and relax, my friend. All we're doing now is
keeping the little darling warm so our beer ferments. Think of her as a
beautiful woman. You wouldn't expect to go up to a beautiful woman
and—" Churchie gestured at the billet of brush-wood his companion
held—"just stick your log in, would you?"
Del frowned. "I don't know what you mean, Churchie," he said. He
tossed the wood back on the tangle he had cut the day before.
Both men leaned back with their legs splayed, staring at the shimmer of
coals in the long trench. Cecach brush would barely sustain combustion. It
was perfect for a slow fire. "Sure, this is the life," Dwyer murmured. "And
when we get back to a liberty port with what we've made from this Gig…."
Their post was on the ridge line, three hundred meters away and just
out of sight behind the swell of the hill. The main purpose of the garrison
was to keep the civilian contract workers at their posts despite rumors
and Republican propaganda. The vast Smiricky Complex provided a
significant proportion of the Federal government's foreign exchange. The
authorities in Praha could not permit its workers to stream away as had
the agricultural laborers of the nearby latifundia.
There was, however, the threat of a quick thrust by Rube infiltrators or
spacer-inserted commandos. It was against that possibility that the
indigenous garrison had been stiffened by what was, despite Fasolini's
self-conferred colonelcy, a mercenary company of about fifty effectives.
The 522nd had neither the training nor the political reliability to be
steady under attack. The two laser cannon were the only battalion
weapons which could be depended on to stop even light armor at a
distance. Nobody really expected the 522nd to stand and volley
hand-launched anti-tank rockets at point-blank range.
"Should we be getting back, Churchie?" Del asked nervously.
Dwyer started. He had been visualizing himself and—thus far—five

women. Despite his revery, the gangling mercenary's hand snatched up his
gun when his companion spoke. A moment later, after his eyes had
scanned the horizon and his brain had sorted the words for content,
Churchie set the heavy weapon back down. "Lover," he said in irritation, "I
sure wish you wouldn't do that."
The bigger man blinked. His own gun was slung. Its weight was too
insignificant to him to call itself to his attention, even when he was
resting.
Del was the only man in the Company who fired bursts of full-charge
loads as a matter of course. He blinked in surprise when observers asked
him if he didn't mind the recoil.
Churchie sighed. "Look," he said patiently, "if they want us, they'll call
us, right?" He tapped his beryllium cap where it covered his right ear.
Del stared. His left hand began as if of its own volition to scratch his
ribs beneath a bandolier.
"And if just maybe Hummel comes out to check in person—and why the
hell would she?" Churchie continued, "why, we're out making a dangerous
reconnaissance through our own minefields, right? Doing our job with a
smile." He smirked, broadly enough to prove that dentists of Hister made
bridges from stainless steel. "What we know is, that she's not going to
crawl out to get us when she doesn't even know there's a path through the
mines."
"If you say so, Churchie," the big man said after further consideration.
He stared up the slope behind them. Del had done most of the heavy work
involved in the project, digging the trench and manhandling the fuel tank
into position. Churchie alone had chosen the path through the belt of
air-sown mines that ringed the ridge, though. "I just . . . ," Del said. "Well,
aren't we a long way from the shelter if somebody attacks?"
"Attacks!" his companion repeated incredulously. "Attacks?" He waved
his long, dirty fingers in an arc across the horizon of brush, grass, and
silence. "Do you see an attack? Do you see anything? You've been listening
to the radio, haven't you?" Dwyer pointed accusingly at Del's chest. "Seven
years in this business and you don't know that what any government says
is a lie? Look, when there's going \ to be an attack, I'll tell—"
High overhead to the west, they caught the flash of the starship starting
its bombing run.
Del Hoybrin was dumb as a post, but he was; experienced and his
reflexes had kept him alive before. The big man jumped up, heading for

their shelter, and Churchie Dwyer tackled him before those reflexes could
get his friend killed.
Del came down on his face with a thump and a squawk. "Not there!"
Churchie screamed, "here!" He began to slap madly at the coals with the
butt of his gun. Some of them scattered into the brush. The rest stirred
into bright orange life.
"Huh?" said Del.
The big man might just have been able to bound three hundred meters
uphill in the time available, Churchie knew. What Del could not have
done, no way in hell, was to run full-tilt up the crooked path without
stumbling into a mine. That left one choice, a bad one, but better than no
shelter at all when the shrapnel sleeted in. Furiously, Churchie Dwyer tried
to brush the coals out of the trench. After a moment, Del began to help. He
was used to doing things which he did not understand.
They were veterans. They ignored the sonic boom, ignored also the siren
that panicked the indigenous troops in the compound. When the clusters
began to separate in the sky overhead, however, Del paused and looked at
his companion. "Churchie?" he said.
Dwyer reversed his gun again and jerked its charging handle with his
left hand. The stabilized plastic stock was now mottled with gray blisters.
It was hot enough to singe cloth. Churchie spaced five fast shots down the
length of the makeshift reactor. Mash and half-fermented beer sprayed
from each entrance and exit hole, sizzling on the coals beneath.
Fasolini's troopers carried cone-bore weapons. They squeezed down
their projectiles at pressures which only barrels of synthetic diamond,
grown as a single molecular unit, could withstand. At the muzzle, an
osmium needle was expelled at over three thousand meters per second.
The fluorocarbon sabot which had acted as a gas check in the bore was
gaseous itself by the time it spurted out behind the needle. The weapons
were specialized; but it benefitted mercenary soldiers, like whores, to be
able to provide specialized services for their customers. The gun was
meant to bust armor and brick walls. It opened the fuel tank like one of
Jack the Ripper's girlfriends.
Churchie flung the weapon aside. "Come on!" he shrieked at his
companion. He rolled into the trench. Del blinked, then obeyed.
The edge of the cloud of bomblets swept over the brew vessel in its fury.
The two mercenaries were already screaming.

Sergeant-Gunner Roland Jensen clacked down the loading gate of the
automatic cannon which was both his duty and his darling. "There,
Herzen-berg," he said to the plump trainee, "that's how you insert a fresh
can. Now, I want you to line up five more cans for continuous feeding."
Trooper Tilly Herzenberg looked doubtful, but there was nothing in the
section leader's blond arrogance to suggest that he was not serious.
Putting her back in it, she slid a second drum of ammunition across the
base plate to align with the drum Jensen had just loaded. Cooper,
Pavlovich, and Guiterez, the veteran crewmen, watched and stuck knives
in the dirt.
The automatic cannon was the only crew-served weapon in Fasolini's
Company. It was the apotheosis of the shoulder weapons which most of
the troopers carried. What the individual guns could do to light armor,
Jensen's cannon could do to most tanks.
The cannon had a single barrel which was a trifle over three meters
long. The bore at the muzzle was seven millimeters. Through it blasted a
five-hundred gram osmium pencil which had with its sabot a diameter of
twenty millimeters when it was slammed into the breech.
The relationship of projectile to recoil impulse was a constant before an
ape man threw a rock and fell backwards off his branch. Nothing
armorers have done in succeeding ages has changed that relationship in
the least. The diamond bore and modern propellants made it possible to
push the cannon shot to literally astronomical velocities, but the base and
receiver had to be massive to slow the recoil to the point its pounding did
not shatter the gun. The cannon mount had its own treads and motor. It
served as well to draw a caisson of ammunition. Sergeant Jensen drove
from the little saddle forward; and the rest of the crew hoofed it or found
their own transport on a move.
Guiterez jumped up. "Sarge," he said, "what was that in the sky?"
Cooper and Pavlovich had been on Sedalia when Imperial spacers had
free run above them. They dived for the shelter. Guiterez recognized an
answer even when it was not verbal. He threw himself in with his buddies.
Roland Jensen glanced up at the thin, icteric track the starship had
drawn across the heavens. His eyes were as pale as the sky. "Right,
Herzen-berg," he said in a mild voice, "I'll take over now. I want you to
raise the muzzle to 45°." Ammo drums weighed sixty kilos loaded; Jensen
slid one of them into position with either hand. "Use the gauge like I
showed you."
"S-sarge," the trainee said, looking at the shelter opening. When she

had enlisted three months before on Beauty, she was unaware that
Fasolini had already contracted with the Federalists on Cecach,
thirty-seven light years from her home. In fact, the Company had enrolled
her—without any particular qualification of strength or skill—solely to
make up the contract Table of Organization in a hurry.
She dropped into the gunner's seat and punched the gun live. Then she
heeled up the rocker switch to elevate the muzzle as directed.
Sergeant Jensen was snapping the feed lips of each ammunition drum
into the female connector of the drum ahead of it. Rigging them this way
increased the chance of malfunction, but neither he nor any of his crew
were going to pop up to feed a fresh can in normal fashion.
"Sarge, I'm ready," said the trainee in a voice raised two octaves by the
sonic boom a moment before.
Jensen locked the last can in place and leaped to the gun. Leaning
across Herzenberg to get a sight line, he rotated the cannon mount 10° to
the right to eyeball it in line with the track down which the starship had
disappeared. The gun had electronic sights that would spike a gnat at a
kilometer, but at this instant there was neither time nor a hard target for
them.
With his right hand, Jensen threw the Continuous Fire toggle. His left
hand grasped Trooper Herzenberg by the collar, and he lunged for the
shelter. The muzzle blasts of the cannon were so loud that the rain of
bombs was a flickering white light, not a sound, to the cowering gun crew.
Warned by the flash, Trooper Iris Powers grabbed her boots and
jumped into her shelter. Lieutenant Hussein ben Mehdi was right behind
her.
The shelters were half-cylinders, each grown from a single crystal of
beryllium. The shelters would not stop a shell or even a bullet at any
normal range, but they were generally proof against the tiny splinters
spraying from overhead bursts. That was the threat against which
foot-soldiers since the Napoleonic Wars had been least able to protect
themselves.
Shelters were light, but they did not fold up like the canvas tents for
which they substituted. The rigid bulk of thirty curved plates, three meters
long by two across, required as much transport as the Company's
ammunition did. Like self-camouflaging uniforms and a considerable
allowance for target practice during stand-downs, the expense and
administrative hassle of the shelters was simply a matter of plant

maintenance. Fasolini's plant was not hardware but the Company itself,
the trained, effective troops who could command top dollar and could be
expected to survive for another lucrative contract.
Turning the curved roof of a shelter imo real living quarters required
considerable effort. The ground had to be ditched out at least deep enough
that its occupants could lie flat below the shrapnel ol nearby ground
bursts. In addition, those who failed to raise coamings around their
shelters could expect to be swimming the next time it rained. At Smiricky
#4, most of the troopers had paid civilian miners to dig them in. Powers
and Sergeant Hummel had chosen to do the job themselves. The walls of
their dug-out were as deep and plumb as those of Colonel Fasolini's
Operations Center.
That did not make the shelter spacious, a fact which suited ben Mehdi
very well indeed at the moment. The Lieutenant was of middle height with
a wrestler's build and a smooth, dark complexion. He was the only other
'officer' in Fasolini's Company, but he was not really the Colonel's second
in command. His rank was due neither to his military prowess nor to his
administrative ability. Fasolini had an accountant's brain under his coarse
exterior, but that exterior itself could be a handicap in negotiations. The
Colonel used ben Mehdi, his 'Executive Officer', as a suave front in
conference rooms where polish and a raised eyebrow were worth more
money than all the bluster in the world.
Hussein ben Mehdi had no general distaste for garrison duty, but
Smiricky #4 was three hundred kilometers from even a decent brothel.
The Lieutenant was bored, and the attack seemed to have been arranged
precisely to help with the project by which he hoped to improve his time.
He moved fast enough to be inside Powers' shelter when the sonic boom
rattled it, but he was careful not to brush dirt on his uniform either.
"Oh!" said Trooper Powers. She had just taken off her left sock. Her
toe-nails were varnished a deep scarlet. In confusion, the blonde trooper
twisted the bare foot under her and picked up one of her boots.
"Any port in a storm, hey Powers?" said Lieutenant ben Mehdi with a
warm smile. "Hope you don't mind the intrusion." He reached out to grip
between his thumb and forefinger the boot which Powers held. Ben
Mehdi's fingers were long, their nails perfectly shaped. There was enough
strength in them to pluck "the boot away from someone much huskier
than the petite blonde who faced him now.
The shelter roof was translucent. It filtered light heavily toward the blue
end of the spectrum. That alien tinge heightened Powers' look of tension

as she huddled toward the corner of the dug-out. The two bed-rolls, hers
and Sergeant Hummel's, were parallel with a narrow aisle between them.
They were on wooden frames which kept them off the floor. The frames
were low enough, however, that the dug-out's occupants could sit up
without risking their heads to shrapnel through the unprotected ends of
the shelter. Hussein ben Mehdi leaned forward as he sat on the bunk
beside Powers. She gasped as the Lieutenant dropped the boot he had
taken from her and hooked her right sock with an index finger.
"Lieutenant?" the Trooper said. His left arm slid behind her shoulders
despite her efforts to press herself tighter against the wall of the dug-out.
The anti-personnel bombs lashed down like the wind-driven edge of a
hail storm. Each bomblet was about the size of a man's thumb, a tiny
segment of a cylinder, more or less the same as the tens of thousands of
others released from the same cluster. They armed on impact and
detonated a half second later, generally when they had bounced a meter or
two back into the air. They spread a sleet of tiny shrapnel which stripped
trees and killed all unprotected animals in the target area. After an attack,
hundreds of bomblets which had failed to go off the first time lay in the
grass, ready to shatter the leg of anyone walking carelessly.
Inside the shelter, the flashes lighted the mussed bedrolls with savage
brilliance. The crackling detonations merged into a single prolonged roar.
One large fragment sailed through both plastic end-sheets with a buzz
that vibrated on the back of ben Mehdi's neck rather than in his ears.
"They'll be making another couple passes, of course," the Lieutenant
said as he reached for the zipper at the throat of Powers' tunic. The
vicious crack of the automatic cannon a kilometer away was an irritation
now that the bomblets were only occasional thumps delayed by a freak of
chemistry. "It won't be safe for anyone to leave their shelters for, well,
plenty of time," ben Mehdi went on. He brushed aside the hand Powers
raised to block his. He began to unzip her. "You know," he said, "you're a
very attractive woman, Iris."
The little blond whipped her left fist around at Hussein's face. The blade
of her spring knife was no longer than a finger, but that would have taken
it to the Lieutenant's brain if he had not been expecting the attack.
Ben Mehdi caught Powers' wrist with his right hand while his left still
clamped her other arm to her body. She tried to twist the knife to cut the
sinews across the back of the officer's hand, but her weapon was a spike
with no real edge. Hussein ben Mehdi increased the pressure of his grip
until his thumb stood out in a pool of white skin on the woman's wrist.
Then he gave a quick snap as if casting with a fly rod. The knife skittered

out of her numb fingers.
"Now that's a friendly way to treat a guest, is it?" the Lieutenant said.
His face still smiled, but his lips were drawn as hard as his teeth. "Now,
Hummel's in the OC, so we're going to be alone till the All Clear sounds.
And I know you like men, baby, because I saw you last night with one of
the zoomies from the Katyn Forest. That's what light amplifiers are for,
right? Now, I'm a man, and just to prove it—"
Ben Mehdi lowered Powers' hand toward his fly with the same ease with
which he had disarmed her. The little blonde spit in his eye.
The bombing had both blown trash onto the shelter roof and studded
the beryllium mesh with needles of glass shrapnel which conducted light.
Within, the effect turned the blue ambience into mottled shadows and
points as bright as jewels by contrast. Iris Powers' upturned face was
bestial and hideous as a result. The Lieutenant's face, as he slapped the
woman with the full strength of his open hand, was as horrible with no
lighting to augment it.
Power's head bounced against the dug-out wall. She lolled back,
stunned. Her eyes were glassy. The outline of long, strong fingers was
already swelling up in red on her cheek. The light flickered again from the
east as the starship rolled out for its second pass.
"I tell you, bitch!" the Lieutenant shouted. "I'm going to do you a favor.
I'm going to show you just how good it can be with a man so you won't
have to—"
The end flaps shook with the sonic boom and the entrance of Sergeant
Johanna Hummel.
The Lieutenant jumped as if the non-com were one of the second stick
of bombs herself. In some ways, he might have preferred that to what he
got. Jo Hummel hit the floor feet first, but she let her momentum carry
her onto the occupied bunk. The point of her left shoulder took ben Mehdi
in the middle of the back. He slammed forward again, pinned against the
earthen wall as easily as he had pinned Powers an instant before. The
blonde trooper flopped sideways when the Lieutenant released her.
It sounded as if the sky were tearing apart. A sun-bright streak glared
through the filter of the roof.
"Close quarters, Lieutenant," said Sergeant Hummel. She was wheezing
with rage and the distance she had run, but her words were loud enough
to be distinct even against the background. "Fucking close quarters, hey?"
Hummel was as tall as the Lieutenant, with the same blocky, powerful

torso. She had felled men larger than herself with sucker punches, but in
any simple test of strength, ben Mehdi could have bested her. They were
both in excellent physical condition. However, all other things being equal,
a male's greater percentage of muscle to total weight would have told.
All other things were not equal. Hummel s gun was socketed in the
Lieutenant's right ear.
"Sergeant," snapped ben Mehdi, "watch what you're doing! I won't tell
you twice!"
"Real cramped in here, ain't it?" Sergeant Hummel said. She twisted
her weapon to force ben Mehdi's head back against the dirt. The steel
barrel shroud had been dented. The corner of it tore a ragged gash in the
officer's ear. His mouth, open to shout another order, instead passed a
high-pitched whimper.
In a voice as close to gentle as the surrounding noise permitted,
Sergeant Hummel said, "Bunny? Are you all right?"
Trooper Powers sat up again, levering herself with a hand on the back
wall. Hussein ben Mehdi's weight still anchored her thigh to the bunk. She
braced her free foot to tug herself away. The handprint on her cheek was a
flag.
Hummel made a sound at the back of her throat like millstones
rubbing. She stood, gripping the unresisting lieutenant by the shoulder
and raising him with her. She held her gun by the pistol grip, the butt
cradled in the crook of her right elbow. Her index finger was on the
trigger. The muzzle moved with ben Mehdi's head, anticipating each of
the man's cautious attempts to duck away. Outside, the bombs were
sailing in with calliope shrieks. This run, there were no high-altitude pops
as clusters separated.
"What's the matter, Lieutenant?" Hummel rasped. "Worried maybe my
gun's pointing a little close to you, what with all of us shoe-horned into
this little dug-out? Don't you worry, sir. I've killed lots of people, but I
never killed one when,I didn't mean to." She spun ben Mehdi and gave
him a hard shove.
The Lieutenant sagged against the dirt coaming. His breath made the
end flap tremble. He turned his head fearfully. Hummel's gun was no
longer touching his ear, but the tiny hole in its muzzle was aimed to take
out his left pupil without touching the surrounding sclera.
The earth shuddered and a bomb went off with a muffled roar.
"Since the accommodations don't suit you, Lieutenant," the Sergeant

said, "maybe you'd better leave, don't you think? You'd be best off at the
Operations Center. And I think you ought to start now."
Three more bombs detonated. Two were below ground. The third hit
something heavy and metallic. It rang like a bell even before the shattering
explosion.
"Jo, Allah!" the Lieutenant pleaded. "Not now— not during incoming!"
Debris from the first bomb, pebbles and the heavier clods, pattered on
the shelter roof. Hummel smiled and gripped the shroud of her weapon to
emphasize rather than to steady it. "This stick's armor piercing," she said.
"Just keep your head down and you'll be fine. Oh—and don't step on
anything left over from the first pass, hey? But that's the sort of chance we
gotta take when there's someplace we need to go."
Ben Mehdi tensed. Behind the Sergeant, Powers was pulling on her
boots with apparently total concentration. The ground shook under the
impact of more bombs.
"Your choice," said Hummel. Her index finger tightened.
Hussein ben Mehdi bolted from the dug-out, into the haze of dust and
combustion gases. His car had dripped a bright streak of blood onto his
shoulder.
Sergeant Hummel waited only until she was sure that the Lieutenant
would not burst back in behind the muzzle of his grenade launcher. Then
she whirled, tossing the gun onto her own bunk to free both hands. She
clasped Powers. The blonde woman began to sob in a mixture of relief and
fury. "There, there, Bunny," the Sergeant said, stroking the other woman's
silky hair. "There, there."
When the fusillade of fragmentation bombs sputtered away, Lieutenant
Waldstejn rose and started to climb out of the shelter. Colonel Fasolini
grabbed him by the ankle and pulled him back down. "What the hell's
your hurry?" the mercenary asked. "We've got a long afternoon ahead of
us. They aren't done, not by a long shot."
The Lieutenant settled back on his haunches uncertainly.
Albrecht Waldstejn had a commission as a result of the two years of law
school he had completed before being conscripted. His posting as a supply
officer of a garrison battalion resulted from negative attributes rather
than a demonstrated genius for administration, however. Waldstejn's
parents had been forceful enough in opposing Federal war policies that
the couple was taken into preventative detention. Their deaths were

almost certainly the transport accident the government claimed—but the
government still thought it wise to put the son under military discipline.
After the four-week curriculum to which officer training had been
reduced, the young man had been shunted into a slot where he was
unlikely to cause trouble.
Waldstejn's initial mistake with the 522nd was to reorganize the mess
his predecessor had left. The young officer broke for fraud all three of his
underlings, including the quartermaster sergeant who had run the section
while previous supply officers drank themselves insensible.
That left Waldstejn with no non-commissioned officers, two privates
dumped on his need because nobody else in the battalion wanted them,
and the smouldering hatred of his commanding officer. Major
Lichtenstein had been receiving his rake-off on goods sold illegally from
the battalion stores in the past.
Waldstejn got along rather better with Colonel Fasolini. The mercenary
leader had a tendency to look for the easiest way to get the job done, but
at least his notion of what the job was had similarities to Waldstejn's
conception. Major Lichtenstein commanded a battalion of screw-ups and
criminals, with no promotion to be expected this side of the grave.
Lichtenstein's priorities were not those of the government in Praha, and
they were shared by most of the officers and men in his command.
"Why are you so sure the bomber won't be shot down?" Lieutenant
Waldstejn asked. He craned his neck out of the shelter but kept Fasolini in
the corner of his eye. The whole floor of the valley swirled like mist from a
lake at sunrise. Bomblets which had been flung wide left ragged clots of
dust up to the ridge lines and beyond. The explosions had started a few
grass fires, now blurred in with the dust pall but sure soon to replace it.
"Matter of fact, I'm surprised I don't hear the lasers firing by now."
Fasolini settled himself against a wall. The shelter was unassigned. It
had been set up between the Colonel's Operations Center on the
compound perimeter and the building of the Complex which housed the
522nd's HQ. The Colonel was a cautious man. He had provided for just the
sort of eventuality which had occurred—an attack sudden enough to catch
people between the headquarters. Hunching his shoulders to keep the X of
his crossbelt from biting him, the mercenary said, "They aren't firing
because they don't have a target. And the bomber won't be shot down
because it's not a bomber, it's a starship. Only time they need to worry's
when they're out of their hyperspace envelope to fire—" he snapped a
thumb and finger for emphasis, loud as a pistol shot— "or when somebody
goes after them in another spacer. You know how long it takes to get a

starship programmed to operate this close to a planet. They must've spent
weeks, and it'll be weeks before your side puts anything up to stop them."
The older man frowned. "Not that I think they'll hang around that long,"
he concluded.
"But why here?" Waldstejn said, aloud but more to himself than to his
companion. They were speaking in English, the tongue of convenience
throughout the human universe. Fasolini had a smattering of a score of
languages. He could ask for directions or a woman on most planets.
Waldstejn, however, had only his native Czech and business-course
English. A month as acting liaison with the mercenaries had sharpened
his English into a fluency equalled only by the multi-lingual curses he had
picked up in the same school.
"Why the hell's that gun firing?" the Colonel said, frowning toward the
northeast corner of the compound. Waldstejn knew the automatic cannon
was emplaced there, toward the most probable channel for armor but
almost a kilometer away from the nearest mercenary position. The plan in
Praha had been to seed pairs of mercenaries every four hundred meters or
so along the perimeter. Fasolini had agreed to man observation posts on
both ridge lines—the mercenaries' electronics were an order of magnitude
better than Cecach manufactures. Further, Fasolini had agreed to put the
cannon at least temporarily where it was most potentially useful. But after
taking a good look at the 522nd Garrison Battalion, the Colonel had told
Major Lichtenstein that he had no intention of putting his whole force out
in packets which would be left with their asses swinging as soon as
something popped. You cannot stiffen gelatine with B-Bs; and you could
not keep cannon fodder from running just because there was one team
still firing within earshot. Most of the Company was therefore bivouacked
on a short segment of the northern perimeter.
That meant the cannon was far enough away that Lieutenant Waldstejn
had forgotten it. The distance had also thickened the sharp muzzle blasts
into something quite different from what he had heard—painfully—during
a demonstration firing when the Company first arrived. Waldstejn's lips
pursed in speculation.
Fasolini touched the wear-polished spot on his helmet that keyed the
radio. He said, "Top to Guns.
What the hell do you think you're up to. Roland? Shut her down before
our whole fee goes up the spout!"
The mercenary listened a moment. To Waldstejn, out of the net, the
reply was only a tinny burr like that of a distant cicada. The gun continued

to fire its eight shots a second, regular as a chronometer.
"Listen, I was on bloody Sedalia too," the Colonel shouted suddenly. "I
don't care what you figured, I'm not having ammo / buy pissed down
a——
Waldstejn touched the older man on the shoulder. "I'll clear it, Guido,"
he said. "I'll get an acquisition request off today."
"Hold on!" Fasolini snapped. He took his fingertip from the
communicator control. "What do you mean, you'll clear it?" he
demanded. "You don't have authority to supply one of those mothers—
there isn't a unit like it in the whole bloody Federal army."
"And by the time somebody in Military Accounts has figured that out,"
the local man said reasonably, "we'll both have long white beards. Look,
the noise'll make a few of them—" he waved. The breeze carried a burden
of faint moans, people too slow or too ignorant to get under cover before
the bombs hit— "think they're in a battle, not an abattoir. Requests from
independent commands have an automatic clearance up to fifteen
thousand crowns—and believe me, the Major knows better than to flag a
chit I've approved." The pride in Waldstejn's voice was as obvious as it
was justified.
Fasolini squinted at the younger man. Instead of replying directly, the
mercenary keyed his communicator again. "Top to Guns," he said. "All
right, you've got clearance, Roland. But it's still a bloody waste." To
Waldstejn alone he added, "Damned fool thinks they'll be programmed to
whip-saw back and forth on the same track, so if he keeps enough crap in
the air they'll fly right into—"
The sky flashed a yellow that went white and terrible in the same
instant. Fasolini's mouth froze in shocked surmise. Both men leaped up to
stare skyward, even though they knew the bombs were soon to follow.
Sergeants Breisach and Ondru were shrieking in the bare lobby of the
warehouse where the wave of anti-personnel bombs had caught them. The
sheet-metal roof was in scraps and tatters that writhed with by-products
of the explosions. Sunlight poured through the dozen meter-diameter
holes and the myriads of pinheads stabbed by fragments. The metal had
stopped most of the glass-fiber shrapnel itself, but blast-melted droplets of
the roof had sprayed down on the lobby.
The sergeants had timed their visit to be sure that the Supply Officer
himself was absent. They had a proposal to which they had expected the
two privates on duty would agree without argument. Instead, they had

received flat refusals. Now neither of the non-coms was seriously injured,
but the shower of molten iron had not improved tempers which
opposition had already frayed.
Private Hodicky rose gingerly from behind the counter. He boosted
himself to the top of it. Hodicky was only a meter fifty-six in height. He
could not have seen the floor simply by craning his neck over the broad
counter. A splash of metal the size of a thumbnail crackled from a request
form on the counter. It left a brown discoloration on the paper. "Are you
guys all right?" the Private asked nervously.
Behind Hodicky stood Jirik Quade—dark and scowling and quite
obviously regretful that both sergeants were able to get to their feet under
their own power. Quade ran a hand through his hair, trying to comb out
the flecks shaken from the walls and ceiling by the bombing.
The warehouse personnel had been protected by the counter-top itself.
In the lobby, Sergeant Ondru's uniform looked as if he had been dragged
through barbed wire on his back, and the tear in Breisach's scalp was no
less bloody for being superficial. Breisach's obscenities were uncontrolled
and unintelligible, but Ondru retained enough rationality to pick a
scapegoat.
Ondru leaped to the counter. He was tall enough to look Hodicky
straight in the eye, even before he gripped the Private by the collar and
dragged him forward.
"Now Sarge—" the little private cried, scrabbling at the back edge of the
counter to avoid being pulled onto the lobby floor. "Now Sarge, we
didn't—"
"You little bastard!" Ondru shrieked. "You kept the gate closed so we
eouldn't get in under cover, didn't you? Hoped we'd be killed! Well, you
little prick, I'll show you killed!"
Smiricky #4 was on permanent Yellow Alert. Officers and non-coms
were required by regulations to go armed at all times. Ondru carried his
assault rifle in a patrol sling that cradled it muzzle-forward at his waist.
Like the Intruder patch he had bought from a drunk in Praha, the sling
was the affectation of a man who had not seen combat in the seven years
of bitter war that had wracked Cecach. Now it put the grip of the rifle in
place for the Sergeant's right hand. He raised the muzzle at the same time
as his other hand dragged Hodicky's face down to meet the weapon.
Private Quade hit Ondru across the temple with the edge of a
metal-covered receipt book.

Ondru dropped as if his legs had been sawed off at the knees. There was
a pressure cut through his blond hair, as clean as anything a knife could
have left. The book flew out of Quade's hand and flapped into a lobby wall.
Hodicky lurched back when the Sergeant released him, but his companion
had already started to vault the counter and finish the job. Quade s mouth
was open but soundless, and his eyes held no expression at all.
"Mary and Joseph!" Hodicky cried. He grabbed Quade by the waistband
and jerked him to a halt. "Q, boys," he said, "let's talk this over!"
Private Quade was no taller than Hodicky, but for an instant as he
twisted he towered over his companion like the angel with the flaming
sword. Then Quade's expression cleared. His hand, raised to strike though
he had no weapon to fill it, lowered as Hodicky watched transfixed. "Jeez,
Pavel," the black-haired man mumbled, "you know not to touch me when I
get, get, you know. . . ."
Then the loudest noise in the warehouse was a click. Sergeant Breisach
had recovered enough to draw back the charging handle of his own rifle.
"You little faggots," the non-com said in a quavering voice. At his feet,
Ondru moaned. The side of the fallen man's head was a sticky mat of
blood. "I ought to shoot you both, but I'd rather see you hang. And you
will, by God, don't think your prick of a lieutenant's going to save your
asses this time."
Quade turned slowly. At this range, the light projectiles of the assault
rifle would shred the plywood counter and the men behind it. The little
man's eyes were going blank again. His muscles braced for an action
which was quickly slipping out of conscious control.
"Sergeant, hell, what're you talking about?" Hodicky babbled brightly.
His companion frightened him worse than the man with the gun did.
Breisach might or might not be ready to kill; Quade was beyond doubt
ready, though Hodicky hoped he alone of the spectators knew that. "We're
partners, right, Sergeant Breisach? Just like you say—we slip you booze
out of the stores and you boys split the profits with us after you move it.
Sure, we're all friends here." Hodicky's right hand was resting on Quade's
waistband again.
Sergeant Ondru had risen to his hands and knees. Breisach swallowed
and took a step backward. His hands were relaxing minusculey on his
pointing rifle. The Sergeant's body was beginning to quiver with the pain
of his own injuries. His mind was not wholly able to absorb the return to
the subject which he and Ondru had come to the warehouse to discuss.
"Say," Hodicky rattled on, "you boys'll need uniforms too, won't you? Q,

go on back and get a—large-long and a large-medium, right, Sarge? Go on,
Q, the boys won't want to wait."
Quade shook himself like a dog coming out of the water. "W-what did
you say, Pavel?" he asked thickly.
"Go get a couple uniforms," Hodicky repeated in a low voice.
"Large-long, large-medium. Quick, Q, it's what the Lieutenant would
want."
Nodding, not really aware of what he was doing, the black-haired
private walked through the door to the back. With a smile too stiff to be
wholly engaging, Hodicky said, "Now, Sarge, maybe you could point that
thing some other way? Don't want any accidents that'll screw up profits,
do we?"
Briesach grunted, fumbling for the safety catch. Blood seeping from his
shrapnel wound glued his collar to his neck. "If you bastards think you're
going to try something cute when this is over—" he began. He did not
finish the threat. The sonic boom of the follow-up run sent all of them,
even the logy Ondru, scrambling for cover again.
From the sensor screens within the massive hull of the Katyn Forest,
the shower of anti-personnel bombs was merely an intriguing spectacle.
First Officer Vladimir Ortschugin spat into the bucket and watched the
show. Idly, he reached for the stick of tobacco in a thigh pocket of his
coveralls. The Katyn Forest was a freighter, not a warship, and her home
planet, Novaya Swoboda, was quite neutral in the struggle taking place on
Cecach. The starship was at Smiricky #4 to load cargo at double rates for
the hazard allowance. Nothing that had happened thus far justified the
bonus.
The bombs swept the broad valley like surf on a dun beach. Pin-prick
flashes flattened nearby grass and lifted rings of dust from the soil. Then,
while the after-image of the opening still clung to the brain, the main body
of the cluster overran it in undulant glares of white light. The wave rushed
past the buildings of the Complex and the bunkers set out five hundred
meters in a perimeter. One miner stood in the open. He blinked at the
sight until it washed over him and left him liquid and as formless as
yesterday's sand castle.
Ortschugin watched unmoved, letting the sensors distance him and
save his sanity.
The bridge was dancing with the bright chaos of the screens. The Power
Room communicator shrilled, "Ortschugin! When are those idiots going to

shut off the conveyor? Don't they know we can't secure the ship until they
do?"
The First Officer raised his eyes to Thorn, the other crewman on the
bridge, and then to heaven. "Excellency," he said, "I can't raise anyone in
Central Warehousing. I'm sure they've gone to cover." The ones with
common sense, at least. "Why don't we just—" relax would be the wrong
word— "wait it out. The most these little bombs will do is scratch the
finish of the hull. For that, it doesn't really matter whether the holds are
closed or not."
The Katyn Forest was a hundred and fifty meter cigar. Her bridge and
hyperdrive inverter were forward; her engines were astern. Most of the
ship's length was given over to her holds amidships. Hold One, forward,
already held several carboys of mercury, a by-product of the smelting
process. The remaining cargo volume was being filled with copper ingots
by the Complex's automated loading system. The conveyor belt was not in
the least affected by the fact that Captain Kawalec and the crewmen
stowing the copper under her direction had bolted into the Power Room.
The great cargo doors could not be closed while the conveyor was hooked
up; and the conveyor could not be disconnected so long as hundreds of
tons of ingots continued to roll up it and spill into Hold Two.
Not, as Ortschugin had said, that it made any real difference to the
freighter.
"The Front has collapsed, then," said Thorn, fingering his beard as he
watched the screen. "I hope that doesn't mean we'll be overrun here."
"Ortschugin!" the Captain demanded. "See if you can get those cretins
now that the bombing's stopped. I want to raise ship and get the hell out
of here! Full holds be damned, I'm not paid to be shot at!"
"I'll try again, Excellency," Ortschugin replied. He carefully turned off
his sending unit after he had spoken. "Don't get your bowels in an uproar,
bitch," he muttered before he made another perfunctory call to Central on
the land line. No one answered, of course.
The lower curve of the freighter's hull rested a meter and a half deep in
the ground. Normally the Katyn Forest would have docked at a proper
spaceport like the one at Praha. Copper would be carried from the smelter
to the port on ground-effect trucks which hissed down the line of
broadcast power pylons. Increased pressure on the Front thirty kilometers
to the east had brought a modification. A starship would be landed
directly at the mine and refinery complex to eliminate the slow process of
transferring the cargo and to free scarce transport to carry materials to

the Front.
From what the crew had seen when the Katyn Forest popped out of
hyperspace on her landing run, the Federal side of the Front needed more
help than it was likely to get.
Everyone else in the Smiricky compound had to depend on government
news. The Federal and Republican governments had in common with each
other—and with most human governments over the millennia and light
years—the fact that they lied as a matter of course when reality did not
suit their purposes. A navigational template had been
computer-generated on the screens of the Katyn Forest from data a week
old. It showed disquieting contrasts from the present scene. North and
south of Smiricky #4, the Front—limned on the darkness by shell
bursts—had bulged inward through the net of Federal strongpoints. If the
bulges became penetrations, as they were almost certain to do, it would be
kitty bar the door to Praha itself.
The rumble of ingots being dumped amidships was joined by a series of
slower, hull-shaking clangs. Kawalec was trying to clear the vessel's own
cargo-shifting apparatus in order to straighten the recent jumble.
Ortschugin frowned and touched the communicator. "Excellency," he said,
"they'll probably make another pass. It might be best to keep yourself and
the crew under cover until this has all blown over."
The response came on the Power Room line. Nadia Kawalec had not
risked her own life among possible live ordnance. "Don't act stupider than
you already are, Ortschugin," she snapped. "They're bombing here just to
scatter the locals and keep them from blowing the place up. Well, that
may work, but they're not going to catch us too!"
Why the hell not? the First Officer wondered silently. The copper would
not be paid for until it was delivered on Novaya Swoboda. The Rubes
would be just as glad of that golden egg as the Federals had been. The 
Katyn Forest and her crew had little to fear on that score.
He looked at the screens. The dazzling flash of the starship blowing up
chilled Ortschugin as it would have chilled any spaceman who saw it.
The starship in fact destroyed itself. It had been adapted to a job for
which it was not intended in the belief that its hyperspace envelope and its
high real-space velocity would be adequate protection. Starships were not
armored in the technical sense, but their hulls were of braced steel a
hand's breadth thick. That was needed to withstand the torque of
hyperspace inversion. The momentary friction of Mach 5 in an
atmosphere made the attacking vessel's nose glow, but it was intended

that the ship be back in her envelope before any structural damage
occurred.
A single osmium shot from Jensen's cannon met the starship in the
instant it dumped its second stick of bombs. The projectile had started to
tumble as it ripped an exit hole through the top of the spacer's hull
amidships. During the instant of its glowing passage, the round tore
through the power boards of the hyperspace inverter. At the speed of a
slow comet, with its cargo bay open to destroy even the semblance of
streamlining, the vessel tried to plow through a planetary atmosphere. Its
fragments burned white as they tumbled across the sky.
The debris held Ortschugin transfixed for long seconds. At last he
glanced down at the glowing tracks of the bombs which the spacer had
released before it dissolved. Cursing, incredulous, the First Officer
grabbed for the intercom again.
The Katyn Forest was in the war after all.
* * *
Churchie Dwyer did not bother to look around. He thrust himself out of
the trench with his eyes still screwed shut against the pain. "All right,
Del," he said in a squeaky voice. "We're all right." He turned, crouching on
all fours, and slitted his lids enough to permit him to examine the brew
vat.
Their side of the ridge had not been part of the intended target. It was
well within the scatter range of the clusters, however. The air was sharp
with residues of the explosives. The two bomblets which had gone off
directly over the tank had opened ragged holes in the upper sheet steel.
None of the shrapnel had penetrated the bottom of the fuel tank. Del
and Churchie were unmarked— by the bombs themselves.
The trench hissed and steamed with the half-cured mash still dripping
onto the coals. The mercenaries' uniforms were of tough material, but not
all the coals had been quenched when the men threw themselves down.
Churchie could feel the cracking of fabric that had melted into the flesh of
his shoulders and buttocks. His hands and scalp had not been exposed to
the coals directly, but the steaming brew had parboiled all his bare skin.
The vat, the brew, and Churchie's dreams of wealth beyond a
vault-blower's were ruined utterly.
Rising, the lanky soldier kicked the tank. It thumped, but it would not
ring. Screaming with rage, he kicked it again.
"Churchie, I'm burned," said Del Hoybrin, and good God he was! The

big man had crawled into the trench face down, as if it were not a fire-pit.
He had saved his bollocks at hideous cost to his knees and elbows.
Dwyer drew his wrist knife. The nickel steel of its blade had been
collapsed to crystals of four times their natural density. It was a day's work
on a diamond sharpener to give it shaving edges, but it would hold those
edges even if it were punched through body armor. Short-gripping the
blade, Churchie began to separate the bigger man's flesh from his
uniform. He worked with a surgeon's skill, oblivious to what had moments
before been the ungodly pain of his own burns. Under his breath Dwyer
muttered, "Shouldn't have sold our goddam wound cream to those hick
miners who thought they could get high on it. ... But don't worry, baby,
we'll get you relieved and fixed up down the hill, just as soon as—" the sky
flashed— "got the bastard!"
The starship's lengthy disintegration brightened the heavens and
Churchie's stainless-steel smile. He watched with practiced eyes as the
bomb load separated into eight fireballs on parallel trajectories. He
sheathed his knife with the care its point demanded, then grabbed his
companion by the arm. "Come on, Del," he said, "let's get the hell back to
where we're supposed to be so we can call for a relief." He picked up both
guns by their slings.
"Churchie, there's bombs," said Trooper Hoybrin. He pointed at the
fireballs with an index finger as thick as a broom-handle. "Shouldn't
we—you know?"
The gangling veteran clapped his friend on the shoulder. "Come on,
sweetheart," he said. "The first load was for us, keep our heads down.
These aren't clusters. I'd suspect those bastards in the buildings and the
spacer are going to have something to do besides laugh at us in a little
bit!"
When it was too late, Vladimir Ortschugin realized the point that he
had missed. The Republicans might have been willing to deal with the 
Katyn Forest on normal business terms if she had landed in their
territory. Since she had not done so, however, it was well worth their time
to see that the starship stayed on the ground until they captured it. The
Smiricky Complex itself was not the target—it could not fly away from the
onrush-ing Republican columns.
All eight armor-piercing bombs of the second stick were aimed at the
grounded starship.
Ortschugin and Thorn could watch the missiles swell on the screens, but

they could do nothing to stop them. The crewman had fumbled out a
golden crucifix at the end of a rosary. Tobacco juice, unnoticed, was
drooling from the corner of the First Officer's mouth.
The first bomb landed a hundred meters short. The earth quivered,
then shot up in a steep, black geyser from the buried explosion. Almost
simultaneously, one of the next trio hit the Katyn Forest astern. The vessel
pitched like a canoe in the rapids. Both men on the bridge were thrown to
the deck.
The impact of the bomb was followed by its slamming detonation
within the Power Room. Dissonant vibrations made the thick hull slither.
They drove the surviving crew to shrieks of pain. In Hold Two, a cargo
grab whipped. The rotary teeth which had been hooking ingots into the
feed pipe snatched a crewman's leg. She screamed, but the operator was
unconscious and there was no one to prevent her from being hauled all the
way up the twenty-five centimeter pipe.
No one else died in the hold. Captain Kawalec was alone in the Power
Room when the bomb exploded on the main fusion unit.
On the ground, the Katyn Forest supplied its internal needs from the
auxilliary power unit forward. The main bottle was cold when it fractured.
That saved the ship and most of Smiricky #4. It would not have mattered
one way or the other to the Captain, who must have been within touching
distance of the bomb when its two-hundred kilo charge went off. The five
survivors of the crew shed more tears for the main drive than they ever
thought of doing for Her Excellency Nadia Kawalec, however.
Ortschugin rose to his feet. He wiped his face with the back of his hand.
The instruments worked perfectly. The emergency tell-tales pulsing for the
Power Room hull and the main fusion unit left no doubt as to what the
damage had been. The bearded First Officer pushed the general address
system. "Shut off all equipment and report," he croaked to the crew. "The
bombing's over for now, you don't have to worry." After a moment he
keyed the system again and added, "This is Ortschugin speaking, the
Acting Captain."
CHAPTER TWO
The lobby and counter area of the warehouse were silent except for the
scraping of the front door which Albrecht Waldstejn had unlocked to
enter. Enclosed, the fumes of the explosives were more noticeable than
they had been outside. The Lieutenant's stomach roiled, not only at the
odor. There were splashes of blood on the lobby floor.

He stepped forward. "Hodicky!" he shouted. "Quade! Where the hell are
you?"
Hodicky popped out of the main storeroom so abruptly that Waldstejn
cursed despite his relief. "Private Quade all right too?" he asked in his
next breath.
"Oh, yes sir," the little enlisted man said. "Q's up on the roof, checking
the part we can't get to from below because of the racks. If it's all like
this—" he waved at the lobby roof with its bright splotches of sky—"just
the sheeting and not the beams, we'll have a quick fix done before dark."
Somebody finally shut off the siren at Headquarters. Waldstejn had not
realized how irritating its distant throb had been until it ceased. "How do
you plan to fix that?" the officer asked, duplicating Hodicky's upward
wave. Maybe, he was thinking, they could set a fan in the front doorway
blowing out to vent some of that damned sweetish stench.
"Well, sir," Private Hodicky said brightly, "the plastic sheeting for
waterproofing the insides of dug-outs came in yesterday. We'll use it
ourselves instead of issuing it. And I just checked stores. There's thirty
liters of spray epoxy, that'll be plenty to tack the sheets down with." He
frowned. "Now, we're not talking blast-proof, but a quick fix to keep out
most of the rain—that we can have up while it's still daylight."
"Well, I'll be damned," Waldstejn said. He nodded his head in
agreement. "Just the two of you, though? You don't need some more
bodies?"
Hodicky snorted. "You think they're—" he thumbed in the general
direction of Headquarters— "going to assign more men because you ask
them, sir? No, Q and I'll handle things, don't you worry."
The Private glanced upward. The roof quivered thinly to the touch of
boot soles. "Ah, sir," Hodicky said as he eyed the roof, "you wouldn't mind
if a couple bottles of gin evaporated from the booze locker, would you?"
Immediately within the main storehouse were two large steel cabinets.
One held small arms and ammunition, the other held the battalion's
medical supplies and the officers' liquor rations. Their hasp locks would
open to Waldstejn's thumbprint alone. "There was a lot of stuff flying
around a few minutes ago. Some it it probably busted a bottle or two,
don't you think?" Hodicky hopefully met his superior's eyes.
"I think," said Lieutenant Waldstejn very carefully, "that if anything
evaporates from that locker, you will get the same three years in the
glasshouse that Quartermaster Stanlas got when I caught him."

The silence was broken only by the measured pad of Quade's boots,
coming nearer along the ridge line. "However," the Supply Officer
continued, "I will very cheerfully withdraw two bottles of gin from my own
ration as a present for you and Private Quade when you've finished with
the roof."
"Mary, you scared me, sir!" Hodicky gasped through his smile. "We'll
get right on it." He turned to dart back into the store room. But as the
little man did so, he paused and turned again. "Sir," he said, "I ought to
just keep my mouth shut, I know, but.. . . Look, it's just as much against
regs to issue your own booze to enlisted men as it is to let a couple bottles
disappear. What's the deal?"
Waldstejn smiled, more at himself than at the question. "Look,
Hodicky," he said, "if you get caught and my ass comes up on charges as a
result—fine. I trusted somebody I shouldn't have and I got burned for it
like I deserved. I never swore to anybody I'd make sure enlisted men got
pissed on beer and officers on spirits. But my accounts are going to be
straight because / say they will, not for some damned regulation. Now, go
fix the roof while I take a look at what's happened inside." He walked
toward the counter's gate.
"It's like you said, Pavel," Private Quade called from above. His head
was silhouetted against one of the larger rips in the lobby ceiling.
"Come on down and help me carry," Hodicky shouted back. "We're in a
hurry."
Hodicky waved the Lieutenant through into the stores area and followed
him. In a low voice— though there was no one nearer than Quade, whose
rapid footsteps were slanting toward the ladder at the back of the
building—the Private said, "Ah, sir, I noticed lots more rat droppings than
we'd thought when I was checking things out a moment ago. The
shipment of warfarin hasn't come in—" it had, but Hodicky had checked
the invoice himself— "and you know how they give Q the creeps. While
you're in the locker, why don't you withdraw some digitalis from medical
stores. I'll lace some flour with that and put it out for Q, you know. I don't
like it when he gets upset."
The holes in the roof now lighted the warehouse more than the glow
strips did. Waldstejn frowned at his subordinate in puzzlement. If Hodicky
knew that digitalis was poisonous, then he did not have some wild-hare
idea of using it to get high on. The officer sighed. "All right," he said, "but
be careful. You two are the only staff I'll get from the Major, and I don't
need you keeling over with heart attacks."

"Thank you, sir," the Private said. He began to walk briskly down the
aisles toward the back door of the building.
"If this bombing means what I'm afraid it does," Waldstejn called after
him, "I guess we're going to have worse problems than rats in a little bit."
Maybe you will, Pavel Hodicky thought as he jogged between racks of
boots and uniforms. For the Privates, though, a couple of rats named
Breisach and Ondru were the number one problem. If Hodicky did not
take care of it fast with spiked gin, Q was going to do it his own way. At
the moment, Hodicky was still uncertain which result frightened him
more.
CHAPTER THREE
The pounding on the door was audible over the gnat-swarm keen of the
computer terminal. Private Quade wore a taut expression as he returned
to Waldstejn from the front lobby. "I shouted through the door like you
say," the Private explained. "He won't go away. You let me—" Quade drew
a trembling breath— "and I'll get him to leave."
"No, wait here," the Lieutenant said. His desk beside the terminal was
littered with computer tape and hand-written notes. It was a rush job and
he was a long way from finishing it. Quade's condition, however, indicated
that Waldstejn had better take care of the problem fast. In many ways,
Jirik Quade was an ideal subordinate. He was dogged, and he would
accomplish without complaint any task within his capacity. Quade
seemed honest; he was as strong as men half again his size; and his utter
loyalty to Waldstejn, the first commanding officer who had treated him
like a human being, was embarrassing.
Still, you do not ignore your guard dog when it starts to growl at
children; and Waldstejn did not intend to ignore Private Quade when he
started to shake with frustration and rage. The Major could wait for his
figures.
The Supply Officer did not bother to close his tunic front, but he did
snatch up the equipment belt which he had looped over a drawer pull. He
carried it in his left hand. The weight of the radio and holstered pistol
made it swing as he strode.
There was a rustle from the other end of the warehouse. Private
Hodicky was scrambling out of his sleeping quarters at the back. This was
Quade's night for late duty, but Hodicky could hear the knocking and

shouts; and he could extrapolate an outcome as well as his Lieutenant
could. Waldstejn decided to handle the problem himself anyway. His rank
and his assurance that he was acting on instructions of the battalion
commander might quiet someone determined to get supplies on the
orders of some lower officer.
Besides, it would give Waldstejn a chance to unload some of the
frustration which he owed properly to the Major's request.
The knocking, paced but determined, continued as the Lieutenant
strode through the lobby. When the call from Headquarters came through,
Waldstejn had ordered Quade to letter a sign for the front door: CLOSED
BY ORDER OF BATTALION COMMANDER. NO REQUESTS ACCEPTED
UNTIL FURTHER NOTICE. Now as Waldstejn threw open the door he
shouted, "What's the matter with you? Can't you read the bloody sign?"
Then he blinked. Switching to English and a subdued tone, he said, "Oh,
ah, Vladimir. Look, I've got another fifteen, thirty minutes work for my CO
and there's nobody else here who can run the computer. I really can't even
talk to you now."
"Ah, sir," said Private Hodicky from behind the counter. "I can handle
the computer, if that's what you want. We had the same unit in my
lyceum."
The little man had not intended to admit his competence with the
system. As short-handed as the Supply Section was, he would probably
wind up with his previous duties as well as work on the computer. For
another thing, it was the lyceum computer which had gotten him sent
down with six months active and a forced enlistment for the duration of
the war. Hodicky had broken into the school office at night and used its
terminal to transfer funds to his own bank account. The transaction had
been flawless from a technical viewpoint; but the branch manager had
known perfectly well that a seventeen year old slum kid should not have
been able to withdraw thirty thousand crowns. Using common sense
instead of what the terminal told him, the manager had called the police.
But Hodicky had not expected to be serving under an officer like
Lieutenant Waldstejn, either. . . .
"I don't mind waiting," said Vladimir Ortschugin. He massaged the heel
of the hand with which he had been pounding. "But I need to talk to you
as soon as you're free, Albrecht."
"Sure," the Lieutenant said, "just a second." He had tossed a few glasses
with the spaceman in company with the two mercenary officers. He could
not have remembered Ortschugin's last name for a free trip to Elysion III,

however. Switching back to Czech, Waldstejn exclaimed, "You can really
work that bitch, Hodicky?" The Private nodded. "Well, you're one up on
me," Waldstejn continued. "They're in the middle of a staff meeting and
somebody decided they had to know everything about arms, ammunition,
and ration stocks. Not just our stores, mind, but unit stocks as well. That
means we've got to run platoon and section accounts, issued and
expended, for the whole six months to get the bottom line. You can really
handle that?"
"Yes, sir," the little man said. He turned and trotted back toward
Waldstejn's alcove.
"That's a silver lining I didn't expect," the tall officer muttered in
English. He led Ortschugin into the counter area where there were a pair
of tube-frame chairs. They left the outer door open. After struggling with
the accounts for two hours, it would be relaxing to handle the sort of
oddball supply requests that might come up at this time of night.
"I apologize," Ortschugin said. "I know you must be busy, but—" he took
a leather-covered flask out of his breast pocket and uncapped it— "we
know now what we must have, and it is crucial that we learn as soon as
possible who we must see to get it." He handed the flask to Waldstejn,
shifting his cud of tobacco to his right cheek in preparation for the
liquor's return. "We must have a truck power receptor so that we can fly to
Praha on broadcast power." 
,
Waldstejn choked on his sip of what seemed to be industrial-strength
ethanol. "What?" he said through his coughing. It was not that the request
was wholly impossible, but it certainly had not been anything the local
man had expected.
The Spacer drank deeply from his own flask and belched. He stared
gloomily upward before he resumed speaking. Several of the brighter stars
were tremblingly visible through the plastic sheets. "Our powerplant is
gone, kaput," the bearded man said at last. "Replacement and patching
the hull, those are dockyard jobs. We can fly, using the APU to drive the
landing thrusters—but minutes, you see, ten, twenty at most before the
little bottle ruptures also under load and we make fireworks as pretty as
those this morning, yes?" He swigged again, then remembered and offered
the flask to Waldstejn—who waved it away. "So we are still sitting when
your Republicans take over, yes?" Ortschugin concluded with a wave of his
hand.
The Swobodan's flat certainty that the battalion would be overrun

chilled Waldstejn. "That may be, I suppose," the local officer said carefully,
"but— well, from what you said that night with Fasolini, that you just
shuttled cargo, you didn't mess with politics. ... I wouldn't think it would
make much difference to you. The Rubes don't have much time for
mercenaries, I'm told, but like you say, you just drive a truck."
Ortschugin did not at first answer. He began craning his neck, trying to
look all around him without getting up from his chair. Waldstejn,
guessing the ostensible reason for the other's pause, hooked a wastebasket
from under the counter. The spaceman spat into it.
The delay had permitted Ortschugin to consider the blunt question at
length. He found he had no better response to it than the truth. "You are
right, of course. The problem is not—" he gestured with both hands and
grimaced— "patriotism, it is mechanics. We can use the broadcast power
line to fly to a dockyard—if we have a tuned receiver, and if the dockyard
is in Praha. Budweis has an adequate dock, surely; but there is no pylon
system to Budweis. We must leave now, and for Praha, if the Katyn
Forest is not to lie here until she rusts away ... and ourselves, perhaps,
with her. I—"
The Swobodan paused again. He made no effort this time to hide his
embarrassment at how to proceed. At last he blurted, "We—Pyaneta
Lines— can pay you. To save the vessel, they will pay well, only name it.
But there are troops guarding the trucks still in camp, and the officer in
charge will not deal with me. You are our last hope."
Waldstejn stood and walked idly to the terminal on the counter. He cut
it on. "Diedrichson won't deal with you?" he remarked. "Wonder what got
into him. It wasn't honesty, that I'm sure of." He began tapping in a
request, using one finger and wondering how Hodicky was doing on the
other terminal. "Diedrichson and the Major are close as that," the Supply
Officer concluded, crossing his left index and middle fingers and holding
them up. A massive silver ring winked on the middle finger. A crucifix was
cast onto the top in place of a stone setting.
The local officer turned again to his visitor. "So," he said in a tone as
precise as a headmaster's, "because you couldn't bribe the fellow in charge
of the vehicles themselves, you decided to bribe the Supply Officer. Right?
Figured I'd be an easier mark than Diedrichson because we'd had a few
drinks together? That is right, isn't it, Lieutenant . . . you know, I've
forgotten your last name?"
Ortschugin set the flask down with a thump on a shelf beside him. He
did not meet Waldstejn's eyes. "Albrecht," he said quietly, "I came to you

because I know of nowhere else to go. I am no longer First Officer—" he
raised his bearded face— "I am Captain. Her Excellency died in the
attack."
The spaceman stood and his voice took on a fierce resonance. "The
vessel, the four crewmen who remain, they are my responsibility. If I must
steal to save them, if I must bribe—I will save them." He slammed his
broad, pale hand down on the counter to punctuate his statement.
Lieutenant Waldstejn's icy distaste melted. He reached out and laid his
hand on the back of the spaceman's, squeezing it. "Hell, I'm sorry,
Vladimir," he said. "I'm just pissed because you're getting out of this hole
and I probably won't." He drew a deep breath. "There's an antenna in
stock; we're set up for some transport maintenance here, you were right.
You can have it." Then, "Got anything left in your flask?"
Ortschugin bellowed with delight. He embraced the slighter man. "But
of course you can come out with us," he said. "This base, this Smiricky
Complex—in days it will be in Republican hands. Who will know?"
The tall Supply Officer snorted bitterly. "I don't think you give the
Morale Section all the credit it deserves," he said. "They've saved the
Rubes a lot of trouble by shooting people they decide are deserters."
"You are afraid of that?" the spaceman exclaimed. He stepped back and
handed Waldstejn the liquor. "No problem. We'll hide you aboard and
take you off-planet when we're repaired."
Waldstejn drank, choked, and gave Ortschugin a wry smile. When he
could speak again, he said, "Seems to be my night for making speeches.
Look, Vladimir, I'm no hero . . . but I took this job, and I guess I'll stick
with everybody else." He shook his head. "Hell, I don't know . . . ," he
added, but he did not make his subject clear.
Business-like again, the Lieutenant continued, "I'm doing this for one
simple reason, my friend. I want your cargo to be shipped from Praha, not
Budweis. And I'm not giving you an antenna, I don't have any authority to
alienate government property."
Ortschugin frowned, but he waited for the rest of the explanation.
"I do have authority," the Supply Officer went on with a grin, "to hire
transport in an emergency. I think we can justify the emergency—" he
waved at what was left of the roof above them— "and so I'm hiring you to
transport one power-beam antenna, surplus to local needs, back to Central
Stores in Praha. Now, get your crew here with a wagon. I'd as soon it
happened while it's still dark and the folks who might ask questions are in

Headquarters."
Ortschugin whooped again. He went out the door, bawling snatches of a
song which sounded bawdy even in a language Waldstejn could not guess
at.
Someone cleared his throat at the inner doorway. The Lieutenant
looked up. Both his subordinates stood there. Hodicky held a long coil of
twenty-centimeter computer tape. "Oh," Albrecht Waldstejn said. "He'll be
back—the crew of the freighter— to pick up the truck power antenna in a
few minutes. Here, I'll okay it right now." He found a request form and
began to fill it out, checking the unit number from the terminal display.
"We'll take care of it, sir," Hodicky said. "I've got the figures—" He
waved the tape so that it rustled. "Want me to feed it to Headquarters?"
Waldstejn gave the request to Quade and took the tape. "Four bottles,
Private," he said after a glance at the print-out. "And a morning off if I
can swing it." He looked up. "No, I'll carry it over as hard copy. They didn't
splice the land-lines cut by the bombs yet, just ran commo wire point to
point. Their terminal isn't connected—" the young officer glanced around
to see that no one outside was listening— "not that anybody there could be
trusted to push the right button for a print-out anyway. Hold the fort,
boys," he added as he walked out of the warehouse.
Waldstejn sobered as he walked toward the concrete Headquarters
building. Dimly on the eastern horizon were the flickers and rumbling of
others trying to hold forts in grim truth.
And failing.
"Ouch, you butcher!" cried Churchie Dwyer. "Did you learn to use that
in a stockyard?"
"You'd bitch if they hanged you with a new rope," Bertinelli replied
calmly. Bertinelli was a Corpsman. He carried a gun like everybody else,
but he ranked with the sergeants for pay division. He was secure both in
the light touch he knew he had and in the fact that nobody else in the
Company could handle the medical tasks as well. "It's just like I told you, I
learned in a morgue on Banares, putting accident victims back in shape
for open cremation. Now, lie back—" he gestured with the debriding glove
with which he was clean ing Dwyer's burns— "or I don't answer for what
it's going to feel like."
"They sure are doing a lot of talking," said Del Hoybrin. Bertinelli had
recleaned the big man's sores first. Now Del knelt with his triceps on the

lip of the bunker, staring up at the transponder. The communications gear
hung from a balloon tethered a hundred meters over the 522nd's radio
shack. Through the night visor of his helmet, the minuscule heating of the
transponder's circuits as it broadcast was a yellow glow. Satellite
communications had died in showers of space junk at the beginning of the
war, but there were other ways to boost tight-beam communications over
useful distances.
"Well, you might at least give me something for the pain," Churchie
grumbled. He lowered himself again onto the cot that doubled as an
operating table.
"I'm going to give you something," Bertinelli said. "I'm going to give you
a square meter less skin if you don't shut up and lie still." He touched the
deep burn over Dwyer's right shoulder blade. The mesh of sensors and tiny
hooks in the glove's pad began to purr. Under the control of a
microprocessor in the wristlet, the glove was lifting off dead tissue to
prepare the area for antiseptic and a covering of spray skin. In the same
mild voice, the Corpsman added, "I can see the bombs starting fires and
blowing the trash into your shelter. But I'm damned if I see why you
thought you had to lie in it. And I'd like to know what you found to bathe
in that had such a pong, too."
"Do you suppose we'll get paid again before we move, Churchie?" Del
asked. "I'd like to—for the girls again, you know. Usually there aren't girls
where we go." There was a troupe of prostitutes at Smiricky #4, intended
for the contract miners but available to the garrison as well.
"Think we'll be pulling back soon, then?" Bertinelli asked with just a
hint of tension. He lifted the glove and began to spray the debrided area.
"Sometimes," Del said in a neutral voice. "They're doing a lot of
talking."
Churchie snorted. He continued to lie flat with his eyes closed. "Happen
to notice which direction the transponder dish was pointed, baby?" he
asked.
Del turned to his companions. The featureless visor was a stage beyond
even the big man's usual moon-faced innocence. "East, Churchie," he said.
"Right, my dear," Churchie agreed. "And does that tell you anything?"
The Corpsman had stiffened, but after a moment he went on with his
work in silence.
"No, Churchie," said Del.
"Right again, sweetheart," Churchie bantered with his eyes closed.

"Well, it might mean that they're talking to the Federal commander at the
Front, that's true . . . but they haven't any business doing that, we're not
under Second Army control, we're handled by Central from Praha. . . . And
Praha's west of here, unless they moved it since last night. So, and seeing
how high they lifted that balloon before they started to jaw ... I'd put
pretty good money that our local friends have opened negotiations with
the other side."
Bertinelli began to curse under his breath. He moved the glove to his
patient's left shoulder.
Del resumed his observation of the transponder balloon. "What does
that mean, Churchie?" he asked.
His friend snorted again. All the humor was gone from his voice as he
replied, "Wish to hell I knew, darling. Wish to hell. What I'm afraid it
means is that Fasolini's Company is deep in shit."
The only light in the Operations Center was the green glow of the
phosphor screen. It emphasized the wrinkled anger of Colonel Fasolini's
face as he said, "Gibberish! Goddam gibberish!"
Sookie Foyle snapped her fingers in frustration. "Look, Colonel," she
said, "I'm a Communicator, not a magician. You get me a copy of the code
pad the indigs are using, and I'll let you know what they've got to say.
Otherwise it's garbage—" she waved at the groups of meaningless letters
which continued to crawl across the screen—"and it's going to stay
garbage."
The three sergeants—Mboko, Hummel, and Jensen—stirred restively in
the darkness. They were the tacticians of the Company, but the present
situation was too amorphous for their skills to be of any use. Lieutenant
ben Mehdi bent forward and said, "We don't have to read the
transmissions to know what they're saying, do we, Guido? The only thing
we don't know is the exact terms the Major's holding out for—and that
doesn't matter to us, because we ought to be making terms with the
Republicans for ourselves, right now, before it all hits the fan. Otherwise,
we wind up taking whatever we're offered."
There was silence again in the OC. The Communicator looked at
Fasolini. The skin at the corners of her eyes was tracked with sudden
crow's feet. She did not speak.
"If it's the contract you're worried about," ben Mehdi went on, "the 
force majeure provision clearly—"

"Shut up!" the Colonel snapped. His subordinates froze. "Sorry,
Hussein," Fasolini went on in a tired voice. He rubbed his face with his
palms. "You see, I tried that before I called you in, bounced a signal to the
Rube CinC, Yorck, on his internal push." The stocky man managed a smile
and squeezed Foyle's shoulder. The Communicator beamed.
"They won't deal," Fasolini went on, "not on any terms we can take.
They don't like meres, they don't use them themselves . . . and they like us
even less than most."
"They wouldn't deal on any terms?" ben Mehdi pressed with a frown.
Colonel Fasolini looked up. After a moment, he said, "No terms we can
take. They're real unhappy about their starship this morning." The only
sound in the OC was the sigh of the fan in the communications terminal.
"They know it was us that did it. They want the whole gun crew—" Fasolini
neither raised his voice nor looked at Sergeant Jensen— "and every tenth
man at random from the rest of the Company. The others they'll give
passage off-planet without guns or equipment." He shrugged. "I told Yorck
if he showed himself within a klick of the compound, I'd personally blow
him a new asshole."
"O-kay," said Sergeant Hummel. She appeared to be looking at nothing
in particular, certainly not the Sergeant-Gunner beside her. "Let's don't
wait around. Two trucks'll hold the personnel, the equipment we ditch and
put in a claim for it at Praha."
"Lichtenstein's got a guard on the trucks," objected Sergeant Mboko.
The sheen of his smooth, black face stood out above the absorptive cloth of
his uniform.
"So he's got a bloody guard!" Hummel snapped. "They're the least of our
problems. We grease them quiet, load the trucks, and bam! we're out of
the compound and heading west before the indigs know what hit them.
They can't shut off the power, because the pylons are energized from both
ends of the line."
"The guards may not be a problem," retorted Sergeant Mboko, "but the
bunkers on the perimeter are. There's a straight line of sight right down
the pylons for what—three kilometers? Every bunker's got anti-tank
rockets. Do you really think even the indigs are going to miss straight
no-deflection shots with wire-guided missiles?"
Sergeant Jensen cleared his throat and spoke for the first time since
Fasolini had dropped his bombshell. "It was not the crew who shot down
their ship, Colonel," said the big blond. "It was me alone. Perhaps if you
offer me, General Yorck will— will be. . . ." Jensen's voice caught.

"Shut the hell up, Roland," Lieutenant ben Mehdi muttered.
"Well, all this may be a lot of fuss over nothing," said Colonel Fasolini.
"It's just a matter of dealing with Lichtenstein when he gets the bottom
line himself. And Lichtenstein will deal, no trouble there. I just thought
you all had better know how the land lies in case we need to move fast."
The Colonel stood up. He was by a decade the oldest person in the
shelter. Just now, as he shrugged his crossbelts out of the creases their
weight drew over his collar bones, he felt his age. "Wish to all the saints
that we knew how the real land lies," he said bleakly. "Waldstejn, their
Supply Officer, he was complaining the other day that one of his convoys
had managed to route itself to some old working thirty klicks from here.
They had one truck go off when they were turning around and they just
left it there. Now, if we could find that and get it on track again. . . . But
we've got jack-shit for a bearing, and I don't see wandering around Cecach
till the Rubes find time to round us up and shoot us. I guess we wait."
"Colonel," said Communicator Foyle. She pointed toward the terminal.
"Distant input—must be Yorck."
Garbled characters were crawling across the bottom of the screen
again, leaving phosphor ghosts of themselves as each line shifted up to
make room for the next.
"Better get to my section," Sergeant Hummel said. She picked up her
weapon, carrying it at the balance instead of slinging it.
"Yeah," said Colonel Fasolini. "Maybe we don't wait too long."
The doors and curtains of the Headquarters building were closed, but
the bombing had stripped the black-out shutters from one of the front
windows. Waldstejn had not bothered to pick up night goggles when he
left the warehouse. Enough light still shone through the curtains within to
show him the squad on guard. There were two non-coms present,
Sergeants Breisach and Ondru, though presumably only one of them had
the duty officially. They had approached him with an offer shortly after he
took over as Supply Officer. Waldstejn was not sure whether the pair of
them were genuinely dim-witted, or, more likely, that they were so
crooked that they made the rest of the 522nd look good. Under that
assumption, the Sergeants thought that Waldstejn had cleaned house on
his subordinates in order to have all the graft for himself.
Albrecht Waldstejn had disabused them in a tirade which he believed
had impressed even that pair.

At the moment, Sergeant Ondru was having a loud argument with one
of the Signals staff. Rather, Ondru and his men were grinning as a
signalman shouted and waved the envelope he carried. "Sorry," the
non-com said, "I've got orders not to pass anybody. Major wouldn't like it.
Now, maybe if you'd give me this important message you're so hot to
deliver, I could decide if it's really important enough to disturb the brass."
"Why don't you start doing your job, Ondru," the tall officer said as he
joined the group, "and stop poking your nose into things that are none of
your business."
The infantry squad stiffened. One man even stood up. Sullenly, Sergeant
Ondru said, "I've got my orders."
"I've got my orders, sir!" Waldstejn snapped back.
"I've got my orders sir," the non-com parroted. He stepped aside. Either
he had been told to pass the Supply Officer, or he had decided not to make
an issue of it. At best, there were too many ways that the young officer
could make life unpleasant for the soldiers who drew their supplies from
him. At worst—well, nobody really thought that Waldstejn would be trying
to crash a staff meeting to which he had not been summoned.
The signalman plucked at Lieutenant Waldstejn's sleeve. The officer
recognized him by sight, but the only name he could think of was 'Porky',
the pudgy man's nickname. "Sir," the signalman pleaded, prodding
Waldstejn with the envelope he carried, "the land-line's out, somebody
must've tripped over it, and I've got to get this message to Major
Lichtenstein. Can . . . ?"
It did not sound like something a Supply Officer should be getting
involved with. Waldstejn did not touch the envelope. "Put it on the air,
then," he suggested. "Somebody in there surely has a working receiver."
Porky nodded like a man trying to duck his head out of a noose.
"Lieutenant," he said, "they do, but the meres have them too. I don't dare
put this on the air in clear." He swallowed. Despite the rapt silence of the
squad on guard, he added, "It's from the . . . it's from east of here."
Waldstejn took the envelope in the hand that held his own print-out.
"All right," he said, "I'll deliver it to the Major."
His face was still as he opened the door into the building. Maybe it was
something that a Supply Officer got involved in. At least, if the Supply
Officer had friends among a group of mercenaries that might be set for a
long fall.

"Look," Captain Tetour said abruptly, "what if they won't take any
offer? We'd be better off fighting than surrendering. You know the stories
that all Federal officers are executed in the field."
Brionca, the Operations Officer, sneezed out her snuff and slapped the
table for emphasis. "We've been through that, dammit, we can't fight, the
armored regiment they'll send will plow us under. What we need to think
about is how we'll sweeten the pot so they've got to deal."
"Well, I've been thinking some more about that," said Captain
Strojnowski. He watched the point of his stylus click on the table instead
of looking around at the others. Strojnowski's Third Company was
perhaps closer to being a military unit than was Tetour's First, and the
Captain himself had shown promise in line service before discrepancies
had shown up in his pay vouchers. "We've been talking as if they'll just
swarm down the valley with tanks and troop carriers. But they won't risk
that against Fasolini's men; and besides, we've got the two laser cannon—"
"Which gave us so much air defense," Brionca thundered, "that they
weren't even switched on until after the ship had blown up. Want to bet
your life it'll be any better when it's tanks ripping us apart?"
"Now wait a goddam minute," said Stoessel, the young lieutenant in
charge of the lasers. He had been included in the council of war even
though he was not a member of the 522nd Garrison Battalion. The guns
were detached from Central to Smiricky #4, but their chain of command
still ran directly to Praha. "You guys give me a target," the lieutenant
continued in a high voice, "and I'll hit it. But there's no acquisition system
in the universe that'll hit a starship that's in normal space only a—" He
broke off, suddenly aware of the disdain on all the faces watching him.
"Not that I want to engage tanks," he concluded lamely. "I mean, they
mount lasers too, and they're armored. . . ."
"Then don't worry about it until somebody tells you to," snapped
Captain Khlesl, the Intelligence officer who cradled a handset between his
shoulder and ear. He turned to the Battalion Commander on the chair
beside him. "Major," he said, tapping the handset without taking it away
from his ear, "I think the damned thing's broken again. Maybe we'd better
send one of the guards over to Signals and see—"
Someone knocked on the door to the outer office. An officer swore.
Major Lichtenstein himself began to rise from his seat with an expression
of fury. His face smoothed into mere sourness when a voice, muffled by the
door panel, announced, "Sir, Lieutenant Waldstejn with the figures you
requested. Also a message from the Signals Section— they say the line's

gone down again."
Captain Brionca was closest to the door. She pulled it open without any
need to be asked. Smoke and warm air swirled from the meeting room.
The draft from the outer office felt cooler because that within had been
heated for hours by eight bodies. "Give me that," she said, reaching for the
papers the Supply Officer held. Other staff officers were getting up.
"Sit down, Brionca," rumbled Major Lichtenstein. "Bring them here,
Waldstejn."
The Lieutenant stepped briskly to the head of the table and attempted
to salute his commanding officer. Lichtenstein ignored that and snatched
the sheaf of papers from the other's hand. "Not this crap," he muttered as
he slid aside the supply print-outs. His staff was tense. "Here we are, Mary
love us," the Major went on in a caressing voice. He ripped open the
envelope from Signals.
Major Wolfgang Lichtenstein was much of an age and build with
Colonel Fasolini, his mercenary counterpart. Liquor had broken the veins
of his face and brought him to the command of the 522nd. He had been
drinking this night as well, but it was tension and not alcohol which had
kept the Major in a state of nearly comatose silence during most of the
staff meeting. His fingers trembled. He had to lay the sheet of message
paper on the table to unfold it after he had teased it from the envelope.
"For God's sake, what is it?" blurted the artillery lieutenant.
"Mary and the blessed saints!" the Major wheezed. He slumped back in
his chair as if relief had severed his spine. "They've made an offer we can
live with. Mary, Mother of God!"
The Intelligence Officer snatched up the document before Captain
Brionca could reach it from the other side. "Why," he said, "they'll accept
the battalion as a unit and integrate it into their own forces! We've won!
Officers may be reassigned, but no prison or executions!"
"Don't know that I want to be Rube cannon fodder either," someone
muttered. He was answered at once by a waspish, "Have you looked at the
choice?"
"But what's the catch?" Captain Tetour objected. "They know they've
got our balls in a vise!"
"No catch," insisted Captain Khlesl, holding up the message form. " 'No
quarrel with fellow citizens of Cecach, only with the government of
idolators in Praha.' " He slapped the paper down. "All we have to do is to
turn over the Complex unharmed. And to disarm the mercenaries and

turn them over too."
There was abrupt silence around the table. "What do you mean, no
catch?" Strojnowski said sourly. "Fasolini may have ideas of his own about
turning in his guns."
"Wait a minute," someone said in amazement. When the others turned,
they saw the speaker was Albrecht Waldstejn. The Supply Officer had not
left the room. "Why are we concerned about the terms the Rubes might
offer? There's twenty-three ore haulers empty in the compound right now.
They'll hold all the troops and most of the civilians— and if we move fast,
we can be clear before they cut the pylon line."
"Get him the hell out of here," Captain Tetour said.
Lieutenant Dyk commanded the Second Company since the regular CO
had been invalided out with bull-head clap. Dyk had not spoken during
the meeting proper. Now, faced with a chance to score off Waldstejn, he
said, "Because we've got orders from Praha to hold to the last man! If we
retreat, Morale Section will have every one of us shot. Every officer for
sure."
"Frantisak's right, though," Brionca said. "We can't just waltz over to
the meres and say, 'AH right hand over—' "
"God damn it!" Waldstejn shouted. His hands were clenched. "If we
can't go, we can put them on a truck before we surrender. That's murder!"
"You damned fool!" Dyk shouted back. "Those foreigners are the only
thing between you and me and a firing squad!"
"Another word from him," said the Major as he lurched to his feet, "and
they won't have to shoot him." A flush and the shadows of the overhead i
light hid the patterning of Lichtenstein's face. His right hand was
fumbling at the flap of his pistol holster. The motion seemed almost
undirected and the fingers never did touch the gun butt. "You're out of
uniform, Lieutenant," he muttered. His hand fell away from the holster.
Taking a deep breath, the Major shouted, "Guard! Guard!"
Lieutenant Stoessel sprang up to fetch someone, but his zeal was
unnecessary. Sergeant Ondru rushed into the outer office with his slung
rifle clattering on the door jamb. More formally, the non-com paced the
three steps to the inner doorway and saluted. "Sir?" he said. Members of
his squad were peering through the open doors.
"Have three men take Waldstejn here to his quarters," the battalion
commander said, gesturing with a heavy thumb. "Tie him to a goddam
chair and make sure he stays in it."

The Supply officer turned and slammed a fist into the wall. He did not
speak.
"If you're real lucky, Lieutenant," Lichtenstein snarled at the younger
man's back, "I'll have you untied when all this is over."
Waldstejn walked past the Sergeant. He shrugged his arm away from
the hand with which Ondru would have gripped his upper arm.
"He doesn't talk to anybody!" the Major shouted. Everyone else in the
office was silent, watching. "He tries any crap, shoot him!"
Sergeant Ondru carefully closed the building's outer door behind him.
"Breisach, you take over here for me," he told his startled companion.
"Doubek, Janko, come on—we're going to escort our prisoner here to his
quarters." He prodded Waldstejn between the shoulder blades with a stiff
finger.
"And make sure your night goggles are on," the Sergeant added. "We
just might get a chance to shoot an escapee." He prodded the Lieutenant
again. This time he used the muzzle of his rifle.
"Halt!" cried the first of the guards to see him.
Colonel Fasolini flipped up the visor of his helmet. "It's me, Fasolini," he
said in Czech. "Your CO just sent for me."
"You're alone, then?" Sergeant Breisach demanded. "We were told there
was two of you." The whole squad was on its feet and tense.
There was reason enough to be tense, the squat mercenary knew; but
perhaps these local troops were reacting only to the morning's raid. "No,
I'm alone," Fasolini said. "I make the decisions for the Company by
myself." He entered the building at the Sergeant's assenting nod.
Fasolini stood out like a wrestler in a law office among the battalion
staff. His helmet and the grim burden of his crossbelts made him utterly
alien. Chairs scraped as Federal officers rose to greet the mercenary. "Glad
you were so quick, Colonel," said Captain Khlesl. The little Intelligence
Officer had been chosen to make the presentation. Now he reached across
the table to shake the mercenary's hand. "Do sit down. A drink?"
The Colonel seated himself in the chair left vacant for him. Captain
Strojnowski across the table would not meet his eyes. "No drink," the
Colonel said. "Maybe later."
"Right," agreed Khlesl, "right." He smiled, continuing to stand. "You
see, Colonel," he continued, "the strategic situation has deteriorated very

sharply in the past twenty hours. The—I'll call them the enemy—has
broken through—"
"I know what the Rubes've done," Colonel Fasolini said bluntly. "At the
moment, I'm more concerned about what you propose to do about it. I
assure you, me and my boys'll agree to any reasonable suggestion."
Major Lichtenstein belched, then looked around as if he suspected
someone else of making the sound. The room was silent.
"Well," Captain Khlesl said, "yes. The truth of it is, Colonel, that the
plan we have decided to implement is surrender. We have some reason to
believe that General Yorck will be quite generous in his terms . . . though
of course we'll have to disarm all the troops in the compound first. We—we
here are as good patriots as any on Cecach, but with Republican armored
columns certain to encircle us within another day at most, well. . . .
There's no point in causing needless slaughter, is there?"
"After all," put in Captain Tetour, "the garrison was put here to keep
the civilians in order and to keep the Rubes from making some sort of raid
on it. Well, we've done that. But they've got tanks from Terra!"
"Sure, I can see that," the mercenary agreed with a smile that slashed,
then slumped back to stark reality. "Thing is, we've got a notion that
General Yorck may not be quite so generous to mercs as he might be to ...
brothers and sisters of the Cecach soil. Eh?" He smiled again, a reflex and
not a real plea. Captain Khlesl's grin had stiffened into a bright rictus.
"Now, I wouldn't be surprised if some of you people kept off-planet bank
accounts," Fasolini continued. "Doesn't mean you're not patriotic, it's just
common sense, spreading the risk." He gestured with both hands, palms
down, fingers splayed. "The rest, you can get an account easy enough.
Now, what I'm offering is a pre-accepted order on my agents on Valunta
to transfer—" his eyes counted— "thirty-one thousand Valuntan pesos,
that's over twelve thousand crowns, into each of your private accounts. All
you have to do to get that money is to give us one truck and one hour. It's
that simple."
Major Lichtenstein rolled forward in his chair. He planted both palms
meatily on the table. "How about your life instead?" he said. His voice
rode down the buzz of talk that had followed the mercenary's offer.
"Come on, now," the Major cajoled heavily, "that's a fair deal, isn't it?
Man to man. We hide you, save your ass when the Rubes roll in—which
you and me couldn't stop if we wanted to. You're clear. Your gear's gone,
but that's gone anyhow. And Mary and the Saints, you won't have any
trouble finding gallows bait to replace what you leave here, will you? Come

on, man to man—what do you say?"
"Well, there's a whole lot of truth in that," Colonel Fasolini said. He
leaned back in his chair, his tension apparently submerged by the new
consideration. "A lot of truth," he repeated. "You know, Major, I think I
can buy into that. I mean, businessman's got to know when to cut his
losses, don't he?"
Fasolini stood up. "Tell you what, gents—" he nodded to Brionca—
"Captain, I'm going to my Operations Center now to pick up a few items.
I'll be back in an hour and give my troops the order to disarm from here."
He smiled. "Okay?"
"Take all the time you need, Colonel," Major Lichtenstein agreed. "Glad
you're a reasonable man."
The mercenary closed the inner door behind him. Captain Brionca
jumped to her feet. Lichtenstein's face was a mask of fury. He nodded to
his Operations officer. "The bastard's lying," he said. "He's going to
double-cross us."
Brionca caught the handle of the outside door just as it closed. She
snatched it open, throwing her shadow forward on a fan of yellow light. 
"Kill him!" she called to the guards.
CHAPTER FOUR
As they neared the warehouse, Albrecht Waldsten stumbled less
frequently. He had recovered both his night vision and his poise during
the march, despite Sergeant Ondru's frequent jabs. "You know," the tall
officer said in a thoughtful voice, "you boys'd have to tie me up regardless,
it'd be your asses if you didn't—"
"Never fear that," quipped Ondru. Because of the way his rifle was
slung, he had to step very close to his prisoner in order to poke the weapon
into his ribs. He did so again.
Waldstejn missed a half step. His voice was still friendly as he resumed,
"But it strikes me that the knots might not be quite as tight if we all had a
drink or two together first. After all, it's not much point worrying about
liquor rations now, is there?"
One of the privates whistled, "Holy Mother," under his breath.
Ondru shifted his grip on his rifle. The looming warehouse had a rosy
cast through his light-enhancing goggles. The visual cliche made him bark
out a laugh. "You mean," the big sergeant said, "that you'll open the liquor

cabinet if we don't try to amputate your legs with the ropes?"
Waldstejn turned his head, stumbling a little again, and replied, "Hell,
yes. What did being a hard-ass get me? Look, I may be dumb, but I'm not
too dumb to learn."
The Sergeant grinned back at his prisoner. "Guess we got a deal, then,"
he said. Ondru was thinking about how he would tie the sanctimonious
bastard as soon as he opened up the booze. On his belly, with one cord
looped from his throat to his ankles, that was for sure. That way if
Waldstejn relaxed a muscle, the weight of his own feet would start to
choke him. That for sure.
The Supply Officer had the magnetic key to the front door in his pocket.
He swung the panel inward. One of his escorts felt a twinge of concern and
brought his rifle up. Waldstejn was very careful to move slowly and to
avoid any suggestion that he hoped to leap inside and lock the others out.
The lobby was even dimmer than the outdoors had been. The holes in
the roof were brighter than the solid metal around them, but they served
to illuminate the interior only for the escort with their night goggles.
Lieutenant Waldstejn was thoroughly familiar with the lay-out, however.
He walked without hesitation to the counter, knowing that there was
nothing between it and the door to trip over. He swung open the gate.
"Here," he said, "I'll just get the keys from back here and—oh, would one of
you like to turn the lights on? The panel's by the front door."
Sergeant Ondru had stuck close to his prisoner's left elbow. "No!" he
snapped. "Janko, get your goggles off." The night goggles issued to Federal
troops had no built-in overload protection. The face-shields of Fasolini's
mercenaries would hold a desired brightness setting, regardless of changes
in ambient light. The Cecach-produced goggles, however, multiplied light
by a set factor. They could dazzle their users with excess enhancement.
"Sure, no problem," said Lieutenant Waldstejn. He was trying to keep
the fear out of his voice. The officer pretended to fumble beneath the
counter for a key. The liquor cabinet had had a thumblock, keyed only to
his fingerprint, ever since Waldstejn had taken over as Supply Officer.
Waldstejn's equipment belt was still looped over the back of the chair
where he had slung it while talking to Captain Ortschugin. "There we go,"
Waldstejn said, jingling the keys from his pocket. His left hand, hidden by
the chair, unholstered the little pistol.
"All right, you can turn on the lights, Janko," Sergeant Ondru said as he
raised his own goggles.

Waldstejn stepped next to him, thrusting the pistol into the Sergeant's
ribs as the lights flashed on.
The view of Doubek, behind the counter, was blocked by his own
goggles and his sergeant's body. Janko, three meters to the side at the
light switches, caught the motion. He gasped and threw up his rifle.
"Mother of God!" Ondru squealed to his subordinate in a high-pitched
voice. "Don't shoot—you'll hit me!"
"Drop the guns, drop them!" Waldstejn cried on a rising inflection. He
caught a handful of Ondru's tunic to hold the man close while he shifted
the pistol in Janko's general direction. Janko dropped his rifle with a
clatter.
The other private backed a step away from Ondru and the officer. He
held his rifle waist high, advanced but not precisely pointing at the
tight-locked pair.
"Drop it!" Waldstejn repeated, peering past the equally-tall man whom
he held. He waggled the pistol at the uncertain private; and when it went
off, Waldstejn himself was more surprised than any of the others in the
room.
The muzzle flash of the little gun burned Ondru through his tunic. The
Sergeant yelped but managed not to clap a hand to the spot. He stood as
rigid as if he were a carcase on a meat hook. Doubek, by contrast, flung
his rifle down as if it had burned him. He jumped backwards twice and
banged into the wall. "I didn't mean anything, sir!" he bawled, holding out
his empty hands. "I didn't mean anything!"
Blood was beginning to stain the left leg of his trousers, but he did not
appear to notice it.
"Janko, come over here," the Lieutenant said. He gripped the sling of
Ondru's rifle and jerked the weapon away. The Sergeant had not been able
to drop the rifle as ordered because the sling was held by his shoulder
strap until Waldstejn tore it.
Waldstejn stepped away from the non-com. "I'm going to lock you all in
the liquor cabinet," he said with no awareness that the statement might
sound like a joke. He had not been sure his pistol was loaded; he had no
recollection of taking off the safety; and he certainly had not intended to
shoot Doubek, thank God it did not appear to be serious. Albrecht
Waldstejn was more afraid of himself than he was of any other facet of the
situation. He had made his plans, though, and he would carry them out
now even without real awareness of what was going on in his head.

The door to the stores area banged open. "What the hell's happening?"
demanded Private Quade. His eyes glanced angrily around the room until
they lighted on the Supply Officer. "My God!" the Private gasped. He
lowered the section of pipe he held in his right hand.
"Go on, quick!" Waldstejn ordered. To the others, his voice held a snap
of command. "Into the back." He pumped the assault rifle vertically. He
was afraid to gesture with the pistol lest it fire again.
Ondru and his two subordinates shuffled tensely into the stores area.
Quade remained in the doorway. He frowned as the others moved past
him. The Lieutenant tried to wink at the black-haired man when none of
the others was looking. 'You too, Quade," he said harshly. "Into the back."
The Private obeyed slowly, still frowning.
The lights in the stores area threw crisp shadows down the aisles of
racked supplies. The liquor cabinet was actually a cubical shipping
container three meters on an edge. The sides were sheet steel. Access was
through a pair of fully-overlapping hinged leaves in the front. The outer
leaf was closed by a hasp and lock. The cabinet was in no sense a safe, but
it was completely proof against undetected pilfering.
It would also serve as a prison until someone opened it from the
outside.
Waldstejn set down his rifle, then thumbed the padlock. He kept his
pistol advanced toward the men of his escort, but he pointed the muzzle
high— just in case. All three of them seemed to be in shock. Doubek was
clutching at his wound with both hands and whimpering.
"In there, the three of you," the Lieutenant said as he wrenched open
the inner leaf. More than half the container's volume was filled by cartons
of spirits, but there was adequate room for the prisoners.
All three of them shuffled forward. Doubek was sniffling. "We won't be
able to breathe," he said. "We'll die." His eyes were screwed shut.
Waldstejn stooped quickly to retrieve the rifle. "It isn't airtight," he
said. "Besides, you'll only be inside for as long as it takes Private Quade
here to cut the lock off."
When the three prisoners were inside the liquor cabinet, Waldstejn
waved the rifle in Quade's direction. For the Private's sake in the
aftermath, Waldstejn had to make it clear that his subordinate had
nothing to do with what was happening. "Private Quade," the young
lieutenant said loudly. "I'm deserting." He paused while he closed up the
cabinet. The hinges squealed like the damned in torment. Winking

again—he had to be sure Quade did not think that the threat was
serious—the officer continued, "You can get bolt cutters and free them as
soon as I'm gone, but if you move a muscle while I'm here I'll shoot you
down like a dog."
Waldstejn's belt still hung on the chair out front, so he thrust the pistol
into his side pocket. He stepped quickly to the arms locker—another
shipping container—and opened it.
Private Hodicky slipped out from behind the ration boxes which had
hidden him until the prisoners were locked in. "What can we do,
Lieutenant?" he whispered.
"Go back to bed and pretend you were asleep," Waldstejn whispered
back. He had to tug harder to open the arms' locker than he had the more
frequently used liquor store. "On second thought," he said, glancing at the
dark-haired Quade, "make sure he knows what's going on and doesn't get
himself into trouble. I only need a couple minutes." 
The arms locker held a variety of unassigned pieces and munitions,
from anti-tank rockets on down. All Lieutenant Waldstejn needed was a
canister of ammunition for the rifle he had appropriated. They were not
going to be able to carry much, he and the mercenaries. The Company
would probably have a spare weapon for Waldstejn, in fact. But the
Cecach officer knew that he would be useless against the bruising recoil of
one of the meres' cone-bore guns. Better to carry an assault rifle and at
least be able to spray the countryside with it if the need arose.
He turned back to his subordinates, clutching a ten-kilo can of
ammunition by the handle. There was no time to worry about bandoliers
and other gear, though he would pick up his belt as he went out. Hodicky
was whispering with his mouth close to his friend's ear. Quade was no
longer frowning. His face was quiet and as unexpectedly shocking as a
razor blade in an apple. Waldstejn swallowed. "I told you not to move!" he
shouted to prove to the prisoners that he had not left yet. He strode
toward the door, weighted by the rifle and ammunition filling his hands.
Hodicky touched the tall officer's sleeve. "Good luck, sir," he whispered.
Lieutenant Albrecht Waldstejn, late Supply Officer of the 522nd
Garrison Battalion, nodded back.
He did not trust himself to speak.
"Off and on, children!" cried Roland Jensen as he dropped into the gun
section's double shelter. He slapped the sole of Herzenberg's right boot for

emphasis.
The four troopers in the shelter jerked alert. The males had been
playing a desultory game of Casino. They were using an infra-red signal
lamp for light and reading the pips through their night visors. "Your
weapons, two basic loads of ammo, and three days rations. Now, now!"
Jensen's own field pack was already strapped to the back of the gun
seat. He swung back outside again.
Guiterez stuck his head and shoulders out through the end curtain. He
was rolling the Casino cloth. "Where we shifting, Sarge?" he asked. "Is this
a patrol?"
"For the moment, we're shifting to the OC on my own authority," the
section leader said harshly. He locked a second can of ammunition into
the one that was always loaded in the cannon. "Now shut up, get your ass
in gear, and do exactly what I goddam tell you.”
The Sergeant-Gunner loaded a third drum. That should be enough, a
balance between functioning and the chance there would be no one alive
to feed the gun after the first blasts of a firefight. He waited, breathing
hard as he surveyed the compound through his visor. Bright needles 01
amplified light marked each of the locally-manned bunkers. They were
constructed of earth over steel planking. That looked far sturdier than the
Company's beryllium felt, but when the bombs had hit that morning, two
of the heavy roofs had been shaken down and suffocated the troops
beneath.
The necklace of Cecach dug-outs ended in a dark gap a kilometer south
of the automatic cannon. Fasolini's shelters had no crowns of light, even
on maximum enhancement by the visors. If Jensen had wanted to, he
could have located even those by switching to infra-red. The plumes of
body heat from the personnel would give away the positions even if no one
inside were using an IR light source.
The gun crew tumbled out. Pavlovich held Herzenberg's pack as well as
his own. The recruit was good, though; she would shake down. Another
month of campaigning with the Colonel and she would be ready to shift at
the drop of a hat.
Jensen twisted his seat forward into driving position. "Everybody
aboard," he said. "This time you ride. And for God's sake, keep your eyes
open."
The gun began to judder forward on its tracks even as the crew obeyed
the unexpected order. Jensen never permitted anyone to ride the cannon

as if it were transport and not a weapon. The extra load drained the
batteries and strained the running gear.
Somebody looked out of the nearest bunker as they passed with the
inevitable chatter of loose tracks. Jensen divided his attention between his
course and the bulk of the local headquarters in the center of the Complex.
Colonel Fasolini would handle things, he always did.
But if worst came to worst, nobody was going to take Gunner Jensen's
crew without paying the price.
"Where's a pair of bolt cutters?" demanded Jirik Quade as the front
door closed behind Lieutenant Waldstejn. Quade himself ducked into the
open arms locker.
Private Hodicky looked in surprise at his black-haired friend. He and
the Supply Officer had assumed that Quade would simply refuse to open
the makeshift prison at all. Such a dereliction would implicate Quade in
the incident needlessly, because a few minutes' start was all that
Waldstejn required. "Ah, Q," Hodicky said, "let's don't be in too much of a
rush, huh?" He pitched his voice low so that the prisoners could not hear
his hesitation.
Sergeant Ondru's resonant threats from within the liquor store would
have covered the words anyway. "Quade, you crap-head," the non-com was
bellowing, "if we're not out of here in thirty seconds it'll be Morale Section
for you, not just the glasshouse. God be my witness, I'll have you shot! I
know you planned this with him, and you'll by God regret it."
Quade lunged back out of the arms locker as abruptly as he had entered
it. He carried a loaded rifle by the handle at its balance. "Pavel," he
shouted angrily, "the cutters—I told you to get the—hell, never mind. I'll
use this!"
"Hodicky, you little turd!" Ondru boomed. "It's your neck too, I swear
on my mother's grave!"
The black-haired private snatched up the tubing he had carried when
he burst in on Waldstejn and his escort. The tube was about half his own
height, a thick-walled section from a hydraulic suspension. It had made an
excellent weapon; now it served as a crowbar as well.
Quade set down the assault rifle. While Ondru continued to shout
threats from inside, the Private slipped his tube through the lock strap. He
caught the end of the tube under the edge of the hasp riveted to the door.
Using the hasp as a fulcrum, Quade tugged at the tube. Nothing gave.
Quade braced his toes under the edge of the door.

"Q," said Private Hodicky, "wait, I'll get the bolt—"
"God damn it!" Quade shouted. Tendons sprang into high relief on his
throat and wrists. The length of tubing flexed. Seams started at both
shoulders of the little man's uniform. Hasp and lock bounced across the
room as the rivets gave way. "Mother of God," Quade muttered as he
slumped against the door. His lever, noticeably bowed, clanged on the
floor.
"Get this open, you bastards," called the Sergeant.
Quade stepped away from the container. "Well, do it, Pavel," he ordered
huskily. "Open the goddam doors."
Hodicky obeyed with a feeling of trapped fear. He spent his life skating
over the thin ice of others' angers, others' needs, but this was an open
abyss beyond his control or understanding. He pulled open the outer leaf.
The inner one sprang back under the weight of Sergeant Ondru. On the
floor behind him sat Doubek. The wounded man moaned and held the
thigh which none of the three prisoners had thought to bandage. Janko
waited hesitantly as well. He was more than willing to let Ondru carry the
burden of informing their superiors of what had occurred.
Ondru's rage was bomb-fierce. It drove him out into the warehouse
with a roar. "Now you little s—" he began. There was a pause. In a wholly
different voice, the non-com continued, "Quade, what do you think you're
doing with that rif—"
Quade shot the Sergeant through the center of the chest.
The assault rifle had a burst control which disconnected the sear after
five shots, even if the trigger were still depressed. Quade squeezed the
trigger eight times to empty the forty-round magazine. Hodicky screamed
and stared at his friend to avoid seeing what was happening to the
Sergeant.
The weapon fired light, glass-cored bullets which had little accuracy or
striking power beyond three hundred meters. Point blank, as here, the
bullets burned holes in thin steel and pulped flesh like a sausage mill.
Liquor containers burst as the bottles within them exploded. The air stank
of alcohol and blood as Ondru fell backward. Quade's rifle continued to
spit round after round into the cra-tered chest. The limbs spasmed and
the mouth gaped until a bullet shattered the chin. With horror, Hodicky
noticed the gunman's fingers continued to pump the trigger even after the
magazine had dropped automatically from the loading well to make room
for a fresh one.

Hodicky nerved himself to touch his friend's shoulder. "Q," he said, "it's
okay now. Loosen up." His head ached with terror and the muzzle blasts.
Sergeant Ondru's head and shoulders had been sawn away from his
lower body. Liquor was gurgling from the ravaged cartons and was
beginning to pool around the corpse. Neither Janko nor Doubek had been
touched by bullets, though a shard of bottle had torn the seated man's face
unnoticed. Both of them stared at the gunman. Their faces and clothing
gleamed with their Sergeant's blood.
"Think I'm a faggot, do you, Ondru?" Quade muttered under his breath.
He shuddered and turned from the carnage. "Pavel," he said in a normal
voice, "I'm going with the Lieutenant. You and him are the only people
who ever treated me decent, and I wasn't going to last here without him.
You know that." Quade locked a fresh magazine into his rifle, then lifted a
canister of ammunition. "See you around," the black-haired man said,
using his full hands as an excuse to prevent an embrace.
"Hey, I'm coming too," Hodicky said brightly. "Sure, I'll—I'll come too."
He turned to the door.
"Wait a minute," said Quade. He was frowning again. "Sure you want to
do that?"
"Gee, it's like you said," Hodicky insisted. "With the Lieutenant gone,
our ass was grass for sure."
"Well, get a rifle then," Quade said bluntly. "We'll need it."
"Q, I—" Hodicky began. He stepped into the arms locker, taking a rifle
and canister as the others had done. "Let's roll," he said in the cheerful,
brittle voice of a moment before. He had not loaded the rifle.
Janko and Doubek watched the two follow their lieutenant. Neither of
Ondru's men spoke or moved from the open locker for over a minute after
the others had gone.
* * *
"The hell that wasn't shooting," Churchie Dwyer insisted. He stepped to
the front opening from which Del Hoybrin still surveyed the interior of the
compound. "You heard it, Del, didn't you?"
"If you say so, Churchie," the big man agreed.
"It was somebody trying to start an engine," said Bertinelli as he loaded
a chip viewer. "Too hollow for a gun."
A visored head thrust through the back curtain. In the voice of Hussein
ben Mehdi, it said, "Doc, I want you to be ready in case something blows

yet tonight," Then, "Dwyer? Is that you?" Churchie was recognizable with
his visor down only because he stood next to the huge bulk of Trooper
Hoybrin. It was pointless to direct a request for information to Del, of
course. "Why aren't you two at your posts?"
"Sir," said Churchie with the deference which came easily when he was
not looking for trouble, "Sergeant Hummel relieved us because of our
wounds. They have to be dressed every four hours, you—what the hell is
that?"
"It's Sergeant Jensen and the gun," said Del as his friend spun to see
what was making the noise. The corpsman frowned and stepped forward,
trying to get a look past the shoulders of the other men.
Lieutenant ben Mehdi backed out of the medical station to look for
himself. The OC shelter was only fifty meters away. He had preferred to
walk over with his directions to Bertinelli rather than to put his
nervousness on the air. Now ben Mehdi called plaintively, "What are you
doing here, Guns? Did the Colonel—?" He stopped.
Jensen braked the gun carriage from the fast walk at which he had
brought it from the head of the valley. The whine of its linkless tracks
ceased. The Gunner stood and rotated his seat back into the firing
position. "This will do for now," he said to his crew. "Dismount but stay
close."
Only then did the blond sergeant walk over to Lieutenant ben Mehdi.
He lifted his helmet visor so that he could speak without its muffling. In a
very low voice, Jensen said, "Sir, I came in without orders. My boys were
out. in West Bumfuck and I didn't want them left if folks started climbing
trucks in a hurry."
Ben Mehdi grimaced beneath his own face shield, then lifted it. "I would
to Allah that Guido—" he began. He broke off when Dwyer called,
"Visitors, people."
Someone in Cecach fatigues was panting toward the Operations Center
from the direction of the Complex itself. Sergeant Jensen eyed ben Mehdi
a moment. The Lieutenant paused uncertainly. Jensen gave a shrill,
carrying whistle and unslung his shoulder weapon. "Over here," he called
to the newcomer. "And you can leave what you're carrying, just for now."
It was unlikely that, however badly the Colonel's negotiations were
going, the indigs were going to send a sapper to bomb the OC. It was also
cheaper not to take the chance.
The newcomer dropped his burden. As the man approached at a

staggering jog, both ben Mehdi and the non-com recognized him as
Waldstejn, the local Supply Officer. He was blown from the half-kilometer
run, but the exertion had also damped his nervousness. "Where's the
Colonel?" Waldstejn demanded. "Need to see him fast."
Sergeant Jensen eased and ben Mehdi found his tongue. "I thought you
might know," the mercenary officer said. "He was with your people." Ben
Mehdi gestured toward the Headquarters building. "Or did you come
from the warehouse?"
"Mary, Mother of God," Lieutenant Waldstejn wheezed. He bent over
with his hands on his knees to draw deep breaths. The assault rifle which
he gripped clattered on his right shin. "All right," he said, straightening
abruptly. The eyes of the gun crew and the troopers who had been in the
medical station were on him. "They're going to kill you, trade your lives for
an easy deal themselves. Lichtenstein and the rest."
Churchie Dwyer whistled a snatch of tune under his breath, but no one
interrupted.
"You've got outposts north and south on the ridges?" the Federal officer
asked.
"North only," said ben Mehdi. "We've loaned your people the gear on
the other side."
"Call them in, back here," Waldstejn said. "Like the gun, good, but you'll
have to leave it because—"
"Who the hell are you to give orders?" demanded Sergeant Jensen.
"Look," Albrecht Waldstejn pleaded, "I won't have the bastards kill you.
For God's sake, take my word for it till Guido gets back. I can maybe find
you a way out, but we've got to move!'
Lieutenant ben Mehdi touched his commo key. "Black One," he called in
a voice even tenser than usual under the circumstances, "this is Red Two.
Bring in the Listening Post at once. Disable the gear, just bring them in."
"Sarge," called one of the gun crewmen. Two more figures were
stumbling across the clear area between the Complex and the bunkers
surrounding its perimeter.
Waldstejn stiffened. His goggles were not as efficient as the
mercenaries' visors. "There were some guards," he began, "but I don't
think they'd—oh!" The two short figures in Federal cammies could be only
Quade and Hodicky, the damned fools. "They're mine," Waldstejn said,
"it's all right."

The Privates approached the group around their lieutenant. They were
in better shape than the run had left Waldstejn. The Cecach officer
ignored them. He said to Jensen and ben Mehdi, "You've got a path
through the mines besides the one along the pylons to the west, right?"
The mercenaries nodded. "Right," continued Lieutenant Waldstejn. "You
can create a diversion around the trucks—"
All the mercenaries stiffened as their helmets popped on the command
channel. There were no words over the radio. The night suddenly flashed
and crackled with gunfire in front of the battalion headquarters. Troopers
spun up the electronic magnification of their gunsights and strained to see
why half a dozen assault rifles had fired.
Del Hoybrin had been watching Headquarters even before the shooting.
He flipped his face shield up and out of the way to keep it from interfering
with his cheek-weld on his gun stock.
"Del!" Churchie shouted beside him.
The open door of the building five hundred meters away was a perfect
aiming point. Hoybrin fired a three-round burst. His big body rocked
back. Leaning into the weapon, he fired again. The yellow rectangle of
light down-range smeared ragged as poured concrete shattered under the
impact of the osmium missiles. One of the Federal riflemen began
spraying the night in nervous flickers. His chances of hitting anything at
the range were next to nothing.
Del Hoybrin fired a third burst before Dwyer wrestled up the muzzle of
the gun. None of the other mercenaries had tried to interfere. They had
gone flat on their bellies, watching the big man with a caution born of
experience. "Del!" Churchie screamed, "don't shoot now!"
Albrecht Waldstejn and his men had dropped to the ground a moment
after the mercenaries had done so. "God help us," the Cecach officer said
to ben Mehdi. "Let's get to your Operations Center and try to sort this out
fast."
"But Churchie," Del Hoybrin was saying in surprise. "I was watching
them. They just killed the Colonel."
"The lights!" shouted Captain Brionca. "Turn out the lights!"
Strojnowski might have been soldier enough to risk it, but he was more
interested in rolling outside to learn what was going on. The squad on
guard was from his own Third Company.
Lieutenant Dyk was cowering under the table with the rest of the

officers in Lichtenstein's office. The young man leaped up with a cry and
slapped at the light switch. Then he stumbled over a chair, scrambled to
his feet again, and reached the panel in the outer office just as another
volley of projectiles ripped through the building. The overhead lights
flickered out as a gush of blue sparks exploded from the shorted wiring.
Dyk spun, screaming. An osmium projectile punched a neat hole in the
partition wall behind him, having shattered bone on its path the length of
the Lieutenant's outstretched arm.
Lime dust from pulverized concrete roiled in the air within the building.
Papers were burning on a secretarial desk. Shorted equipment or a spray
of. metal ignited by friction had started the fire, the only illumination
remaining in the Headquarters building. The Federal soldier's return fire
had ceased also. Either the damned fool had emptied his rifle or he had
realized that he did not have a snowball's chance in Hell of hitting
anything at the range.
The good lord knew why the meres had stopped shooting, though.
"Ondru, report," the company commander growled.
"We got him," Sergeant Breisach's voice responded from the darkness.
With his goggles on, Strojnowski could just make out the forms of the
guards hugging the ground as he was doing himself. Radios within the
building were sizzling with unanswered questions from the perimeter
bunkers. "Then, blooie!" Breisach went on. "Look, we can't handle them at
the range. You gotta bring in arty or something, Captain."
As if summoned, the artillery lieutenant scurried through the door in a
low crouch. "What happened?" he blurted. "Did you get—" The young
officer tripped over Strojnowski's outstretched feet. He pitched forward
and screamed. The hand he had thrown forward to break his fall had
splashed in what was left of Colonel Fasolini's thorax. The mercenary had
worn body armor that might have saved him at a hundred meters. When
the muzzle flashes were close enough to burn his uniform, the high velocity
sprays had turned fragments of the backplate into missiles themselves.
The air stank with the effluvium of ripped intestines.
From inside, Captain Brionca rasped orders slightly out of synch with
her words over Strojnow-ski's belt radio. "All Boxer units!" she was saying.
"All Boxer units! Fire at will at any off-planet troops you see. Do not leave
your positions. Repeat, do not—"
An assault rifle stuttered briefly, pointlessly, near the eastern interface
between Federal and mercenary positions. The Bunkers were too widely
spaced for the Federal weapons to be really effective. White flashes from

the bunker, two guns and then a third, continued for several seconds. The
shooting ended in a momentary orange ball in the midst of the muzzle
flashes. The thump of the tube-launched mercenary grenade provided a
coda to the chattering gunfire.
The artilleryman was trying to wipe his hand in the dirt. "Mortars," he
was saying, "high explosives. We'll blast them out from a distance!"
Strojnowski punched his company push. "Ranger Six," he said,
identifying himself to his troops, "to max Ranger units. Cease fire! Repeat,
cease fire. Unless you've got a target in range and coming at you." The
infantry captain paused to let that sink in. Then he added, "If you're fired
at by meres, reply with anti-tank rockets. Don't use your rifles, use rockets
and wait till you've got something to aim at."
Screw Brionca and her stupid orders. The 522nd did not have to worry
about a job they were not equipped for. All they had to do was to keep the
meres pinned down for the day or less until the Rube tanks arrived.
Strojnowski did not like the deal, but he liked it better than he liked
having his ass shot away.
"Come on, Breisach," the officer ordered. "We'll crawl to my bunker and
I'll use your squad as a reserve." The rest of the battalion officers could
stay inside a targeted building if they wanted. Strojnowski only wished
that he could intercept the mercenary communications as they almost
certainly were intercepting those of the 522nd.
To the surprise of the infantry captain, the young lieutenant was
crawling along beside him. It was probably a lack of any other direction.
"But why aren't we shelling?" the artilleryman demanded. "Why?"
"Because we aren't soldiers, we're goddam prison guards!" the older
man snapped back. "We're here to keep the contract laborers from
breaking out, not to fight a war. The 522nd doesn't have a Heavy Weapons
Company. No mortars, no heavy machine guns . . . Hell, the meres were
supposed to be our heavy weapons!"
The whole area was studded with bits of smelter slag. It passed
unnoticed in the coarse grass, but it gouged at the knees and bare palms
of a man trying to crawl across three hundred meters of it. Grunting,
balancing discomfort against the risk of a bullet if he stood, Strojnowski
said, "I felt sorry for them, getting the shaft that way. But if the Rubes
need help executing them now, I'll shoot every off-planet SOB myself!"
CHAPTER FIVE

Two more mercenaries in battle dress scurried to the Operations Center
from the east. They were hunched over with caution and the weight of
their equipment. Lieutenant ben Mehdi leaned from the shelter to observe
them in helmeted neutrality. "Team?" he called in a low voice.
"Black Twelve," one of them panted back. Both troopers knelt, keeping
the hump of the OC between them and the distant Complex.
Ben Mehdi nodded agreement. "Right. We're forming up fifty meters
north—" he pointed— "in a defile. Mboko's in charge there." He touched
his helmet and ordered, "Black One, leapfrog your odd teams. Twelve is
in." From the west, the Lieutenant could see two troopers from White
Section already scuttling toward the OC.
Ben Mehdi's words echoed within the shelter because the external
speaker of the console was live. Albrecht Waldstejn was not on the
Company net. He could no more listen to the necessary crosstalk as the
escape plan went forward than could any other member of the 522nd.
And the escape plan was his, almost in its entirety.
"That's forty-two ready to jump," Waldstejn said, "plus us."
"Motion around the truck park," Trooper Dwyer reported from the back
arch. "Somebody ought to spray them, one of the shelters do it when the
team leap-frogs out."
"White Two," crackled the speaker, "leap-frog your odd teams. Twelve is
in."
"That's it," said Sergeant Jensen. "Just the section leaders left. Time for
the old girl to keep some heads down."
"Good luck, Sergeant," the Cecach officer said. "Ah, Communicator?" he
went on.
Jensen was crawling out of the back arch of the shelter. Churchie Dwyer
was there, watching the Complex with his huge partner. He nodded to the
Gunner. It was a nasty job. Jensen could have told off one of his crewmen
to do it. But by the White Christ of his ancestors, he was the Gunner in
Fasolini's Company.
Communicator Foyle looked at Waldstejn with a flashing smile. "Sookie,
sir," she said.
Waldstejn smiled back, tight as an E-string inside and furious with
himself to be thinking what he was thinking about the plump brunette.
Not now, Mother of God! "Right, Sookie. Time for you to leave too."
Switching to Czech as the Communicator rose, the Lieutenant added,

"Hodicky, you and Quade follow her. I'll be along in a minute or two."
"We better stay with you, sir," said Hodicky. He looked like a wren
caught in a thunderstorm, huddled and miserable. "Not knowing the
language and all, you know, sir."
Hodicky did actually have more than a smattering of English, but his
friend did not. Private Quade had just finished stuffing a pair of
mercenary cross-belt bandoliers with ammunition he and Hodicky had
dragged from the warehouse. Ammunition for the assault rifles was
packed in the form of loaded plastic magazines. When emptied, the clips
were simply discarded like ration envelopes. The pockets of the cross-belts
comfortably held pairs of Cecach magazines in place of the individual
chargers of the mercenaries' own heavier ammunition. "There you go,
Pavel," the black-haired private said. He proudly held out a bandolier to
his friend.
A mercenary slid into the Operation Center past Lieutenant ben Mehdi.
She flipped up her visor. Waldstejn had not met her before, so far as he
knew, but he recognized the Sergeant's voice when she rasped, "I'm
Hummel, Black One. You're in charge now?"
"Yeah, I guess I am, Sergeant," the young lieutenant agreed. His
muscles were tensing involuntarily. Hussein ben Mehdi cleared his throat
and shifted as if moving out of the line of fire. "And until we get our butts
out of here, this isn't a democracy." Mother of God! how he wished that
Sergeant Jensen were still in the shelter.
"Democracy?" Hummel repeated. "It's about to be a bloody morgue,
isn't it? What's going to happen when we're half-way up the ridge—" she
gestured; Hussein ben Mehdi flinched back— "and they start popping
rockets at us? Think they won't? We need a diversion so they're not
searching the north ridge till we're over it and gone!"
"Quade, cool it!" Waldstejn snapped. The little man had set down the
bandolier and was watching Sergeant Hummel with a fixed expression.
"Let's us cool it too," Waldstejn said to Hummel in a voice that was mild
but which trembled. "We're all tight."
The mercenary non-com eyed Quade. Hodicky was gripping his friend's
arm and whispering into his ear. Hummel grinned wryly. "I got enough
Czech to manage," she said. "It'll keep the pins in if everybody
understands."
Waldstejn swallowed. "Right," he said. "We've got a diversion. Sergeant
Jensen's going to set his gun to sweep the Complex on continuous fire."

Hummel shrugged. "Won't work," she said. Another trooper stooped at
the arch behind her, anonymous behind a lowered visor. Ben Mehdi edged
even further away. "They'll volley rockets at the muzzle flashes—some-body
will. Take all of ten seconds—all right, maybe a minute. How far do we get
in a minute?"
"Gun ready," said the console.
"Column ready," it immediately echoed itself in Sergeant Mboko's voice.
Del Hoybrin turned. With his partner and Jensen, he was the rear
guard. "You're going now?" the big man said, making a little shoving
gesture With his left hand.
"Shut up, Del," Trooper Dwyer muttered. He was veteran enough to
guess his chances of coming through the next minutes alive. Despite that,
he wanted to get it over with.
Dwyer also wanted to piss; and that, at least, he could do something
about. Unsealing his fly, the gangling man began to urinate loudly on a
trunk of Fasolini's in the corner of the shelter.
"Lieutenant?" said Private Hodicky. His voice caught in his throat. He
cleared it and said, "Q and me've got the uniforms. We could get in and
get a couple trucks moving." He nodded back in the general direction of
the truck park, north of the Complex proper. "They'd think we were going
out that way in—" he swallowed— "instead of like we are."
"That won't work either," interjected Lieutenant ben Mehdi. The
console spoke again, but no one in the Operations Center paid attention to
it. "The uniform might work if they got close before they were seen, but
they'll be tracked all the way from here. Once they're in range, all hell
breaks loose."
"Flares!" Lieutenant Waldstejn whooped in sudden delight. Everyone
else in the shelter jumped. "Our night goggles! They get overloaded. We
set off a ton of flares, all at once, and everybody watching is blinded. By
the time they've got their sight back, we're in the truck park!"
"We don't carry flares," Hummel pointed out. "Don't need them with—"
"God damn it!" Waldstejn snapped, as suddenly furious as he had been
elated. He poked at the communications console, looking for the Send
button. "Guns?" he demanded. "Guns? Do you read me?"
"Guns to Red One, ' Sergeant Jensen replied. "I read you. I'm ready to
crank up. Aren't you ready?"
"You'll be given your orders when it's time, Sergeant!" Waldstejn

responded in a tone that surprised him more than it did the others around
him. Hodicky smiled wanly. "Ah, Guns," the Lieutenant went on, "do you
have any illuminating rounds? Flares, you know? We can blind anybody
watching through goggles if we can get a light bright enough."
There was a moment's pause on the other end of the connection. Then
Sergeant Jensen said thoughtfully, "Flares, no sir. But light, now ... I can
make the whole compound bright as day if that's what you need."
"On the command, then," Waldstejn said. "Pointer Two-One, out." He
had used his Cecach callsign without realizing it. It served as well as
another.
Waldstejn swallowed. He turned to face the others in the shelter as well
as he might and said. "All right. Privates Dwyer and Hoybrin—" he
remembered the names; Del Hoybrin had resumed his search of the night
and did not acknowledge the compliment, however— "you will act as the
rear guard. Lieutenant, Sergeant Hummel—" nodding to them crisply—
"you will proceed to the defile. Be ready to move as soon as the shooting
starts, just make sure you've left a guide for the rest of us. My men and I
will set out now for the truck park. I'll tell Sergeant Jensen to give us light
as soon as the—as someone opens fire on us."
"Bullshit," said Jo Hummel.
Everyone looked at her. The non-com gave a lopsided smile and went
on, "I speak Czech, remember? Trooper Powers and me'll cover your boys."
She glanced at the Federal privates with more appraisal than affection.
"You'll go take charge of the Company. Like we all decided," Hummel
added. She gave a snort.
"Your uniforms won't pass," Waldstejn objected sharply.
"I said cover, didn't I?" the Sergeant replied. "If it works, two's plenty to
get a few trucks rolling. We got Gun's push—" she tapped her helmet—
"and we got something that'll do some good when the shooting starts." She
gestured in disdain at Waldstejn's slung assault rifle. "Which you sure as
hell don't."
"Talk's cheap, lady," said Private Quade. His right hand was caressing
the grip of his own rifle. Hummel turned to him. "Then let's get a goddam
move on, trooper!" she said. "Come on, Bunny." Sergeant Hummel began
to stride toward the back arch, as squat and as powerful as the weapon
she cradled.
Waldstejn caught her by the shoulder. "It's my place," he said quietly.
Hummel's anger was fueled by fear of the task she had just undertaken.

"Do / know the way to this abandoned truck?" she demanded. "Your 
place, Lieutenant, is with your troops. And they're out there goddam
waiting for you!"
Waldstejn released her. Del and Churchie backed away to let the three
volunteers out to join Trooper Powers. The night covered them from bare
eyes in seconds.
"Right," Albrecht Waldstejn said to no one in particular. "We'd better
get out to the others, hadn't we?
Lieutenant Stoessel sprinted the last twenty meters to the tunnel
entrance of Gun Pit East. Since the lasers were sited at opposite ends of
the compound while battalion headquarters was in the middle, it had
been a toss-up which of his guns Stoessel made for when the meeting
broke up in slaughter. The camouflage pattern of his tunic front was
smeared with sweat and real dirt. The right sleeve was dark also, with the
blood and wastes of the murdered Colonel.
The gun pit was a figure-eight, partly dug down and partly raised by a
berm of the soil lifted from the interior. The back lobe of the pit was the
fusion bottle itself. It was connected to the gun platform in the larger front
lobe by cables which were virtually bus bars in their construction. At rest,
as now, the laser cannon lay flat beneath the lip of the berm. Because the
energy beam was recoilless, the tube could be quickly raised and rotated
at any angle through a 360° arc.
The whole crew was present when Stoessel burst in on them, but none
of the gunners showed signs of wanting to aim the weapon anywhere it did
not point already.
"Abel!" the Lieutenant said to his crouching gun captain. "I radioed you
to open fire on the e-enemy cannon. You haven't even unlatched the tube!"
Yeoman Abel looked at his commanding officer sullenly. "We've got
power up," he said. The other five enlisted men stopped talking and eyed
each other or the ground between their boots. That way they could ignore
the laser. "They did a bug-out before you called us, sir," Able went on.
"Besides, I figure three seconds after that tube—" he gestured with a jerk
of his bearded chin— "lifts over the berm, it takes a round. If she's charged
when that happens, there's gonna be shit flying all over here."
"I gave you a direct—" Stoessel began. He paused, then said, "What do
you mean, they did a bug-out? They abandoned their cannon?"
"Naw, drove off with it," put in one of the crewmen who was glad of the
change of subject. "We heard it."

"You can see for yourself, sir," the Yeoman agreed. "But I think I'd want
to keep my head down. We're pretty well off, here— if we don't stir things
up," he finished pointedly.
The Lieutenant scowled, first at his men and then at the laser in their
midst. The automatic cannon had been emplaced only two hundred
meters from Gun Pit East. He could take a look and perhaps have
something to report to the Major.
Lieutenant Stoessel stepped again to the tunnel which sloped up
through the berm. Distant sounds crackled. As Stoessel reached the outer
tunnel mouth, he could see muzzle flashes winking near the Complex
center. "There's shooting at the truck park," he remarked idly. "I wonder
what's happening there?"
He might have chosen his words more carefully if he had known they
were going to be his last.
Pavel Hodicky was desperately afraid that he was going to have to kill
somebody in the next few minutes.
A little animal peeped and sprang away between the Private's feet. That
frightened him back to immediacy. The four-man commando—properly a
unit and not an individual designation—was spread in a line fifty meters
across. The two Federal privates were in the middle. The mercenaries
provided the end posts, checking the alignment and giving brief, angry
whistles when one of the indigs straggled.
Face it; when Hodicky straggled, Q seemed to keep station instinctively,
since his formal training had been as cursory as Hodicky's own.
They walked in a crouch, almost waddling. None of the four of them was
up to crawling four hundred meters, but nature made them hunch over in
anticipation of the shots that were certain to come. Hummel had been
nonchalant in her brief instructions. The guards would shoot while their
targets were well out of range, she had said. Hodicky's brief squint
through his night goggles had shown him that the mercenaries were as
bent over as the locals they escorted, however.
For the most part, Quade and Hodicky advanced with their goggles up
over their foreheads. The promised illumination would otherwise blind
them as well as the Federal guards. Afterwards, the deserters could dash
forward, mingling with the guard detachment and getting among the
trucks in the confusion.
The buildings of the Complex looked a single mass of geological

proportions. Only the mercenaries' signals proved to the Private that he
was really heading for the truck park. At its fence, he knew, were his
comrades of a few hours before— watching his advance in rosy detail
through the lenses of goggles he might have issued them himself.
Well, Hodicky couldn't complain. It had been his own idea, hadn't it?
Only Mary and the Saints, let him not have to kill—
The muzzle flashes ahead of him could have been the courting dance of
a firefly. The bullets that snapped about his head had nothing of the same
innocence. Pavel Hodicky threw himself down, knowing that at least one of
his former comrades lacked his own unwillingness to kill.
The shots were Sergeant Jensen's signal. Hum-mel's call for "Light!"
blatted over the radio as the blond man was already swinging onto the
gunner's seat.
He had lain beside the automatic cannon lest premature motion bring a
volley of fire on him before the commando was in position. The indigs had
been willing to let a sleeping dog lie; now they would feel its teeth despite
their forbearance.
Right and left pedals controlled the gun's traverse and elevation. Jensen
worked them simultaneously while his left thumb flipped the sighting
screen to its wide-field, acquisition mode.
The electric motors training the gun whined a friendly, familiar note to
the Gunner. The slim barrel dipped only a degree under the lightest of left
toe pressure, but the signal from Jensen's right heel aimed it back toward
its previous position at the east face of the compound.
Toward, not to. The traversing pedal braked the muzzle to a halt as the
mounded berm of Gun Pit East slewed across the sights.
Someone in the mass of buildings to Jensen's right had noted
movement at the automatic cannon. An assault rifle began to spit at him
from a window of the Complex. At this range, the gunfire was pointless;
but the first anti-tank rocket could be only seconds away.
Sergeant Jensen had taken a professional interest in the laser cannon
when his own weapon had been sited near it. Now he was betting a
number of lives, his own included, that he remembered the lay-out
correctly. The protective berm around the gun pit was a full two meters
thick at its base. The earth comprising it was loose, however, heaped up
by the digging blade and only cursorily stabilized. That would stop
fragments and even normal shell fire; but what Jensen had in mind was

something else again—or Saint Ultruda save them!
The sight screen zoomed to battle magnification, a three-meter field at
this range. The central orange dot was at the base of the rear lobe of the
pit. Hoybrin and someone else were now shooting from the Operations
Center nearby. Hoybrin for certain, because the weapon was firing bursts.
They were trying to suppress Federal gunmen from the Complex who were
slashing at Jensen's life.
That did not matter now. All that mattered to the Gunner were the
traverse pedal and the red switch under his right thumb. He pressed them
together.
The blip of a rocket's sighting flare arched from the Complex toward the
mercenaries' lines. Lieutenant Stoessel had just enough time to wonder
what had set off the firefight when the sheaf of osmium projectiles plowed
the dirt to his left.
The automatic cannon had neither tracers nor need for them. As with
the laser itself, what you saw in the sights was what you got. Jensen's
burst gouged the berm at a flat angle and at velocities that made the earth
itself a fluid. Jets of dirt were spurting skyward even as the rounds clanged
against the fusion bottle which the berm had been intended to protect.
The casing was heavy, even in comparison to the sudden blows it
received; but a hairline fracture caused a ripple in the magnetic flux
within. The astronomical pressures did the rest.
The blast was in theory not a nuclear explosion, only a jet of plasma
from a relatively small fusion chamber. The matter of the bottle, the inner
surface of the berm, and everything else within either lobe of Gun Pit East
were stripped to ions. They shot upward like a minor solar flare. Ravaged
atoms gushed up the access tunnel. Lieutenant Stoessel's body did not so
much burn as sublime at their impact.
Bright as day, Roland Jensen had promised the new lieutenant. The
Gunner was grinning like a skull as he threw the drive in gear. He
cramped the wheel hard, then jumped out of the saddle. The self-propelled
gun lurched noisily into what had been the medical station. It crumpled
the shelter roof as it passed. Jensen felt that he had to at least jerk the old
girl away from where she had been targeted, even though he would
abandon her then.
Bright as bloody day!

Jirik Quade was up and running while the ground still rocked from the
explosion. Hodicky scrambled up to follow, pulling his goggles down with
his right hand. He was cursing his friend because the curses were a
normal thing, a frequent thing to hear, and everything else around him
was out of the Hell of his Grandmother's lectures.
The plume of charged vapor still hung over Gun Pit East, far to the left,
but it was no longer a blinding flare. Night breezes were cooling and
dispersing the pink glow. It was at once the pyre of seven soldiers and the
only tombstone they would ever have.
Most of the platoon guarding the park was at the main gate on the west
side. There were a number of troops on the north face of the woven-wire
enclosure, however, much closer to the mercenary positions. These were
the men who had been firing at the commando. One of them continued to
do so. His blinded companions huddled at the base of the fence, where
even amplified light could not separate them from the humps of earth and
rank grass. A single soldier stood erect, screaming and spraying his
personal darkness with an assault rifle. The muzzle was pointed up at
almost a 45° angle.
The two mercenaries had stayed flat when Quade and Hodicky rose for
the final dash. Now their guns cracked in unison. The limbs of the man at
the fence splayed as if he had been electrocuted. There was a tiny fleck of
light behind him as a projectile clipped a fence wire which was also in its
path. The figure crumpled. There was no further sound or movement at
the fence.
Quade reached the truck park before his friend did. Hodicky's body had
moved at its best pace despite the terror filling his mind, but his lungs
burned with exertion. The loaded bandolier was an anchor across both
collarbones.
There was more to the operation, however, than the strength and
stamina in which Quade excelled most of the other men in the compound
regardless of size. He had the cutting bar out when he reached the fence.
Instead of using it to slash an opening in the wire, the black-haired
deserter waved it in his left hand like a saber. His right hand prodded the
night with the rifle he held by its pistol grip, while his eyes searched for
someone to kill. The moonless sky provided Quade's goggles with only a
blur of pinks and shadows. It had no targets for his frustration.
The goggles affected depth perception seriously. Hodicky bounced
against the webbing of the fence an instant before he had expected to
reach it. "It's me, Q—Pavel!" he shouted instinctively as he saw his friend

spin to face the sound. Someone atop the main powerplant was volleying
rockets. The flare pots left pinkish trails across the sky over the truck park.
Pulverized concrete spewed across the launching site as a mercenary
replied.
Hodicky deliberately dropped his rifle in order to unsling his own
cutting bar. Like much of the mercenaries' equipment, the principle
behind the tool was very simple. It was a light, narrow saw with a blade
fifty centimeters long. It cut on the draw stroke, and its teeth coarsened
gradually from the hilt to the tip. The fact that the teeth were razor thin
and almost permanently sharp made the bar effective whether one needed
to cut tissue or tank armor. The ten-gauge wire of the fence was more a
pressure against the blade than a real obstacle to it.
The little private slashed down, then across and down again in an arc.
Wires quivered discordantly as a section of fence fell inward. "Come on,
Q!" Hodicky said as he hunched through the opening.
His sleeve snagged and tore unnoticed on a sharp end.
Quade threw down his cutting bar and reached for his partner's
weapon. "You forgot—" he said.
From the darkness, someone whispered, "Janos? Is that—?"
The black-haired deserter turned and fired in a single motion. There
was a horrible scream, above even the muzzle blasts. As if in echo of the
initial burst, a soldier fifty meters away began shooting at Quade's back.
Reflex snatched Pavel Hodicky's hand to his rifle. Instinct froze it there
while bullets cracked and sang in parting wires. The Federal soldier was
flat on his belly along the fence line, an almost impossible target for
Hummel and Powers. They were also prone and two hundred meters away.
The mercenaries tried anyway. Truck bodies boomed as they were hit by
projectiles that had passed over their intended target.
The Federal gunman was shooting high as well. It was the flash of one of
his bullets hitting a post above Quade that snapped the deserter from his
revery of slaughter. He whirled away from the screams which a second
burst had not silenced. Still firing from the hip, Quade walked his shots
into the opposing muzzle flashes. Again he fired until his rifle spat out its
empty magazine.
"Come on, Q!" Hodicky cried. He ran to the cab of the nearest truck,
still clutching his rifle. His trousers were slimed with feces.
"Forty-one," whispered the trooper as she reached Lieutenant

Waldstejn. His slap on the shoulder sent her out to join the others who
had preceded her, snaking single file behind Sergeant Mboko. This much
was easy, though every step chanced a rocket or the fury of the remaining
laser. At the ridge line, the risk of fire from the compound ceased, but a
false step would shatter both legs on an air-sewn mine.
There were two cleared tracks through the mine belt surrounding the
valley: west along the pylons, to permit the trucks to enter and leave the
compound; and this one which Colonel Fasolini had decided to clear in
case he needed a bolt-hole. The Colonel had not expected the 522nd to
turn on his men; but neither had he expected the battalion to hold against
a Republican attack. The truck route would become a killing ground for
the locals rushing into it—and that, with luck, would have permitted the
Company to slip out the side door and regroup.
It is impossible to foresee everything, especially during a war. Troops
whose commanders try to provide for the dangers they do foresee,
however, often are around afterwards to bury the less fortunate.
"That's the last," whispered Lieutenant ben Mehdi. The officer followed
the trooper Waldstejn had just clapped forward by rote. "I'll stay and pick
up the rear guard."
A rocket corkscrewed overhead, then plunged into the ground a
hundred meters away. The white ball of the explosion was momentary but
so intense that the shock wave a third of a second later seemed to be an
echo. The near impact was chance. The federal soldier who launched the
missile had lost control of it either through lack of training or because one
of the mercenary rear guard had put a round close enough to the rocketeer
to make him drop his controls.
Muzzle flashes lighted the face of the Complex and most of the Garrison
Battalion's bunkers. Occasionally a soldier threw the switch on each
assault rifle magazine which ignited the bullet jackets in a stream of
blue-green tracers from the muzzle. That was rare, however, because it
was certain to draw fire from one or a score of his ill-trained comrades. It
was impossible to be sure what was going on at the truck park almost a
kilometer away.
"Waldstejn?" ben Mehdi said, trying to prompt a response from the
Cecach lieutenant.
Albrecht Waldstejn blinked beneath his goggles. Grit scooped from the
ground by the near miss was drifting across the men. "Right," Waldstejn
said. "Keep your head down." He scrambled off to join the last of the
troopers following Sergeant Mboko.

Hussein ben Mehdi watched the firefight, trying to detach his mind
from what was going on within the compound. When a stray bullet brred
overhead, his hand tightened on the sweaty grip of his own grenade
launcher. In general, the Lieutenant could pretend that it was a game, a
light show.
He risked a quick glance up the way the other had gone. By daylight,
they should all be clear, thanks be to Allah . . . and to the path that
Fasolini's instincts had provided. "Allah receive you, Guido." the
mercenary muttered. "If you were not a saint, then at least at the end you
gave as much for your people as the Christ did for his."
* * *
Hodicky reached for the truck. Something cracked like a heart breaking
on the side of it. That was surely a stray round, but the little private
hunched over and ran to the next vehicle anyway.
Although the cargo bay of the ore hauler loomed high and wide behind
it, the cab was only a step from the ground while the vehicle rested on its
skirts. Visibility from the cab was not a factor since most of the time the
vehicle tracked automatically across a line of pylons. For maneuvering in
close quarters like the truck park, there were TV cameras at each corner of
the cargo bay.
The cab lay-out was simple. Hodicky flipped on the battery switch to
energize the controls and instruments. He did not turn on the lights. His
goggles and the instrument glow let him see what he was doing well
enough without drawing fire. Hodicky had driven induction-powered
trucks before—never this big, and never in a lot so tight. But no one was
going to complain about scraped metal tonight, the Virgin knew.
The little private twisted the joy stick to align the receiving antenna
with the broadcast pylon at the gate. The cab door sprang open. Hodicky
screamed and lurched around with his arms thrown up.
"You all right, Pavel?" asked Private Quade. His nose wrinkled. "Jesus
Christ, what is it stinks in here?"
Hodicky licked his lips. "Go start the next one, Q," he said. "I'll have this
moving in a bit." He could worry about clean trousers some other time.
"Hell, I never drove anything, Pavel," Quade admitted. He turned his
head away. "I just came because . . . you could of got hurt."
"I—" Hodicky said. "Keep an eye out." He turned back to the antenna
control, making a final adjustment and then pressing the switch that
should transfer the vehicle to external power. There was a lurch as the

drive fans beneath the bay came on line automatically. The blades began
to sing as they ran up to idle speed. "Watch it now, Q," Hodicky warned.
He twisted the knob which should increase the power and bite angle of the
fans.
The air cushion which the fans built under the skirts lifted the huge
vehicle a few millimeters off the ground. It skidded forward, not yet in
perfect balance. The left side almost at once scraped down the next vehicle
over. Metal screamed.
The would-be driver swore and twisted at the wheel while he fed in
more power. He over-corrected and Quade, on the ground, had barely
enough time to throw himself out of the way as the right side dragged.
If the wheel were released, the truck would swing itself onto the pylon
corridor. It would ignore obstacles in doing so, however, and it would have
locked itself against the adjacent vehicles. Hodicky twisted savagely at the
wheel again, wondering if the auto-pilot could possibly have done a worse
job than he was managing himself.
Part of the distant rear of the cargo bay tore free. The truck lurched
ahead. Hodicky released the wheel and felt the vehicle swing with glassy
smoothness. The windshield was fogged by acid grime from the smelter,
but through it he could see the closed gate a hundred meters away. The
rifle of one of the guards there flashed. The entire panel of the truck
window disintegrated, spraying the cab with fragments of pin-head size
and smaller.
Hodicky threw himself out the cab door. His toe caught on the coaming.
The Private tripped and rolled with a skill he could not have managed
deliberately. The fans of the truck blasted dust in his face as it slid past.
Weeping, Hodicky scrambled to his feet and ran for the shelter of the
remaining vehicles. His rifle and bandolier pounded at the bruises they
had left when he hit the ground.
No one shot at him as he ran. Quade was hosing the gate guards with
bright cyan streaks of tracer, knowing that would keep their heads
down—and that it would concentrate what interest remained on him
instead of his friend.
A rocket from the Complex hit the rear of the careening truck. There
was a white flash that silhouetted the vehicle. The jet of gas and gaseous
metal spurted across the empty cargo bay and out the other side in a
dazzling spike. The ore hauler shuddered, but its drive units were
untouched. The gyro stabilizer had brought the truck back on an even keel
when the cab plowed through the gate.

Even empty, the big ore carrier weighed over twenty tonnes. The
chain-link fencing was intended to keep humans out, not vehicles in. The
guards were caught between Quade's snapping tracers and the onrushing
truck. Some of those who thought they had scrambled clear at the last
instant were killed by the gate itself. The hinges gave before the locking
chain on the other side. The whole construct of steel wires and stiffening
bars sprang away from the cab like a huge flail.
The truck staggered, but it surged on through. The right skirt was
trailing and a drive fan screamed as it wrapped itself in wire.
Quade fumbled for a third magazine. He paused with his hand in an
empty pouch of his bandolier. He looked around for his friend as he
resumed the process of reloading, this time consciously. The door of the
next truck in the line was open.
The black-haired man ran to the open cab. The truck bay was creased
where Hodicky's first decoy had scraped along it. Soldiers in bunkers over
a kilometer away were firing rockets into the truck park, acting more from
instinct than awareness. Those which were aimed well enough to hit the
broad target detonated with hollow booms. That drew additional fire.
"Pavel, come on, for God's sake!" Quade shouted into the truck cab. His
left palm rested on the door jamb. He could feel the vehicle quiver as its
fans came on. "One was enough! Come on, they're shelling us!"
"Get out of the way!" Hodicky cried. The truck slid forward as he spoke.
The gap in the line beside him let the truck swing even as its drive nudged
it into motion. Hodicky could not see for his tears, and his mind was filled
with the intake roar of the fans.
The side of the ore hauler slapped Quade as he tried to jump away from
it. Its pitted surface of steel and paint flakes bit and spun the little man,
dropping him in the vehicle's wake. Hodicky, oblivious to that as he was to
almost everything else, threw himself out of the cab as the truck picked up
speed. As he did so, a pair of rockets from the gate slammed head-on into
the cab. Both doors sailed away like bats startled from a cave. The
sheet-metal front of the cab ripped upward, tangling the power antenna in
shreds.
Only the back-up human controls had been destroyed. The vehicle did
not stop. The detuned antenna dropped its power beneath the setting and
the vehicle slowed to a trot. As it glided through the gap torn by the first
truck, the sides of the ore hauler sparkled like a display. Federal soldiers
were firing their assault rifles point-blank into the cargo bay. The
disintegrating bullets blasted holes in the sides as they hit.

Hodicky picked himself up. He had scraped his left palm badly on the
ground. That pain seemed to be all he could focus on as he staggered back
to the remaining trucks.
Jirik Quade lay crumpled on the gravel in front of him. The right sleeve
of his uniform had been shredded from shoulder to wrist along with the
skin beneath. Quade's hand was still locked on the grip of his rifle.
Hodicky's scrapes and dizziness washed away in a rush of glacial fear.
All external sounds sank to a murmur as blood roared in the little man's
eardrums. He knelt and gripped his friend's shoulders in order to turn him
face up. "Mother of God, Q," he whispered. "Mother of God!"
"Goddam, that truck hit me," Quade muttered back. He opened his eyes
with a start. "Christ, Pavel," he said, trying to raise his torso and finding
that his right arm did not work. "How long've I been—Christ watch it!"
A Federal soldier had run toward them from the wreckage at the gate.
He had lost his helmet of ceramic-impregnated thermoplastic, but his rifle
waved at arm's length as he strode. "Hansel!" he cried, "are you all right?"
Hodicky twisted as he knelt, unslinging his own weapon. The chill had
returned. The Federal soldier was within ten meters. "Hans\" the man
called again, skidding to a halt.
Hodicky raised his rifle. He froze. Behind him, Quade was trying to
reach his rifle with his left hand. The sling was caught under Hodicky's
knee.
"You bastard, you killed him!" shrieked the Federal. The muzzle flash of
his rifle flared magenta in Hodicky's goggles. An impact sledged the little
private backward over Quade.
The Federal's cheeks and eyes bulged momentarily. There was a tiny
hole in the bridge of his nose and another, perfectly matching, in the back
as he pitched forward.
"You sons of bitches coming or you going to wait for a private car?"
roared Jo Hummel as she jerked Quade to his feet. Firing was still general
now, but it seemed to be concentrated on the moving vehicles rather than
on the truck park itself. Trooper Powers hunched in the angle of a truck
body and cab. Her weapon was shouldered and ready for another target.
"Christ, Pavel," the black-haired man cried.
Sergeant Hummel knew that the three of them were in the open. Shots
could rip lethally from the darkness before Bunny had a prayer of reacting
to the gunners. But Hummel knew also that the deserters had saved the
necks of troops they did not know when they started the truck careening

westward. The Sergeant reached past Quade to lay her palm on Hodicky's
chest. "Hell," she said, "the pump's fine and I don't see any blood. Gimme
a hand and I'll carry him."
Quade was too battered to protest as the Sergeant raised his friend for a
packstrap carry. Hodicky's left cross-belt flapped around his knees. Powers
stepped to them. She slashed the whole bandolier away with a knife she
slid from Hummel's boot sheath. A bullet had struck the bandolier over
the deserter's left shoulder. It had disintegrated on and with the two
loaded magazines in the pouch. The loaded ammunition was electrically
primed. It was as little affected by heat or shock as so much clay. The
impact had ripped the tough fabric of the bandolier, however, and it had
stunned the man wearing it.
"Well, we bought them some time," Hummel muttered as she handed
her burden through the fence to Private Quade. Hodicky was beginning to
drool, but he had not yet regained consciousness. "I only hope they know
how to use it up there."
The three soldiers looked instinctively toward the northern ridgeline. Its
dark silence was the best proof they had that their mission had succeeded.
"The Lieutenant says the lead team's through the mines, sir," Sergeant
Mboko reported to Albrecht Waldstejn.
The Cecach officer gave a bleak smile. They were all accepting" his
leadership as if he had a real rank among them; and as if he knew what
the hell he was doing. But one thing the tall officer had learned even before
he was conscripted was that crises were best handled by people who were
willing to make decisions. Fasolini's mercenaries might have gained only a
day of life; but they did have that day over what staying in their shelters
would have given them.
Sergeant Mboko was thinking along the same lines. Aloud he said, "I
wanted to take a truck. The
Colonel said it'd be suicide. He was right a lot of the time."
After a moment, the mercenary said, "The background on Cecach
looked pretty clean. Stalemate at the Front, that's not so bad. Real wackos
on the other side, but the Federals who wanted to hire us about as decent
as anybody in the middle of a war."
"Old data," said Waldstejn softly.
"Yeah," Mboko agreed, "about a year old. The Rubes got heavy armor,
the Front went to hell. And the folks running things in Praha seem to have

figured that if they're crazier bastards than the Rubes, then they'll beat
the Rubes. Wrong both times, I guess. . . ."
From the modest height of the ridge, the two men had an excellent view
of what was happening in the valley. There were a few riflemen firing
uselessly from the Complex and outlying bunkers. Most of the garrison
seemed to be concentrating on lobbing rockets into the two trucks. Both
vehicles were beyond the westernmost bunkers of the compound, but only
the first was still moving. The damaged second ore hauler had skidded
and overturned when a rocket destroyed all the drive fans on its right side.
Rounds continued to crash into it one or two a minute, now that it was
immobilized. The white flashes reached the watchers in false synchronous
with the booming of earlier warheads.
No one could have survived in the riddled cargo bay of the first truck,
but Waldstejn thought for a moment that the vehicle itself might drift out
of sight along the diminishing pylons. Then there was a hiss unlike
anything else that had savaged the valley that night. The laser cannon had
lifted from Gun Pit West, and its tube was cherry red.
Mboko cursed and shouldered his weapon. It was a long shot, but a
large target and a fragile one.
The Cecach deserter touched Mboko's arm. "Let them," he said. "We're
all dead, remember?"
"You know," said the Sergeant, "most times you get a really nasty war,
it's planets that a couple different nations colonized together, different
planets. You people here— one foundation, everybody Czech. . . . But you
managed the job pretty well, didn't you?"
The laser drew a pale line across the night. The beam was pulsed so that
metal subliming from the target would not scatter it in a reflecting fog,
but the modulations were at too high a rate for human retinas to respond
to them. Twenty-five square centimeters of the truck's plating flashed
from red to white to black as the metal vaporized and the apparatus
within the plenum chamber took the beam directly. Steel burned when
severed cables shorted input from the receiving antenna into the hull. The
gun continued to play on the glowing wreckage.
"You better go, sir," Mboko said without looking away from the
spectacle. "I'll bring in the rear guard, never fear."
As Waldstejn started to move off, he heard the Sergeant say, "Colonel
was right a lot of the time. But he still hired us out to these Federal sons of
bitches."

CHAPTER SIX
The radioed summons had been to Ensign Brionca's office at the 522nd
Headquarters building. Vladimir Ortschugin noticed immediately,
however, that the real power there lay with the Republican chaplain. The
holes punched during the fighting thirty-six hours before had been
patched with plastic sheeting, but the building still smelled of burnt
insulation.
For that matter, the Swobodan spaceman caught a whiff of Major
Lichtenstein's body also. It hung as an object lesson from the boom of a
crane parked just outside. The Major's neck had stretched so that his right
boot drew little circles in the dust as his body twisted. Formally, the
Republicans had executed Lichtenstein for failing to prevent the loss of
much of the mercenaries' valuable equipment. Personally, Ortschugin
wondered whether the Re publicans would have deemed the offense
punishable by death if they had been able to imagine any other use for the
fat, drunken Major.
Ortschugin strolled into what had been the Major's office. He bowed
and said, "Excellency, I am Acting Captain Vladimir Ortschugin, a free
citizen of Novaya Swoboda. I am at your service."
Ortschugin had gained a few hours observation of the men who had
conquered Smiricky #4. The Swobodan was aware now that his
assumption of 'business as usual' had been seriously in error. Perhaps the
very highest officers thought in terms of political and economic realities.
Most Rubes, however, were on a mission for their Lord.
The slim, dark Republican officer did not speak. He rose from his chair
instead and walked over to the spacer. The Republican uniform was taupe
colored, a shade too dull even to be called black. Perhaps at base it was a
yellow of infinite drabhess, like a mole's hide. The Republican wore no
insignia of rank, but Ortschugin did not need Captain Brionca's obvious
terror to recognize the man's authority.
The Republican touched the chain which was barely visible at the
throat of the Swobodan's tunic. He tugged out the small crucifix attached
to it, still without speaking. With a single jerk of his hand, the Republican
broke the chain and dropped the little icon on the floor. As his boot
ground the silver against the tile, the Republican said, "On Cecach we no
longer worship a dead god, Captain. We worship the One Who is Risen.
This will be your only warning." He returned to his chair.
The back of Ortschugin's neck was stinging, but he was not sure
whether the drops crawling down his vertebrae were sweat or blood. He

swallowed to be able to say, "Yes, Excellency, I understand."
"You know your ship has been confiscated for trading with idolators,"
the Republican said as if he really did assume that would be obvious to the
Swobodan. "What will be required to fly it back to Budweis?"
"Well, Excellency—" Ortschugin began.
"I am not an 'Excellency', foreigner!" the Republican officer broke in.
"Only our Lord is excellent. You may refer to me as Chaplain Bittman, if
you desire."
Ortschugin nodded obsequiously. What he desired. . . . But if he were to
survive the next minutes, much less lift again from this damnable planet..
.. "Yes, Chaplain Bittman," he said aloud. "The hull damage will not
prevent us from operating in an atmosphere, though of course we could
not, ah, go off-planet under such circumstances." That was a lie—they
could work ship in pressure suits if they ever got a powerplant. The
discomfort would be a damned cheap price for a return to Swoboda. "But
we still need a main fusion bottle. We can't lift on the auxilliary power
unit, and we couldn't stay up for more than a few minutes on it alone if we
did lift." And that was almost the truth, more was the pity, or the Katyn
Forest would have been long gone.
"What about the broadcast antenna you rigged?" asked
Captain—Ensign, now—Brionca unexpectedly.
The two men looked at her—Bittman in cool surprise, Ortschugin with
an expression he prayed did not reflect his horror at the question. "Yes,
tell us about that," prodded the Chaplain. "You have fitted an antenna to
take you to Praha along the truck pylons?"
"We had, ah, considered, doing that, yes," the spaceman answered
carefully. He decided that only the simple truth was going to work. That
bitch Brionca was staring at him sullenly. Her uniform looked as if she
had slept in it. Her eyes looked as if she had not slept for a week. "The
power hook-up proved possible—" they could check the ship and see that—
"but there are delays in the alignment controls. The program is simple
compared to our ordinary navigational work, of course, but it's very
different. ..." Ortschugin let his voice trail off. Sweat from his forehead
made his eyes sting, but he was afraid to raise his hand to wipe them.
Saint Nicolas be with us now!
Bittman stood again. He was showing the first signs of real interest
since his eyes had stopped measuring Ortschugin for a rope. No one had
suggested that the spaceman sit down. His knees were beginning to quiver
with the unaccustomed brace in which tension was holding him. "You

mean that your whole huge starship can run on broadcast power in good
truth?" the Chaplain demanded.
"We, ah, thought perhaps so," the Swobodan agreed. "We didn't test it
before the Complex, ah—"
"Yes, was liberated," Chaplain Bittman finished for Ortschugin. He
added, in a voice which had no more expression or mercy than the clack of
a trap closing, "I advise you not to 'test' the system now, either, Captain.
The idolators are attempting to make a stand along the line between here
and Praha—they know how important it will be to the future of the Return
to God. Elements of the three armored regiments are pushing them back.
Major elements." Bittman permitted himself a smile at something he
probably thought was funny. "What do you suppose the concentrated fire
of, say, four Terra-built tanks would do to the hull even of your starship,
Captain?"
"We're at your service, E-Chaplain Bittman," the spacer said through
dry lips, "but the pylons do lead only west from here."
"For the moment!" the Chaplain retorted with a zeal that shone across
his slim, swarthy face. "Do you know why this line is crucial to the Lord's
work, Captain?" he demanded rhetorically. "Because the fusion plant here,
for the mining and smelting operations, was more than big enough to
energize a broadcast system as well. That means that when we complete a
temporary link from our own system east of Bradova, we have a channel
for the heaviest, bulkiest supplies straight to the idolators' capital! Our
armor is the head of the spear plunging into the heart of schism and
idolatry!"
For the moment, Ortschugin's mind made of him an engineer again and
not merely a victim. He understood the situation perfectly. Pylons were
easy enough to raise and align. They were, after all, little more than
lattices with two pairs of antennas. The lower alignments beamed power
to whatever vehicle was equipped to receive it, while the upper alignments
charged the system itself. Cutting a pylon would prevent vehicles from
proceeding until the gap was repaired, but the other parts of the system
would continue to function.
If it were energized from both sides of the gap.
Republicans and Federalists both had crisscrossed their sides of the
Front with branch lines to supply their troops. The power and load
capacity of the branches was limited, however. The working, full-scale
fusion plant of Smiricky #4 could very well tip the scales. The next
Republican thrust would not outrun its supplies and so be contained, the

way previous victories had been.
Ensign Brionca understood also. She was looking at her hands,
interlaced on the desk in front of her. Her fingers were not moving, but
each nail left a bloodless white halo on the back of the hand where it
rested. For the first time, Captain Ortschugin felt a twinge of sympathy for
her.
"Well, that's good news—that we'll be able to repair your vessel," the
Republican chaplain was continuing briskly. "But that was only one of the
things we needed to discuss with you." He sat down. His voice was cool
again, his face composed. Bittman had become a human being who no
longer wore the mantle of the Lord. "I am informed that you had personal
contact with the mercenaries who were stationed here and with the—" He
paused, with his mouth quirked in irritation.
"The Supply Officer," Ensign Brionca said. She did not look up.
"Lieutenant Waldstejn. Albrecht Waldstejn."
"Yes, the Supply Officer," the Republican agreed with a sharp glance at
Brionca. He turned his attention to the spaceman. "What do you know
about their intentions, where they planned to go?"
Ortschugin's face went blank in surprise. "Go?" he repeated. "Well,
Praha, I suppose. . . . But good Christ, you don't mean that—"
"Never curse again on the soil of Cecach!" Bittman said.
Ortschugin nodded and swallowed. "Yes, Ex-C-Chaplain. I, ah, I was
very surprised that any of the—of them had survived. We watched the
trucks being blasted on our screens, you see."
"There was no one in the wreckage," the Ensign said dully. "No sign of
anything human, not even a driver. They all walked out while we were
shooting at empty trucks."
"Yes," said the Chaplain with another look of appraisal, "we may have
executed Major Lichten-stein more painlessly than his actions deserved.
But as for you, Captain Ortschugin—" the voice was the voice of a
computer, balancing accounts for the Lord— "I would not have you think
that this is a minor matter, a few heretics. We will find these—persons,
with the Lord's help. Even now we are searching their most likely hiding
place. If you can help us, well and good."
Like a yo-yo, Ortschugin thought as the Chaplain rose again, but there
was no humor on the spacer's face or even on the surface of his mind.
"If you know something of their intentions and you do not tell us,"
Bittman continued, his face like wood and his voice like steel, "then be

assured that the prisoners we take will speak, will tell us everything they
know before they die. If you have hidden anything from us, you will join
those you tried to protect."
"I know nothing of their plans," the Swobodan said. He cleared his
throat. "I didn't know they had plans, and I thought they were all dead."
He paused. Then he added, "I suppose that was right, wasn't it? They are
dead, Waldstejn and the rest. They just don't know it yet."
* * *
"Christ, what a place to be buried," muttered Churchie Dwyer.
"I didn't think there'd be whores," Del Hoybrin agreed sadly. Even his
long-time comrade had to turn to be sure that the big man was serious.
Before the outbreak of fighting, ore from Pit 4B had been rich enough
to employ eighty to a hundred miners. A branch line connected the pit
with the truck route between Praha and Smiricky #4. A line directly to the
smelter complex would have been shorter, but there were two severe
ridges in the way. Loaded trucks did not like hills. Neither did Churchie,
but nobody was asking him. . . . The muscles of the veteran's shins burned
with climbing as badly as if they and not his back had been broiled two
days before.
The pylons leading south-west toward the main line flared their
bract-like antennas not far above the scrub which had recovered most of
the area. "The old man was really pissed when they dumped the truck
here," Pavel Hodicky remarked shyly. "I can see why, now. Even if
everybody in the convoy was asleep, they should've heard the branches
hitting the trucks, shouldn't they?"
Dwyer grunted as the trooper ahead of him released one of those
branches. "Hell," he said, "Lichtenstein was always pissed. Pissed on
brandy." His voice changed, taking on a reverential note which was
blasphemous when applied to the images Churchie polished in his mind.
"I know just how to sweat that brandy out of him, too. Sweat the marrow
right out of his bones, for what he did to us."
"Ah, I meant the Lieutenant," Hodicky explained. "He was our boss." He
squeezed Quade's shoulder, trying to bring the black-haired man into the
conversation.
The four of them, two veterans and two deserters, had been together
since the escape. By the time Sergeant Hummel's commando had
stumbled back to the Operations Center, the 522nd's aimed fire was
concentrated on the truck line westward. All a rear guard could do then

would be to draw the indigs' attention to the real escape route. Del and
Churchie had joined their section leader unharmed. A rocket had sailed
over them to demolish the front of the shelter, however. The Company's
cone-bore weapons had no true muzzle flash because the propellant was
fully consumed in the barrel. After continuous fire, though, a miasma of
faintly-glowing sabot material had drifted in front of their position. It was
that which had marked them for a Federal rocketeer who was a damned
sight better than belonged in the 522nd.
Well, so were Quade and Hodicky in their ways, though that
black-haired runt gave Churchie the creeps when their eyes met.
The company was straggling down to the overturned truck. It loomed
out of the brush like a fish cast up with other flotsam by a high tide.
Troopers were clambering over the vehicle. At its side stood the new
command group. Sergeant Jensen was already leading his small section
toward the buildings at the pit head. The Federal lieutenant was obvious
for his sand-mottled fatigues among the woody blurs of the mercenaries
around him. A bloody supply officer. Well, Mrs. Dwyer hadn't raised her
sons to get their heads blown off like generally happened to leaders in this
business. Churchie didn't give a hoot in Hell who was in charge, as long as
they knew what they were doing. Officers who put men and bullets in the
same category of fungible goods did not last long in mercenary units.
One of them had not lasted through his first firefight when he
commanded Churchie Dwyer.
"Suppose there's anything worth having in the buildings?" the veteran
asked, nodding through a gap in the brush.
"Doubt it," Hodicky said, glancing to the side also. He was enough
shorter than Dwyer that he could not see the pit head at the moment.
From the hilltop, six grueling hours before, however, they had all gotten a
glimpse of the shaft cover and the paired barracks. While the mine was in
use, the valley was defoliated periodically just like that in which Smiricky
#4 lay. Now from an angle, a sea of brush lapped the roofs. The regrowth
of the brush was taller though still less dense than some of what the
Company had just marched through miserably.
Between lyceum English and the blend of Slavic languages Dwyer had
picked up during a life of slaughter and chicanery, the two men could
communicate fairly well. Hodicky was pathetically grateful for the
attention. The chance to actually give the veteran useful information was a
delight. "The place was abandoned two, three years ago," he explained.
"There was still ore, but they couldn't keep workers. They'd bug out over

the next ridge where there's a big farm, ride back to Praha in produce
trucks. Or if they were Rubes, and a lot of them are sentenced to the mines
instead of—well, sentenced to the mines . . . some of them would try to slip
across the Front."
The little man grimaced. He had known a few Reformed Brethren in
school, though his home neighborhood had been almost solidly Catholic.
The Rubes were all crazy, besides going to Hell for sure when they died.
"They stationed troops around the Complex," Hodicky continued, "that's
what we were doing there. But it wasn't worth it for the outlying pits, it'd
take too many guards for how much they were getting out of them."
Waldstejn had often lectured his two subordinates in the warehouse for
lack of anyone else in the 522nd for him to talk to. Hodicky, nearly as
lonely himself, had listened to his present benefit.
They were close enough to the truck now that the press of troops
standing around it hid more of the vehicle than the foliage did. The
stream down the middle of the valley could be heard just beyond. "Well,"
said Churchie Dwyer, "there might at least be some booze in there, right?
Only fair, after this goddam hike that we ride back—"
And then, with reflexes that not even the thought of liquor had dulled,
Dwyer was clearing his weapon.
"Well, nothing structurally wrong," Lieutenant Waldstejn said. The
drive fans rotated freely under the impulse of Sergeant Mboko's hand.
The convoy had been reversing manually in the dark, and one of the
vehicles had managed to slip its skirt over the skirt of the next ahead.
Because the branch to 4B had less than half the available power of the
main line, the fans had not responded as the driver had expected when he
tried to correct the tilt. The whole business had demonstrated an
ineptitude striking even for the Transport Service.
Now, though, as dusk blurred the far slope to | gray suede, there was a
chance that the accident would save everybody in the Smiricky garrison
who deserved saving.
"What's it loaded with?" asked Lieutenant ben Mehdi. The voices of
troopers echoed from the j back of the vehicle.
"Hey, everybody out!" ben Mehdi added. "I don't j want people screwing
around when it may be stuff | we need. Bastien—" he waved to a Leading
Trooper in Mboko's section— "get your team together and start
off-loading the cargo."
"It was all supplies for the Complex, so I wasn't i really concerned," said

Waldstejn, walking toward \ the back himself. Sergeant Jensen had gone
off to find a cable to right the truck. The other three mercenary leaders
appeared to drift with him. "From the codes on the manifest, it wasn't
food, ; dammit. Probably drill bits for—"
"Jesus Christ, watch that!" screamed Sergeant Hummel as two soldiers
swung a case from the truck to the ground. "That's explosives!"
The packing case was banded with gray plastic, i It hung from the
fingertips of the men who had just released it. All their efforts could do
was to drag them after the case. It hit the ground with a thump and a
spurt of dust. There was dead silence around the vehicle.
"Well," said Lieutenant Waldstejn testily, "I don't know what the
problem is. They weren't going to pack detonators in with the explosives,
after all." Tense faces loosened as the Cecach officer stepped to the case
and rubbed grit from its warning label with his open palm.
Johanna Hummel looked a little embarrassed also. Without hesitation,
however, she said, "Lieutenant, I've been places where they tried to
stabilize nitrogylcerin with mica. When I saw the red star—" she nodded
at the label—"I didn't wait around."
"Well, on Cecach we use plastic explosives," Waldstejn retorted
defensively. "We're civilized, even if we don't have all the high tech
electronics—" He stopped and turned back to Hummel. "Forgive me,
Sergeant," he said. "You were obviously right. And if we're civilized, then
the way we've treated you and the Company gives little enough proof of it."
"Well, we still need to get it the hell out of the truck, don't we?"
remarked Sergeant Mboko. "It's going to be a bitch to right anyway." In a
louder voice he ordered, "Carry on, Bastien, but make a chain, will you?
Don't just toss the stuff around like so many sand bags."
"Ah, Sergeant Hummel," Waldstejn said, "start your troops cutting
brush on the far side of the truck." The Cecach officer forced himself to
face Hummel. He felt awkward about giving orders to any of the
mercenaries, but it had to be done—for all their sakes. Hussein ben Mehdi
and the two male sergeants made it easy with an acceptance that met him
more than half way.
Jo Hummel made nothing easy. Her attitude was a challenge, while her
sex—and her apparent sexual preference—aggravated Waldstejn's
discomfort. Now she said, "Look, Lieutenant, I hope to God you don't
think you can turn this low crap—" she waved a hand— "into levers to help
pry the truck up with. My section's tired. Since there's no straight
branches as long as your dick, I don't see—"

"I believe, Sergeant," Waldstejn interrupted, grasping the nettle, "that
we can wedge a mat of brush under the side as soon as we get it off the
ground. That way if the cable slips, we don't start over from the beginning.
Now, if you'll give that order, I want to talk with you in private." He jerked
a thumb to the side, away from the vehicle and the troops around it.
Hummel pursed her lips. Beside her, Trooper Powers squatted on the
ground. She had taken off her helmet and was kneading her temples
wearily through her bright blond hair. "Yes sir," Hummel said. She raised
a finger to key the radio.
The reconnaissance drone, jinking around brush scarcely three meters
above the ground, sailed over them like the first of the shells it surely
presaged.
Trooper Herzenberg's light-wand trembled, throwing the shadow of the
mine elevator over the far wall in a quivering circle. She was exhausted
with the long march. Sight of the cable they had been sent for brought no
elation, only a shudder at the new job it presented. "Guns," she called,
"here's one that's still up. Want me to climb out and cut loose the cage?"
There were three shafts at the pit head for reasons which no one in
Jensen's section could fathom. All three were covered by a single high,
sheet-metal building over fifty meters long. Two of the elevator cages were
at or near the bottom of their shafts. The third, which Herzenberg had
been sent to check, had a winding drum full of cable. The newly-recruited
trooper still found the difficulties attending the mass of braided steel to be
insoluble.
Guiterez strolled over to her before Sergeant Jensen himself arrived.
The big building was un-lighted except for what entered through rust
holes and the pairs of windows high in either roof gable. To eyes adapted
to the daylight outside, the small patches of brightness were more dazzling
than useful. Guiterez took the dim light as an invitation to lay his hand on
Herzenberg's solid hip. The gesture was more of a caress than a pat. The
female trooper was almost too tired to bat him away, but she twisted and
the butt of her slung weapon cracked Guiterez across the knuckles.
"Hell, honey," said the veteran, ignoring the rebuff, "you don't need to
risk that sweet little ass of yours." He knelt, resting his gun barrel on the
shaft railing.
"Hold up, Tilly," Jensen replied on the radio. "I'll take a look at it." The
whisper of his words followed their radio shadow through the air of the
big room.

Guiterez flipped the holographic sight picture up to full magnification.
The braided elevator cable shimmered at an apparent fifteen centimeters
from his right pupil. Four orange lines rayed from the center. The greatest
advantage of the electronic sight over an optical one was that there was no
tube for heavy recoil to slam against the shooter's brow ridge.
The cable quivered across the field of view despite Guiterez' attempts to
steady it. The picture slowed as he took a deep breath.
"Look," Herzenberg said, "Guns says—"
The shot blasted. There was a momentary fluorescent tremble of sabot
material and a flash from the cable. The needle-slim projectile was far too
small to sever a one-centimeter cable. Instead, it drilled a neat hole which
made no significant difference in the strength of the multiple, redundant
strands.
"God damn it, Dog," one of the approaching crewmen shouted, "will you
stop clowning around?"
"Well, I thought—" Guiterez said, standing up sheepishly. He lowered
his weapon and massaged his shoulder.
"If you'd thought," said Sergeant Jensen harshly, "you'd have known we
could do without the last—" he eyed the angle of cable from the take-up
drum, through the support pulley, and down again to the elevator itself—
"four meters with what there is on the drum." The tall section leader
reached up with his cutting bar. He positioned it carefully on the highest
part of the cable he could reach with his hip supported by the guard rail.
Then he slashed downward and parted the cable with a single stroke. The
short end of the cable flew up with a twang of released tension. The cage
dropped a centimeter or so before its automatic braking system locked it
to the guide rails with a horrible scrunch.
"That," said the Sergeant-Gunner, "is what you'd have done if you'd
thought." He was taking quick breaths which belied the apparent ease of
what he had just done. Almost anyone else in the unit would have needed
several strokes to cut the braided steel. "Now," Jensen continued, "you and
Herzen-berg cut through the axle on both sides." He tapped the drum. It
rocked a little now that its ratchet no longer supported the weight of the
elevator. "We'll roll the bastard down the hill and save ourselves the
trouble of dragging the cable."
There was a shot, then a crackling volley from outside the shed. The
veterans slipped their weapons into their hands. Herzenberg followed suit
a moment later.

"Guns to White One," Jensen called on the command push. "Give me a
sitrep."
Instead of the requested situation report, there was an crackle of static
and a few words in what might have been Sergeant Mboko's voice.
The Gunner looked around at the sheet metal and dim tracery of girders
surrounding them. "We've got to get outside to hear anything," he said.
"You two—" he pointed to Guiterez and the newbie— "get cracking. We
may need the truck ready yesterday if somebody's caught us." With the
other two members of the gun crew at his heels, Jensen began sprinting
for the distant door.
Herzenberg and Guiterez looked at one another. Swallowing, they laid
down their guns and undipped their cutting bars. As their blades rasped
against the axle in distinct rhythms, the firing beyond the walls ceased.
The first trooper to fire at the reconnaissance drone missed by a
country mile. The drone had a three-meter wingspan and a speed of less
than a hundred kph—but it was as unexpected as a bomb in a flower
basket. Satellite recce was impossible amidst laser cannon and
stratosphere-launched penetrators. Satellites became orbital junk within
minutes of starting their first pass over hostile territory. High altitude
aircraft were in an even worse plight.
But a vehicle which whirred along near the ground, tacking often and
randomly as it ran its programmed course, was preserved by terrain
irregularities from the weapons that wrecked its higher-flying brethren.
The drone was powered by an almost silent high-bypass turbofan. The
intake cowling looked large above the slim, armored cigar carrying the
fuel and instrument package, but the engine had been deliberatedly
understressed in the expectation that it would pick up trash and bullets in
the normal course of its existence. Still, the drone was slow enough that
almost anyone in the Company could have demolished it, despite its
twitching changes of direction, if there had been a clear field of view. The
trooper who glanced up to see the rotor sailing toward his face at a
hundred klicks went straight over on his back. For navigational purposes,
the drone treated the soldiers as if they were bushes. The drone lifted to
clear the truck behind him as it would have cleared the man himself—by a
meter. His shot was scarcely into the same sector of sky as the fog-gray
wings that flashed above him.
"Maria!" Waldstejn blurted as the drone flicked overhead. Around him
more experienced troopers were snatching at weapons whose slings were

entangled with the straps of cast-off packs. Shots thrashed the brush as
the drone skipped away downstream. Then somebody planted a boot in
the small of Waldstejn's back and thrust him out of the way without
ceremony.
Private Quade, fifty meters away with the last of the Company, had
more warning than the soldiers around the truck, and his assault rifle
could spray rounds toward what seemed a hopeless target for aimed fire.
The right wing lifted as the drone banked left, its body out of sight below
mounds of coarse scrub. The gray-brown camouflage mottling of the
upper surface was suddenly puckered by three bright specks—holes
punched by Quade's offhand burst. The right wingtip dropped and the left
one rose, further away as the drone threaded its way out of the
shot-spitting pocket. It was effectively undamaged, and no further shots
could be expected to—
A gun went off directly above Albrecht Waldstejn's head. He twisted on
the ground to curse the shooter who was both wasting ammunition and
threatening to deafen him. Out of the corner of his eye, Waldstejn saw the
drone again. It was flipping skyward, end over end, in a spray of sparks
and fuel which then ignited in an orange flash. A projectile had coursed
the cylindrical body the long way, taking no more account of the armor
than it had the brush through which it had drilled to reach its target. The
drone spun, shedding its wings as it did so. Open-mouthed, the Cecach
lieutenant watched Iris Powers put a needless second round through the
center of the fireball. The drone blew up on the ground, another flash
above the scrub and a pillar of black smoke.
Powers began to switch magazines. She had braced her trim buttocks
against the top of the truck's plenum chamber when she shot. By leaning
forward at the waist, she had avoided having her shoulder broken between
the recoil and the immobile mass of the truck.
"How in the hell did you do that?" Waldstejn demanded as he got to his
feet. "It was out of sight—the body of it, I mean."
The section leaders were still shouting into their radios to stop troopers
from firing toward the! smoke.
Powers blushed. A wisp of blond hair curled from beneath her helmet
and across her cheek. "From where the wing was, the body had to be—!
where I aimed," she said. She spoke so quietly that Waldstejn had almost
to read her lips since! the shooting had partly deafened him.
"Goddam good work, Bunny," said Sergeants Hummel as she hugged
her friend. Powers was! slipping two loose rounds into the magazine shes

had just taken from her weapon. "I think we're I clear, Lieutenant,"
Hummel continued. Her tone! was businesslike but no longer hostile.
"We're low I enough here—" she gestured in the direction of the stream
and the fuming remains of the drone—j "that it can't have been in radio
contact with its base when Bu—Trooper Powers hit it." Hummel and
Waldstejn exchanged tight smiles. "So they don't know we're here."
"Well, we may not be so lucky the next time," Waldstejn said. "Pick the
six best shots in the Company and put them on look-out until we get
moving." He smiled again, his lips as taut as his guts. "And Private Quade,
he should be among them. Mboko, let's get moving on this truck. We
need—"
Waldstejn fell silent. Soldiers were throwing themselves down. And after
surviving the bombs that had hit Smiricky #4, even an ex-Supply Officer
could guess the meaning of the howling from the western sky.
* * *
Horobin had time to slip the glossy pornography under a stack of log
books when Director Piccolomini opened the door. He did not, however,
have time to scan his instruments before his superior could do so.
"Everything normal, sir," said the Reconnaissance Technician, taking a
chance that would have paid off nineteen times out of twenty. His blood in
his ears roared against the purr of the score of monitors in the room with
the two men.
Director Piccolomini's face darkened to a shade in ugly contrast with
his taupe uniform. He pointed at the inked tape curling from one of the
top row of monitors. Peaks jabbed at five minutes intervals against the
pre-printed time scale along the edge. There was no peak during the latest
six minutes. As the Director of Reconnaissance and his subordinate
watched, the tape continued to crawl out of the monitor with only the flat
line that indicated no signal had been received from the drone keyed to
that machine. "What do you mean normal, Technician Horobin?"
Piccolomini demanded.
"I—" Horobin stammered. His skin prickled with sweat, as if
Piccolomini were a furnace and not a short, balding man.
• "Well, do your job, you fool!" Piccolomini shouted. "You only have two
drones out. Surely you know what to do if there's an anomaly on one of
them!"
Horobin had not bothered to read the glassine-covered Special
Procedures sheets when he took over the watch. Normally the trailer
housing the monitors was the quietest, most private place in General

Yorck's headquarters. Now the Technician fumbled for the sheet marked
Monitor 7, feeling as if he were about to melt away and wishing to the
crucified Lord that he could. He turned to his superior. "It say—" he
began.
"Don't tell me, you idiot!" Piccolomini cried. "Do it! Do it!"
The handset slipped from Horobin's fingers when he picked it up, but
on the second try he managed to punch the correct combination into the
key pad. Reading the data through the glassine and the blur of
perspiration clouding his eyes, the Technician said, "Echo to Landseer."
"Go ahead, Echo," replied the artillery controller through a burst of
intervening static.
"One of our drones has failed to report in segment Apache," Horobin
continued. "That is, ah— yeah, Apache. Execute Apache soonest."
"Roger, execute Fire Order Apache," buzzed the controller's voice in
apparent disinterest. "Landseer to Echo, out." The speaker clicked and
went dead.
"Well, aren't you going to log it in, Technician Horobin?" Piccolomini
asked. "One of your drones has disappeared while flying a high-risk
pattern, hasn't it? Do I have to tell you all your duties, man?"
Dear God, if you'll only get him out of here, the Technician thought, I'll
make it up to you. I swear it. And he slid out the log book, having
forgotten completely what he had hidden beneath it only seconds before.
The photographs flopped to the floor, glossy side up. The blonde woman of
the top one appeared to be smiling, though it was difficult to tell since
most of her mouth was hidden by the labiae of her brunette companion.
Piccolomini looked from Horobin to the photographs. The Director's
face momentarily relaxed from anger to puzzlement. His mind was
struggling to find a present referent for the picture, as if it were an
enlargement of the internal structure of a molecule.
The expression that replaced puzzlement would have been suitable for
someone who had stumbled upon a pack of dogs devouring an infant.
Technician Horobin felt faint. He was holding himself in a tight brace
and vainly willing an end to his vital functions. The trailer shuddered
under the hoarse blasts of the alarm the Director had pressed to summon
a squad of the interior guard. "Is this how you serve your Lord?" Director
Piccolomini shouted. "Swilling the foulest poisons of the adversary while
the enemies of the Lord's Church sweep clear of his vengeance? Do you
know what this means, Horobin? It means death! Death!"

The tape from Monitor 7 was still flat. A series of peaks sprang up on
the other working monitor, however. It was keyed to a drone with the
column advancing toward Praha. It had picked up the first salvo of the
battery executing Fire Order Apache. Six twenty-centimeter shells were in
flight toward what Republican analysts had determined to be the most
probable hiding place along the segment of its path where the drone had
disappeared.
"Death!" Piccolomini repeated.
The bars sang against the axle. It was awkward cutting up from the
bottom, but otherwise the weight of the reel bound the notches against
even the ultra-slick sides of the bars. Between strokes, Guiterez panted, "I
don't know where you get off on this high and mighty crap. Don't I helped
you? Girl, you don't know shit when you came here. Me and the boys, we
save your ass a lotta times, a lotta times. So what's the harm you give us
the time, huh? You give us the time, we give you the time."
Herzenberg had closed her eyes, as if that would somehow lessen the
effort of sawing. Her breath burned her throat, and her voice caught the
first time she tried to speak. "The only time I want from you," she said, "is
time to myself. Goddammit, Dog, if I was looking for a dick I'd have—"
"Christ Jesus, get clear!" blasted Sergeant Jensen's voice from their
radios.
Both troopers dropped their cutting bars and turned. The tall section
leader stood in the doorway, silhouetted by the outside light. Jensen's face
was hidden. His voice held the horror of his realization that Guiterez and
Herzenberg would not have been able to hear the sound of incoming shells
as those outside could.
A rosette opened in the roof of the great shed. For a microsecond, the
interior blazed with six clean shafts of sunlight. Then the salvo detonated.
Without specific reconnaissance—the data the drone would have
broadcast if Trooper Powers had not shot it down—Republican
intelligence units had no way of knowing about the overturned truck and
the troops clustered around it. They did have pre-war maps and imagery
from the last minutes before the satellites spilled down in gouts of fire,
however. From these materials, spurred by the chill, righteous fury of
General Yorck, they had plotted likely escape routes for the mercenaries;
suitable search patterns for the drones which would track them down like
the beasts they were; and probable shelters from which the pursued might
ambush a drone before it could report them.

Pit 4B had been one of those shelters.
The shell that went off in an air burst on the ridge girder perversely
saved Trooper Herzenberg's life. The high-capacity shell ripped its casing
into a sleet of fragments that seemed hideously dense; but the pattern was
spherical and Herzenberg, fifteen meters beneath its heart, was missed by
any shrapnel large enough to be lethal. The shock wave flung her down in
a red blur—the flash of high explosive and the blood surging in the
capillaries of her eyes.
The shell that lanced into the ground beside the mine shaft did not, as a
result, cut the trooper in half on its way.
Earth and steel gouted across the huge mine shed, red flashes and the
reeking black smoke of combustion products swaddling the fires that gave
them birth. The shell that knocked Herzenberg to safety rolled back the
roof in a thirty-meter ulcer. Bare girders sagged with the ends of the ridge
pole, saved from collapse by the fact that their burden had been stripped
away from them.
Someone was screaming. After an instant of disorientation, Herzenberg
became sure it was not herself. She opened her eyes.
The cavity in the roof was no bar to the sunlight, but smoke and dust
swirled surreally over the skeletal girders. It blurred and scattered the
twisted scene below. The elevator cage was warped. The shaft on which it
stood had lost all definition on two sides to a shell crater, but the tubular
frame of the cage had not offered much purchase to the blast. The flat,
heavy ends of the cable reel had caught the force squarely, however.
When the shock wave hit it, the reel had torqued and snapped the axle
where the troopers' cuts had weakened it. It now lay up-ended across both
of Guiterez' legs.
Herzenberg wobbled to her screaming companion. She was obscurely
troubled to find herself five meters from where she had been during the
last moment she could remember. Nothing was clear in her mind or her
vision. Grit and long-chain molecules racked her lungs even more than the
sawing had.
Upright, the drum was as tall as the stocky woman. It was tilted by the
flesh it crushed beneath it. Herzenberg strained to tip it clear, bloodying
her hands on frayed strands of the cable. The reel shuddered. Guiterez'
mouth closed and his eyeballs rolled up as he fainted. Weeping with
frustration, Herzenberg looked for a lever. She found her companion's
weapon. She thrust the barrel under the drum and pried with the stock.
The light barrel shroud crumpled onto the diamond core.

"Get out of here!" someone shouted. "Christ Jesus, get out!"
Herzenberg did not look around. Tears of rage and effort blinded her.
Her brain was not capable at the moment of processing further
information anyway. Sergeant Jensen surged around her. He gripped the
gun butt with one hand. With the other, he plucked the woman away for
all her hysterical determination could do to hold her to the lever.
The trooper fell backward as her sergeant straightened. His hair was a
sun-struck halo rimming the gray metal of his helmet. The dense plastic
gun-stock sheared with a crack like nearby lightning. The reel began to
topple away from the man it imprisoned.
The roaring in Herzenberg's ears was not blood but the second
incoming salvo.
The last image that Herzenberg's eyes carried with her into blackness
was that of flame fountain-ing from a shell burst. At the apex of one red
tendril, silhouetted against the sky, was a ball which had recently been a
human head.
"Fucking A," muttered Marco Bertinelli as he started to run up-siope.
The pit head buildings were in tatters. The end of one barracks was
ablaze, and a sooty pall rippled turgidly over the shed covering the shafts.
Someone in the gun crew was screaming over the radio for a medic,
though.
"Team One to me," Sergeant Mboko ordered, jumping up as well.
"We're going to get them out and get our own butts out of there too." He
began to stride after the Corpsman. His gun was in his hand instead of
being slung.
"Black Section, off and on," said Jo Hummel. The high points of her
bandolier had been frayed and dirt-smeared by the speed with which she
had hit the ground moments before. "We'll take up a cover position on the
next ridge and wait for White. Move it!"
Fire Order Apache had been a simple Battery Three—three shells from
each tube of the battery, with no delays or follow-up shellings scheduled.
But no one in the Company knew that. Every move had to be made in the
gut-crawling awareness that Rube artillery had the area targeted.
"Wait, dammit!" said Albrecht Waldstejn desperately. "Mboko! Cancel
that, we need the truck clear now!"
The black sergeant ignored the call. Half his section was beginning to
follow him as ordered. The troopers glanced at one another and the

smouldering impact zone.
"Forget it, Lieutenant," Sergeant Hummel said off-handedly. She was
checking the response of her own troops and not bothering to look at
Waldstejn. "It was a good idea, but if the Rubes've got us taped, there'll be
a ground patrol along any time. That thing—" she turned to wave at the
truck— "can't outrun a tank, and we can't fight a goddam tank either, not
with what we got on our backs. Come on, Black Section!"
"Hold up, I said!" shouted Waldstejn. The troops nearest him looked
back in concern, but they continued to file off after the section leaders
familiar to them. The Cecach officer's voice was only a murmur without
authority in the brush a few meters away.
Sookie Foyle's helmet was flexed to a five-kilogram backpack. The
plump-looking Communicator undipped the microphone from that pack
and threw its red toggle switch. At once, the sending units of every commo
helmet in the Company were locked out, keeping all channels clear for the
command set. In a clear, dispassionate voice Foyle announced, "Max
units, freeze in place for orders from C-captain Waldstejn." She handed
the mike to the startled officer. Through a half-smile she whispered,
"Should I have made you a colonel?"
"All right, people," said Albrecht Waldstejn with the appearance of
calm. "Those shells came from the west of us. We're already surrounded,
so we're not going to run after all."
He paused. Troopers had halted in place, startled by the command but
too unsure of the situation not to obey. Their uniforms shimmered in
shades of gray and brown as the fabric picked up nuances of its
immediate vicinity.
"You goddamned stupid hunkie!" roared Sergeant Hummel, furious
most of all at the realization that only Waldstejn had access to the radio
net now. She strode back toward the officer, holding her weapon
muzzle-high as if a banner fluttered from it. "We're not going to surrender
now, they'll feed us our balls if we do!"
The young Cecach officer had the disorienting feeling that he was
standing on a chess board and that a giant version of his own hand was
reaching for him. His face was as still as chiseled steel. Into the
microphone he said, "We're going to fight our way out, people. We're
going to give the immediate pursuit a bloody nose to buy us some time,
and then we're going to ride home in style. I swear by the blessed Virgin!"
Hummel had stopped in her tracks. She sucked in on her lips as part of
an expression which was not wholly a frown.

As Waldstejn paused the second time, he caught the eye of one of the
mercenaries—Dwyer, the gangling fellow who appeared to have taken
Hodicky and Quade under his wing, thank God. The trooper grinned
knowingly and shook his head in mock exasperation.
"First," Waldstejn said loudly, "White Section empties that truck, and I
mean fast. Sergeant Mboko, report to me when you've got that organized.
Second—"
As he continued to thump out orders with the unhurried aplomb of a
drop forge, Waldstejn found himself noting the warmth of the
Communicator standing close with the command set. He did not let
himself look directly at her, though. Not yet.
Gunner Jensen's face and hands were black. His torso was white and
unmarked though the tunic had been blown completely away from it.
Cooper and Pavlovich knew their section leader too well to bother arguing
with him. They slashed at the springy brush with their cutting bars,
clearing a path downhill to the truck as Jensen had ordered. They grunted
with exertion. The faster they worked, the further away they would be
when the follow-up salvo arrived.
Marco Bertinelli hopped beside the Sergeant. The Corpsman carried
only the two extra helmets and his own medical pack, but he still had
difficulty keeping up with the burdened Jensen. "Guns," Bertinelli
pleaded, "for God's sake, let me check you out, will you? We can get a
stretcher party up here and—"
"Said I'd do it and I'll do it," the blond man repeated flatly. He cradled
the still form of Trooper Herzenberg. Her right arm and leg were bare
except for splints and mauve patches of Skin-Seal over the abrasions. They
had set the femur first. Jensen had extended her thigh muscles with as
much force as was necessary to bring the ends of the fractured bone back
into alignment. Herzenberg had been mercifully unconscious when they
set the broken humerus a moment later.
"Shouldn't have forgotten they couldn't hear incoming, working inside
like that," Jensen said. There were cracks across the surface of his
scorched lips, but he had not let the Corpsman treat even' those. "Can't
help Dog, but I won't leave her up there for the next round."
They were nearing the frantic activity around the overturned truck.
Pairs of soldiers were dragging cases of explosives into the brush. Some of
them carried their pack-shovels already extended in the hand that did not

grip the case. "They'll learn Dog didn't come cheap," the Gunner said. "A
lot of them'll learn that."
CHAPTER SEVEN
"You got a rummy team checking you out, Captain," whispered what
had been Guiterez' radio helmet. "Smile for the camera."
The warning meant that there were a pair of drones this time: low-ball
on the deck, high-ball a kilometer behind and three hundred meters in the
air. Instead of transmitting its information in bursts when it lifted higher
into the air, the low-ball drone had a constant link with its companion.
The higher bird transmitted the data to Army HQ for processing. It was
safe from small arms because of the distance it trailed the lead unit. It was
still cold meat for more sophisticated air defenses, but the system was a
good one for pin-pointing hot spots in a generally cool environment.
"All right, it's working," said Albrecht Waldstejn to the two privates
who had escaped with him.
They stood carefully on top of the truck box, resisting the impulse to
leap up in an access of nervous energy. Waldstejn began to wave. From
their vantage point, four meters plus their own height, the trio of Cecach
soldiers had a good view over the top of the scrub. There was a ragged
path down which the reel of cable had been rolled. At the other end of the
path, the pit head oozed a thick smudge. The dust lifted by the shellbursts
had settled out of suspension, but fires still burned there and among the
brush piles ignited by the mercenaries.
The cable lay in tangled sections beside the upright truck. Some lengths
were still reeved through holes punched in the side. By looping the cable
around braces and putting men on both ends to pull, the Company had
managed to right the truck with a concerted heave. Waldstejn had
supposed that they would need to double-loop the cables, using sturdy
vegetation for mechanical advantage in lieu of proper blocks and tackle.
Fifty strong, disciplined humans had proved to be all the advantage
required.
There were no obvious signs of what had been the truck's cargo.
The low-ball snapped past the three of them, close enough that a puff of
exhaust from its engine dried the corneas of Waldstejn's eyes. It was
moving much faster than the ordinary survey drone which Trooper Powers
had brought down. Even from his height, Waldstejn could follow its course
with his eyes for only a second or two before it was gone. He lowered his

arms, but it was a moment before he remembered to relax the rictus into
which his face had formed itself when he tried to smile.
"Goddam," muttered Jirik Quade. He was knuckling the muscles of his
own taut belly with his head bent over. Quade's pain was real enough, but
it had nothing to do with physical fear. The black-haired soldier had to
become an actor in a few minutes. He was out of his depth, part of a
complex scheme at which all of his instincts rebelled. He did not
understand the whole plan, and he was desperately afraid that he would
not be able to handle his role. But the stakes were clear: the certainty that
Pavel and the Lieutenant would die if he did not carry out the act.
Pavel Hodicky had been waving also. "They'll make another pass," he
said in a fast, detached voice. "The drone approached from the east, so the
ground units will come from the east too. Even if the drones have
infra-red, they won't pick up anyone but us, because Lieutenant ben
Mehdi says Cecach technology isn't up to—"
Waldstejn put a gentle hand on the little private's shoulder. The
younger man was shivering. "That's right, Pavel." the officer said. "See, the
high one's orbiting already—" he pointed. "In a few—sure, here it comes."
Water sloshed against both narrow banks of the stream. The drone
angled back up the valley so low and tight that its wing-tips trailed twigs.
Its nose cap was flat black, uncamouflaged and permeable to the full
assortment of sensors which might be included in its instrument package.
For an instant, the drone pointed directly at the truck. Waldstejn saw a
blurred flash of the terrain behind the aircraft through the cowling of the
turbofan. Then the drone pitched and was gone, whipping soots and
smoke from the fires high enough to make the men cough.
Then there was silence in the valley, and nothing moved except by
pressure of the wind.
Private Hodicky took a deep breath. "You know, sir?" he said in a
normal voice. "I thought they'd shell us when they found us. Shell us first, I
mean. I know they'd send somebody by to pick up the pieces later. . . ." He
gave Waldstejn a wan grin.
The young officer laughed. He thumped the heels of his hands together
in an instinctive attempt to loosen his muscles. "Tell you what, soldier," he
admitted, "I was guessing fifty-fifty myself on that. Eagles, a patrol checks
us out, crowns they target the next salvo on this truck instead of up there
at the mine." He waved.
"Hell, shells or no shells, what's it matter?" asked Private Quade
off-handedly. "We're sitting on a bomb, ain't we?"

It was an honest comment, not a gush of pessimism forced into words
by fear. Jirik Quade's fears had little to do with the lethal hardware they
were juggling. But his words tightened the insides of his two companions.
Churchie Dwyer had expected the induction roar and the
higher-pitched howl of the fans themselves as they pumped air into the
plenum chamber at pressures so high that steel floated on it. He had not
expected the oncoming tank to shake the ground beneath it without any
direct contact.
"Black Three," he said, touching his key. He was not sure the tiny
transmitter in his helmet would carry down to the Lieutenant, not with
him flat on his belly in a slit trench like he was. "Vehicles approaching,
estimate thirty kph—" that was slow, must have backed off the throttle
when they got close— "estimate several vehicles."
Beside Dwyer, Del Hoybrin stretched out his arms to grasp the forward
corners of their cover sheet. Churchie had carefully strewn the top of the
microns-thick fabric with loam and foliage before they crawled beneath it
into the cramped trench. The sheet would blur to match its surroundings
more slowly but with even greater delicacy than their uniforms did; but
the veteran figured that in a pinch, nothing looked more like dirt than dirt
did. Now gusts eddying beneath the skirts of the approaching vehicle
swept across the light soil and caused the sheet itself to flutter.
Tanks were hideously expensive and in short supply for exploiting the
main breakthrough. Therefore, Waldstejn's quick appraisal had left the
Company in reasonable hope that the pursuit _would be limited to light,
indigenously-produced armor, vulnerable to their shoulder weapons. But
they could handle a tank also, so long as—
"Lead vehicle is a tank," Churchie reported, but he was unable to hear
his own voice. The muddy daylight through bare patches of the cover sheet
was blotted out. The roar was palpable as the huge armored vehicle slid
across the trench on its cushion of air. The cover sheet molded itself to the
mercenaries like a coat of body paint. It rammed them down with a
pressure which though uniform forced a wordless scream from Dwyer's
throat. .
Then it was past. Brush whanged and popped against the skirts of the
next vehicle, an armored personnel carrier which slipped along at a
respectful distance from the tank. Equally large, the APC lacked the tank's
massive armor and weaponry. Its crew and infantry complement scanned
the brush through vision blocks, uneasily aware that because the tank was

proof against most weaponry, a band of cornered fugitives might hit the
APC first in hopes of dying with their teeth in a throat.
The personnel carrier slid over the trench. Its fans were powered by gas
turbines and not by a fusion bottle like that of the tank. Its passage was a
caress by comparison with that of the heavier vehicle. With the hatches
buttoned up, it was difficult to see the ground even at a distance from the
vehicle. If anyone aboard tried, whirling dust hid the outlines of the
mercenaries.
It did not occur to Del Hoybrin to try to report. Churchie handled that
sort of thing. Dwyer was only half conscious. Blood drooled from his left
nostril.
There were five more armored personnel carriers ripping stolidly
through scrub already bulldozed by the lead tank. Then, closing the
column with the scarred, brutal assurance of the town bully, came the one
they could not count on dealing with.
The Rubes must really want them bad, Dwyer thought muzzily, to send 
two tanks after the Company.
"Ooh, Daddy Krishna, that's a big mother," murmured Trooper David
Cooper.
"Tell me about it," agreed his shelter-mate, Grigor Pavlovich. "You
know, if we hadn't left the gun behind, they'd be expecting us to do
something about that bitch ourselves. And goddam if I know what we'd do
except get eat up."
The troopers who had been actually overrun by the Republican armor
had a worse view of the vehicles than many others in the Company. As the
Cecach lieutenant—was he a captain?—had said, there were Rubes any
way they moved, so it was a toss-up where a patrol would be vectored in
from. The Company was strung in one and two-man shelters no deeper
than body thickness, in a circuit three hundred meters' radius from the
truck. Twenty-odd shelters in a kilometer or so made the bunkers around
Smiricky #4 look as dense as a phalanx . . . but the guns would carry, and
the chances of the entire Rube unit being in range of somebody were very
good.
With what was rumbling down the hill now, though, that put them in
the place of the frog that swallowed the bumblebee.
"Whooie," Cooper said. He was able to look over the lip of his trench at
the armor because of the distance intervening. "I tell you, buddy, if that's
indig manufacture, then you and me hired onto the wrong side in this

one."
"Naw," Pavlovich explained, "they were built by Henschel on Terra. The
Rubes bought tanks, the Feds bought men. Us." He turned his head to spit
tobacco juice over the side of the trench without raising his head further.
"I still think we hired on the wrong side."
"Hell, there's two of them," his companion whispered. The tense
half-humor was gone, leaving his voice flat. The grip of Cooper's weapon
felt sweaty and very frail beneath his palm.
The tank wallowing through brush at the head of the column was
painted taupe to match Rube uniforms and their outlook on life. It gave an
impression of enormous solidity, but it did not look particularly
large—certainly not at six hundred meters, not even through the
magnification of Cooper's gunsight. As a matter of fact, the tank was only
about nine meters long and four wide. The height was almost greater than
the width, because the plenum chamber and drive fans had to underlie the
entire vehicle.
There was a stubby muzzle on the bow slope flanked by lights, sensors,
and vision blocks. It would be an automatic weapon of some kind,
probably a light cannon. The ball mounting would limit it to 90° of arc or
less, but the tank itself could spin like a top on its air cushion. The gun
thus had all the traverse that a turret mounting could have offered.
What was mounted in the turret was a reflector-beam laser as powerful
as the pair which had been emplaced at Smiricky #4 for air defense. For
the heaviest anti-armor applications, a cannon firing shot of high kinetic
energy was still superior to a laser of the same bulk. The great advantage
of a laser—when it was coupled with the fusion plant which a tank
required for mobility anyway—was that the laser never ran out of
ammunition. Instead of being left defenseless after twenty, forty, even a
hundred discharges in a hot battle, a laser-armed tank could continue
ripping so long as an opponent shared the field with it. Especially for
tanks built for export to worlds which might lack the materials or
technology to produce osmium or tungsten-carbide penetrators, a laser
main gun made sense.
But the most lethal weapon in the world was useless if it could be
knocked out before it was used. To the mercenaries lying in ambush, the
most frightening thing about the tanks was that their armor made them
virtually invulnerable to any weapons the Company had available. Indeed,
the tanks were very possibly invulnerable even to hits by the automatic
cannon that Cooper and Pavlovich had crewed before bugging out of the

Smiricky compound.
The tank was faceted with blocks of sandwich armor. The hull and
turret had no curves, but neither did they have any shot traps or plates
vertical to a probable angle of attack. The sandwich was faced with sloped,
density-enhanced steel, up to ten centimeters thick on the turret and bow
slope. The central layer was a mat of monomolecu-lar sapphire, its
interstices filled with a high-temperature gum which acted to equalize
mechanical stress. The sapphire filling was far inferior to steel in terms of
stopping high-velocity projectiles, but under battlefield conditions it was
impenetrable by lasers or shaped-charge warheads.
Behind the sapphire was a second layer of steel as thick as the first; and
the first layer alone would shrug off rounds from the Company's shoulder
weapons like so many drops of rain. Two tanks. Krishna.
One of the armored personnel carriers swung out on the column. It
doubled back around the tank at the end, returning to squat at a point on
the ridge overlooking the valley. The other seven vehicles continued to
rumble down toward the truck. They kept a ten-meter separation and
probed the brush with nervous twitches of their weapons.
The APCs were designed to carry a half-platoon of troops apiece. They
were as large as the tanks and mounted an automatic cannon in a small
turret forward. They were not significant threats as vehicles—their light
armor would stop shell fragments and rounds from indig assault rifles, but
the mercenaries' guns could penetrate them the long way. The danger of
the APCs lay in the fact that they carried twice the number of troops as lay
awaiting them. Nobody had to tell the Company's veterans how lethal a
short-range burst from an assault rifle could be.
"Well, I'll tell you one good thing," Cooper said to his partner. "It isn't us
up there with that APC, waiting for somebody to step out and take a leak
down our necks. . . . And it isn't us down there, either."
The motion of Cooper's eyebrows sufficed for a gesture toward the
stationary supply truck. The three figures in camouflage fatigues looked
very small atop it. And against the bow and the pointing weapons of the
lead tank, they looked hopelessly vulnerable.
"Fine, there's two of them," the radio said in the attentuated voice of
Albrecht Waldstejn. "Ignore the APCs. Your only target is the farther tank.
Ah, farther from the truck, the second tank."
There was a whisper of heterodyne in Sookie Foyle's ears as her
command set rebroadcast the message. The radios woven into the helmets

of the Company were short range. Under ideal circumstances, they were
good for a kilometer. The fact that everyone's head was stuck below
ground level made the present circumstances far short of ideal, and there
was no damned room for error. One channel of the command set was
dedicated to Waldstejn's helmet. Anything he said over the radio was
banged out to the whole Company on a separate frequency.
Sookie was alone in a slit trench on a knoll to the northwest of the
ambush. It was the direction from which it had seemed least likely that
the Rubes would approach. That was not because Foyle was a woman or
the Communicator per se. There were seven other women in the
Company; and like those others, Sookie Foyle carried a gun and was
expected to use it goddam well. At the moment, however, her duty was
more important than that simply of a gunman. She had to set off the
ambush itself.
The armored vehicles were dark blotches against the yellow-green of
Spring foliage. From a slight elevation, the armor was as obvious in its
approach as ticks crawling across a sheet. The few troopers huddled low in
the notch of the valley had a view of only a few meters through the scrub.
It was one of them who would have to detonate the make-shift mines on
which the Company's prayers had to rest.
One of the figures below on the truck brushed his head in what could
have been a wave toward the oncoming tank. "Don't think I'll dare key this
again," whispered Albrecht Waldstejn. "It's all in your hands, Sookie. For
God's sake, don't give the word until a tank is in range. Whatever
happens."
She could not see the Cecach officer's fixed smile as he greeted the
hostile armor. His back was to her, and the distance was long for that sort
of detail, even through the gunsight. Waldstejn's transmission had clicked
off at the last half vocable, suggesting more than reason permitted Foyle to
believe.
Sookie tried to wet her lips with a tongue that was almost equally dry.
Let him live, she prayed silently. Dear God, let the others both die but let
him live.
Her hips moved in the narrow trench, pressing her groin tighter against
the soil in an instinctive search for relief.
Sergeant-Gunner Roland Jensen could see nothing but the dirt just in
front of his eyes. Enough light seeped through the cover sheet for that.
Even without the cover, there was nothing to see above his shelter except

brush, and he had seen enough of that during the march from the
compound. Like much Cecach vegetation, the scrub that had retaken this
valley dangled roots at intervals from the tips of branches. That had made
the Company's flight an obstacle course, but at least it meant now that
their pursuers were unlikely to notice the hiding places before they were
intended to. ...
Jensen was singing to himself, mouthing the words soundlessly as he
always did to pass time. It was a habit to disconnect his brain until it was
needed again. The blond man had a reputation for patience, for perfect
stolidity.
"If in the field your grave you find," he sang, starting the fourth stanza.
He was not at all patient, not with the ox-like torpidity of a Del
Hoybrin, at least. But Jensen had learned to wait. The supply truck had
contained caps, detonating cord, and the explosives themselves; but there
had been no provision for initiating the explosion except electrically. It
was a load of fungibles, after all. The Smiricky Complex had no need of the
ignition hardware itself.
"That is not cause for crying. ..." The ground was trembling. Part of
Jensen's mind could hear the snap of branches springing up against
armor plating. His helmet's commo worked. He had heard without
difficulty Waldstejn's final relayed instructions. That meant Jensen would
be able to hear the Communicator's own instructions as well, and there
was no reason in the world to tiy to see anything for himself.
"In the green, green grass, just rest your ass. ..." It had been easy to fuze
the truck, easy enough, but the daisy-chain had to be initiated separately
for the plan to have a prayer of success. The device chosen to set off the
daisy-chain was Sergeant-Gunner Roland Jensen.
"And watch the clouds go flying!"
It was his own fault, but Allah save him from the fruits of his stupidity!
Lieutenant Hussein ben Mehdi pressed his knuckles against his brows
as if he could somehow force out the awareness of what he had to do. He
had hung the bundle from his pack only seconds before leaving the
Operations Center for the last time. It only weighed two or three kilos,
after all, and it might be useful. Use-ful! Allah save him from the Hell he
had earned, it was that indeed. And who but Lieutenant ben Mehdi, the
foresightful officer who had brought the bundle—who but he should be
trusted with its use?

There might have been no reconnaissance drones accompanying the
patrol . . . but not even ben Mehdi had been able to think that it was
probable that the ground forces would not have that support. He alone of
the Company—save for the Cecach trio, might Allah requite them!—was
placed within the daisy chain. If there were drones at all, they were most
likely to orbit the center of affairs, and even a few meters could make a
crucial difference.
Ben Mehdi had no overhead shelter except his cover sheet and the acrid
smoke. They had lighted a brush fire a few meters away from where he lay.
It should confuse vision and the possible heat sensors on the Republican
vehicles. Whether or not it hid the mercenary, the smoke certainly
punished him with its smouldering lethality. His gas filters made each
breath agony, but they did nothing to prevent smoke tendrils from making
his eyes burn.
As Allah willed, but might he not will so terrible a thing! prayed
Hussein ben Mehdi. Beside him in the trench lay the bundle of five,
broomstick-slim anti-aircraft missiles. To fire them accurately, he would
have to stand with the bundle extended on its launching staff. He would be
as obvious as if he were waving a Federation flag. Ben Mehdi had both the
experience and the imagination to picture how the Republican gunners
would react.
Allah preserve him!
The lead tank came to a quivering halt twenty meters from the waiting
truck. Behind the tank, the six vehicles which had followed it down from
the ridge formed a hedgehog. Each armored personnel carrier pulled close
to the vehicle ahead of it, then rotated 30° to one side or the other. That
way the heavier bow armor and the turret weapon faced attacks from the
flank, but the troops within the rear compartment could still use their
weapons through the firing ports provided for them. The tank at the rear
did a slow 180° turn on its axis so that its heavy laser covered the track
the vehicles had just ripped through the scrub.
"Too far," muttered Quade, kneading his thighs with hands that left
sweaty patches on the fabric. "Goddam, won't get neither of them."
"We'll work something out," said Albrecht Waldstejn. Moving sideways
so that he continued to face the armored vehicles, the Cecach officer
stepped down to the roof of the cab. He used the edge of the microwave
dish as a handhold. It was warm with use. The truck had a live feel though
it was motionless in any gross sense. Hodicky had run the fans up to speed

and then locked them flat while the trio mounted the truck. That way they
could be seen. The fans were still spinning without load, ready to boost the
vehicle on its air cushion as soon as someone dialed up their angle of
attack.
There was presumably a radio discussion going on among the officers of
the Republican patrol. No sign of it reached Waldstejn as he clambered
down. He stepped on the driver's seat, then to the ground.
The armored vehicles had no external loudspeakers, and it was quite
obvious that their crews were not anxious to unbutton until they better
understood the situation. The tank's main gun followed Waldstejn on
silent gimbals with the same precision that it would have tracked a target
worthy of its ravening power. The automatic weapon on the bow slope
occasionally moved. It was clearly ready to sluice the truck body with a
stream of explosive bullets.
The patrol was halted, but all the vehicles still hovered a finger's width
above the ground. A fire that had smouldered near to death now
quickened with a gush of sparks. The draft beneath the skirts of the lead
tank bathed the Federal troops with smoke and dust blown across the
stubble of cut brush. The fans roared as they sucked air through protective
gratings to replace leakage around the skirts. Because it was omnipresent,
Waldstejn did not realize how loud the noise was until Hodicky tried to
speak over it. The little private had followed Waldstejn to the ground, but
he still had to shout to ask, "How close, sir? You see it now. How close?"
Staring at the dark bow of the tank did not put Waldstejn any nearer to
being able to judge how thick its armor was. Too damned thick, almost
surely.
The mass of the tank was an aura about it, and its three-meter height
was no longer a statistic but a lowering presence. It was not the armor
that mattered now, just the angle, and that number was not changed by
Waldstejn's fear of the reality whose laser glared at him like the path to
Hell. "Half this," he said to his subordinate, "or a little less if you can,
but—don't startle them whatever." The tall officer began to walk toward
the tank. His hands were in plain sight and his body was so tense that he
was near to fainting.
Hodicky yelped at the change in plans, but it had taken Waldstejn's
action to break the silent deadlock. There was a swish and a clang as a
side-panel of the lead personnel carrier hinged down. The section of troops
which the vehicle held moved nervously onto the ground. They blinked in
the sunlight with their rifles pointed in various directions.

The real value of armored personnel carriers lies in the troops they
carry. From their inception, however, there has been a tendency to use
them as fighting vehicles rather than as infantry transporters. Even brave
men hesitate to leave their dark cocoon for natural terrain searched by an
enemy's fire. Rationally they may know that the metal box encasing them
is more a magnet for fire than a protection in a hot engagement; but
reason dies when the first bullets rake the field.
Republican designers had developed a simple solution for the problem.
The troop commanders could throw switches and drop either or both side
panels of their APCs. The thin armor-plating became a ramp which
neither hindered the troops' deployment nor encouraged them to stay with
their vehicle. Most of the present unit knelt, coughing at the smoke in the
air. Six of the soldiers trotted toward Waldstejn. One of them was an
officer marked by a pistol and a belt-slung radio. "Hold it right there!" he
ordered Waldstejn.
Someone came to a decision. There was a change in the medley of the
drive fans. Republican infantrymen turned in alarm. Waldstejn's own
heart leaped in fear of the unexpected modification. Then the background
noise died away as all the vehicles settled to the ground. Their fans slowed
to idle on descending notes. The difference was as abrupt as that of
walking out of a stadium where amplified music was being performed.
"Thank God you've found us, sir!" Lieutenant Waldstejn cried to
forestall the Republican officer. The troops in dark uniforms clustered
about their captive. Others from the group still near their vehicle moved
uncertainly toward the two Federal privates. "My men and I were
kidnapped from Smiricky #4 by a band of bloodthirsty
cut-throats—off-planet dregs, every man of them and their whores too!
Now that you're hot on their trail, we have a chance to get revenge. Why,
you can see how the beasts used us."
Waldstejn waved back toward the Privates. Quade and Hodicky
certainly looked the hang-dog remnants of brutal torture. Quade's uniform
had one sleeve. The scabs on his arm had opened again when he climbed
from the truck. Red cracks seamed the dried blood. They looked to be one
stage removed from amputation, though the scrapes were trivial
compared to the bruising Quade had received at the same time.
For his part, Hodicky had washed his trousers at the first spring they
came to. He had then marched in them wet. Dust had fused to mud that
seeped into the fabric as indelibly as the original dye. That, together with
gares ripped in the cloth by the brush and an expression of stark terror,
made Pavel Hodicky look as battered a victim as his black-haired friend.

"But where—" the Republican officer began. His radio broke in on him.
Its demand was a buzzing snarl, audible in full only through his earpiece
but easy enough for Waldstejn to reconstruct from his own experience
with anxious superiors. "Sir, they say they were capture—" the Republican
tried to explain.
"Is your commanding officer in the tank, Major?" asked Lieutenant
Waldstejn pleasantly. He could not identify Republican rank tabs. If he
could have, he would have bumped the harried officer two grades for
certain rather than by estimate. "Here, it'll be simpler to do this directly,
won't it? I understand, I'll keep my hands where everyone can see them."
As he spoke, the Federal officer began to walk forward at an easy pace. He
was striking for the right side of the tank that faced him squarely. He held
his hands at shoulder height, their bare palms forward.
"No!" shouted the Republican officer as his radio buzzed again. "No sir,
I didn't—"
"That's all right, boys, keep me covered and we'll all be safer," said
Waldstejn to the two infantrymen who seemed ready to block him without
direct orders. Retaining his calm smile, Waldstejn nodded in the direction
he was moving. The tank laser and the automatic cannon of the nearest
APC were both trained on him—and on the Republican troops around
him. One of them leaped back with a look of horror and an oath.
From what Waldstejn had heard, swearing like that in the Rube forces
was good for six months solitary—or death, if your Unit chaplain was
hard-nosed. Even so, the Federal officer thought the oath was a reasonable
response to the imminent likelihood of being blasted by friendly weapons.
And Albrecht Waldstejn was well able to empathize with that concern
at the moment.
"Ah, none of you guys'd have some water, would you?" asked Private
Hodicky. He gave the Republican soldiers a nervous smile. The Federal
private had learned years before that bullies found his smile a good reason
to kick him. That was fine. These troops could like him or despise him, it
was all the same. What they had better not do was fear him and watch
him closely.
"Ah, back in the can," one of the Republicans muttered with a gesture
toward the personnel carrier. There was the usual tendency of troops
being moved by vehicle to strip gear from themselves. Packs and web gear
prodded uncomfortably when you were one of eighteen or twenty men
being jounced in a cramped troop compartment. Of course, that meant

that when something happened, your gear was in a tangle out of reach.
None of the six men clustered around the Federal captives carried a
canteen. Only two of them had slung belts of ammunition before spilling
out of the vehicle.
Not that that mattered. Two shots would be quite enough for Hodicky
and Q. Their hands were as bare as Waldstejn's.
"This your truck?" one of the Rubes asked. He nodded. The taupe-clad
men were uncertain. Their covert glances toward the rear showed it was
not action by their prisoners that they particularly feared. The 522nd
Garrison Battalion had been typical of second-line Federal units in having
little or no discipline. Its officers were for the most part despicable;
certainly they were despised by the troops they nominally commanded.
The situation in the Republican forces was wholly different. Rigid
control was exerted downward from all levels. Breaches of discipline were
corrected with a rigor which seemed harsh even by comparison with the
standards set for civilians by the theocrats of Budweis. There was a basic
flaw, howler, in Frederick the Great's dictum that soldiers should fear
their officers more than they feared the enemy. That stifles initiative and
causes men to look up the chain of command instead of themselves taking
even the simplest measures.
Measures like deciding what to do with a pair of Federal privates they
had been told to watch.
"We fixed it," croaked Jirik Quade. He gave the skirt of the supply truck
a thump with his hand. The contact felt good. He hit the metal again.
"When, when we got away from the, yeah, the guys who, ah. . . ." Quade
thumped the vehicle a third time and watched it carefully. He had not
made eye contact with any of the Rubes since they approached the truck.
He was going to screw up, he was going to get Pavel and the Lieutenant
killed, and he did not even have a gun!
"Right," said Hodicky with enthusiasm. Lieutenant Waldstejn was
walking toward the tank, now. He seemed to be drawing with him a
cluster of Rubes including the protesting infantry officer. "We fixed it up,
but then we waited for you guys. You know, we tried to j-join the Lord's
forces be—"
Waldstejn turned. He looked worn and lonely amidst the taupe
uniforms. "Private Hodicky," he called in a clear voice, "show the Major
how the truck works. Just back it up a little."
"But sir]" the little private cried.

Waldstejn ignored him. The tall, slim officer stepped around the bow of
the tank, out of Hodicky's sight.
"One of you guys want to get in with me?" asked Hodicky. His mind was
neatly calculating, chosing words that clicked out engagingly through his
fixed smile. He climbed the step, then slid into the cab through the door
that they had left open. "Not that we could run anywhere," the Private's
mouth pattered on, "jeez no, think what that—waving at the armored bow,
thirty steps away— "would do!"
"Hey, hold on," said a dark-clad soldier. "I don't think. . . ." His assault
rifle was of a pattern different from those issued to Federal troops, but it
had the same sort of hole in the muzzle end. More or less without thinking,
the Republican began to point the weapon for emphasis.
Private Quade undid his fly.
The dark-haired private was supposed to call attention away from
Hodicky by counterfeiting an epileptic fit. He couldn't do that, could not
act any better than he could have flown a starship. But there had been no
one else to use, because Quade could not drive the truck, either. . ..
"Hey, watch that!" a soldier cried as he leaped away.
Quade's urine splashed audibly from the skirt of the truck, gouging
away at the grime on the steel. As Hodicky boosted the power, air squirted
out beneath the skirts. The side-draft caught the urine and atomized it
across Quade's boots and those of the Republicans on the ground with
him. "Whoops, should've looked for the lee rail," the little man cried
happily over the intake whine. The others cursed.
The truck slid away at a slow, non-threatening pace. Hodicky was
backing and turning simultaneously so that the open tail-gate of the truck
swung toward the bow of the tank.
"Hey!" shouted a Republican. He fired for emphasis. His bullet cratered
the door of the cab.
Hodicky chopped the fans, grounding the truck. "Hey, guys!" he cried,
raising both hands to his startled face. "Hey, it's over!"
He was going to have to wash out his trousers again, he thought sickly.
If he survived.
From the foreshortening of her sights, it looked to Sookie Foyle as if the
supply truck had been swung into direct contact with the lead tank.
Despite the optical exaggeration, that meant that the deserters from the
522nd had done their job well.

That left Foyle with her own problem.
There had been almost four tonnes of explosive aboard the overturned
truck. The mercenaries had buried it in a rough hundred-meter circle
about the truck. That meant there were five meters or more between each
thirty-kilogram case and the cases to either side of it ... and the second
tank was still outside the daisy-chain entirely.
"Control to Guns," Foyle whispered into the mike. "They're halted out of
position. Don't do anything—" God, she shouldn't have started this, Jensen
didn't need to be told by a Communicator to follow the plan set down
ahead of time—"when the truck goes off. C-control out."
There was no reply. Well, Guns would tear a strip off her when it was all
over, and she deserved that or worse.
The daisy-chain was for the moment only a construct of Foyle's
memory. The individual mines had not been marked. They were merely
covered with friable soil from the holes in which they were laid. Excess
dirt had been scattered in the brush where the breeze picked it up and
mingled it with dust from kilometers away. There was little chance that
the Republicans would notice the explosives, even if they dismounted.
More possibly, someone might stumble over the chain of det cord which
connected the cases of plastique, but the thin cord blended well with the
yellow-gray soil.
Sookie Foyle had to read the daisy-chain like the dial of an invisible
clock. It was flattering that the Company's command team—ben Mehdi
and the sergeants with whom she had worked for years—had assigned her
the task without hesitation. That flattery was small recompense for the
horror into which a screw-up would plunge her.
Foyle had spread her sight picture to survey the whole Republican
column. Now she tightened the magnification again, focusing on Albrecht
Wald-stejn. His head was visible above the fender of the lead tank.
Nothing would happen for some seconds, at least. The trench which would
protect the Cecach soldiers was twenty meters from where the Captain
now stood. It had been hidden beneath the cab of the supply truck until
the vehicle moved. The charge would surely not be fired before Wald-stejn
too could reach a place of safety.
The Federal officer turned from the Republican tanker to whom he had
been speaking. Waldstejn's face had in the past days lost a garrison
softness that could never have been called fat. He had deliberately left a
stubble of whiskers which suggested privation. Now he was shouting
something back toward the truck. His face smiled as he stood waiting, but

his blue eyes were closed.
Republican soldiers began running. They were crying things unheard as
Foyle furiously traded magnification for field of view.
Then the blast blotted out everything in the center of her sight picture.
* * *
A hatch, invisible beyond the facets of armor, opened on top of the
turret. A furious Republican officer looked out. He had to bend forward to
see Waldstejn. "Ensign Farrago," the tanker shouted to the officer from
the APC, "are you a complete idiot? And what is that truck doing?"
"Sir, I—" the infantry officer said yet again.
There was a shot. Waldstejn's heart leapt but he did not turn. From
where he stood, close to the side of the tank, the truck and his two
companions were hidden by the massive armor.
"Hey, it's overl" Hodicky cried.
He was alive, thank God, and Waldstejn's smile never slipped as he said
to the tanker, "Sir, it was only an earnest of our good intentions, I assure
you."
"Lieutenantl" Hodicky cried, "they're dragging me—"
"Go. ahead!" Waldstejn shouted over the steel and sapphire barrier
between him and his men, between him and the trench that was to have
been his shelter from the blast.
Men were shouting. He rested his left hand on the armored flank.
Waldstejn was in the dead zone, so close to the Republican tank that its
laser could not be depressed enough to hit him. The builders had cured
that problem very simply by embedding a line of anti-personnel charges in
the armor at waist height. By throwing a switch, the tank crew could spray
the ground outside their vehicle with shrapnel that a mouse could not
hope to hop through.
Ensign Farrago gripped Waldstejn by the shoulder, bellowing
something unintelligible. There was a burst of shots nearby.
Waldstejn's eyes were closed. "Dies irae," he whispered through smiling
lips. Not the hymn for itself but as a return to childhood and the problems
of a choirboy. "Dies illa—"
And perhaps as a prophecy.
"Solvet saeclum in favilla—"
Day of wrath, this day that rips the ages into ash.

He did not hear the explosion. The shock wave had already stunned him
before his brain could have perceived it as noise.
Their eyes had followed Pavel and the moving truck. For the moment, at
least, none of the Republican infantrymen seemed interested in the deep
trench which had just been revealed beside Jirik Quade. The black-haired
private closed his fly. For the first time since he had heard the
Lieutenant's plan, Quade was at peace. His duties were complete. He was
too pleased with the success of his own improvisation to notice anything
else which might be occurring.
There was a shout and a shot. All the world moved in a gunsight as the
Private turned. His mouth and eyes were open and his mind was
searching for a target. In the air hung the crackl of a high-velocity bullet
exploding on metal, sharper than the muzzle blast that spawned it.
"Hey, it's overl" Pavel blurted, white-faced in the cab.
Quade grunted with relief. The Rube nearest him had stepped back in
shock as the little private turned. Now the guard, too, relaxed; but he did
not lower the rifle he had aimed at Quade when the Federal spun like a
breech closing.
The Rube who had fired pointed his rifle in the air and turned half away
from the vehicle. He looked embarrassed. Two of his companions pushed
past him to the truck. "Hey, out of there," one of them demanded. A
taupe-clad tanker was now leaning from the tank and shouting toward
men hidden by the tank's own bulk.
Hodicky had rotated the supply truck around an axis just in front of its
cab. He was only three meters from where he had started, but the truck
was closer by its full length to the tank. A Rube reached into the cab and
caught Hodicky's ankle. The dark-clad soldier slanted his rifle up in his
free hand, a threat in fact if not by deliberation.
Everything was according to plan, except that the Lieutenant was
squarely in the line of fire.
"Listen, you idolator!" said the Rube holding Hodicky, "I said to get 
outl" He jerked at the ankle he held. Pavel gripped the door jamb and the
steering wheel. The gun muzzle jabbed at his ribs.
"Lieutenant]" the Private cried, "they're dragging me—"
"Go ahead!"
"I'm coming," Hodicky gasped to the soldier who held him. The other's
finger twitched toward the trigger of his rifle. Quade, two jumps away,

was a weapon himself now, but the guard nearest him was watching the
drama at the truck instead.
Hodicky released the steering wheel and let himself be pulled down
from the driver's seat. Hi§ right hand reached under the dashboard as the
guard hauled him forward. Only Quade understood what his friend had
just done.
They had twenty seconds.
Pavel cried out as he bounced on the pressed-metal step. The soldier
holding him dragged the little man a pace further from the truck, then
kicked him. "Does that help you listen?" the Rube demanded. "Does that?"
Sergeant Mboko had improvised the delay switch with sand and a
ration can. When the can was flipped over, the sand ran out until it no
longer had enough weight to depress the switch which had originally
flashed the headlights while it was held down. Now the switch waited to
send current to an electrically-primed blasting cap in the back of a
thirty-kilogram shaped charge.
The Republican soldier spat and turned from Hodicky. He faced Quade,
half his size and as bedraggled as a cat caught in a rainstorm.
"G-go, Pavel," Quade said. Blood droplets jeweled the cracked scabs on
his taut right arm.
"You want some of this?" the Rube shouted. He waved the butt of his
rifle in the smaller man's face.
Quade ignored the weapon. He leaped for the Republican, gripping him
by both biceps. The man screamed. Quade's fingers compressed his
muscles as if they were clay in a potter's hands.
Pavel Hodicky was dizzy with pain. He had not felt the boot hit him. It
had been lost in the hot rush of his lower spine hitting the cab step. Even
as Quade spoke, Hodicky was rolling through a red blur. He was not
rational enough to be scrambling toward the trench—or even scrambling
away from the imminent blast. He was simply moving because his last
conscious awareness had been of the need to move. The ground dropped
away beneath him.
Another of the guards cried out. The man Quade held was gasping and
staggering backwards. Dark-clad soldiers were leaping to their feet with
curses. The two nearest men were battering at Quade with their gun butts.
Quade wrenched his head back with a gurgle of triumph. His opponent
fell away as if propelled by the blood jetting from his throat. A Republican
screamed again and fired with his rifle almost touching Quade's back.

The soldier trying to hold Quade from the other side gaped down at his
left arm. A bullet had struck the elbow and disintegrated, amputating the
limb within the sleeve. Quade turned toward the man who had killed him.
Shock has no effect on a berserker. The black-haired Federal had ceased to
be human seconds before the shots ripped his heart and lungs to pulp.
Quade gripped the gun muzzle with his left hand. He reached for his
killer with his right. His snarl was silent because he had no diaphragm to
drive the sounds. The blood on his teeth was not his own. The Republican
shrieked and turned away just as the world dissolved in a red flash.
For all its simplicity, the shaped-charge principle was discovered by
accident. An engineer tested a small block of explosive by detonating it
against the side of a safe. The safe was not structurally injured. In its steel
side, however, was stamped in mirror-writing the logo of the explosives
manufacturer. The logo had been impressed in the block, and on
detonation the gases propagating along the sides of that shallow
impression were focused at their mid-point. They struck the safe with
greatly-multiplied force, stamping themselves into plating which would
have resisted the impact of much larger unfocused blasts.
Shaped charges were gleefully adopted by the military as soon as armor
became a commonplace of war again in the Twentieth Century. If the face
of the explosive were hollowed into a long, conical throat, the blast could
be focused in a pencil-thin jet of unimaginable intensity. A
thirteen-kilogram charge could blast a hole through fifty centimeters of
hardened steel. Sergeant Mboko, with practically unlimited quantities of
explosives to work with, had molded his charge from a full thirty-kilogram
case. Even with the imprecisions involved in such a field expedient,
Mboko's weapon could have ripped through any practical thickness of
steel armor.
Unfortunately for the mercenaries, the sapphire core of the Terran
armor would shrug off a jet of white-hot gas that vaporized metallic
armor.
Unfortunately for the Republicans, Albrecht Waldstejn had allowed for
that when he made his plans.
The supply truck blew up with a deep red flash. Quite apart from its
focus, the thirty kilograms of explosive were comparable to the bursting
charge of a large shell. The rear half of the vehicle disintegrated. The cab
and some shredded remnants of the body lurched forward, crumpling with
the acceleration. The trench that sheltered Private Hodicky was two

meters deep. Despite that, the shock wave slammed him from one end to
the other. The men struggling at ground level were killed instantly by the
unimpeded blast, even before the shrapnel tore their hurtling corpses. The
face of Jirik Quade was smiling with perhaps as much happiness as it had
ever shown in life.
Instead of the tank's invulnerable frontal armor, Mboko's shaped charge
was directed toward the skirts around the plenum chamber. The drive
fans were buried in the floor of the vehicle, out of the way of possible
assault. They had enough extra power to keep the tank floating on its air
cushion even if there were some holes in the heavy steel skirts that focused
the cushion downward. What happened this time was not merely a few
holes.
Centimeter-thick steel vaporized like ice in a gas flame. A ragged
twenty-centimeter circle was gone from the bow skirt. Almost the entire
rear skirt ballooned away. The jet, spreading but still powerful, had
punched the metal there after traversing the hollow length of the plenum
chamber. Brush flared at the touch of white-hot gases. The tank driver
had started to lift his vehicle immediately before the explosion. Now the
tank lurched to the ground again. Though its drive units were undamaged,
they could not pressurize a plenum chamber that gaped like a barn in a
whirlwind. The fans roared, whipping the nearby brush into a sea of
orange flames.
The armored personnel carriers were protected by the tank from any
serious effects the blast might have had on them. Inside the APCs, men
were bounced against equipment and each other; but both the vehicles
and their complements remained combat ready.
Waldstejn and his companions had done their part. The rest was up to
the Company.
CHAPTER EIGHT
Churchie Dwyer knew the APC was close. They had heard it returning
as a lookout from the direction the column had taken. He had been
cursing as he recovered from the pounding the tanks had given him, and
this too was reason to curse. But it was also reason to lie still and pray that
their cover remained adequate.
The look-out vehicle had approached at a leisurely pace. That might, of
course, have meant that it was taking its time to get into a perfect firing
position from which to rake the trench. The pair of mercenaries could not
even bump up the lip of their cover sheet to watch. They lay on their

bellies with their heads toward the approach to the valley. If they tried to
turn around now, they would be seen unless the Rube driver was blind. All
they could do was to listen to the fans and feel their sheet quiver above
them from air spilled from the plenum chamber.
Even so, when the huge blast in the valley signaled them to action,
Churchie was shocked to find that the side of the personnel carrier was
within arm's length of him. That meant that if somebody dropped the
sides, the two mercenaries would be knocked silly without anybody
knowing they were there.
The APC was starting to lift from an idle. Dwyer fired. He was trying to
angle his shot forward toward where he thought the driver must sit. The
muzzle blast rebounded from the flat side with stunning force. The steel
puckered inward where his projectile had struck it. The hole in the center
was rimmed with lips of metal white-hot from the impact. The APC
started to rise. Churchie fired again, letting the vehicle's incipient turn
change the angle for him. Then his partner began to rake the personnel
carrier with fully-automatic fire.
Republican APCs had five firing ports in each side panel. The troops
within could spray their surroundings through the ports without
dismounting. When the shooting started, however, none of the soldiers
had inserted his rifle in a port. Hoybrin's burst gave them no opportunity
to correct that error.
The big mercenary walked his fire from the rear hinge forward. He
leaned into the first shot so that his gun muzzle almost touched the armor.
At the end of an eight-round burst, the recoil had pounded him erect and
lifted his point of aim from waist height to shoulder height. Del slid his
bracing right foot against the back wall of the trench. The vehicle was still
up on its fans, but the gyros which balanced it could not prevent it from
beginning to slide down-hill. It would have required a living hand at the
controls to stop that drift. The thin armor echoed with screams and curses
as soldiers tried to clear weapons while their dying comrades thrashed in
the same cramped quarters. Aimed shots from Churchie's weapon
punctuated the human sounds with high-velocity cracks. Breathing deeply
with the exertion of absorbing recoil, Del Hoybrin ripped the remainder of
his twenty-round box through the front portion of the troop compartment.
At such short range, most of the osmium projectiles punched neat exit
holes in the far sidewall of the vehicle. One of the wounded or dying men
inside clamped on the trigger of his assault rifle. That burst multiplied
casualties inside in a way that a dropped grenade could not have equalled.
The light bullets spalled fragments from the armor. Everything sailed

around the riddled crew compartment, flaying and burning where the
osmium bullets had only punctured.
The APC was nine meters long and weighed over fifteen tonnes. The
murderous delight of having so huge an opponent at his mercy blinded
Churchie Dwyer to the significance of its uncontrolled drift. Del was
kneeling to insert a loaded magazine in his weapon, but Churchie was fully
erect. The personnel carrier was four or five meters away, still broadside
to them. The mercenary had just fired at the rear compartment, trying to
smash the turbine, when the automatic cannon in the turret opened up on
him.
Parallax and the breadth of a finger saved Dwyer's life. He had forgotten
about the cannon because the shooting started when the big gun was too
close to bear on the troopers. The range had opened almost enough when
the gunner squeezed the trigger. Churchie was still so close that the
electronic sight failed to compensate perfectly for the angle between the
gun muzzle and the fiber-optics sensor beneath the tube. The shells which
should have taken off the mercenary's head instead blew up on the brush
fifty meters beyond him.
The sheaf of twenty-five millimeter cannon shells did not crack like the
lighter, faster projectiles of the infantry weapons. Their shock waves
slapped Churchie across the forehead, lifting off his helmet. The gout of
propellant gases from the muzzle stung like a spray of hot sand.
Screaming, the tall mercenary threw himself flat again. The recoil of his
weapon was dangerously liable to break the collarbone of anyone firing
from a prone position. Eyes stinging, deafened by his own shots even
before the cannon blasted in his face, Churchie began shooting at the
turret he had previously ignored. At his second round, a white spark
beneath the gun tube marked his hit momentarily. The hot metal was
quenched by a spray of vaporized oil as the cannon's recoil compensator
blew up.
The gun jammed at once. Churchie continued to fire at it until his own
weapon spat out a plastic clip to announce that it needed to be reloaded.
There was a moment's silence. Cannon recoil had speeded the vehicle's
drift and had swung its bow away from the mercenaries. Gray smoke was
leaking from the ports and bullet holes in the troop compartment.
Hydraulic fluid which had splashed on the turret face was sustaining a
sluggish fire. As the APC crackled into unbroken scrub, Del Hoybrin fired
a long burst into its engine compartment. Fuel exploded. It blew off an
access plate and sent flames rocketing twenty meters into the sky.

"Churchie, what do we do now?" the big man asked.
Not all of them were dead. You could feel the screams as a high
component of the roaring fire. No one seemed to be healthy enough to
release the side panels, though.
Nothing grated in Dwyer's right shoulder as he locked home a fresh
magazine. "Now," he said, "we move to where we can see what's going on
down there." He nodded curtly. The Rube vehicle was fully involved now, a
blotch of flame and black smoke. It warmed bare skin and blocked all view
of the valley. "Could be the beggars need us," Churchie added. A level of
hearing was returning, as it always did; and always less than the level he
had had before battle. "Just could be."
Mingled with the shots and grenade bursts in the valley was the
unmistakable hiss of a laser. At least one of the Republican tanks was still
in business.
The shots mean all three of the indigs are dead, thought Hussein ben
Mehdi, please Allah, may it mean that they are all dead and I don't have
to—
The ground rippled. The air went orange as the charge detonated. The
shrub nearest the mercenary bowed away from the shock. His cover sheet
lifted, then was jerked back by the implosion that echoed the blast. The
whole valley rang with the savage crash of the tank skirt hammered and
dissolved by superheated gas.
The Lieutenant sprang to his feet. He generally wore body armor in
action, but he had known he could not pack it out on his feet. Ben Mehdi's
clamshell was somewhere back at Smiricky #4. Colonel Fasolini's set was
there too, shattered uselessly into his body in all likelihood . . . but
Lieutenant ben Mehdi wished that he had his anyway.
The sunlight undimmed by the cover sheet had drawn him up. Now ben
Mehdi's whole focus was on the bright sky. His mind tried to close off
everything his peripheral vision showed. The reconnaissance drones were
still in their tight, fluttering orbits. Ben Mehdi raised the air defense
bundle. Its telescoping staff gave a meter of stand-off between his face and
the five tiny rocket motors. The bracing strap was looped around his right
shoulder, and the wire sighting ring was clicked into place.
Please Allah!
The lead tank squatted in a sea of fire only thirty meters away. Closer
yet to the Lieutenant's right were the nearest of the dark APCs. Three of

the five gun turrets pointed more toward him than away, and the flanks of
all the vehicles could mow the scrub clean with whips of automatic fire.
The drones were both within the sighting ring. Screw them all! Ben
Mehdi jerked the release cord with his left hand.
The sky to the mercenary's rear was fouled by trash from the explosion,
bits of the truck roof and a plume of the light soil sucked upward in the
following seconds. It would not affect the missiles' infra-red homing, but it
gave ben Mehdi the unnecessary feeling that Death lowered at his
shoulder. The five plastic tubes at the end of the staff chugged in rotation.
Felt recoil was mild, comparable to a large-bore pistol rather than to one
of the Company's armor-piercing shoulder weapons. The first four missiles
each left the launcher with a hiss and a puff of black smoke. The last tube
ruptured at the base. The missile sizzled skyward, a bright spark, but the
backblast scorched ben Mehdi's hands and the skin of his throat beneath
his face shield.
The Lieutenant threw down the empty launcher and flopped back in his
shallow trench. The valley rang with bullets striking armor and the
startled, enormous, return fire of the Republican vehicles. No one had shot
at ben Mehdi. None of the enemy had even seen him through the brush in
his self-camouflaging uniform. Surprise and the concentration of fire from
higher up the slopes had saved the Lieutenant where a hard suit could not
have.
There was a bright flash overhead. The drones' turbofans were mounted
high and they had a low infra-red signature besides. There was nothing
else in the sky to confuse the missiles' homing systems, however. The
maneuvers built into the drones' stacking programs might have helped
them against a human gunner, but they were useless against the air
defense cluster. The tiny missiles were short-range and not particularly
fast, but for targets within their capabilities they were hell on wheels.
The drone closest to the flash continued to fly, but it trailed a white
mist. The second flash and the report of the first, lost in the gunfire, were
almost simultaneous. The wings of the other drone folded abruptly like
those of a hawk preparing to swoop. The third flash was followed by the
red glare of atomized fuel igniting in the wake of the drone damaged by
the first warhead. It drew the last two sparks as well, decoyed but decoyed
without harm because there were no proper targets for them.
Praise Allah! thought Lieutenant ben Mehdi. He had done all that any
of them could expect. Now he could lie flat until the fighting was done,
and no one could think him a coward.

But his right hand had already drawn his grenade launcher, and his left
arm was tensing to raise him again over the lip of his trench.
Trooper Dolan sat up in her trench, throwing back the cover sheet. A
cannon shell hit her squarely in the chest. That was bad luck—the burst
continued to climb the hillside, blasting rock and brush far above any of
the mercenary positions. For Max-ine Dolan it would have been the worst
of luck anyway, whether or not the round had been aimed at her
deliberately. Her arm separated from the offal that squelched back into
her trench. Twenty meters away there were speckles of blood on the gun
Jo Hummel had leveled at the Rube column.
The Company's weapons and gunsights made three hundred meters a
clout shot for a steady hand. Sergeant Hummel had been there too often
already to think that her hands would be steady at the start of a firefight.
After the first magazine, after instinct took over and her gun slammed the
shoulder of an equally-mechanical gunner, then Hummel could equal her
firing range accuracy on the battlefield. For now she kept her sights open
to the point that the nine meters of a personnel carrier just fitted the field.
The orange bead jumped against the taupe background as she opened fire.
Every trooper in the Company had a number and warning of a field
court—a bullet behind the ear, mercenary companies had no time to waste
on frills—if they were caught engaging the enemy in any other order.
White Section was emplaced north of the stream, Hummel's Black Section
had the south. Each trooper was to divide his section number by the
number of vehicles in the column, then fire at the one whose number
resulted. That would put a multiple cross-fire on all the Rube armor,
rattling the tank gunners—God help us! —and shattering the APCs.
If you were unwilling to violate orders, you had no business leading a
section of Fasolini's Company. Jo Hummel blasted away at the second
armored personnel carrier, not the first. She could not hope to hit the
taupe-clad soldiers who had dismounted from the leading APC. The
buttoned-up second one was a big target, its alert gunner had begun
raking the hill before most of the Rubes had responded to the explosion,
and besides ... it had been Dolan's assigned target, so one of the bastards
was going to be shorted whatever Hummel did.
The veteran sergeant jerked the trigger, angry as always at her clumsy
technique as she tried to keep the sight bead centered. The armored
vehicle was quivering. Smoke and muzzle flashes continued to burst from
its automatic cannon while rifle fire sparkled on its flanks. The punishing
recoil of her weapon drove from Sergeant Hummel's mind the awareness

of the blood spattering her gun's barrel. Almost, she could forget the
warmth of Trooper Iris Powers, kneeling in the trench beside her and
firing at targets which could pulp her as surely as they had Dolan.
* * *
The gunner of the second Rube tank saw no need to pulse his laser for
the present targets. The weapon drew a line of slag and brush exploding
into fire across the northern slope. The sparks of projectiles flickering
against the tank's armor may have endangered troops in the personnel
carriers and dismounted. They constituted no danger at all to the vehicle
from which they bounced—but Cooper continued to fire.
The tank was fifty meters further from him than the nearest of the
APCs, but Dave Cooper was too good a shot for that to matter. Cooper had
started firing with the hope that he could pierce the tank's armor. He had
a downward angle on the vehicle's back deck where its plating was
thinnest. The fusion bottle was separately enclosed, no chance of harming
that in any case. But a fighting vehicle is such a dense assemblage of
hydraulics and wiring, of ammunition and black boxes, that a round
which penetrates anywhere has a real chance of doing disabling damage.
Designers' instinct crowds equipment together so that the armor need not
be spread thin to cover the volume. That ensures disaster on those
occasions when the armor is nonetheless thin enough.
Henschel of Terra had won their gamble this time. A chance image as
Cooper's gunsight rose in recoil proved his failure. The tank was turning
but its deck and turret were still partially aligned with the mercenary. He
caught the flash on each as a single round ricochetted from deck to turret
and off again skyward. It left little more than a scar on the paint at either
impact.
The tank was sliding forward, perhaps to shield the line of lighter
vehicles from the shots tearing at their right flanks. The mercenaries' slit
trenches were raggedly aligned, wherever overhanging scrub gave shelter
and a field of fire low among the stems. The line of geometric exactitude
which the laser drew across the slope could not directly threaten more
than a few positions. The gunner was firing blind in an attempt to cow the
ambush-ers with volume in place of precision.
The attempt was working very well. Even Cooper, focused on his own
business, could tell that the shots coming from the northern slope had
slackened abruptly. A trooper leaped up screaming as the beam passed by.
The brush behind him and his own uniform were both afire, though the
laser had not struck him squarely. Slag and ash exploded around the

mercenary as a score of Republican riflemen finally found a target. The
trooper dropped again, sawn apart by multiple hits. The blood soaking his
fatigues quenched the fire the raving beam had lighted.
There were the sensor pick-ups, Cooper thought; redundant but at least
vulnerable to his shots as the hull and turret proper were not. He was
swinging his weapon, following the tank's motion and aligning with the
cupola vision blocks when Pav-lovich screamed in frustration, "Goddamn
that laser!"
Without really thinking about it, Cooper shifted his sight picture a
meter further down range and fired. It was a good shot. The release broke
cleanly and the recoil was a surprise as it always is when the shooter
concentrates on his sights and lets his muscles act on instinct. It was the
last round in the magazine, though, and Cooper rolled sideways to hook
out a fresh one without bothering to see what the effect had been. He and
his fellows had bounced so many shots from the tank with no effect that
his mind retained only duty in the place of hope.
The massive vehicle slid on past the fourth, then the third personnel
carrier. The squat tube of its laser continued to traverse the hill slope. But
there was a tiny, glowing dot where the tube and its mantle joined, and no
beam issued from the weapon.
Trooper Powers shifted aim and fired twice more. Those were her ninth
and tenth rounds. She had just run out of the targets she had chosen with
the tacit agreement of Sergeant Hummel.
The only automatic cannon still firing was the bow gun of the lead tank.
The turrets of the five armored personnel carriers each had a pair of holes
in them. The holes were centered in whichever surface happened to have
been facing Powers at the time she fired. She did not bother to check her
results. It was conceivable that a projectile or two would be turned by the
armor. It was even possible that the white-hot osmium needles would fail
to destroy anything vital in the gun mechanism or gunner as they lanced
through the compartment. The chances of either were vanishingly small,
and there was plenty more ammunition in Powers' bandolier to deal with
them if the need arose.
Beads of sweat quivered on the Trooper's upper lip when recoil shook
her body. Her blond elf-lock was darkened and glued to her forehead.
Blinking, she increased the field of her gunsight and swept it over the
brush near the leading personnel carrier. A swath of darkness among the
twisted stems was not shadow but taupe fabric. Powers dialed up the

magnification again, concentrating wide-eyed on the holographic display.
The boots were obvious, and the dark blur lying foreshortened in front
of them had to be the soldier's torso. Body shots were uncertain with the
Company's weapons, though. All the theories about velocity effects and
hydrostatic shock could not change the fact that sometimes an osmium
projectile would drill straight through a man without discernible result.
Better to—
A hard line, the front rim of a helmet, twitched beyond the foliage. The
soldier's eyes were closed but his lips trembled in silent repetition. Powers
squeezed off.
The helmet sprang out of her sight picture as the gun recoiled. She
traded magnification for field again. Not to check the results; that would
have been a waste of time.
To find another target.
The lead tank was planted for good. Its bow gun streamed shells across
the valley floor, endangering no one but the dismounted Rubes who might
have survived the shaped charge. Albrecht Wald-stejn was crumpled near
the lead personnel carrier, where the explosion had thrown him. The
officer whose attention he had held through the last seconds was sprawled
face-upward on his turret. His hips and legs dangled down through the
hatch at an angle which would have been impossible if the shock had not
broken his spine. The laser was silent, either damaged or without a
conscious gunner at the moment.
None of which put Sookie Foyle nearer to ac complishing her own task,
but the chance was coming.
Three of the APCs had lifted, but the rear tank was the only vehicle
actually in motion. The whole valley floor was a killing ground. None of the
APC commanders seemed willing to choose a route out of it when all
routes were bad; and the Commanding Officer of the unit lay dead on his
turret.
Ten meters—but the tank was accelerating. "Now!" Foyle screamed.
"Guns, now!"
Only the disdain with which it shrugged off osmium projectiles made
the mass of the tank credible. Gracefully, accelerating at a rate which
must have rocked the men inside her, the tank approached the
daisy-chain of high explosives. Dirt loosely mounded over a mine now
squirted to either side, driven beneath the skirts by the fans.
Then it was past. The uncovered case of explosives gleamed in the

sunlight behind the Republican tank.
"Guns, now\" Communicator Foyle was shouting as Sergeant-Gunner
Jensen reached out of his trench and crimped the grenade fuze. No
Republican saw the motion, an arm thrusting full length, then
withdrawing beneath the sheet which had covered it until then.
The five further seconds which Jensen waited were as long as any block
of time he could remember. He held his shoulder weapon tightly by its
grip and barrel shroud. Jensen was not very good with the individual
weapon, not like he was with the splendid automatic cannon he had
abandoned. At this range, it would serve very well, though, if no stray
round or ricochet—
The grenade went off ninety centimeters from Jensen's head. Then the
world exploded.
The field expedient the Company had chosen to set off the daisy-chain
was simple and effective. An ordinary mini-grenade would be set off next
to a blasting cap, which would in turn be crimped into the first link of det
cord. Concussion of the grenade would set off the lead azide primer in the
cap, and the initiation cycle would proceed in normal milli-second course.
The problem was that the grenade itself had a five-second fuze. The
tank, the target which had to be in the killing zone, had dialed on full
power by the time it reached the daisy-chain—and passed it.
The ring of explosives went off like a read-out dial around the streak the
shaped charge had already burned across the landscape. The individual
blasts were squat and black and so huge that they completely hid the train
of det cord that spurted between them at almost ten kilometers per
second. To the mercenaries posted higher in the valley, there was a
perceptible delay between the first case to detonate at the northern
tangent of the ring and the last on the south toward which the blasts raced
in mirror image from either side. The delay was in no sense significant.
Most of the explosives were wasted. Only three of the cases had any real
effect on the Republican column. The remainder blew the ground into a
gigantic funerary wreath, strewing brush and pulverized soil harmlessly
over a square kilometer. There had been no assurance of where the
Republicans would come from; and there would have been three cases,
ninety kilos of plastic explosive, adjacent to any column which approached
the bait.
The third armored personnel carrier blew straight upward, flattening

and opening like a steel flower. Its self-sealing fuel tanks ruptured and
were wrung like sponges by the blast. The sprayed fuel ignited in a great
orange banner. It drifted north and started to settle before it burned out.
Plating and the heavier contents of the vehicle tumbled over the black
tendrils. The gun turret, squarely above the case of explosives, hung thirty
meters in the air for the fraction of a second while inertia struggled with
gravity. Then it fell back into the crater which gaped to receive it.
The fourth APC flipped over on its right side under the impact of blasts
in front and to either flank. The angle it had taken in the hedgehog
formation determined the details of its fate. Its fans shrieked. They were
spinning at full throttle without the brake of an air cushion now that the
plenum chamber was sideways. Several mercenaries on the south slope
found the hubs irresistible bull's-eyes. The fan motors began to dissolve in
cascades of blue sparks.
By contrast, the second personnel carrier was skidded twenty meters
forward. Its nose grounded, then bucked upward when the rear drive fans
lost all power. Heavy screens prevented trash from being sucked into their
ducts, but the cubic meters of dirt excavated by the daisy-chain flooded
the rear intakes and cut off the air flow completely. The vehicle began to
wallow. Its driver and most of its infantry complement—those still
alive—had been battered unconscious by the see-saw impacts. Like its
overturned sister or the windows of an abandoned house, its
defenselessness drew redoubled fire.
If the Republican tank had been directly over a charge the way the third
APC had been, the tank would have been surely disabled and very possibly
destroyed. Its mass and five meters grace saved it from either occurrence.
Gimmicks had failed. Only stark courage remained.
Shock waves travel faster through ground than through air. When the
daisy-chain went off, the little creek froze in a pattern of tiny white-caps at
the intersections of the profusion of ripples. The floor of Lieutenant ben
Mehdi's shallow trench bounced him up as he had not quite chosen to do
willingly. Twenty meters away, the front elevation of the second tank was
back-lit by the explosives it had just cleared.
The red flash was momentary, but not even the huge mass of the tank
could ignore the blast entirely. The looming bow nosed down. Its skirt
plowed a furrow four meters wide in the soil and brush. The grate-covered
intakes along the upper deck sneered at ben Mehdi for an instant. All the
anti-personnel charges ringing the hull went off together.

The crackling discharge was inaudible, but a diagonal line sawed off
flanking foliage like wind sheer over a sand dune. The dirt rolling in front
of the low skirt spewed higher, shot through the blue-white light like static
electricity. Then the stern slammed down, the tank slewed, and tonnes of
choking grit swept across it and ben Mehdi.
The Lieutenant fought upright in grim terror. His face-shield trapped
air for his lungs, but the mass that blanketed him was lethal and blinding.
The weight slipped away as ben Mehdi rose. The heat and grimy prickling
remained. The first thing that the mercenary saw as soil cascaded off his
face-shield was the tank, bucking and howling and broadside, less than
three meters away.
The tank's skirt was crumpled. That increased the difficulties posed by
the choked intakes. The driver was expert, however. First he had
deliberately grounded his vehicle. He was clearing his fan ducts with short
bursts where full power would have burned out the drive motors.
"Come on!" roared somebody else. Beside Lieutenant ben Mehdi loomed
Gunner Jensen. He had lost his helmet again. His face and bare torso were
gray with dust.
They ran toward the bellowing vehicle together. Jensen's left hand was
on the Lieutenant's shoulder, but ben Mehdi was being guided rather than
pulled. His own mind had disconnected itself in the maelstrom. Its hopes
and prayers were void.
Jensen used his companion's shoulder as a post when he leaped to the
deck of the tank. Ben Mehdi staggered. The vehicle was rocking from side
to side. Shrieking, the turret began to rotate though the laser itself was
silent. Beside the Lieutenant, the armor rang and a crater the size of a
demi-tasse splashed out of the steel. The inner face of the crater gleamed
with its new osmium plating. That was a molecular film of the projectile.
It had vaporized with the steel as kinetic energy became heat in a
microsecond.
The Sergeant fired down into a fan duct. His body recoiled upward as if
he were riding a jack hammer, once, twice, and there was a shower of blue
sparks from the intake as. the laser tube brushed Jensen off in a flurry of
limbs.
Lieutenant ben Mehdi acted with the passionless intellection of a
computer. It was all he had, now that Jensen had stirred him into motion.
Ben Mehdi ducked, craning his right arm and his grenade launcher up
over the tank's deck. The pocked armor burned where his chest pressed
against it. As the steel surged and air pumped down the intake past his

weapon, ben Mehdi fired. The contact-fuzed grenade burst on the grating,
lifting the mercenary's weapon but not tearing it out of his grasp. The
tank's own armor protected his flesh, and the centimeter or so belled from
the muzzle of the launcher tube did not impair its effectiveness. The
Lieutenant thrust the weapon back and fired again. This time the blast
was on the drive motor itself. The searing crackle of a short circuit
extended the explosion.
When a second red light winked from his control panel, the Republican
driver plunged into the panic he had resisted until then. He rammed the
throttle forward and held it there, though the four rear intakes were still
clogged. Even with the damage of its plenum chamber, the tank managed
to skid sideways in a triumph of over-engineering. Ben Mehdi was
knocked down. Jensen scrambled away from the steel Juggernaut. Then
three fans failed explosively. The tank ground to a halt. It was alive, but it
would be immobile until it could be hauled to a dock capable of repairing
something built more massively than a starliner.
Sporadic shots were still being fired. All the armored personnel carriers
were wrecked or burning. The few surviving Republican infantrymen were
throwing down their rifles, praying to be allowed to surrender.
Captain Albrecht Waldstejn was not fully conscious. His hands were
pressed against the ground, but he did not have enough coordination to
push himself up to a kneeling position. "Got to move before they spot us
again," he was whispering. "Got to go where they won't be looking. . . ."
CHAPTER NINE
"Look, baby," said Churchie Dwyer on the vehicle-to-vehicle push, "it's
all one with me. But if you people don't come out now, you don't get asked
again."
The interior lights of the lead tank were on. The mercenary could not
claim that it was the darkness of the fighting compartment that made him
claustrophobic. Dwyer did not like it, though, even with both hatches wide
open. Mrs. Dwyer hadn't raised any turtles, no sir. A bunker was bad
enough, and bunkers weren't usually targets three and a half meters high.
The commander of the other tank responded with a volley of what were
literally curses. The Rube officer took delight—or at least, such pleasure as
anything gave him at the moment—in cataloguing the torments due
Dwyer and the rest of the Company in Hell. Just fine, the gangling trooper
thought. He snapped off the radio. There were some people whom it was

more than a business to blow away, and a lot of them on Cecach seemed to
wear taupe uniforms. Churchie levered himself up and stood on the tank
commander's seat. His head stuck out in the open air again that way. "All
right, Del," he shouted. "Let's do it."
The Rube gunner stared nervously at Churchie from the other seat in
the turret. He had waved a rag from his own hatch instead of trying to
drag his CO clear and button the tank up. That had saved his ass, but he
was obviously uncertain as to whether or not it would stay saved. For the
moment, his mercenary captors needed him to identify controls in the
disabled tank. That was a short-term proposition.
Trooper Dwyer bumped his knee on the turret controls. "Goddam if I
know why anybody serves in a coffin like this," he grumbled in Czech to
the prisoner in the seat below. "Only goddam thing I can see they're good
for is shooting the hell out of other tanks—and we can't even do that since
some dickhead put a couple rounds through the laser."
"I, I'm sorry," the gunner said. He nodded his head as if the bruise on
his forehead had not left it throbbing in agony. The prisoner would have
agreed or apologized in response to anything the mercenary said to him.
Not only had the gunner seen the bodies outside before his captors
ordered him back within the tank, he could also smell the men who had
been aboard APCs which had burned.
Churchie craned his neck to watch Del. The job had fallen to Dwyer
because he spoke enough Czech and he was not involved in further
planning the way Hummel and ben Mehdi were. It would be a relief when
it was over, but that ought to be soon. 
The crew of the second tank refused to be reasonable, and they had a
bow gun which still worked even though it did not bear on anything in
particular. The Rubes could watch Del Hoybrin dragging the power cable
toward them from their captured consort, twenty meters away, but there
was nothing they could do about the fact. For that matter, if they even
thought about it at all it was probably to make sure they were not
touching metal.
Del clamped the cable to the stub of the second tank's radio antenna.
The big man waved to Churchie, then ran back to cover behind the
captured vehicle.
Churchie dropped back into the turret. "All rightie, sweetheart," he said
to the captive gunner, "you do it." Frightened but willing to do whatever
he was asked, the Republican flipped a switch on the control panel
between the two seats.

The tank generator could be used to supply six-hundred volt DC current
through a reeled cable at the stern of the vehicle. The tanks' fusion bottles
made the heavy vehicles useful power sources for units in bivouac. Now it
gave the Company a means of eliminating die-hards whom they could not
reach otherwise.
When the captive gunner threw the switch, all the instruments in the
second tank flickered and the electrically-primed ammunition for the bow
gun detonated. There were about a hundred and fifty rounds in the metal
loading drum. When they all went off together, the driver's hatch blew
open and the huge turret lifted its trunions from the track on which they
rotated.
Inside the captured tank, the explosion was only a thump. Churchie
Dwyer raised himself again to look at the results. Gray smoke was boiling
out of the fore-hatch and around the turret base of the other vehicle.
There were no screams from the crew; nor, of course, were there survivors.
Del Hoybrin was watching as he waited for further directions. "Right,"
said Churchie to his prisoner. "Up and out, baby. You just earned yourself
the chance to be tied up and left at the pit head, what's left of it."
The Republican obeyed, using the hydraulic lift on his seat instead of
clambering out as if it were part of an obstacle course. He had a sick
expression on his face.
"Cheer up," said Dwyer as he swung his own legs clear. He gestured
toward the other tank. The smoke from its hatch was now black and
occasionally touched with the flames which were cremating the bodies
within. "Think of the alternatives, hey?"
"That was Black One at the pit head," said Communicator Foyle.
"They've secured all the prisoners and they're following on."
Albrecht Waldstejn had a radio helmet, now, but he had made no
response to Sergeant Hummel's call. He did not respond to Foyle's
prompting, either. The savior and by God commanding officer of the
Company was trudging ahead in a daze. The Communicator touched him
on the shoulder. "Sir?" she said.
"I'm all right!" the Cecach officer snarled. When he turned toward the
contact, he stumbled. There was a curse from the line of troopers behind
as they bunched. A stretcher bearer stumbled in turn.
"Oh, Maria," Waldstejn prayed as Sookie Foyle's arms helped him
straighten and resume his place in the file. Most of the Company had their
night visors locked down, though there was still enough afterglow to see

the back of the trooper marching in front of you. "Sorry, Sookie," the
officer muttered. "I was . . . I'm not very alert."
"My fault to bother you, Captain," Foyle said. She took pleasure both in
Waldstejn's use of her first name and in the opportunity for her to call him
by the rank she herself had conferred. When they got back to Praha, it
would be over; but they were days short of Praha at best. Days and nights.
"Sergeant Hummel said the rest of Black Section is following along," the
Communicator repeated. "And she said it worked just like you said it
would with the tank."
"Damn, I should have stayed with them till they got clear," the young
officer muttered. "I don't like—" he shrugged— "running out that way."
Shrugging had been a bad idea. It pulled at the scabs over his shoulder
blades and the torn fabric sticking to them. Waldstejn had skidded on his
back very hard when the explosion hurled him down. Marco Bertinelli had
looked at him, but he was not the sort of medic who would spend time on
a scraped officer when there were real wounded around. And even from
the first, before a trooper had handed the logy Waldstejn a canteen and
amphetamines, the Cecach officer had been alert enough to prevent that
misuse of the Corpsman's time.
"So you could slow them down while they try to catch up with the rest of
us?" the Communicator asked bluntly. "Sir, a few people had to take care
of the prisoners and the last tank. We've got stretcher cases, we've got
people like you who ought to be in stretchers. Right now, Jo Hummel
needs you like a hole in the head. Tomorrow night we'll all need you. After
all, it's your plan."
"My plan," Albrecht Waldstejn repeated in a dull voice. He hoped he
had explained it in detail to somebody else. Because right at this moment,
it was unbearably difficult to remember how to walk in lock step with the
trooper in front of him.
Pavlovich's hands were on fire.
"Look, Guns," Sergeant Mboko was saying behind him, "I can tell off a
couple of my people if you need a hand with the stretcher."
The trouble with the stretcher was not just the weight. Herzenberg's
boots caught Pavlovich's thighs every time an irregularity in the ground
threw him off stride. Also, a stretcher pole bit the hands differently from
anything else. The calluses at the base of the trooper's fingers had already
worked loose. One of the resulting blisters had burst stickily. The rest
would follow before this night—much less this march—was over.

"No," said Sergeant Jensen. The poles trembled with the violent shake
of his head. "We'll take care of our own for now, Stack. You'll need all
you've got left unencumbered if the Rubes manage an ambush."
Sergeant Mboko snorted, but he did not state the obvious. The
Company would need more than his leading fire team if they stumbled
into the enemy yet tonight. "Well, don't forget the offer," the black
sergeant remarked. He shouldered brush aside to pass Pavlovich and
Cooper on his way forward.
Take care of our own! The gun crew was part of the Company, wasn't
it?" Pavlovich's arms felt at each stride as if they were going to pull out of
his shoulders. Cooper, ahead of him, was crumpled under the weight of
two packs and weapons. At least he did not have the stretcher poles flaying
his palms.
Of course, they already had flayed Cooper's palms. Cooper had taken the
first half hour on the front of the stretcher, while the gun slings had cut
against Pavlovich's collarbones and the two packs ground his vertebrae
together. In a few minutes, they would switch off again. It would have
been nice to have a couple of the under-loaded troopers of White Section
lending a hand.
Grigor Pavlovich continued to stumble forward silently. It would not
have done him any good to speak to the Gunner. Besides, Roland Jensen
still carried his own pack and weapon as well as the back of the stretcher.
And so far as either of his conscious crewmen could tell, Jensen intended
to carry the stretcher without relief until the column halted at daybreak.
"God damn it," Pavel Hodicky burst out through his snuffling. "It isn't
fair!"
Instead of agreeing with the younger man, Churchie Dwyer said, "Well,
I don't know it's ever fair, baby. But it was going to happen, if that's what
you mean. Hell, it was bound to."
Hodicky spun. The tall veteran, last man in the column as usual, waved
him onward with the ration bar he was chewing. They had full rations
again, courtesy of the stocks in the two APCs which had not burned.
"March or die," Dwyer said, and his grin did not make the words a joke.
The deserter fell into line again. They had lost a pace or two on the next
ahead, Trooper Hoybrin. Del carried two packs like the troops of the main
unit with the four stretcher cases. The spare pack was Hodicky's, though
the little private had not realized the fact yet. He had accepted the rifle
and bandolier they had handed him, but in the shock of Quade's death he

had not been able to think about the rations and field gear which should
have been his responsibility also. Hodicky would have been up with the
main body, except that Dwyer had tipped Sergeant Hummel the wink as
she told off her rear guard.
"Look," Hodicky muttered as he trudged forward, "I know Q didn't talk
much, but he wasn't dumb. He wasn't!"
"No argument," the veteran replied mildly around the last mouthful of
ration. Ignoring orders, he pitched the foil wrapper into the brush. If the
Rubes were sophisticated enough to track them by that, they were too
sophisticated to need to do so. If Captain Waldstejn didn't like it, Captain
Wald-stejn could police up all the crap himself.
"Well, I suppose you thought it, though," Hodicky replied. He was
calmer but still defensive. "I've heard what he did, stood there to keep
them away from me till the bomb blew him up. But it wasn't because he
was stupid, it was for me\ Because I got myself in a hole, didn't know what
I was doing . . . and Q gets killed."
"Look, sweetheart," said Churchie Dwyer. He had carried around a
three-legged cat for a year until a quarantine official on Rereway had
killed it. "Del's dumb, right? You tell him to stick his arm in a drive fan to
jam it and he'd likely try. But he's not going to go out of his way to kill
himself. Now, there's times you're going to go West no matter what you
do. But even in this business, you can die in bed if you don't spend too
much time looking for someplace else to do it. I don't have a word to say
against your friend Q . . . but baby, he was going to buy it before he was
much older. In a bar or a barracks—or hell, in the kitchen when his old
lady put a knife in him. I'm sorry, but he was the kind who finds a way."
They marched along without speaking further for several minutes.
Hodicky had made sure that his issue boots fit when he was assigned to
the supply room, but the unaccustomed marching had raised a blister on
his right heel anyway. "Churchie?" he said at last. "Umm?"
"What would you do if somebody ordered you to stick your arm in a
drive fan?"
The gangling trooper laughed. "Well, kid," he said. "I've knocked around
a bit. One of the reasons I've stuck with the Company is it's not the sort of
outfit you hear orders like that very often." After a pause, he added in a
somewhat lower voice, "I don't guess you'll ever hear an order like that
twice from the same guy."
The brush whispered against their uniforms as they continued to march
toward the objective Albrecht Waldstejn had set for them.

* * *
"Stupid bastards," muttered Sergeant Mboko toward the distant gleam
of light. Pressing the bulge on his helmet to key the command channel, he
said, "White One. I'm on the last ridge. The outpost's manned, I can see
light there."
"—got to rest here," Hussein ben Mehdi babbled, his words stumbling
over the last of Mboko's. "We're all beat, we're wasted. There's no way we
can—"
The voice cut off. Either someone had physically removed the
Lieutenant's finger from the transmit switch, or Communicator Foyle had
cut him out of the circuit. Damned right, the chickenshit . . . though the
Lieutenant had earned his pay with that tank, so you never could tell.
Brush crackled. Mboko had ordered a general halt, but Dubose had
decided to squirm up beside his section leader. "That it?" the Leading
Trooper asked. His voice was muffled by his face shield. Minuscule leakage
from the shelter two klicks away made it a beacon under the shield's
enhancement.
"Why—" the Sergeant began. His radio interrupted him.
"Top to White One," said Albrecht Waldstejn's voice. It was thinner
than radio propagation alone could explain. "Will the brush where you are
cover us in daylight?"
The black sergeant looked around him. Light enhancement, no matter
how effective, robbed you of real depth perception. Still, Mboko had been
using a night visor long enough to make more than an educated guess
about the present surroundings. "Yeah," he said, "it's no different from the
rest of what we've been hiking through. Stay low, stay twenty meters back
from where the ridge drops away, and I don't see any problem. If they send
a drone over, we've got problems irregardless."
"If they think there's a reason to search for us here," Waldstejn agreed,
"then we've got problems." There was a pause and a crackle of static. The
Captain's voice resumed with a difference in timbre which marked the
general push, "Top to max units. We'll bivouac on this ridge. White One
will give assignments left to his section, Guns will assign his people and
the wounded center, Red Two will assign Black Section right until Black
One rejoins. We'll be here all day with no smoke and no movement."
There was a pause, but it was for Captain Waldstejn to dear his throat.
"Get your rest now, soldiers. Tomorrow night we come down to it. Over
and out."

"So that's really it, huh?" Dubose said, waving again toward the light on
the far ridge.
"Why the hell ask me, trooper?" replied Sergeant Mboko testily. "Didn't
you spend just as much time as I did at Smiricky #4?"
CHAPTER TEN
The five of them did not need to look at one another while they hashed
things out. The command channel would have worked, would have
permitted the non-coms and the two officers to lie with their separate
units while they made the final dispositions.
Human nature beat technology in straight sets, as it usually does. The
command group lay on its individual bellies, facing inward like a dry-land
version of an Esther Williams routine. They were as tired as any of the
troopers they commanded, and the sun that spiked down through the
bush above them was just as hot as it was elsewhere on the ridge. When
Gunner Jensen saw someone crawling toward them, making the shrub
shiver, he snarled, "What the hell do you think you're doing, trooper? Get
back where you belong, and if you disobey orders again I guarantee you
won't move a third time." Jensen's hand was tight on his gun-stock, but
the real threat was in his hard blue eyes.
Sergeant Hummel looked back over her shoulder. The strain made her
squint. "It's Dwyer," she said to the command group. More sharply, she
called, "Spit it out, soldier, and get your ass back where it belongs." The
section leader did not care for Trooper Dwyer. She knew a good deal about
him, and she guessed more. But Dwyer was not the sort to need
hand-holding or to call his superiors' attention to himself without reason.
"Look," Churchie said. He was speaking toward the soil rather than to
the command group. If there had been a way to hand this to somebody
else, he would have done so; but Del could never do it, and nobody but the
pair of them knew. "There's another goddam route through the mines."
Hummel rolled on her side so that she could look at Dwyer more easily.
Alone of the five listeners, she understood the veteran's self-directed anger.
Dwyer was in the process of volunteering for a particularly nasty job. He
must have figured his chances of survival were even worse if he remained
silent. Perhaps Del Hoybrin's life also had a place in Churchie's
calculations. Hummel was quite convinced that the survival of the rest of
the Company had not been a major factor.

Lieutenant ben Mehdi craned his neck to see past a branch and say the
wrong thing. "What do you mean 'another route', trooper?" he demanded
in a voice that cracked for dryness.
Trooper Hoybrin carried four extra canteens. Churchie's response had
all the sneering range that he would not, save for anger, have lavished on a
superior. "Hey," he snapped, "we march in by the way we came out, that's
the plan? Right over the fucking mines even a dickhead'd have sense
enough to lay there after we did a bug-out? Or maybe you were figuring to
waltz in along the pylons, where there's still a working laser and a half
dozen bunkers with a clear field of fire?"
"Calm down, soldier," said Albrecht Waldstejn hoarsely. "Tell us about
the better way."
The gangling veteran was right. Hummel and Mboko had insisted—with
a parochial contempt for indig forces—that the Company's escape route
would not have been sealed, not in three days. Waldstejn, with the mild
agreement of Sergeant Jensen, thought that even Lichtenstein would have
mined the corridor before the surrender. That way, the Major would have
had something to offer his new masters in place of inertia in the face of
failure. The real problem was that there was no way to determine who was
correct. The corridor would only be scouted in the dark, when whoever
was making the reconnaissance was likely to detonate a mine if there were
any.
The casualty was acceptable, under the circumstances. The warning the
blast would give to the garrison was not.
"There's an old fuel tank on the slope," Churchie said. He was mumbling
again, and the others had to strain to hear him. "It's still there, I checked
before I broke in on you guys. There's a cleared path, narrow but they
didn't know about it, so I figure it's still there. I can flag it. Other end's the
OP."
"That observation post's still manned," said Sergeant Mboko. "They had
a light on last night."
"Campbell said he smashed the monitors before he leap-frogged in," Jo
Hummel responded. "Unless they switched gear from the south OP, then
it's visual only. And I doubt any of the indigs could figure out how to
connect Class 3 sensors even if they did try." Hummel was still looking at
Dwyer. He would not meet her eyes.
"Well," said Sergeant Jensen, "I like it better than trying to enter along
the truck route. And that was the best choice I'd heard."

"Even if the sensors aren't working," said Sergeant Mboko patiently,
"there are guards there. If anything happens, we've still got to get down
the back slope and through the bunkers after they're alerted. That's just
what you were afraid of if they'd mined the Colonel's corridor."
"No, it'll still work," said Waldstejn with sudden animation. His
headache had dulled to a background level after they halted. The muscle
cramps and bruises were almost a pleasure by comparison. "I'll be the first
one through. If anything happens, a shot or somebody hits the alarm, I'll
be right there at the radio. Nobody on night duty in Headquarters is going
to worry if he's told in Czech it's all right."
"God dammit, you are not going to do that," Sergeant Hummel insisted
with real anger. "No goddam body but you has a prayer of making a deal
with that spacer. Things are tight enough anyway without a bunch of us
trying to introduce ourself while all hell breaks loose." She paused,
breathing hard. "Nothing wrong with the plan, though," she muttered. "I'll
go first instead."
The Cecach officer sighed and struck both his palms against the
ground. A thorn jabbed the heel of his right hand. "Sergeant," he said, "we
aren't talking about being understood. If the first thing the duty officer
hears after a shot at the OP is somebody muttering pidgin on the radio,
he's not even going to wonder what happened. He's going to know, and
he's going to hit the general alarm so fast his hand blurs. This isn't hero
time, this is business."
"Well, hell, your kid can do it then," said Churchie Dwyer.
They had forgotten him. The command group turned in surprise to an
unexpected voice. The muttered statement made sense only to Waldstejn
anyway. In the brief pause, the Cecach captain said, "Private Hodicky? Ah,
I don't think—"
"Well, why not then, dammit?" Jo Hummel ' interrupted. "He's a native
speaker and he's damned well expendable!"
The Captain's mind flashed red, but no retort was called for. In the
present circumstances, 'expendable' was a technical term, like 'dead'. A
factor to take into account.
In any case, it was impossible to object to Sergeant Hummel's
characterization when she had just volunteered to take the lead position
herself. Waldstejn said, "I think we've got to class Private Hodicky with
the walking wounded. His friend, you know, Quade—that was a bad shock
to him."

"It's going to be a worse shock if they're waiting and kill us all!" Hussein
ben Mehdi burst out. "The only way we got out alive was they were all
looking the other way. And this is the Rubes, not the bone-brains in the
522nd!"
"Hey," said Trooper Dwyer.
The others ignored him. "That's right, Captain," said Sergeant Mboko.
"They need that big a garrison if they're going to keep the Complex going
with all those civilians."
"Ten to one odds if we crash in," Hummel agreed harshly. "And them in
bunkers, likely with heavy weapons this time. Who the hell do you think
we are, an armored division?"
"Captain!" said Churchie Dwyer. For the first time, the veteran trooper
had lifted his head toward the command group and had spoken distinctly.
They looked back at him. "Captain," Dwyer said, reverting to his normal
whining tone toward superiors, "the kid'll be OK. He's coming around.
And he'll be OK."
Waldstejn sighed. He began picking at the thorn in his palm. "We've got
a lot of choice, don't we?" he said to his hands. Then he looked up. "All
right, Hodicky will be with the leading element to cover in an emergency,"
he said crisply. "Thank you, Pri-Trooper."
Churchie Dwyer dipped his head in response. He slid backward, looking
for a place more clear of brush so that he could turn around. Albrecht
Waldstejn called after him, "Trooper? We'll brief him later, of course,
but—would you tell Pavel about this? Give him a little more warning."
Churchie nodded again. As Dwyer crawled away, the Cecach officer was
saying, "All right, the observation post is nearer where we want to go; but
da we have details of the bunkers along that section of the compound?"
CHAPTER ELEVEN
The markers were stakes of brush split lengthwise so that their white
cores faced the oncoming troops. Tape would have been better, but they
did not have tape, did not have wire—did not even have cloth which would
not determinedly blend in with its surroundings. Directly ahead of Pavel
Hodicky, Churchie Dwyer grunted as he thrust another stake into the
ground. He began to crawl forward, angling to the right this time.
The Cecach private had not thought about the mines at all during the
time he was stationed at Smiricky #4. The mines had been strewn around

the valley years before in much the same way that the cluster bombs had
been dropped during the Republican attack. They were laid on the reverse
slopes instead of being targeted on the valley itself, of course; and unli'ke
the bombs, they did not arm themselves until they had been exposed to
the air for an hour or two. After that, they slowly weathered to the look of
rocks the size of a child's fist. They remained lethal until they were
detonated, and a kilogram's pressure or less was quite enough to set them
off.
"Another stake!" Churchie whispered.
Hodicky passed one to the veteran, taking another in turn from Del
Hoybrin behind him. Colonel Fasolini's escape route had been a genuine
corridor, cleared to a minimum width of two meters. It had a single
dog-leg in it so that a fortunate intruder could not simply follow his nose
across the minefield; but the escape route had been intended for fast use
under adverse circumstances.
Churchie Dwyer had not needed such a corridor, -nor could he have
have cleared one without being caught. Wherever possible, Dwyer had
skirted mines which lay in his immediate way. Only when chance had
sewn an area too thickly to be avoided had he actually removed mines.
There was no safe way to do that except by blowing them in place. Trooper
Hoybrin had carefully dropped a hundred-kilo sack of dirt on each mine
while his partner prayed that both the blast and the noise would be
adequately absorbed.
The path which resulted from the troopers' combined labors was a
snake trail. Churchie himself was muttering gloomy appraisals. Pavel
Hodicky would have been terrified of what he was doing, except that he
was even more terrified of what he might be about to do.
Hodicky had been issued a helmet salvaged from one of the four dead. It
had blood on the inner lining, but that was not why he did not wear it
now. Bareheaded, with the darker Woodland pattern of his uniform
turned out, Hodicky might for a moment pass for a Rube soldier. The
off-planet precision of the metal-fiber helmet would mark him at once to
anyone who saw it; and Hodicky had learned very early in life that the top
of his head was generally going to be the first part of him people saw.
Dwyer paused again. Hodicky had been following by watching the
veteran's boots and pretending there was nothing else around him. Now
Churchie was gesturing forward with one crooked finger. The Cecach
private forced himself to look.
Slightly above them and less than three meters away was the

sand-bagged end of a shelter. Two narrow firing slits had been left in the
facing wall. The light from within the shelter made the slits glare at
Hodicky like the eyes of a predator.
Cautiously, concerned now with noise alone since they were beyond the
mines, the mercenary began to crawl toward the slits. Hodicky also began
to edge forward, a little more to the right to bring him to the blank side of
the beryllium arch instead of the bags. He could hear whispers of
movement behind him but he dared not look around. After swallowing
hard, Hodicky unslung his rifle and began to waddle up the final slope. He
could not crawl as Churchie did without the weapon scraping on the
ground. A noise like that here, and—
The back curtain of the shelter brushed open. Light bloomed about the
soldier who had just exited. The man was reaching for his fly, spitting
distance from Hodicky, when he stopped and cried, "What—"
The Cecach private stood up. "It's all right, Sergeant Breisach," he
called in a loud voice so that no one in the shelter would panic. "We were
sent to relieve you." Hodicky walked toward the tall man whom he had
expected never to meet again.
The curtain shuffled. Hodicky could not see it yet from his angle, but a
voice called, "Hey, they're relieving us?" It was easy enough to visualize the
face turned hopefully out toward the darkness.
"What do you—Sergeantl" Breisach said, closing with a snarl and a
snatch toward his rifle. That movement stopped. The turncoat did not
have enough visual purple to see the hedge of weapons aimed at him, but
Del Hoybrin's looming bulk was itself a death threat. Breisach backed
toward the curtained entrance again, driven by Hoybrin's gesturing rifle.
Dwyer and Trooper Powers had thrust their weapons through the firing
slits. When the soldier within turned in sudden confusion, it was to face
the muzzles of a pair of guns aimed at his chest and right eye. His hands
rose silently and his jaw began to tremble.
Sergeant Hummel stepped past Hodicky and tugged the slung rifle from
Breisach's arm. The captive was still in Federal uniform, but his collar
wings were ragged. All the non-coms of the 522nd had been publicly
stripped of their rank tabs as part of the restructuring process of their
new overlords. A few soldiers had been hanged as incorrigible idolators as
well, but that had been a ploy to get the attention of the rest. The Council
of Deacons knew as well as anyone else did that religious partisans were
assigned to shock units, not sumps like the 522nd Garrison Battalion.
"In there," Hummel rasped to their captive. "And don't move except I

tell you."
Breisach obeyed with a look of sullen hatred. Hummel opened her
mouth to send Trooper Hoy-brin in to watch the prisoners. Pavel Hodicky
was already following the ex-sergeant. The section leader blinked, but she
had more important things to worry about at the moment. Standing
outside the shelter for the sake of radio propagation, she began to report
the situation to the rest of the command group in urgent tones.
The shelter was cramped by three men and the tension. Pavel Hodicky
did not know the other captive though he also wore a Federal uniform.
The little private only glanced at that man, however. He was focused on
Wolfgang Breisach, just as the big ex-sergeant glowered at Hodicky alone
instead of at the weapons pointed at his back.
"You're gone, you know, you little bastard," Breisach said. "You got
nowhere left to run." His torso was angled forward, lowering his head. The
shelter was deep enough to clear Breisach's hair along the arch where he
stood, but anger was tugging him forward against the chain of fear.
"Didn't think they'd leave you all here," said Private Hodicky. His mind
was widely separated from his voice, from the present world. "Lot of
things I didn't think."
"You know what they're going to do to you and your little faggot
friend?" Breisach continued hoarsely. "The—the Deacons, they don't like
queers, no. They'll—"
"Quade's dead, you know," Hodicky said. He was smiling. "It was really
because of you and Ondru that he, that he had to go off the way he did."
"Kid!" Churchie Dwyer whispered from the firing slit. Del had pulled
aside the curtain, but he was viewing the interior of the shelter with no
more than his usual mild interest. The other prisoner was openly terrified.
He had backed into a corner. He did not notice the radio until his hip
brushed it. Trooper Powers was twisting her own weapon to keep it
bearing on the nervous man, unable to intervene through the opening in
any other way.
"Hey, that's too bad," Breisach sneered with his voice rising. "Burning
in Hell like that, what do you suppose he'd give for a taste of your nice,
juicy cock?"
"Why don't you ask him?" said Pavel Hodicky. He fired. The bullet
shattered Breisach's breastbone. The other prisoner knocked over the
lamp as he flung himself against the wall. There was a cavity the size of a
fist at the base of Breisach's throat. Air which had been rammed through

his upper windpipe blurted out his mouth with a spray of blood. The
involuntary sound was lost in the blasting report of the rifle. The dead
man fell forward. His clawing right hand brushed his murderer's boot.
Sergeant Hummel slid past Del in a crouch, her weapon waist-high and
ready. "What the hell"?" she snarled as she took in the tableau.
"Victor to Blue Light," demanded the radio.
Private Hodicky walked to the set. The remaining captive scrambled
away from him on the dirt floor. Hummel started to move toward the little
private, but she caught herself after only a step.
The radio was one from battalion stores, perhaps one Hodicky himself
had signed out one day in the past. He keyed the microphone and said,
"Blue Light to Victor. We had an accidental discharge but no harm done.
Over." Fresh blood and powder smoke stank in the confined shelter.
"Victor to Blue Light," said the radio. "I'll have to log this, you know.
Over."
"Do anything you please," said Pavel Hodicky. "Blue Light, over and
out." He set down the microphone.
The section leader touched Hodicky gently on the arm. "I'll take over,"
she said. "Go on out, get a breath of air while I talk to our friend here."
She toed the living prisoner. He was beginning to stand up again.
Hodicky nodded and walked to the curtained doorway. Del Hoybrin
moved back to let him through. Before he stepped outside, the little
private turned again. In a voice of sedated calm he said, "Q isn't queer,
you know. Neither of us are."
"To tell the truth," said Jo Hummel, "it hadn't occurred to me that it
mattered."
Shaking her head, she began to question the wide-eyed captive.
Sergeant Mboko's boots scrunched as he ran toward the gunslit. The
noise sounded louder to him than it really was. Every time his toes
slammed down, his ears felt the shock of all his weight and equipment in
addition to the airborne sound.
It also seemed louder because the black non-com knew exactly what
would happen if any of the men in the bunker awakened. It was unlikely
that even a garrison soldier could miss with a burst at a point-blank,
no-deflection target.
They would rather have bypassed the bunkers. The Company had

returned to Smiricky #4 looking for escape, not a battle. Though the
bunkers themselves were spaced widely enough that a file could safely
thread between them in the darkness, each position also housed an
intrusion alarm. The sensor loops of the alarms effectively closed the
interstices between the bunkers.
The plan of attack banked on a peculiarity caused by the real mission of
the 522nd, which was to prevent the laborers from escaping. Both ends of
the sensor loops were attached to the monitors by lead wires. If a
bio-electrical field approached the charged portion of the loop, the alarm
would sound. The portion of the loop which was lead wire, however, was
insulated so that the outpost itself would not set off the alarms; and
around the Smiricky compound, the leads were toward the outside instead
of on the inward face of the enclosed area. Unless the Rubes had changed
the system—and the prisoner swore they had not—the sensors were
arrayed to warn of escape, not attack. Mboko should be able to get very
close before the defenders realized he was there.
The edges of Mboko's knife shimmered in the starlight: very close
indeed.
Hussein ben Mehdi lay on his belly, wishing the herbicide sprayed on
the valley every quarter had been more effective. The growth which
managed to sprout on the blasted soil was stunted and deformed even by
Cecach standards. None of it was over a hand's breadth high, so it was as
useful for cover or concealment as the felt on a craps table. The thorns
jabbing at his sixth and seventh ribs, however, were as long and as sharp
as anything he had felt on this planet— might the Stoned One devour it!
There were four White Section troopers beside the Lieutenant. They
were watching dust puff around Mboko's boots as he sprinted the eighty
meters to the dug-outs. The troopers were tense, ready to follow their
Sergeant if he were successful.
Lieutenant Hussein ben Mehdi was with them because he was their only
hope of survival if the shit hit the fan instead.
Sergeant Mboko ran in a crouch, ready for the shock of the bullets
which would prove he had failed. Ben Mehdi felt a shiver and looked away
from the non-com. His grenade launcher was two centimeters shorter now
than issue, the amount which had been tattered by its own blasts in the
tank intake. Gunner Jensen had suggested that ben Mehdi switch
weapons with another of the grenadiers, but two practice rounds had
proved to the Lieutenant's satisfaction that the short tube still had what it

took. His hands knew the launcher's grip and fore-end. Objects may not
have souls, but familiarity can give them the semblance of one.
If the guards in the bunker opened fire, somebody had to lob grenades
through each of the gunslits. No one in the Company could be trusted to
do that at night except Hussein ben Mehdi.
Everyone in Fasolini's Company was armed with a real weapon, even the
nominal 'lieutenant' who had been signed on as a negotiating tool. Most
people thought that ben Mehdi had chosen the grenade launcher over an
armor-piercing squeeze-bore because the former was relatively light. That
was not the case. The recoil of the squeeze-bore made it almost impossible
to fire from a prone position, hugging the ground with the greatest surface
of your vulnerable flesh. By contrast, ben Mehdi could launch
gas-propelled concussion grenades all day and never have to lift himself in
the face of fire.
And he had gotten very good, against the day that the Colonel might
decide that his five grenadiers were superfluous to a company of tank
busters and should be reequipped. The Lieutenant had wanted to be able
to prove that his skill, at least, was too great to be discarded.
That skill had just set him at the Windy Corner.
Sergeant Mboko reached the bunker and flattened himself against the
face of it, between a pair of gun-slits. He waved back at the troopers
waiting to follow if he made the run himself without tripping the alarm.
Quickly but in single file, the five mercenaries scrambled to obey the
summons. Further back in the darkness, the remainder of the Company
lay tense but immobile until the leading team had cleared the bunker.
Lieutenant ben Mehdi was the last man in the file, but he got to his feet
without hesitation. Him in a shock commando—him!
And the strangest thing of all was that, as Allah willed, the situation did
not seem to be bothering him the way it should have.
The bunker was dug halfway below surface. Its roof was only a meter
above ground level. Sergeant Mboko braced his left hand on the top and
sprang up, directly onto the soldier sleeping there.
The Cecach soldier started up with a cry which would have been louder
if much of the breath had not been driven out by the mercenary's hips. For
the Sergeant, it was like stepping onto a platform that was not really
there. The irregular, sand-bagged surface had hidden the guard in the
darkness. Mboko had kept his face-shield up because depth perception

was more important to him than light-gathering while he sprinted toward
the bunker.
Now Mboko swung wildly at the cry in the same instinctive horror with
which he might have brushed a spider from his eyelid. The knife jarred
and twisted in his hand despite its keen edge. The human bulk beneath
him kicked while its throat made clucking noises. The Sergeant had not
slashed through the neck as he had intended; he had buried ten
centimeters of his blade in the soldier's temple.
Mboko could hear the troopers of his section running toward the
bunker. With a desperate fury, the Sergeant tugged his weapon clear. The
soldier's heels were drumming on the sandbags. It seemed impossible that
the guards within the bunker would not awaken at the perfect time to
slaughter the five men. Mboko braced his left hand on the Cecach soldier's
chest.
The soldier had been a woman. Her breasts lay like gelatine over
muscles which were going rigid in death.
The knife came free. There was no sound from inside the bunker.
The first of Mboko's troopers vaulted to the top of the position as the
Sergeant waved them on.
It was not a neat operation, but they were not in a business where neat
bought any groceries. The six mercenaries poised at the narrow doorway.
That many men would be in each other's way inside. Ben Mehdi and
another trooper knelt, facing the Complex proper. Mboko counted with his
raised fingers for the others. As the Sergeant dipped his hand the third
time, Dubose launched himself into the bunker. He carried a knife in his
right hand and a light-wand in his left. The Leading Trooper flicked on the
wand, silhouetting Mboko against a background of dull yellow as the
Sergeant plunged through the doorway himself. The other two of the entry
team were a step and a step behind.
There were three Cecach soldiers inside. One was up on his elbow,
awakened by the scuffling above him. The guard had time to shout and
raise a hand before Dubose landed on his chest. The mercenary tossed the
light-wand aside reflexively as he grappled, striking twice at his victim's
throat. Three of the dying soldier's fingers came off as his hand convulsed
on the blade it had clutched in desperation.
The light-wand was necessary for speed and safety, but its saffron glow
awakened the other two guards as well. The section leader ignored them.
He jumped past Dubose to the alarm monitor in a corner. Mboko put the

toe of his boot through the screen. The alarm disconnected with a pop and
a stench mingled of ozone and arcing components. Only then did Mboko
turn to find that his men had handled their tasks with the necessary
competence.
Butter Platt was cursing. He had tripped on a foot-locker and cut his
own left hand badly. That had not prevented him from ripping his target
all the way from belly to collarbone. He had kept the blade of his knife to
the right of his victim's sternum, where the ends of the ribs are still
cartilaginous in a young man. The opened body cavity gaped like a run
spreading in a stocking. The point had not nicked a bowel, so the bunker
filled with a smell like that of blood on turned earth. When the
curly-haired mercenary looked from his own wound to the damage he had
caused, he began to smile. His uniform developed a bulge where it covered
his groin.
Chen did not care for knives. Because of the bunker's low ceiling, he
could not swing his entrenching tool properly. Instead, he stabbed down
as if the short-handled shovel were a fishing spear. Its sharpened edge bit,
but the Cecach soldier somehow managed to scream until the shovel had
chopped him three more times.
The light-wand had rolled under one of the cots. Sergeant Mboko
picked it up. In its yellow light, the four mercenaries appeared to be
smeared with a black that glistened on their skins and molded their
uniforms stickily to their bodies. The section leader took a deep,
shuddering breath. "OK," he said, "that's it."
The troopers began to file out. Mboko called after them, "Dubose, get a
dressing on Platt's hand."
"Christ, Butter," Dubose muttered as he glanced from the cut to Platt's
face, "you're a real sicko. You really like hurting people, don't you?"
"Hey," said the other trooper as he stepped into the night, "do I talk
about you and your little girls?"
Mboko switched off the wand. He held it in one of the sand-bagged
firing slits and flicked three pulses toward the darkness and the rest of the
Company. They were keeping strict radio silence now that the ridge no
longer shielded their transmission from the receivers in the Complex itself.
All clear. No problems.
God, what a way to make a living.
The Sergeant stepped out of the bunker and drew another deep breath.
The fresh night air flushed the abattoir reek from his lungs, but nothing

could clear his mind.
There were no guards posted outside the Katyn Forest. The bridge
scuttle was retracted and all three cargo holds were clam-shelled shut.
Nothing could be done about the rent in the hull where the bomb had
punched through, however. The handholds meant for operation in a
vacuum gave access of a sort up the curve of the hull. It was not access
which would have done Albrecht Waldstejn much good without Trooper
Hoybrin above, hauling him up by rope to the point the cylindrical hull
began to curve in again, however.
Panting, the Captain reached the hole on which they depended for
entrance. Sergeant Hummel and three Black Section troopers were already
there. Waldstejn, with his familiar face and uniform, had to be the first
inside.
Necessarily, they had made a great deal of noise on the hull. The lights
visible within the Power Room meant nothing—in that location, the glow
strips were probably permanently charged. Waldstejn braced his hands on
the impressed lips of the bomb puncture and let his legs dangle. Maria. If
a squad of Republican guards were waiting for the first man through the
hole . . . well, it would be quick.
Churchie Dwyer gave him a thumbs-up signal and a stainless steel grin.
Waldstejn grimaced, then dropped to the deck with a clang.
He was facing the muzzle of a rifle. The bearded First Officer—Captain
Ortschugin— watched him over the sights. His eye was as cold as that of
any of the Company's gunmen.
Albrecht Waldstejn picked himself up carefully. He raised his hands,
but he smiled. "Vladimir," he said to the grim-faced spacer, "we need to
talk, and I'll take a drink if you've got something handy. I think we're each
other's tickets home."
CHAPTER TWELVE
Thorn was running through the pre-flight check with other spacers in
the stern compartments. Except for that, Ortschugin was alone on the
bridge with Waldstejn. The Cecach officer felt cramped, especially after
the days he had just spent without a roof over him.
"I don't mean I'm not in this," the spacer said. "These—fanatics, it is not
possible for normal people to live around them. Only by staying sealed off
in the ship can we survive here, and if they carry us back to Budweis, well.

. . . But we have no chance, not really. Just crossing the whole
compound—" he spat tobacco juice into a can—"pft!"
Waldstejn grinned. "You haven't been with these meres," he said. "I—in
garrison, there wasn't much to choose between them and the 522nd, you
know? Soldiers with nothing to do but raise hell. But out there, Vladimir,
Mary and the Saints. . . ." The Cecach officer shook his head. "Nothing's
sure. But I'm as sure as I can be that we'll get clear of here without a
problem. For the rest, well—Bittman talked big, but their front-line tanks
are going to have more to worry about than just us. We'll have to trust
some to luck and your hull plating, sure, but ... if it doesn't work, they'll
believe you were hijacked at gunpoint. And for the rest of us, there's no
other chance anyway."
A mercenary with drooping moustaches and a look of unexpected
enthusiasm came clashing along the corridor from the holds. "Captain,"
he said as he burst into the bridge, "Guns says to tell you the old girl
herself's back there! And the ammo!"
"Your cannon?" Waldstejn translated uncertainly. He glanced at
Ortschugin. "What's the cannon doing here?"
The Swobodan nodded. "All your gear," he said. "Their gear, I mean, the
meres. Next week, when the pylons are laid to here, we carry it back to
Budweis with ourselves and the copper—all spoils, useless here but of value
to the Return, you see."
Thorn turned from his controls. He said something to his captain which
Waldstejn thought was a report that they were ready to go.
Ortschugin confirmed that. "Whenever you want," he said to the Cecach
officer in English. "Thorn says the board's green."
Albrecht Waldstejn stood. "I'll check with the others," he said. "There's
still three hours to dawn, no need to lift before everything's locked down
tight." He grinned at Cooper, the mercenary who had brought the report,
then looked back at Captain Ortschugin. "Hell, Vladimir," he said, "I know
it doesn't matter a damn whether their gear's aboard or not, not for
getting to Praha. But doesn't it make you think that—well, keep a crucifix
handy, hey?"
The young officer was laughing as he strode off down the echoing
corridor. He had changed in a very few days, thought Vladimir
Ortschugin. An impressive man, now. A pity that he was going to die so
young.

"Hold Three, ready," said the intercom in Sergeant Mboko's voice.
"Hold Two ready," it immediately added as Sergeant Hummel.
Sergeant-Gunner Jensen nodded to Albrecht Waldstejn across the dim
interior of Hold One. "Hold One ready, sir," the blond man said.
"Waldstejn to bridge," the Cecach officer said to the intercom on the
bulkhead beside him. "Raise the hatches."
When the mercenaries first filed aboard the Katyn Forest, there had
been no copper stored in Hold One. Now the length of the hatches on both
sides were lined with a waist-high breastwork of ingots shifted from the
other two holds. The mercenaries who knelt along the breastworks
stiffened as machinery began to squeal. The metal-to-metal seals of the six
great doors broke. The Company had boarded by the narrow bridge
scuttle because of the noise entailed in opening one of the holds. Now
there was no choice. Gray light spread in Hold One as the top-hinged
hatches swung up along the full length of both sides. All lights within the
holds proper had been doused, though in One and Three there was a slight
scatter from the bow and stern compartments. The noise of the hatches
rising might not itself provoke a reaction from the garrison, but it would
certainly awaken everyone in Smiricky #4 and focus a fair number of eyes
on the starship. Ideally, they would have waited until they were under way,
but the auxilliary power unit could not winch up the hatches and raise the
ship simultaneously.
One after another, the hatches squealed to a halt. Their lower edges
hung a meter above the hold's decking. Every member of the Company
able-bodied enough to shoot now knelt behind the inner barriers of
copper. The four seriously-wounded troopers were in the crew's quarters,
while all the personnel of the freighter itself were at their stations.
Albrecht Waldstejn squinted into the night. His hands trembled
violently on the assault rifle he had never before fired. Any time now, he
thought. Any time.
The intercom crackled in Russian. A moment later, Captain Ortschugin
repeated his laconic statement in English: "Lifting ship."
Its lift engines driven by the full power of the overloaded auxilliary
power unit, the Katyn Forest began to lurch toward the lines of pylons and
the havoc sure to come.
A twenty-kilo ingot of copper clanged to the deck before the drive
steadied. Alone of the troopers in Hold One, Del Hoybrin did not wonder

what would happen if the whole bulwark shifted in on them.
The vibration bothered Del because it kept him from aiming steadily.
They were supposed to open fire as soon as anyone shot at them, though
not before. The way the ship was bucking, however, Hoybrin was afraid
that he would not be able to hit much. He hoped nobody would shout at
him if he messed up.
The Katyn Forest accelerated too slowly on its lift engines for the effect
to be felt. Now that static inertia had been overcome, however, the
buildings of the Complex had begun to slide by at a fast walk. None of
them were lighted. The vibration damped itself to an acceptable level, and
Del began to study things through the holographic gun-sight.
The ship was passing the truck park. The hole cut in the chain-link
fencing had been sutured with a web of steel tape. A pair of soldiers in
mottled fatigues leaped to their feet. As the starship passed twenty meters
away, one of the guards threw his rifle to his shoulder.
Del killed both of them with a short burst. The Cecach soldiers flopped
back against the fence as all the guns on the port side slammed into
action. Trucks beyond the dead men lighted with pinpoint flashes as
projectiles ripped along them.
The Katyn Forest was swinging around the west corner of the park.
There was a hesitation as Captain Ortschugin attempted the unfamiliar
business of locking their jury-rigged antenna onto the broadcast power
system. There were more guards at the gate. It was closed now by an ore
carrier parked across the ragged opening. Del fired the rest of his
magazine into the men. Because of the angle, dust sprang up ten meters
beyond the soldiers like a line of surf on a strand. An instant after the big
trooper had squeezed off, the parked truck and the men falling beside it
caught the full force of the twenty port-side gunners. Grenades burst amid
gravel fountains which the high-velocity projectiles had already sprayed
up.
Del Hoybrin reloaded with the perfect economy with which he did
everything that had become instinctive. He was worried. He wished
desperately that he could talk to Churchie beside him. There was no time
now, and it was too noisy to be heard over the gunfire anyway. The
troopers on the starboard side of the ship were engaging the bunkers
while those on the port ripped the buildings of the Complex proper.
Del had not waited for the Rubes to shoot first. Instead, he had
squeezed off reflexively just because a guard was aiming a rifle at him.

He was afraid he was in trouble again.
Rosa Brionca was as nervous as the watch officer in the
communications building. The phone only burped her call sign once
before her hand stabbed from the blanket roll to snatch it. "Mole One to
Victor," she said, not yet awake. "Go ahead."
The Council of Deacons did not enlist women into armed formations,
even into rear echelon units the way the Federals did. General Yorck had
honored his agreement to enroll the 522nd, however, men and women
alike. It may have been that from Yorck's strait viewpoint, the males of the
turncoat battalion were already degraded to the level of females.
The Republicans had given a choice to the officers of the 522nd. They
could be reduced to the rank of Private and assigned to rifle companies, or
they could keep their commands as provisional officers, Ensigns, in the
Lord's Host . . . under the tutelage of the Chaplain who would be assigned
to direct the moral welfare of the unit. Rank hath its privileges, Captain
Brionca assumed as she took the latter option and the command that went
with it.
The main privilege rank brought to those who had defected to the
Lord's Host was the privilege of failing while Chaplain Ladislas Bittman
watched. Brionca had realized what that meant even before two platoon
leaders were hanged beside Major Lichtenstein. Their units had not been
transferring mercenary stores to the Katyn Forest with the alacrity which
the Chaplain expected.
"Three of the bunkers are reporting noise from the starship," the watch
officer said. Brionca could not remember who had the duty tonight, her
mind was too fuzzy. "Ah, I heard it too."
"Right," the nominal commanding officer mumbled. She thrust her feet
into her boots. Brionca had begun sleeping in her uniform on the floor of
her office. That way, whatever happened she could at least make a show of
dealing with it before Bittman arrived. The night before, two soldiers had
drunk glycol coolant and gone off their heads.
Brionca had ordered them shot.
"Get on the horn," she decided abruptly. "Get their captain over here to
my—no, get them all over to my office, fast." She hooked her equipment
belt, juggling the handset between shoulder and jaw. "And—"
The gunfire outside silenced her as surely as if every round were fired
through her brain. Brionca dropped the phone and stumbled for the door

without bothering to slide up her boot fasteners."
"What is this, Ensign?" shrieked Chaplain Bittman as he threw open the
door of his room. It had been the Sergeant-Major's office. "What is this?"
The outer office was pitch dark, but Brionca had learned there was no
safety in that. She hit the door with her shoulder, then rolled on the
ground outside as she had not done since training exercises five years
before. One boot flew off. She ignored it and ignored also the thunkl as
Bittman too plunged through the doorway. She had gotten out just in time
to see the signals building destroyed.
The Katyn Forest was sliding toward them along the pylons one
hundred meters away. The belly of the ship's dark bulk glowed with
vaporized sabots as shots gnawed through the commo building.
The balloon supporting the directional antenna was starting to sink, but
it had already served to mark the commo center for the mere gunners. The
facade exploded inward, then the roof collapsed under the concentrated
fire. Anyone inside was as surely dead as the electronic equipment
shorting and sputtering in the rubble.
An anti-tank rocket burst and lighted twenty meters of the vessel's port
side. Brionca tugged out her own pistol. "The antenna on the front!" she
screamed uselessly as she aimed. "Shoot off the power receptor!"
The Katyn Forest was broadside to the HQ building now, and the
mercenaries' fire shifted to the new target. The muzzle blasts were not as
loud as the crashing shock waves of the projectiles themselves as they
ripped overhead. The pistol that Brionca had meant to fire remained
frozen in her hand as she sprawled in the dirt.
The night the Company had broken out, a single distant marksman had
raked the building. This time, the fire of twenty guns wrecked it with a
vengeful thoroughness. Lime dust and sand spurted from the structure
like smoke from a smudge pot, hiding the ex-captain and saving her life
when she had given up on it herself.
A grenade went off with a distinct bang. Then the starship was past,
dragging the pall of dust into fanciful shapes in its slip stream. There was
a fire burning somehow in one of the perimeter bunkers. It winked like a
distant reflection of the blaze starting where the signals building had
been.
The dust was choking. Ensign Brionca stood up, stumbled, and kicked
her remaining boot off into the night somewhere. Maybe the laser in Gun
Pit East would stop them.

Bullshit. Maybe the ground would open and they would all fall into it.
Chaplain Bittman staggered toward her. He was hacking and wheezing
so badly that he had to shake his fist to assert his fury. The slim man's
uniform was limed white. His eyes stared as if inset on a skull. The sound
of gunfire was a rasping background for him when he finally found his
voice. "You're a traitor, whore of Satan!" Bittman wheezed. "False not to
Man but to your Lord, all of you! And as the Lord shall burn you in
everlasting hellfire, so shall I—"
Rosa Brionca shot him. The Chaplain looked surprised. There was a
tiny, dark fleck on the front of his dusty uniform. He raised a hand as if to
touch it.
Brionca's pistol had been buried in dust and grit. She thought it would
jam after the first shot. To her surprise, the gun instead functioned
perfectly nine more times.
The warhead sent a sizzling white line across the interior of Hold One.
The shaped charge had penetrated the hundred millimeters of hull plating
and sent the metal spurting as an ionized stream to gouge the far
bulkhead. Molten steel splashed back over most of the dozen mercenaries
in the compartment.
High-velocity shrapnel would have done more real damage, but the
dazzling spray caused momentary havoc. "Shoot or by Christ you will
burn!" roared Sergeant Jensen. He fired twice into the night without a
specific target, just to drive home the order. A thumb-sized welt was
rising on his own cheek, but he knew that the Company's only chance was
to keep the garrison down by sheer volume of fire.
Jensen found his target in the fluid shimmering that characterized light
enhancement. The curving berm, the lattice-strengthened tube, visible
from the angle he overlooked it. He fired, his sights a useless blur beyond
the intervening face-shield. When he flipped the shield out of the way, the
holographic reproduction still quivered too badly from the unsteady drive
effects for Jensen to make the difficult shot.
The blond man howled a curse. He was furious now that Waldstejn had
not allowed him time to set up the automatic cannon. Its dampers could
have kept it steady despite the vibration, accepting input only from the
controls. Sure, it might have taken an hour longer to weld the outriggers
to the deck since there was no dirt for the spades to bite in. But an hour
would be cheap if the choice was—
Jensen fired a three-shot burst. Strong as he was, the recoil punished
him. The gun barrel jumped as the stock hammered Jensen's shoulder

back and down. Riflemen were firing from the bunkers toward which the
ship hurtled. The mercenaries around the Sergeant-Gunner were angling
forward to blast away at those active targets. The worst someone with an
assault rifle could do was to kill a few of the troopers lining the holds. The
laser cannon, if it were still operable when the Katyn Forest cleared it,
would burn them to slag as surely as it had the decoying trucks four nights
before.
Jensen ripped out another burst. He tried desperately to anchor the
fore-end but failed because the problem was not with the barrel but with
the shoulder supporting the stock. They were hissing by the gun pit, now,
eighty meters away and ignored in its stillness. Jensen's gun slammed and
ejected its empty clip. He might have hit the laser . . . but he was sure he
had not. Bullets spanged on the hull and the copper breastworks.
Mercenaries ducked, as if that mattered a damn if the laser were not
destroyed.
Jensen turned. His normally-pale face was suffused with rage and
frustration. His big hands were fumbling with a fresh magazine, but this
shoulder-bobbing toy was not a real gun, was not his gun. "Lieutenant!"
the Sergeant-Gunner screamed to the third man down the firing line from
him, "for God's sake, the laser!"
Hussein ben Mehdi turned momentarily toward the cry. His face was
that of a reflective balloon. A face-shield was no handicap to a man who
shot by instinct and not through his sights. The Lieutenant wheeled. His
right hand was on the pistol grip, his left on the barrel which he lifted with
the precision of an aiming screw. The grenade launcher jumped three
times. The slap of its gas discharges were inaudible against the
background of high-velocity fire ringing through the hold.
The Katyn Forest lurched as it took the line that would speed it out the
west end of the valley. Gunfire ceased abruptly. They were out of the
bunkered compound, and the mercenaries' guns no longer had targets
they could bear on.
Roland Jensen's hands suddenly remembered the pattern. They
reloaded his gun while the big man blurted, "Did—did you hit it, sir?"
Hussein ben Mehdi raised his face-shield. He could not remember the
last time a Company non-com had called him 'sir' and sounded as if he
meant it. "Well, we'll know in a few seconds, won't we, Guns?" he said with
a deliberate cruelty of which he was at once ashamed. His own fear was
personal. Roland Jensen's fear was for his section and the Company, not
for himself. "As Allah wills, Sergeant," ben Mehdi added in an apologetic

voice, "but—yes, I think it pleased Him to guide my arm.
In Smiricky #4, some survivors were blasting useless rounds after the
ground-hugging starship. Few of the bullets would hit as the range
continued to open. None would do more than fleck the hull.
Other Cecach soldiers were tending the wounded or staring in shock at
their dead. In Gun Pit West, there were moans, but no one remained to
give aid. The crew, huddled behind their berm, had been saved from the
carnage to the very last. Then, as the ship pulled past and heads lifted in
relief, three grenades had turned the laser above them into deadly
shrapnel.
The Katyn Forest's bulk blotted the last visible pylon. Then the pylon
reappeared and the starship vanished forever from Smiricky #4.
CHAPTER THIRTEEN
"I don't care whose fault it is," Colonel Kadar snarled to his
Communications Officer. "I need to get through to Headquarters. If the
Smiricky link isn't working, find another one!"
Except for the road, the plain had been a single giant wheatfield
stretching as far as the eye could see. The wheat still remained, its stalks
green and the heads just beginning to be tinged with gold. It was no
longer part of a farm, though. Farms, even latifundia, are human things.
There was no longer human interest in the plain as a place where food
grew.
The road remained important, and it grew death and wreckage.
The vehicles of Tank Regiment Seven lay in a defensive star. The tanks
and personnel carriers faced outward like the segments of a watch face
while the support vehicles clustered together at the hub. There should
have been twice Kadar's present total of fighting vehicles, six APCs and a
pair of tanks. The second element had left Budweis only twelve hours
behind the first and should have joined Kadar by now. Instead, only the
support vehicles had caught up with him. All the Captain in charge of
them could say was that the armor had been diverted two days earlier on
secret orders.
And now, however he fiddled with the triple-braced antenna, the
Communications Officer could not make the tight-beam contact with
Sector Command.

Dismounted soldiers chewed on wheat stems as they waited. The
swathes the vehicles had cut across the wheat were a green darker than
their tawny surroundings. Kadar's eyes wandered from one blank stare to
the next. The most powerful unit in the Lord's Host—except that half of it
was missing and the rest was stalled while its commander tried to find out
what in the Lord's name Headquarters was thinking of! Kadar slammed
his fist against the turret of his tank.
The command frequency snarled back at him so suddenly that Kadar
froze. Subconsciously he feared that the blow had set something off. The
dished antenna on the commo van was finally receiving signals, routed to
the huge Henschel tank by a scrambled transponder. An aircraft was
replacing the balloon relay at the captured mining complex . . . but the
content of General Yorck's furious message gave Kadar no time to wonder
why.
The Colonel signaled an acknowledgment. The transmission snapped off
as curtly as it had begun. Its message was stored in the tank's memory,
available either on screen or as hard copy if the commander required it.
Kadar did not need a repetition. The orders were as simple as their
accomplishment should be.
A ripple of interest was running through the troops who a moment
before had been waiting in bored lethargy. They knew a signal had been
received, but only Colonel Kadar knew what the message was. Exulting in
the power of secret knowledge, Kadar himself swung the turret of his tank.
His gunner peered up at him, as much at a loss as were the infantrymen
outside.
The laser had been in ready position, zero deflection, zero elevation.
Instead of aiming, Kadar kept his foot down on the traversing pedal as he
squeezed the hand switch. The weapon drew a pale line across the
daylight. The beam merely hissed until the turret rotated it through the
nearest broadcast pylon. Steel latticework vaporized with a roar and a
coruscant white glare. Larger, fluid gobbets spit from the supports and
sparkled as they rained into the dust and stunted vegetation below.
The Republican soldiers were on their feet now. Heads twisted even
from the commo van to watch the fireworks. The power-broadcasting
antennas waved madly as their support toppled, taking them out of the
circuit. Kadar continued to traverse his blade of pure energy. A pylon of
the east-bound roadway collapsed as the beam slashed it also. There was
now a one-kilometer gap in the Praha-Smiricky truck route. Both halves of
the lines were still energized, but the receptor antenna of a vehicle could

not align across the gap and leap it.
MERCENARY IDOLATORS IN CAPTURED STARSHIP PROCEEDING
WEST ON ROADWAY FROM SMIRICKY the message had read.
WEAPONS CAPABLE OF DEFEATING LIGHT ARMOR. IMMOBILIZE
AND DESTROY VESSEL BETWEEN SEVERED PYLONS.
There had been a further direction. It had struck Colonel Kadar as an
unnecessary one, given the bubbling Hell into which his lasers would
convert the starship after they sliced through the outer hull. Still, General
Yorck was known for spelling out requirements precisely. It was to be
expected that he would close with TAKE NO PRISONERS.
The truck cartwheeled off the line. It was an empty ore-carrier
returning from the battle area to the temporary road-head at the Smiricky
Complex. The Katyn Forest had swung out slightly to bring her port side
to bear on the unsuspecting vehicle on the other line. A three-shot burst
from the automatic cannon had ripped low through the truck,
demolishing half the drive fans and letting the vehicle scrape down at its
full forward speed.
The effect was spectacular. Troopers cheered. Some of them, however,
and all the command group, knew that it was going to be different if and
when they met real fighting vehicles.
Jensen nodded to Pavlovich. The crewmen had been in the gunner's seat
for what was, after all, no more than a training exercise. "Good," the
section leader said. "Damned good. I couldn't have done better myself."
And if a target on a fixed course two hundred meters away was not a great
test of skill, then the statement was still perfectly true, and it was made by
a man whose praise counted. Pavlovich flushed with pleasure.
The Katyn Forest continued to plow forward at a sluggish fifty KPH.
Her lift engines were designed for maneuvering at maximum loads, not for
high speed transit. Still, the Company was separated from safety by
something more tangible than mere distance. Since the engines acted by
direct impulse, there was no air cushion to smooth irregularities in the
drive. The buzz and tiny lurchings were disquieting at any time and were
quite impossible to deal with when multiplied by undamped gun-sights.
Albrecht Waldstejn rang a knuckle on the inner face of the hull. "How
long if a laser hits it, Vladimir?" he asked soberly.
Captain Ortschugin was sitting on one of the carboys of mercury which
shared Hold One with the mercenaries' stores and the automatic cannon.
He shrugged and said, "Who knows?" But spacefaring was not a

profession that encouraged question dodging. "Ten seconds?" the
Swobodan amplified. "Perhaps fifteen, perhaps more if their guns don't
hold a target perfectly. I doubt that. . . . And a few seconds more still
before something vital is hit and we go like—that." He waved a morose
hand sternward, where the wreckage of the shot-up truck had presumably
strewed itself.
"Fine, the hull," said Sergeant Mboko, "and if we have any chance we
got the doors open, right? So we can shoot back." He gestured. The
hatches and breastworks were still up as they had been during the
break-out. "What happens when a laser slides across that?" The black
sergeant snapped his fingers with a power and a suddenness which
startled even his listeners. "Not ten seconds, I tell you. Not one. I say we
dismount now. We're just a target here."
"Maybe Stack's right," said Sergeant Jensen. He glanced at his cannon
with sad affection. They had welded it solidly to the deck of Hold One. The
barrel had a 360° traverse and a practical arc of fire of almost 90° to
either broadside now. "Lasers aren't a good way to punch through armor,
I don't care what they say. Not when the metal itself fogs the beam when it
burns away. But sure, they'll aim first at the openings. And I can't claim
that the old girl has much chance to knock out a tank from the front."
Captain Waldstejn's face had gone blank in the midst of the Gunner's
assessment. Sergeant Hummel, ignoring whatever the officer might have
found of interest, snapped, "If we walk, we're dead for sure, Guns. You
think they're going to roll into another ambush? Look, if we ground the
ship as soon as we make contact we can try and shoot out the lasers again.
I know, they're going to sweep the holds and a lot of us aren't going to be
lucky, but at least—"
"Vladimir, how much will the pumps that evacuate the holds handle?"
Albrecht Waldstejn interrupted. He rapped one of the deck gratings with
his boot.
Ortschugin shrugged again. "We can empty the holds of water three
hundred meters down in a one-g equivalent," the spaceman said. "Bulk
cargos, grain, we discharge that way too. There are atmospheres that
dense, some places we dock, you know."
The mercenary leaders looked in confusion from Waldstejn to the
bearded, passive face of the ship's officer. "I think," said Waldstejn, "that
we just might have an answer."
CHAPTER FOURTEEN

The idiom of the bridge displays differed from that of normal human
optic nerves. If one knew what to look for, however, the displays gave a
very clear picture of the world—including the drone which had been
following the Katyn Forest for the past ten kilometers.
Vladimir Ortschugin pointed. "See, Albrecht," he said, "just above the
horizon. Your friends could shoot it down, perhaps?"
To Waldstejn, the pip coasting through the shadows of the holographic
analog was whatever the space captain said it was. He shrugged. "I
suppose. If they've got one, they've got others, though." The Cecach officer
swallowed. "No sign of—other vehicles?"
The spacer grinned like a demon at the euphemism for 'tanks'. He
gestured toward the analog display. "We can't see through rocks, after all,
and we've never had ionospheric radar fitted. Who can say? In—" the
calculation process was natural to him, but the figures, surface speeds and
distances, gave Ortschugin a pause— "one hundred and twelve seconds,
then we should have a good view of the plain beyond."
The bright, metallic echoes of the pylons stretched at spaced intervals
behind them on the shadowed landscape. There was still one sharp peak
ahead, before the holographic display faded off into a land unknown to its
radar primaries.
"They'll be waiting," Waldstejn said with the detached certainty of a
man about to become part of an air crash. "Start the pumps. I want the
starting load on the broadcast grid, not the APU."
Captain Ortschugin nodded. He threw a pair of yoked switches. Then he
slid another control up through the gate, into the red zone on its face.
"Full power from the auxilliary," he explained. He grinned again.
"Seventeen seconds," he said.
"Who'll join me in a game of twenty-one?" asked Churchie Dwyer. He
riffled his cards.
"Shut the hell up!" snapped Sookie Foyle. No one else in Hold Three
spoke. Some of the soldiers did not even look up from the weapons which
they held in front of them like flags at a service of honor.
"Well, I only asked," Dwyer protested mildly. He wriggled his shoulders
against the copper bulkhead. The corner of an ingot scratched where his
fingers could not reach. He began to flip the deck over one at a time in a
game of privy solitaire.
Sometimes you could get people to play when their minds were on

something else. They made dumb bets, took cards they didn't need, and
forgot the rules in useful ways. Way deep down, the troopers in Hold Three
were sure they were all going to die.
The hatches were closed. All of Black Section sat with the wall of copper
between them and the coming fire besides. If the starship hit the ground
hard, those same ingots were going to pulp everything human that shared
the compartment.
The thing was, if you went West, it didn't hurt you to have a pocketful of
other people's money. And if just maybe you came through . . . well, hell,
Praha was quite a town for a bright fellow with the ready. Why stare at
your gun when there wasn't a damn thing you or it could do to change the
odds?
"Vector two-two-zero!" the intercom blared.
Churchie's cards spewed over his lap as he too snatched up his weapon.
Their targets were four kilometers away as the Katyn Forest bellied
over the rise, and Roland Jensen could not see them yet. He sat where he
belonged, in the gunner's seat. Pavlovich and Cooper were flat on the deck,
waiting to take over when the section leader was killed—if they did not all
die together. Like Jensen, the gun crewmen wore suits from the vessel's
stores, meant for operation in corrosive atmospheres. The suits could not
deflect a direct hit from a tank laser for more than a few microseconds.
The automatic cannon was angled forward and to the right, at 390
mils—the sharpest angle possible that would clear the bulkhead. The ship
swung as it slid forward on the slope. Gravity was urging the Katyn
Forest to a greater speed than the lift thrusters themselves could drive her.
Jensen could see wheat through the firing slit instead of the indigenous
scrub of moments before. All the landscape was cloaked in a silvery mist
as the pumps rammed mercury out of the vent above the hatch. 
"Three hundred!" Captain Waldstejn's voice reported, "three-fifty—"
There was a black speck in the gunsight. It sprang into a tank, distorted
into a lowering blur by the spray of liquid metal. The pale beam of the
laser was only a quiver as it sheared the power antenna behind the
starship.
"Got her!" roared Sergeant Jensen. With one gloved hand he squeezed
the lock which would keep the muzzle aligned with its present target. As
his other hand squeezed the trigger) the Katyn Forest took off.
The starship's lift engines did not need to hug the ground the way an air

cushion vehicle did. The auxilliary power unit of the Katyn Forest did not
have enough juice to raise her to high altitude or even simultaneously to
maintain forward motion and climb. By straining the APU, however, and
by trading velocity for climb, Captain Ortschugin managed to slant his
lurching command some ten meters in the air. Kadar's target was not
where his computers had put it on the basis of data fed in at leisure. As
the two Republican gunners snatched in panic at manual overrides which
they had not expected to need, Jensen's projectiles sleeted in on the
right-hand tank.
The mercury fog blurred the gunsight, but it had no real effect on the
osmium penetrators themselves. The hull and turret face of Kadar's tank
rippled in a silver spray as eight rounds a second struck them. The
projectiles did not hole the armor. Ten or a dozen hits at the same point
might have blasted a gap in the frontal slope of even one of those Terran
monsters; but the range, plus the vibration and maneuvering of the
weapons platform, spread the hose of bullets instead across the whole bow
of the tank. The laser tube disintegrated. Dispersion and the big gun's
cyclic rate accomplished what accuracy could not have managed under
the circumstances.
"Rotate!" screamed Gunner Jensen, but Ortschugin had never ceased to
spin his vessel on her vertical axis. The Katyn Forest had lost the
momentum of her forward plunge and with it the capacity to stay aloft on
auxilliary power. Now she settled between the two cleared roadways in an
explosion of dust. The yellow-gray doughnut billowed up about the ship.
The remaining laser stabbed her regardless like Polonius through the
curtain.
All the tankers knew was that they had cut their target away from the
broadcast grid but that she was still moving. The vast bulk of the starship
was a reality which overwhelmed concepts such as armor and weapons
effectiveness. The preset program had gone to hell when the Katyn Forest
lifted. Now the tank gunner spun his sight picture across the scarred
hugeness of the vessel's plating. He was not trying to lock on and pierce a
single point, but rather to catch and destroy the gun which had just
devoured his consort.
In Hold One, Sergeant Jensen felt a mild vertigo which was lost among
the other chaotic sensory inputs. The section leader was trying to traverse
the automatic cannon faster than the ship itself spun so that his muzzle
would be waiting when the second target slid in view. The two axes of
rotation differed, and the blur in his electronic sight would have been
disorienting anyway.

The laser beam was a clapper, ringing on the hull of the Katyn Forest.
The tank weapon cut a whorl of geometric roundness through the roiling
dust. The tough hull surface scaled off in sparks and vapor, even though
the beam was only glancing across it while it searched for its real victim.
"Vector three-fifty!" cried the intercom, and" Jensen's world exploded.
Cooper saw the gun and his section leader in relief against a glare
brighter than the heart of an arc light. The beam's fusion-powered spike
struck the fog of mercury droplets and scattered cata-clysmically. To the
tankers and the infantry still more distant in their APCs, the raging blue
scintil-lance meant the guts of the starship had vaporized. In fact, the
actinic glare was almost entirely beyond Hold One, not within it.
'Almost entirely', when power like that of the tank laser was involved,
meant that the hold was a blue-lit Hell.
The beam slid down the length of the open hatchway with a roar of
heavy-element ionization. The tankers had no target but the firing slit
itself. They raked it as the starship continued to lurch forward, wheeling
like a dying shark. Despite the scattering effect, ingots in the breastwork
welded together. Sergeant-Gunner Jensen was slumping out of his seat. 
Cooper's mouth was open behind his face shield. Even he could not have
said for sure whether he was screaming in the noise and stink and light.
He dragged his section leader down behind the copper and took over the
gun himself.
The atmosphere suit made the controls unfamiliar, and Cooper had no
idea where his target might be anyway. He had been belly-down until the
instant he took charge, with no more picture of the action outside than
the stacked copper ingots could give him. Now the plain gaped and the
tank was only a speck at four kilometers distance. The laser beam itself
gave Cooper his target. It lanced back to its source from the coruscant far
end of the hold.
With a calm he had never felt in training, the mercenary pedaled in
right traverse. The gun mechanism performed flawlessly despite the flash
of Hell-light that had taken out its gunner. The tank was a sudden blur in
the funhouse mirror of the sights. Its turret was rotating to draw the beam
back across the hatchway. The ionizing discharge began to encroach on a
sight picture already fogged by the last of the mercury being sprayed from
the vents. "Got her!" cried David Cooper. The hammering recoil of the
automatic cannon drove a bass note through the snarl of the laser.
Down range, the second tank began to come apart under the osmium

hail.
As before, the Henschel compound armor adequately withstood the
battering. The crew within did not. The laser tube and the tank's outer
surface shattered like a sand-blasted ice carving. Though the armor did
not give way, it flexed and rang like the head of a tympany. The tank
captain, a veteran of APCs but new to his present Terra- built command,
panicked. He threw open his hatch and tried to bail out.
Projectiles from the automatic cannon did not ricochet from the armor.
Their velocity was far too great for that. Instead, they splashed like
meteors on stone. Each round coated and vaporized a col-lop of
density-enhanced steel. The wave-fronts sprayed the Republican officer
and ripped him apart like so many white-hot razors. His body dripped
back down the hatchway through which he had jumped. Screaming with
the contagion of madness, the two crewmen followed their commander up
and to the same end.
When the second can of ammunition had run through the chamber,
Pavlovich shook his partner. "You can stop, now, Dave," he said. "You can
stop."
"Yeah, Bertinelli says it'll be a day or two before the bandages come off,
but he ought to be OK," said Sergeant Mboko. "It was shock, mostly. He's
wrapped in a heating blanket and that turtle of his is being as much nurse
as she can with her own breaks."
The ship rocked with another short burst. In Hold One, troopers
cheered as Cooper and Pavlovich took turns in the gun seat.
"Gun Section s been taking it on the chin," Lieutenant ben Mehdi
remarked. He flashed a grim smile around the group crowded into the
bridge. "Glad they got a chance to get a little of their own back."
The starship's visual sensors did not magnify their images, but fresh
mushrooms of flame were clearly visible against the background of wheat.
The field was marked by more than a score of fires, now. Some of them
had burned down to smudges of rubber and lubricants and flesh. The
lighter Republican vehicles had been laagered far enough from the tanks
that they would not be damaged while the starship was being destroyed.
When the gun crew had time to turn to them, they were dark blotches
against the grain and still easy targets. While the Katyn Forest crawled
under auxilliary power across the gap in the pylons, the automatic cannon
smashed the thin-skinned vehicles one after another. The few which still
survived were stopped. Their crews had abandoned them to the projectiles

which would probe inexorably for their fuel tanks in any event.
"Got it," Captain Ortschugin muttered. The starship shook herself as
her lift thrusters began winding out on broadcast power again.
Sergeant Hummel was staring at the analog display with a look of glum
disapproval. To the radar, an armored personnel carrier was much the
same whether or not it was a burned-out wreck. The unchanging
hologram suited Hummel's mood better than did the cheers echoing from
Hold One. "Fine, we chew up a reserve squadron," she said. "We're twenty
klicks from the new Front, still, aren't we? What's going to be waiting
there?"
"Jack shit unless our luck's a lot worse than it's been so far," said
Albrecht Waldstejn. The question had surprised him until he realized how
little the Company knew about the general situation on Cecach. On some
worlds, no doubt, the conversion of an armored battalion to scrap metal
would be a minor datum on the weekly Intelligence Summaries. Here,
though—
"Look," the young captain explained, "you knew those tanks were
imported—but did you know there weren't fifty of them on Cecach? And
that they were what changed the whole face of the war in the past year,
year and a half? People, what you've done here and back at 4B—you may
have stalled the whole Rube drive. Those were the reinforcements they
needed to put them through. I don't think they'll risk more tanks, even if
they could shift them into position in time. And the rest we can pretty well
take, so long as we keep moving so they can't drop the heaviest high-angle
stuff on us."
There was a startled silence on the bridge. "I be damned," said Jo
Hummel. "You mean we've got a chance after all?"
Thirteen hours later, battered and with two more troopers dead from a
well-directed anti-tank rocket, the Katyn Forest set down again. She was
in the spaceport around which Praha had developed during its centuries
of human colonization.
CHAPTER FIFTEEN
The Katyn Forest was reduced to scale in the closed repair dock. Even a
small starship so dwarfed the norms of human habitation that the vessel
had taken down cables and a few balconies during the last kilometers of
its passage. Ortschugin, cursing in Russian, had let his bows overhang the
escorting troop carrier when it slowed for crowds of amazed spectators.

The spacer would not feel safe again until he had rung his command into
stardrive once more. That was at least days in the future, even with only
minimal repairs to the vessel . . . but Captain Ortschugin had no desire to
add even a minute where it was unnecessary.
"Point that thing somewhere else," Sergeant Hummel said to a
disembarking Federal soldier, "or I'll feed it to you." With her finger, she
gestured away the assault rifle the man carried awkwardly.
Ten kilometers beyond the current Front, they had paused to load a
Federal platoon. The Praha authorities had been at best confused by the
reports Lieutenant Albrecht Waldstejn had been sending in clear through
attempted Rube jamming. The authorities were not so confused that they
would permit a Trojan Horse into the heart of their supply system,
however. The platoon had verified that the starship was what her
passengers had claimed . . . but the look of the mercenaries had bothered
the Cecach troops very much. It was not so much that the men and women
of the Company looked murderous. It was more that they looked as if they
did not care how many more they killed.
If there was any truth to half the stories they told, mostly to one
another, the mercenaries really did not care.
Hold Three was open. A cat-walk had been run out to disembark first
the indigs, then the Company. The last of the Cecach soldiers marched off
in a column of fours past the platoon already drawn up within the dock.
Some of them glanced back nervously.
"Waldstejn, Albrecht W E," shouted the leader of the waiting unit. His
voice echoed in the enclosed dock without losing any of its sneering
arrogance.' 'Number W-nine-three-nine-five-one—''
"That's me," said Albrecht Waldstejn. He was third in the sluggish file
of mercenaries. Stepping past Hummel and Powers, the Cecach officer
walked toward the speaker.
"—five-two-eight," the speaker concluded loudly. Two of the soldiers
with him dropped their gun muzzles to cover the returned lieutenant.
Their commander looked up from the long print-out in his hand.
"Waldstejn?" he demanded. "What kind of uniform is that?"
Albrecht Waldstejn did not need the brassards or the strack uniforms to
identify the unit arrayed to greet them as part of Morale Section. The
chain-dogs had always frightened him, even before he was conscripted.
Their brief was limited in theory to members of the armed services, but
many of them shared with their Republican opponents the belief that
righteousness took precedence to human distinctions.

They seemed less frightening now, to a man who in the past week had
learned that death took precedence even to righteousness.
"It's what there was available," the Lieutenant said mildly. He fingered
the off-planet synthetic. It was already losing its coppery tone to take on
the shadows of the dock interior. "Christ knows, it looks better than the
one I was blown through the bushes in."
The Morale Section officer was a colonel, though his name tag was too
dim to be read. He slapped Waldstejn across the face. "Watch your
tongue, soldier!" he said. "You're in enough trouble already!"
There was a pause in the shuffling of boots behind Waldstejn, a restive
silence like that of a cat tensing to spring. The Cecach lieutenant turned. 
"Stand easy\" he shouted. He managed not to add the curse that would
have brought another blow— and what he was praying he could avoid.
Wald-stejn's cheek burned. His body trembled with the lightness he had
never thought to feel after they reached safety, reached Praha. "Stand 
easy, I say!"
The mercenaries' weapons were closer to use than the crisply-uniformed
chain-dogs realized. None of the hands Waldstejn glanced across were
thumbing guns to safe again, but there was a slight relaxation. The line
began to move again.
The Colonel blinked. He had been startled by the incident, but he did
not understand it. He glanced back at his print-out—names and ranks,
Waldstejn could see now, and enough of them to be the entire complement
of the 522nd Garrison Battalion. "All right," the Colonel said, "all
members of the Cecach garrison of Smiricky #4, front and center! Cecach
Armed Forces only!"
Pavel Hodicky was just crossing the catwalk between Troopers Hoybrin
and Dwyer. Like his lieutenant, Hodicky had been issued a uniform from
the Company stores aboard the Katyn Forest. Before the Private could
speak, Churchie Dwyer's palm swung across his mouth. Albrecht
Waldstejn was saying loudly, "Sir, I was the only member of the battalion
not to turn traitor. The rest of these troops are off-planet volunteers,
under contract to the government."
The Morale Section officer looked from Waldstejn to the soldiers who
had broken out of Smiricky #4 with him. More of the men than not had
shaved when they got the opportunity, and all the troopers wore fresh
uniforms. They were still a savage, alien presence eying the Colonel and
the crisplooking platoon with him. "Right," the Colonel said. He found he
had to clear his throat before he could add, "Who's in charge of you lot,

then?"
There was a pause too brief to be called hesitation. Hussein ben Mehdi
strolled forward. His left thumb was hooked in his equipment belt. It
seemed natural enough that his right palm would rest on the grip of his
holstered grenade launcher. "I am," he said in a drawl which emphasized
disdain instead of volume. "Since the native battalion we were supposed to
be supporting decided to turn coat and murder our Colonel. What seems
to be the problem?"
The chain-dog commander blinked again. Ben Mehdi's moustache was
its precise line again despite the thin welt of pink scar tissue angling
across his face. His tone of suave superiority, coupled with the
implications of the words themselves, shook an officer who was used to
deference from even generals with line commands. "Ah," he said, "your
men will accompany Captain Kolovrat here to the Transit Barracks for
reassignment. Stack your weapons. They'll be returned to you when
required."
Someone in the Company rank cursed audibly. Lieutenant ben Mehdi
gave a chuckle which sounded more natural to others than it seemed to be
to him. His mind was quivering with memories of the tank that howled
and shuddered as he fired down its intake duct. "I'm afraid that won't be
possible—" he gestured as if he could not recall Federal rank insignia and
saw no reason that he should— "Captain. We'll continue to billet ourselves
on the starship here. I'll be obliged if you'll make arrangements for our
commissary—" he paused—"and for proper bedding, yes."
"Who in the hell do you think you are, soldier?" the Colonel roared.
"I think we're—" and ben Mehdi's peremptory gesture brought the three
sergeants forward. Jensen's face-shield down even in the dimness of the
dock—"the people whose contracts you broke, Mr. Government!"
"We didn't—" the Colonel began. Around him guns pointed at the
mercenary sergeants, then wavered as Morale Section soldiers met eyes as
flat as the reflective face-shield.
"Captain, you put us in a position of danger in which we were attacked
by Federal troops," the Lieutenant said flatly. "By Cecach Armed Forces.
That's a breach of contract, pure and simple. All deals are off until we've
made a composition of damages with the hiring authority."
It was a flawless performance, thought Albrecht Waldstejn. He
supposed that it would usually have been acted out in a conference room,
with Colonel Fasolini there to provide the bulk and bluster. Individually
the three sergeants were the faces of Death. Together, they were the

Furies, and their silence had lowered over the Cecach platoon as surely as
Colonel Fasolini must have done in dozens of meetings with dress
uniforms.
"There are three bulk carriers in port that seem to have been converted
to carry troops," said Sergeant Jensen. His lips, cracked and gummy
behind the shield, caused him to enunciate with great care.
"Yeah, just how many other contract soldiers are there right here in
Praha?" rasped Sergeant Hummel. She pointed a finger at the Morale
Section officer. Her slung weapon waggled also, its barrel parallel to the
line of her forearm.
"And don't think the units at the Front haven't heard how Federal
troops turned on us," added Sergeant Mboko somberly. "Praha wasn't the
only place we talked to when we sailed through the lines."
The Cecach Colonel was opening his mouth to speak. Before he could do
so, Lieutenant ben Mehdi applied the counter-stroke to the whip-saw. "Of
course," he said, "we don't hold you personally responsible, Captain . . .
but until legal responsibility is determined, I think you'll agree that
matters had best be left to your superiors."
The Colonel turned abruptly. "Take that one away!" he snarled to the
pair of soldiers holding Albrecht Waldstejn. As sharply, he whipped back
around to ben Mehdi, but he did not meet the mercenary's eyes. "For the
time being, you can remain aboard," he muttered. "Someone will see
about rations and bedding."
"Some problem about Captain Waldstejn, I see?" said Hussein ben
Mehdi. He thumbed idly toward the sound of boots echoing out the rear of
the enclosed dock.
"Lieutenant Waldstejn," snapped the Morale Section officer. He was out
of the quicksand and his arrogance had returned in full force. "And there's
no problem, no. An internal matter which even hired killers can
understand, I suppose."
Ben Mehdi raised his lip and an eyebrow instead of asking the question
out loud.
"The 522nd had orders to defend its positions to the last man," said the
Cecach colonel in a rising voice. "Lieutenant Waldstejn instead chose to
retreat."
"Even your sort shoot soldiers who desert in the face of the enemy, don't
you?"

CHAPTER SIXTEEN
"You understand, Mr. Mehdi, that the, ah—" Benoit paused to look
around the bridge of the Katyn Forest, even though he knew that he,
Captain Ortschugin, and the mercenary lieutenant were alone there. The
plump man was factor for a dozen off-planet space lines besides Pyaneta
Lines; but he was legally a Cecach citizen and thus subject to local law if
the wrong person heard him imply that there were two governments on
the planet— "the Republicans had no right to seize the Katyn Forest. That,
of course, affects your claim for salvage for rescuing her."
"The Rubes poked guns in my face and told me the ship belongs to the
Lord's Host," said Vladimir Ortschugin. "You were going to come from
Praha and tell them they were wrong?" The spacer spat ringingly into the
cuspidor.
"Yes, I believe the Captain has noted the salient point," ben Mehdi took
up smoothly. He had stripped off his holster and bandoliers for this
interview. Now he luxuriated in an absence of weight which to him was by
no means primarily a physical thing. "It isn't significant for purposes of
the present discussion whether the loss was due to piracy or to the act of a
duly-constituted government. The fact is, the loss did occur—"
"The vessel was still under the control of her crew when you, ah,
boarded her," the Factor interrupted.
"In the possession of her crew," said the mercenary, "but under the 
control of the cannons trained on her, wouldn't you say?"
The hull shuddered. A pair of gantries had begun to winch the damaged
fusion bottle out of the Power Room. The omni-directional bracing had
been cut, but the weight of the unit itself had pressure-welded the bottle
to the deck during years of service.
"Not that we plan to be unreasonable, Mr. Benoit," resumed Hussein
ben Mehdi. He unfolded a print-out run from the Katyn Forest's own
manifesting computer. "In fact," the mercenary said, "we have a
proposition here that will reduce the out of pocket cost to your client by
twenty percent."
Forty percent, in all likelihood, ben Mehdi said within his smiling
face—though he would hold out for thirty-five down to the last. But
Pyaneta would take the deal.
By Allah, they would take it if the Company had to ram it down their
throats with gun barrels.

"How they hanging, Pavel?" asked Churchie Dwyer. He did not look up
from the lap board on which he was dealing cards.
"Churchie, good God, he's been condemned!" blurted the Cecach
private. "One of the repair crew just told me!"
"Yeah, that's old news," said the veteran, continuing to deal. "Guess you
wouldn't have heard it, not leaving the ship—" he grinned up at the
deserter—"so you don't get recognized and wind up in the next cell."
"Old news?" Hodicky repeated. He squatted to bring his face nearer to
that of Dwyer. "You knew that?"
"Yeah, we been playing poker with some of the guards at the Karloff
Barracks," Churchie said. "They mentioned it a couple nights ago, didn't
they, Del?"
Del Hoybrin was seated on the deck beside Churchie. He nodded
happily. "Hi, Pavel," he said. "I can't believe this!" Hodicky said. "The
Lieutenant saves your butt how many times? And all you care about's how
much money you can win from the guys whore going to kill him!"
Dwyer peeked at each of the hands he had just dealt. He sighed and slid
them together into a pack again. "Win?" he said. "Not with the cards I've
been getting, kid. Why, even Del here's been making out better'n I have." 
"That's right, Pavel," agreed the big trooper. 
"Tried everything, you know," Churchie went on while his fingers
shuffled as if with their own sentience. "Been carrying over liters of
industrial ethanol, cutting it with juice while we play. Hell, those hunkies
still clean me out every afternoon. And don't they crow about it!" The
gangling man dealt the cards, face down as before.
Half a dozen workmen began manhandling the base unit of a vibratory
cutter through the hatchway. The holds and the compartments aft were
theirs, twenty-four hours a day while the repairs went on. The bridge and
the cramped quarters forward provided a little privacy but no real quiet.
Troopers had rented several rooms outside the port with the tacit
approval of Federal officials while negotiations continued.
The Cecach private licked his lips. Anger gone, he pleaded, "Churchie, I 
know you don't mean that. Look, if you know people in the place he's
being held, maybe you can get through to see him. There's got to be
something we can do!"
"Churchie says he can appeal," put in Del Hoybrin. He frowned as he
generally did after he had spoken of his own volition.

"Appeal!" Hodicky shouted. "Appeal! Sure, to Commandant Friis. His is
Morale Section. Mary and the Saints, he complains that his men ought to
have the same authority everywhere that they have within ten klicks of the
Front. To shoot people without any trial for 'crimes against discipline'!" 
"Ever been in Karloff Barracks?" Churchie asked unperturbed. "Thought
you might have trained there or something."
The little man shook his head. He was unsure where the question was
leading. "No," he said, "the place has just been the military prison since
before I was born." He grimaced. "They stopped executing people there a
couple years ago. Too many complaints about the shooting right in the
center of town, since Friis really got Morale Section 'organized'."
"Well, Pavel," said the veteran judiciously, "I don't see there's much
good in you getting your bowels in an uproar, then." He began to turn over
the hands he had just dealt. "Feel like a game of something?"
Pavel Hodicky slumped. The anger had burned out. Now the hope was
gone too. "Then that's it," he said dully. "After all he did for you, and
you're just going to leave him to die."
"Umm, I don't remember that I said that," commented the veteran. He
glanced over toward the dockers who were hoisting their apparatus into
position. The six poker hands were now face up on the board in Dwyer's
lap. The first four of the hands he had dealt so swiftly were straight
flushes, king through nine in each suit. The fifth hand was four sevens and
the ace of spades.
The last poker hand was a trey and two pairs— aces and eights.
Churchie Dwyer picked up the last hand, the Dead Man's Hand which
Wild Bill Hickok had held when a bullet spattered his brains over the card
table. "No," said the veteran, "I don't remember saying that at all."
"Hey Doc," gibed one of the troopers in the rented room, "his hang
better than yours. Maybe you ought to go back to bodies."
The crewman from the Katyn Forest beamed over the other sewing
machine. He had just enough English to catch the drift of the compliment.
Marco Bertinelli gestured angrily. "Maybe you'd like nice business
suits?" he demanded.
"Hey, I don't need the shears in my eyes," said Iris Powers, though the
gesture had not really been that close. She stood with her arms out, ready
for the Corpsman to drape her with the swatch he was cutting to length.

Bertinelli bent to his work again. "Look," he said, "tailoring, it's an art.
My old man, he'd kill me—sure. But if you make fatigues—" he nodded to
the wedge of camouflage print against Trooper Powers' arm— "they've got
to look like fatigues, right?"
"Goddam," said Sergeant Hummel as she tried to tug down the legs of
her own new garment. "I swear this crotch seam has teeth. But yeah,
you're right, Doc. We're rolling our own instead of picking them up ready
made so we don't ring too many bells. Looking like the Federation Guard
isn't exactly a low-profile idea."
"There's plenty of troops around in tailored uniforms," objected the
trooper who had made the first comment. "Hell, Praha's so rear-echelon
it's ninety percent asshole."
"Sure," agreed Marco Bertinelli. Perfect, the cuff would be a centimeter
too long. "But it isn't the strack troops who get assigned to this kind of
duty, is it?"
Pinched lips rather than words indicated agreement all around the
room.
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
"Kings full!" sang the Sergeant of the Guard as he slapped his cards on
the table. "Sweet bleeding Jesus, Churchie, it was the best night of my life
when I ran into you in Maisie's last week. I swear to God, you're buying
the best poker education a man could want."
There was a buzz from the monitor in the glazed booth attached to the
guardroom. "Sarge," called the soldier there, "it looks like the van, but it's
early."
"Well, handle it," said Sergeant Bles. His fingers trembled, organizing
the pile of large-denomination scrip he had just swept from the table. The
other two guards in the game watched their sergeant enviously, but they
had folded after the draw. One of them took the deck as Churchie Dwyer
passed it with a glum expression.
"I don't understand their papers," the man actually on duty called
plaintively. The guard post was a brick room built against the inner face of
the wall. The booth had a view of the entrance road, from the
double-barred gates to the line of barracks converted to prison blocks. A
fiber-optics system gave the monitors in the booth both a close-up and a
panorama of anyone who pulled up to the front of the gate.

"God damn, Stieshl," muttered the Sergeant as he stood up. "Does your
mommie got to hold your cock when you pee?" He strode toward the
booth. "They got "a pass for 1430, they get in. It says 1530 like we was told,
then they cool their heels in the steet for an hour, right?" He bent over his
subordinate's shoulder to see the paperwork the blonde driver of the van
was holding to the receiver.
Churchie Dwyer got up and stretched. He could see the monitor past
the two Federal guards. "Well, Del," he said, stepping casually toward the
booth himself, "I guess it's about that time."
"Now, what the hell," Sergeant Bles muttered toward the screen. He
turned and saw the knife slide out of Dwyer's sleeve.
The mercenary punched him in the solar plexus as hard as his ropy
muscles could drive a short blow. The Sergeant's breath whuffed out with
a sound too muted to call attention to itself. The fifteen-centimeter knife
blade had split all four chambers of his heart. The dead man could not
really be said to have felt its passage.
Dwyer cleared his knife with a sucking sound but little blood. The guard
sergeant was collapsing in the half-flinch, half-crouch to which the punch
would have driven him even without steel on the end of it. Churchie did
not have to worry about the men behind him, not with Del Hoybrin in the
room. There was a bleat from one of the card players, then a loud crunch.
The deck scattered. Some of the cards flicked Churchie's back as he leaned
toward the man in the booth.
On the left monitor, the truck driver was saying urgently, "Wait a
minute, buddy, I've got it right—"
As the puzzled guard started to look back again for his sergeant,
Churchie's left hand gripped his hair to position his head. He stabbed
through the base of the guard's skull. The Federal soldier squawked. His
torso began to draw itself backward into an arch. The mercenary swore.
His knife hilt was clamped against the victim's spine by the convulsion.
The blade was sunk for half its length through bone and up into the
cortex. Churchie yanked sideways in a panic. Even the density-enhanced
blade had its structural limits. It flexed, then snapped off in the skull. The
guard's limbs flailed, knocking over his chair and hammering against the
wall of the booth.
Dwyer reached over the body and threw the gate switches, outer and
then inner. He was breathing very hard. "Bastard!" he panted. "Bastard!"
He flung his broken knife against the wall in a clatter.
The van pulled up outside the booth. Two men in Federal fatigues

jumped out of the closed back, Leading Trooper Gratz and Hussein ben
Mehdi wearing sergeant's pips as the best Czech speaker available for the
guard post.
Churchie looked behind him. Del was standing by the overturned table,
more or less as he had been when he crushed the skulls of the two card
players against one another. One of the sprawled men was breathing
stertorously. Neither of them moved.
"—ing door!" ben Mehdi snarled as he rattled the panel beside the
booth. The van whined off toward the euphemistically-titled Transit Block,
accelerating.
Churchie stepped to unlock the door he had forgotten. Before he did so,
he paused to pry the wad of money from Sergeant Bles' dead hand.
"Hey Lieutenant," the young jailer called as he led the way down the
corridor, "they're here for you early." There were a number of ways to des
with the knowledge that most of the people with whom you worked would
be dead in a few days. This jailer handled it by ignoring the fact anc
treating his charges as if he were an enthusiastic hotel manager.
Albrecht Waldstejn thought that brutality might have been preferable.
But then, it was hard to be sure.
Waldstejn stepped back from the shower. The spray continued to swirl
down the cell's sole drain. "They can damned well wait, then," he shouted
to the steel door. "Or they can carry me out like this. God knows it doesn't
matter to me."
"Get your clothes on and do it fast!" snarled another voice through the
observation gate. "I'm not spending any time here that I don't have to.
You, get the door open!"
"Sir," the jailer objected, "there's no need—"
"Do it!" There was a click as someone laid a magnetic key against the
lock plate.
Waldstejn was not sure until the door swung outward. A company of
meres who could not be assigned forward till a contract dispute was
settled, well. . . . But Private Pavel Hodicky was back in Federal uniform,
this time with captain's insignia and a sneer on his face to match the false
commission. The little deserter was the only man or woman aboard the 
Katyn Forest who could carry on an extended conversation without being
branded an outlander. If Hodicky looked young for his rank, then the
casualties of the past year had meant sudden promotion for more men

than him.
No one spent much time in chit-chat with members of a death squad,
anyway.
"Snap it up," snarled Hodicky in a voice like that of an angry lap dog.
Beside him stood the jailer in a gray service uniform. He carried a shock
rod, the only variety of weapon permitted within the unit. Two of the three
other soldiers waiting in Federal fatigues were mercenaries whom
Waldstejn knew by sight but not name. The third was Sergeant Johanna
Hummel with a set of Cecach handcuffs instead of the molecular springs
which Waldstejn knew the Company stocked for its own use. The
condemned officer felt a fleeting surprise that he did not see Iris
Powers—but Powers spoke no Czech and might have endangered them all
by ignoring a chance direction.
Waldstejn slipped on his boots. As he straightened from fastening them,
Pavel Hodicky seized his wrist. The deserter's fingers trembled with
suppressed hysteria. "Lock them," he said to Hummel, "and let's get this
over." The Sergeant obeyed with a clumsiness which could have been
explained by embarrassment. The Cecach officer caught the light in her
eyes, though, and he knew that she was wired for battle, fearful and
exultant together. Waldstejn's own expression of shock was real enough, 
Maria; and it was yet to be proven that death did not lie just beyond the
cell, as he had assumed when they gave him word that morning that his
appeal had been denied.
"Ah, Lieutenant?" the jailer said. "There's your cap and—"
"Forget it," interrupted Private Hodicky. He gave Waldstejn a push in
the middle of the back. "Mary and the Saints! How long is he going to
need it, anyway? Now move, sweetheart, movel"
The condemned man stumbled as he marched down the corridor in the
middle of four soldiers as grim as any the jailer had ever seen. The man in
gray shook his head sadly as he stepped back into the cell.
He had to get the room ready for the next, ah, customer.
"Hey!" said the clerk behind the counter, "everybody signs. Don't you
know that?"
"Hey?" Hodicky snapped back. "Who the hell do you think you are,
soldier?" He glared through the reinforced glass at the arms-room
attendant. "All / know is they rotated us back for a rest and gave us this
crap! Now, if you've got any more bloody forms, hand them through so we

can get our guns and get out of this place."
The little private turned from the counter with an ostentatious flare of
his nostrils. It had been easy once he had learned to think of them all as
images on a computer screen. Just like nights in the lyceum office,
inputting data that the system, the System, thought was true.
Of course, a mis-key here and they really would go out as garbage.
Lieutenant Waldstejn was bent over as if he were muttering a prayer to
his boots. "Names . . .," Hodicky heard him whisper.
"Lichtenstein," Hodicky said, pointing at Sergeant Hummel, "you sign
first." God the Savior, what would have happened if all three mercenaries
had filled out the forms in non-Cecach names? Thank the Lord, thank the
Lieutenant. "Then Breisach, then you, Ondru," he continued aloud. If he
sounded like an obsessive-compulsive with a burr up his ass, then that was
reasonably in keeping with his present persona. Three soldiers who did
not know their own names were more of a problem.
The door guard was watching them instead of his screen. "Wouldn't be
surprised to get a little rain," he remarked with a wave toward his
monitors. There was not enough sky visible on them to make the comment
more than a hope for conversation. In the alley dividing Transit Section
from the next unit over stood the van they had stolen and restenciled for
the purpose. Churchie Dwyer had claimed that was easy. The harder trick
had been to get two more rifles and a pistol for the 'Captain', but there
were too many troops quartered around the capital for even that to look
like an epidemic of theft.
"All right," the clerk said. He laid the three rifles and the sidearm in the
drawer and slid them through to the anteroom proper.
"You boys be careful," said the guard as he pressed the latch button. He
was trying a joke since the previous ploy had been ignored. The bolts in
the outer door snicked back into their housings. "Yes sir, this one looks
real dangerous—for a no-guts deserter!"
Nobody spoke this time either. The high-voiced officer paused a
moment before he thrust his stooped prisoner toward the doorway. The
guard did not like the look in the Captain's eyes. And he did not like the
muttered reference to a Delete key.
"There's a van," Lieutenant ben Mehdi called tensely. He was hunched
forward, feeling horribly exposed in the glass booth. If he leaned back,
however, he stuck to whatever had spurted onto the chair cushion. There

were things ben Mehdi had seen often enough, now, to know that he would
never get used to them. The interior of the guard post was one such thing.
"Allah be praised, it's them!" He stood up, waving toward the van which
was high-balling out of the compound interior.
Another horn squealed angrily. There was a truck outside the gate as
well. It looked exactly like the one in which the mercenaries were about to
escape.
"Bloody hell," muttered Churchie Dwyer as he peered past the
Lieutenant. The close-up screen showed clearly the gate pass the driver
was holding up to it. "Fifteen minutes early. . . . Say they got to wait, that's
what Bles would've done."
The four bodies were stacked in a corner where they could not be seen
through the booth's glazing. Ben Mehdi could have done without a
reference to the man he had replaced, however. "Are you crazy?" he
demanded. He threw a switch and the outer gate slid back. The van pulled
up to the inner one. "You think they're just going to watch when we all get
in a truck and drive away?" The Lieutenant closed the gate behind the
incoming vehicle and opened the one in front of it. The van with Trooper
Powers driving and the Cecach private beside her in the cab waited. Its
turbine whined on more throttle than idling required.
"Del," ordered Churchie Dwyer.
The incoming van pulled through the gate and stopped in front of the
identical vehicle waiting to exit. An officer stepped out of the cab. He
ignored the gate guards. Instead he shouted to Trooper Powers, "You!
Soldier! What do you think you're doing in one of our trucks?"
Hussein ben Mehdi fumbled to find the door latch. It was not really a
212th Service Company truck, just one repainted to look like it, but that
would not help matters. A member of the real firing squad was leaning out
of the back of their enclosed van. The officer reached for Powers' door.
Allah help—
The Federal officer jerked open the door. Powers' weapon was across
her lap. Its off-planet design was a dead giveaway. She thrust the muzzle
into the officer's belly and blew him back into the road. The projectile
itself would have left only a punch-mark on entrance and exit, but the
man's flesh had to absorb also the spurt of propellant gases and the
vaporized sabot. The combination eviscerated him, leaving his spine bare
and his soft parts from ribs to pelvis a spray across the truck he had
stepped from.

"Now, Del!" Dwyer shouted. He fired through the glass of the booth.
Lieutenant ben Mehdi shrank down to the floor, bawling with pain from
the blasts as Trooper Hoybrin promptly emptied his own weapon into the
van in two long bursts.
The booth windows blew outward, crazed by the projectiles but
showered onto the road by the muzzle blasts themselves. A Federal soldier
flopped out of his van and lay howling on the pavement with no visible
wound. Powers drove across him. Her back tires splashed the puddle of
burning fuel that dripped from the other vehicle.
"Come on come on come on!" Churchie Dwyer was screaming as he
vaulted the emptied window frame. Hoybrin followed with Gratz, who had
not as yet fired a shot in the operation.
It was Hussein ben Mehdi who remembered to open both gates before
he too stumbled out of the booth.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
"It's started," said Sookie Foyle. Her fingers trembled, but they were
precise enough to throw the toggle switch which would do the rest.
The ship's radioman watched the brunette approvingly from the bridge
proper. The Communications Bay of the Katyn Forest was little more than
a one-man alcove off the bridge. With additional equipment welded to its
bulkheads, even someone as short as Communicator Foyle had to watch
her head as she stood up. The crewman smiled through the tangle. "Come
have a drink with me, hey?" he said. "Relax."
"Are you out of your mind?" Foyle retorted. "Go on, I'm busy."
Pavlovich tapped the crewman on the shoulder. He murmured
something in low-voiced Russian. The two men walked down the corridor
together while the Communicator strained to listen through the welter of
recorded orders and dialogues she had just set the Katyn Forest to
broadcast.
There were demands to police and security forces, directing them to
deal with riots, bombings, and commando raids in various parts of the
city. There were reports from firemen and patrol vehicles of wrecks,
robberies, and tenement blazes. There was even an order, tight-beam and
scrambled, to Spaceport Control, that all vessels lift off at once to avoid
rebel attack. All the signals were broadcast from the starship. Its
transmitter hopped frequencies automatically with the abruptness of a
scanning receiver. And all of the messages were recorded, because nobody

aboard now was competent to carry on a live dialogue in Czech. It could
not be expected that the blurted demands would be obeyed, but at worst
they would increase the confusion and cause real orders to be discounted
as well.
Between each flurry of signals there was a five-second pause. During
these pauses, the transmitter of the Katyn Forest was not blanking her
own receivers. It was then that Sookie Foyle strained to hear a message on
the Company's emergency push.
Not, of course, that there was a great deal those remaining on the
starship could do, except listen to their comrades die.
The back of the van had eight passengers for six seats, and one of the
eight was Del Hoybrin. Albrecht Waldstejn was not complaining. The
choice was more room and the sullen faces of a real firing party watching
him. Still, when Sergeant Hummel said, "Hell, forgot the cuffs!" she poked
him in the eye with the key.
The rescued officer cursed by reflex, then took the key and said in
apology, "You people shouldn't have done it. I ... I mean—"
"Yeah, well," said the non-com, "save the congratulations for about ten
blocks, huh?"
The only view from the back of the van was through the small
communication window into the cab and through the windshield. Dwyer
and Gratz were standing bent over, trying to peer out. Trooper Hoybrin
braced his partner against the jolting vehicle, while Gratz tried to grip the
side panel with one hand and Dwyer with the other. A third trooper was
slitting the sheet metal with his knife. His eyes would not have time to
react to the blur through so small an opening, but Waldstejn could not see
that it would do any harm to try.
The squeal of the brakes was no adequate warning. Deceleration
slammed everyone against the back of the cab.
"Roadblock!" said Churchie Dwyer as he struggled to clear his weapon
from ben Mehdi's legs.
Waldstejn could hear Private Hodicky shouting, "Out of the way, fast!
We've got orders to arrest saboteurs at the Port immediately!"
"Blue berets, " Gratz whispered. Sergeant Hummel had elbowed her way
to the glass to look for herself. "Two trucks across the steet."
"Defense Police," the Cecach lieutenant said. He realized as he spoke
that the identification was valueless at this juncture. It had been spewed

out by a mind that wanted to avoid the realities of the moment by
focusing on trivia.
"Sorry, sir," said a Czech speaker who did not sound in the least sorry.
"My orders say nobody, so nobody gets through. You want to take it up
with my Colonel, fine."
"All right," murmured Sergeant Hummel. "Dwy-er, Hoybrin, Gratz, and
Diesson—out the back on three, turn rigjit, and kill it if it breathes." She
touched the door latch with her left hand. In her right she held the assault
rifle which had been part of her disguise. It was better for this job anyway.
"Rest of you bastards, follow me to the left. Same drill."
"I need a gun," said Albrecht Waldstejn.
Hummel looked back at him through the tangle of soldiers sorting
themselves to her instructions. There was no anger in her expression, only
grim appraisal. "For God's sake," the non-com said, "will you keep your
head the hell down?"
The young officer could see himself in the veteran's glance, even after
she had faced back and started the count. "One." Pasty and soft from ten
days in a narrow cell. "Two." Unarmed and hopeless with a gun if there
had been one available. "Three!" and Hummel took her troops onto the
street like blue-fish into a school of herring.
Albrecht Waldstejn followed them out anyway.
The officer in charge of the roadblock died before he could glance
toward what was happening at the back of the van. Dwyer's shot snapped
through both his temples and splashed the colloid of his brain in ripples
from the interior of his skull. Simultaneously, Sergeant Hummel sprayed
three soldiers who were still on the open back of their ground-effect truck.
After that, it was a shooting gallery; but the ducks shot back.
Two air cushion trucks had been swung across the street with a platoon
of Defense Police aboard. The road behind the mercenaries had already
jammed solidly, but their van was the first westbound vehicle to have been
stopped. Ten seconds earlier and they would have gotten through
unchallenged. As it was, the blue-capped troops were still deploying and
were more concerned with setting up the roadblock than with the vehicles
they had begun to stop with it. The Federals wilted under the unexpected
fire.
The eight mercenaries rushed the trucks. The Defense Police who had
not died in the first blast flopped to cover behind their vehicles. Trooper
Gratz fired through the door of one of the truck cabs, then jerked it open.

The driver was hunched down on the seat. He shot Gratz in the face with
his assault rifle. The mercenary stumbled backward to the street.
Waldstejn snatched at the dead man's gun and fought his rigid muscles
for it. He twisted back with the weapon to receive the shot which he knew
must be coming.
The police driver was dead. Gratz' preliminary round had drilled
through the Federal's body from neck to pelvis. The tiny,
directionally-stable projectile had killed the man quite surely, but the
massive internal haemorrhage had not been fatal in time to prevent the
victim from revenging himself.
Waldstejn jumped into the cab and locked the far door.
The truck clanged as mercenaries fired through its skirts to get at the
Federals on the other side. Somebody had crawled onto the bed of the
vehicle, but a burst of rifle fire had stopped or killed him. The Cecach
officer dropped the weapon he had appropriated in order to drag the
driver's body aside with both hands. The corpse slid out from under the
wheel, and Waldstejn took its place.
The power was on. Waldstejn found it hard to see the controls while he
bent over because his nose was almost on the dashboard. A Federal was
tugging at the locked left-side door, shouting questions at him. Waldstejn
let the turbine rev to full power for several seconds. Then he reached for
the attitude control.
Someone fired an assault rifle point-blank into the door.
The light bullets disintegrated on the outer panel. They hit the inner
panel as a spray of steel and glass. The portion that burned through into
the cab proper flicked across the tall officer like a line of boils. He
screamed. His fist slammed the control forward so abruptly that only the
immense torque of the electric drive motors kept the fans from stalling.
The truck lurched, then buried itself in the shop window across the
sidewalk.
There was another ripping burst from an assault rifle. Waldstejn rose
and twisted to look out the back window. His left arm and side were alive
with cold fire. Jo Hummel was reloading her captured weapon by the cab
of the second truck. When Waldstejn slid the lead truck forward, the
Sergeant had the shot she had been waiting for. Her burst raked the line
of Federals whose cover had just driven away from them. A dozen Defense
Police sprawled on the pavement now. Trooper Powers sent the van
through the gap between the trucks. She made a tire-squealing left turn as
she cleared the cab of the vehicle which was still in position. Blue-bereted

soldiers leaped away from her bumper.
The mercenaries stood and shot them down like driven deer.
"Come on, come on!" Powers was shouting. She reversed to clear the
line of east-bound vehicles which the roadblock had stopped also. Most of
them were already abandoned. One of the mercenaries began firing into
them deliberately until a fuel tank blew up.
Waldstejn staggered out of the shop into which he had driven. He was
dragging Gratz' weapon by the sling. His body was not working as it
should have. All his mind could hold was his determination to reach the
van before it drove away. He stepped blindly into Del Hoybrin and
recoiled, nearly falling.
"Churchie's hit!" the big man wailed. He had just slid his comrade's
form off the back of the truck. Dwyer was as limp in his arms as a grain
sack. The front of his tunic was bloody from shoulder to waist.
"We'll get him back," wheezed the Cecach officer. He pointed to the van.
Sergeant Hummel was poised beside the vehicle. She fired into a clot of
Federal bodies where movement had suggested volition.
Trooper Hoybrin swept his left arm around Waldstejn's chest. He began
trotting for the van, ignoring the weight of the two men and three
weapons which he carried. Albrecht Waldstejn began to lose
consciousness.
Blackness was a welcome relief from pain.
There was a check-point at Gate 2, a tunnel under the blast wall of the
spaceport. The checkpoint was unmanned, and that was a very bad sign.
Hussein ben Mehdi got out of the van awkwardly. The two sprawled
casualties made a close fit closer, though Hummel had ridden off in the
cab and Gratz was not taking up any room at all.
"Well, I can drive in," the petite blonde was saying.
Sergeant Hummel stood beside her open door, peering across the
boulevard. There was no traffic on it, presumably as a result of roadblocks
elsewhere in the city. "Hodicky," the non-com asked, "did you ever know
them not to have gate attendants here?"
The Praha native shook his head. "Let me check the Lieutenant, huh?"
he said. He squeezed past Hummel as ben Mehdi walked forward.
The three-story buildings around the port were all sixty years old or
less. That was the date that the fusion bottle of a freighter too large for the

docking pits had failed. The first construction that had taken place
afterwards was the encirclement of the whole port with a berm instead of
trusting pits to deflect catastrophe from the city. An arched ramp with
broadcast pylons led the largest vehicles up the vertical eight-meter outer
face of the berm and down the inner slope. Radial tunnels ducked below
ground level to serve lesser traffic. But there were always movement
controls, especially now in wartime. And with multiple emergencies, real
and imagined, crackling over the airwaves . . . the booth should not have
been empty.
"Well," said Lieutenant ben Mehdi, "the attendant ran away. Big deal."
Sergeant Hummel frowned. Passers-by were nervously watching the van
and the troops around it. The squad was a nexus for the crisis that
worried the civilians. "Maybe," said Hummel, "and maybe they decided
there wasn't any way to hold this side." She waved at the blank wall across
the peripheral boulevard. It was defended only by the empty kiosk and a
tipping-bar gate. "Let's you and me walk through and see what's on the
other side, Lieutenant."
Ben Mehdi went cold. Trooper Powers got out of the cab on her own
side. "I'll go along," she said.
"Not till you learn some Czech, Bunny," said the non-com. Her voice
sounded light until it cracked. "Lieutenant, leave that—" she pointed to
the grenade launcher—"and take Diesson's rifle." She looked up at the
troopers around her. "How's Dwyer?" she asked.
"Be okay if he gets to Doc pretty quick," said one of the men. "The
Captain's coming around, sort of."
Hummel nodded. "Okay. Diesson, you're in charge. If this one's blocked,
head for the ramp— Hodicky'll know where to find it. Let's go,
Lieutenant."
Ben Mehdi followed the Sergeant numbly. There was, by Allah, no
question of who was in charge, not here. He supposed he should be
thankful to be considered an acceptable follower at a time like this. She
would not have brought him a month ago, the bitch.
The Lieutenant was getting dizzy, in part because his torso was too
tight to permit him to breath. His clam-shell armor had not been among
the loot in the Katyn Forest.
Hummel glanced into the kiosk as they walked past it. The little booth
was as empty as it had appeared to be from across the street. They could
flip the pole up easily if they wanted. The van would not even have to

break it off as they drove into the tunnel. "Well, who knows, Lieutenant?"
the non-com said as she settled her rifle where she wanted it. "You might
even be right about everything being clear."
They started down.
The tunnel dipped, then rose in a single fluid curve. Like the berm itself,
the tunnel was designed to redirect a blast. It was quite impossible to
hope to absorb the full potential of a fusion unit. The tunnel was concrete
lined and three meters high, although the vehicular height was less since
roof lines cut the chord rather than following the arc. There were steps
along the right wall, but the two mercenaries kept to the vehicle way. The
grade lengthened ben Mehdi's strides despite his nervousness.
The tunnel was only fifty meters long. The mercenaries were halfway
through, at the nadir of the curve, when six armed soldiers appeared in
silhouette at the spaceport end. "All right!" one of them shouted. "State
your business."
"Sir," Hussein ben Mehdi called back, too caught up in the situation to
be worried about the quality of his Czech, "we were ordered to stand by at
the freighter Boudicca and await further orders." He could not tell the sex,
much less the rank, of the troops because the bright daylight was behind
them. Their weapons were clear enough, though. Automatic rifles like the
one he carried, deadly in trained hands as his were not . . . and the squat,
solid outline of a heavy grenade launcher whose capacity ben Mehdi was
well able to imagine. But Allah would not permit his servant to be trapped
in this hollow killing ground when—
A seventh figure strode against the background of the sky. "What's
this?" the newcomer demanded. "You there, drop those guns! And—say, /
know you!"
It was the Morale Section Colonel who had met the Katyn Forest when
she docked.
"Run!" shouted Jo Hummel as she sprayed the Federal soldiers. Ben
Mehdi ran, because there was nothing else to do.
The Colonel and two of his squad flopped face down on the concrete.
The others sprang away as if flung by the muzzle blasts. The angle
protected them from the second burst which Hummel sent up the tunnel
as she herself turned. The opening behind her danced with motes of
concrete settling upon the bodies.
"Tell—" the Lieutenant heard her shout. Then the grenade went off.
There was no reality in the tunnel but that of the blast. The Federal

grenadier had lobbed the round in without exposing himself to rifle fire.
That showed a competence the Lieutenant could appreciate, even as the
shock wave pitched him forward. The grenade detonated on the tunnel
roof. The curve protected even Sergeant Hummel from the shrapnel that
rusticated the smooth concrete from which it ricochetted. Ben Mehdi
glanced back as he rose. The Sergeant was sprawled in a fog of white lime
and smoke from the bursting charge. She did not move, the bitch, the 
bitch, and the Lieutenant scrambled back to her side.
The shadows against the dust-smeared daylight were more than bodies
and blast residues now. Federal troops were peering into the tunnel to see
whether the grenade had cleared it. Ben Mehdi swung his rifle toward
them. The unfamiliar weapon would not fire. Perhaps the safety was still
on or he had not charged the rifle properly. He threw it down and began
dragging Hummel by the arms.
A rifle bullet winked on the tunnel wall and spattered both mercenaries
with bits of itself. "Hold it there, you swine!" one of the oncoming figures
shouted. The Federal's instincts were those of a policeman, not a combat
soldier. At the moment, ben Mehdi was as defenseless as any deserter
dragged out of an attic.
"Get down!" somebody cried in English.
The Lieutenant threw himself flat. Trooper Iris Powers squatted on the
steps, halfway down the slope. She held her weapon low. The first
armor-piercing projectile would bring a storm of automatic fire which
would sweep all three of them into—
The little blonde emptied her magazine in a single twenty-round burst
that was almost a directed explosion. Not even Del Hoybrin could have
stood up to that recoil and kept the muzzle down. Powers managed by
butting the weapon against a step and letting the concrete instead of her
shoulder receive the jack-hammer blows. Precise aim was as impossible as
it was unnecessary. The osmium projectiles ricocheted instead of
shattering like bullets from the assault rifles. Buzzing projectiles and
chunks of concrete ripped through the dusty tunnel like a round of
canister.
Lieutenant ben Mehdi rose to his hands and knees again. His fingertips
were bleeding from the way he had unconsciously tried to dig himself into
the pavement. It hurt his hands too much to drag Hummel. He threw one
of the non-com's arms over his shoulder and began to stagger up the slope
with her in a packstrap carry.
Iris Powers did not help him with the burden. She reloaded and backed

out behind the others with her weapon to her shoulder. Twice she fired
into the reeking fog. The mercenaries were well clear before there was
return fire from the inner mouth of the tunnel.
The truck and the troops with it waited as the trio stumbled back
across the boulevard. There were sirens converging on them from three
directions. To their rear, the wall around the port was as bleak as the one
against which the condemned are stood.
She caught the signal just as another dummy message began to cycle
through the transmitter. Foyle's hand flashed out and killed the
transmitter's power in time for her to catch his tag, "—in Allah's name,
Big Brother!"
Sookie Foyle slapped in the patch which fed all the intercoms into the
main unit. "Big Brother has you," she said, hearing echoes of her voice
from the bridge speakers and each compartment stern-ward in a
reflected-mirror pattern. "Hold one for—"
Before the Communicator could get the word out, Sergeant Mboko's
voice boomed "White One to Sister, tell us what you need."
Foyle listened with her eyes open as she always did. If her duties had
required her to find a switch or dial instantly, her body would have
responded. Her mind was in the world of visualized sounds crackling out
of the speaker.
"Sister to White One," hissed the voice of Hussein ben Mehdi, "we made
it to the wall but we can't get through and we can't get back. They got us
bottled in a building across—" there was a blast of white noise which was
not atmospherically generated. Something had exploded close enough to
the commo helmet to overload its filters. The Lieutenant's voice resumed,
"Save what you can, Stack. This was a good try but it—" an automatic
weapon overprinted his signal— "Over."
Sergeant Mboko was on the bridge. Captain Ortschugin stood at the lip
of the Commo Bay, listening to the speaker as intently as Foyle did.
"Sister, hold what you got!" Mboko said. "You're at the entry point?
Over."
"See you in Paradise, White One. Over and out."
Sookie Foyle stared at Ortschugin as the Captain turned away. "I'll
prepare to lift ship," she heard him say to Sergeant Mboko.
The roof of the adjacent building was afire. That meant there would not

be another attempt to rush them from it. Six Federal soldiers had died
before one had fired his grenade launcher as he fell back through the trap
door. That had ended the rush, but it had not helped the trooper sprawled
beside Albrecht Waldstejn with a bulged skull and a hole between his eyes.
Automatic rifles yammered across the boulevard. Waldstejn cursed and
fired back. He cursed again. The recoil had hurt him, as usual, and he had,
as usual, missed. There was one body crumpled on the inner slope of the
blast wall, but Del Hoybrin had nailed it there. Now Federals within the
spaceport slid only far enough up the berm to fire in the general direction
of the roof overlooking them across the boulevard. They would probably
duck back even if Waldstejn did not respond . . . but the next time they
might pause long enough to aim, and that could be all she wrote for the
two men still alive on the roof.
There were wrecked emergency vehicles in either direction along the
boulevard. A truck and several police cars were burning. Water still leaked
from the riot control vehicle which a garbled message had sent to the
scene with its water cannon. Surprise and confusion had made cold meat
of the first waves who did not realize they were being dropped straight
into a war. But killing Federal troops was not going to do any long-term
good for Albrecht Waldstejn and the team which had tried to rescue him.
Nothing was.
Del Hoybrin fired across the radial street. He was too late. The shoop
from a window there became the shattering detonation of an anti-tank
rocket. It demolished much of the second floor of the building in which the
mercenaries were holed up. The van in which they had arrived burned in
the street. Its smoke was at least an edge of cover for the rest of the team
on the ground floor with the wounded.
The Cecach officer had stumbled up the stairs, pushed by the big
trooper since there was not enough room to be carried. Churchie Dwyer
had been alive when they left him, and Jo Hummel was breathing though
unconscious with streaks of dried blood beneath her nose and ears.
Enforced motion and the pain of his cracked ribs had ridden Waldstejn
out of the state of shock into which he had begun to slip. Now he was
becoming increasingly dizzy. The building seemed to tremble even after
the warhead's racket had died away. The blast wall across the boulevard
was expanding as his eyes tried to focus on it.
The blast wall was not moving. A'starship was sliding toward it,
broadside, at a measured pace.
The rest of the Company were coming for them, and they were bringing

the Katyn Forest.
"Clear the area!" blatted the starsliip's external speakers in bad Czech.
"This area is about to be destroyed! Clear the area!"
Cooper tensed as the volleys ripped out from Holds Two and Three.
"Get down," croaked Gunner Jensen. The skin of his face was red, and it
would be weeks before he had eyelashes again; but he was master of his
gun and his section, by Saint Ultruda!
The inner face of the berm was turf. It absorbed the hail of projectiles
with no sign of their passage. The score of Federal troops there had been
concerned only with the building on the other side of the blast wall. They
leaped and died against the turf, scythed down by the shots from behind
them. There was no target worthy of the automatic cannon as yet, and
Jensen did not want his three crewmen endangered by rising to fire their
shoulder weapons when the infantry sections had the business well in
hand.
Herzenberg tried to smile at her section leader. The effect was grim, but
the thought brought her an equally-awful rictus from Jensen in reply.
Herzenberg had insisted on being in Hold One with the rest of Gun
Section, though she could not have been of much practical use even if she
were better trained. The polymer splints on her right arm and leg
permitted her to move without restriction. Nothing could change the
blinding pain such movement caused, however, except enough drugs to
knock her flat anyway.
The Katyn Forest was steadier under her own power than she had been
when she drew from the broadcast grid, but she still bucked as she started
to lift. The sloping berm dropped below as they approached it. Someone
stood on the nearest of the buildings, waving a gun butt-upward.
The brick and stone facades of other buildings began to powder as the
troopers in Holds Two and Three opened fire. They were leaning over their
copper breastworks to shoot down at an angle. The cannon could not be
depressed in its present mounting. A target had to be in the same plane
for the gun to bear. The speakers continued to call their warning, but it
was doubtful whether words could be heard over the muzzle blasts. Still, it
was the most chance that Mboko could give non-combatants under the
circumstances.
The Katyn Forest began to settle as if to land on the peripheral
boulevard. With her belly ten meters in the air, the vessel paused. The
intercom boomed in Ortschugin's gruff English, "Bridge to Guns—here we

go." With a gentleness that belied the Swobodan's looks, the starship
managed the incredibly difficult job of rolling two degrees on its axis.
Jensen's sights swung down across building fronts, then over the Cecach
soldiers and vehicles huddled along the structures where the angle
protected them from the trapped mercenaries. The Federal troops were
blazing away furiously at the Katyn Forest, though bodies and cratered
facades showed the damage the Company's infantry was wreaking.
Sergeant Jensen started a block in front of the starship's bow and
traversed left on Continuous Fire.
The big osmium slugs took buildings down in a row like a
demonstration of controlled demolition. The lighter weapons had blown
gaps in the facing walls. The cannon's slow traverse sawed through the
massive but brittle structures, including the load-bearing firewalls
separating adjacent buildings. Bricks and blocks and humans, most of
them civilians huddled in their rooms, cascaded into the boulevard.
Federal soldiers flattened to the pavement while Jensen's fire ripped
overhead. The debris avalanched over them.
The shattering fire paused momentarily while Pavlovich slid a fresh
drum into the ammunition feed. Then Jensen dumped the full hundred
rounds down the street by which the rescue commando had approached
the port. The gun raked buildings on both sides with the exception of the
one on the left corner from which Albrecht Waldstejn had waved as the
starship loomed over the blast wall. Secondary explosions blew geysers of
brick and stone from the stately cascades that filled the street.
"Set her down, Control!" Jensen called as Cooper this time reloaded the
automatic cannon. The Katyn Forest rocked level and settled onto the
boulevard. The ship had hovered less than a full minute to give the big gun
a chance before the locals were ready to react to the situation.
When the cannon opened up, the infantry had shifted its fire to
concentrate on the buildings to the left of the one in which their comrades
were trapped. The Federals in that stretch too had already been silenced.
But as familiar figures staggered from the corner building, the Gunner
opened fire again. In part, it was for safety's sake, demolishing everything
in sight that faced the boulevard. That way no one could crawl to a
window and shoot a trooper on the edge of safety.
There was more to it than good technique, however. Roland Jensen was
a veteran who knew that killing was a matter of business, not emotion. But
there were two figures fewer than there should have been running toward
the ship, and three of those he did see were being dragged or carried by

others.
It gave Gunner Jensen a certain pleasure to see Cecach buildings
collapsing with a roar as he drew his sights through them.
CHAPTER NINETEEN
"Are you all right, Captain?" asked Roland Jensen. He spoke with the
calm born of experience with wounds.
"I'll live," said Albrecht Waldstejn. He touched the tape over his ribs.
Hold Two was a babel of enthusiasm and minor casualties, but it was big
enough for that and the cargo of metal as well. The Cecach officer looked
from the general confusion to the men who had joined him in the corner
where he sat staring at his hands. Jensen, Mboko, ben Mehdi . . . even
Vladimir Ortschugin. "You got me off-planet with my life," Waldstejn
continued. "I guess we're off-planet? I was getting these—" he touched the
tape again— "done . . .?"
"We entered the envelope six minutes ago," Ortschugin said with
satisfaction. "Six minutes and . . . thirty-nine seconds."
"Yeah, well," said Waldstejn. He looked from his hands to the other men
again. "Hey, I don't want you to think I don't appreciate it. They were
going to kill me, I know. Only . . . only . . ." He breathed as deeply as the
tape would allow. "Look," he went on, "you won't be able to understand
this, I know, but—that was home. I'm alive, and I don't have a home or
a,,hell . . . don't have a future." The young man grinned bitterly. "You need
an engine-wiper, Vladimir? Or maybe the Company could use a trooper
who's proved he can't hit a damned thing with a gun?"
"I can teach anybody to shoot," said Sergeant Mboko. "I can't teach
them to think better than I do."
"We want you for our Captain, Mr. Waldstejn," said Roland Jensen.
"Call yourself Colonel like the Old Man did, if you like."
Waldstejn straightened. His eyes searched for the member of the
command group who was missing.
Lieutenant ben Mehdi understood the look. "Worried about Hummel?"
he said. "Don't be. Bertinelli's still working her over, but it was her idea to
begin with." The Lieutenant's mouth quirked into something with less
humor than a smile. "That was before we crashed back into
Smiricky—while some of us didn't see much use in planning for the
future."

"I'm going back to the bridge," said Captain Ortschugin. He thrust out
his hand to be shaken. "But look—you saved my ship, which is nothing, I
am no Excellency to pull strings . . . but also you saved a ship of the
Pyaneta Lines. It could be that something other than engine-wiper could
be found for you." The spacer strode off, spitting tobacco juice at random
into the jumbled ingots.
"Can I have a little while to think about it?" Albrecht Waldstejn asked
his hands.
The two non-coms exchanged looks of surprise. "Ah, I don't know if you
realize what this means when we're not on service," Sergeant Mboko said.
"That's three full shares of what's usually a damned big pie."
"I appreciate that, Sergeant," Waldstejn said with raised eyes and a
sharper tone. "If you need my decision now, however—"
Hussein ben Mehdi stepped between the two men. He gave Waldstejn a
salesman's broad grin. "Hey," he said, "it's three days before we dock on
Novaya Swoboda. No hurry, sir, no hurry." He put his hands on the
shoulders of the two big non-coms. "Come on, boys," he added, "we need
to settle bunk arrangements now that the crew's quarters are the sick
bay."
The three men walked forward. Albrecht Waldstejn was staring at his
hands again.
Churchie Dwyer cried out sharply and awakened. Del Hoybrin held his
comrade's hands firmly until he was sure that Churchie would not strike
himself in the face the way he had an hour before. "Are you all right,
Churchie?" the big man asked.
"Jesus, Del, Jesus," the wounded man whispered. The drugs left him
without physical pain, only patterns of weights and pressures which
trapped his body. That made it hard to tell reality from dream . . . but Del
Hoybrin was here, and in his dreams—
"Jesus!" the veteran repeated. He tried to focus on the concerned face of
his friend. Bertinelli glanced over, then went back to the trooper whose
grazed scalp needed a fresh dressing.
Churchie licked his lips. "Del," he whispered, "how many people have I
killed, do you suppose? The ones that I could see, I mean."
The bigger soldier wrinkled his brow in concentration. "Gee, Churchie,"
he said, "I don't know. A lot, I guess?"
"Every damned one of them deserved it, sweetheart," the wounded man

said. He closed his eyes. "Nobody alive don't deserve it, and it don't bother
me a bit to handle things. . . . You know that?"
"Yes, Churchie," Del said. "But why don't you go back to sleep now?"
The Doc had told him it was best for Churchie to sleep for the next
twenty-four hours or so. Del really did not like it when his friend was
asleep, though. Churchie kept moaning all the time.
"Hey, Lieutenant," called someone as Hussein ben Mehdi walked
through Hold One on his way to the bridge.
He paused, looking for the speaker. Trooper Powers waved. She sat on
the end of a cot; but it was Sergeant Hummel, supine on the same cot,
who had spoken. Hummel raised herself to one elbow and beckoned him
over.
Ben Mehdi obeyed with a blank face. "Didn't expect to see you here,
Sergeant," he said neutrally.
"Had them shift me out as soon as I woke up," the non-com grumbled.
"If I'm going to feel like hell, I may as well have some elbow room while I
do it." She paused. Her eyes and the cold blue eyes of Iris Powers were on
the Lieutenant. He shifted his weight, preparing to leave. The Sergeant
stopped him by adding, "Bunny tells me we owe you one."
Ben Mehdi looked at the seated woman, then the reclining one. "Yeah,
well," he said. "I'm just as glad it was you being carried, not me."
Sergeant Hummel nodded, then grimaced at the pain. "I'm not worth a 
damn," she muttered to no one in particular. Then she focused on ben
Mehdi again. "Yeah," she said as the officer fidgeted, "but we got three
days of this, they tell me." She looked at her blonde friend and asked,
"Bunny, how long's it been since we really partied?"
Trooper Powers' mouth spread in a wide, slow grin. "Podele's World,
wasn't it?" she said. "Sure, Podele's World. The bartender."
Hummel looked back at ben Mehdi. "I'll tell you what, Lieutenant," she
said. "We'll get a room in a good hotel when we dock in. And we'll lay on
enough booze and food for—" she pursed her lips as she examined the
officer—"four days, let's say. And then we'll party."
Ben Mehdi's eyes widened. He stared at the older woman, then the
younger one. Both of them were smiling wickedly. "Allah!" he said. He
started to point but caught himself. "You mean both of you?"
"Hey, Lieutenant," said Iris Powers. The smile was in her voice as well

as on her lips. "Don't knock it till you've tried it." She chuckled aloud.
"And I don't remember anybody knocking it then."
After a further moment of gaping, Hussein ben Mehdi began to grin
also.
CHAPTER TWENTY
"Hi, Lieutenant," said a voice. Its language and familiarity broke into
Albrecht Waldstejn's black revery better than a shout could have.
"Hi, Pavel," said the ex-officer, ex-Cecach citizen. He gestured toward
the jumble of ingots on which he sat. It occurred to him that he would
need to borrow some kit for at least the next three days. "Make yourself at
home."
"Thank you, sir," Hodicky said shyly. "I suppose I ought to call you
Captain now." When Waldstejn looked at him with an odd expression, the
smaller man added, "They've signed me on, sir—into Black Section with
Churchie and Del. I'll be under you again. Ah, if you join."
Waldstejn managed to smile. He put out his hand. "Congratulations,
Trooper Hodicky," he said. He shook with his beaming former
subordinate. Then the smile faded. He added with the bitterness which
had until then been internal, "It's not quite what you were raised for,
though, is it?"
"Oh, you mean supply?" the new Trooper said in surprise. "Oh, that was
just the army. But Lieutenant Mehdi says if I want, I'll get trained on
really hot electronics, the sort of thing I'd never see back on Cecach. Not
just computers, but commo and sensors like you wouldn't believe!"
"I suppose I meant the killing, soldier," the ex-officer said flatly. "That's
the bottom line, isn't it? For a job as a 'contract soldier'."
Hodicky's face changed, but he did not edge back from the man beside
him. "Yes sir," he said, "I suppose it is. I guess I can handle that, sure." He
paused. "And I guess I'd rather do it for other people. Leave them with the
hate that eats them up every night. I don't like to feel that way myself."
Waldstejn blinked at the younger man. "Sorry, Pavel," he said, "I
don't—"
"Don't understand what it's like to be so small that anybody on the
block can beat the crap out of you?" Hodicky said. "And smart enough,
smartass enough, that most of them want to try?" He took a deep breath
and swallowed. With less passion he continued, "I guess your family had

enough money that it wasn't a problem anyway. I'm glad for you, sir. . . .
But the first person I ever met who needed me and wanted me around was
Q. And him and you were the only two who ever tried to stand up for me,
ever. Well, I've got a family now, sir. It's not screaming kids and an old
man who beats me with a chair leg whenever he's sober enough to move.
I'm in the family business. And I'm going to be good at it, all of it."
The anger that had welled up out of the little man's past suddenly
evaporated in a smile. He reached out to Waldstejn again, touching the
older man on the wrist. "But Mother of God, sir, I won't be as good as you.
You talk about killing? You saved the life of everybody in this ship!" He
waved at the hold and beyond it, the troopers beginning to settle in for
another night in a freighter. "And that's why they saved you. We saved
you."
Albrecht Waldstejn turned his arm to link his hand again with that of
the younger man. "Pavel," he said, "you don't have anything to justify.
Certainly not to me."
Hodicky squeezed the hand, then released it as he stood up. "Look, sir,"
he said. He had lost both the shyness and the anger of previous moments.
"I'm not a priest. Maybe Q's burning in Hell, even though he died to save
me. But I don't think so. And I don't think God gave us talents we weren't
supposed to use. You've got a hell of a talent for leading troops, sir."
Smiling again, the little man gave a finger-to-brow Federal salute before
he strode away.
I envy you your belief, thought Albrecht Waldstejn. His lips passed only
a smile.
, The tall, young man looked at his hands. This time he really saw them,
the flesh and the crucifix ring, instead of shadows from the past and
future. Most of the scrapes and cuts had healed, though there was still a
pucker where the head of a deep-driven thorn was working back to the
surface.
Waldstejn had not killed anyone, not directly. He was fairly sure of that,
as clumsy as he had proven to be with a gun. But the flesh would have
looked the same if every shot he fired had snuffed out a life.
And his soul?
It was a big universe, even the human part of it. Perhaps Hodicky was
wrong, perhaps there was no God who granted talents . . . but at one level
or another, Waldstejn, too, felt that doing a job well was good, a Good,
and that doing a job in the mutual respect of one's companions was a
Good as well.

Even if the job were slaughter.
The air whispered with a nearby presence. Waldstejn looked up. Sookie
Foyle stood as Hodicky had, with a trace of nervous shyness on her plump
face. When she caught the tall man's eye, she smiled into sudden beauty.
"I just wanted to, to say I'm glad you made it, sir," she said. "And that I'm
glad you're with us."
Instead of gesturing the Communicator to a seat, Albrecht Waldstejn
took her by the hand. As he guided her gently down beside him, he said,
"You know, Sookie, I've pretty well decided that I'm glad too."
THE END

