
ACE BOOKS, NEW YORK
An Ace Book, Published by the Penguin Group
Copyright © 2005 by Dawn Cook. 
ISBN: 0441013554 
BOOK DESCRIPTION: Princess Contessa's dreams of living happily ever after
marrying a prince are shattered when her "parents" reveal that she's actually a street
urchin they raised as their daughter to thwart assassins from their real target.
Contents
1    2    3    4    5    6    7    8    9    10    
11    12    13    14    15    16    17    18    19    20    
21    22    23    24    25    26    27    28    29    30    
31    32    33    34    35   
 
To my parents, who sort of gave me the idea…
I’d like to thank my editor at Ace fantasy, Anne Sowards, who helped make this a better story, and
my agent, Richard Curtis, for without his efforts, there’d be no story at all.

One
 
It might have been chance that kept my attention tight across the street and upon the mud-splattered
gypsy van, but I doubted it. Nebulous coincidences like chance aren’t allowed sway in my life, everything
being planned  to  the moment if I didn’t arrange  for spontaneity.  No…  it  was  probably  my  thirst  for
something  outside  my  ken,  my  wish  to  see  what  lay  around  the  corner  just  outside  my  sight  and
understanding. Either that, or I was bored out of my mind.
“Look, Kavenlow,” I said, squinting in the sun at  the gaily painted  gypsy van. “A palmist. Here.”  I
dumped my latest purchase of fabric into his arms. “I want my fortune told.”
“Tess.” The man lurched to keep up with me as I started forward. “We should get back. It’s not safe
for you to be out this long.”
“Oh, may God  save  you,” I complained.  “It’s  not even noon  yet.  I’m safer  here  than  in  my  own
rooms.” Whether fortunate or unfortunate, it was true, and I confidently made my way across  the busy
street, a way parting itself for me as I cut across the narrow avenue for the wood-slatted, horse-drawn
van parked in the shade of the closely packed buildings.
There was a huff of exasperation as Chancellor Kavenlow hastened to catch up, and I slowed. I gave
the thickset man a surreptitious look to gauge his irritation as he came even. His lightly wrinkled face was
taut, his cheeks red from the sun’s heat. The fingers gripping my packages  were  strong  from reining in
unruly horses, their tips stained from the ink I had spilled during my history lesson yesterday. His neatly
trimmed black  beard  and  hair were  grizzled with white, as  were  his thick eyebrows.  But  his  jaw  yet
carried the firm sensibility I relied upon. He was still my dear Kavenlow,  the one  to  whom I went first
with my questions and last with my complaints.
Right now, his brow  was  creased  in bother.  I winced,  thinking I’d  reached  the balance  where  my
parents’ anger at him for letting me stay out this long outweighed the scene  I would make  if he bodily
dragged  me  shrieking  back  behind  stone  walls.  It  hadn’t  happened  since  I  was  thirteen,  but  the
remembered humiliation still brought a warmth to my cheeks.
It had been cold when we started out, and  he looked  uncomfortable  under  his cloak;  he had  been
carrying mine most of the morning. His boots were dusty, as was the bottom half of my dress, the street
having turned the lace-strewn white cloth a begrimed yellow from my knees down. Seeing him so irate, I
resolved to stop at a winery on the way home to bribe him into a better mood. If the truth be  told,  the
black leather jerkin and dagger on his belt made him look more like a master horseman than a keeper of
books and armed attendant.
“Tess,” he said, his blue gray eyes pinched as he eased into the slower pace. “I strongly suggest we
go back. Your suitor has arrived early.” He glanced  behind us as  he shifted my packages  to  his other
arm, squinting from the sun despite his leather cap. “And he’s brought so many soldiers. Twice as many
as he needs. They’re thick in our streets.”
I forced my expression into a carefree smile. I’d noticed that as well, but since there  was  nothing I
could do  but watch  and  wait,  I hadn’t  said  anything. And I knew  Kavenlow  was  more  aware  of the
situation than he was of the fly currently trying to land on his nose. “He probably heard what happened to
Prince Rupert,” I said, thinking I could be safely married by now if the dunderhead hadn’t gotten himself
killed a day’s ride inside our borders last year. Just as well. The man had a nose like a potato. “I don’t
think we’ll ever  live that one  down,”  I added,  pulling up short  to  allow a  wagon whose  driver  didn’t
recognize me in time to rattle past.

Kavenlow looked pained as he took my elbow. “The point I’m making is that it’s a  mistake  to  risk
meeting him prematurely in the streets.”
“Of course I want to meet him prematurely,” I said. “I won’t see him for three weeks if my parents
get their way.” Eyebrow  cocked  in a  rather  saucy  expression,  I pulled out  of  his  grip  and  made  my
sedate way to the gypsy van. “I won’t be long,” I said over my shoulder. “While I’m with the madam,
you can  get a  drink from the tavern  across  the street.  And I need  a  rest,”  I lied. “This heat  is  doing
terrible things to my hair.”
I fussed with the pile atop my head that I’d made of my waist-length curls. Apart from a few strands
artfully pulled out for effect, the neat topknot was held together by not only hairpins but also  needlelike
darts. They were made from the bone of a bird and  were  hollow to  hold a  drop  of venom. The short
blowtube  to  launch them bisected  the arrangement  like a  decoration.  Kavenlow  insisted  I  have  them
when out of the palace, though I’d never had to use them.
Kavenlow watched me check the position of my darts, his craggy face carefully neutral. I had  been
wearing them for the last seven  years.  Assassins  plagued  my mother’s  house.  My first few years  had
been  fraught with near  misses,  prompting my parents  to  give  in  to  Kavenlow’s  insistence  that  he  be
allowed to teach me how to defend myself should I ever become separated from my guards. Hence the
bullwhip I wore as a belt under a silk wrap and the throwing knife strapped to my thigh. Heaven help me
if I ever needed it—I’d have to lift my skirts to  reach  it. The darts,  though, were  Kavenlow’s  and  my
secret. One sent a person either comatose or into convulsions; two  brought  death.  The weaponry  was
very unprincess-like, but then, I was supposed  to  shatter  the world  if that  damned  prophesy  could  be
believed.
The attempts on my life had slackened off after my tenth year when my parents began searching for
suitors, but now that I was in danger of actually marrying someone, they had started up again. This time
the assassins had switched from me to anyone I had shown a liking to. It made for very nervous suitors. I
couldn’t blame Prince Garrett for bringing so many men.
My eyes rose to search out the unfamiliar black and green uniforms of the Misdev prince as I rose up
onto the first step of the van. I wondered if Garrett was as young and  handsome  as  his portraits  made
him. If they were  anywhere  truthful,  I  wouldn’t  complain.  “Besides,”  I  added,  my  gaze  dropping  to
Kavenlow’s as a thrill of anticipation flashed through me, “I want to know what Prince Garrett is like.”
“Then let’s  go back  to  the palace,  and  you can  ask  the maids.” Kavenlow’s  sea  gray  eyes  were
weary with a repressed exasperation. But the tiny scar above his eyebrow wasn’t red yet, so  I knew  I
had some leeway.
“The maids! They won’t know anything except what color  his stockings  are.”  Giving him a  wicked
smile to dare him to stop me, I climbed the last two steps and knocked dead center of the red circle on
the door. A flash of expectancy struck through me and settled to a steady burn as a tremulous greeting
came from inside.
I’d been waiting what seemed like half my life for a husband. And by all that was holy, it wasn’t fair to
procrastinate into my third decade, shaky political situation or not. Papers had been signed, and now that
I was  mere  days  from meeting my intended,  I was  nervous.  Gypsies  were  well-traveled.  The madam
might be able to tell me things about Prince Garrett my parents couldn’t— or wouldn’t.
I  reached  for  the  simple  latch,  hesitating  when  Kavenlow  grasped  my  sleeve.  I  looked  down,
astonished not that he had touched me but at his troubled expression. The gypsy van had to be safe; he
wouldn’t have let me come down this street if he hadn’t investigated it already. “I’m coming in with you,”
he said, worry tightening the corners of his eyes.
My lips parted in surprise. Kavenlow hated gypsies almost as  much as  he hated  the ocean,  always
turning overly protective  when I invited them to  the  palace  to  entertain.  “It’s  just  a  foolish  woman’s

fancy,” I said, mystified that my harmless entertainment had him concerned. “Go have a drink. I’ll be fine.
Perhaps you could get me one as well?”
He made a small sigh of surrender. “Very well, little miss,” he said, and I smiled. He hadn’t called me
that  in  years.  He  hesitated  before  leaving,  looking  up  as  if  fixing  me  into  his  memory.  His  thick,
salt-and-pepper eyebrows bunched, but it was the glint of apprehension in his solemn eyes that made my
stomach clench. Something was wrong.
“What is it?” I asked, my gaze roving over the noisy crowd  as  I came  down  the stair,  my instincts
flashing into a wary caution at the tension he was trying to hide.
“It’s nothing. Go on. I’ll wait across the street.”
Still unsure, I watched as he turned away and, with slow steps, crossed the street to sit at an outside
table in the sun. I slowly mounted the stairs again, taking a long, appraising look  at  the street.  I wasn’t
convinced all was as it should be anymore.
A puff of exasperation escaped me when I spotted the blue and gold of my father’s soldiers tucked
into the shadows. They were like rats; see one, know a dozen more were out of sight. Upon seeing my
attention  on  him,  the  guard  waved  merrily.  My  nose  wrinkled  in  bother,  and  I  gave  him  a  sour,
pinky-wave back. They knew I hated  them shadowing me when I was  out of the palace,  but I could
ignore them if they remained hidden.
Kavenlow had settled himself, watching everything with his hands  free  and  his eyes  roving. Still not
comfortable, I accepted the call through the door to come in. A chill enveloped me as I opened the door
and stepped into the van’s darkness. Immediately I moved from the opening to let my eyes adjust to the
light of two candles. It was quieter than it ought to be, the noise from the surrounding market dulled. A
forest bird fluttered against the bars of its cage. Vermillion curtains and drapes hung from the ceiling to
insulate against the heat and noise. A red rug spread dusty and worn, the tassels tattered.
“Close the door,” the madam whispered, and my attention jerked  to  a  corner.  She  was  in red,  the
gaudy color and her chains of jewelry blending into the bloodred background draped around her. There
was a  fox on her lap,  and  her swollen fingers gentling the animal and  the tips of her stringy gray hair
swinging were her only motion. I eased the door shut to seal myself in the ash-scented dark.
“Sit, girl,” the heavy woman said, her ugly voice rasping.
My eyebrow rose, but I accepted the slur in the spirit of the moment, feeling her magic gave her more
latitude than most. On  a  small table  between  us sat  a  lit candle,  an empty dish, a  jagged  rock,  and  a
feather. I eased myself onto the folding stool  across  from her.  “You wish your fortune?” she  said,  her
harsh accent pulling my eyes to hers.
I nodded, pausing at the creased, leathery look of her face. “Yes. I’m soon to be—”
“Be still,” she muttered, shocking me. The fox flowed from her, and I watched, my anger dulling as it
sniffed my foot. I wondered what live fur felt like but was  too  respectful  of its teeth  to  reach.  The old
woman grunted when it curled up under the table between us. A wisp of its tail brushed my street-dirtied
boots, and I froze, unwilling to move and make it leave.
Metal  charms  jingling,  the  madam  stretched  out  a  flaccid-muscled  arm  to  light  a  stick  of  wood
jammed between the slats of the wall. She blew the stick  out,  but it continued to  smolder,  sending the
smell of wormwood to thicken the air. “Show me your hands,” she said.
Not liking her tone, I nevertheless set them onto the knee-high table between us. She glanced at my
left—mumbling derisively that love leads to peril—then took my right, gripping it with an uncomfortable
firmness. Her paper-thin skin was cool and dry, showing none of the heat coming off the bay. She was
from the forest and seemed to have captured its essence in her van.

“What are  you called?” she  said,  gumming her teeth  as  she  leaned  over  my  hand  and  pulled  her
candle close. Her wrinkles folded in on themselves in a vision of ugly wisdom.
“Tess,” I said, then gave her my proper name, trying not to sneeze at the fragrant smoke,  “Princess
Contessa of Costenopolie.”
Her bird-bright  eyes  flicked to  mine.  “Oooh,  a  princess  are  we,”  she  mocked,  leaning  to  shift  a
curtain with a red-knuckled finger. A shaft of light fell over her worn face as she looked out across  the
street. The curtain dropped. “You aren’t a princess. A princess wouldn’t have one tired man looking out
for her; she would have five young men with whips and swords. She would not be on foot,  but have a
coach to carry her. And her guardian would not be  swilling ale while his charge  allowed  herself to  be
trapped in a van with a horse harnessed to it.”
I stiffened. “I told Kavenlow to sit over there,” I snapped, my ire rising. “And he’s  not swilling ale;
he’s drinking water. If your horse moves, it will die. If you threaten me, you will die as well. I’m Princess
Contessa,” I said, surprised to find her grip tightening until I couldn’t pull away. “I walk alone because an
entourage makes me a target.”
She leaned forward, her bosom pressing up to look flabby and soft with age. “Oh-h-h,” she mocked.
“You’re that Red Moon Princess, eh?”
I  fought  to  keep  a  pleasant  expression.  The  Red  Moon  Prophesy  was  not  mentioned  in  polite
company, having dogged my existence like a hungry cur since the month I’d been born.
“Yes,” she murmured, eying me as if it was a grand jest. “A child of the coast  destined  to  rule and
conceived in the month of the eaten  red  moon will make  an alliance of the heart  to  set  the mighty as
pawns and drive out the tainted blood rising in the south.”
“So I’m told,” I said, trying not to clench my jaw. And if I ever find out who painted that in blood
upon the doors of every royal family the year of my birth, I’ll have them flogged, keelhauled, and
spitted. Not necessarily in that order.
She all but snickered at my bothered look, but I didn’t find anything amusing about  it. Many ruling
families, especially those in the southern reaches, took that to mean I was going to  grow  up to  war  on
them and decided to kill me as a child. Others were willing to chance that I would marry their son  and
bring them glory. All I knew is the burning-hell flight of fancy had made my life burning-hell difficult. Just
try finding someone nice to dance with you with that hanging over your head.
“Bah,” she said shortly, pulling my hand to  her face  and  sending her cool  breath  against my palm.
“You’re going on a journey. Quite soon. You’d best prepare for it.”
My anger dulled as she fell into the expected patter. Convinced she was going to say something worth
hearing, I eased the tension in my arm, and she brought it closer. “A betrothal excursion?” I prompted,
wondering if there might be something other than wood ash in that smoke. And why did she have a rock
and a feather on her table? “My suitor has arrived early,” I prompted.
“Do tell?” she said sourly. “Here.” She trailed a begrimed nail down a crease in my palm. “Changes
not of your doing. You’ll be traveling by horse, then ship, then horse again.”
I touched my throat and took a pleased breath. “We will be going to the islands? Oh, how splendid!”
I couldn’t help my smile. I’d never been on the water, since Kavenlow had an unreasonable fear of it. I
thought  it  dreadfully  unfair.  It  would  be  wonderful  to  see  more  of  the  land  I  would  eventually  be
responsible for, especially if my future husband were with me.
My smile turned sly, quirking the corners of my mouth. Being out of the palace  would make  for far
more opportunities to get to know Prince Garrett better, fewer eyes  to  catch  us “talking,” and  a  much
better chance to make foolish, daring choices that we could laugh about when we were old and gray.

The woman  had  started  to  mumble  incoherently,  and  thinking  the  performance  was  wonderful,  I
resolved to pay her extra. “What of my husband?” I asked slowly, frowning as my tongue seemed thicker
than it ought to be.
“Husband?” she murmured, gazing at the rock as if it meant something.
“The man I’ll be traveling with,” I encouraged.
She looked at me, then back down, appearing to be confused. “He’s dark like you. Brown eyes, like
you. Brown hair, like you as well, though he has the decency to keep it short.”
I stifled a surge of annoyance. I was a princess. I was supposed to have long hair.
“Good hands,” she was mumbling. “Skillful hands. Tell him to watch what he does with them, or they
will be the death of him.”
I blinked. What kind of a fortune was that?
“He’s closed, too,” she said. “Hard to see. Here. Take this.”
She released my hand, and I shivered. Picking up the rock, she dropped it into my grip. My fingers
curled about it, holding it gently as I felt its roughness  against my skin. “Mmmm,” she  said,  her fingers
brushing  my  palm  as  she  took  it  back.  “You  won’t  be  able  to  understand  his  pride.  But  he  will
understand yours. Best I hope he’s patient.”
“Pride?” I questioned. This was the oddest fortune I had ever been told.
She grasped my hand again, and I started at her quickness. “I see—stone,” she murmured, slumping
as she fell into a deeper I trance. “Marble and hay. Silk and red ribbons—”
“Gifts!” I jerked my hand from her, alarm jolting me out of the smoke-derived fog in my head.  The
fox at my feet yawned I and  settled  itself further. “Saint’s bells and  incense.  I forgot,”  I exclaimed. “I
have to find a betrothal gift. Forgive me, madam,”
I said hurriedly as I stood and swung my coin bag from my wrist to my hand. “I have to go.”
The stool I had been sitting on almost fell, and I scrabbled to catch it, flustered.  She  sat  blinking at
me, clearly struggling to shake off her interrupted magic. “Please accept this as a show of my gratitude,” I
said as I set a coin clattering into the empty bowl. She was quite good.  “I’d  ask  that  you come  to  the
palace,” I said impulsively. “I need another entertainer for my betrothal  festival, and  the women would
enjoy speaking with you.”
The folds in the old woman’s  face  deepened.  She  took  a  sharp  breath.  Gathering her black  shawl
tight about her shoulders, she gave me a patronizing smile. “No.”
I froze in surprise. No one had ever refused me outright before. I was too shocked  to  say  anything
and just stood  blinking in the thicker  smoke  at  the ceiling. I felt my breathing slow  and  found  myself
unwilling to speak or move. A tap at the door echoed in my head.
“Princess Contessa?”  Kavenlow’s  voice filtered through the thick wood.  “I have your  water.”  He
opened the door, the heat and noise seeming to pool in with the light. The bird in the cage fluttered to be
free. The fresh air revived me, and I took a cleansing breath. Kavenlow’s shadow eclipsed the light from
the street. “I brought you a drink, Tess,” he said, the van shifting as he entered and handed it to me.
Taking it, I gave him a bewildered smile and tried to shake the fuzziness from my thoughts. My search
for the perfect gift would have to wait. Kavenlow’s brow was furrowed worse than the time I broke the
guards’ practice scaffold, swinging on it. I knew without asking he wouldn’t let me stop anywhere on the
way home.
“If you want a token of love,” the old woman said, “I have it.”

Kavenlow’s face went slack and empty. He gave the gypsy a curiously anxious look from behind his
beard, then slowly— reluctantly—shut the door behind him.
“You  don’t  understand,”  I  said,  glancing  into  my  cup  of  water.  “It  has  to  be  something  unique,
something my suitor has never seen.”
“Something  from  far  away,”  the  old  woman  said,  waving  at  the  still-glowing  stick  of  incense.
“Something of value. Something small. Something you like as well?”
My eyes teared, and I tried not to breathe that foul smoke. “Yes. Exactly.”
She chuckled, lumbering to her feet and reaching for a pouch hanging from the ceiling. “I know what
pretty women like,” she said, taking it down and untying the binding to show the bag was really a square
of fabric as she opened it up on the table.
I leaned close: a bundle of silk woven with the likeness of seaweed, a bone knife, a  pointed  rod  of
black  metal the length of my  forearm,  a  metallic  cross  inlaid  with  red  wood,  a  flat  black  stone  that
seemed to draw in the candlelight, a plain ring of gold, a string of tiny bells, and a palm-sized puzzle box
of colorful wood. But it was the knife my eyes lingered on.
“Not money,” she said. “Give me something of yours.”
A frown pulled my brow tight. All I had with me of value was the ring Kavenlow gave me last summer
and  my  favorite  necklace  with  blue  stones  and  rubies—and  she  wasn’t  getting  Kavenlow’s  ring.
Bothered, I set the cup down and reached for the clasp of the necklace. But the old woman shook her
head, her gaze upon the circlet atop my head. My eyebrows rose. She wanted my circlet?
I glanced at Kavenlow to gauge how this particular trade was going to go over with my parents. He
was staring at the wall most helpfully, already trying to divorce himself from the coming furor when it was
found I’d “lost” my crown again. But burning chu pits, I wanted that knife.
Knowing I’d pay for it later in spades, I took my circlet off and set it on the table. It was only a bit of
twisted metal, worthless in my eyes. She  nodded  her acceptance,  and  I eagerly reached  for the knife,
pleased to no end. “Tell me about this,” I demanded,  knowing the story  behind it was  probably  more
valuable than the knife itself.
Immediately she bunched the fabric up, retied the binding, and hung it from the ceiling. My circlet was
inside the impromptu bag, and I felt oddly naked without it. She  sighed heavily as  she  settled  her bulk
back into her chair, and it creaked in protest. “It’s from the east,” she said, apparently  not minding the
smoke she had stirred up. “It belonged to a young man searching for unfailing love. He became a sultan;
that’s a king of the desert. He found a good  use  for the ring I gave him in return.  The knife of a  king
makes a fitting gift, don’t you think?”
My fingers seemed slow as I turned it over in my hands, and I wondered if I ought to ask Kavenlow
to open the door. But it seemed like too much effort.  Engraved  upon  the knife were  large beasts  with
noses as long as their legs and  ears  as  big as  their backs.  Fanciful. It  was  perfect,  especially with the
story that went along with it. I blinked lethargically, trying to decide something. But I couldn’t remember
what my last thought was…
Her hand darted out, grabbing me. I gasped,  jerking away  as  she  pricked  my finger on the blade.
Shocked, I lurched to my feet. My stool crashed to the floor.
“Tess!” Kavenlow shouted. The van dipped as he put himself between the woman and me. The fox
darted under the dresser. The table hit the wall as he flung it aside.
My heart pounded like the beating of the bird’s frantic wings as it tried to escape. Instinct backed me
to a corner. My face went cold, and my grip tightened on the knife still in my hand. The smoke swirled
through me, numbing me. I should do something; I couldn’t remember what.

“Get back, Kavenlow!” the gypsy cried shrilly as she rose. Her rough accent was gone. “If you dart
me, I swear I’ll pull your insides out through your nose!”
I clasped my throbbing finger to my chest. She knows him? I thought, forcing the concept through my
muzzy head. She knew Kavenlow?
“How am I going to explain a cut on her?” Kavenlow exclaimed. Red-faced, he stood stiffly between
the gypsy and me with his hands clenched at his sides.
The large raggedy  woman sneered  at  him, her stubby  fingers  sending  the  jewelry  about  her  neck
clattering. “That’s your problem, not mine. And you’ve made a mistake. She has no defensive reactions
at all. Her thoughts revolve around men and buying things.”
Kavenlow’s shoulders were tense with anger. The smoke seemed to fill my bones. I couldn’t move. I
heard my pulse slow, and I forced my eyes to remain open. “Just recognize her so we can leave,” he said
tightly.
My  lassitude  deepened  with  every  breath,  and  I  wondered  how  I  could  still  be  standing.
Concentrating fiercely, I shifted my head to  see  my finger and  the drop  of blood  there.  My knees  felt
shaky. The gray smoke pooled in my head. “Kavenlow?” I whispered, hearing nothing.
“Pick my table up,” the gypsy woman commanded, and Kavenlow obediently righted it, replacing the
candle and the shawl covering it. The rock and feather were sullenly placed in the center along with the
bowl.
Grumbling in complaint, the gypsy settled herself in her chair and relit the candle  from another.  “Do
you dream, woman-child?” she said, fixing a sharp gaze on me.
I blinked,  dizzy. “How dare  you address  me like…  that…”  I  whispered,  my  voice  trailing  off  to
nothing.
“Answer her, Tess,” Kavenlow said as he pulled me from my corner.
“You want a fortune, dearie?” the gypsy woman said in a mocking falsetto. “I can give you a fortune
to make your hair turn white.” She leaned forward, running her eyes over my dusty clothes.  “Tell me if
you dream.”
I swallowed hard. “Yes, of course,” I said, hearing my voice as if it came from across the room. The
smoke was turning my head, making my mouth work when my mind said to be quiet.
“Any of them come true?” she asked.
“No,” I said, then hesitated. “No, of course not.” What an odd thing to ask.
“Animals,” the old woman said. “Do they do what you want?”
My brow furrowed, and a distant part of me wondered at the absurdity of the question. “I can ride a
horse.” I took a deep breath to dispel the fog in my head, but it only made it worse.
The gypsy shook her head in disgust. “Can you walk unnoticed?”
“I’m  a  princess.  Walking  unnoticed  is  pretty  much”—I  took  a  breath,  willing  myself  out  of  the
fog—“impossible.” My finger throbbed as I gripped the bone knife. I wondered if the fox had run away,
and my attention wandered  until I found a  pair  of black,  unblinking eyes  watching me from under  the
dresser. It was panting, afraid. My water had spilled, and I wished I could find enough stamina to coax it
out to drink from the puddle.
The gypsy followed my eyes to the fox. She made  a  rude  sound  I and  leaned  forward.  I made  no
protest as she reached out and plucked a loose hair from the shoulder of my dress. Holding it over  the
candle, she made a show of smelling the smoke when it flashed into light and was gone. “She can do little
for the amount of venom you’ve subjected her to,” she said sourly. “She’ll hate you if you haven’t told

her the cost, which I’d wager six horses you haven’t. What is she, eighteen?”
“She’s twenty, and I chose that risk.”
The woman harrumphed. “Breach the confidence, and you’ll be ripped to shreds. The Costenopolie
playing field will be destroyed to keep any disturbing ideas from taking root.”
“I’m aware of that.” His stance was stiff with no show of repentance. A part of me wondered  who
this woman was who thought she could treat Kavenlow as a drudge.
“She’s weak-minded. I pulled her here easier than if she were a starveling child.”
Kavenlow gritted his teeth. “She would have come without your summons. She likes gypsies.”
“So do I,” the woman said sharply. “But I don’t  go traipsing into their vans with no thought to  my
safety.”
A spark of anger finally broke through my fog. “Kavenlow sees to my safety,” I said hotly. “I don’t
need to think about it. And you will not address him in such a tone.”
The woman’s brow rose as if surprised I had broken my silence. “This is what you taught her?” she
said, fanning that mind-numbing smoke at me. My anger died, all my efforts to pull from my haze gone in
a  breath.  “Reliance  on  others?  A  smart  mouth  that  runs  without  thought?  You  wanted  a  princess,
Kavenlow? You have a princess. What you plan on making from this is beyond me.” She  leaned  back
with a shrewd gleam. “Either you are  a  moonstruck  idiot or  more  cunning than even my master.”  Her
eyes narrowed in threat. “He’s dead.”
I could almost hear the words, “I killed him,” hanging unsaid between them. Kavenlow stiffened, his
feet planted  firmly and  un-moving. “How I play my game is my business,”  he said  through his  gritted
teeth. “Do you recognize her or not?”
A sigh escaped the woman. Her fingers played with the jewelry about her neck. I watched, unable to
look away until the fox poured itself from under the dresser and slunk to the puddle  by my feet.  For  a
moment, only the small sound of its lapping could be heard, and then it slunk back into hiding. I smiled,
pleased it had trusted me.
“Aye,” the gypsy said grudgingly, eying the fox’s nose peeping from under the dresser. “I’ll recognize
her. There’s something there—though the package it comes in is worthless. You should burn your plans
and start over. This woman is only fit for dressing in finery and resting on another’s arm.”
A flush of anger cut through my benumbed state, then died.
“Thank you,” Kavenlow said, an irate relief in his voice.
“Thank you?” the gypsy questioned  mockingly. “Whatever  for?  Go  on.  Get  out.  I  want  to  leave
before the crush.”
Kavenlow hesitated. “Something is coming? Tell me.”
A shaft of light stabbed into the smothering darkness  as  she  shifted the curtain and  peered  into the
street. “If you can’t see it, you’ll have to wait until it happens. I’m not your nursemaid.”
Plucking her smoldering stick from the wall, she wafted it under my nose. “You won’t remember any
of this,” she said to me, and I lost sight of everything but her eyes sharp with an old bitterness. They were
blue. What gypsy has blue eyes?
“When I cut you,” the woman said, “Kavenlow beat me with the flat of his sword,  burned  my van,
and slaughtered my horse. Oh, it was a sight to remember,” she said dryly.
“Burned your van?” I said, my eyes tearing and my words slurring at the sudden smoke.
The gypsy smirked at my loose speech, the folds of her face falling into each other. “Yes. Burned my

van down to its wheels. It’s what he wants to do. Can’t you tell?”
Kavenlow pried the knife from my fingers. “That won’t work with her,” he said as he tucked  it into
the coin purse dangling from my wrist.  “She will eventually remember.  She’s  stronger  than she  seems.
I’ve never been able to cloud her memory.”
“It’s a good thing I’m not you, then, isn’t it?”
His lips pressed into a thin line behind his graying beard. Taking my arm, he moved me to the door.
The rush of light and heat as he opened it was so sudden and shocking, it was almost a pain. I balked,
unable to leave the cool rest of the van. With a smooth motion, Kavenlow hoisted me into his arms.
“Come see me again when you find unfailing love,  dearest,”  she  said  sarcastically  as  he carried  me
down the steps, “and I’ll tell you your children’s fortunes.”

Two
“Not so tight,” I gasped when Heather tugged my bodice laces. “I do have to breathe.”
“Tish, tash,” the young woman said, giving the laces a final yank before tying them off. “We have to
make the most of what little you have. Heaven help you, Tess, if you took away the dress and long hair,
you could  be  a  boy.  And you want to  make  a  good  impression  if  you  see  him  in  the  hallways—by
accident, of course.”
My eyebrows rose at the blatant hint of scheming. “And passing out from lack of air will impress the
chu out of him, won’t it,” I said dryly, but a stab of anticipation brought me straight.
Saucily humming the music I had picked out for my wedding, Heather helped me into a clean dress.
She had joined the palace staff as a kitchen girl when I was seven and she was eight, but after borrowing
her for a game of tag, I insisted she become a member of my “court.”
Court had been a rather grand name for my loose gathering of companions at the time. I had  been
horribly obnoxious,  demanding everyone  play  with  me,  noble  and  commoner  alike.  Heather,  though,
remained while others drifted away—a steady companion and extra set of ears keeping me informed of
the palace gossip.
“Have you seen him?” I asked, worried  as  I sat  in a  rustle of fabric before  my mirror in my outer
room. She had been unusually silent while I’d washed the street dirt from me, making me think the news
wasn’t good.
“He who?” Her eyebrows were high with an artful disinterest.
“Garrett!” I said, pushing her away in exasperation as she tried to arrange my hair.
“Prince Garrett of Misdev?” She said his name around  a  languorous sigh that  sent  her ample chest
heaving dramatically. “The entire staff met him after breakfast while you were out. He’s been with your
parents since, cloistered away with papers and maps. Dreary stuff. I don’t know  how he stands  it, the
poor man. I’m sure he’d rather be out hawking or riding.”
Heather pulled a curl from my topknot, and I tucked it back. I didn’t like her that close to my darts;
she thought they were only a favorite bit of decoration. Lord help me if she ever pricked herself. I didn’t
wear my knife or bullwhip behind palace walls, either.
“And where did Kavenlow ride off to in such a hurry?” she continued. “The cook  said  he took  the
cold pork she was going to serve tomorrow and ran to the stables. Such a fuss that woman made. You’d
think he stole a live pig the way she was bellyaching!”
I frowned. “Kavenlow left? By horse?”
“Right out the front gate.” She teased out another curl. “Bilge scrapings, Tess. Let me put your hair
down. Honestly! Why won’t you let me pad you in front a little, too? Just for today? You’re as tall and
thin as a dinghy’s mast.”
Exasperated, I let the curl stay. Heather’s preoccupation with my looks  was  because  I didn’t have
any, and she did. She was shorter than me by half a head and pleasingly round where a woman should
be,  with  rosy  cheeks,  blond  hair,  and  wide,  child-bearing  hips.  Fine,  good,  Costenopolie  stock,  as
Kavenlow would say.
“Kavenlow  didn’t  tell  me  good-bye,”  I  mused  aloud.  “That’s  not  like  him.”  Then  I  brightened.
“Perhaps it has something to do with a betrothal gift.”
“That must be it,” Heather said. “Though why he raided the larder is beyond me.”

“We didn’t eat while we were out.” I carefully took the darts from my topknot and placed them in the
hairpin cushion. My hair tumbled down, and I reached for the brush.
The morning’s excursion had been an obvious ploy to keep me out of the palace and prevent me from
meeting Garrett.  I thought Kavenlow  was  being grossly overprotective.  Though our  grandparents  had
warred upon each other, King Edmund had far more to gain by his second son marrying into the family,
hoping to prosper by the Red Moon Prophesy rather than be  destroyed  by it. Our  marriage had  been
arranged for almost a year, but Garrett and I weren’t supposed to meet until a  month from now at  the
summer festival, then be wedded this winter at the turning of the year. That he was early didn’t bother me
at all.
Heather pressed her lips and took the brush from me, struggling to get through the tangles the wind
from the bay had made of my curls. “I don’t like you going down into the streets. You’re going to end up
 dead,” she said, giving my hair a sharp tug. “And what’s going to happen to me then? You couldn’t pay
me to go into the streets with you again.”
“That was years ago,” I protested. “Heather, bury it and find a new horse to ride.”
A tinge of red came over her sun-starved cheeks, and her tugs grew  sharper.  In all honesty,  it had
been  a  near  miss. The surrounding merchants  and  townsfolk  had  spontaneously  retaliated,  stoning the
man to death under my and Heather’s horrified eyes. To Kavenlow’s fury, he hadn’t been able to  stop
them. My people  left nothing to  question  in their anger.  Kavenlow  had  stomped  about  the palace  for
days. Two days later, he began secretly desensitizing me to the poison on my needles to supplement my
growing whip and knife skills.
“You should have sent me,” she said, tugging on my hair. “I know what you like.”
I  took  the  brush  from  her  before  she  yanked  my  hair  out  entirely.  “I  was  buying  something  for
Garrett.”
“Oh, that’s right.” A randy glitter came into her blue eyes. “What did you get him? A matched set of
jewels?” Her eyes went wide with a mocking innocence as she fluffed my clean underskirt. “No-o-o-o?
He probably has a pair already. Maybe a great, awful, long sword? No? He has one of those  already,
too.” She giggled merrily.
“A knife,” I said, meeting her grin with my own. Heather should have been married years ago, but had
she accepted any of the numerous offers, she would’ve had to leave me until I was wed as well. And life
beside me was too comfortable for her to give it up. Not to mention the court stipend.
“A knife?” Heather repeated. She played with the ends of her hair, her full lips falling into a pout that
generally got her whatever she wanted from the cook’s boy.
I nodded. “It used to belong to a desert king. Want to see it?” I reached for my coin bag  atop  the
vanity, pulling out the knife and placing it in her palm. “Be careful,” I warned. “It’s wickedly sharp. The
gypsy I bought it from accidentally pricked my finger on it. See?”
Heather dutifully glanced at the tiny spot as I held my hand out. “Kavenlow beat her with the flat of
his sword,” I said, a distant feeling coming over me. “He burned her wagon and slaughtered  her horse.
She had… blue eyes. Have you ever seen a gypsy with blue eyes?”
Heather’s mouth fell open. “Kavenlow?” she whispered. “He beat her?”
“Oh, it was quite a sight,” I said slowly, seeming to  smell smoke.  I felt odd,  starting when Heather
took my hand and pulled my finger closer for a better look.
“Chu, Tess!” she exclaimed softly. “Why didn’t you tell me before?”
I pulled away, confused. “I don’t know.” Frowning, I turned to my mirror. “Do you think Garrett will
like it?” I asked, tucking the knife in a drawer. “You saw him. What’s he like?”

My pricked  finger apparently  forgotten,  Heather  sat  on the edge  of my dressing  couch,  her round
cheeks  pinched  as  she  beamed.  “You are  so  fortunate,  it makes  me ill.  Of  all  the  fat  ugly  men,  you
somehow find the single handsome one.”
At least he isn’t ugly, I thought. “Is he clever?” I asked her reflection.
“Clever? It matters? He’s gorgeous!”
“Oh,  how  nice…”  I  said,  trying  to  feign  an  air  of  indifference  as  I  smoothed  my  hair.  I’d  seen
portraits, of course. But portraits often lied.
“Yes, and he looks like he really knows how to use his sword,” she confided. “Even the one buckled
to his belt,” she added, her blue eyes innocently serious.
I gave her a raised-eyebrow look. Angels give me strength. I’d been waiting for a husband too long.
A girl can crochet only so many doilies.
“And he made the head cook blush with his praise of breakfast,” Heather added.
That was impressive. Getting that old woman to color took some doing. “He can’t be better looking
than the falconer’s boy,” I protested, praying she’d say he was.
She nodded enthusiastically. “By a wagonload. Lord help me, his shoulders would make angels cry.
And he has such a tight little—”
“Heather!” I cried as she dramatically fanned herself, falling back on the couch by the window.
“Oh…”  she  moaned.  “You  will  have  so  many  children,  you  will  put  the  peasants  to  shame.  To
shame!”
I turned away, pleased. I was obligated  to  marry the most lucrative offer,  no matter  what the man
who came with it looked like or how stupid he was, especially with the “Marry her for glory or murder
her for safety” mentality the surrounding noble families were afflicted with. And the marriage offers had
tapered off dramatically since poor Prince Rupert.
“Looks aren’t everything,” I said, running the brush over my hair and getting it stuck in a curl.
Heather’s face was masked in a mocking horror as she met my gaze in the mirror. “Listening to you,
one would think looks were nothing!”
I cocked my head. “If one thought that, one would be… half-right?”
She threw a cushion at me, which I easily knocked aside. “Your royal blood is showing,” she said in
disgust. “Looks are everything.”
I gazed at myself in the mirror, hoping Garrett didn’t think so. “I want a husband as smart as I am,” I
said, thinking wistfully of Prince Rupert’s witty letters still at the bottom of my wardrobe  drawer.  “One
who can play a decent game of thieves and kings.”
“Games,” Heather said with a sigh as she came  and  took  the brush  from me. “Is that  all you think
about?  Men  are  pigs rooting  in  the  mud,  royal  and  common  alike.  The  sooner  you  realize  that,  the
happier you’ll be.”
“A man with high standards,”  I continued,  knowing she  didn’t understand.  “Dangerous,  maybe?” I
said, and her eyes went bright with repressed laughter. “A man with power, not necessarily wealth.”
Heather snickered as she brushed my hair. “You have a better chance to catch a punta by the tail than
finding a man that meets your standards, Tess. Especially when you have such a small inlet to cast your
net in.”
I sighed. “Use a mythical creature to catch a mythical creature,”  I said,  thinking that  it was  a  good
analogy—and not very encouraging. Puntas were large, ferocious cats with tufts of silver on their ears,

able to vanish in a whirl of wind when surprised, which wasn’t very often. They haunted the beach as well
as me mountains, reputed to be able to heal the sick, bring rain to end a drought, or call wandering herds
of goats to their doom. I’d  seen  a  punta  pelt  before,  dry  and  dusty,  cracking  with age.  They avoided
people to the degree that it was questioned whether there were any yet alive.
I stood, running my hands down my white linen dress. It wouldn’t be my fault if Garrett and I met in
the corridors. “Do I look all right?” I asked anxiously.
Heather sent her gaze over me, shaking her head  in dismay. My eyes  dropped,  and  my face  went
slack. It didn’t matter how tall I stood or how courtly my accent was, I was not built right. My curves
were too shallow and my figure hidden under the yards of fabric was too defined by my afternoons  on
horseback. It hadn’t seemed to matter before. It did now.
There was  a  heartbeat  of silence, then clearly realizing what she  had  done,  Heather  bustled  close,
fluffing my skirt. “Oh, your hair looks fetching,” she asserted brightly, her face flushed. “I’ve never seen
longer, and  it’s that lovely rich brown,  like freshly turned  earth.  Just  like your eyes.  You  look—nice.
Princess nice.”
I gave her a thin smile. I wasn’t  ugly, but we  both  knew  I wasn’t  the one  the palace  guards  were
sighing wistfully after when we went down the hallways together.
“All you need is your circlet,” Heather said as she turned to my vanity.
A small, pained sound escaped me, and I said nothing, keeping my eyes on my reflection.
“Tess!” Heather wailed, her shoulders slumping. “Heaven help you, again? I swear, you’d lose your
feet if you didn’t use them to stand on.”
“I didn’t lose it; I traded it for Garrett’s knife,” I said defensively. “Could you slip out to the smith’s
for a new one for me? I’d be ever so grateful.”
My voice was entirely reasonable, hiding my sudden flush of worry for what my mother would say if
she found out. It had sounded like a good idea at the time, and it was my crown, drowned it all. I was
tired of being told what I could and couldn’t do. One  would think that  being a  princess  meant making
your own decisions, but I never got a say in anything, always bending to do what was proper, what was
expected. And I was weary of it. My thoughts drifted to the picture of Garrett  hanging in the receiving
room. Oh, I was so weary of it.
Heather  stood  with  her  hands  on  her  hips,  waiting.  She  wasn’t  supposed  to  leave  the  grounds
unchaperoned, and I’d have to  sweeten  the deal  for her to  risk  it. “I’ll tell everyone  you’re  cloistered
away sewing,” I offered, recalling her unending prattle this morning had been exclusively about her latest
suitor, and how long it had been since she had seen him. Alone. In the spring air. Wink, wink. Nod, nod.
Sigh, sigh.
My shoulders slumped. If I couldn’t follow my desires, at least she could. And maybe she’d tell me
about  it in the morning. “Take  as  long as  you want,” I added.  “I can  get out of my dress  tonight  by
myself.”
I couldn’t—at least not without hurting myself—but I knew I had won when a sound of anticipation
slipped from her. “All night?” she questioned. “You won’t tell anyone I’m gone?”
I nodded, relieved the price of Garrett’s knife wouldn’t be a lecture from my mother but an evening of
sewing buttons back on my dress when I popped them off to get out of it tonight.
“Oh, pig feathers, it’s a deal!” she said, licking her thumb and extending it. I did the same,  and  we
pressed  them together,  sealing the bargain with spit as  we  had  when  we  were  giggling  fools  keeping
secrets. Apparently not much had changed.
She looked to the door, clearly eager to be gone. “I hear there’s a new fish in the solarium’s pond,”

Heather said as she picked up the basket in which she had brought me my noon meal. “Very pretty. You
should see it. All glittery with black and green…”
Black and green. The same color  as  the  uniforms  of  Garrett’s  guards. I met her grin with my
own. I would have been surprised had she not known where Garrett was.
Standing by my door, her smile faltered. “You aren’t really going to force an introduction, are you?”
Seeing her troubled brow, I shook my head, bowing yet again to what was expected of me instead of
what I wanted. Chu, I was so weak of determination, it was pitiful. But to do more than steal a look at
Garrett would be a severe breach of etiquette. “No,” I said. “Just look.”
She gave me a  satisfied nod  and  tugged open  the door.  Leaving it propped  for me, she  sashayed
down the hallway with her empty basket on her arm, giving each sentry she passed a flirtatious hello, her
mind obviously on—er—other things. I headed the other way, getting only cursory greetings until I turned
the corner  since most of the guards  were  watching Heather.  All I had  to  do  was  get to  the  solarium
before Kavenlow intervened. And he was gone for the day.
Nervousness began to creep up my spine like a wolf spider, and I gathered up my skirts so I could
move  faster.  The  halls  were  bright  with  noon,  and  my  father’s  soldiers  posted  at  the  corners  were
wearing their best uniforms of gold and blue.  They looked  j unusually dapper.  I gave each  a  nod  as  I
passed, and got more than a few encouraging winks in return. We had grown up together, and I felt as if
they were  overly protective  brothers.  They I  knew  where  I  was  headed,  but  only  Kavenlow  or  my
parents had the authority to stop me.
Anticipation tingled to the tips of my toes when I found four guards at the door to the solarium. Two
were unfamiliar, dressed in the well-appointed uniforms of black and green that I had seen in the streets.
Lavish hats with drooping black feathers sat perched upon their heads. I eyed them, thinking the gaudy
things would blow off in the first breeze  from the  bay.  The  men  were  undoubtedly  part  of  Garrett’s
personal guard. One looked too young, I the other too old.
I shook my head at my father’s sentries to tell them not to announce me. One smiled and opened the
door,  taking  care  to  shut  it  softly  behind  me.  The  sun  was  glaring,  and  I  squinted  about  the
empty-seeming indoor garden. I heard  my mother’s  laugh and  placed  them at  the unseen table  by the
orchid pond. The space was draped in vines to make a private nook. I had often used it for a classroom,
and there  was  an  ongoing  game  of  thieves  and  kings  between  my  father  and  me  on  the  fishpond’s
retaining wall.
Following the voices, I crept down the tiled path between potted ferns and lavish vines from the south
border islands. The heat of the day was thick, caught between the stone walls and the high glass ceiling. I
wished I had worn something lighter. My pulse quickened as I heard what had to be Garrett’s voice. He
spoke with great precision, hitting every syllable with a clarity that hinted at a clever mind and swift wit.
I eased around a large potted tree, well-hidden behind the captain of my father’s guard and another,
unfamiliar man in black and green. My father looked up across the distance when the sentries shifted to
recognize  and  dismiss  me.  Brow  furrowed,  he  started  to  rise  but  then  turned  the  motion  to  that  of
resettling himself. “Leave now,” he mouthed at  me, distracting my mother and  the young man standing
beside her by shuffling the papers on the table.
I scrunched my face up in rebellion. I’d leave, but how fast I obeyed remained up for interpretation.
Hunched with my skirts held tight to me, I studied Prince Garrett.
As promised,  he was  handsome,  making a  trim figure beside  my squat,  dare  I say  rotund,  father.
Garrett stood a shade taller than I, I guessed. His hair was straight and fair, cut short about his head. My
brow rose in appreciation at his clean-shaven features. I liked a tidy man. Freckles scattered across his
narrow nose made him look young.

He reached for a map, the black fabric of his uniform pulling tightly across his shoulders. I felt warm
just looking at  him. His attire  wasn’t  flashy, using the cut of the cloth to  hint at  his  wealth  instead  of
distracting medals and  jewels.  He  smiled at  something my mother  said,  and  I  noticed  his  teeth  were
straight and even. My eyes ran down the snugness of his trousers as he turned his back to  get a  paper
resting upon the pond wall, and my lips curved in a sly smile. Heather was right.
I rubbed my finger where the gypsy had pricked it as his pleasant voice joined my mother’s in an easy
laugh. It rankled me to be hidden away like a bauble to be brought out for theatrical effect. If I had half
the fortitude of my father,  I’d  force  an introduction now.  But what I did was  sigh  and  turn  to  leave.
Protocol and diplomacy. They ruled me. Coward.
My foot scraped the slate tiles, and I froze.
“Tess,” my father said as I spun and my mother met my horrified eyes. “What are you doing here?”
He stood with a quickness I’d never seen in him before, dismay in his stance.
Garrett  smiled as  he straightened  to  his full height. Our  eyes  met,  and  my stomach  twisted.  I  was
knee-deep  in  the  chu  pits  now.  Trying  to  force  my  face  into  a  pleasant  expression,  I  squared  my
shoulders and came out from behind the sentries.
“Oh, Tess,”  my mother said,  touching the yards  of ribbon  binding her  yellow  hair  in  its  elaborate
coiffure. “Why didn’t you wait?” She and my father exchanged unreadable looks, seeming to be at a loss
what to do.
Shaking inside, I curtsied low. “Good afternoon, Father, Mother,” I said with a formal stiffness. “I do
apologize. I was unaware you were here.” It was an outright, bald-faced lie, and  I approached  slowly,
praying I wouldn’t trip on a slate tile and fall flat on my fundament. That would be about right for my day
so far.
My pulse quickened when my father came forward, taking my arm in a  show  of ceremony.  “I told
you to leave,” he whispered, looking unusually stately in his best receiving garb.
“I’m sorry,” I whispered back. “I only meant to look.” But my unease sharpened to a fine point when
he answered me with silence. Together we halted before Garrett standing beside my seated mother. Her
petite, wispy figure was tight with an unusual tension.
“Prince Garrett, second son to King Edmund,” my father said. “This is our daughter, Tess. I apologize
for her forwardness, but she has a mind of her own, as you can see.”
A flash of emotion went through me as my father settled my hand into Garrett’s.  It  was  strong  and
lightly callused, telling me he had much practice  with a  sword.  He  held my hand gently, as  if he might
break  it. “A woman  who  thinks  is  a  boon  to  her  kingdom,”  Garrett  said,  his  voice  mixing  with  the
birdsong as if it belonged. “I’m pleased to meet you, Your Highness—under any circumstances.”
I flushed, thankful he didn’t seem offended by me pushing up the courting timetable. “It’s an honor to
make your acquaintance, Prince Garrett,” I said formally. “I trust your journey to join us was uneventful.”
The expected words flowed from me, a well-practiced litany. His nose was small, and his eyes  were  a
riveting green.  Both my parents  had  blue eyes,  and  I’d  never  seen  quite their like before.  They  were
beautiful, and I couldn’t look away.
As tradition dictated,  Garrett  brushed  the  top  of  my  hand  with  his  lips.  I  smiled,  welcoming  the
age-old promise behind that simple act and the feeling it pulled through me. “The honor is mine,” he said.
His voice was pitched low and his enunciation elegant. “Now that I have found you, the trials of the road
have faded to a distant memory. It’s truly a pleasure to see the claims of your beauty have erred on the
side of modesty. But why did you have the portrait artist straighten your curls? I think they become you.”
I met his smile with my own, glad to see he had a sense of humor. Straighten my curls, indeed. A flash
of emotion went all the way to my toes, raising gooseflesh on the way back. This is to be my husband?

Oh, the trials of being a princess… “Please call me Tess,” I said, thinking my face must be red. “Life is
too short to stand on formality behind palace walls.”
Garrett glanced at my mother for permission before inclining his head in agreement. “Tess, then,” he
said. “I’d be pleased if you called me by my given name as well.”
“Garrett,” I repeated. “Of course.” The formalities observed, Garrett escorted my pounding heart and
me to the table. The tension eased as our court manners could now be dropped.
I glanced at the game of thieves and kings in progress upon the wall of the pool in passing. My father
had finally shifted his pieces, putting one of his knights in danger to lure me into exposing my king. Pulling
Garrett to a halt, I accepted the challenge of taking his piece in the hopes I could return my thief to safety
before his second knight could make good his threat. My father made  a  sound  of surprise  as  I set  the
black knight aside.
“Your princess is threatened,” Garrett murmured as he helped me with my chair.
My hopes soared. He knew how to play thieves and kings! “Yes,” I murmured. “But if he takes her, I
will have his king in four moves.”
“Clever,” he breathed into my ear, adding to my fluster. A slow shiver filled me from the inside out.
And I rather liked the way his hand lingered on the back  of my chair.  The mix of possessiveness  and
protection was something I couldn’t find fault with at the moment. I knew I was behaving worse than a
kitchen maid who had caught a nobleman’s eye, but I couldn’t help it. Saint’s bells, but I liked him.
“There,” my father said  gruffly as  he stood  by Garrett.  “Isn’t this as  nice as  a  day  on  the  bay  in
summer?”
An awkward silence threatened, and my mother graciously stepped into the breach. “Tess?” she said,
calm and  self-possessed  despite  my  social  blunder.  “We  were  going  over  the  proposed  exchanges.
Would you like to see?”
Immediately I shifted my attention from Garrett’s  presence  behind me to  the map on the table.  All
fluster  aside,  I  was  keenly  interested  in  what  King  Edmund  was  offering  in  return  for  taking  their
unnecessary, second-born son off their hands and out of their borders.
The map showed much of the lower part of the continent, my mother’s large bays and several of her
smaller ones clearly marked. We controlled the usable beaches for hundreds of miles up and  down  the
coast, and thus most of the sea trade came from or through us. The shore we didn’t actively use met the
land in jagged cliffs. Farther inland were  the hardwood  forests  where  we  harvested  the timber for our
homes and the sturdy, fast ships we were known for. Between the woods and the sea was a distressingly
small tract of land fit for farming.
Beyond the forest was Misdev. King Edmund retained a slim portion of the forest we took from them
two generations ago. The kingdom was thoroughly landlocked but made up for it by consisting of large
tracts of farmland butting against the mountains. It was hoped the union between us would rub out the last
of our grudges and increase the quality of food crossing into our borders.
My father leaned over the map and tapped a finger upon a small cove on the outskirts. “See here?”
he said, leaning so his bald spot showed. “We would lose one of the minor, shallow harbors. Along with
a generous ribbon of land so they can get to it.”
A  whisper  of  unease  took  me.  The  proposed  section  would  drive  a  dangerous-looking  wedge
between us and our neighbors to the south. They wouldn’t like that at all, and neither did I. “But I a good
portion of the populace pulls their fishing boats out there,” I said, tugging the map from under my father’s
elbow. “I thought we would be returning the forest to them.”
My father had a satisfied air about him as he leaned back and I beamed, his gaze alternating between

Garrett and me. “Didn’t I tell you she was clever?”
Frowning, my mother touched  his shoulder.  I watched  the exchange,  not knowing what was  being
said. A sullen, almost defiant look  flashed across  my father’s  face  before  he focused  on me. “You’re
right, Tess,” my father said. “They will lose their homes, but they will be farmers.”
“Where?” I asked, struggling to keep my voice mild and polite. “It takes a generation to turn woods
into good farmland. What will they do in the interim?”
“They will farm the land we get in exchange for the harbor and boats,” my father said, clearly pleased.
“Boats!” I cued. I looked at my mother, who nodded almost imperceptibly. A harbor and boats? We
controlled  the sea.  Our  armada  was  the only  thing  we  had  to  fend  off  the  greed  of  the  surrounding
kingdoms. “How many boats?” I asked warily.
“Dear, that’s not polite,” my mother said, and I pulled from her gentling hand.
“Neither is forcing your people to scratch the ground for their sustenance  instead  of pulling it clean
from the ocean as they have for generations,” I said hotly.
“Tess!” my father exclaimed as he flicked a glance over my shoulder to Garrett.
“Forgive me,” I said,  my words  and  tone  contrite  but my expression  grim.  I  steeled  it  back  to  a
proper, pleasant demeanor as there was a whisper of linen and the prince moved to the opposite side of
the table so he could see me. His shadow fell over me, and I looked up.
“You have no reason to ask for forgiveness,” he said. “You care for your people. I won’t  fault you
for that. A queen puts her people first.” He straightened, holding my gaze with his. “Your people will be
justly rewarded on their first harvest, dear lady. The produce  they bring to  your markets  will not have
spent weeks drying on the back of a cart or being bruised in the belly of a  ship. It  will be  fresher  and
bring a correspondingly higher price.”
“Boats and a harbor?” I questioned my father, ignoring Garrett and his soothing smile.
My question clearly made my father uncomfortable, and his chin bunched behind his beard. He knew
as well as I the threat another force on the water, no matter how small, would bring.
“Trust, Tess,” he said. “Trust is expensive, especially with the history of—ah—your birth. The tracts
of land we will receive will delve deep into Misdev. King Edmund deserves proper compensation.”
Lips tight, I turned to Garrett. “And what will you gain from this, Prince Garrett?”
Garrett,  though, didn’t seem  disturbed  by my obvious  ire.  He  sank  down  to  a  crouch  before  me.
“Besides the satisfaction of knowing I’ve  won a  beautiful lady as  my bride  instead  of an old hag with
warts and an ugly nose?” he said as he took my hand. “Nothing. The boats and harbor will be managed
by me only until such time as my brother becomes king after my father.”
Beautiful lady? I thought. I was a flat-chested, narrow-hipped woman who looked  like she  should
be tending fires, not lounging before them. His flattery fell flat, pulling me into mistrust. My heart pounded
as I caught a  dark  emotion flickering behind his eyes.  Jealousy.  Garrett  was  unsatisfied  with  being  a
second  son.  That was  dangerous.  No  wonder  his  father  was  so  generous  with  his  land.  He  wanted
Garrett out of his kingdom and safely settled.
Garrett  raised  my hand to  his lips, letting them linger a  shade  too  long upon  my fingers.  My  eyes
jerked to his. A chill slid through me, and I struggled to not yank my hand away.
This wasn’t right. None of it. But it wasn’t as if I wouldn’t be able to keep an eye on him. I would be
queen after my parents; he would never be more than what he was now. With me, he would have at least
the illusion of his own kingdom instead of a castle on the outskirts of his brother’s realm.
I began a steady pull away from him, and annoyance flickered over Garrett as he was forced to let go

of me or make it obvious I didn’t like his touch. “Then it’s settled?” he said, his tone light as he rose to
stand over me. “Perhaps we can choose the boats tomorrow?” He smiled, but it no longer warmed my
soul.
“Tomorrow?” my father said haltingly.
Garrett stood and drew me reluctantly to my feet. He was taller than I by half a head, outweighing me
by several stone of sword-worked muscle. My heart gave a thump as I took in the faint scent of horse
and leather,  the familiar smell having lost all its comforting memories. “Everything is in place,”  Garrett
said.  “I suggest we  move the  wedding  up  to  circumvent  any  possible  retaliation  concerning  the  Red
Moon Prophesy.”
Shocked,  my  breath  caught,  and  I  reddened.  How  dare  he  speak  so  cavalierly  of  my  private
heartache? That burning-fool fantasy was the bane of my existence.
“We can be married in place of the betrothal festival,” he continued. “All the important guests will be
here.”
“No,”  came  my mother’s  faint protest.  She  had  a  peculiar  expression,  dismay  and…  guilt?  “The
wedding has been planned  for the turning of the year.  We  have set  arrangements  for informal parties,
teas, and joint excursions to provide time to become better acquainted. That you’re here early does not
change our timetable. We have been fighting assassins for years, Prince Garrett. You are safe.”
Garrett  seemed  unperturbed.  “I  insist,”  he  said  softly,  and  I  stiffened  when  his  grip  on  my  arm
tightened and then relaxed. “I will send my guards with news of the changes. They will be faster on horse
than your ships. I’m only thinking of my bride’s safety.”
I stood  stiffly  beside  him,  disgusted  at  his  impatience.  He  was  thinking  of  my  father’s  ships  and
harbors,  not me. Slowly I tried  to  pull away.  They wouldn’t make  me marry him if I didn’t  want  to,
would they? Then our ships and harbors would be safe. But even as I thought it, I knew what I wanted
made no difference. It never did.
Brow furrowed, my mother gave my father a sharp look. Seeming reluctant, my father came around
the table, taking me from Garrett and pulling me a step away. I went with him willingly, feeling as if I had
to wipe my hands free of the Misdev prince.
“I understand your worries, Prince Garrett,” my father said, placing himself between Garrett and me.
“But as  my wife says,  we  are  skilled at  fending  off  assassins.  Having  the  wedding  after  the  shipping
season is to provide protection against a prophesy-induced attack. To have it earlier, even as a surprise,
would invite violence. Our agreement remains unchanged. You will have your bride. But there will be no
marriage for at least six months.”
Garrett’s stance stiffened as I stood beside my father, relishing his protection for the first time in years.
“I believe you are  stalling, sir,” Garrett  said,  a  faint flush coming over  his pale  features.  “You  have  a
lovely daughter, and I see no reason to wait for an assassin’s knife when everyone is in agreement.”
My mother sighed at my obvious ire. She gave my father a tight smile. “Dear,” she said to me, patting
the chair beside her. “Come sit. Gentlemen? I would speak with my daughter?”
My father slumped, turning from a sovereign to a father struggling to reconcile the will of a kingdom
with the will of his daughter. “Leave us,” he said to his guard. Still not looking up, he said tiredly, “Prince
Garrett, if you would ask your man to join him?”
Garrett made a quick gesture to his guard, and the two sentries turned smartly and  left. The silence
was uncomfortable as we  waited  for the sound  of the door.  My resolve  stiffened. Garrett  wanted  my
father’s ships and harbor. He didn’t care about my safety.
“It’s my responsibility,” my mother said, her eyes sad upon my father. “I’ll explain.”

Explain what? I thought. I already knew I had no say as to whom I married. But I could make things
difficult, drag the proceedings out, make sure everyone knew I wasn’t happy. Papers had been  signed,
but if I set my mind to it, it could be years until the actual wedding took place. Who knew? Maybe if I
stalled long enough, he would find a poisoned knife in his ribs.
Nodding with his head lowered, my father gestured to the prince. “Prince Garrett,” he said. “Would
you accompany me on a brief tour of our interior gardens? We can rejoin the women shortly, and all will
be explained.”
“Mother?” I demanded, feeling my stomach tense.
Garrett  cleared  his  throat.  “It’s  all  right,  Tess,  dear.  I  have  a  desire  to  learn  the  history  of  that
exquisite statue there. I won’t be but a moment.”
I scowled openly at his term of affection. My parents exchanged that same weary look, and my father
escorted Garrett out of earshot to the most recent addition of statuary, a young woman in flowing robes.
My father moved his hunched figure as if he would rather haul nets out of the bay than tell Garrett of the
life-sized statue I pitched cherrystones at when avoiding my lessons. It’s not nice to have a statue prettier
than oneself.
Garrett  gave me what was  probably  supposed  to  be  an encouraging smile before  he followed my
father, standing so I could see him across the short distance. Thinking he was rather vain, I frowned and
turned away. My mother took my hand and pulled me down into a chair beside her.
“Tess. Sweetheart,” she said, her eyes showing deep lines at the corners.  “I was  expecting to  have
the next few weeks  to  tell you this. I am so  sorry.  Garrett  arriving early has  thrown everything into a
quick coming-about, and now your impatience has complicated things beyond belief.”
“You can’t give King Edmund one  of our  harbors,”  I protested  in a  harsh whisper.  “The man is a
flop! A carp mouthing the top of the water for scraps. What about the Rathkey’s proposal? They must
need something, living way up in the mountains like that.  Metal,  maybe,  or  wool.  I don’t  mind waiting
until their son gets a little older.”
“Tess,  hush,”  my  mother  pleaded.  “This  isn’t  anything  to  do  with  Garrett  or  the  marriage
arrangements.”
My next outburst died. Suddenly I wasn’t so sure I knew what was going on.
“We do love you,” she said, her thin hand looking pale atop my sun-darkened one, “and please don’t
take this the wrong way, but…” She hesitated and took a deep breath. “You aren’t the crown princess.”

Three
What do you mean, I’m not the princess?” I said, almost laughing. That was ridiculous.
My mother’s eyes were sad, and her face drawn. “Dear,” she said, her nervous gaze darting over my
shoulder to the two men. “Not so loud. I know this is awkward—”
“How can I not be the princess?” I exclaimed, pulling away.  Mystified, I glanced  to  my father and
Garrett. It was obvious they had heard me. The prince was red with anger, and my father wore a look of
pained determination.
Garrett  stood  with  his  hand  upon  his  sword  hilt.  “You  dare  play  my  family  as  fools?”  he  said
indignantly. “We  offered  you immeasurable tracts  of land,  and  you give us insult? Using lies  to  null  a
signed agreement is craven. Wars have started for less, sir!”
My father’s face darkened. “We do nothing of the kind. We fully intend to honor our agreement. We
have a crown princess.” He glanced at me with that same tinge of guilt. “She just isn’t Tess, here.”
Confounded, I stared blankly at my father. What, by the three rivers, is going on?
My father turned his back upon Prince  Garrett  and  came  to  the table.  I jumped  as  he cupped  my
chin, meeting my eyes with a sorrowful expression. “I’m sorry, Tess. If it was up to me, I’d  let you be
queen. You’d have made a good one.”
He looked at Garrett standing by the beautiful statue. “Prince Garrett,” he said, his voice carrying a
weary weight. “Allow me  to  explain.  There’s  been  no  breach  of  contract.  I  introduced  Tess  as  my
daughter, nothing more. Any judgments you came to are unfortunate.”
“I am so the princess,” I said,  looking from my mother’s  pinched  face  to  my father.  A bad  feeling
settled over me. No one was laughing.
“No, sweetness,” my mother said. “But you are our daughter. We love you very much. Please don’t
make that face.”
Garrett hadn’t moved. His eyes were fixed on me. I couldn’t tell what he was thinking. “If she’s not
the Red Moon Princess, who is she?” he asked tersely.
My father winced. “Ah—we aren’t entirely sure.”
My eyes widened and I stared, not believing this was happening. “But I’m the princess!”
“It  was  troubled  times,  Tess,  when  your  sister  was  born,”  my  father  said  persuasively.  “The
assassination attempts began the week we found the prophesy  painted  on the wall, and  we  had  to  do
something. There had been a lunar eclipse the fall before your sister was born, and it seemed she was the
royal child of prophesy. We sent Kavenlow to find an infant to confuse the assassins, and after the first
two babies perished, we sent your sister into hiding.”
“I’m a  decoy?” I exclaimed, feeling my  face  warm.  “A  moving  target?”  I  looked  at  them  as  my
disbelief whirled into outrage. “You’re not even my parents?”
“Of course we’re your parents,” my mother protested. “We bought you honestly.”
My breath seemed to freeze, and a wave of nausea swept me. I held my hands to my middle. Why
hadn’t Kavenlow told me? He had known, and never told me. I was  a  foundling? I was  one  of three,
lucky enough to survive a prophesy that wasn’t even mine to bear?
“We assumed the situation would ease, and we could bring her back and raise you together as proper
sisters,” my mother pleaded. “But things only worsened. Even to finding assassins among her suitors. We
thought it prudent to wait until she was safely home before telling you so as to protect your sister while on

the road, but between your impatience and Prince Garrett’s early arrival…” Her hand reached out, and I
drew away, unable to accept her touch.
Garrett was a blur of jerky motion at the edge of my sight as he paced. “Where’s the princess?” He
spun to a stop. “I was promised the Red Moon Princess. Where is she?”
My father stiffened at Garrett’s callousness. “She is safe,” he said  coldly. “The chancellor has  been
sent this very afternoon to fetch her.”
May  heaven  help  me, I thought, going cold.  It  was  true.  And  Kavenlow  had  known  it.  He  had
known and never told me. I felt betrayed, trapped. I wanted to run, but there was nowhere to go. It had
all been a lie: the fancy dress, the privilege, my entire life. I was a beggar’s unwanted child. I was bought
and paid for. And Kavenlow, the only soul I trusted with my hidden wishes, had known it and let me live
the lie, making myself into a fool.
My father stood between Garrett and me. “The joining of Costenopolie and Misdev will take place as
planned  in  six  months,”  he  said  firmly.  “I  apologize  for  your  misunderstanding.  There  has  been  no
intentional deception. You have a bride, Prince Garrett, the same you have been exchanging letters with
this past year.”
I felt I might pass out. I couldn’t seem to get enough air. Who had gotten  the letters  I had  written?
Were the letters I had received in response even real?
Garrett’s pacing came to an abrupt halt beside the pond. “Six months puts me on the wrong side of
the shipping season,” he muttered. “How far away is she?”
I stared, hearing but not understanding.
My mother’s  lips were  pressed  together,  making her look  severe  and  protective.  “That is none of
your concern,” she said coldly. “Our chancellor is bringing her back directly.”
“Who else knows?” Garrett said tightly. “Who knows this harlot is gutter trash?”
My eyes widened, and I gripped the arms of the chair. I was going to pass out. I knew it. My father’s
jaw clenched, and his round cheeks reddened. “Take care, Prince Garrett!”
“Who else?” Garrett exclaimed. “I have a right to know!”
My father was ramrod stiff. “Other than us and the crown princess? The chancellor.”
“No one else?” he insisted, his brow furrowed. “Not even the people caring for her?”
“No,” my mother said. “Chancellor Kavenlow told them nothing. The crown  princess  herself found
out only recently of her true birth so she could properly answer your letters.”
“I’m not the princess,” I whispered as the nightmare forced itself into my reality.
“No, dear.” My mother turned to me.
“I’m not going to marry Prince Garrett?” Somehow I sounded plaintive, as if it meant something. But
there wasn’t much left to my world at the moment, and I was trying to build on what I had. It was  like
making a castle with dry sand. Everything slipped away.
“No.” Her eyes tightened. “And I thank God for that.” Garrett’s breath hissed in, and  he spun.  His
smooth cheeks were spotted with red. My mother’s face was grim with a repressed anger. “You speak
like a snake, Prince Garrett,” she said. “Your pleasantries are to  lull the unsuspecting. You are  far too
eager  to  accelerate  the marriage,  couching it  in  a  false  concern  for  your  bride.  We  will  hold  to  our
agreement of marriage, but I doubt if my body-born daughter will ever share a bed with you.”
Clearly surprised, my father blinked. “Wife?”
“He calls Tess gutter trash,” she said, gesturing angrily at Garrett. “He wants only the glory promised

by the prophesy.”
Garrett gripped the top of his sword, his knuckles white. “She is gutter trash! And you tried to pass
her off as the Red Moon Princess. You wouldn’t dare do that to my brother!”
Hand upon the hilt of his sword, my father stood before the man I almost wed, shaking in a repressed
anger. “It would be best if you retired to your rooms, Prince Garrett. We  will speak  again tomorrow.”
His voice was frighteningly cold.
Garrett’s fierce green eyes were unwavering from my father’s. “As you say,”  he said.  He  turned  to
my mother. “Your Highness.” Spinning on a heel, he strode up the walk to the door, his boots  loud on
the slate.
I sat in shock, blinking at nothing as his steps grew faint and vanished. My mother dropped her head
into her hands and started to silently weep.
I’m not the princess?

Four
The creak of my outer door closing woke me. Eyes open, I stared into the dimness of the predawn
dusk as Heather rustled about, trying to be quiet. A knot of worry loosened about me, and  I stretched
my feet downward to find the hot water bottle. Its warmth was all but gone, telling me as clearly as the
lighter black  outside  my window that it was  almost sunrise.  Too  early for me, but not for wandering,
lustful members of my court.
A smile curled up the corners of my mouth. Heather was always sharp to spot a chance to escape the
palace walls. As long as she didn’t get pregnant, everyone would look the other way, and I enjoyed living
vicariously through her. Reattaching buttons was a small price to pay for hearing how she had spent her
evening. I just hoped she remembered what I had sent her for.
My flicker of anticipation died. I wondered if Heather would still like me after she found out I was a
beggar’s child.
“Heather?” I called, shame deciding for me that I wouldn’t tell her until I had to. “What did you do,
wait while the smith smelted the metal?”
There was a scrape of a foot on the floor inside my room, and I frowned. I could smell horse. That
wasn’t Heather.
Head throbbing with fear, I bolted upright, reaching for the knife under my pillow.
“Nuh-uh,” a masculine voice said, and a thick hand gripped my shoulder in a painful pinch. A gasp of
fear escaped me, and I struggled as the man swore and put a  hand over  my mouth, pinning me to  the
headboard. I froze, leaving my knife hidden when I heard the snick of steel against leather from a second
man entering my room.
“There now, Princess,”  the man holding me said.  “See,  I tolds  you she  was  a  good  girl. She  only
needs to know what’s what.”
The second man grumbled something, his black shadow shifting uneasily from foot to foot. My heart
was pounding, and I was cold. Where were my guards? Why was I alone?
“Now,” the first said, his moist fingers against my face stinking of mutton, “Prince Garrett sent us to
fetch you. I can knock your pretty little head and carry you, or you can walk.”
That was a choice? “Walk,” I mumbled around his hand.
He eyed me in distrust, his grip on my shoulder tightening until I cried out.
“Gent,” the second said, sounding worried. “Don’t bruise her. He won’t like it.”
The fingers on  me  slackened,  and  he  stepped  back.  My  pulse  raced,  and  my  head  throbbed.  I
wanted my knife, but it would be useless against swords. Where are my guards?
My face went slack, and my breath faltered. Garrett had taken the palace. He had enough men with
him to take the palace! God help us… My parents…
The man standing over  me  gestured  with  his  bare  blade,  and  I  scrambled  out  of  bed  before  he
reached for me. Stomach clenched, I drew myself up and forced my arms down from where I wanted to
clutch them about myself in fear and cold. The second man motioned to  the door,  and  I stumbled into
motion. My thoughts were a sickening slurry as I went into my outer  room,  one  guard  before  me, one
behind. It was the first time I had ever felt imprisoned by swords, never having had them drawn against
me instead of for my protection.
My nightdress wasn’t enough to stop the dawn’s chill from soaking into me as I paced the empty halls

in my bare feet, becoming more afraid as I went. Most of the lamps had died, and faint calls and shouts
echoed occasionally. We came into the main receiving room, as large and spacious as the banquet hall.
You could get to anywhere from here, and  I stared  at  a  small archway  beside  the dais.  Please,  no, I
thought. Not the one leading to my parents’ rooms. My shoulders eased as the man before me went to
the large archway leading to the solarium.
It was warmer past the heavy oak doors of the indoor garden, the moisture beading up on the inside
panel. I could smell the night blooming vine my mother loved, mixing with the early roses. The damp air
was a balm against my face. The sound of my father’s voice raised in anger was both a relief and a fear.
“Father,” I whispered, darting round the first guard to reach him.
“Hey! Get her!” someone shouted.
I ran down the path to the glow of torches, jerked to a halt by a rough hand when I turned the corner
of the path and found the fishpond. “Mother!” I cried in fear, struggling to push the hand about my arm
away as the soldier who had caught me apologized to Prince  Garrett.  My mother was  in the grip of a
Misdev guard. Angels save us. There was a knife at her throat.
My attention flicked over the tiled patio. Garrett stood confidently with one foot upon the fishpond’s
retaining wall beside  my game of thieves and  kings. My mother was  before  him, looking small  in  her
nightdress, pride in the set of her lips and the flash of her eyes. Two guards held my father. One  had  a
bruise on his cheek and a cut lip. My father was sweating, straining against their restraint. His fear chilled
me. I’d never seen my father afraid. It was quiet, with only the sound  of water  and  the first twitters  of
caged birds. The sky beyond the glass was gray with the coming dawn. No one would hear us here. No
one would see.
“Well,” Garrett said as he pulled his foot  down  and  straightened  his uniform’s coat.  “Now  we  can
start.”
I said nothing, taking my cue from my parents. They looked vulnerable, pulled from their beds in their
nightclothes with their hair rumpled and their faces bare. They were no longer a king and queen, showing
only their deeper bond of husband and wife. I could see their love and fear for each other. And I knew
Garrett could see it as well.
Garrett turned to my father. “I’m not going to be delicate about this. Tell me where  the Red  Moon
Princess is, or I will cut her throat.”
Shock took my breath away. “No!” I cried. I tried to break free, my knees buckling when the hand
on me squeezed my arm with an unbearable pressure.
“Tess, no,” my mother said, and the calmness of her voice pulled me back from the brink even as the
knife under her ear glinted. “He won’t do it. His father doesn’t want a war with us.”
Garrett blinked one eye at my father with a mocking slowness. “For once we are in agreement. My
father is a coward. He and my brother. They’d quake in their boots if they knew what I was doing.” He
took a step to my father. “Where is the Red Moon Princess?”
My father went desperate. With a guttural groan, he fought to break free. The guards wrestled him to
lie half upon the table, his arms pulled behind his back.
“I’m going to  count  from five,” Garrett  said,  his breath  fast as  he came  to  stand  before  the  table
between my father and my mother.
“You won’t,” my father said, his face pinched as the guards kept him unmoving.
“Five,” Garrett said, his hands on his hips and his back to my mother and me.
Chin against the table, my father sent his gaze over Garrett’s shoulder to my mother. Desperation and
fear showed from him. His breath came fast in indecision.

“Don’t tell him, Stephen,” my mother said, standing unafraid with a Misdev  knife at  her throat.  The
man holding her had wide, frightened eyes. His hands shook.
“Four.” Garrett ignored her, fixed entirely on my father’s fear.
“Don’t tell. He won’t do it.” My mother’s voice was strong.
Garrett stood unmoving. “Three.”
My father’s eyes shot from Garrett’s to my mother’s. “May?” he quavered, and the guards shifted to
keep him down.
“Stephen. It’s a bluff,” she said, still calm.
“Two,” Garrett said, the word short and clipped.
“May?” It was frantic with indecision.
“No, Stephen!”
“One.”
The word was as devoid of emotion as the ones before. It settled heavy upon my ears. Garrett flicked
his eyes to the guards and nodded.
I stood frozen as the Misdev guard ran his knife across my mother’s neck with a silken sound.  Her
eyes widened. Red flowed, drenching her shoulder and side.
“Mother!” I shrieked, jerking into motion. Using nails and feet, I squirmed and twisted. I could hear
my father’s shouts, and Garrett’s angry demand to hold him. The guard restraining me went to help them,
and I ran to her, crumpled where the guard had dropped her.
“Mother!” I cried, falling to pull her head onto my lap. Her eyes were open, glazed.
“Tess,” she whispered, her eyes unseeing. “Don’t think—we didn’t love you.”
“Mother? Mother!” I looked down. There was so much blood between my fingers. I couldn’t stop it.
I couldn’t stop it!
The tension eased from her, and she went slack. I looked up in delirium. My father was under a pile
of guards. I could  hear  him angrily sobbing  my mother’s  name over  and  over.  Garrett  stood  over  us.
“This can’t be real,” I whispered. “This can’t be happening.”
Garrett’s attention flicked down to me. He reached out, and before I knew  what he was  doing, he
yanked  me  up  from  my  mother.  She  slumped  gracefully  as  if  sleeping,  her  blood  staining  the  moss
between the flagstones. The white of my nightdress was crimson and warm. Garrett pushed me into the
grip of one of his guards. “Her turn,” he said softly.
“May,” my father wept as the men pulled him to his feet. “May. You took my May.”
Garrett strode forward and slapped my father smartly across the face. “And I’ll take your gutter trull
next if you don’t tell me where the Red Moon Princess is.”
A guard held me. Terrified, I looked at my father. His grief shone from him, beaten and overpowered.
He slumped as the hands holding me tightened. “No,” I whispered plaintively, too shocked to do more.
My mother was dead. She had been alive, and now she was dead. The grief and loss in my father’s eyes
when he raised them to mine was like a blow to my middle. I struggled to find enough air.
I tried not to,  but I cried  out when the guard  holding me put the knife, still red  from my mother’s
throat, against mine. He stank of sweat and fear, and the knife trembled against me.
Garrett’s smile broadened as my father hung unresisting. “She’s at  the nunnery on Bird Island,”  my
father said, his voice cracking. “Damn you to hell. She’s in the mountains on a peak called Bird Island.

Leave Tess alone. Please… don’t hurt my daughter.”
Garrett leaned close, smug and confident. “Are you sure?”
“Yes!” my father shouted, beaten. “Yes. She’s there. I swear it. Oh God, you took my May. She’s
gone.” His head bowed to hide his eyes, and he slumped.
Garrett made a satisfied noise and motioned the guard to take the knife from me.
I took a shuddering gasp of air. My father pulled his eyes up. They met mine from under his mussed
hair falling about his face. My only warning was the tightening of his jaw.
Crying in rage, my father struck at the guards. I broke free of the grip on me at my father’s triumphant
shout as he took another’s sword and drove it deep into its previous owner.
“Run, Tess!” he shouted, magnificent as he fought the Misdev guards in his nightclothes. The softness
I’d always seen was  gone.  He  swung and  parried,  swirled and  danced  in a  pattern  of movement and
sound given purpose and grace by the grief in his heart. His shouts were thundering vengeance, his blows
carried the might of desperation of a loss never to be paid. He stood over his fallen love and fought as if
mad, thinking only to assuage the pain in him. Three Misdev guards fell before him, and Garrett’s brow
furrowed.
“Father!” I shouted as a soldier he thought downed ran my father through from the back.
My father faltered. Horrified, I watched the second remaining soldier swing his sword in a smooth arc
to land like an ax upon my father’s  neck.  His breath  escaping  in a  pained  sound,  my  father  reached
upward.  Blood  flowed  past  his  fingers.  Face  confused,  he  slumped  from  the  table  to  the  floor.  His
outstretched hand touched my mother, and he went still.
“No!” Garrett shouted, his beautiful face ugly with frustration. “You killed him! I needed him alive!”
“He attacked me, Prince Garrett,” the man whined. “He killed Terrace.”
“You bloody fool!” Garrett shouted, cuffing him with enough strength to send the man staggering. “He
had to verify the true princess’s birth!”
The man scrabbled backward, standing white-faced and shaking. The guard holding me tightened his
grip.  Heart  pounding,  I  heard  the  distant  sound  of  the  door  opening  and  feet  on  the  path.  Garrett
scowled. Pulling me away from the guard holding me, he said, “Kill him.”
The man who had murdered my father froze. His mouth opened and shut.
“Sorry, Kent,” the soldier said, pulling his blade. “Better you than me.”
Kent didn’t even try to run. Falling to  his knees,  he whispered  a  prayer,  his eyes  fluttering closed,
unable to watch.
I turned  away,  finding my head  resting against Garrett’s  chest.  I tried  to  shove  him  away,  but  he
pulled me close. His breath caught as the sound of a sword meeting bone thunked through me. My eyes
closed, and I thought I was going to vomit.
“His death is your fault,” Garrett  whispered,  his breath  moving my hair. “The last one  there?  He’s
dead, too. I can’t use the real princess now. Who would believe me? Everyone who knows who you are
is going to die. Congratulations. You’re royalty again.”
Horrified, I tried to break free. He held me tight, his strength far beyond mine. Sobbing, I stomped on
his foot, and when his hand got too close, I bit it.
“Slattern!” Garrett exclaimed, shoving me at the remaining sentry.
I  landed  hard,  crying  out  as  the  man  brutally  squeezed  my  arms.  “Damn  you,  Garrett,”  I  spat.
Garrett’s face showed a dark anger as he inspected his palm. It was his sword hand, and I had  drawn

blood. “I’ll see more of your blood before I’m dead. I promise you!” The words raged from me, hot in
vehemence. I couldn’t look at my parents; I would collapse from the truth.
Garrett stepped close. Green eyes placid, he drew his arm back and swung the flat of his hand at me.
His palm met my cheek with an explosion of hurt so unexpected I almost didn’t recognize it as  pain.  I
reeled and would have fallen had the last guard not been holding me.
“Keep her quiet,” Garrett muttered as two guards came around the corner. Cheek burning, I gazed
numbly at them, trying to make sense of it all. I couldn’t.
The oldest  paused  as  he took  in the carnage,  going ashen  behind his  salt-and-pepper  beard.  The
other gave it only a brief glance.  He  was  the only Misdev  guard  I’d  seen  who looked  the part,  being
neither too old nor too young.
Taking off his overdone  hat with long drooping  black  feathers,  he stood  beside  the  prince  with  a
comfortable  ease.  He  wore  a  black  sash  about  his narrow  waist that  the  other  guards  lacked,  and  I
guessed he was the captain of Garrett’s guards. He stood a good head taller than the prince, strong and
broad of shoulders, in the prime of life.
“You said you weren’t  going to  kill them,” the captain  said.  His eyes  lingered on me. I alone was
unhurt in the room,  the blood  on my nightdress and  hands  clearly not mine. My eyes  widened  at  the
man’s audacity.
“It was your men who did it,” Garrett said tightly. “And I don’t need a king or queen, only a marriage.
We have the outer garrisons. In sixteen days, the rest of my men will be here, and we will have the town
and harbor. Until then, we will hold the palace and continue as if nothing has happened. Do you think you
can manage that—Captain Jeck?”
My eyes widened in understanding. Garrett was going to  pass  me off as  the real  princess.  He  was
going to… He was going to kill Kavenlow!
Garrett flicked his fair hair from his eyes and frowned at the blood on his uniform’s coat. “Have your
men managed  to  find the last of the guards?”  he asked  as  he took  it off. Sweat  stained  his  silk  shirt
underneath.
“Yes, Prince Garrett.” It was a tight admission, and I could hear Jeck’s frustration for having to take
such abuse from someone so young.
Garrett’s smile made a mockery of his handsome face. “Good. Something done right. Lock them in
their own cells. They will be oarsmen when we need them.”
I stood in shock. My betrothal plans had been nothing but a ruse. Garrett glanced at me and rubbed
his bitten hand. “Has her room been searched?”
Jeck nodded. A part of me noticed his boots were as well-made as Garrett’s, but heavier.
“Put her there,” Garrett said. “And keep someone outside her door. I don’t  care  if it’s the Second
Coming, there will be a guard on her. Is that clear, Captain?”
“Yes, Prince Garrett.” Jeck’s tone was heavy with repressed anger. “And the bodies?”
Garrett had moved to the game board, his breathing slowing as he took in the shifting of the pieces
that had  occurred.  My father’s  careful plans to  snag me had  been  destroyed,  knocked  askew  in  the
slaughter. “Bury them in the gardens,” he said as he tipped a piece upright onto the wrong square. “All of
them.”
My stomach twisted. Buried without markers, without rites.
“And,  Jeck,”  Garrett  said  idly.  “Have  someone  run  down  their  chancellor.  He’s  headed  for  a
mountain peak called Bird Island.” The prince nudged a pawn on the dividing line to sit dead center on a

black square. “When he joins up with a  woman with straight,  fair hair, I want them, and  anyone with
them, killed.”
“Yes, Prince Garrett.”
My pulse quickened. I had known it, but to hear it said aloud made it terrifyingly real.
Garrett shifted to the opposite side of the board and reached for a black piece. “Knight takes pawn,”
he said, eying me as he removed the piece and set it aside.
“You’re wharf slime,” I said, knowing I would stay alive only as long as he needed me. “You’re the
muck we scrape from the bottom of our boats and throw into the chu pits. Starving wolves wouldn’t eat
you. Your insides will be drawn out through your nose. You—”
Taking three  steps,  Garrett  closed  the gap  between  us.  My eyes  widened,  and  I gasped  when he
pulled his sword. Panicking, I twisted to escape. The guard’s grip on me jerked and went slack. I broke
free and ran for the unseen door.
“Catch her!” I heard.
I fell, my feet pulled out from under me. Scrabbling violently, I twisted. The heel of my palm struck
something. There was a pained grunt, and I was yanked to my feet. It was Jeck, the captain of the guard.
The man held me up off the floor. My pulse hammered, and I froze as his grip bit painfully into my arms.
This one would give me twice the hurt if I struggled.
There was  a  wet  cough  from  the  floor.  My  gaze  darted  from  Jeck’s  eyes  to  the  tiles.  I  took  a
frightened breath, unable to look away. The guard had dropped me because Garrett had run him through.
The young sentry writhed on the floor, his blood washing the slate tiles as he struggled to rise with little
gurgles, finally falling still.
“He was the best man I had!” Jeck exclaimed in frustrated anger. “Why?”
“I don’t have to explain myself to you.” A bright flush hid Garrett’s freckles. “Get her to her room.”
Jeck held me as Garrett wiped his sword clean and sheathed it. The Misdev prince walked past me
without a glance, a frown twisting his youthful face into an ugly mask.
“Let me go!” I demanded  when Jeck  pulled me down  the path  in Garrett’s  footsteps.  My  fingers
pried at his grip as Jeck pushed me stumbling through the door and into the hallway. It  was  quiet,  with
only one Misdev soldier standing guard. There was a soft shuffle as the old guard  followed us out and
closed the door to the solarium.
Garrett was disappearing around a corner, flanked by two of his own. I twisted, stomping on Jeck’s
foot. He grunted, his grip tightening on my arm. I went still. As his fingers loosened, I jammed my elbow
into his gut, and  his breath  whooshed  out.  “Hold her,”  Jeck  gasped,  and  the  old  guard  grabbed  my
shoulders.
“Squirmy little thing, isn’t she?” he said, then yelped when I lunged at him, only to  be  yanked  back
before I could reach his eyes. The third man laughed until Jeck barked at him to be silent.
As I fought to get free, Jeck wrenched my arms behind my back and bound my wrists with the black
scarf he took from his waist. “Let me go!” I demanded, the pain from my shoulders making tears  start.
My hands were sticky from my mother’s blood. It felt awful.
“Hold still,” Jeck muttered, jerking me roughly around and flinging me over his shoulder.
Outraged, I kicked my bare feet at nothing. Jeck gave a little hop, resettling me as if I was a sack of
salted fish. His shoulder cut into me, and I struggled for air. “Get the room cleaned,”  Jeck  said  tersely.
“Bury the bodies in the garden.  Make  it deep  enough so  the dogs  don’t  dig them up.  I’ve  got her all
right.”

“I said, let me—go,” I wheezed, feeling my face redden as Jeck started down the hallway. “Put me
down. You’re a coward. A lackey for a spineless, gutless excuse of a man. Garrett is seaweed caught on
my boat’s keel. He’ll kill you as quick as that soldier. He’s a cur. A—”
Jeck turned the corner and shifted me from his shoulder  to  the floor.  I made  a  tiny shriek  as  I slid
from him, struggling to keep from falling while I found my balance. The hallway was empty, and I pressed
against the wall in fear as Jeck stood before me. His arms were as strong and muscled as if he pulled nets
all his life. His brown eyes were cold, and his jaw clenched under his closely cropped beard. He smelled
like horse, and my mother’s blood on my nightdress stained his shoulder. “Why did he kill my man?” he
asked in a whisper.
“W-what?” I stammered, my fear faltering in surprise. He reached out, and a gasp slipped from me as
he pinned me against the wall. The stones were cold on my back.
“Why did Prince Garrett kill my best swordsman?” he asked again.
My chin trembled. I wasn’t the princess. If that became common knowledge, Garrett would kill me
and use the real princess despite the problems of ill confidence it might instill.
Jeck saw my fear, and he jerked me up to push me back into the wall again. I bit my lip, refusing to
cry out again as the stone hurt my shoulder. The man looked only a few years older than I was. He must
be brutal to have gained captain so quickly.
“Tell me, Princess,”  he whispered,  glancing down  the empty  hall.  “King  Edmund’s  second  son  is
reckless.  Ambitious, but reckless.  I want to  get out  of  this  alive.  If  I  like  what  I  hear…  I’ll  let  you
escape.”
Hope warred with common sense. Hope won. “Prince Garrett killed him because he knew I wasn’t
the crown princess,” I stammered.
Jeck’s face went still. I felt three pounding heartbeats, and then he breathed, “The real one is on the
road from Bird Island. The devil takes my soul. Who else knows?” I said nothing, and he shook me until
my head snapped back. “Who else?” he demanded.
“The chancellor and  the real  princess,”  I  blurted,  frightened.  I  waited,  hope  making  me  hold  my
breath. He shook his head at my unspoken question. Despair took  me. He  wasn’t  going to  let me go.
“No! Please!” I begged as he bent, grasping me about the waist and flinging me over his shoulder again.
I cried and cursed, filling his ear with the foulest language I had overheard on the docks. He ignored
me, not even puffing is he climbed the two flights of stairs to my apartments. There were two unfamiliar
guards outside my room, and one held the door open. Jeck flung me onto the floor of my sitting room. I
cried out as I hit the rug. The door slammed shut. Sobbing, I twisted and squirmed until I got my bloody,
sticky hands free.
“Coward!” I shouted, flinging an empty pitcher at the door before  I even rose.  It  shattered  into six
pieces. Running to the door, I locked it from the inside. I spun, looking over  the empty room  that  was
now my prison. There was nothing in it to help me. Giving up, I flung myself onto the couch and cried.
He had killed those I had called my parents. He was going to kill Kavenlow. And I was helpless to
do anything about it.

Five
Standing before my vanity mirror In my outer room, I tugged my skirt down over my narrow hips to
try to make the hem meet the floor. The gray dress I had on was too short, but it and my red underskirt
were the only things I could  put on without Heather’s  help.  My eyes  closed  at  the reminder of her.  I
hoped  she  was  safe  with her young man  beyond  the  walls.  The  front  gates  weren’t  visible  from  my
window, but what I could see of the grounds looked normal, as did the streets. It seemed as  if no one
was even aware the palace had been taken over.
Slumping, I sat on the chair before the mirror with my elbows  on the vanity—waiting. The night air
pooled in my room, making goose bumps. I didn’t care. Pulling my gaze up, I found my eyes red-rimmed
and miserable-looking in the light from the fire. My stomach growled, and I turned away, angry that my
body went on while my soul had died. Earlier today, I’d thrown the meal the Misdev guard brought me
out the window lest it be poisoned. In hindsight, I probably could  have chanced  it. Garrett  needed  me
alive until he was sure Kavenlow wouldn’t be showing up with the real princess.
“Kavenlow,” I whispered harshly, feelings of betrayal making my shoulders  tense.  He  had  known  I
was a foundling and never told me. The chancellor had been more available than my parents, in essence
raising me as he filled my days with diversions when no one  else  had  the time. And  his  devotion  had
been a lie, I thought bitterly. I had trusted him, loved him as a second father. I couldn’t be angry with my
parents. They were dead. The blood pounded in my head  as  I held my breath.  I wouldn’t cry.  It  had
taken me all afternoon to stop the first time.
Hand shaking, I  reached  for  my  brush.  My  day  spent  wallowing  in  self-pity  had  left  my  cheeks
blotchy and my hair a tangled mat. I welcomed the sporadic jabs of pain as I yanked the brush through
my curls. It reminded me I could feel something other than grief and betrayal.
My reflection gray from the dusk, I began methodically arranging my hair. It seemed likely I would be
dining with Garrett; I had a few extra preparations. Sniffing in a very unladylike manner, I piled my curls
atop my head, binding the topknot together with a black ribbon. I wished I had a black dress to match it.
Gingerly letting the arrangement go, I pulled my hairpin cushion close and plucked one of my decorative
darts from it. I glanced at my door before I touched the flat of it to my tongue. Immediately it went numb.
Satisfied the venom was still potent, I tucked the needle into my topknot.
I had never defended myself with my darts before, but I knew firsthand what the venom did to  me.
Kavenlow had spent the last seven years conditioning me to it until I hardly noticed when I accidentally
pricked myself. The convulsions and nausea had been frightening and painful until I passed  out,  leaving
me ill and weak for days until my body developed the ability to throw the poison off quickly. Even now
my left  leg  turned  sluggish  when  I  was  tired.  I  had  risked  death  every  time.  More  proof  I  was  an
expendable pawn even to Kavenlow, bought to  keep  the real  princess  safe.  Angels save  me, I was  a
fool.
I continued arranging my hair, finding only four needles from yesterday were still good. The last had
chipped and gone dry. I threw it into my sitting room fire, nudging the remnants of my nightgown stained
with my mother’s blood into the flames. I had tried to wash, but with only a small pitcher of water, I still
had a tacky residue on my hands and legs. I refused to look at my trembling fingers, knowing ugly black
stains still lingered in the cracks of my skin.
Jaw gritted to seal away my grief, I closed my empty jewelry box.  Garrett’s  guards  had  looted  my
room,  finding  not  only  my  jewelry  but  also  my  bullwhip,  the  knife  under  my  pillow,  the  handful  of
unadorned darts I used for practice, and the rope I used to sneak out my window when the moon was
full and I wanted to walk in the garden.
I stood before the fire and fingered my dart pipe, wondering if it might be  recognized  as  a  weapon

and lead to my hairpins being confiscated as well. Unwilling to chance it, I snapped the wooden tube in
half and threw it into the fire. I’d have to get close enough to scratch Garrett. I didn’t think it would be a
problem. I was sure he would be here soon—gloating.
An unexpected pain prompted me to close my eyes. They weren’t my real parents, I told  myself.
They used me, bought me in the village like a  horse  or  dog.  But even as  I thought it, I knew  whether
bought or born, I had been their child. And they had loved me.
My throat closed in on itself, and I forced myself to breathe. Garrett had killed them. Tonight, I would
return the favor, sending Garrett’s body back to his father with my regrets, blaming it upon the assassins
who plagued us. Kavenlow might suspect what had really happened, but I didn’t care. The tears pricked,
seducing a headache into existence as I refused to cry. I had thought Kavenlow loved me. It was all a lie.
Everything.
My threatened tears vanished at the sound of a key in my lock. I spun, frightened, as Jeck strode in
unannounced. Past him in the torchlit hallway were two sentries. He tucked the key into an inner pocket.
“Your Highness,” the imposing, square-shouldered man drawled, and my heart pounded.
“Knock before you come into my rooms,” I demanded as I wiped the back of my hand across  my
eyes. “I may be a prisoner in my own palace, but I’m still the princess.” I took a false strength in that he
would have to treat me as such even though he knew the truth.
“My mistake,” he said and smiled. It looked like an honest reaction, and I wasn’t sure what to make
of it. His gaudy hat with the excessive  drooping  feathers  was  missing, and  I thought he looked  better
without it. “Prince Garrett has requested your presence for dinner,” he continued, standing with his hands
behind his back  at  parade  rest.  “I’ll  carry  you  if  you  refuse.  You  may  want  to  walk,  though.  He’s
undoubtedly going to  propose,  and  you’ll want to  look  your best.”  He  hesitated,  his brow  furrowing.
“Don’t you have anything nicer than that to wear?” he asked.
My mouth dropped open—part anger, part embarrassment. “Perhaps if the Misdev dog gave me my
court, I could manage a decent appearance,” I said stiffly. “Tell him if he wants a proper princess, he will
have to  supply me with the trappings.  He  should check  with his guards  first, seeing as  they  stole  my
jewelry.”
A smile quirked the corners of Jeck’s mouth, then was gone. “Prince Garrett has your baubles,”  he
said. “Tell him yourself.”
He  reached  for  my  shoulder,  and  I  jerked  back.  Annoyed,  he  reached  out  again,  gripping  my
shoulder with a painful strength through his soft leather gloves. My affront that he dared touch me warred
with common sense, and I did nothing as he turned so the guards in the hallway couldn’t see his face. “I
also found a knife under your pillow, darts, a whip, and enough rope to tie down a bull,” he murmured, a
blatant question in his soft voice and brown eyes. They were  the color  of earth  in the candlelight, with
flecks of gold.  “It’s  unusual for a  princess  to  know  the art  of defense,”  he breathed,  sending a  loose
strand of my hair to tickle my neck.
“But I’m not a princess, now, am I?” I whispered, my heart pounding as I shrugged out of his grip.
“So I’ve been told.” A wary tone had darkened his voice, and he rested his hand upon the butt of his
sword as he gave me a visual once-over. “Out,” he demanded.
I draped the same black scarf that he had used to tie my hands with earlier over my shoulders like a
shawl of grief, blew out my candle, and went before him. The way was darker than usual, with only every
other lamp lit. We passed no one as Jeck and two sentries escorted me through the silent passages, and
it felt cold. I walked beside Jeck, wondering why he asked the two sentries to slow when it was obvious
I was having trouble keeping to their pace. He knew I wasn’t the princess. Why did he bother with any
kindness?

I was getting the distinct impression that Jeck didn’t care if Garrett succeeded in his plans to take my
mother’s lands or not. It seemed as if Jeck was waiting, riding the waves until he knew  which way the
wind was going to shift. Waiting for Garrett to make a mistake?
My mind whirled as we passed from the corridor into the formal banquet hall. It echoed with a high
blackness, but a warm yellow light spilled into the spacious room from the small dining room between it
and the kitchen. Jeck took my elbow, his grip tightening when I tried to pull away. “Stop touching me,” I
demanded, and my face burned when he outright ignored me.
We entered to find the room empty but for the long table. There were only two chairs—one at either
end instead of the usual three clustered  in the middle—and  a  wave  of grief almost buckled  my knees.
With more grace than I would’ve credited him, Jeck guided me to a chair and  made  me sit before  the
elaborate place setting. I was too upset to be amused that I didn’t have a table knife. And sitting with my
back to the archway to the kitchen instead of the hearth made me uneasy.
“I’ll stay,” Jeck said to the guards who had accompanied us. He shifted a step away from me and fell
into a parade rest. “I want Olen as Prince Garrett’s escort, then you’re relieved.”
The two sentries left the way we had come. Looking over the familiar room, a pang of heartsickness
settled heavy in my middle. This was where I had eaten most of my meals with my parents.  The room
had no windows but was bright with oil lamps. Sitting between the kitchen and the large banquet hall, it
served as a staging area for food on the occasions  we  had  a  large function. There  was  a  fireplace  we
used  in the winter. Right now the ugly black  hole of the empty hearth  was  hidden behind  one  of  the
ceiling-to-floor tapestries that softened the room.
Jeck stood with a relaxed tautness, his well-honed body held still while thoughts unknown occupied
him. I watched his square jaw alternately tense and relax, and I wondered if he would leave when Garrett
came so I could kill the Misdev  cur with no interference.  “Are you the captain  of Garrett’s  guard?”  I
asked suddenly.
Jeck shifted, seeming surprised that I had broken my silence. “I act in that position.”
“What else do you do?” I persisted, hearing the lack of completeness in his words.
“Keep him alive when he does something foolish,” he muttered.
Nodding, I shifted my empty wineglass to the proper side of my plate. He was charged with Garrett’s
safety just as Kavenlow had been charged with mine. Garrett had said he was acting without the blessing
of his father. Perhaps Jeck might be open to working against Garrett’s interests in order to maintain his
king’s? Starting a war with your neighbor is not undertaken lightly, and embarrassing if your son does it
without your knowledge.
“Jeck,” I said, hesitating as I fumbled for the proper  term of respect.  “Captain,”  I added.  “I don’t
have the luxury of time to be delicate. Are you King Edmund’s man, or his son’s?”
There was a creak of leather as he looked at me, then away. “You are a nosy woman.”
My  boot  tapped  silently  under  my  skirt.  “I  won’t  sit  idly  by  and  let  Costenopolie  fall  to  Prince
Garrett,” I said as I turned the plate so the pattern was right side up.
Jeck made a puff of amusement. “Prince Garrett’s chances of success  are  excellent. And you have
overestimated your reach, Princess. I’m charged by my king to protect his son. I’ll kill you before  I let
you harm him.”
It wasn’t a boast—it was a simple statement—but I was too drained to be afraid. My eyes  rose  at
the soft cadence of boots in the banquet hall. Garrett entered, accompanied by the old sentry  from this
afternoon.  Three  men,  I  thought  as  the  older  man  took  up  a  position  behind  Garrett.  I  had  four
needles—two of which would be needed to kill Garrett. The odds were not slanted enough in my favor.

I was shocked to find myself thinking Garrett looked all the more  handsome.  He  entered  the room
with a poise and confidence that hid the ugliness of his true nature. His fair hair had been slicked  back,
and his jawline was firm. Moving with a predatory grace, his every motion screamed of his comfortable
expectation of supremacy. But then I noticed  his riding boots  gave him more  height than he deserved.
And when he met my eyes with a cold distaste, my impression of him reversed from a powerful man to a
spoiled child.
Garrett’s brow rose mockingly as he took in my subdued attire and black shawl. He had changed into
a more decorative uniform. Gold glittered from his sleeves and collar, and I wondered  if they were  my
father’s adornments. Yes, my father, I thought as grief pulled my eyes down. My entire life was a lie, but
they had been my parents, and I would have my justice.
“Princess Contessa,” Garrett said with no emotion. He went to the far seat, not bothering to take my
hand in greeting as I deserved and so denied me the pleasure of kicking his shin. “How gracious of you to
join me for dinner,” he added as he shook out his napkin and sat.
I let mine lay where it was. I had no intention of eating, starving though I was.
“Olen, tell the cook we’re ready,” Garrett prompted irately, as if his sentry should know the niceties
of polite dining as well as how to split an opponent with three strokes. My pulse hammered as  the old
guard went into the kitchen passage behind me. Two men; four darts. Olen would be back. I had to get
Garrett alone. My foot under my dress jiggled nervously.
“Silent?” Garrett said, and my eyes flicked to his. “Good,” he said as he poured a glass of wine for
himself. “Stay that way.”
I stilled my foot. “You are a cur,” I said softly, knowing my words  would carry  in the small room.
“I’m going to send you home in a box. There will be holes for flies. By the time you get to your father, he
will see as clearly as I the maggots that infest you.”
Garrett  sipped  his drink,  his amused  gaze going  from  mine  to  Jeck’s.  The  captain  shifted  himself
closer to me. His leather-gloved hand rested upon his sword hilt.
“I like you better silent,” Garrett said.
“Your father will thank me,” I predicted. “He sent you to marry into my family’s blood, not destroy it.
He won’t like you altering his plans.” Garrett’s pale face colored, and I guessed I had found a sore spot.
“Second sons are always a problem,” I added, and he clenched his jaw. There was a scuff behind me,
and I stiffened as Olen returned.
“It will be a few moments, Prince Garrett,” the guard said as he took up his spot again.
“Good.” Garrett’s once-beautiful green eyes were ugly, and his smooth cheeks were red with anger.
“I’ve something for you.” He rose from his chair and set his napkin aside. My stomach  tightened as  he
approached,  and  my  fingers  trembled  at  the  chance  to  dart  him.  My  eyes  flicked  to  leek.  He  was
watching closely, and I forced my breathing to slow.
Garrett took a handful of green, purple, and silver from his pocket. I recognized the familiar sound of
sliding stones and metal as jewelry. I held deathly still as Garrett went behind me. I stifled a shudder as
my scarf slid from me like water to  make  a  black  puddle  upon  the floor.  He  draped  a  necklace  in its
place. Green and purple stones so dark as to be almost black decorated it, making an obscene show of
privilege. It was extravagant and heavy with wealth.  My proposal  gift. “That’s for you,” he said  as  he
stepped away. “Now we can wed.”
“Why a wedding?” I said, refusing to look at it. “You have what you want.”
“By force,”  he admitted  as  he resettled  himself in his chair.  His elbows  went on the table,  and  he
leaned forward,  looking entirely reasonable  and  pleasant.  “I want it legally, as  well. I  won’t  leave  an

opening for my father to take my kingdom to add to his own. I will prove to him that I’m more worthy
than my brother. Once the rest of my men get here,  I will secure  your ships and  harbors.  You will be
coronated shortly after that, followed by our marriage.”
“Then my death?” I said caustically, though I was shaking inside.
His face was sickeningly indifferent. “That’s up to you.”
“My parents are dead,” I said, making my words harsh so I would feel nothing. “Do you think no one
will notice?”
“Oh, I expect them to.” He picked up his table knife and idly balanced it upon the tip of a finger. “I
have their crowns, and that is what makes a sovereign.” He smiled. “That and one’s birth. But you know
all about that, don’t you? The survivors are the ones who write the history books. What does it matter to
the common man who sits on the throne?” He set the knife down. “No one will care, Princess, as long as
the goods keep moving.”
Disgusted, I undid the necklace’s clasp and threw the jewelry across the room. It hit the floor in a pile
of glittering stone and metal. The old sentry behind Garrett shifted. Jeck never moved, quietly watching.
Thin lips tight, Garrett rose to retrieve it. “How long you live after we consummate our marriage is up to
you. There will be no children. You won’t be allowed to carry them to term.”
He paced the length of the table to me, his anger hidden but for the sharpness of his steps. Jeck was
poised as Garrett replaced the necklace. I kept my hands in my lap with a white-knuckled strength. I’d
never dart all of them. I had to get Garrett to make them leave.
“If you are  troublesome  I’ll feed  you  to  your  dogs,”  Garrett  whispered  in  my  ear  from  over  my
shoulder. “Be agreeable, and I’ll simply treat you like one.”
My breath came and went. Anger, I thought, my hands beginning to sweat in their tight grip. Garrett
was reckless  when he was  angry. If I could  make  him angry, he would want  to  remind  me  I  was  a
guttersnipe. He couldn’t do that properly unless the sentries left, especially his more valuable captain.
The beginnings of an idea set my heart to hammer. I waited until he sat down and took up his wine
before I yanked the necklace off, snapping through the clasp. It reached the wall this time. There was a
crack of a jewel breaking.
Garrett’s face reddened. “Gutter trull,” he snarled, standing so quickly his chair scraped  against the
stone floor. “You broke it!”
“Princess,” I insisted, making the word as imperialistic as I could. “Put that on me again, and I’ll toss
it into the harbor’s chu pits the first chance I get.”
“It would suit you better then, wouldn’t it,” he said, his perfect hair shifting out of place.
“Look  at  you,” I mocked.  “Coming  to  the  table  smelling  of  horse  and  with  dust  on  your  boots.
You’re nothing but an unwanted extra son to be sold for your father’s gain.”
“Shut your mouth!” he cried, his refined voice harsh.
“Don’t speak to me in that tone,” I demanded. “I am Your Highness or Princess.”
Garrett crossed the room in tight strides. “You two, get out,” he said to the guards, but his eyes were
on me. His fingers were trembling, and his freckles were lost behind his red face.
My pulse raced, and I worked to keep victory from my eyes. “Second son,” I goaded.  “Worthless
but for what a woman can give him.”
“Leave us,” Garrett said through gritted teeth.  “I have a  few words  of love I wish to  speak  to  my
bride, and I am—shy.”

Olen edged to  the door,  but Jeck  stood  firm. Garrett  took  his murderous  eyes  from mine. “I said
leave!” he demanded.
“Prince Garrett, I’m against this. She is—”
“A woman!” Garrett said, spitting the words. “Get out.”
“This is a mistake—”
Garrett stiffened. “Get—out,” he repeated. “Don’t contradict me again.”
A muscle near Jeck’s eye twitched. I stiffened as he moved, not to the door, but to me.
“What are you doing?” Garrett exclaimed as Jeck took a cord from his pocket and began binding my
unresisting hands in my lap.
“Securing her before I go, Prince  Garrett.”  His words  were  clipped  and  seethed  with frustration.  I
could smell his sweat of repressed anger as his one hand gripped both my wrists.
“Get out!” Garrett shouted, cuffing the larger man. His raised voice brought a Misdev guard from the
kitchen, looking awkward  wearing an apron  in his new role  of cook.  “I don’t  need  a  woman tied  up
before me. Get out before you’re whipped!”
I shivered, though the anger in Jeck’s eyes wasn’t directed at me. The cord slipped from my wrists
and disappeared  into Jeck’s  pocket.  The guard  from the kitchen eased  back  into hiding, and  the  old
sentry stood uncomfortably by the archway to the banquet hall.
“Prince Garrett,” Jeck said flatly, “my apologies.” He turned on his heel and left with Olen going first.
I didn’t watch him leave. I couldn’t. If Jeck recognized the victory in my eyes, I knew he would risk a
whipping and stay. The sound of Jeck’s thick boots was loud in the banquet hall, and I swore I heard the
painful thump of something, or someone, hitting the wall.
“His father was a farmer,” Garrett said scornfully. “The breeding always shows.”
“Oh,” I said lightly. “Your mother ran on all fours, did she?”
Garrett lunged, grabbing my arm and pinching it painfully. “You may want to shift your grip higher,” I
taunted,  ignoring the hurt. “Most  of my dresses  show  my arm there.  It  would be  a  shame to  leave  a
bruise for everyone to see.”
“Beggar’s get!” he said, yanking me out of my chair, and forcing my back onto the table. “You’re my
play-pretty,” the prince said, his beautiful face ugly. “Nothing more. Irritate me, and I’ll hurt you. Even a
queen is alone from time to time, and you will be alone more than most, stupid woman.”
My eyes narrowed, my arm a flaming agony where he was gripping it. “Are you through?” I said, and
his green eyes became choleric. He yanked me up. I reached for a needle. I jammed it into his chest.
Garrett stumbled back, releasing me. “Slattern!” he cried, plucking out the dart and throwing it to the
floor. “I’ll beat you myself for that!”
I scrambled sideways along the table as he grabbed for me. But his stance wavered. Face ashen, his
hesitated. He met my expectant expression in horror, realizing the needle was more than decoration. His
mouth  opened,  and  he  clutched  at  his  chest.  He  made  a  strangled  moan.  I  watched,  shocked  and
horrified at how fast he crumpled to the floor.
Heart pounding, my gaze darted from one empty archway to the other. How much time? I thought as
I knelt by the convulsing prince.  “You’re  a  Misdev  dog,”  I  whispered,  knowing  from  experience  he
would remember everything until he passed out. “You’re foolish and ambitious, and your father will thank
me for ridding him of such a dangerous combination.”
“N-n-n-n-n,”  Garrett  stammered,  his eyes  rolling back  and  his  limbs  jerking.  Foam  caught  at  the

corners of his mouth. He was terrified, and rightly so. Not knowing if you would be able to stop jerking
long enough to take a clean breath was enough to make one insane. I wiped the sweat of remembered
fear from my hands, glad when he passed out, his limbs going slack and still.
“Cur,” I muttered, feeling ill as I rolled him over so I could  see  his shoulder.  Pulling another  needle
from my topknot, I lifted his collar. I’d take his life as easily as a rabbit’s.
“Prince Garrett,” came Jeck’s voice from the banquet hall. There was the sound of boots.
I took a panicked breath. Jeck crashed into me, knocking me from Garrett. The scent of horse filled
my senses. I jammed the dart into Jeck where his jerkin parted to show skin.
“Damn,” I heard him pant, but his grip tightened instead of falling from me as expected. He pinned me
to the floor. My arm was still free, and I scrambled for another dart. Why wasn’t he going down!?
Panicking, I scratched his neck with the new dart to leave a trail of blood. His fingers went slack. My
breath whooshed out as his deadweight fell upon me. His breath came in a quick heave. I could feel the
beginnings of tremors in him.
I  frantically  shoved  him  off  me,  already  gripping  my  last  dart.  Crouched,  I  waited  a  breathless
moment, then gathered my skirts and crept to the archway. I peeked around the corner to find the dining
hall empty and dark. Satisfied no one had heard, I turned.
Garrett was unconscious, but Jeck wasn’t. Not only was he still awake, but he had pulled himself into
a sitting position against the wall. He watched me through eyes  weaving in and  out of focus.  His large
body mass wasn’t enough to explain how he could  ward  off the effects  of two  darts.  He  must have a
shade of immunity, and I wondered where he had gotten it. The look in his eyes made it clear he knew I
was going to kill his prince.
Shaking inside, I went over  to  where  Garrett  lay. I crouched  and  brushed  aside  a  fold of cloth to
show skin not yet toughened by age, still freckled and smooth. He was no older than I was. My fingers
trembled. I had never taken anyone’s life.
I was suddenly sickened. My eyes closed as revenge bitterly cried for justice. “He killed my parents,”
I  whispered,  trying  to  become  angry.  Garrett  shuddered,  unconscious.  I  cursed  my  indecision,  my
weakness. He deserved death for what he had done.
“No,” I said with a frantic exhalation and pulled away. Killing him now was a mistake. Garrett’s men
had the palace and  outer  garrisons.  Unless I had  control  of the palace,  King Edmund would descend
upon me in retaliation, finishing what his son started. I couldn’t retake the palace alone. I needed help.
My eyes rose, and my stomach churned. I needed the chancellor. I needed Kavenlow.
Tucking my last dart back into my topknot, I went to Jeck. He was shivering from the venom. I was
impressed; he ought to be dead. He watched me, his eyes showing pain but no fear, waiting to see which
way the wind would blow. “I won’t make my people go to war over a stupid man’s death,” I whispered.
“I’m leaving to get help, not fleeing—and I’m giving Garrett the chance to escape. Tell your king I spared
his son’s life once. I’ll kill him if he is still in my palace  when I return.”  I glanced  to  the kitchen at  the
sound of the cook coming up the passage.
“But you—aren’t—the Red Moon Princess,” Jeck grunted, his mustache twitching as  he forced  the
words past his lips.
He was right, and I blinked. I’d forgotten. I leaned close, knowing I only had a moment. “I am now,”
I said, shoving him over and making sure he had a good view of the wall.
A sound of outrage slipped from me as I saw the hilt of my bone knife showing from behind the hem
of his jerkin. “That’s mine!” I said, taking it in a flash of self-righteous anger.

It was light in my grip, but I felt safer for having it, paltry as it would be  against a  sword.  Garrett’s
necklace I left where it was. I didn’t want anything he had touched, and selling it would only start a trail
to me.
The glow of approaching lights in the large hall brought my head up.  “Chu pits!” I swore  under  my
breath. This was not what I needed. I looked frantically at the kitchen passage. The cook was coming. I
had nowhere to go. My eyes lit upon the covered fireplace.
I dove  for it, settling the tapestry  behind me  with  a  silent  prayer  that  no  one  would  see  the  soft
movement. I had hidden here a score of times while playing hide-and-seek as a child. I crouched, trying
to slow my breathing. Hide-and-seek, I thought as the cook entered and shouted for help. Only this time,
my life hung on the outcome.

Six
I heard the cook’s boots falter. Stooping, I found the thin spot in the tapestry  I’d  made  as  a  child.
The peephole was lower than I recalled, and my knees complained. The scent of old ash tugged at me,
threatening to tickle into a sneeze. I held my breath, stomach tight with tension.
“Guards!” the cook  cried,  retaining  the  presence  of  mind  to  slide  the  tray  onto  the  table  before
lurching to Garrett. “He’s alive,” he whispered as he bent low over his prince. Jeck lay slumped beside
him, ignored. I couldn’t help but shirk back from the curtain when Olen and three sentries clattered into
the room with drawn swords.
“Here,” the cook called. “Get him up. Help me get him up! Up off the floor.”
“We were only gone a moment!” Olen said as all five lifted Garrett to lay him prone on the table. The
tray of food was almost pushed onto the floor. “Where’s the princess?”
My legs trembled,  and  I tried  to  swallow  as  the  soldier-turned-cook  spun.  His  hand  slapped  his
sword where it hung over his apron. “She didn’t come through the kitchen! I swear it!”
Please, I thought, don’t look for me here.
Olen pointed to the youngest of the three guards. “You,” he demanded, “roust the guard to find her.”
The sentry ran from the room, and I felt dizzy from relief. Olen knelt by Garrett. “Give me the wine. Let’s
get some of it into him.”
“No wine,” came a thin croak, and my gaze darted to  where  Jeck  lay. “He might choke  on it,” he
said, shifting himself upright on an elbow.
“Captain!” Olen said, his expression easing as he went to help him. “What happened?”
My stomach quivered. I was impressed. Jeck had more willpower than I had ever seen in a man. His
clearing gaze darted over the room as he dragged himself into a chair. I clutched my dagger in one hand
and my needle in the other, but he never looked at the tapestry.
Garrett’s breath turned into heavy wheezes. Jeck leaned across the table to tilt the prince’s  head  to
the side.  It  was  none too  soon,  as  Garrett  vomited, covering the table  and  floor with his last  meal.  I
swallowed hard, forcing back my own gorge at the smell.
“Clean that up,” Jeck  said,  taking control  of the situation though he couldn’t  yet stand.  The  cook
vanished into the kitchen.  “He’s  going to  live,”  Jeck  said  to  Olen.  Brow  glistening  with  sweat,  Jeck
reached for Garrett’s wine, gulping it.
“What happened?” Olen asked again as he refilled the glass with a shaking hand.
Jeck took a slow breath as if relishing the ability to do so. “She poisoned him.”
Olen stiffened. “Poison!”
Jeck nodded, his face pale under his tan. “She must have had it on her when I searched her room.”
Jeck went still, and I could almost see his thoughts. What else had he missed? I wondered for him, my
eyes narrowing in satisfaction.
The cook returned with a bucket and scented candle. He slopped up the mess as two guards tended
to Garrett: loosening his clothing, wiping the vomit from his face, generally accomplishing nothing as  the
prince struggled to regain consciousness. His hands ineffectively tried to push them away. “She vanished
into air,” one of the guards said, his face drawn. “She didn’t come through the kitchen or the hall!”
“Fool,” Jeck said harshly as he took a swallow of wine. “She’s just faster than you.” He set the glass
down as Garrett started to cough, his entire body shaking.

“Help him up,” Jeck ordered, and Garrett was pulled into a sitting position atop the table. The prince
looked  repulsive, pale  and  vomit-strewn,  still shivering from the venom. A swollen  bruise  was  on  his
upper chest where the dart had punctured his skin. He would probably wear it for days, and I knew the
use of his left arm might be impaired even longer.
“Where is she?” Garrett panted, his bloodshot green eyes weaving in and out of focus.
Olen stood at a stiff attention, worry clear in his wrinkled face. “We’re looking—”
“Find her!” Garrett cried. He hunched into himself as his shout instigated a violent cough. Pushing the
fumbling guards away, he rolled into a chair.
Garrett and Jeck were sitting at  the same  table,  and  my eyebrows  rose.  There  was  a  heartbeat  of
silence before Jeck lurched to his feet.  The large man leaned  heavily on the table.  “You and  you,” he
said, pointing at two guards. “Escort Prince Garrett to his rooms. Keep the fire high. Stay with him. He
may convulse again.”
I nodded a hidden agreement. Garrett was coming out of it too fast not to have a relapse.
Jeck took another gulp of wine. “Olen, pull everyone not guarding the palace’s sentries. Search from
the walls inward. No telling how far she’s gone. Keep the interior of the garden walls manned. Don’t give
them torches. They’ll ruin their night vision.”
“Yes, Captain.”
Jeck’s voice was steady and unhurried, seeming to make the air in my chest tremble. Garrett moaned
and doubled in pain. My eyes narrowed in satisfaction. I’d done well letting him live. Death would have
been merciful. When I did kill him, it would be painful. My eyes closed as I remembered the warmth of
my mother’s blood on my hands and the fear in my father’s voice. I would make it painful. I would make
him hurt.
“Get off of me!” Garrett protested as two guards tried to lift him. His words were badly slurred, and
his eyes were glassy. “Get your—filthy—hands—off me!” The sentries backed up, too inexperienced to
know what to do. “I want that whore now!” he demanded, focus wavering.
Jeck put his hands behind his back and straightened. His face was drawn, but it had already regained
its normal color.  His immunity couldn’t  have been  an accident,  and  that  worried  me. “We’re  looking,
Your Highness,” he said. “I have set up a perimeter—”
“Worthless  farmer!” Garrett  shouted,  startling me. I jumped,  my  shoulder  bumping  into  the  black
stones. “You let her poison me! I’d be safer with a chu slinger.”
Jeck’s jaw clenched, and he stared fiercely at a spot over Garrett’s shoulder.
“Who searched her room?” Garrett asked, his voice virulent and his head weaving.
“I did, Prince Garrett,” Jeck said tightly.
A tremor shook Garrett as the venom began reasserting control.  “Get me a  whip,” the prince  said.
No one moved. “I want a whip!” he shouted, lurching to his feet.
My mouth fell open as Olen strode out. Garrett was going to flog Jeck? I felt ill. I’d never witnessed a
flogging, but I’d seen their aftermath in the streets.
The two young guards approached Jeck, backing off at the murderous look he gave them. Motions
abrupt and short, Jeck removed  his leather  jerkin.  It  hit the table  beside  the cooling tray  of food.  His
black linen shirt was next, but this he carefully folded. He stood directly before me with the table between
us. I stared wide-eyed, blinking.
I had been raised as a princess. Was I chaste? Of deed, perhaps, but not thought. I had  stolen my
share  of kisses  and  caresses  in dark  corners  at  elaborate  functions when the laughter flowed and  the

music played.  Usually the young nobleman  was  more  inexperienced  than  I,  anxious  and  stammering.
Worried about  being caught.  Worried  about  not being caught.  Worried  about  that  damned  prophesy.
Even so,  I was  not such  an  innocent  that  the  sight  of  a  bare  torso  would  fluster  me.  But  Jeck…  I
swallowed and held my breath.
Burning chu pits. The  man  is  magnificent. His shoulders  were  marred  with old white scars,  but
they  were  as  strong  and  smooth  as  the  blacksmith’s.  His  skin  was  dark  from  the  sun,  looking  like
well-oiled wood as his muscles bunched and eased as he moved. I could see every line that ran down his
abdomen to vanish beneath his trousers. His power was clearly born from long hours with a blade.  No
longer hidden behind the disguise of clothing, his every movement possessed the unconscious grace of a
predator. He was beautiful. And I’d never seen his like.
Olen  returned  and  apprehensively  extended  a  short  black-stained  whip  to  Garrett.  The  prince
snatched it, his expression ugly. “Hold him down,” he demanded.
Jeck shook his head, his hands clenched as  he leaned  over  the table  and  braced  himself. My eyes
followed a puckered scar cutting a ragged path across his side.  It  hadn’t  healed  as  well as  the others.
There was a faint red mark on his chest where my dart had found him.
“Let me remind you,” Garrett said as he staggered to stand behind him. “You are  here  to  keep  me
alive!”
He swung the whip at his last word. It met Jeck’s back with a crack. I jumped, startled. Jeck tensed,
his eyes staring straight ahead at the tapestry. It was as if he was looking at me, and I backed up from the
musty fabric. Olen reached to catch Garrett as he stumbled, thrown off balance by his swing.
“It’s the only reason you are here!” the prince said. The whip descended, the blow harder this time.
Jeck’s eyes narrowed as his anger grew. My mouth went dry, and I bit my lip.
“Another lapse,” Garrett said, “and you’ll be chained with the slave detail, Captain Jeck!”
The prince nearly fell as the whip met Jeck again, the poison’s effects returning. Olen caught him, and
Garrett hung in his grip, his face white. “Find her. Bring her to me,” he panted.
Garrett threw the uncoiled whip at Jeck’s back. I started  as  it hit him and  slid to  the floor.  “Finish
whipping him,” Garrett rasped. “Do it properly.”
They weren’t done? I thought in horror.
I didn’t move as Garrett was all but carried out by a sentry. Olen looked at the remaining guard, then
Jeck. “He’s going to kill us, Captain,” he said softly. “Taking a palace  with boys  and  old men? We’re
spread too thin, and what we have are poor soldiers at that. Half-trained and better at guiding a plow or
chopping vegetables than to stand where you tell them.”
“He gave you an order,” Jeck said. His voice was low with a barely leashed anger.
Olen edged the whip away from Jeck’s boots before bending to pick it up. Taking Garrett’s place, he
pulled his arm back and swung, grunting with the effort. The leather hit Jeck with a  loud,  soul-breaking
crack. My air hissed in, my hand going to my mouth. It  was  nothing like Garrett’s  blows.  Jeck’s  head
jerked, and his eyes bulged at the sudden, real pain.
Taking no pause, Olen swung again. Garrett had been weak from the venom; Olen was not. He was
using all his strength to drive the cord into Jeck’s flesh. It came away red with blood. My pulse pounded,
and I watched, horrified but unable to look away.
A third strike, and Jeck grunted. His grip on the table went knuckle-white. The muscles in his neck
became cords. His teeth showed as he gritted them. My eyes went hot with tears.
I looked away at the fourth strike, unable to watch Jeck’s eyes glaze with pain. So it was that I only

heard the fifth strike  and  Jeck’s  groan.  I was  shaking, holding a  hand over  my mouth to  keep  still. It
wasn’t my fault. It wasn’t. How could someone do that to a person?
“Five strikes, Captain,” Olen said somberly. There was a hesitation, then, “Get the surgeon.”
“Wait.” It was a breathy exhalation, and I looked through the tapestry, my eyes  wet.  Jeck  lowered
himself into a chair. He put his elbows on the table and leaned forward to keep his back from touching
anything. “Put someone in Prince Garrett’s rooms. I don’t care if he threatens  to  have us burned  alive.
He’s going to have a relapse. The venom isn’t out yet.”
“Captain?” the young guard questioned as he gingerly coiled up the whip.
“Go,” Jeck said. He took a slow breath. “And put a guard outside the chancellor’s room immediately.
No one in or out. Send the surgeon to wait for me there.”
“Yes, Captain.” Olen nodded, and the two left.
Kavenlow? I wondered. Why was Jeck interested in a chancellor?
The room grew quiet as the sound of their boots in the banquet hall diminished. Sharp and bitter, the
smell of vomit and blood mixed with the scent of cooked meat and the ash in the flue. Over it all was the
candle the cook had brought in, adding pine and rosemary to the mix.
Jeck’s head lifted. His face was haggard, but his eyes were intent. He was listening.
Blood humming in my ears,  I eased  back  from  the  musty  tapestry,  my  grip  on  the  dagger  going
sweaty. I was sure he could hear my pounding heart. Only cloth separated us.
“You should have killed him, Princess,” he said, and I froze, panicking. Slowly Jeck levered  himself
up, his eyes on the table. My pulse slowed at his vacant stare. He was  talking to  himself. “You should
have killed either him, or me, or both. I will wring your neck myself before I give you the chance to harm
him again.”
I held my breath as a wave of vertigo took me. Don’t find me. Don’t.
Jeck  prodded  his chest  where  my dart  had  hit him. He  grunted in surprise  as  he  plucked  out  the
broken tip of the needle and flicked it to the floor. Slow from pain, he gathered his belongings, hesitating
briefly before scooping up my scarf as well. Cradling everything in one arm, he took a slab of meat from
the tray and shoved it in his mouth. He wiped the juice from his beard as he left, never looking back.
I waited a long time hidden in the hearth, wondering if Jeck was right.

Seven
My eyes were on the archway to the kitchen as I slipped from behind the tapestry. The smell of roast
meat lingered, though the platter was gone, taken to  feed  Garrett’s  men, I’d  wager.  It  didn’t matter.  I
was shaking too badly to be hungry.
Snatching a napkin, I wiped the soot from the soles of my boots,  then bent  to  smear  my footprints
into a blur. I wedged the napkin in a crack in the chimney and turned. Heather was the only one to have
found me in the hearth, and it had been my own fault, having left black footprints while checking the door.
 Heather, I thought, praying she was still beyond the palace walls and safe.
I held myself still, listening. It was surprisingly quiet, since the staff was dead or gone, and most of the
soldiers were in the garden.  Hopelessness  pinched  my forehead.  I couldn’t  fight Garrett’s  men; I was
almost half their weight and had only one dart and a decorative knife. I had to get out. The quickest way
was through the kitchen.
Putting more faith in my dart than my dagger, I tucked the bone blade at the small of my back  and
edged down the tunnel until a muted conversation brought me to a halt. Breath held, I peered around the
cold stone. The sword belted about the cook’s apron made him look ridiculous. I was sure he and  the
sentry  leaning  casually  against  the  table  had  been  told  to  watch  the  door,  but  they  were  far  more
interested in the brace of squab over the largest hearth, the fat dripping down to spurt into flame.
Beyond them was the moonless night. The door  was  open  to  let the heat  of the kitchen escape.  I
didn’t know whether to be thankful or insulted they thought I was so little a threat. My gaze flicked from
the door to them. It was so close, I could smell the dew.
The soldier-turned-cook spun to show a satisfied smile on his round face. “Leave your grubby hands
off,” he said sharply, looking far happier in his new position of cook than I would have expected. He held
a pan under a squab and basted it. “Them’s for the prince.”
“Aw he ain’t gonna miss a leg,” the other said, leaning close with his Angers twitching. “You said he
spilled his guts like a pregnant woman.”
“You touch ‘em, and I’ll cut your burning fingers off!” the cook  threatened  as  he turned  to  set  the
basting pan aside. “I want them pretty, not torn apart.”
As I expected, the second man reached for the birds. Their backs were to me. I bolted to the door,
shocked  when a  new wave  of dizziness shook  me. Muscles  suddenly shaking, I skittered  around  the
archway and put my back to the outside wall. My shoulders tensed as the cook shouted, then I slumped
when I realized he was yelling at his companion.
Out, I thought as their argument grew louder. I had  made  it. Fingers gripping the cold  stone  I was
pressed  against,  I  listened  to  my  heart  pound,  panting  while  the  unreal  feeling  began  to  pass.  The
sensation was akin to having accidentally pricked myself on one of my darts, and I put my fingertips in my
mouth, looking for the telltale bitter bite of venom. There was only the taste of ash. The dizziness must be
from my hunger. I hadn’t eaten all day.
The air was cold, and I shivered in my thin dress.  Gaining the garden  had  been  very much like my
games of hide-and-seek as a child. Easier, almost, as it was  night. It  had  generally come  as  a  surprise
whenever Kavenlow woke me from a sound sleep and bundled me off to a remote corner of the palace,
announcing to all at breakfast that the first to find me got my dessert that night. I had usually spent all day
skulking through the palace to reach Kavenlow’s safe tree, pilfering my lunch from the kitchen or gardens
as I went.
The working-class children who were my playmates were always delighted, since my hide-and-seek
took precedence over their usual chores. Sentries replaced them when I was older, and Kavenlow got a

lot of resistance until he told the captain it was good practice ferreting out assassins for his men. It  had
been then that my delight in the game blossomed into almost an obsession as I outsmarted the very men
set to keep  me safe.  But  this  time, I thought as  my smile of remembrance  faltered,  if  I’m  caught,  I
won’t forfeit my dessert, I’ll forfeit my life.
Taking a steadying breath, I tucked my last dart back into my topknot and crouched. The sound  of
approaching voices jolted me into motion, and I slid into the kitchen’s outdoor firepit. Pushing up on the
heavy oak cover, I slid it half over me. The sharp smell of ash and burned fat was an assault, and I kept
my breathing shallow to  keep  from coughing. The pit was  still warm from last  night’s  dinner.  Shifting
uneasily in the defunct coals, I poked my head above ground level to see a pair of sentries.
They were halfheartedly beating the bushes with the flat of their swords as they complained loudly of
their interrupted dinner and how this was a waste of time because I was probably crying at the back of a
closet. If all of Garrett’s men were this inexperienced, I’d have a chance. Even the stableboy had known
the value of stealth while playing hide-and-seek.
The two passed. Feeling tense and ill, I waited until their voices vanished before I eased out of the pit.
I stank of burned fat, and a dark stain of grease smeared my elbow. I was a mess.
Taking a steadying breath, I checked for lights and ran to a small grove  of trees,  skidding to  a  halt
among them. The gray of my dress mixed with the shadows. Moonrise would be in a few hours; I had to
be over the wall by then. Breathlessly I waited for any sound of pursuit. There was none.
Jittery and nervous,  I gathered  my skirts  to  keep  them from snagging and  eased  through the small
grove.  Almost  lost  against  the  black  sky  was  my  goal:  the  only  tree  in  the  garden  whose  branches
reached over the palace walls. It was Kavenlow’s safe tree, and I frowned, realizing he had  taught me
the many paths to reach the one way out using games and diversions.
Lights and  noise pulled my gaze up.  My pulse quickened.  They were  far enough away  for  me  to
move, but not for long. I glanced the other way, then ran for a dull shimmer of rocks.
My breath came in time with my soft footfalls on the damp grass. I slowed to a hunched crawl as my
boots scraped on the loose scree. The pile of rock was from a stone arbor, left where it had fallen after I
had said it made a grand place for snakes and butterflies to overwinter.
Dropping down, I felt for the small depression I had scratched out nearly a decade ago. It  was  too
shallow to provide much cover  now that I was  twice as  big, and  I felt exposed,  crouched  beside  the
rocks. They were warm yet from the sun, and I pressed against them.
The sound of a dog cheerfully barking seemed to freeze my heart. “Banner,” I whispered in dismay,
recognizing him. They had loosed the dogs to find me. And they would, wagging their tails and licking my
face.
“Down. Down!” a sentry shouted, hardly a boy by the sound of it.
Please, no, I thought desperately, knowing if I moved Banner would find me all the sooner. I peered
over the rocks to see a distant light. My hope sank as a sudden pacing and heavy breath came out of the
dark.
“Dog!” I heard a deeper voice call, and the distant torch bobbed. “Whatcha find, dog?”
The large wolfhound stood poised, listening. His tail began to wag. I sank miserably down as he made
a beeline to me from across the open space, leaving the sentries  behind.  His wet  nose  pushed  into my
hand, and he licked the grease from my elbow. “Go away,” I hissed, but he wanted to play. “Bad dog!” I
whispered, and his swinging tail faltered. He whined, his paws as big as my hand almost pushing me over
as he wanted to know what he had done wrong.
“Oh, you’re a good dog,” I said in dismay, fondling his ears as I forgave the massive animal. “Good

dog.” Wishing he would be still, I peeked over the rocks. The lights were closer.  I looked  to  the wall,
then back. I couldn’t run with him, and if I stayed, they’d find me.
“Dog!” the guard called, and Banner’s ears pricked. He didn’t move. It gave me an idea.
“Down,” I said, and the large dog dropped, his eyes catching the faint light as he waited expectantly. I
grabbed his bearded muzzle and brought it close to my face to remind him I was the leader of his pack.
“Stay,” I whispered. “Stay.” He watched as I backed up, his tail swishing uncertainly. “Stay.”
Stomach churning, I crept  through the boulders  until they gave way to  pebbles  and  finally grass.  I
prayed  Banner would do  as  told  as  I  ran  to  a  shack  hidden  behind  a  bank  of  roses.  The  scent  of
decaying weeds was thick. I circled the gardener’s hut until I could see the palace wall and my tree.  A
shadow hiding a glint of steel shifted beside it. My eyes closed in despair. Leaning against the very tree I
had to climb was a sentry.
A shout pulled my eyes open. They’d found Banner. Everything was falling apart!
“Here he is,” one called to the other. “Here, dog.”
“What’s he got?” the second asked.
“Nothing. Come on, dog. Up. Up!” There was a pause, then, “He won’t get up.  Hey you.  Move!”
My eyes widened at the sudden yelp. “Fool dog!” the guard yelled. “Get up!”
“Good boy,” I whispered,  cringing as  Banner yelped  again. The shadow  beside  my tree  moved.  I
watched,  not believing, as  the sentry  left his post  to  see  what was  going on.  A  young,  inexperienced
guard, indeed.
“Hit him with your sword,” a deeper voice said. “Get him moving.” The sentry at the wall started to
jog, passing me in a creak of leather. That easily, I was beyond their perimeter.
Cursing myself as a coward, I ran to the tree. Banner cried out in hurt, and the warmth of tears filled
my eyes. He should have left, run to his kennel. Stupid dog. Why had he listened to me? But he stayed,
his loyalty buying me time.
My hand touched the smooth bark, and I reached for a limb. Skirts catching, I levered myself up to
the first branch. The bark scraped my palms, and dizziness washed through me, setting my arms shaking.
There was a yelp of pain, and a stab of helplessness took me. “Good boy,” I whispered as I went higher.
I was a coward, running away while he was beaten.
Muscles  protesting  from  lack  of  food,  I  finally  reached  the  limb  paralleling  the  top  of  the  wall.
Banner’s cries turned  angry. Tears  pulled at  me, and  I risked  a  glance at  the three  lights circling him.
More were converging on them.
The guards had begun to bait him, urging him to attack. One called out to kill him as they would never
get a monster like him back in his pen. Hating myself, I turned my back on Banner, standing upright upon
a wide branch. Banner’s barks grew savage as I inched forward,  arms out for balance.  Tears  flowed,
unchecked. He trusted me, and I was abandoning him. I couldn’t explain to him why.
The branch turned before coming close enough to the wall for me to jump, but another limb continued
over my head, actually passing over the wall. Standing on tiptoe, I grasped it, closing my eyes to steady
myself. Hunger sapped my strength; fear and worry made me dizzy. My feet left the branch, and I inched
my way forward one hand width at a time. Banner’s barks cut off in a heartrending cry of pain.
“Banner, just run away,”  I sobbed,  my  grip  threatening  to  slip.  The  branch  thinned.  The  soldiers
cheered, and heartache gripped me. They had cut him. I was sure of it.
Another handhold, and I froze at the whine at the foot of the tree. Banner! He was alive! Then my
heart sank. He had come to see what he had done wrong. They’d follow him!

My arms trembled  as  the guards  rattled  closer.  Panicking,  I  lurched  forward  another  handhold.  I
looked to see the shimmer of the wall under me. My fingers found a smooth strip of leather. It was  the
strap of a bag hanging in a thick tangle of branches. Yanking it from its hiding spot,  I dropped  the few
feet to the wall to land in an unsteady crouch. My muscles trembled from overuse and cold. I felt as if I
might pass out, dizzy and unreal.
“Thank you, Banner,” I whispered, tears clouding my sight. “You’re a good boy. Now, run!”
I slipped over the side of the wall and fell into nothing.

Eight
I hit the ground hard, rolling into the street. A wagon was approaching, black and slow with a single
torch.  Favoring  my  ankle,  I  tucked  back  off  the  road  and  into  the  shadow  of  the  wall.  My  pulse
hammered. A long howl came from behind the wall, and my eyes closed in heartache. “Run, Banner,” I
whispered, hating myself. “Just run away.”
I was out. It hardly seemed to matter. I lowered my head as the wagon passed,  heavy with people
and household belongings. Suddenly I was aware I was filthy, smeared with bark, grease, and dew. I’d
never been past the walls alone before, and I felt naked without…
“Kavenlow,” I said savagely aloud. This is his fault, I thought as I sat and massaged my ankle while
the wagon creaked by. Kavenlow should have told me. I could have done something had I known. I had
been so shaken by learning of my true birth that  I blinded myself to  Garrett.  I’d  seen  his frustration at
being a second  son  and  his pride  demanding he take  a  kingdom for himself. It  had  been  there.  I had
ignored it, wallowing in self-pity. And now my parents were dead. Because of me.
“Footsore already, love?” rasped a voice.
My breath hissed  in. An old woman with a  cloth bag  was  standing before  me. I hadn’t  heard  her
approach because of her bare feet. “Beg your pardon?” I stammered, frightened.
“Footsore? Aren’t you going? I’m going. Misdev soldiers thick in the streets,” she mumbled over bad
teeth. “Then suddenly, not a one. And Costenopolie men going to the palace and none coming to replace
them? I don’t like it. No, I don’t.”
I stood up, gingerly putting weight upon my foot until I was  sure  it would hold me. There  were  no
cries coming from behind the wall, but I had to move. The leather bag in my grip was water-stained and
old. I could hear the sound of sliding coins inside.
“And that poor woman,” the lady said as I edged away. “Shouting at the gate, demanding she be let
in, and the guards pushing her down. That’s not Costenopolie men. No, it isn’t.”
Heather! I thought. “Is she all right?” I asked, stepping close. “Did they hurt her?”
The woman squinted. “I don’t know. But I’m leaving. You should, too.”
A wet cough spun me around. “Go home, Mabel,” a thin man said. Holding a cloak tight to him, he
crossed the torchlit street to join us. “The lights are up in the palace because of the Misdev prince. Don’t
be filling her head with your old-woman fantasies. It’s wedding plans.”
“Ha!” the old woman barked. “Then why did you pack your leaky old rowboat?” 
“It never hurts to be prepared, I say.”
I backed away from them, a false smile on my face. I didn’t think they realized I was  gone as  they
continued their discussion, each assertion louder and laced with more fond insults than the last. One thing
was clear.  The city  was  emptying.  Somehow  the  people  knew  something  was  wrong,  and  fear  had
started an exodus. That was  fortunate.  I could  get lost in a  crowd,  slip past  the gates  with the rest.  I
needed a horse, a cloak, food… I needed money.
Remembering the jingle of coins,  I struggled with the knot  holding the bag  closed.  A well-dressed
couple passed me with what looked like all their belongings on a tidy cart. Two children were asleep in
the back. I tried to hide the grease on my dress as the woman eyed me with contempt. Cheeks flaming, I
went to the nearest light to look in the bag.
There was money, enough for a  decent  trip into the streets.  My eyes  widened  as  I recognized  the
bitter smell of Kavenlow’s  venom, and  I wasn’t  surprised  to  find a  small capped  jar,  the  white  crust

helping to seal it. There was also a handful of unadorned darts tied with a purple ribbon. A quick  taste
assured me they were potent, and I added several to my topknot in relief. It wasn’t until I was replacing
the bundle of unused darts that I found the folded paper tucked at the bottom  of the bag.  It  was  from
Kavenlow, and my brow furrowed in anger.
My dear Tess,
That you have found this means I have taught you well. It saddens me I must
rely on ink and paper to convey how proud I am of you.
 
If you are climbing the walls to escape, I’m probably dead, and the stability of
the  realm  is  in  jeopardy.  Flee  if  you  deem  it  best  for  the  short  term,  but
Costenopolie  is  now  yours.  I  wish  your  game  well.  Whatever  task  the
sovereigns have given you upon the return  of  their  princess,  use  it  to  further
your deception. I worked hard to keep  the  king  and  queen  from  knowing  my
real  intention  for  you.  Be  satisfied  knowing  that  though  royalty  holds  the
crown, we are the cunning and strength that keep the realm intact.
 
You’ll never know the depth of my grief for my lies of omission, but I want you
to believe that you were never the king and queen’s. You were mine, and I loved
you  as  the  child  I  couldn’t  have.  You  are  the  daughter  of  my  heart,  the
inheritor of my skills.
Your loving mentor, 
Kavenlow
The tears started somewhere in the middle, and they ran down  my face  unchecked.  My chest  was
tight with an unbearable weight. How could you do this to me? I thought desperately. Just when I was
ready to hate you? Choking back a sob, I stretched to put the note to the lamp flame and watch it burn.
No one would see his words but me. I didn’t understand all of what he meant, only that he loved me. I
felt like Banner, howling at the wall as his source of strength slipped away, leaving him with an unheard
promise to return.
I dropped my head as a handcart passed. Wiping my eyes with the back of a grimy hand, I numbly
walked, heading downward to the docks and the inns. Kavenlow’s absence made the once-comforting
streets seem fraught with a hidden menace. Garrett’s soldiers were absent, a situation I was sure would
remedy itself tomorrow when they began searching the streets.
Much to my surprise, a good deal of the dock market was open  as  greedy  merchants  pandered  to
frightened  people  hoarding  food  and  supplies.  The  lights  were  high,  and  so  were  the  prices,  but  I
wouldn’t have to wait until morning to  outfit myself. First,  though, I needed  a  quiet place  to  draw  my
scattered soul together and find a sense of purpose.
The dizziness had passed now that I wasn’t running, but exhaustion pulled at me as I angled for an inn
set back two streets from the docks. It would probably be quieter. I glanced back at the palace before
crossing the street. It glittered like a necklace in candlelight, high on the hill. My eyes closed in a pained
blink, and I turned away. They are dead. Both of them.
Striving for an air of wealth rather than destitution, I resolutely smoothed my filthy dress  and  strode
into the inn. The stagnant air smelled of overdone potatoes, but the low-ceilinged room  was  warm and
almost empty. Three men were gaming at a table by the hearth.  Another  sat  alone with a  bowl,  eating
soup as carefully as if it were money to be counted. A surly tavern maid eyed me, but it was the man in a
tattered cap leaning against the casks that I approached. A beggar would seek assistance from the tavern

maid; a lady would demand it from the owner.
He gave me a once-over, the question clear in his eyes  as  to  what a  woman with good  boots  was
doing alone with no coat, covered in filth, and her hair falling down  about  her shoulders.  “I would like
some supper,” I said, pronouncing my words carefully.
The innkeeper took a  breath  to  speak,  but a  shrill voice coming through a  dark  archway  shouted,
“Get her out! We aren’t the palace to feed the city’s laggards.”
I gave Kavenlow’s water-stained bag a subtle shake, sending the soft sound of sliding coins to  him.
The man glanced at the archway. “Tend to yourself, woman!” he yelled. He was smiling when he turned
back, his work-reddened cheeks split to show he was missing a tooth. “Running away from our husband
now, are we, ma’am?”
I looked at the empty tables. “Supper?” I asked as I set two coins down, glad Kavenlow had insisted
I handle the money when in the streets and so I knew how much was needed.
“Help yourself to what’s in the pot,” he said, nodding to the hearth behind me.
“I left so quickly,” I stammered, embarrassed, “I don’t have a bowl.”
Saying nothing, he leaned to reach behind a counter and pull out a  wooden  bowl  and  flat length of
wood that might be considered a spoon—if one was desperate.
“She pays for that!” the unseen woman shouted, and the man’s shoulders hunched.
I took them, feeling ignorant. “Would it be possible to have a bath?” I asked.
“I ain’t doing any bath!”  the woman exclaimed. The bar  wench  suddenly  found  something  to  do,
vigorously scrubbing at a far table with her back to us.
I brought out two  more  coins.  It  was  twice as  much as  I paid  for dinner. My mother’s  blood  still
stained my hands; I would give him the entire bag if needed. “Shut your mouth, woman!” the man yelled
over his shoulder.
“I ain’t doing any bath!” she insisted.
“You’ll do a bath,” the man bellowed. “Shut yer mouth!” He turned to me, and I gritted my teeth to
keep the tears from starting. “It’ll be a while. You want it in a room?”
Head down, I nodded, though I wasn’t planning to sleep in it, and he reached behind him to draw a
tankard of dark liquid. “Here,” he said,  handing it to  me. “Take  your pick  of the rooms  in back.  The
second one has a lock, ma’am.”
My face  went cold.  “Thank you,” I managed,  a  sick  feeling thundering down  upon  me.  I  was  so
alone. There was no hidden escort, no friendly guard behind me. I was alone after sunset with a bag of
money in a tavern two streets up from the docks, dressed in rags and  covered  in pig grease.  The only
thing that could make this worse was if it started to rain.
Knees feeling like wet rags, I crossed the room to a table near the hearth and sat with my back to the
wall. I set the heavy tankard down, and with Kavenlow’s bag over my shoulder, I found the pot held a
fish stew. The thought of eating was repellant, but having nearly passed  out from hunger, I took  some.
Eyes were on me. I didn’t like it. I’d never eaten by myself before.
The men turned away as I sat down. Slowly my fear eased, warmed away by the creamy soup. The
spoon was hard to manipulate, and  I felt like a  fool as  I struggled to  keep  anything on it. I found my
appetite quickening—until I realized the gelatinous blob I was  pushing around  in my mouth in question
was probably twin to the fish eye that was now staring up at me.
Gagging, I hunched over the bowl and spat it back out. My face was warm as I looked  up,  but no
one seemed to have noticed. I stifled a shudder and pushed the bowl away, my gaze falling upon the old

man eating. He didn’t seem to care that his soup was looking back at him, but I did.
The gaming table grew noisy, and my attention went to them as they played three rivers. The oldest
man at the table was graying at the temples and had a kind, noble-looking face despite the weary slump
that put him as a laborer of sorts. He was dressed simply but clean. A stick was tight between his teeth,
and he shifted it from one side of his mouth to the other.
Closest to the hearth was a soft-spoken man, tight with both his money and opinions. He was dressed
like a merchant with clean boots and a good cloak.
The last had his back to  me. He  wore  a  nondescript  shirt and  trousers  of brown  cloth.  Unlike the
other two, he had no beard, and his brown  hair was  cut severely  short  as  the younger sentries  like to
keep it. His jests were quick, as was his speech, and he seemed to be winning a lot. I watched him pull a
few coins to himself with pleasant, encouraging words to the others. His hands  were  too  clean to  be  a
laborer, and his clothes weren’t good enough for a merchant’s. Soldier? I thought, but dismissed it as his
build—though nicely muscled and sturdy with a broad back and trim waist—was clearly used to casual
exertion rather than the discipline of swinging a sword. He had a dagger, though, its outline showing at the
top of his ragtag, thin-soled boots.
Then I saw him draw a card from his collar and replace it with one from his hand, disguising the action
as a stretch. My breath hissed in. He was a cheat! That’s what he was!
Outraged, I felt my cheeks warm, then checked my upward motion. What the chu pits was I doing?
I was worried about a thieving cheat when my life was  balanced  between  my quick  feet  and  Garrett’s
anger?
Chilled by the thought of Garrett’s soldiers, I pushed my bowl farther away and looked into my bag
to estimate  what I could  purchase.  There  was  enough  for  supplies  but  not  a  horse,  too.  They  were
expensive in a coastal city where the little fertile land was used for growing food for people. They would
be even more costly with half the city surging through the gates.
How was I going to get a  horse? Worried,  I took  a  sip from the tankard,  almost choking at  the
acidic taste. It was near spoiled. God help me, this was the worst meal I’d ever not eaten.
I spat the ale back and frowned as the cheat laughed at something the merchant said. My gaze rose,
lighting upon the money on the table. My eyes narrowed in speculation.
I could play cards. Kavenlow had  taught me. As  a  rule, he cheated.  The first time I caught him, I
swore I’d never play against him again. He had laughed uproariously—which made me so angry I could
have had him stuffed and turned into a rug— men changed the stakes. If I caught him cheating, I got his
dessert. If he won without me spotting the deception, he got mine. It had been a very enjoyable winter.
The flash of pleasant  memory died.  Depressed,  I wound  a  stray  curl  back  around  my  topknot.  I
would find Kavenlow. But I needed a horse.
Leaving my uneaten soup, I rose with my tankard and bag and approached the table. The talk fell to
nothing as the men looked up. I flushed for my forwardness; I hadn’t been introduced, but I didn’t think it
mattered. “Three rivers?” I said. “May I join you?”
The silence grew uncomfortable. The merchant glanced at the innkeeper, and he shrugged. It was the
cheat  who broke  the tableau  by shoving a  bench  away  from  the  table  for  me.  I  ignored  it,  my  face
warming.  Immediately  the  merchant  rose  with  a  quickness  undoubtedly  born  from  pandering  to
customers. The other two men got to their feet as well.
“Let me help you, madam,” the merchant said, taking my tankard  and  setting it on the table  before
assisting me onto the rough bench with a practiced ease. “My name is Trevor.”
“Thank you, Trevor,” I said, breathing easier now that someone had finally said something. I eyed him

speculatively as I adjusted my filthy dress.  “I believe I have visited your shop  on high street.  You sell
threads and cords, yes?”
“Yes  ma’am,”  he  said  with  a  smile.  He  didn’t  recognize  me,  and  for  the  first  time  all  night,  I
appreciated the fact.
“Collin,” the second man said. His stick shifted between his teeth as he sat back down.
The cheat had hardly risen from his bench and was already back to shuffling the cards. “Ma’am,” he
said, giving me no name, and I nodded at him.
“I’m…” I hesitated, not knowing what to call myself. “I find I’m in need of a distraction tonight, with
all the excitement in the streets. What version are you playing?”
As one, the men relaxed. “Stones dam the river,” the cheat said, sliding a card to me. “Forest blocks
the sun.”
I nodded. I’d played that. Pulling an appropriate coin from the bag atop my lap, I set it in the center
of the table with the rest. I took up the cards and bit my lower  lip. Play circled  from me to  the cheat,
exactly how I wanted it. If I couldn’t win what I needed, I could blackmail the cheat into losing to  me.
That is, if I could catch him cheating and show him I could prove it.
There would be  two  circles  of the table,  each  of us trading cards  with a  visible waste  pile  or  the
unseen remainder of the deck. At the end, each could fold and lose their coin, or throw in another to buy
the chance to win it all. The strongest hand won. It was a simple game.
We played our first turns in silence. My dislike of the quiet prompted me to turn to the merchant, the
most refined of the three. “Trevor,” I said, eyes watering as I pretended to sip the awful ale.  “You sell
that marvelous thread made by insects, don’t you?”
“Yes ma’am.” He discarded a sword card into the up-facing pile. “I don’t think I will be selling much
silk for a time. I would be wise to shift my inventory from domestics to the thicker cords that can be used
in ropes for warships, but I have yet to find a supplier.”
“Warships!” I said, my surprise genuine. How could he have even guessed such a thing? It had only
been this morning that Garrett began his bid for my lands.
“Rumors,” Collin growled around the stick between his teeth. “Costenopolie won’t go to war over a
damned-fool marriage.”
I blinked. But my unease went unnoticed as the merchant took up his tankard and said, “No, but the
Misdev dogs might. May they rot in hell.”
With loud agreements,  the other  two  men  raised  their  drinks  in  salute.  All  three  took  a  draught,
slamming their tankards onto the table with undue force. I watched Collin in fascination as he didn’t have
to take the stick from his mouth to manage the lip of the cup.
“You deal in cords and string?” Collin questioned as he picked up the merchant’s  discarded  sword
card and put down a red pawn. “I make twine for nets.”
The two exchanged shrewd looks as I chose an unseen card. Anything was  better  than the pawn  I
discarded. It was a black stone, useless with the cards I had, but I kept it, casting aside a valuable queen.
I had three reasons for giving it away. One, it would imply I had an excellent hand and perhaps I could
bluff my way to winning. Two, if I was right, the cheat would take it, squirreling it away for future use. Or
three, it would lead the table to believe I was a  simpleton. Any of the results  would be  favorable.  My
heart gave a pound as the cheat hesitated for the barest moment before picking up it up.
Collin leaned toward the merchant, his eyes carefully away from the man’s cards. “With incentive, I
could pull my workers from nets and shift them to ropes. Ropes will be in high demand if we  war  with

Misdev.”
“To the Misdev dogs!” the cheat said loudly. “May they rot in hell.”
“May they rot in hell!” the men returned. The man eating soup weakly joined in, and I belatedly raised
my tankard, pretending to drink the swill. Excitement tingled my toes as the cheat slipped the queen into
his sleeve and replaced it with another while we drank. It was very quick, and I never really saw it, but
my games with Kavenlow assured me that’s what happened.
“Pay the pot or fold?” the cheat asked, his brown eyes innocent as he discarded.
Collin chewed furiously on his stick before tossing in a coin.
“Fold,” said the merchant, placing his cards unseen on the table.
“Me, too,” the cheat said, unable to show his cards and risk someone recalling he ought to have the
queen I had thrown away.
Immediately I put a coin in to join Collin’s to further the illusion I was foolish. After losing the queen, I
had a very bad hand. Collin won, and he gathered the coins, looking pleased.
The cards went to the merchant, and he shuffled them. “I’m surprised  you aren’t  at  your shops,”  I
offered as he slid my cards to me. “The town seems to think it’s noon at midnight.”
“People fleeing war do not buy spools of flax,” he said shortly.
“All this talk of war is foolish,” the cheat said. “What does it matter who she marries?”
His stick  clamped  between  his teeth,  Collin picked  up a  card  and  threw  a  black  wolf  down  with
enough force to almost send it off the table. “I’d rather the princess marry a goat keeper than one of King
Edmund’s spawn,” he muttered. “My grandfather came back with his hand black and stinking from the
last Misdev war. He lived long enough to touch  the sea,  then died  among the nets  he could  no longer
even mend. And what did he die for? A strip of forest.”
The bitterness in his voice surprised me. “It wasn’t for a strip of forest,” I said as I took up the wolf.
“He died to keep the Misdev devils out of our harbors.”
“May they rot in hell!” the men shouted, and I found myself joining them. My attention wandered as I
realized my father almost put King Edmund in our harbors, the very thing my grandfather had fought so
hard against. Distracted, I never caught the man cheating, and he won.
“And what do you do, sir?” I asked the cheat as Collin dealt a new hand.
“I’m in trading,” the young man said without hesitation, his eyes on his cards.
My eyes flicked over him. “Trading?” If he was in trading, I was a dock whore. Which I wasn’t. So
far. Despite what I presently looked like. “What do you trade in?”
He glanced at me. “Black sheep. When I find a farm with such an animal, I buy it.”
“Black sheep,” I repeated. I discarded a priest, taking up the red sun. I was betting the cheat would
take the priest. Instead, he chose from the unseen pile.
“And what is it you spend your daylight hours upon?” the cheat said sarcastically.
My mocking mood went bothered as I realized I didn’t do much of anything. “Purchasing,” I said. “I
purchase large amounts of goods for sundry reasons.”
“You tend house,” he said, his tone making it an insult.
“You  would  be  surprised  at  the  amount  of  planning  that  goes  into  one,”  I  said  hotly.  “But  you
wouldn’t appreciate it, seeing as you don’t stay in one spot for the span of a moon’s life—chasing black
sheep as you do.”

The merchant glanced at Collin. “Ah, I’m sure you keep a fine house, ma’am.”
“Then why is she leaving it?” the cheat asked.
“The Misdev curs,” I answered, unable to keep my eyes from dropping.
“To the Misdev curs!” the cheat asserted.
“May they rot in hell!” the other men returned.
I watched closely as they drank, but the cheat  didn’t shift his cards.  I wondered  if he knew  I was
watching. On my final turn, I was lucky in picking up a river card. I had a strong hand containing all the
elements. No longer needing my king, I discarded him. The cheat’s  eyes  crinkled at  the corners  as  he
picked it up. I waited for him to pocket it, but when the game ended and I had won, he still held all his
original cards.
It was my turn to deal, and  I almost missed his treachery  in the rush of cards  upon  the table.  The
cheat only returned four. The fifth went into his boot as I pretended to slop my ale and Trevor solicitously
blotted it up. My eyes narrowed. I was sure it had been the king. It was the only good card he had held.
“Gentlemen,”  I  said,  intentionally  shuffling  the  cards  so  they  threatened  to  spill  from  me.
“My—husband used to play a  game with me when we  were  first wed.”  I grimaced,  putting a  tone  of
irritation in my voice. “We used to play for sweets. Of late he refuses to play anything with me at all. I still
recall it fondly, though. Do you know spit in the wind?”
The table went still in speculation. The pot built upon itself quickly in this game, reaching dangerous
proportions with four or more players. I knew the cheat would be unable to  resist.  The two  honorable
men looked at each other, clearly unwilling to take advantage of a woman with a tankard of ale in her.
But the cheat nodded. “I know it,” he said. “I’ll play one hand. More would be too rich for me tonight.”
“Well,” Collin hedged, “if it’s just one hand.”
“One hand,” the merchant agreed.
I dealt out the six cards per player, a thrill of warmth starting in my middle. Taking a steadying breath,
I picked  mine up,  planning out how to  use  them. My pulse increased  as  I anticipated  the end,  and  I
concentrated on keeping my breathing even.
There was a jingle as we all contributed a coin. Spit in the wind was too fast for sleight of hand. The
cheat’s  cards  would stay  right where  they were.  Everyone  simply played  the card  of his  choice.  The
highest card won, pulling in the coins along with the cards. The winner then had not six cards  to  chose
from but nine. The losers had five. Play repeated with additional coins being bet until one person had all
the cards—and all the money. The winner would have taken six coins and turned  it into twenty-four  at
the very least.  I had  an even chance  of walking away  with the pot.  I  would  either  win  it  outright  or
blackmail the cheat into losing it to me.
The cheat won the first round, then I won the second. The merchant won the third, setting everyone
to seven cards except for Collin, who had three. “I’ve got fish offal for a hand,” the man said, knowing he
couldn’t come back from such a low position. Spitting his stick onto the floor, he threw his cards on the
table. “I’m done. I’ll buy my cards out.”
I stifled a smile. I had been hoping he’d do that. What it meant was he would contribute three coins to
the table, one for each of his remaining cards, instead of playing to the end. My pulse hammered as the
coins hit the table. I had to win this.
The cheat won the next, and I the next two, then the cheat again. It  brought  the merchant down  to
three cards to the cheat’s and my nine each. “That’s as far as I’ll go,” the merchant said, easing his cards
down and emptying his tankard. Three more coins joined the center of the table. He remained watching,
as did Collin. Both wanted to see the end.

Together the cheat and I laid down our chosen cards. My jaw clenched. I hardly bested  his by the
color, and the man’s mocking brow shifted to concern.
The merchant leaned toward Collin. “When this is done, I’d like to talk with you. I might be willing to
loan you money to hire more workers if they make cord for my shops.”
Collin’s eyes went distant in thought. “I’ll starve if we go to war and I’m making nets.”
I was ahead by two cards. I should act before I got behind, making his concession look forced. “Do
you think it will come to war?” I said, surprised at the quaver in my voice.
Immediately the merchant became reassuring and jovial. “Not at all, milady,” he said, his reassurance
falling flat on me. “King Stephen dislikes war as much as the merchant guild. Princess Contessa  will be
wed in such a manner that no one will think to go to war. I can’t see the king abandoning his comfortable
slippers to put on boots and march or sail away. Still, it is best to be prepared, eh?”
The  cheat  made  a  rude  noise  and  reached  for  his  tankard.  Clearly  he  didn’t  care.  “Ah,”  I  said
cryptically,  thinking  of  the  card  in  his  boot.  “But  a  king  can  find  himself  in  the  oddest  of  boots
occasionally.” I looked at him squarely, eyes wide and innocent. “And a queen often finds herself on the
strangest of arms—from time to time.”
The cheat  froze as  he took  in my carefully accented  words.  His tankard  slowly descended  to  the
table, and he stared at me. “Is that so?” he said, shoulders tense.
I nodded slowly, confidently, as he forced his shoulders down. “It is. I’ve seen it.”
His clean-shaven chin was thrust forward, and I wasn’t surprised when he jostled my ale to spill it as
he reached to place  another  coin.  “The cards!”  the merchant called,  and  as  he and  Collin pushed  the
discard pile to safety, the cheat leaned close to me.
“What do you want?” he muttered, his eyes almost black in the dim light.
“Lose to me,” I whispered breathlessly, “or you’ll lose your hands.”
The barmaid sighed at the spill so loudly I could hear her from across the room. The cheat kept  his
eyes upon his cards as she blotted at the mess. I knew he was trying to decide if I would call him on his
cheating, and  what would happen  if he couldn’t  escape.  He  eyed  the  coins  on  the  table.  His  breath
quickened as his gaze went to the door. I narrowed my eyes in threat.
“Fold or play?” the merchant prompted. The cheat reached for a card in his hand.
“Innkeeper?” I called loudly, my eyes riveted to the cheat’s brown ones. My heart pounded. I knew
that I couldn’t  turn him in; they might  cut  off  his  hands.  But  cards  was  a  game  of  not  just  skill  but
bluff—and Kavenlow had taught me well.
His mouth twitched, and his thumb rubbed the second finger on his hand. “Ah, hell with it. I fold,” he
said, grimacing as he threw his cards to mingle with the others.
The two men leaned back with a sigh. I didn’t reach for the coins, surprised when my exhaled breath
shook. I jumped when the innkeeper bumped my shoulder, brought by my earlier call. “I’m buying the
table a round of ale,” I said. “It was a wonderful game, gentlemen. If you will excuse me?” I sat on my
bench and smiled at each in turn as my pulse slowed.
The merchant rose immediately, knowing from experience a lady wouldn’t put such a large sum away
while anyone was  watching. “A pleasure,  ma’am,” he said,  inclining his  head  and  going  to  the  casks
where the innkeeper was drawing four tankards.
The bench scraped loudly as Collin rose  with a  pained  slowness.  He  had  a  new stick  between  his
teeth already. “Ma’am,” he said  shortly, almost hobbling as  he went to  join Trevor.  I wondered  if he
suffered from bone-ache, and the stick was from a willow.

I turned to the cheat. For all of three seconds I resisted the urge to cock my eyebrow, then gave in,
making him scowl. There was no joy in taking his money. I had been lucky.
“That’s my money,” he said as he placed seven coins atop the pile to pay for his loss.
Immediately I stiffened. “Not anymore, it isn’t.”
He  leaned  closer,  clearly  going  to  say  something.  I  could  smell  horse  sweat  on  him,  and  earth.
Glancing at the door he muttered, “Purchasing? You’re good. You’re very good.”
On edge, I shifted all but one coin into my bag to pay for the ale. “If you mean I know how to play
cards and spot a cheat, yes. If you mean I cheat? You are sadly mistaken. I could have won it all from
you honestly, but I’m in a hurry.”
Silent, he glanced at my bowl of soup  before  he pulled the king from his boot,  the queen  from his
sleeve, and a priest from behind his collar. “We made a good team, didn’t we?”
My jaw dropped. “This is my money,” I said as I stood. “All of it. Get out of my sight before I tell the
innkeeper and you’re thrown into the pillory.”
He stood slowly, clearly not alarmed as the cards were now upon the table  and  not on his person.
Gathering them all, he wedged them in a stiff leather box and tucked it behind his shirt. The man had his
own cards. How could he not be a cheat? “Good-bye, Lady Black Sheep.”
I frowned at the connotation as he went to get his ale. He said a few words to the merchant and cord
maker before he left, swallowing his tankard in two breaths to make his Adam’s apple bob.
My bag was substantially heavier, and knowing the target I was, I motioned for the innkeeper.  The
flush from my win vanished as he brought me a new tankard. “Do you have a son who can accompany
me as I shop tonight?” I asked.
He nodded and took the coin I had left on the table.  “I’ll fetch him, ma’am,” he said.  “Though if I
were you, I’d wait until morning.”
“Everything will be gone by then,” I said, clutching my arms about myself. He walked away, his head
nodding in understanding.
The merchant and Collin were deep in conversation as I waited for the innkeeper’s son. I felt ill, the
fish soup sitting uncomfortably in my knotting stomach. My first stop would be to get a new dart pipe. I
expected the cheat was a thief as well, and despite the assurance of an escort and a topknot of deadly
darts, I was alone and vulnerable.
My eyes closed, and my jaw clenched. My parents were dead, I was  a  beggar’s  get,  and  the only
person I had left in the world had let me live a lie. And there wasn’t a soul I could tell.

Nine
“No horses!” I flicked my gaze past the stableman to the stalls. “What are those?”
The man took the lantern down from an overhead hook and rubbed his whiskered face.
It was blessedly warm inside the stable, but my arms were still wrapped around me. To my disgust,
the innkeeper’s son  had  been  half-drunk  in addition to  being half-witted.  After fending off his groping
hands, I had left him on a corner singing of women to finish my shopping alone. I was safer without him.
And I wasn’t as out of place as I had originally feared.
Scores of people were in the streets shopping by lamplight. Being under a terrible time constraint and
too dispirited to care, I had accepted inferior everything: my blankets  were  one  thickness  not two,  my
cooking utensils were  made  of  copper  and  wood  instead  of  clean  metal,  and  the  change  of  clothes
shoved dismally into the bottom of my pack had been worn before.
At least my boots were my own, and the gray cloak  bumping about  my ankles  was  fresh from the
loom. Even better,  I again had  a  whip coiled  in supple  loops  and  fastened  to  my  waist.  It  was  eight
beautiful feet  of leave-me-alone,  and  it gave me more  confidence  than I deserved.  No  knife,  though.
Clean steel of any length and strength was nearly as expensive as a horse.
I had been to two other liveries already. If I didn’t find a horse here, I wouldn’t have time for my bath
and find a mount both. And leaving without a horse with the hope to buy it from a fellow traveler wasn’t a
promising proposition.
“Come back tomorrow,” the man said as he shuffled to the wide doors. “I’ve got a few at  pasture.
Seems horses are in demand now. Damned wedding has everyone jumpy.”
The last was  muttered  darkly,  and  I  reached  out  after  him.  “Wait.  Please?”  I  said,  and  his  eyes
widened as he caught sight of my whip. I clutched my cloak closer, hiding it. “What about one of those?”
I stepped  from  the  ring  of  light  his  lamp  made  to  where  two  magnificent  black  horses—a  perfectly
matched mare and a gelding—stood sleepy and nodding.
His brow  was  furrowed,  his mind  clearly  on  my  whip  and  not  the  horses.  “Ah—you  can’t  have
those,” he said. “They belong to someone in the palace. A gift for the princess.”
I took a breath to explain, then let it out in frustration as  I gazed  at  my beautiful horses  I couldn’t
have. He wouldn’t believe me. Probably take me to the palace gates as moonstruck. Lips pursed, I went
to the last stall. “What’s wrong with this one?” I said, surprised to  see  a  child curled  up in the corner,
almost under the mare’s feet. Her body was thin from growing too fast, covered  by a  grimy, too-short
dress. I couldn’t tell how long her hair was as it was a mat of tangles and straw, and her toes were black
with filth.
The man leaned over the edge of the short wall. His gaze fell upon her, then rose to the horse. “Can’t
sell you Dirt.” His voice was oddly flat.
“Why not?” The brown mare looked sturdy, though a little short. Almost a large pony. My irritation
tightened, knowing in a  seller’s  market,  he could  demand  almost anything. When he  didn’t  answer,  I
entered the stall. The mare’s whiskers tickled my palm when she dropped her head to greet me. “Is she
yours?”
“Bought her this spring,” he admitted, clearly not pleased I was in with her.
Good, I thought. It was a matter of finding the right price, and I was going to make sure it was one I
could pay.  I ran my fingers down  the mare’s  leg and  lifted a  hoof.  Kavenlow  had  taught me to  ride,
insisting being able to choose a good horse was as important as being able to keep your seat in a jump.
Letting the man stew for a bit, I looked her over. “There’s talk of war in the streets,” I said calmly as I

patted the mare’s shoulder. “You can sell her to me tonight or give her to the palace when they assemble
their cavalry troops in the morning.”
“Costenopolie doesn’t have a mounted army,” the stableman said quickly.
“I imagine they are going to need lots of horses, then—aren’t they?”
The man looked like a trained bear as he shifted from foot to foot. The girl woke, and I scraped up a
smile to soothe her frightened stare.  She  couldn’t  be  more  than thirteen,  gawky with adolescence.  I’d
been  enamored  of horses  at  that age,  though I’d  never  been  allowed  to  sleep  with them. “She has  a
cracked hoof,” I said, trying to keep the price reasonable, “and is out of condition. I’m willing to pay you
a good price, regardless.”
The girl’s eyes widened. “You can’t,” she cried, scrambling up. “You won’t!”
“Shut yer mouth!” the stableman  bellowed,  and  I,  the girl, and  all the horses  jumped.  “I’ll sell the
worthless thing if I want!” He turned to me with a smile. “You leaving tonight?”
I hadn’t  liked him shouting, and  I nodded  curtly. My curiosity took  on a  tinge of confusion as  he
beckoned me out into the small stable yard. Giving the mare a pat, I latched the stall shut behind me and
followed him to where he waited just outside. He leaned close enough for me to smell the sour pork he
had eaten tonight, and I backed away. “If it were just the horse, ma’am,” he said, “I’d sell her to you and
be done with it. But it’s the girl.”
My eyebrows rose, and I glanced behind me into the lit stables.
“I bought the horse after her family died in a fire,” he continued. “It used to belong to them, and she
won’t leave the mare. Screams as if the devil himself were after her if you try. She  won’t  stay  with the
folks that took  her in and  gave her work,  either.  They quit  coming  to  fetch  her,  seeing  as  she’s  old
enough to be on her own. If I sell the mare to you, she’s going to follow you sure as chu pits stink. She’s
a wicked thing, but I get too much work out of her to let her go for nothing. Maybe if you added a little
something…”
My face warmed. He had himself a slave. I recalled her haunted eyes watching me from her narrow
face. She was what I would have been had Kavenlow not bought me: a beggar beholden to filth like this
man for everything she had.
Kavenlow had kept me from such misery as this, I thought, unable to be angry with him. He had
lied to me, but his love had been true. I had to find him before a Misdev soldier did. And though it would
complicate my life immeasurably, I couldn’t leave this girl here  to  accept  whatever  this man forced  on
her. Right now, her grime protected her. That might change if he ever got drunk and found her. “I’ll take
both,” I said, praying I had enough.
“She’ll make  a  fine  servant,  ma’am,”  he  said,  his  eyes  fixed  on  the  money  I  was  stacking  on  a
fencepost. “She jest need a good whipping. I can’t bear to beat a woman. But seeing as you are one…”
His grin turned ugly. “She’d make a fine lady a good servant,” he repeated, his eyes dropping to the coil
of leather on my hip.
She wouldn’t, and I fought to keep from sneering that he would pander to me like that. The man was
vile. I’d known such commerce took place in my streets. God save me, I was one of the commodities. I
would make it clear to the girl that I bought her freedom, not her. “I want the girl, her horse, and the tack
for it,” I said, disgusted as I gave him everything but a few coins.
“Done,” he said greedily as he snatched them up in a thick-fingered hand.
We spun at the sound of hooves. “Look out!” the stableman shouted, stumbling back as  the brown
mare clattered into the yard. The girl clung to the horse’s back like a brown shadow. “Addie!” he cried
as the mare took the low fence. “Come back here. Wretched girl!” He ran to the street’s edge, coming

to a frustrated halt. Dogs barked, and a candle flickered as a curtain was pulled aside. I stood in shock
as my horse ran into the dark and was gone. “Addie!” he shouted again. He turned to me, anger hunching
his shoulders. “I’ll get her ma’am,” he all but growled. “I’ll get her and tan her hide so well she won’t be
able to go horseback for a fortnight.”
“My horse,” I said, outraged. “You let her steal my horse! Is this why you’re the only one in the city
with horses to sell? How many times have you done this tonight?”
The man’s face went ashen in the light spilling from the barn. “No, ma’am!” he cried. “She run off on
her  own.  Ask  anyone;  I’m  an  honest  man!”  He  took  a  step  to  the  gate,  then  turned  back  again.
“Wait—wait here,”  he said,  his words  seeming to  stumble over  themselves.  “I’ll  get  your  horse.  She
couldn’t have run far.”
My eyes narrowed as he jogged to the street. He turned and gestured for me to stay, then lumbered
into the dark. Dogs barked at his shouts, and I stared in disbelief at the empty street. He had my money.
I had no horse. I had to leave. Now.
Not  knowing  what  else  to  do,  I  went  into  the  stables  to  pick  out  my  saddle.  There  wasn’t  a
sidesaddle, but I could ride astride. Kavenlow had insisted I learn, despite the stares of the stable-boys.
Worried, I sat on a bale of straw and tugged my dress hem down. The gelding flicked his ears back and
then up, clearly not sure whether he liked me or not. “That girl is halfway to the forest  by now,” I said
aloud, and his ears stayed pricked.
I frowned with a sudden thought. I had paid for a horse, its tack, and a girl, much as the idea revolted
me. It wasn’t my fault he had allowed all but the tack to run out the barn  door  and  into the night. The
horse I bought wasn’t coming back. I had every right to take one of these. After all, they were intended
for me.
Making soft noises,  I entered  the mare’s  stall and  made  friends  with  her.  I  liked  the  more  flashy
gelding, but the mare would have more endurance. “Why shouldn’t I take you?” I whispered, my fingers
arranging the silky strands of her mane. “You’re my horse. That I haven’t been presented with you yet is
a formality. He should be thankful I paid for you at all.”
I flushed in shame for what I was going to do as I got the saddle and pad and tightened the cinch. The
mare tossed her head as the weight of them hit her back. She looked  as  eager  as  I was  to  leave.  Her
stablemate stamped and blew; he knew he was being left behind.
My expectation that the man would come bursting back in at any moment kept my pulse hammering.
Guilt made me choose the bridle in most need of repair, and I slipped the bit in between her teeth. The
bag of belongings I had purchased went into a tattered saddlebag I found. I hadn’t exactly arranged  to
purchase it, but I was stealing a horse; the bag was incidental.
Fingers trembling, I turned the oil flame down and led my mare  out into the yard.  The noise of her
hooves was loud, and I cringed. I had paid for a horse. I was taking one. My gaze roved over the empty
yard, listening for the stableman. Nothing. I couldn’t wait. I had to go.
I gazed up at the stars, unseen behind the smoke of a hundred fires. Asking for forgiveness, I swung
up into the saddle. Pitch— as I decided to call her—shifted a  step,  then settled  as  I adjusted  my new
cloak to best cover my legs.
“She’s my horse to take. I’m not a thief,” I said as I shifted my weight and sent Pitch into the street.
But somehow I couldn’t seem to still the small, nagging voice that said I was.

Ten
I pulled my cloak, tighter about my shoulders, relishing the clean smell of the wool  and  glad for its
warmth as the cold slipped in from the bay to fill the town. Having decided careening through the streets
on a  galloping horse  was  a  sure  way to  attract  attention,  I was  again on foot.  Slow  and  hypnotically
relaxing, the noise of Pitch plodding behind me at the end of her lead echoed against the buildings. I was
sensing alarm in the few knots of people huddled under the puddles of flickering light, and  I wondered
what the rumors had shifted to.
I  warily  eyed  a  group  arguing  as  I  passed.  The  street  traffic  had  dropped  off  with  an  alarming
suddenness, but the people  who were  left were  noisy. “Lady Black  Sheep,”  a  masculine voice called
sarcastically, and my breath seemed to freeze in me. A shadow  pulled itself away  from the lamp. Chu
pits, it was the cheat. I looked up at the hazy heavens, wondering why it wasn’t raining. Everything else
seemed to be going wrong.
He angled away from the small group, a gray horse trailing behind him. My hand plucked a dart from
my topknot and I field it hidden in my palm. I wondered if I should risk making a scene by darting him or
if there were enough people about that I could tolerate his presence. I decided on the latter but kept the
dart where it was.
“Sir Cheat,” I said tightly as he came even with me. His horse wore a patched riding pad instead of a
saddle. A bedroll and pack were tied behind it, filthy with use.
“My name isn’t cheat. It’s Duncan.”
“I don’t care,” I said, eying the street. Pitch made greeting noises and accepted the gray gelding in the
easygoing manner of equines. I, however, wasn’t pleased.
“Look… lady,” he said, “and I’m being generous with the title. I have to talk to you.”
My jaw clenched. “I don’t owe you anything. Go away.”
“Hey,” he said. “Hold up.” He matched his pace to mine. “Ah, no one has caught me cheating since I
was fourteen.”
“Congratulations.”  My  eyes  were  on  the  next  pool  of  light.  Perhaps  I  should  have  tolerated  the
innkeeper’s son after all.
“Will you listen to me?”
He grabbed  my arm,  stopping  me. Shocked,  I tugged away  from him. “Don’t  touch  me!”  I  said,
feeling my face go hot. Angry, I continued on, my pace quick and stilted. If he grabbed me again, I was
going to drop him where he stood.
The cheat  took  a  breath  and  surged  after  me. “All right, but  listen.  What  you  did  in  the  inn  was
incredible. I’ve never built up such a stockpile of cards before. Not that fast. You fed them to  me,” he
said, sounding grudgingly impressed. “Offered distractions so I could move them. And you did it so you
could blackmail me into giving the winnings to you.”
“What if I did?” I said, not proud of myself.
“Don’t be  such a  snot,”  he said,  and  I stifled the urge to  slap  him.  “I’m  not  mad.  Not  anymore,
anyway. It was as beautiful a bit of trickery as I’ve ever seen. You took the table’s money and kept your
lily-white hands spotless.”
“Must be my breeding showing,” I muttered. Why was he still here? I had made it obvious I wanted
him to go.
“Will you stop?” he demanded. “We can do far better together than we can alone.”

My feet halted, and I stared at him. He thought I was a thief. He wanted us to work together? “I am
not a thief!” I said loudly, and he pursed his lips in bother and glanced over the empty street.
“Of course you’re not,” he said, with a hurried quickness, eyes still roving. “Neither am I. I’m a cheat,
and I only take from those who can afford it.”
“Oh,” I said dryly. “A noble cheat. That makes it so-o-o-o much better.”
Duncan didn’t seem bothered by my scorn, actually touching the brim of his dirty hat.  Angel’s Spit,
was there nothing clean outside the palace? “So what do you say, Lady Black  Sheep?  Shall we  find a
quiet table and have a quiet conversation?”
“No,” I said sharply. “I’m not interested in your paltry little schemes…” I hesitated.  “What did you
say your name was?”
“Duncan.”
“… Duncan,” I said, gripping Pitch’s lead tight. “I want to leave the city, not fleece it.”
“Good  idea.  Leaving, I mean.” He  lurched into motion as  I strode  briskly forward.  “This damned
betrothal has everyone jumpy. But you’ve got a star-shining play with your act of fallen wealth to soften
their  guard,  little  girl.  Pit  that  with  my  skills  at  cards,  and  the  excess  coinage  we  could  alleviate  is
incalculable.”
I seethed  at  being called “little girl,” but as  I put  my  eyes  on  the  next  puddle  of  light,  my  throat
tightened in fear. I forced myself to keep moving and not draw attention by changing my pace. A soldier,
in my father’s colors, but I could tell he was Garrett’s man by his stance alone.
Not so soon! I thought, my knees going weak. They couldn’t be looking for me in the streets already.
Swallowing hard, I shifted the dart between my fingers. I could probably put the sentry down from here
using the new dart tube in my hair, but it would tell Garrett where I was.
There was an alley to my right, and I took it, heading away from the docks and toward the western
gate up a  street  and  over.  A flash of annoyance  colored  my fright as  Duncan matched  my move.  He
glanced behind us with a casual interest. “Where are we going?”
“We aren’t going anywhere,” I said, distracted. “Will you please leave?”
The alley opened into the next street. This one was still lit and busy as it led to the gate. I forced my
pace to slow, matching that of those around us. My pulse raced. Duncan walked beside me, his silence
worrying. I put the back of my hand to my face, carefully wedging my palmed dart into my sleeve.  My
cheek was cold. How was I going to get past them?
“I don’t think you realize the extent of my talents, Lady Black Sheep,” Duncan said. “I am the best
carder up and down the coast. Maybe you’ve heard of me?”
“No. And stop calling me that.”
“What do you want me to call you, then?”
“Tess.” I glanced ahead to a guard questioning a haggard woman with a  heavy pack  bowing down
her shoulders. They were looking for me: a woman traveling alone.
“Well, Tess,” Duncan continued, watching me watch  the woman.  “I can  assure  you there’s  few as
good at cards as I am. It’s a mistake to walk away. You owe it to yourself to at least see what you’re
turning down.”
The woman was  dismissed,  and  she  shuffled to  the gates  with  an  uncomfortable  haste.  They  are
looking for me! I thought, my mind whirling. “Take my hand,” I said, feeling ill.
“Your hand?” he said slyly, the surprise I’d have expected utterly absent. “Of course.”

My stomach dropped. Shifting his horse’s lead, he slipped his hand into my free  one.  It  was  warm
and dry, and he twined his fingers into mine with a grip that wasn’t tight but comfortably firm. A surge of
unexpected emotion warmed the pit of my belly, mixing with my fear in a spine-tingling slurry of reeling.
I kept my head lowered as we  approached  the sentry.  I thought of my dart  up my sleeve  and  the
whip on my waist. Don’t see me. Don’t see me, I thought, the litany setting my blood to pound through
my head.  Vertigo  came  from  nowhere,  rising  to  set  my  limbs  trembling  as  we  passed  him.  But  we
continued, unchecked. The city gate was ahead, the night black beyond it. “What is he doing, Duncan?” I
asked softly, thinking I should have eaten that soup, whether it was staring at me or not.
Duncan tipped his hat off, looking behind us as  he picked  it up.  “Watching us,” he drawled  with a
questioning, confident lilt to his voice.
“Hold me,” I whispered, feeling unreal and distant. “Keep walking.”
“Of course, Tess.” His tone had a sly understanding, and he put an arm over my shoulders and pulled
me close.  I could  smell the stink of ale on him, mixing with woodsmoke,  crushed  grass,  and  his own
sweat. My blood tingled, and I cursed myself for a fool, thinking how heady his arm felt about me while
my life hung by a thread. He wasn’t a nervous young noble. His hands weren’t ready to fly from me at
the slightest sound.  They gripped  me with a  dominating sureness  that  carried  a  promise  I’d  never  felt
before.
“Mmmm, a whip?” he breathed as his featherlight touch of his fingers slipped  down  my shoulder  to
find my hip. “You are  full of surprises.  Anything else  I can  do  for you,  love?” An unstoppable  shiver
shook me. “A kiss, maybe?”
Oh, God help me. He knew what he was doing to me. A wisp of my hair pulled against the stubble
on his cheek, and I stared at him, seeing his eyes go intense. I heard the guard hail someone behind us,
and I pushed Duncan away.
His soft chuckle said more than words. I could tell I was flushing and was glad the dark  hid it. My
heart was pounding, and my knees were weak. It’s from the danger, I thought, not because a man’s
arms were about me. But I knew I lied. I’d been held by men before and stolen flirtatious kisses behind
the roses. I knew how easy it was to confuse the thrill of danger with the stir of desire. And I knew what
I felt was not born from the guards but Duncan.
Duncan glanced behind us, then leaned close. “They’re looking for you,” he said,  his breath  on my
cheek warm. “What did you do? Correct their manners? Tell them their stockings needed mending?”
“Nothing.” I forced my thoughts from him, recognizing them for the folly they were.
“Well, there’s another guard. I’d wager he knows. I’ll ask him.”
Fear pulled my head up. “No.”
Duncan’s look turned almost angry. “Spill it, pretty thief. What did you do?”
Taking  a  quick  breath,  I  eyed  the  gate  ahead,  counting  four  sentries,  two  on  either  side  of  the
opening. I couldn’t tell Duncan who I was. “They might think I stole a horse,” I improvised. “Just help me
get past the gates.”
His anger turned to a manipulative understanding. “Ah. This one here?” he asked, not appalled  as  I
thought he should be. “Not smart, Lady Black Sheep. They hang you for that in the capital. Well, they’d
hang me for that. You, they’d probably strip and flog.” He eyed me. “That might be entertaining.”
“I didn’t steal her,” I nearly hissed, frantic he might turn me in. “I paid for her. The man let the first
one run away. I had every right to take another! And you are a disgusting pile of chu, you know that?”
We slowed as we fell into the line before the gate. My face went cold when his expression changed,

becoming darker, more intense as he ran his eyes slowly over  me, lingering on my shallow curves  and
face, never reaching my eyes. I’d never been looked at like that before, and I stifled a shudder.
“I want everything you won at the inn,” he said, finally meeting my eyes.
My breath caught. “I spent it. All of it.”
“In an hour?” he protested. “You had—” His brow furrowed in bother. “You couldn’t have spent all
of it!”
“I’m good at spending money,” I said bitterly. “It’s all I’ve  done  for the past  ten years.”  We  were
starting to attract attention, and I lowered my voice. “Please. Help me get out. I’ll give you whatever you
want—except the horse.”
The press  of the people  at  the gate  had  increased,  and  Duncan’s  gray horse  tossed  his head  and
fidgeted. The cheat soothed the flighty animal with a surprising gentleness. His eyes caught the torchlight,
glinting in greed. I waited in a breathless anticipation.
His gaze flicked to the sentries at the gate, men over my shoulder behind us. Nodding, he pulled out a
clay flask. Uncorking it, he took a swallow. My lips curled as he spilled some on his front.  “Get back,
woman!” he suddenly shouted, shocking me. “Before I beat you blue.”
Wide-eyed, I gripped the dart hidden in my sleeve. A wash of vertigo took me, dying to nothing as he
rolled his eyes toward the sentries in exasperation. My tension eased, then swelled back to life.
“Damned wench,” he said, hunching into himself and slurring his words. “Get behind me where  you
belong.”
I flushed. But the cart ahead of us trundled through the gate. Freedom beckoned, barred by sheathed
swords. The night shimmered in the hazy moonlight, its darkness and cooler air welcoming compared to
the crush of people behind me. I shirked back between the horses, trying to stay unnoticed. Nausea rose
high, and I forced myself to breathe.
“Trouble?” the sentry said as he looked past Duncan to the people lined up behind us.
“Cursed wife spent all the money,” he grumbled. “Left me with hardly anything to put ale in my belly.
Why do we have to wait? We’ve never had to wait before.”
Duncan leaned heavily against the sentry, breathing his stale breath over him. The sentry pushed him
away. “What was your business?” the other guard asked in a bored litany.
“Selling my culled rams. She bought a cloak with the money.” He  turned  to  me, spittle flying as  he
shouted, “You don’t need a cloak! You never stir your ugly hide out of the house!”
Don’t see me, I thought, pulse hammering. Don’t see me at all. My head felt thick, and I stared at
the ground and held onto the saddle as my knees threatened to give way. Something was wrong. I was
afraid, but it wasn’t fear that was making my muscles tremble and  my head  spin. The sensations  were
reminiscent of when Kavenlow had been building my immunity to the venom on my darts. Why was I so
dizzy?
“She keeps  me from my ale,” Duncan slurred.  “Shouldn’t keep  a  man from  his  ale.”  He  lurched,
falling into the sentry again, holding himself up by the man’s shoulders.
The sentry shoved him away. “Go,” he said in disgust. “Go on. Get out.”
Duncan fell back into his horse’s shoulder. The frightened animal shied, and I reached out. “Woman!”
he shouted. “Help me onto my horse.”
“Get out,” the sentry demanded, drawing his sword. I cried a warning as it descended, smacking into
the rump of Duncan’s  horse.  The animal lunged forward  through the  gate,  dragging  Duncan  since  he
refused  to  let go of the reins.  I jogged  after  them with Pitch.  When I  caught  up,  Duncan  shoved  his

horse’s bridle into my hand and stumbled to Pitch’s side.
“I said, help me up!” Duncan slurred.
The guard’s eyes were on me. Leaning close, I whispered, “Get on your own horse!”
“A man wouldn’t let his wife have a saddle before he had  one,”  he said  softly. Then he broke  into
song, singing lustily as  he tried  to  get up on to  Pitch’s  saddle.  The mare  spun in a  quick  circle as  he
fumbled and lurched, finally gaining her back.
Outraged, I flung the reins over Pitch’s head to him. His horse’s reins were in my hands, and I looked
up at the gray’s tall back. The monster stood too high for me to get up on without a stirrup, so I angrily
paced beside them. Duncan gave a loud, wet belch, disgusting me. My jaw  clenched,  but as  I glanced
back at the city’s walls, I realized I was out. I had done it! Somehow we had done it!
The night air felt cooler, and a great deal cleaner. Heart pounding, I fought the urge to  move faster.
All of the visible traffic before us had turned west to the little arable land we had. My ears warmed as I
abruptly understood the words that Duncan was singing. Even worse, he kept starting over every time he
got stuck at the same phrase. Finally he remembered it, yelling it at the top of his voice. The silence as he
quit seemed all the more profound.
Slowly the noise of the  horses’  hooves  became  loud.  We  were  alone,  the  trees  arching  over  us
protectively,  hiding  us  from  the  stars.  I  tucked  the  dart  back  into  my  hair  with  shaking  hands.  My
dizziness had gone, leaving my hands trembling with only my spent fear.
The  shadow  that  was  Duncan  looked  down  at  me,  his  smug  satisfaction  obvious  even  in  the
blackness. “There you are, Lady Black Sheep,” he said. “I got you out, safe and sound.”
“Thank you,” I said tightly, my worry at my vertigo coming out as anger. And I didn’t like him riding
when I was forced to walk.
“Thank you?” he said, sounding affronted. “I got you past four—no, five guards—and  all I get is a
thank-you? You ungrateful brat! You think that  was  easy?  It  wasn’t  as  if it was  raining and  we  could
have simply walked past them.”
My eyes narrowed as he swung down, putting us back on more even terms.  The knots  in my belly
eased. It lasted for all of three heartbeats until he said, “So, about my fee…”
I rocked back a step. I had  nothing. My offer,  while not empty,  lacked  a  certain  promptness.  My
face burned. “I said I spent it. You’ll get your money as soon as I do.”
“Oh-h-h-h,” he laughed. “I’ve heard that before. And I’ve got a burning-hell good idea on how you
can pay me back.”
The appraising way he was eying me made my pulse race, and a new fear set my stomach to roil. He
was three stone over my weight and stood half a head taller than I did. Remembering the warmth of his
arm about  me, I backed  up.  If he touched  me, he would die with three  darts  in his  belly.  “Take  my
supplies,” I said, cursing my voice as it quavered.
“I don’t  want your supplies.  I want to  know  how you saw  me move my cards.  A week  working
together ought to do it. And I keep everything until you pay me back what you took in the inn.”
My breath  came  in a  gulp of surprise.  A week  working  together? “I told  you I’m not a  cheat.  I
appreciate your help, and if you don’t take your fee from my supplies, it’s not my fault.”
Saying nothing, he shoved Pitch’s lead at me, and I stepped back out of his reach,  heart  pounding.
He hesitated, eying me. “Kinda skittery, aren’t you?”
I stared,  not believing this was  happening as  he dropped  Pitch’s  lead  and  reached  for  her  cinch.
“What are you doing?” I finally managed, snatching her reins up and gripping them along with his horse’s

lead.
“Taking your saddle until you pay me back.”
Pitch’s ears flicked as her cinch swung free. “What?” I exclaimed. “I never…”
He turned, his stance going aggressive. “You said if I helped you past the gates, you would give me
anything except your horse. I can’t believe you were stupid enough to steal a horse! Or do you make a
habit of using your womanly charms to win your innocence? God I hate that. You women get everything
for nothing.”
“You chull bait!” I exclaimed. “I’ve never stolen anything in my life! I paid for her!”
“Yeah. All right.” Undoing the knot holding the pad to his horse, he handed me the blanket. I held it
blankly. “You can have my riding pad,” he said magnanimously as he moved my saddle from Pitch to his
horse.
Dumbfounded, but realizing the only other option was to cowardly dart him and run, I did nothing as
he took the blanket from my loose grip and fastened it atop Pitch. Giving his horse a reassuring pat, he
made the half jump to  his horse’s  back,  not even using the stirrups.  I dropped  his horse’s  reins,  and
Duncan leaned forward to gather them up.
“Where to?” he said, looking very pleased with himself as he sat tall in my saddle. “Saltwood is the
only thing in this direction, and finding a fisherman willing to risk a coin on cards is like finding a virgin in a
brothel.” He  hesitated,  his face  lost in shadow.  “There’re  the  sailors,  though.  They  don’t  have  much
money, but they’re free with it. That might be a good place to start. Work out the tack  we’re  going to
play out before we hit the bigger towns.” He hesitated, looking down at me. “You gonna walk the whole
way?”
I led Pitch to a fallen tree and scrambled up the best I could. Duncan’s eyes widened as he saw me
with my feet to either side of the animal. He opened his mouth, then looked away as I flushed and pulled
my cloak to cover my legs. I sniffed, trying to make it as haughty as I could. “Keep the saddle. I’m not
working with you,” I said, nudging Pitch into motion.
“No, no, no, my pretty thief,” he said as he pulled even with me. “You owe me. And I want to know
how you spotted me moving my cards. If you caught me, someone else could.”
“I’m not a thief,” I said, wondering if I dare try to outrun him in the dark. I’d never ridden without a
saddle. The movement of muscles under me was odd, and not entirely uncomfortable.
Duncan’s words caught at me, reminding me who I really was. Within hours of losing my crown I had
shown my true birth, becoming a thief with frightening ease. The princess had taken everything from me. I
was nothing, thanks to her.
I felt the warmth of tears and held my breath, refusing to cry. I had to find Kavenlow. He  was  all I
had left. He would know who I was.

Eleven
I rubbed at my neck, in time with Pitch’s motion as I watched the flight of birds winging their way to
their evening roosts. The mat of needles and dead leaves muffled the sound of hooves. This far out, the
path was a thin ribbon, but it was  still clear  where  it ran,  circling the rocky  places  and  running beside
narrow, deeply cut streams until a good crossing was to be had.
We had  passed  only a  few people  today,  on foot  and  slow with their belongings. They had  been
frightened and unwilling to talk. It seemed my unrelenting pace had put us ahead of the crush, though, and
we  hadn’t  seen  anyone  since  noon.  Duncan  had  said  nothing  about  traveling  deep  into  the  night
yesterday;  I had  waited  until  almost  dawn  before  collapsing  by  the  road  like  the  beggar  I  was.  He
probably thought I was trying to leave him behind. He’d be right. The man was sticking tighter to me than
a burr, and I had resigned myself to his presence. At least until I found Kavenlow and the chancellor paid
him off and “encouraged” him to leave.
Pitch stumbled, and I winced when my cramped knees flamed at the jolt.  I was  hungry, exhausted,
and the pain from riding too long was almost unbearable. But I’d sling chu in the careen pits before I said
anything to  Duncan.  I’d  stopped  several  times  today  to  shift  my  legs,  blaming  the  halts  on  checking
Pitch’s feet  for nonexistent stones  or  watering her.  Duncan seemed  obnoxiously  fine,  perched  on  my
saddle and probably used to the travel.
I brushed  a  wisp of  curl  out  of  my  eyes  and  tucked  it  behind  an  ear.  The  continual  jarring  had
loosened my topknot, and as I wound my hair back up for the uncountable time today, I spotted a maple
leaf impaled upon a  stripped  twig. Kavenlow  had  put it there.  I had  been  following his markers  since
sunup—though Duncan didn’t know it—Kavenlow’s modified garden game of hide-and-seek paying off
in an unusual way.
The way the branch that held the marker was growing showed direction. The height of the leaf told
me he was on a horse. An upside down leaf would tell me he had lingered and moved on, or camped in
this case. We had just passed one like that. Despite my pace,  I was  almost a  full day  behind him. I’d
never catch him before Garrett’s assassin did. But Kavenlow had kept me alive for two decades. I had
to believe he could survive one Misdev guard.
I’d  been  watching  the  markers  closely  for  his  path  to  leave  the  trail  and  strike  out  southwest.
Saltwood was a harbor town, and though it would be faster by nearly several days to cross the large bay
between us and the mountaintop called Bird Island than to go around it, Kavenlow hated the water and
would most likely take the longer way.
The  thought  that  I  should  have  tried  to  free  a  garrison  instead  of  chasing  after  Kavenlow  flitted
through me, quickly dismissed. It would precipitate an armed attack, ending scores of lives, soldier and
commoner  alike.  Garrett  was  the  only  one  I  wanted  to  kill,  and  with  Kavenlow’s  political  skills  to
convince King Edmund his death was justified, that’s what I’d do.
I shivered in the chill of the coming evening. The sun was behind the trees, and it was growing dark.
We were passing beside an open field, gray in the low light, and after flicking a bothered glance behind
me at Duncan, I angled off the path and into it.
“Stopping already?”  he said.  “You went till almost dawn  yesterday.  What  about  the hundred  men
following you?” he mocked. “Seeing as you stole your own horse and all.”
“I didn’t steal Pitch,” I said tightly. “I paid for her.”
“And that’s why I had to sneak you out, yes?”
My breath quickened, but I tried to ignore him. There wouldn’t be a hundred men hunting me. There
would be one: Jeck Depressed, I shifted my weight, and Pitch obediently halted. My feet hit the ground,

and pain  almost  buckled  my  knees.  Clutching  at  the  riding  pad,  I  breathed  slow  and  shallow.  “I’m
camping there,” I said, pointing to the edge of the field.
Duncan swung from his horse—I’d found out today he had  named the gelding Tuck.  Both of them
reached for a tuft of grass, the cheat contenting himself with a single stem,  the horse  taking a  mouthful.
“That’s a god-awful place  to  camp,”  he said  around  the stalk  of green.  “If you want to  sleep  on soft
ground that’s  going to  leave  your  blanket  wet  again,  fine,  but  I’ll  be  over  there.”  He  gestured  to  a
crumbling rock face that looked as appealing as sleeping in a  dog’s  kennel.  “The fire’s warmth will be
reflected by the rock, and it will be drier.”
I was too tired to try to disguise my ignorance. “You’re right. I’ll get wood for a fire.”
“I don’t suppose you know how to start one, do you, Lady Black Sheep?”
The arrogant mockery in his voice pushed me beyond my tolerance. Jaw clenched in a flash of anger,
I flicked the bone knife from my waistband and sent it spinning across the space between us. His horse
shied as it thunked into the tree next to him. “My name is Tess! Use it!”
Duncan blinked at  the hilt of the knife quivering a  foot  away  from him. “Uh, sure,  Tess,”  he said,
reaching to  wiggle it free  from the wood  soft  with  spring  sap.  My  anger  took  on  a  healthy  dose  of
exasperation when avarice joined his surprise as he looked it over. “Hey, I’ve never seen a knife like this.
What is it? Bone?” He grinned. “Find it lying about, did we?”
Insulted, I snapped, “I bought it.”
“Just like your horse?” he challenged, eyebrows high. “All right. How much, then?”
My lips pursed. “For more than you’ll ever have to lose,” I said, knowing he wouldn’t believe me if I
told him I bought it with my crown. Literally, it seemed. I was embarrassed for having lost my temper. He
was still turning it over in his hands, and the thought crossed  me for the first time that  he might not be
willing to give it back. Worried, I hobbled closer and extended my hand. Eyes distant in thought, Duncan
gave it back, and I tucked it away.
Making an “uh-huh” of disbelief, he led  Tuck  off  the  path  to  the  rock  face.  Slow  and  pained,  I
followed, trying to keep my limping as unobtrusive as  possible.  My left leg had  gone sluggish as  it did
when I was tired, and I tried to hide its hesitancy.
Seeming unconcerned that Tuck would wander, Duncan took my saddle off his horse  and  gave the
gray a fond slap on the rump, letting him graze as he wanted. I collapsed beside the black circle of a past
fire, thinking longingly of the bath I’d paid for but never used.
“Get up,” Duncan said, pushing the toe of his soft boot into my ribs. “You’ll go stiff.”
“Stop it,” I said irritably. “I’ll get the wood in a moment.”
He squatted beside me and brushed my dress up to my knees. Shocked, I bolted upright. “What the
chu pits are you doing?” I shouted, jerking my leg out of his hand.
“Rubbing the life back into your knees. Even a blind man could see they hurt.”
Again, he reached out. Appalled, I drew back and kicked him square in the chest.
Duncan fell backward. His rump hit the earth,  and  his breath  whooshed  out.  My pulse pounded.  I
scrambled up, my fingers tingling as I fought to keep from reaching for my darts.
“What the devil is wrong with you?” he gasped from the ground, his fingers splayed over his chest as
he struggled to breathe. There was a wet print of my boot on his lower chest.
“Don’t touch me!” I demanded, face tight. He was a grasping lowlife of a man. How dare he presume
I wanted his hands on me? Even if I had. Once. By mistake.

Duncan staggered to his feet. His face was red, and his eyes were watering. “You ungrateful brat!” he
exclaimed, hunched into himself. “I was trying to help.”
“You’re a filthy liar. And don’t you ever raise your voice to me again!”
Still red-faced, Duncan made a sarcastic bow, sweeping his raggedy hat off and running it along the
dirt. “Whatever you say, Princess.”
My face went cold and my anger shifted to alarm. “What did you call me?”
“Princess,” he mocked, his eyes bitter as they dared me to throw my knife at him again. “That’s what
you seem to think you are: talking in that fool accent, checking your hair six times a day, unable to show
an ounce  of gratitude  for someone  who helps you.  Your  act  may work  on half-drunk  merchants  and
fisherman, but I know who you are.” He pointed, and my breath caught. “You’re a cheat and a thief, no
better than me, so bury your airs and shovel chu like the rest of us!”
“A thief and a cheat,” I said, hearing my voice shake. “And if you touch me again, you’ll find out if
I’m an assassin, too.”
He pulled his narrow face into a smirk, thinking I was making an idle threat. Tugging his water sack
from his pack, he affected a mien of indifference. “I’ll find the water,”  he said  over  his shoulder  as  he
swaggered into the brush.
Full of a flustered anger, I removed Pitch’s tack and rubbed her down. The horse  arched  her neck
and nickered at  my overly aggressive  touch,  leaving to  join Tuck  before  I was  done.  Eying Duncan’s
pack suspiciously, I arranged my things to claim some space. Knowing the horses wouldn’t likely stray
from a meadow surrounded by trees, I left to search out some wood.
My knees  felt like embers  as  I struck  out across  the field in the opposite  way Duncan had  gone.
Slowly my muscles loosened, the pain almost feeling good. Firewood was only one of my goals. What I
really wanted were the flowers from the stand of torch plants growing in the field where  the sun shone
most of the day. It was too early in the season, but I gathered  the spent  blossoms  from last year’s  tall
spikes lying flat on the ground. When dried and powered, the yellow flowers made a tea to ease pain and
act  as  a  mild  sedative.  It  wouldn’t  help  me  tonight,  though,  and  so  after  putting  what  I  gathered  in
Kavenlow’s small bag tied to my waist, I went to search out a willow.
I found one in a rill that was probably dry in high summer, cutting several twigs and a good portion of
me underbark.  Working my way back  to  camp  gathering deadwood,  I vigorously chewed  a  sap-rich
twig, thinking of the man in the inn.
My cloak snagged on a briar at the edge of the meadow, jerking me to a halt. Dropping my wood in
exasperation,  I  worked  to  free  it,  hesitating  when  done.  I  was  exhausted,  and  breathing  in  the
evening-cooled air, I looked over the meadow. Last year’s dead vegetation was  already  dew-wet  and
purple in the graying dusk, and there was a definite chill in the air. No rain, though, and I was thankful for
small favors.
My face went slack when I realized the field was empty.
“Where are the horses?” I whispered. “Duncan?” I cried, not seeing him. Then I went cold. “He took
them,” I breathed.
Wood forgotten, I ran to camp, fear making me feel unreal and disconnected. Had he played me like
one of his marks? Following me until he could steal everything? Not a day from the city, and I lose
everything. I was such the fool!
I skidded to a heart-pounding halt by the rock face. My things were where I’d left them. He hadn’t
robbed me. But the question still remained as to where the horses were.
“Hey! Here!”  came  a  faint call. I spun to  find Duncan emerging from under  the far trees.  He  was

leading Tuck; Pitch followed obediently behind. “I found good water,” Duncan said when he was close
enough. He slipped the rope from Tuck and shooed the horses into the field. Looking up at my silence,
his face darkened. “I’m a cheat, not a thief,” he said hotly.
“Can you blame me?” I all but shouted. “I come back to find you and the horses gone. I don’t know
you from a hole in the ground. You should have told me you were taking them!”
Duncan coiled up his rope and tossed it at his pack. “Get off your pedestal, Princess. I’m sorry  if I
scared you. I was only watering them.”
“Don’t call me that,” I said, my heart beginning to slow. “And you didn’t scare me.”
“I think I did.”  He  crossed  his ankles  and  sat  down  in a  smooth  motion. His  eyes  were  amused,
watching me from under his tatty hat. An emblem had been torn from it, and I wondered where he had
gotten it. Taking up a stick, he peeled the bark from it for kindling. “You look like that  net maker  with
that stick stuck between your teeth.”
Aghast,  I  stiffened.  “It’s  to  ease  my  soreness,”  I  accused,  refusing  to  throw  it  away.  “I’m  not
accustomed to riding without a saddle.”
“I can tell. It won’t be long before you are, though. You smell like a horse already.”
My jaw dropped. The gall of him! I stared, not knowing what to do. Feeling six times more filthy, I
sat down across the fire from him and took up a stone to pound my willow bark with. “Better that than
the chu pit you smell like,” I belatedly muttered.
“I think it’s an improvement,” he said. “Better than that soapy smell you had  before.  And I like the
smudge of pollen on your nose.”
Immediately I wiped it off and took the stick  out from between  my teeth.  My face  warmed,  and  I
pounded at the willow bark, thinking I’d like to do the same to his smirk.
Making a scoffing noise deep in his throat, he pulled a wad of fluff from his pack. Using a striker rock
and flint, he set a spark to a triangle of charred linen. The burned fabric held a faint glow of ember until
the healthy wad of waste flax caught. “What are you making for dinner?” he asked as he tried to get the
sudden burst of flame to catch the grass and twigs.
“I’m not making you dinner,” I said flatly. “I don’t even like you.”
His fingers were among his infant flame. “Camp tradition,” he said as if not having heard the last part.
“One person makes and tends the fire, the other makes dinner.”
“I got the wood,” I said quickly. A wisp of unease floated through me. I’d never made anything to eat
in my entire life.
He eyed me from under the brim of his hat. “What wood?”
I took a breath to explain, then let it out. Saying nothing, I lurched to my feet. The bottom half of my
dress darkened with dew as I stomped across the open field to pick up my dropped sticks. I struggled to
get it all back in one trip. Duncan just sat  and  watched,  the lazy cheat.  “Here,”  I said  as  I dropped  it
beside him in a clattering pile. I had bits of lichen all over me, and now my dress was wet. Angel’s Spit,
will I ever be clean again?
“What did you find for us to eat?” he asked lightly, and I stared at him. “Whoever gets the wood has
their eyes on the ground,” he said slowly as if explaining something to a child. “Did you find anything to
eat?”
I unclenched my teeth. “No.” I was sure he was making it all up. But seeing as he had eased himself
back  against the rock  face  with his hands  behind his head,  I knelt and  hesitantly pulled out  my  small
stewpot. “I’ve got a few things from the stores. What do you have?”

“Travel cake,  cheese,  dried  fish. The usual. Help  yourself.”  He  tossed  his  patched  bag  at  me.  It
landed at my knees, and I reached for it. His claims of the division of work were chu in a pit, but I was
starving, and he wasn’t showing any signs of doing anything.
At  least  he  didn’t  expect  me  to  furnish  all  the  food,  I  thought  as  I  opened  his  bag  to  find  it
contained what he said and more.  Convinced  if I protested  he would have me brushing his horse  and
mending his shoes  because  I sat  on the west  side  of the fire, I silently warmed  things up,  burning my
fingers twice.
I would be  the first to  admit my quiet compliance was  partially due  to  my thoughts being full  and
worried. Finding the horses gone had struck me with a mind-numbing blow. I’d never been so vulnerable:
out in the woods with a man I knew to be a cheat and a vagrant. Always I’d had guards and Kavenlow.
I checked my hair, vowing to keep my darts close.
Duncan industriously cleaned my saddle as I prepared my torch flowers and put them to dry beside
the fire. With luck, they would be crisp enough to powder by morning. The decoction  from the willow
bark would do tonight.
It  was  fully  dark  when  I  irresolutely  decided  there  was  nothing  more  I  could  do  to  dinner  and
pronounced it done. Duncan eagerly filled his bowl from the pot over the fire, then after tasting it, emptied
it reluctant  spoonful by reluctant  spoonful. Clearly it wasn’t  what  he  had  expected.  I  would’ve  been
angry, but even I admitted it was tasteless. Without a single word of thanks, he put his back against the
rock face and pulled out his leather box of cards.
I could feel him watching me, and I tucked myself closer to the fire. It only left me too hot in front and
too cold behind. The branches moved incessantly, the rustling continually drawing my gaze to the edge of
the firelight. My eyes widened at the screech of a  bird  or  animal. Duncan didn’t seem  bothered,  but I
wished the horses were closer.
The cheat silently manipulated his cards in and out of hiding, blatantly watching as I emptied my pack
to rearrange it into some semblance of order. We hadn’t said but a few words to each other while on the
trail, but now that we were face-to-face, his quiet irritated me. It had been a difficult day. I wasn’t used
to silence and wanted someone to talk to. Finished with my repacking, I cleared my throat. “I’m… sorry
for kicking you,” I said.
Duncan wiggled a stick into the fire until sparks flew up. “Forget it.” He rubbed his nasty stubble and
glanced at me. “Like you said, you don’t know me from a hole in the ground.”
It was the first halfway intelligent thing I had heard  him say,  but I didn’t know  what to  come  back
with. We had nothing in common.
“Play a hand with me?” he asked, his thin fingers sliding a card into his sleeve as slow and unhurried
as a musician playing scales.
Or so I thought. I met his eyes briefly. He made an odd picture of slovenly attentiveness as he sat in
his travel-stained clothes, poised and alert as he practiced his craft. “No, you cheat.”
“I’ll let you win,” he offered, a new smile on him, the first that wasn’t at my expense.
My shoulders eased. “Then I especially don’t want to play.”
Duncan shuffled the deck, keeping the same five cards on top. “Then I’ll let you lose.”
I ducked my head  to  hide my smile. “No,  thank  you.” The spring night was  cold,  and  I set  some
water to warm for tea. Dinner had been awful, but how hard could it be to make tea? “Do you have any
honey?” I questioned. He looked at me in bewilderment, and I added, “For tea.” He shook his head with
a cautious  slowness,  and  disappointed,  I dug out my tea  and  dropped  a  handful into the  cold  water.
Duncan was staring at me. “Do you want some?” I asked, trying to be nice.

“Um, yes,” he said hesitantly, and I added another handful. His brow furrowed. He leaned forward as
if to say  something, then sat  back.  “Do you want to  head  inland after  Saltwood?”  he said,  his words
clearly not what he originally intended. “It’ll be warmer.”
I pushed my fingers into my forehead as if in pain. “Duncan,” I said wearily. “I’m not a  cheat.  You
should take my saddle and just… go away.”
His eyebrows arched slyly. “You won’t find anyone better,” he persisted.
“I’ve seen street performers who can move cards like you,” I scoffed.
Duncan went cocky. “Can they do this?” he asked, bringing one of my needles out.
My jaw dropped. “W-where…” I stammered. My hand flew to my topknot, my fingers counting to
find a dart missing. “When did you take that?” I demanded, going frightened.
“Earlier.” He was smug, almost frightening in his confidence.
“When?” I said, unable to think of a time when he had been close enough.
Duncan put a finger to his nose and grinned. “I’m not saying, Lady Tess.”
I watched the dart, thinking Lady Tess was marginally better than Lady Black Sheep. “Fine,” I said
cautiously. “You’re clever and quick. Give it here.”
He heard the threat in my voice and pulled away. “Is it valuable?” He looked at it with a new interest,
grinning to show his teeth. “Did you lift it where you got that knife?”
“Duncan…” I warned. “Give it to me.”
He shook his head, thinking it was a grand game. I lunged around  the fire to  take  it, and  he pulled
away. Jumping, his fingers jerked apart. “Damn,” he said, eying the needle by his knee. “That’s wickedly
sharp. I can’t believe you keep it in your hair.”
I went cold. “Duncan, listen,” I said, knowing the venom’s effects would be  slowed  if his heartbeat
stayed slow. “You’re going to be all right. I promise I’ll see you out of it.”
Duncan looked at me as  if I was  insane. Then his humor left his face,  replaced  by a  sudden  pain.
“Wha—” he started, then bent double. “Chu pits,” he moaned. “What is it?” Then he fell over, curled up
about himself.
Lips pursed, I leaned across the camp and snatched my needle up and tucked it where it belonged. I
was more irritated than worried. Shifting around the fire, I checked his pulse at his neck. It was fast but
steady.  “Idiot!” I berated  him. “I told  you to  give it back.”  He  moaned,  and  I  sighed  in  resignation.
“You’ll be all right,” I said, scraping up my empathy and  awkwardly  patting his shoulder.  “I promise  I
won’t let you stop breathing.”
Apparently it wasn’t the right thing to say, as a violent spasm shook him, and his jaw clenched until his
neck muscles turned to cords. Remembering the cold, I pulled his blanket over him. He had curled into a
ball, his eyes closed  and  his face  tight with an agony he didn’t understand.  His breath  came  in quick,
harsh pants.
I bit my lip in concern and poked the fire for more light. He looked awful, a tinge of purple edging his
lips. The venom seemed to be acting harsher than usual. His gasping breath hesitated, then resumed. My
mild concern shifted to alarm. That wasn’t good.
“Duncan?” I said, knowing he could hear me. I watched his pulse at his neck. The wild pounding had
frightening hesitations.
“Duncan, you’re all right,” I lied. He was having a bad reaction, made worse by his fear.  “Listen to
me,” I said firmly, trying to keep what little presence of mind he had left, focused. “I have to look at your

finger.” I reached for his right hand, clutched to his middle. “Let me see it,” I coaxed.  “You need  your
hands for your trade.”
Frightened for him, I yanked  his hand from his shivering huddle to  find it swollen grotesquely.  His
middle finger was purpling. A stark white upraised circle showed where the dart had penetrated. It would
be easy to slow the venom’s spread with a tight bandage from his elbow to his finger. But doing so might
cause irreparable damage to his hand.
“I’m sorry,” I whispered, feeling nauseous. “I have to bandage your hand. It’s going to hurt like the
devil’s dogs are chewing it, but it will slow the poison down.” I hesitated, having to be honest with him.
“You might lose your finger, but if I don’t, you might lose your life.”
He jerked. “N-n-n-no,” he moaned,  yanking his hand out of my grip and  curling around  it. Sweat
beaded up on his forehead, glistening in the firelight.
“Duncan!” I tried  to  sound  authoritative but was  scared  to  death.  What  if he died  out  here?  “It’s
either that or you might die. I told you to give it back. Let me see your hand!”
He clenched into himself, trembling and sweating. He managed another guttural moan, and I touched
his shoulder, turning alarmed at how his muscles had locked up. His shoulders were like rocks. “Let me
have it!” I demanded,  tugging at  his arm.  He  gritted  his teeth,  and  his eyes  were  clenched  shut. Even
under the throes of the venom, he was stronger than I was.
Frustrated, I sat back on my heels, watching. If he fell unconscious, his hand was mine.
Anxiety prompted me to pick up Duncan’s cards, dusting each one carefully before I put it back in his
box. Listening to his painful rasps of breath, I wished he’d pass out, then prayed he wouldn’t as he might
never come out of it. I sat at his shoulder, worrying as I built up the fire.
“You’re doing fine, Duncan,” I said as the first hints of rhythm returned to his breathing. His blanket
was soaked in sweat, and I draped my second blanket over him. “That’s it. You’re going to be all right,”
I whispered, falling into a soothing pattern of voice. “I’m right here. I’ll see you through it. I promise.”
The words sounded eerie coming from me. They were nearly verbatim to Kavenlow’s whispers when
I had struggled to throw off the venom. I wondered if he had been as worried as I was  now,  when he
watched with only his voice to ease the pain. The memory of Kavenlow prompted me to run a hand over
Duncan’s  head.  Kavenlow’s  touch  had  always  made  the  pain  easier  to  bear,  as  if  he  knew  and
understood. Duncan was an idiot, but his pain was my fault.
His shortly cropped hair was  softer  than I had  expected,  a  pleasant  whisper  on my fingertips. My
tension loosened as the warmth of the fire finally soaked into me, making my hands tingle in relief. I let
one rest atop his shoulder to feel his muscles slowly ease. “You’re going to be all right,” I whispered as
the hurt finally left his face.
He took a shuddering heave of breath. It was his first grasp at conscious control, and my shoulders
slumped. They ached, as if I had been the one struggling to breathe, not Duncan. His gamble to save his
hand had worked. Tucking a wisp of hair from my eyes,  I moved  away,  stiff and  sore  from the day’s
ride.
I reached for the forgotten tea, black and boiling over the fire. My hands  were  shaky  as  I pulled it
from the fire and poured two cups. I set Duncan’s within his reach and moved to my bedroll. Experience
told me he would want something to shake the cold that gripped him. And I needed something to steady
myself as well. Watching his misery had brought it all back. Until I had built my resistance high enough to
suit Kavenlow, he had repeatedly subjected me to that same pain, that same fear. The reminder left me
heartsick. What had it all been for?
“Who… are you?” Duncan rasped.

My attention jerked to him, finding him huddled under the two blankets. His eyes looked black as he
stared at me over the low fire, his long face haggard under a day’s growth of stubble and his struggle. I
wondered if he hated me the way I hated Kavenlow the first time I had gone through that hell. I looked at
the fire, trying to find an answer. “No one,” I said, believing it. My eyes closed so they wouldn’t fill, and I
felt the fire’s heat on my cheeks.
“That’s a pit full of chu,” he said harshly, and I opened my eyes. Taking two  attempts,  he propped
himself up on one elbow. He hunched as he coughed violently, then wiped the spittle from himself. “I saw
you repacking. Everything you need for extended travel, but you’ve never slept in the open before. You
ride like a man but have the manners of a lady.” He held his breath as he shook with a repressed cough.
“And though you know what to do with torch flowers, you can’t cook worth a tinker’s damn. Who are
you?”
“I’m no one,” I said, recalling Garrett’s face twisted in disgust as he learned of my true birth. My eyes
flicked to his and away. “I’m a beggar’s child,” I whispered, afraid.
Duncan clutched the blankets tight about  his shoulders.  He  shivered,  eying me over  the flames. “A
beggar’s  child wouldn’t  walk  away  from  a  bowl  of  uneaten  soup.  They  don’t  have  poison  on  their
hairpins, either. Neither do thieves.”
He raised his tea to his lips with shaking hands. Hesitating, his face drained of what color it had. “You
 are an assassin,” he said, dropping the cup. Tea soaked into the ground. “I thought you were—who did
you kill? Sweet mother of God. I helped you escape! They saw  me! They’re  going to  come  after  me,
now!”
“I’m not an assassin,” I asserted, depressed.
“Then what are you?” he demanded. He tried to raise his arm, becoming panicky when it didn’t move
as well as it ought. “What did you do to me?” he cried.
Frustrated, I shouted, “Next time listen when I tell you to do something!”
He hesitated, then settled back on his blankets, showing a wary respect. I waited until I knew he was
listening, then added,  “My hairpins have poison  on them. I’ve  been  conditioned  to  withstand  it.  One
scratch usually won’t kill a person. Two will, unless you work hard to keep them breathing.” I recalled
Jeck retaining enough control after two darts to talk. “Usually.”
“Only an assassin would be immune to poison,” he said, shivering.
I sighed as I gathered my thoughts. Perhaps he’d believe the truth now. “You were  right, earlier,”  I
said in a flat voice. “Well, almost.  I’m—” I took  a  breath,  forcing the words  out as  my betrayal  rose
caustic and strong. “I’m the princess’s decoy, bought to shield her from backlash caused by that damned
Red Moon Prophesy. I’m immune so as to extend my usefulness.”
And I’m stupid, I thought bitterly. I should have seen it. No one risks the life of a princess to make
her immune to poison.
And you don’t  leave her  upbringing  to  the  chancellor,  however  well  he  keeps  her  occupied  and
prevents her from bothering the royal family.
I closed my eyes against the hurt. In that instant, I hated them. Hated them all: my father, my mother,
Kavenlow,  the princess  I had  unknowingly protected,  all of them. When  I  opened  my  eyes,  I  found
Duncan watching me with a mix of disbelief and mistrust. “Listen,” I said, deciding he needed to hear it
all. If Jeck found him with me, he might be killed by association. “King Edmund’s second son, Garrett, is
making a bid for Costenopolie’s land and ships. He could have had it all but in name had  he bided  his
time and married the real princess at year’s end, but he wants it now. He took the palace and the outlying
garrisons, and when the rest of his men get here, he’ll take the city, the harbor, and all the ships in it.”

Grief broke through, and I caught my breath. All I cared about and thought was true had died in the
name of Garrett’s meaningless conquests. Nothing had arisen to replace what I once thought real. “Prince
Garrett killed my parents,” I whispered. “After I find Kavenlow, I’m going back to kill Garrett.”
“You can’t  kill a  prince  of Misdev,”  Duncan whispered,  his knuckles  white  where  he  gripped  his
blanket.
“I almost killed you,” I said, weary of everything.
“But it will start a war,” he protested, hunching into his blankets.
I dropped my gaze. “Kavenlow can stop it.”
“Kavenlow?” he questioned.
“The chancellor.” My face twisted as I struggled not to show my emotions. “He went to fetch the real
princess. He’s the only one I have left—” My voice had risen to a squeak, and I cut my sentence short.
“He doesn’t know what happened,” I said flatly. “I have to find him.”
“You’re the Red Moon Princess?” he said, a hint of belief in his long face.
“Not since yesterday.” I said the words carefully, refusing to feel anything. My life had been  ruined,
and all for nothing. I glanced up at the branches and the clear skies beyond them. Where is the rain? My
life can’t get any worse. It ought to be raining.
Numb, I took a gulp of tea and set it aside. It was bitter. “Drink some tea to keep your heart strong
through the night, and don’t even think about swallowing any of that vile ale of yours,” I said. Not caring
if he had more questions, I lay down, wrapped in my cloak, and drew my last blanket over my head. I
wanted to sleep, exchanging my reality for dreams if only for the span darkness ruled the sky.

Twelve
The light on the inside of my eyelids was a restful gray, not the bright glare I usually woke to. And I
was cold. Confused, I tried to separate myself from my dream of shifting waves. I smelled horse, and the
surprise of that, not the stick poking repeatedly into my shoulder, brought me fully awake.
My pulse leapt as I bolted upright. Duncan was crouched on the far side of the fire. The stick that had
been  poking me was  in his grip. My hand  dropped  from  my  darts,  and  I  clutched  the  prickly  wool
blanket to my neck. Sitting to curl my legs under me, I blinked at the man.
The dim light of morning made him look more unkempt than usual. He  had  a  brown  cloak  over  his
shoulders that I hadn’t seen before, its hem black from use. “Morning,” he said as he dropped the stick
and pushed the rim of his hat back. “I’m going to water the horses. I thought you’d want to know.”
“Thank you,” I said, then coughed at the coldness of the air. The birds were noisy, and I wondered
how I had slept through them. Saying nothing, he rose and went to Tuck. He wasn’t using his right hand
much as he coddled the gelding into taking the bit. “Can I… see your hand?” I asked.
He hesitated. Dropping Tuck’s lead, he eased down into a crouch beside me. Silently he pushed his
shirt up to his elbow. I leaned  close.  His deeply  tanned  arm was  still swollen, and  the purple  and  red
streaks  across  his palm  and  finger  were  downright  ugly.  Still  having  not  said  anything,  he  flexed  his
poison-bloated hand, wincing.
“Can you move your cards?” I asked, knowing he must have tried.
His eyes were fixed upon his shifting fingers. “No.”
It was flat and emotionless, and guilt made me drop my gaze. “It will get better, but your fingers might
always be slow when you’re tired.” I hesitated. “Do you want some willow tea?”
“No.” Rising, he turned his back on me, sliding the bit into Pitch’s mouth with a practiced ease. The
horse mouthed it noisily.
Shivering,  I  bent  to  tighten  my  bootlaces.  I  felt  bad  about  what  had  happened,  but  at  least  he
wouldn’t be following me anymore. “You’ll be heading inland, then?” I asked, not sure I was  happy  to
see him go. I didn’t like being alone.
He turned, his nasty stubble unable to hide his surprise. “We aren’t going to Saltwood?”
“We?” I blinked up at him. “After last night? I nearly killed you!”
“Really…” Motions  stiff with what  I  thought  was  pride,  he  set  the  saddle  pad  on  Tuck,  quickly
followed by my saddle. He rubbed his right shoulder before cinching it as if noticing a general weakness
there.
“There’s no reward for helping me,” I said. “Just take my saddle and go.” Miserable, I removed my
needles and let down my hair. “I can find Kavenlow on my own,” I whispered as I set my black ribbon
aside and forced a comb through my curls.
Duncan’s rough bark of laughter pulled my head up. He was laughing at me ? The nerve!
“Tess,” he said  as  he stood  by Tuck’s  head.  “Let’s  say  you  are  the  princess’s  decoy  and  not  a
lunatic.” His eyes flicked to my darts beside me, then the whip on my waist. “You don’t  owe  that  man
anything. The king and queen bought you with the sole purpose of keeping their daughter alive. And you
want to help her? Wake up,” he said bitterly. “Your dream is over.”
“They loved me,” I said hotly, surprised to find myself defending them, even though the same thought
had filled my head for the last three days.

“They  used  you.”  His  narrow  face  was  harsh.  “Don’t  you  know  how  the  story  goes?  The  lost
princess returns, saves the kingdom with the help of a goat boy, then marries her rescuer to live happily
ever after. There’s no room for you! If you’re lucky they’ll banish you from the kingdom. If you’re not,
they’ll tuck you away, and you’ll never see the outside of the palace walls again. You,” he said, his eyes
fierce as he pointed at me, “should be running hard and fast. And I’m going to run with you until you go
hungry long enough to realize it’s better to be well fed than spotlessly honest. You have a hard-won skill,
Tess. And I’m not going to let you hide it under morals too expensive for commoners when we could be
living like royalty in two years!”
Angry, I gritted my teeth and swung my length of hair in front of me. I tugged my comb  through it,
heedless  of the sharp  jolts  of pain.  “You  think  I  should  run  away,”  I  said  as  I  picked  at  a  snarl  in
frustration. “From Garrett. From everything. He killed them right in front of me!”
My pulse hammered, and  an upwelling surge of anger  knotted  my stomach.  “He had  my mother’s
throat slit while I watched!” I exclaimed. “I couldn’t keep her blood inside her, Duncan! It’s  still under
my fingernails!” I held my hand up, almost screaming at him. “My father died to protect me! I promised
I’d kill the murdering dog, and I will!”
My anger and grief poured through me, tightening my throat. I dropped my head as I realized I was
almost in tears. Duncan stared, clearly shocked.
Catching  myself,  I  dropped  my  head  and  bound  my  hair  up  off  my  neck.  It  was  hard  without
Heather’s help, but I managed. Duncan silently finished with Tuck and put the riding pad on Pitch for me.
I brought out my venom and refilled the needle Duncan had darted himself with, adding it to the four in
my topknot. I was cold, and I hated it. I hated everything.
“But it’s not your kingdom,” Duncan said, jerking my attention up. “Why do you care?”
My lips pressed together as I put the venom back into Kavenlow’s pouch and tied it shut. “I’ll sleep
in a chu pit before I let Prince Garrett think he can have Costenopolie.”
His shoulders shifted in an audible sigh as stood beside Tuck’s head. “Tess, you’re a commoner. And
there’s no shame in it. Let the royals bicker over what they will. It makes no difference who sits on the
throne. You have to look out for yourself. No one else will.”
I said nothing, putting my eyes on the brightening sky showing behind the spring leaves.
The uneasy silence was heavy as he took up the horses’ leads. “I’ll bring some  water  back  so  you
can wash,” he said, leading the horses away. “I have some soap—if you need it.”
At the mention of soap,  my feeling of filth seemed  to  increase  tenfold.  It  was  more  than the earth
beneath my palms and the blood staining my nails. I miserably got to  my feet  as  he left, feeling all the
aches from yesterday come to life. Today ought to be a joy as I added to them.
I wondered at Duncan’s new respect. I didn’t think it came from me having nearly killed him, and  I
was sure it didn’t stem from a reverence for the crown—of which he had none. I was hoping it was born
from a respect of me and me alone. It was something I found rarely enough among the fawning nobles,
and I found my feelings toward him softening. After two days of fending for myself, his simple offer to get
me water meant more to me than it should.
The sound of the horses in the brush  faded.  I gazed  listlessly after  them, wondering if Duncan was
right and I should just keep running.
Numb, I folded my torch flowers into a cloth and tucked it in Kavenlow’s pouch before tying it to my
belt. The stink of last night’s onions was thick on me, and when I took care of my morning ritual, I found
my inner legs had  a  layer of grime  on  them  from  rubbing  against  Pitch  yesterday.  It  had  gone  clear
through my underthings.

“God help me,” I whispered  as  I dropped  my skirts,  wondering if there  was  anything clean in the
world. Duncan’s water wasn’t going to touch the black mix of horse sweat and dirt.
There was a movement at the far end of the field, and I hurriedly checked that my skirts were in the
right place. A sharp pinch in my shoulder brought my hand up, and I slapped it.
My hand hit not the expected insect but the smooth feel of wood. Heart in my throat, I plucked out a
tiny wooden dart ringed with back.
I was found.
Panicked, I looked up. A black horse bolted from the trees and across the field. Hunched upon him
was Jeck with his cloak flapping like Death himself.
“Duncan!” I shrieked, lunging into the woods.  Hidden  behind a  tree,  I fumbled for my dart  pipe.  I
peeked past the oak, my face going cold as I loosed one, then another, to no effect.  I fumbled for my
whip, but the black monster of a horse was upon me. Gasping, I ran, stumbling as my will was faster than
my feet.
“Duncan!” I cried as I spotted him. He was too far away. Branches snapped as the black horse came
to a four-posted stop. “No!” I shrieked as an arm wrapped about my waist. I jammed a dart into Jeck.
Swearing, he dropped me, pulled the bone  needle  from his thick leather  jerkin,  and  snapped  it in two
with a leather-gloved hand.
I hit the ground hard. Jeck followed me down. I held my last dart like a dagger as I tried to rise. Jeck
caught me halfway up, grabbing the back of my neck so tight I yelped.  His other  hand went about  my
wrist, squeezing. My fingers opened. My last needle fell to the ground.
“Princess,” he growled, and I was flung like a sack of fish over the horse’s shoulders. “He-ya!” Jeck
shouted  as,  with a  lurch, he sprang  onto  the riding pad  behind  me.  My  stomach  hurt.  I  struggled  to
breathe as the horse bolted.
“Let me go,” I panted. The vegetation was a blur as we raced down the trail. Taking a jolting breath,
I kneed the horse. It squealed, rising up to almost spill us.
“Relax, Princess,” Jeck said as the horse’s feet hit the ground and we continued. “Can you fight a little
less energetically?”
He sounded almost casual, infuriating me. “Let me go!” I shouted, bending awkwardly to punch him
in the gut. The man grunted, but I hadn’t been able to put enough force behind the blow to do more than
annoy him.
“Stop it,” he said. “You asked for this meeting, not me. Your trail was clear enough.”
Trail? I thought, going limp in surprise  and  wheezing for breath.  Kavenlow’s  trail of leaves?  Jeck
knew what they were?
“So you’re Kavenlow’s apprentice,” Jeck was saying, confusing me further. “It’s a pleasure.”
Jeck  knew  Kavenlow? I tilted my head,  bouncing with the horse’s  movements. Jeck  was  smiling
behind his trim black beard. I felt his leg tense as he put the horse into a slower gait.
“I thought it was your servant girl, first, seeing as she had disappeared,” he said, his eyes on the trail
back to the palace. “But only a player could escape the palace as quickly as you did. And no one but a
player would have dart venom. Hard luck Kavenlow being sent on an errand just when he needed to be
here. He must trust you if he is willing to let you speak for him. You’re being a shade paranoid, though.
Dragging me out here to talk settlements? The tower would have been fine.”
I took a grateful breath  of air as  the horse’s  pace  eased.  What  was  he talking about?  He  knew  I
wasn’t the princess and would have nothing to do with making treaties. “Let me up,” I demanded, feeling

my face redden from being upside down.
“ ‘Course.” He glanced behind us. His gloved hands tightened about my waist, and it was with great
relief I found myself upright and set gently down upon the horse before him, sidesaddle, as was proper.
His arm stayed around me, and my pulse pounded as my chance of escape dimmed. The man had arms
thicker than a fence post.
He grinned at my cold face. “Surprised? Being the captain  of King Edmund’s guard  is risky,  but it
works.” His grip on my waist tightened as he glanced behind us at the empty trail. “Kavenlow  is either
moonstruck or planning a  game I won’t  live to  see  the end  of if he’s  taking someone  so  close  to  the
throne as  his apprentice.  Hell and  damnation,  what if something happened  to  the real  heir? You’d  be
pulled down before the ink dried on the coronation invitations. The man has more gall than I’d give him
by his milksop looks.”
He looked behind him again. “So, out with it,” he said. “Leaving Prince Chu-head alone this long isn’t
wise.  What  are  Kavenlow’s  thoughts  on  Garrett’s  bid  for  your  land?  I’m  tempted  to  back  the
dunderhead, though his father will have to annex the kingdom as his own before I can use it in play.” His
white teeth showed strongly behind his beard. “I’m going to enjoy tending Costenopolie’s harbors as well
as Edmund’s farms. Hard luck having to start over.”
I stared dumbfounded at him. He was talking as if he stood higher, had more power, than his king’s
son. “Don’t you mean, King Edmund’s farms?” I stammered.
“King? Since when does  a  piece  warrant  king?” Jeck  paused,  taking in my silence. His face  went
empty, and his grip tightened.
“You didn’t leave the trail; you were following it. Damn it all to hell,” he swore. “He hasn’t told you
who you are yet. You’re not a player, you’re still a damned piece.”
Panicking,  I  squirmed.  “Duncan!”  I  shouted,  slamming  my  heels  into  his  horse.  The  black  horse
squealed and lurched. Jeck scrambled for control as I slid to the ground.
Three darts hit me in quick succession as I ran into the woods. Bark bit at my palms as I clutched at a
tree, staggering under the venom. Lungs heaving, I fought off the vertigo, quickly regaining my balance.
Nausea  rose  high.  Jeck  crashed  after  me.  Panic  gave  me  a  renewed  strength.  I  struggled  forward,
running.
“Sorry, Princess,” Jeck said breathlessly as he yanked my arm and brought me to a spun-about halt.
“I’m not wasting any more darts on you.”
I gasped as the butt of his sword arced toward me. There was an instant of white pain in my temple,
then nothing.

Thirteen
My  head  hurt.  It  pounded  from  somewhere  over  my  right  temple.  That  was  the  first  breath  of
awareness, to wedge itself past my muzzy blanket of unconsciousness. The second was that I was sitting
on something sharp. It felt like a thorn, but I had a suspicion it was one  of Jeck’s  darts.  A filmy black
cloth stretched across my face, cutting into the corners of my mouth. I tried to raise my hands, finding my
arms were bound behind me. A familiar chalky taste coated my tongue—the flavor that an overdose of
venom left behind. I pried my eyelids apart, blinking.
It was well past noon by the sun’s position; I had been out most of the day. My boots and stockings
were gone, which would explain why my feet were so cold they ached. A cord was about my ankles. I
was propped  against a  tree,  its bark  pinching my knuckles  and  back.  Before  me  was  a  small  camp.
Jeck’s, I assumed, since it was his horse tied nearby. The black gelding still wore his riding pad, and he
looked annoyed as he flicked his tail at it.
A metal pan steamed over a small, smokeless fire. Beside  it were  my black  hair ribbon,  my coiled
whip, my bone knife, and Kavenlow’s bag. I went cold as I realized Jeck had searched me while I was
unconscious. He had taken my hair down in his search for more darts,  and  the tips were  trailing in the
sticks and leaves. Where else had he looked, I wondered, and why had he taken my stockings off? My
head slumped back to hit the tree. I was tied to a tree in my bare feet. It  wasn’t  raining. That meant it
was going to get worse. Somehow.
Gathering my resolve,  I wiggled to  get free.  The horse  turned  to  watch.  “Mummph,”  I  granted  in
frustration around the gag, but the horse didn’t care. Ears pricked, he looked over my shoulder. I heard
the thuds of approaching hooves. Duncan! I thought, squirming to make as much noise as possible.
Wiggling and twisting, I peered around the tree to find Jeck,  not Duncan,  leading Tuck  through the
brash. My straggles stopped, and I slumped. Tuck eagerly paced to join Jeck’s horse. I closed my eyes
in misery. The gray still wore  my saddle;  Jeck  had  probably  stolen him so  we  could  reach  the palace
sooner. Worry pinched my brow, and I hoped Duncan was all right. A single dart might kill him so soon
after last night.
“Princess.”
My eyes flew open at the soft word. It was entirely devoid of emotion, either sincerity or  mockery.
Dressed  in  black  leather  and  linen,  Jeck  looked  more  like  a  highwayman  than  the  captain  of  King
Edmund’s guard. His black cloak was clean, showing only a dusting of grass and dirt. He eyed me from
under the brim of a simple black hat. It appeared far more functional than the one decked with feathers
he had worn when I first saw him.
Crouching by the fire, he took off his riding gloves and poured the liquid from the steaming plate into a
bowl. My eyes  darted  from the near-boiling water  to  his eyes.  Whatever  was  in  that  bowl  probably
wasn’t soup. And I was sitting here, pretty much helpless.
“I’m glad you woke,” he said as he stood. “I didn’t want to move you until you had.”
“Mummph,” I said, making it as belligerent as I could. My defiance faltered as he crossed the camp
and knelt beside me. Lurching, I swung my bound feet up to hit him.
Balance never  shifting, he grasped  my knees  with a  thick-knuckled  hand and  pinned them. “Easy,
Princess,” he said, sitting upon my knees and tugging the scarf from my mouth.
“Get off me,” I demanded, taking a grateful breath of air. “Let me go!”
“I don’t like being kicked.” He dipped  a  square  of cloth into the water,  and  I squirmed,  tilting my
head away as far as I could. “Hold still,” he muttered.

I flinched when he touched me, but his fingers were gentle as he dabbed at my forehead. Slowly I let
out my held breath, watching his brown eyes. I could almost believe it was concern that pinched his quiet
face. The cloth came away with crusted blood and the faint smell of figwort. It would reduce the swelling,
and I wondered why he bothered.
“My apologies,” he said, his attention on what he was doing. “I hit you too hard. Prince Garrett wants
you in good health, not feverish with infection.” He rinsed  the cloth,  and  the water  turned  red  with my
blood. “He’ll have my hide should I bring you back in too sorry a condition.” Leaving the rag on the edge
of the bowl, he leaned closer to inspect his work.
His shirt brushed my cheek,  and  I could  smell woodsmoke  and  two  days  in the wilds on him. He
eased back, and I started to breathe again. “How gallant of the Misdev dog,” I said  sharply.  “Wanting
me in good health before he weds me, rapes me, then kills me.” I would have called for Duncan, but Jeck
wouldn’t have removed the gag had he been close.
Jeck  made  a  noise of agreement  and  moved  to  sit before  the fire on a  decaying log.  Watching,  I
pulled my knees to my chin to hide my dirty feet as much as to try to warm myself. I thought I’d  been
vulnerable sleeping across  the  fire  from  a  cheat.  Now  I  knew  what  vulnerable  was.  Jeck  rubbed  a
sword-hardened hand over his tidy beard and looked at his horse. “What am I going to do with her?” he
asked the animal as if I wasn’t sitting in front of him.
“Let me go?” I prompted.
His gaze flicked to mine. “No.”
“Untie me? At least my hands? It’s not as if I can run away from you. Not  without my boots.”  My
thoughts went to my knife and whip beside the fire. “And I’m sitting on something sharp,” I complained
to move him into something foolish. “One  of your darts,  probably.  One  would think you  would  have
realized I had some immunity right off. But no-o-o-o, you just keep darting away, wasting them until you
hit me.”
He reached out. Before I realized his intent, he shoved me over. I shrieked as my cheek smacked the
leaf mold. “Get your hands off me!” I cried as a hand fell heavy on my hip, forcing me down. A scream
escaped me as he flung my skirts over my head.
“Hold still. I see it.”
The light was a crimson tint from my red underskirt as I wiggled, fighting him. There was the twinge of
something sharp  being  removed  from  my  behind.  “Get  off  me!”  I  yelled,  and  his  weight  on  my  hip
vanished. I gasped as a hand gripped my shoulder and yanked me upright. By the time I flung the hair
from my eyes, he was back before the fire holding one of his tiny wooden darts between his fingers and
eying it for damage.
“What luck. It’s not broken,” he said as he tucked the sliver of wood into his hatband, showing me
where he kept them. His eyes went to mine, and his eyebrows bunched. If I got loose, they would be the
first thing I would head for, and he knew it.
“You uncouth Misdev barbarian!” I shouted, trying to spit the curl of hair out of my mouth. “Don’t
you ever do that again! I’ll have you keelhauled and thrown into the chu pits!”
He gave me a speaking look, his eyes going to the gag still loose about my neck and the rope about
my ankles. My dress wasn’t exactly where it ought to be, and face flaming, I tucked my legs up to hide
them.
“You are the most vile man I have ever met,” I said, my heart still pounding. “You abduct me, knock
me out, search me while I’m unconscious, and tie me up. Then you shove me down and nearly pull off
my dress while my hands and feet are bound. Untie me. Right now!”

A rude snicker came from Jeck, infuriating me. “I didn’t pull off your dress. I pulled out a dart. Would
you rather I left it in?” I stiffened as he rose to his feet,  flicking a  knife out from somewhere.  “You do
anything I don’t like, I’ll knock you silly again,” he said.
I held my breath, pushing back into the tree  for leverage.  If he got close  enough, I could  kick  him
unconscious, now that my skirts were about my knees. But before I even had a  chance,  he put his big
hand on the back of my head and shoved my forehead to my knees. I took a breath to shout at him, my
impetus dying as there was a firm tug on my wrists, and my hands were free. His hand lifted from me. My
outrage vanished and I pulled my aching arms forward. A groan of pain slipped out before I could stop it.
Jeck eyed me carefully from three steps away as I rubbed my wrists and  the red  marks  left by the
bindings. Tingling jolts pulsed through my fingers with a steady hum, hurting them with the sudden heat of
circulation but soothing my wrists where I held them. My feet were still tied, but I had my hands. I was
halfway to freedom. Soldier he may be, but he was a fool for believing threats of violence would keep me
docile.
“Thank you,” I said  sullenly. The gag was  still  about  my  neck,  and  I  picked  the  knot  loose  and
dropped the spit-soaked rag to the earth.
“If you try to escape, I’ll tie you up again,” he warned as he coiled the cord he had used  about  my
wrists and shoved it in a saddlebag along with my whip and knife. His face lost its emotion when he saw
me sitting cross-legged, holding my wrists. “What—ah—what are you doing?”
I looked up, doing nothing to hide my disgust. “My wrists hurt!”
“Um,” he said, his lips pressing together to almost disappear behind his beard and mustache. “It’s just
the circulation coming back. You’ll be fine.”
“I know  that.”  My eyes  narrowed  when he turned  away.  I remembered  my hands  had  the  same,
humming-tingly feeling when I had been comforting Duncan.  They hadn’t  been  tied  at  all then.  But my
wrists felt better, and I let them go.
I purposely kept my gaze away from the horses. As soon as I could, I’d be gone. “May I have some
of that warmed water?” I asked, embarrassed that my face was streaked with dirt.
Attention on an unvoiced thought, he set the high-walled pan within my reach. I edged closer to it and
the fire. Everything but my hands  were  cold,  the tingling  having  subsided  into  an  ache.  “Did  you  kill
Duncan?” I asked, unable to keep the worry from my voice.
“The man with you?” he said, seeming to jump to the present. “No. I had no reason to.”
“Then how did you get his horse?” I asked.
Jeck smirked and sat down across from me. “He fell off when I spooked his horse. The beast is more
flighty than six deer. I thought the gray was yours. The stableman said you stole a horse and a saddle—”
“I paid for them,” I protested, then hesitated. “You talked to the stableman…”
Nodding, Jeck pulled a travel cake from his saddlebag. “Getting out as one of two,” he said around a
mouthful of fat and grain. “Nice. How did you convince a vagrant to help you?”
I said nothing, feeling sullen. My stomach rumbled at the smell of honey.
Apparently unconcerned, Jeck brushed a crumb from his beard. “I knew you’d want a horse, and the
man wouldn’t stop talking about you. How his girl ran away with the mare he sold you. How you stole
the one that belonged to the palace, and what was he going to tell the palace when they came to collect
them? Oh, woe is me,” he finished in a mocking voice.
I felt ill, realizing I’d left a trail as clear as Kavenlow’s. My eyes flicked to the black gelding. It was
the twin to my mare. “That’s my horse,” I said. “He was holding them for me.”

Jeck’s narrow mustache rose as he grinned. “He’s a fine animal, and a great  deal  more  rested  than
my horse. Being the captain of King Edmund’s guards has its privilege.”
He had taken my horse when it came right down to it. Turning the hem of my dress up, I looked for a
fold of less-begrimed fabric I could use to clean myself.
Jeck leaned to his pack and tossed me a wad of cloth. It arched over the fire and landed squarely in
my lap. I picked it up—fully intending to throw it back into his face—but it was soft and clean, smelling
of soap. Abandoning pride for comfort, I dipped it into the warm water.
Jeck set his travel cake aside and picked up Kavenlow’s bag. My mouth opened as he undid the tie
and upended the pouch. “That’s mine,” I protested. His eyebrows rose  as  he took  in my anger,  and  I
added, “Get out of it!”
Ignoring me, he ran his fingers over everything. “Fishhooks,” he said, dropping them back in me bag.
“Candle, needle and thread, flint.” He glanced at me from under the brim of his black  hat.  “Dry tinder,
cord…” He held up my packet of dried torch flowers. “What’s this?”
“A mild sedative and pain relief,” I said, seeing no harm in him knowing. His soft cloth felt like heaven
against my travel-torn fingers, and my hands were humming from the hot water.
Never dropping my gaze, Jeck slipped the torch flowers into an inner pocket of his jerkin. Outraged,
I stiffened. “Put that back!” I cried. But my anger shifted to alarm when he opened Kavenlow’s venom
and took a sniff.
“Still a liquid?” he murmured. “Interesting.” As I watched, unable to stop him, he removed his hat and
slipped a tiny dart from the hatband. I knew he used a dart pipe, but I had yet to see it. He dipped the
dart  into the venom,  then  touched  it  to  his  tongue.  “Chu,”  he  swore,  recoiling  with  a  grimace.  “No
wonder you put me down with two.” The skin about his eyes wrinkled as  he replaced  his dart  into his
hatband. “And why you were still running after four of mine. What does Kavenlow do to keep the venom
from coagulating after you kill it?”
Kill what? I thought as I struggled with my desire to either smack him for pawing through my things
or thank him for the information. He  recapped  the small jar  when I remained silent, tucking it into his
saddlebag. My face flamed. “That’s mine,” I said.
“What’s yours?” He meet my eyes with a blank expression.
“That’s my dart venom. Put the jar back in my bag.”
He gave me a handsome grin. “What jar?”
Giving up,  I scrubbed  the cooling cloth against my face.  Keeping  even my hair ribbon,  he shoved
everything into Kavenlow’s  bag,  which he then knotted  to  his belt.  “You’re  a  thief,” I said,  unable to
think of anything more derogatory.
His eyebrows rose. “I prefer ‘using my means to their fullest potential.’”
“And a coward,” I added, coming up with something vastly better.
Jeck’s face emptied of all expression,  and  I wondered  if I had  gone too  far.  “No,”  he said  softly.
“Not a coward.” I couldn’t tell if he was angry, and somehow that frightened me.
“What are you going to do with me?” I asked as I braided my hair, despairing of the sticks and leaves
my fingers kept finding.
He scuffed a boot into the leaf mold. “Return you to Prince Garrett as ordered.”
I looped the braid about itself, shaping the entire arrangement into a decorative ball at the base of my
neck.  It  would hold as  long as  I  didn’t  move  about  much.  Sniffing  at  him,  I  tried  to  find  the  air  of
misplaced confidence that worked so well on the palace guards when they caught me where I shouldn’t

be. “This morning you seemed to be acting on your own. And now you’re back to taking orders from a
spineless,  sniveling, worthless  excuse  of a  royal who has  as  much right to  rule  as  a  barnacle  worm.”
Excitement went through me as Jeck stiffened in unease. I’d found a sliver of truth, but how did it fit?
“This morning I thought you were someone else, Princess,” he said.
“Don’t call me that,” I demanded, pretending disinterest as I scrubbed between my toes  to  turn the
cloth brown. “We both know I’m not.”
Jeck rose to take the saddle off Tuck. “People act within the expectations they’re given. I say you’re
a princess. Act like one. And keep your burning hands away from those knots.”
Disgusted he had known I was working my way to them, I made a face and dropped the cloth into
the water. “I’m her double, that’s all,” I said tightly. But Jeck never noticed  my frustrated  anger  as  we
both turned at a scuffling in the leaves. My breath  came  fast in hope,  but I slumped when I spotted  a
squirrel, not Duncan. There was a thump and a squeak. A knife pinned the rodent to the ground, dead.
Shocked, I spun back to find a second knife in Jeck’s hand, his arm cocked to throw it. Frowning, he
slid the knife behind his belt. “But I’m in no hurry to get back to Prince Chu-head,” he said.  “And you
look hungry. Skinny. All legs and arms.”
Ignoring his insult, I sourly picked the mud from my hem. He could throw a knife. How wonderful.
And though I was starving, I wouldn’t eat. He might tamper with my food.
“Well, I’m hungry,” he continued as if I had said something. “We can’t make it back by sundown, so
we’ll leave in the morning. Garrett can stew for a while. Maybe he’ll realize what he has started.” Putting
the last of his travel cake in his mouth, he went to get the squirrel.
The captain’s  casual  disregard  for Garrett’s  standing still shocked  me, serving as  more  proof  that
Jeck held more power than he ought. He had  said  I was  a  player,  that  I was  Kavenlow’s  apprentice.
What the devil was a player? A specialized bodyguard, maybe?
As Jeck butchered the squirrel, I finished washing my feet, thinking about that. Kavenlow had taught
me my letters and numbers, and  countless  ways  to  dally the hours  away,  but nothing about  protecting
anyone  except  myself.  Then  again,  Kavenlow  had  kept  me  alive  my  entire  life  through  a  score  of
assassination attempts. A chancellor.
Feeling as if I was close to figuring something out,  I dried  my feet  on my red  underskirt.  Jeck  had
hinted  at  a  huge  conspiracy.  His  few  words—at  first  glib  and  bewildering,  then  hesitant  and
obscure—had filled me with unease. Things weren’t as I thought. My ingrained beliefs—the beliefs of my
entire society—were based on a veneer that even the royals thought went all the way through. I had very
little to shape my new wisdom upon.
Fingers slow, I placed my damp cloth on the rim of the pan. Kavenlow’s note had  said  that  though
the king and  queen  held the crown,  we  kept  Costenopolie  intact.  It  went  along  with  what  Jeck  had
implied about him controlling Misdev. But I had grown up in the palace. I knew the king and queen ruled.
Didn’t they?
A wash of unreal feeling coursed through me as I recalled how often my and Kavenlow’s diversions
had been interrupted by private councils with men of importance, the letters without the royal seal passed
by Kavenlow’s hand, and his excursions to the docks at all hours.  Suddenly Jeck’s  hints of Kavenlow
pulling hidden strings sounded not only plausible but obvious.
I raised  my head  to  find Jeck  butchering the squirrel at  the edge  of camp.  “You said  I was  a—a
player,” I said, trying to pull more information from him. The familiar word felt odd as I said it, and Jeck’s
first expression of shock melted into a fierce look.
“Don’t,” he said with a frightening harshness. “Don’t ask me.”

I  leaned  forward,  feeling  as  if  I  almost  had  it.  I  recalled  Jeck’s  whipping,  the  frustration  in  his
eyes—and  the control.  “You aren’t  just the captain  of King Edmund’s guard,”  I said,  thinking  I  was
closer to the truth than I had been my entire life. “You’re a player.”
“No,” he said, raising a protesting hand, fingers red with the squirrel’s blood. He saw it, and put his
hand down.  “It was  a  jest.  A very bad  jest.  I’m the captain  of  King  Edmund’s  guard,  charged  with
keeping  his  second  son  alive  until  he’s  safely  married.  That’s  all.”  But  his  brown  eyes  looked  too
determined.
“No, you’re more. You’re a player,” I prodded.
“Princess…” His shoulders shifted as he took a deep breath and slowly let it out. Returning to the fire,
he flicked my damp rag into his grip and wiped his hands clean. He looked worried as he stood before
me. “Damn it, Jeck,” he swore. “Your big mouth finally caught up with you.”
“Listen,”  he  said,  crouching  down  before  me.  “Do  us  both  a  justice  and  keep  your  thoughts  to
yourself. Kavenlow is going to be angry enough with me as it is for letting Garrett make an unannounced
bid for Costenopolie. But forcing his timetable with you?” The corners of his eyes crinkled, and he took
off his hat, making him look younger as it tousled his hair. “I’d rather swing from King Edmund’s rope as
a traitor than interfere with you. That it was an honest mistake means nothing. I’m going to salvage what I
can and get out.” Clearly worried, he carefully set his hat on his bedroll and moved the pan  of bloody,
brown water out of my reach.
My pulse raced. He was more concerned about what he had told me than about  Garrett  killing the
king and queen? I was learning bits and pieces, each one more confusing than the last. “You’re afraid of
him,” I said. “You’re afraid of Kavenlow?”
Jeck looked up from the squirrel, his wide shoulders tensing. “No. I’m not.”
“I think you are, Captain.”
He turned around. “No, Princess. I’m not.” He hung the rodent upside down  to  drain into the pan.
“It’s  not  all  my  fault,  though.  Why  he  kept  you  in  the  dark  this  long  is  beyond  me.  You  have  a
considerable tolerance to venom. He should have had you recognized years ago.”
“Recognized,” I whispered. An image of fox lapping water drifted through me. I could smell burning
wormwood. My heart hammered as memories flooded back.
Kavenlow had been angry, but he hadn’t burned the gypsy wagon. He had carried me to my room,
kissed my forehead, and went to talk to my parents. Why hadn’t I remembered that before?
Suddenly frightened, I met his eyes. “What is going on, Captain Jeck?”
“Nothing,” he said, staring at me. 
“That’s a lie,” I said, knowing it was.
Jeck carefully wiped his fingers clean. “You keep  telling yourself that,  Princess,  and  we  both  might
survive.”

Fourteen
It was cold. The clear skies had allowed the heat of the day to abandon the earth  quickly once  the
sun set, and even the spring frogs were too numb to sing. Everything I owned but the clothes  I had  on
were in Jeck’s saddlebags or with Duncan, thoroughly out of reach.  I wondered  if “my thief,” as  Jeck
had come to call him, had taken Pitch for his own and headed for better pickings. A part of me hoped he
had. The more frightened part of me hoped he hadn’t.
My head throbbed dully where Jeck had knocked me. There was a lump the size of a walnut, but it
didn’t seem feverish. Feeling sorry for myself, I scooted closer to the fire and licked the last of the grease
from my fingers. The previous empty ache in my middle—and watching Jeck prepare the squirrel—had
convinced me it was safe to eat.
“Thank you,” I said  as  I glanced  over  the fire. I froze,  embarrassed;  I had  bolted  down  my meal
before he had even finished half of his. He sat on his log well back from the fire, looking plenty warm with
his boots, coat, and heavy cloak. My eyes lingered on his blanket folded neatly beside  him. I wouldn’t
ask for it. I had my pride.
“You’re welcome,” he said. “I’ve never seen anyone eat the meat from toes before.”
“Dinner last night wasn’t very good,” I muttered. A sudden sneeze shook me, and I clutched my arms
around my drawn-up knees and pulled my thin cloak tighter. The tight band about my ankles  had  been
replaced by a length of rope that hobbled me like a horse. It was humiliating. If I had my knife, I might
loose my bonds. If I had my boots, I could run. If I could  knock  Jeck  unconscious,  I might elude him
entirely. If, if, if…
“So,” I said hesitantly, not liking the silence, “you learned to cook while a guard?”
Jeck laughed, and the pleasant sound of it startled me. “No,” he said. “My father taught me, but I’ll
be damned if it wasn’t his cooking that got me my position of captain.”
“How could cooking do that?” I asked, not liking his rough language.
He pulled a bite from a tiny bone and chewed thoughtfully. Wiping his mouth, he said, “King Edmund
sends his foot soldiers into the field for a month every fall. You know that strip of forest you left him?” I
nodded, and his eyes went distant. “They camp there and fend for themselves. At the end of it, there’s a
contest. Fighting, climbing, swimming, that sort of thing.” He flicked the stripped bone into the fire. “The
best join the palace guard.”
“And you won it your very first year.”
I couldn’t  keep  the  sarcasm  from  my  voice,  but  Jeck’s  eyes  held  laughter,  not  anger.  “No.  It’s
generally the big hulks of men who win. After two  years  of being beaten  black-and-blue,  I befriended
one. Fed him the entire time. I invented so many ways to cook  squirrel,  you wouldn’t know  you were
eating the same animal for a week. He agreed to hoist me up the rope, push me over the wall, and fight
beside me in the final melee if I kept his belly full until then.”
“You cheated,” I said, not surprised.
“No.” Jeck gave me a sideways smile from behind his beard,  his eyes  glinting in the firelight. “You
have to have rules to break them, and there weren’t any. I couldn’t do it by brawn, so I did it by brain.”
Jeck  wrapped  a  cloth around  a  pot  of boiling water  and  pulled it from the fire before  adding  what  I
thought was a ridiculously small amount of tea leaves.
“I had a life expectancy of about forty in the army if we never went to war,” he said softly. “I didn’t
like the idea that my life was that close to being half over. Being in the castle guard would have increased
it dramatically.” He met my eyes. “It did increase it dramatically.”

I clutched my knees to myself, uneasy. “Have you ever killed anyone?” I asked.
“Of course.” He frowned, then added, “I don’t enjoy it, if that’s what you’re asking.”
I thought of Garrett and the shudder of lust I’d felt in him while he watched his guard kill another. He
had enjoyed it. My throat tightened as I remembered watching my parents die. How could I have let him
live? Next time I would be strong. “Does it get easier?” I whispered.
“The doing? Yes.  Much as  I’d  like to  think  otherwise,  yes.  It  does.  The  afterward,  though,  gets
worse.” His eyes met mine. “Why? Do you wish you had killed Garrett?”
Defiance mixed with fear and anticipation in a nauseating mix. “He deserves to die.”
Jeck nodded in an absent fashion. “True, but that doesn’t mean it’s in everyone’s best interests  that
he should. But I won’t let you kill him. I’m not eager  for another  pointless  Misdev  war,  which is what
you’ll get if Garrett dies.”
“There won’t be a war. Kavenlow can convince King Edmund I was justified,” I said.
“Justified…” Jeck stretched his feet out to the fire and loosened his bootlaces. “So the contest ended,
and I and  my dinner companion were  left,” he said,  continuing his story.  “I hadn’t  yet grown into my
height, and I lacked the power that the men who lost had, but I was smarter. It wasn’t long before it was
recognized, and after I got my growth, I moved up to captain. Life became interesting after that.” He met
my gaze from under  his hat,  the firelight flickering to  make  shadows.  “How about  you? How  did you
become the princess’s decoy?”
“Uh,” I stammered, caught off guard. “I was bought in the streets. The only one  of three  decoys  to
survive the earliest Red Moon Prophesy assassination attempts.” I tucked the hem of my dress under my
feet to keep them off the damp ground. “I’m a beggar’s child, I suppose. I didn’t know until”—I thought
for a moment, surprised—“four days ago. Before that it was the usual princess tasks: reading and sums,
how to draw a map, how to play a tune, how to step a dance, how to seat visiting dignitaries at dinner so
no one is beside the person who snubbed  them last spring.” I flicked my gaze to  his and  then looked
away, seeing a worried confusion in his eyes.
“That’s it?” he asked. “He hasn’t taught you anything. Anything of value, I mean.”
“Who  are  you  to  know?”  I  snapped,  but  it  lacked  conviction.  I  had  a  feeling  Jeck  was  right.
Kavenlow  had  been  responsible  for my schooling, and  most of that  had  revolved  around  the political
niceties of being a princess. Perhaps because there was always the chance I might end up on the throne if
anything happened  to  her.  Like  her  royal  snotship  meeting  the  soul  reaper  on  her  way  home,  I
thought, almost hoping she would.
An animal screeched, the same as last night, and I edged closer to the fire. Kavenlow hadn’t  taught
me anything special. If he had, I wouldn’t be sitting here  with my feet  tied  together,  shivering. I would
have chewed my way free when Jeck  had  been  digging a  shallow privy, whipped  him into submission
when he returned, then stolen the horses to run away.
“I was bought for silver, too,” Jeck said suddenly. I looked up at  his quick-worded  admission. His
brown eyes held a hint of vulnerability, and I didn’t think he had ever told anyone before. “Before that, I
lived with a childless farmer. A passing priest saw me throwing rocks at the birds to keep  them off the
corn. He took me right there, yanking me onto his horse and shouting for my father. I was eight.”
Shivering, I pulled my cloak tighter. Jeck must mean his surrogate father. He had said the farmer was
childless.
Jeck looked tired as he gazed into the fire as if searching for his past. “I remember my father clutching
my leg as I sat before the priest on his horse,” he said. “My father told him I was all he had. The priest
kicked  him in the mouth—broke  one  of  his  teeth—then  threw  a  pouch  of  coins  into  the  dirt.”  Jeck

poured the brewed tea into a metal cup. “He died three years later from too much work and not enough
food. I didn’t know until he was  in the ground until grass  had  grown over  him so  thick I couldn’t  tell
where he was. He was the only father I knew.”
“You don’t remember your real father?” I asked, feeling an odd kinship.
“He was my real father.” Jeck’s lips pressed together, all but disappearing behind his mustache. “He
took care of me. We worked together to build his farm so he would have food when he was too old to
work and I would have food until I was old enough to work. If he wasn’t a father, then what is one?”
I said nothing, feeling foolish. Apparently  satisfied with my attitude,  Jeck  took  a  sip of his tea  and
brushed away the drops left on his beard. “The priest left me with the army, and I already told you the
rest. God help me, I thought it was such a waste at the time.”
“You were eight?” I asked, appalled. “King Edmund puts eight-year-olds in his army?”
“No,”  he said  in annoyance.  “I was  a  glorified slave to  the enlisted,  but I joined  when  I  was  old
enough. I never saw the priest again until I made captain. That was when he—” Jeck cut his thought short
and poked at the fire.
That was when he gave Jeck his first dose of venom, I guessed,  and  told  him about  players.  But I
wouldn’t say it. If Jeck realized how much I was gleaning from even his casual words, he would return to
his stone-lipped self.
Stretching to his stack  of firewood,  he set  a  thick piece  on the fire. “Do you want some  tea?”  he
asked, clearly changing the subject. “I don’t have another cup, but you could drink it out of a bowl.”
“Do you have honey?” I asked, and when he shook his head, I gestured no. It wasn’t tea if it didn’t
have honey in it.
His cup almost lost in his big hands, Jeck tilted his head and eyed me from under his hat. “I’m curious.
How old were you when you first tasted venom?”
I tucked an escaped curl behind my ear. “You admit there’s such a thing now?”
The flash of white teeth as he grinned was unexpected. “I do nothing of the kind. But you have quite a
tolerance. If you don’t mind my asking, when did Kavenlow first initiate you?”
I hesitated. He was charming information from me, but if it kept him talking, I might learn something
myself. “Thirteen,” I said. “An assassin found me while I was in the streets. Almost got me with a dart.” I
picked at the grimy hem of my dress. It had been awful. I couldn’t blame Heather for not coming into the
streets with me. I hoped she was all right.
“Kavenlow wanted to give me a better weapon of defense,” I continued,  “suggesting the very thing
that almost reached  me. He  said  I had  the ability to  become  immune  to  it,  that  it  wouldn’t  kill  me.”
Stomach clenching, I remembered my first dose of venom. I hadn’t died—though at the time, I wished I
had. The convulsions had left me weak  and  in tears.  “He said  I’d  never  see  the outside  of the palace
again if I didn’t. It was outright blackmail, even to keeping it from—from my parents. They never knew
the cause for my occasional lethargy.”
Jeck made an understanding noise. His eyes, when I met them, were very intent. I shut my mouth. I
was talking too much. He reached for a stick, his cape  pulling against his broad  shoulders.  Stirring the
coals, he left it to burn. “Do you like him?” he asked, shocking me.
“Kavenlow?” I said, affronted. “He’s like a second father to me.”
His eyes fixed to mine. “Why?” he asked, the word making me uneasy. “He poisoned you countless
times, made you go through the hell of building your tolerance. For what? To protect someone you never
met? To force you to suffer the weight of a prophesy that wasn’t yours to bear? He has lied to you your

entire life. And you trust him?”
“Kavenlow saved my life more times than I have fingers,” I said hotly. “He sat with me every time I
took the venom. And he always had something nice planned for the next day to make up for it. A rare
outing into the hills or—” I abruptly went silent, thinking. “Or a good game of hide-and-seek,” I breathed
as I pondered  Kavenlow’s  diversions with a  new outlook.  I had  never  guessed  they were  more  than
games. What had Kavenlow made me into? My eyes flicked to Jeck’s. I had to stop talking.
“At thirteen?” Jeck’s voice overflowed with disbelief. “You were playing games at  thirteen! I was
learning how to kill a man at fifteen paces with a knife when I was thirteen.”
“How splendid for you,” I said dryly. “But I didn’t have to kill anyone to get past  the palace  walls.
Could you have done the same?”
Jeck grunted at that, seeming pleased rather than annoyed as I would have expected.
“Stop talking to me,” I said in a huff. “I’m going to sleep.”
“You do that. We leave before sunup.”
I shifted my shoulders to show I had heard him, pushing the dirt smooth where I was going to have to
sleep. Leaves  and  dirt clung to  my palms, and  I looked  at  the filth on them in disgust.  I’d  be  leaving
tonight if I could sneak away with the horses.
He wadded up his blanket and threw it at me over the fire. “Sleep on that,” he said.
Relief filled me as the coarse wool rasped across my fingertips. “Thank you.”
“Take this, too,” he said as he undid the clasp of his cloak and carefully handed it to me.
I accepted it with some surprise, my eyebrows rising as  I found the black  wool  lined with an even
blacker silk. It was beautiful, and I wondered that he had something this exquisite. “What will you use?” I
asked, seeing nothing left to him but his coat.
“I’m staying awake for obvious reasons.” He took a sip of tea. “And before you get any ideas, I’m
bigger than you, I’m stronger than you, and if you try anything…”
I made a face as I remembered the shriek of the dying squirrel. His eyes were on me while I struggled
to arrange the blanket with my ankles hobbled. Finally giving up, I covered myself in his cloak, pulling the
hood up over my head as I lay down.
The smell of horse and  woodsmoke  filled my senses—it  seemed  to  warm my chill as  much as  the
added  weight  of  the  cloak—but  the  masculine  smell  of  Jeck  mixing  with  them  stirred  me  back  to
vigilance. I took a shallow breath, then a deeper one, pulling in his scent and studying it as I might a new
concoction from the kitchen. Much to my disgust I decided it was nice. Manly nice, as  Heather  would
say. I sighed, wishing I was of a strong enough mind to convince myself it stank.
I could see Jeck across the fire, his image distorted  from the flames. He  was…  He  was  taking his
shirt off! My pulse hammered, and I sat up.
“Don’t flatter yourself, Princess,” Jeck said, his brow furrowing as his shirt stuck  to  his back.  “Not
every man is trying to get under your skirts.” His shirt pulled away with a sharp suddenness accompanied
by a tight grimace. My stomach clenched as I remembered his whipping. He  dropped  his shirt, leaving
him bare to the waist. Pulling the hood of his cloak over my face, I settled down, propping my head on
my folded arms so I could watch the bunching smoothness of his muscles. I had a feeling he knew it.
Jeck took a rag and dipped it into the water left from making tea.  Twisting awkwardly,  he tried  to
sponge the dried blood from his back. It didn’t take long to realize he couldn’t manage it. “I’ll do that,” I
said, not knowing why I offered.
Jeck’s attention flicked over the fire to me and away.

“You got them because I escaped,” I prodded, sitting back up and letting his cloak fall from me. “I’ll
clean them for you.”
He wrung out his rag in the water and stretched to reach the center of his back, coming short. “Why
would you help me?”
“Why would you bother to feed me and give me your blanket and cloak?” I answered.
Jeck  sighed,  his  entire  chest  moving.  “No.  Soothe  your  conscience  some  other  way.  Like  not
annoying me with trying to escape.”
“They’ll get infected,” I said. “And what can I do to you? It’s not as if I can hurt you. You took all my
darts and tied my feet as if I was an errant goat.”
Jeck’s jaw clenched. “True. But I might have to hurt you. And it’s harder if—”
I felt the blood drain from my face. He wouldn’t hurt me. He couldn’t.
He scowled as he took in my expression. “Hell and  damnation,” he swore.  He  rose,  and  while my
pulse hammered, he brought his pot of hot water and tin of paste to my side  of the fire. Feeling ill and
unreal, I slid down the blanket to make room for him. He sank down beside me, stiffly showing me his
back. “Behave yourself, or I’ll knock you so hard  you won’t  wake  up,” he threatened.  “Don’t think I
won’t.”
I swallowed hard. “I know.” His back was very broad and smooth, the skin dark from long hours in
the sun. The five brands looked raw, rimmed with red and their edges swollen. With the right ointment,
they’d heal. Garrett’s marks were faint welts, nothing more.
The water was hot on my chilled fingers as I wrung out the cloth. I reached forward, then hesitated.
Angel’s Spit,  I’d  never  done  anything like this before.  Taking a  breath,  I  decided  I’d  pretend  I  was
Heather. She‘d know how to wash a man’s back. God help me, I was pathetic.
Steeling myself, I dabbed hesitantly at the highest bloody mark and worked my way carefully down.
His  shoulders  were  different  from  those  I’d  seen  at  the  docks,  bunching  with  strength  gained  from
swinging a blade rather than pulling a rope. He smelled like horse, same as his cloak. Scattered between
the whip marks were a sprinkling of old white scars.
I continued to work, running the cloth carefully over each rise and fall of muscle, feeling the difference
in each of them. I’d never had this opportunity to unhurriedly touch a man, this soft exploration that was
made right and proper by way of an offer of help. It was heady, and the cool detachment I touched him
with seemed to make it all the more intense.
Jeck started as I touched the small of his back to catch a rivulet. I suddenly realized I had gone over
his entire back and had needlessly started over again. What the chu-pits am I doing? Embarrassed,  I
draped the rag over the edge of the pot and opened the tin.
I risked a sniff at the white ointment, recoiling at  the stench.  Garlic and  horseradish,  with a  healthy
dose  of thyme to  try to  counteract  the smell, mixed in what looked  like wax and  fat.  It  was  a  nasty
concoction, undoubtedly guaranteed to remove infection. I hesitantly dipped my fingers. I looked  at  his
back, thinking it was beautiful with power, even marred as it was.
A grunt slipped from Jeck as the cold ointment hit his back. “Sorry,” I said, shifting to kneel behind
him. His skin was warm where I smoothed the paste over the brands. The muscles in his neck turned to
cords, and his shoulders tensed. “I’m not going to try to escape,” I said, trying to get my mind off how
my fingers felt sliding over the smoothness of him.
“I’ll believe that when I have you in the palace,” he replied, his voice strained.
“Well,” I admitted, a finger tracing a brand from his shoulder to the small of his back. “I didn’t mean I

wouldn’t try to escape. Just not while tending your back.”
“Oh-h-h-h-h. A noble-minded prisoner. I’ll rest easy tonight.”
“I’m not a prisoner,” I said quickly. “Prisoners are helpless.”
“No?” he said with a strained-sounding laugh. “What are you, then?”
“All right. I’m a prisoner, but I’m not helpless.” My fingers were humming, almost hurting, really, and
I looked at them. “What’s in this ointment? It’s making my fingers hurt.” Annoyed at how easily his back
could distract me, I roughly smeared the paste across a red line.
Jeck’s breath hissed in over his teeth. Turning where he sat, he snatched my wrist.
“Hey!” I shouted, surging to my knees and trying to tug away. His grip was like sun-warmed metal,
hard and unyielding. I lurched back, the length of my arm stretched between us. “Let go,” I demanded,
frightened. “I’m sorry. I didn’t mean to  push that  hard.”  But it was  the look  on his bearded  face  that
shocked me to stillness. Wonder, fear, and—speculation?
“They’re humming, aren’t they,” he said, making it a statement. “Your hands. Almost enough to hurt.”
My mouth opened, and I twisted my arm until he released me. The tingling in my palms swelled, tiny
spikes exploding from my skin. I made fists of them, willing the sensation to go.
He took a breath to say something. Clearly changing his mind, he extended  his hand toward  me. I
drew back, and he aggressively shifted closer. I spun away, lurching to get to  my feet,  and  was  pulled
back to my knees when he gripped my shoulder. “Let me go!” I shouted.
“Sit,” he demanded, jerking me back onto my blanket.
A cry escaped me. In that instant Jeck frightened me as no one ever had before. He knew I wasn’t a
princess and held no respect that I once had been. I was a beggar, to be treated as such. He could hurt
me without even trying—and he didn’t care if he did. Panicked, I froze in fear as he gripped  my upper
arm. My heart pounded, and I shirked back as he hesitantly, almost reverently, reached out and touched
my jawline.
My lips parted and my shoulders  eased  at  the tingling sensation  where  his fingers rested.  I met his
eyes, seeing flecks of gold hidden within the deep brown. In his touch was the heat of the sun, soothing.
His hand dropped, and I reached to feel my face in wonder. I looked at my hands, then his, knowing he
had felt that same warmth coming from my fingers.
“It’s the venom,” he said. “I dosed you up beyond  your usual levels. Even so,  I’ve  never  heard  of
anyone beside me who could…” He drawled to a stop. Eyebrows raised, he confidently waited for me
to ask the expected question.
I swallowed, afraid at how well he was manipulating me. “Could what?” I whispered.
He picked up the tin I had  dropped.  Picking out a  flake of bark,  he recapped  it. “Agree  to  leave
Kavenlow and be my apprentice, and I’ll tell you.”
My breath came in a knowing sound. “You are chull bait, Captain,” I said, frightened.
His face gave me no clue as to what he was thinking. Breaking our gaze, he took his water and tin of
paste and returned to his side of the fire. Silent, he pulled a clean shirt from his saddlebag and put it on.
Ignoring me, he sat on his log and took up his tea.
I settled myself uneasily on the blanket. The tingling of my hands had retreated to a dull throb, and I
tried to wipe the stink of garlic off on the hem of my dress. Strong and heady, the scent of Jeck’s cloak
assailed  me, thoughts  of  his  smooth  skin  flashing  unbidden  into  my  mind.  Eying  him  over  the  fire,  I
promised  myself I’d  stay  awake,  but my full stomach  and  the warmth of Jeck’s  cloak  put me  asleep
faster than if I had been lost in my sheets and pillows safe at home.

Fifteen
It was the birds that woke me up, Screeching and squawking as if only they could convince the sun to
rise. They were unusually noisy, and I stretched my feet downward in search of my bottle of hot water.
My toes poked from under the covers to find the icy morning instead of a  warm spot.  Jerking my feet
back, I remembered where I was and that my pillow hadn’t slipped to the floor but was missing entirely.
Chu, I thought, keeping my eyes closed as I listened for any movement from Jeck.
The sun wasn’t up yet, I decided as I slit my eyelids and found only a faint brightness. I had woken on
three occasions during the night. Each time I’d found Jeck awake—not watching me but alert. Once, he
had scratched out a grid for thieves and kings, populating it with finger-sized pieces of black and white.
Now, though, when I rolled my head to see him, I found him sitting before a neglect-extinguished fire with
his chin slumped to his chest.
My pulse hammered. I slowly brought my knees to my chin, moving my hands down to my ankles. If
I could worry the knots loose, I could slip away, barefoot or not.
“Get your hands from your feet, or I will lop them off,” Jeck said, his head unmoving.
“Lop what off?” I asked sourly as I sat up. “My hands or my feet?”
Jeck’s head rose. “Care to find out?” he said irately. “Get up. We’re leaving.”
“What? Now?” I complained. “The sun isn’t up. I haven’t had my breakfast.”
A  sigh  shifted  his  shoulders.  He  slowly  rose,  stretching.  As  he  collapsed  in  on  himself,  he
unexpectedly  snatched  his  cloak  off  me.  Gasping,  I  clutched  at  my  cloak  still  wrapped  around  me.
“Aren’t you a basket of sunshine in the morning?” he said as he draped it over his shoulders. “Show me
your feet.”
Feeling shrewish, I poked my toes out from behind my cloak. My feet were nigh frozen.
“Farther…” he demanded, “and put your hands in your lap.”
I sullenly pulled my palms from where I had braced them on the dirt to give myself leverage should he
come close enough for me to kick. Only when I was unbalanced did he lean over my feet. “You were a
good girl,” he said, satisfied.
“I could have gotten away,” I boasted, “but it was too cold. Can I have my boots back?”
Jeck grunted. Before I could take a breath, he flipped his knife from somewhere, darted forward, cut
the rope between my feet, and leaned back. He stood still, as if he hadn’t moved. His knife was  gone.
The blood drained from my face at how fast it had been.
“If you have to do anything, do it now,” he said. “I won’t stop until we reach the palace.”
I shivered, shocked by how easily he could have cut my throat instead of my bonds.
“No farther away than that, Princess,” he warned, pointing as he brought  Tuck  closer  to  make  him
ready for travel.
My head bobbed loosely. Worried, I took care  of my morning ritual as  best  I could,  horribly glad
women wore dresses. As Jeck finished readying the horses, I alternately picked at the leaves in my hair
and the rings of rope about my ankles. The knots were too tight, and I could do nothing with them. It was
humiliating. A frown pinched my brow when I realized Jeck had put my saddle on his horse. Men were
thieves, all of them. Feeling sour and unpleasant, I glanced over the camp, my gaze landing on the game
of thieves and kings he’d scratched out.
My heart seemed to stop. It was the game I had been playing with my father.

Misery closed my throat as I saw the layout wasn’t quite right. “I didn’t take the pawn,” I whispered
in grief. “I took the knight.” Jeck looked up from folding his blanket in confusion. “The game,” I said, my
voice high. “I’m the white side. And I took the knight before Garrett—” I caught my breath and held it.
Angels save me, they were dead.
Jeck glanced from me to the game and back again. “That puts your thief in danger.”
“I know.” It was almost a sob. Standing with my thin cloak clenched tight about me, I watched him
crouch to adjust the pieces. He then moved his king to threaten my thief. I stared at him, my mind swirling
with a sickening slurry of emotion. “Just let me go,” I warbled. “My parents  are  dead.  Kavenlow  used
me. There’s nothing left—”
“Tell it to Prince Garrett.” Face tight, he swept the pieces up into his palm and dropped them into a
saddlebag. It was the last of the camp. Jaw clenched in what looked like anger, he cinched Tuck’s riding
pad so tight that the flighty gray tossed his head and squealed.
“I’m going to pick you up and put you on him,” Jeck said as he came forward. He was so much taller
than I was, and I stared up at him, numb. “If you kick me, I’ll break your toes. If you hit me, I’m going to
drop you. Put out your hands so I can tie them.”
I was too miserable to move. With a jerky quickness, Jeck snatched my hands and wrapped a cord
about my wrists. Garrett had killed my parents. He was going to kill Kavenlow. I would be dead when
Garrett grew tired of me. I should have run. I should have listened to Duncan.
I gasped when Jeck’s gloved hands went around me and he picked me up. Tuck snorted as I landed
gently on him, my feet to either side of the tall gray. The horse danced, and I almost fell. Jeck shoved me
upright, and his rough touch sparked my anger, cutting cleanly through my grief.
I might be a beggar’s child, I might have lost my kingdom to  a  woman I’d  never  seen  and  then to
Garrett, I might have been betrayed by the man I thought of as a second father, but I would sling nets and
shovel chu  from  the  careen  pits  before  I  accepted  being  treated  like  this.  My  face  burned  as  Jeck
brusquely tugged my cloak out from under me so it lay right. “I need my hands to hold on,” I said, forcing
a half cry into my voice though I was seething.
“You’ll hold on as you are, or you’ll ride the entire way on my lap,” he said calmly. My eyes darted
over everything, and I weighed my chances to escape as he knotted Tuck’s bridle to the black gelding.
After a final check on the extinguished fire, Jeck untied his horse and led us to the trail. I balanced easily,
ducking the low branches.
Frustration kept me silent. My fingers twined in Tuck’s mane in a white-knuckled grip. I could not let
Jeck take me back to the palace. Stomach clenching, I assessed what I had to work with as we edged
down onto the sunken trail and Jeck swung onto his horse.
I had no boots. My wrists were bound. I’d have to escape by horse, and mine was  tied  to  Jeck’s.
My shoulders were tight with tension as we shifted from a walk into a smooth  canter.  I licked  my lips,
glancing at Jeck riding beside and a little before me.
I had to get him off his horse. It was all I had; the rest would come as I needed it.
“Captain!” I cried out as I let myself slip. “Jeck!” I shrieked, clenching my eyes shut as I fell. I let go
of Tuck’s mane lest I get dragged under him. I hit the ground in a painful thump, my shoulder taking most
of the hurt. A stick bit into my thigh, and I snatched it, tangling it into my hair. It was only the length of my
finger, but it would be enough.
Tuck danced aside, not liking his rider  falling off. Jeck’s  gelding, too,  was  spooked,  and  it took  a
moment for Jeck to calm him before he could turn him around and dismount.
The fall had shaken me, and my confusion wasn’t  entirely faked  as  he grasped  my shoulder.  “That

was a foolish thing to do,” he said roughly. “Don’t do it again.”
I hid my disgust that his knife was on his saddle and out of my reach. He had put his hat and its darts
on the saddle as well. “I hurt my hands,” I said, allowing my eyes to fill as I held them out to show him. “I
can’t hold on if they are tied.”
Jeck pulled me up, and I wobbled until I found my balance. With an excessive force, he put me back
on Tuck. “I’m not going to free your hands,” he said, squinting up at me from under his hat, his jaw tight
and his shoulders tense. “Do that again, and you’ll ride with me.”
I nodded, making my face sullen to hide my excitement. I was on the trail. I was on a horse pointed
away from the palace. And in this splinter of time—Jeck wasn’t.
He turned his back on me. As he reached for his hat, I tore the stick from my hair and jammed it into
Tuck’s hindquarters.
“Heyah!” I shouted. The flighty horse squealed, bolting into a run. Gasping, I clutched his mane and
crouched low. Jeck’s horse was tied to us and had no choice but to follow. Jeck’s tenuous grip was torn
away. The horses and I fled. Surrounded by trees, there was only one way to  go.  I didn’t need  to  do
anything but hang on.
“Tess!” Jeck shouted. “Damn you, woman!”
I grinned, encouraging Tuck with wild, hissed words. I was free and running.
The wind in my hair had never felt so glorious. The aches from my night on the ground melted into
victory. The thudding of eight hooves pounded into me, making me wish I could go on forever.
But horses are stupid beasts, more inclined to fill their belly than run from a pain they quickly forget.
Tuck began to slow, and judging I was far enough away to get out of my bindings, I sat up, murmuring
until he came to a jolting, arched-necked stop. Jeck’s horse obediently halted  since they were  still tied
together.  As  they vied for the same  spot  of green,  I looked  behind me. Jeck  was  rapidly closing  the
distance, pounding down the path.
I stretched  for Jeck’s  knife tucked  into the saddle.  Fingers bent  awkwardly,  I tugged and  sawed.
Finally the cord parted. Heart pounding, I looked to see Jeck scooping up his fallen hat. I could almost
make out what he was saying, hollering at the top of his voice. The black horse watched him with pricked
ears. Jeck should have stuck to his own tired mount instead  of stealing a  rested  one  who didn’t know
him.
I put the knife away. My pulse hammered and I slipped from Tuck. Ignoring the twinge in my ankle, I
quickly made friends with the black gelding. As Jeck yelled at me, I swung myself onto  my saddle  and
arranged my filthy dress. “What am I going to call you?” I said as I patted the gelding’s neck. I glanced
behind me to Jeck. Unable to resist, I pulled the black up into a squealing, two-footed half turn. “I’m not
a thief!” I called merrily as his front feet thudded  down  and  he pranced.  “I’m using my means to  their
fullest potential!”
Leaning forward, I screamed into the black horse’s ear. He surged forward, willingly charging ahead
with a reckless abandon until our pace was neither safe nor stoppable. Tuck thundered alongside, urging
the black into a faster pace.
Jeck  will  never  catch  me  now, I  thought  in  satisfaction.  I  would  go  to  Saltwood.  I  would  find
Kavenlow. He would explain to me why he had taken a beggar’s child and made her into a player. And
then he would tell me just what the devil a player was.

Sixteen
The stableman watched me as I counted the money he had put into my hand. It was obvious by his
glances into the yard where Tuck and the black gelding stood blowing at the smell of grain that he thought
it suspicious I had them. I didn’t care as long as he bought the saddle. A part of me regretted selling it,
but I needed money for passage across the bay.
Satisfied the coinage was correct, I wrapped the money in a cloth and tucked it away. The relief I felt
surprised me. Money had  never  been  important until I didn’t have any. “Thank you,” I said,  trying to
sound as coarse as my dress and hair were. Five days in the wilds with little water had left me so filthy I
could hardly stand myself.
He grunted in acknowledgment as he took my saddle and moved it to the tack rack. “We don’t see
much  leatherwork  from  the  capital,”  he  said.  “Leastwise  not  for  sale.”  He  hit  the  word  hard,  as  if
expecting me to confess it wasn’t mine.
Last night had been miserable. Duncan hadn’t been at our abandoned camp. Alone and depressed, I
had kept  the horses  plodding forward  most of the night. There  was  no moon because  of  the  clouds,
making traveling difficult. I wasn’t willing to risk a fire when I stopped, and between the cold, the dirt, the
misery of my dead parents, and waiting for Jeck to catch me up or the wolves to take me down, I hadn’t
slept. Morning found me moving before the sun had risen. I was wretchedly tired, but I wouldn’t rest until
a ship was carrying me across the bay.
I took a slow breath, letting my anxiety go as I brought the musty smell of hay and horses deep into
me. I liked stables. I had often hidden in the palace livery to avoid my studies,  until Kavenlow  realized
what I was  doing and  switched  my lessons  to  horsemanship,  pushing me so  far into exhaustion that  I
would willingly sit with paper and ink the following day. Looking back, I realized he had been very good
at such persuasion, invariably getting his way without calling upon my parents to force my obedience.
A memory swirled up unbidden, of Kavenlow squinting from the sun and smiling proudly the first time
I made my pony jump a fence. I had been seven, and so full of myself one would think I’d jumped  the
cracks of hell. The stableman cleared his throat, and I brought myself back.
“Maybe you could help me,” I asked. “I’m trying to catch up with my father. Tall, gray-bearded man
on horse? He’d be dressed well. It would have only been a day or so ago.”
“Haven’t seen him,” the man muttered, rubbing a filthy rag over my saddle.
“Thank you,” I said, edging away. “I may be back to buy food for my horses.”
“I’ll give it to you cheaper than the inns in town,” he said, his voice eager.
Nodding, I stepped from the still warmth of the stables into the late afternoon. Jeck’s horse pricked
his ears, his eyes begging me to scratch the underside of his massive jaw. The silly beast stretched out his
neck like an enormous cat, a low moan escaping him as my fingernails raked  through his stiff hair. My
hand pulled away with dust and sweat under my nails. I looked at them, sighing. I wanted nothing more
than a good meal and a bath. But I didn’t think being on foot would slow Jeck appreciably, and I felt as if
any moment a dart would find me.
Taking the two horses’ leads, I walked into town. The dock street was a dirt track, widening where
thick wooden pilings jutted out into the bay and a scattering of ships rested.  Barnacle  encrusted  fishing
boats were pulled out onto the rocky beach. Most were empty and abandoned, having processed their
haul already, but one latecomer was busy. A vicious flock of seagulls and crows circled and dived as the
man threw out the offal of his catch. The harsh noise of the birds and the dog chasing them were loud. By
the looks of it, the tide was almost in.

Jeck’s horse called out, startling me. Another answered him. My gaze went to the hard-packed yard
of an inn, the Seasick Pony by the placard showing a wide-eyed, pathetic beast with green spittle coming
from it. My heart gave a pound when I saw Pitch tethered outside.
“Pitch!” I cried, not caring that I was attracting stares as I jogged to her. The black gelding behind me
was nearly as enthusiastic, neck arched and tail raised. “Oh, don’t you look fine,” I murmured as I tied
Tuck and Jeck’s horse beside her.
A small stableboy with a broom taller than he was watched me suspiciously, and I took my hands off
her. A flush of guilt for selling the saddle went through me when I saw that my gear was on Pitch,  right
beside Duncan’s. But if Pitch was outside, then Duncan was inside.
Leaving the three horses to their reunion, I eagerly stepped over the dice game on the front steps of
the inn and entered. The room was stuffy and dim, noisy with too many men struggling to  fit months of
entertainment into days. My gaze roved over the throng, my eagerness dulling as the stares of the women
grew hostile. Nervous, I checked my bedraggled topknot.
“Gone!” I heard  a  familiar voice moan,  and  I spun to  the bar.  “Vanished  like  a  meat  pie  from  a
windowsill in spring.”
A smile pulled up the corners of my mouth as I found Duncan sprawled miserably across the counter,
monopolizing the innkeeper. Not wanting to attract more attention by calling out to him, I edged through
the tables with an intentness that would hopefully tell the watching eyes I had my own business to attend
to.
“She was going to make me rich,” Duncan said as I gave a grasping sailor a nasty look and sidled out
of his reach.  “And now she’s  gone.  I looked  for her.  God  knows  I did,  but  I  couldn’t  find  a  trace.
Vanished like a punta in a whirl of wind.”
“Ah,” the innkeeper said. “Don’t chase the women that run from you,  lad.  You’ll find better.  Have
another ale?” It was clearly a well-practiced litany by his bored countenance.
“No.” Duncan pulled his tankard close. “You don’t understand. I could look a lifetime and never find
another like her. I didn’t even care her cooking was like the scrapings from under the stewpot  and  her
tea was like rabbit piss.”
I grimaced, startled to find the innkeeper looking me over with a derisive interest. “Did she have curly
brown hair to her waist with sticks and leaves in it?” he asked.
“Aye.” Duncan sighed, sounding angry. “Full of leaves and wickedly sharp darts. Damn it all to hell, it
was perfect. Now I’m back to nothing.”
My hand went up to check my hair. I hadn’t brushed it in hours. I must look as if I had been pulled
through a knothole backward.
“And was her dress too short?”
Duncan’s head  bobbed.  “God  help me, but she  had  a  red  underskirt.  I  saw  it  when  she  was  on
horseback. And she rode like a man.” Hunched over the bar, he stared up at the innkeeper. “Like a man,
I say!”
I frowned and tugged at my dress. How else could I ride if I didn’t have a proper saddle?
“And does she have a temper about her?” the innkeeper asked, looking from me long enough to spit
on the floor.
“Slap your face as soon as give you the time of day,” he said morosely. “You sound as if you’ve seen
her.”
The man shifted his eyes from me to Duncan. “She’s burning well standing behind you.”

Duncan spun so quickly, he nearly knocked his stool down. “Tess!” he cried, shock on his face as he
rose.  “You’re  alive!” A score  of unvoiced thoughts cascaded  over  him, too  fast for me to  recognize.
Then he settled on one, and beaming, came forward with his hands outstretched.
Alarmed, I held out my hands to keep him away. Duncan pushed them aside and gave me a hug that
forced the air from my lungs. His stubble had turned into the beginnings of a nasty-looking brown and red
beard, and it scraped my bruised forehead. “Stop!” I protested, unable to keep the grin from me. He had
missed me. I didn’t think anyone, except Heather, had missed me before.
“You’re all right!” he said, smiling as he put me at arm’s length. “I thought I’d lost you.”
Embarrassed, I glanced over the room as the noise resumed. The innkeeper had made his escape to a
table, but I couldn’t help notice he kept an eye on us.
“What happened?” Duncan asked, trying to lead me to his stool. “Who was that? How long were you
standing there?” He frowned, reaching out to my head. “Hey. You’re hurt.”
“Don’t.” Flustered, I pulled away, and his frown deepened. “It’s just a bump.”
He took my shoulders and peered down at my scalp. His eyes hardened. “He hit you?”
I  looked  up,  surprised  at  his  anger.  “Yes,”  I  said,  “and  tied  me  up  and  sat  on  me.  But  I  got
away—with your horse and his—so I guess we’re even.”
Hope  lit  Duncan’s  eyes.  “Tuck!  Is  he  outside?”  He  strode  out  the  door,  and  I  stood  for  three
heartbeats, unbelieving. The man was as skittish as his horse, I thought, decidedly put out. I followed
him into the street, trying to scrape my dignity from the floor as I went.
Squinting in the brighter light, I found Duncan running his quick hands eagerly over Tuck. “Hey, boy,”
he said, his eyes alight with pleasure. “Look at you. Not a scratch. Stupid beast. It was only a tree.” He
slapped  Tuck’s  neck  fondly, and  I sourly wondered  if Duncan’s  attempt  to  find me had  been  out  of
concern for me or his horse.
“Tess,” he said earnestly. “Thank you. I raised him up from a foal when he was born out of season
and abandoned. I can’t imagine where I’d get another like him.”
“You’re welcome,” I said, forgiving him for leaving me standing alone in a tavern.
“What happened?” he said as I started to move his gear off Pitch and onto Tuck. “Who was that who
grabbed you?” He leaned close until I could smell the smoke from the inn on him. “You stole his horse?”
he asked, clearly exasperated. “Tess, you’ve got to stop doing that.”
My anxiety flowed back. “I’ve got to go,” I said as I tied my pack onto the black gelding.
“Good  idea.”  He  started  to  take  his  things  off  Pitch  and  put  them  on  Tuck  with  an  unhurried
quickness. “Now for the third time, who was that? You think he’ll follow you?”
I started to help him, hesitating as I tried to decide what I should do with Jeck’s things. Now that  I
had mine back, it didn’t feel right to keep them. “Oh, he’s following me all right,” I said, feeling a pinch of
urgency. “He’s a—” A new caution stopped me from saying player. “He’s the captain of King Edmund’s
guard,” I whispered, not sure how much was lie and how much was truth. “It was luck that got me away,
and he’s as angry as a stingray on a deck. I have to find a boat to take me across the bay. I’ve got to
find Kavenlow.”
“Us.” Duncan pushed Tuck’s bony head out of the way to see me. “You have to find a boat to take
us across the bay.”
His stance was determined  as  he squinted  in the sun at  me. Though as  tall as  Jeck,  he lacked  the
captain’s bulk, replacing it with a lanky quickness. His hand was still swollen from the dart that had nearly
killed him, and it made him look vulnerable in my eyes.  “Duncan,” I protested  softly, “this isn’t one  of

your schemes.  He’s  not going to  stop  until he finds me. I know  I promised  I’d  give you anything for
helping me get past the gates, but a week of my time is going to get you killed.”
“You got away,” he said just shy of belligerent. “How bad can he be?”
A sigh escaped me. I looked down the street, worried. “You don’t believe me, do you?”
“Beat me with a dead carp, Tess. I believed you when you first told me! That’s why I say you should
keep running. He’ll stop if you go far enough. I should know.” He grimaced, looking angry at some past
injustice.
My attention followed his to the light foot traffic. My pulse increased.  Jeck  was  out there.  He  was
getting close. I could feel it. “I can take care of myself,” I said.
“I know you can. That’s one of the things I like about you.”
Shock struck through me, jerking my eyes to his. We were caught between two horses, closer than
proper decorum allowed, hidden from casual eyes. I swallowed, unable to find the will to  pull from his
grip as he took my hands and exerted a soft, subtle pull. He liked me?
“Work with me,” he said softly, making my heart pound. “Say you will. I’m looking farther ahead than
you, and  Tess,  I know  you feel like you owe  them something, but there’s  nothing  left  for  you  in  the
capital.  Nothing. Come  with me… and  I promise  I can  have you living like a  princess  again  in  three
years.”
I tried to swallow, finding my throat too dry to manage it. “Duncan…”
His long face turned pained. “I thought I lost you, Tess. Just…”
My breath caught. He thought he lost me? Suddenly frightened, I tugged from his grip.
Duncan stiffened as my hands slipped from his. “I’m sorry,” he said, ducking his head. “I didn’t mean
how that sounded. It’s just that…”
I forced myself to smile up at him, my hours spent in diplomatic conversation coming to the forefront.
“It’s just that you want to make lots of money,” I said, the stupider part of me hoping that he had meant it
exactly how it sounded. I was an idiot; but at least I knew it.
His breath escaped him in a relieved, half laugh. “Yeah,” he said. “You got me there.”
Relieved that we had sidestepped whatever he had almost said, I ran my gaze from his grease-stained
hat to  his squalid,  worn  boots.  What  was  in  between  was  unkempt  and  coarse.  But  his  words  still
resonated in my mind. He cared about me, Jeck frightened me, and I needed a friend. I didn’t care if his
motives were a little skewed. Or were they?
“I have to find Kavenlow,” I said softly. “He can pay you back for what I took from you in the inn.
And if he doesn’t, he can get it for you.” I felt embarrassed as I looked up, knowing Duncan heard the
unspoken please stay with me in my words.
“Kavenlow, huh,” Duncan said. Lips pressing together for an instant, he licked his thumb and stuck it
out. My thumb was in motion before  I knew  it. Jerking to  a  halt, I watched  his eyes  as  I finished the
motion to lick it and press it to his thumb, sealing our bargain. I wondered if he put the same weight as I
did on the silly bond. “Fine.” He was scanning the street again, shifting back  to  put space  between  us.
The rims of his ears were red. “I’ll stay with you until I get paid.”
“If you’d rather, you can take one of the black horses,” guilt prompted me to say.
He shook his head with a nervous smile. “I’d sooner sleep in a chu pit than take one of those horses.
They’re stolen, remember?” Then he paused, frowning as he looked them over. “Where’s the saddle?”

Seventeen
I flushed and dropped my eyes. “I sold it,” I admitted. “For ship fare.”
His long, stubbly face suddenly empty of emotion, he moved to  shield me from anyone passing by.
“How much did you get?” he asked as his shadow fell over me.
Wondering why he wasn’t angry for me having sold a saddle he had considered his, no matter  how
loosely, I handed him the impromptu bag. He  unfolded it in his cupped  hand,  his head  bowed  over  it:
“Chu,” he breathed in admiration. “You all got this? For that saddle?”
My smile turned relieved. “I know how to bargain.”
“Huh,” he grunted, and my eyebrows rose as he handed it back to me. “Nicely done.”
I looked askance at him. “I thought you’d be angry.”
He turned  to  Tuck,  seeming to  want to  ignore that  he was  doing something nice. “I don’t  need  a
saddle. And now we can cross the bay in comfort.”
“Uh, Duncan? A saddle won’t get two people and three horses across the bay. Especially since we’ll
have to charter a ship. There’s no regular run from Saltwood to Brenton.”
Duncan’s brow lifted. “Who says?”
“Three summers spent sketching the trade routes,”  I answered,  thinking that  though the information
was now proving useful, it still seemed like a colossal waste of time.
Duncan turned an appraising look at Jeck’s horse, and I shook  my head.  “I’m not selling him. The
other one either,” I said with a grimace. “They are a betrothal gift.”
Frowning, he took Jeck’s pack off Tuck. “Maybe we could sell his things, then.”
I’d been through Jeck’s pack yesterday, finding my boots and stockings—I had no clue as to why he
had taken them off in the first place—but my venom was gone, and I’d found only a handful of my darts.
My whip, though, was again at my waist. “I thought you weren’t a thief,” I said. “Besides, the only thing
he has of worth is a bunch of knives, and if we tried to sell them after I sold the saddle, someone would
say we stole them.”
He grinned and touched his hat’s brim. “That’s what you did, Lady Black Sheep.”
I fought the urge to kick his shin. “So you’ll understand then why I’m leaving everything but the knives
at one of the inns for him to find,” I said.
“What? Tess, he kidnapped you. He owes you. A blanket, a bowl. Pick something!”
“I’m not a thief.” I yanked the bag back and slung it behind my things for the time being. Not meeting
his eyes, I untied the two black horses and backed them up with soft words.
Duncan looked at the inn. “Why don’t we eat while we’re here.”
“Tide turns in a few hours. We need to arrange passage, first. Then we can eat.”
A groan escaped him. “Good. I’m famished. You look  at  the boats.  I’ll stay  here.”  His eyes  were
bright, and he hunched closer. “How about my share of that saddle?”
My shoulders tensed, and I touched the fold of cloth with the money, reassuring myself I still had it.
“We need it for getting across the bay. We’re short coinage as it is.”
“Give me an hour, and I’ll double it. Play with me, and I could double it again.”
I felt an instant of fear in that a flicker of temptation burned in me. “That money is to get us across the

bay, not gamble with,” I said, hushed though no one was near enough to hear. “Especially after what you
told that innkeeper about me making money with you.”
“We won’t get caught,” he said, starting to sound angry as he pushed his filthy hat up.
My stomach  clenched.  How  could  I go  from  dewy  and  soft  to  irate  so  quickly?  “You  want  the
money? Fine. Take all of it. But you’re only three days from all but dying from the venom. Your fingers
can’t be fast enough yet. And there  isn’t enough money in town  to  keep  your hands  attached  to  your
wrists if you’re caught.” He said nothing, and guilt prompted me to add, “We can eat, though, and maybe
buy a bath.”
“A bath!” His face lengthened in disgust and he scratched his jawline under his scraggly beard. “You
don’t smell that bad. You look like you need sleep more than a bath.”
Cringing, I led Jeck’s horse and  Pitch into the street.  Duncan hesitated  a  moment before  following
with Tuck. My dress was too short, my boots were dirty, and I had slept in my clothes four nights in a
row. “I may be a beggar, but I don’t have to look like one,” I said as he came alongside. “And if I smell
at all, then it’s not all right.”
Duncan snorted as he paced beside me. As peeved as I was, it felt good to have someone beside me
again. I didn’t like being alone. Over the bay, a bank of rain clouds was building. We were at slack tide,
and it was chancy that we’d be able to leave yet today. Jeck was moving while we  stood  still. I could
lose half a day because we were an hour too late.
Fatigue  forced  me  into  a  slower  pace  as  we  came  to  the  first  dock.  Sun  warming  my  back,  I
evaluated the handful of ships berthed and the precious few more at anchor in the close, deep water that
Saltwood boasted. Seeing them with their sails wrapped and anchors trenched, my thoughts went to the
scores of ships at the capital. They were fish trapped in a tidal pool, trusting the twenty-year peace of the
harbor. I could do nothing to warn  them. I could  only hope  that  I could  find Kavenlow  and  get back
before the bulk of Garrett’s men got to the capital.
Worried,  I focused  on the few docked  ships.  I’d  rather  hire one  of them since the captain  would
likely make me pay the docking fee if he had to tie up to take on the horses.
I  passed  the  first  without  comment.  Duncan  glanced  once  behind  us  as  we  continued.  “Is  there
anyone we can ask what boat is going where?” he questioned.
“No,” I said. “If it’s like most small harbors, the inns put up and maintain their separate docks. They
cater to the captains, knowing their crews will come to their taverns first when given leave. There’s a fee
to pay for the dock’s upkeep, which the captain arranges with the innkeeper, sort of as we do when we
stable our horses. It’s based on how big the boat is and how much trouble the crew generally gives the
innkeeper’s ladies.” My cheeks warmed as I remembered the hostile looks in the Seasick Pony. “It’s the
innkeeper  who collects  the taxes  on the  goods  coming  ashore,  passing  them  to  the  king’s  collection
boat.” My eyes dropped at the memory of my father. “At least, that’s the theory,” I finished, my throat
tight.
Duncan made a rude noise. “I’d think the innkeeper would keep some for himself.”
“That’s your first thought?” I accused, depressed.  “How to  cheat  someone?”  He  gave me a  telling
look, and I dropped my gaze. “In the larger ports, there’s a palace-paid bookkeeper,” I admitted. “But
it’s not worth the salary in the small harbors—as  long as  the innkeeper  isn’t too  greedy.  And in most
places there’s enough traffic to warrant two inns and docks. They watch each other’s purse strings better
than the most loyal servant to the king.”
That seemed to satisfy Duncan, or perhaps he was trying to devise how one could get around  even
that. “How about that boat?” he said, pointing. “That one looks big enough.”
I shook my head. “See how low it’s riding? They already have a cargo and destination, and I doubt

it’s Brenton, seeing as it’s carrying grain, and Brenton has its own farms.”
“That one?” he asked, sounding hopeful as he pointed to the next.
“Too many crewmen sitting doing nothing. It looks like they’re leaving tonight, though. We can check
later where they’re going. Maybe we can convince the captain to make a detour.”
“Chu, Tess,” he swore. “We’re running out of boats.”
Worried that he was right, I bit my lip. I was so tired. My left leg was growing sluggish, and I.  was
nigh starved from the smells of cooking food. “We want a ship that’s big enough to handle the open sea
but small enough to make a profit harbor-hopping,” I said. “One that’s riding high and empty, and whose
crew is ashore, saying the captain has no prospects yet but isn’t willing to move his boat to anchor and
incur another docking fee to take on cargo.”
Duncan eyed me. “You know a lot about boats for a princess.”
“I’m not a  princess,”  I said  tightly. The road  turned  to  wooden  planking,  loud  under  the  horses’
hooves. Kavenlow took me whenever a shipment came in at the palace dock. I hated the idea  that  my
food was better traveled than I was, and he knew  I enjoyed  hearing where  everything came  from and
why some things were twice as expensive other times of the year. It was a wonder Kavenlow had done
anything with me, I pestered him with so many questions.
My feet slowed as we came to the second, nicer dock. “There,” I said, pointing. The end of the pier
was overwhelmed by two large ships. Stuck between them looking like a toy was a trim little schooner. I
liked it. Its two masts were gaff rigged, giving it the ability to run close to the wind. Its timbers were black
with  age  but  clean.  There  was  a  small  shack  in  the  bow  where  I  imagined  the  galley  was,  a  long,
thigh-high rise in the middle above the hold,  and  a  second,  shorter  but slightly higher rise breaking  the
deck at the back right before the wheel.
There were six catapults for lobbing flaming tar against pirates, twice as many as usually found on a
boat this size. The ropes were neatly coiled around the dock cleats; the captain was meticulous—and in
port too long. He was probably anxious to be under way as much as I was. I read the name, smiling. The
 Sandpiper.
Duncan’s eyebrows bunched worriedly at my pleased look. “It’s small.”
“Only because it’s between those two hulks,” I countered.  Turning to  the silent boat,  I cupped  my
hands. “Ahoy, Sandpiper!” I called. I glanced up and down the dock, not liking to  have to  shout.  No
one answered,  and  I frowned.  “You  try,”  I  said,  gesturing  for  Duncan.  “You  have  a  screamer  of  a
mouth.”
He grinned. “Sandpiper!” he shouted, his voice echoing. “Hey! Anyone aboard?”
A dark head rose from the fore hatch. “Hoy,” a gaunt man called back. He was dressed in faded red,
and he squinted at us as if wondering why we had bothered him.
“We’re looking for your captain,” I said loudly. “Is he about?” The man stared at me, and I repeated,
“We’re looking for your captain?”
The man looked at the top of the mast, outright ignoring me. Anger warmed my cheeks. Sailors were
superstitious fools. I’d never been treated like this at the docks when with Kavenlow, and though I knew
it happened, to have it happen to me was a shock. “You ask him,” I muttered, giving Duncan a  nudge.
“He won’t talk to me because I’m a woman.”
Duncan smirked and took a cocky stance. “You, sir,” he called. “Is the captain aboard?”
I seethed  as  the sun-darkened  man  turned  back  to  us.  “He’s  at  the  Three  Crows,  but  if  you’re
looking for the sheepskins they’re gone.” His voice was rough—wind-torn almost.

“Thank you,” Duncan said. “I need to speak to him all the same.”
“Ask him where it is,” I said, peeved when Duncan turned Tuck and headed up the street.
“I know where it is,” Duncan said, pointing. “See? Right there.”
He swaggered  beside  me, finding something funny in that  the man had  talked  to  him  and  not  me.
What a fool bunch of simpletons, I thought. I hated being dirty. It was  the dirt that  had  done  it. The
dirt, the leaves, my filthy black hem, and my muddy boots. They wouldn’t dare treat me like that if I was
clean. But as Duncan angled us past the shop fronts to a sprawling building, my temper eased.
This inn had a fenced yard, and even what looked  like a  separate  building for the louder  guests.  It
was obviously the better of the two inns. The plaque hanging above the open double doors showed three
crows fighting for a perch on a fence post or mast. One had his wings open to land, another was falling
off with feathers splayed, and the last was perched safely, his eye eerily watching everyone passing under
him. The smell of cooked meat almost made me dizzy. It had been days since my last good meal, and I
felt, more than heard, Duncan sigh.
“Let’s put the horses behind the fence,” I said, thinking of Jeck. “Mmmm, smell that?”
A limping stableboy came to take the horses. I handed over Pitch and Jeck’s horse, dismally thinking
that the boy’s clothes were cleaner than mine. Duncan dug through a bag and pulled out his bowl. “Chu,
is it beef?” he asked.
My eyes shut in anticipated bliss as I sniffed. “And potatoes, and carrots, and onions.” My bowl  in
hand, I followed Duncan as he boldly strode under the sign and entered.
I found fewer eyes on me than when I had burst into the other  inn by myself, but I still ran a  hand
down  my  grimy  dress  and  checked  my  topknot  as  I  followed  Duncan  to  the  counter  where  a
bookish-looking man and a well-endowed woman were slicing potatoes for an empty stewpot. The short
man was keeping a tight eye on the loudest table. His beard was cut so close it was almost not there, and
his apron was stained from long use between washings.
“Two for supper,” Duncan said cheerfully, seeming to think this was a grand event when all I wanted
to do was slink to the back and hope no one saw me in my grime and filth. Duncan looked expectantly at
me,  and  I  grudgingly  laid  out  the  proper  coinage,  my  reluctance  at  parting  with  money  new  and
disturbing.
“Help yourself to the stewpot at the hearth,” the man said, his eyes shifting from the noisy table to the
coin and me. His gaze took us in, lingering on the bump on my head. A flicker of concern crossed him.
“The new bread is almost done. I imagine the lady would like a bit of bread, eh? Keep the color in your
cheeks and the curl in your hair, ma’am?”
I dropped my eyes and blushed, having discovered a new appreciation for being called a lady the last
few days. The plump woman next to him sent her knife through a potato with a thump, and the innkeeper
sighed. “I’ll bring you your bread,” he said blandly. “For a bit more, you can have ale instead of water.”
Duncan bobbed his head, then seeing my disapproval, he frowned. “One ale won’t turn my head so
far I can’t do business.”
“I was thinking of the cost,” I muttered, warming with an unexpected mortification.
The man in the apron straightened. “Ah, well. I know  everyone  hereabouts.  I can  help you there  if
you need it.”
Duncan  put  an  elbow  on  the  counter  and  leaned  forward  conspiratorially.  “We  were  told  the
Sandpiper’s captain was here?”
I cringed inside. He was doing it all wrong. Because it was the first thing out of his mouth, the woman

was not only listening, but she would remember us for months.
The innkeeper’s eyes shifted to a corner by the fire. “Aye,” the man said. “That’s him. But if you have
business with Captain Borlett you should wait until he gets a few pints in him.” The man smirked to make
his spotty beard bunch. “He’s doing his books, or trying to, the poor sod.”
Duncan grinned in understanding. “We’ll talk to him now.”
I kicked Duncan’s boot in disgust, and he gave me a black look. In fifteen minutes, the entire room
would know we were in a hurry. The cost of our fare just went up, thanks to him.
The innkeeper shrugged. “As you want it.”
His eyes went to the table at the back. They had started to sing, and a heavy man in a calf-length blue
coat seated in a quiet corner slammed his fist down. “Shut yer mouths, you bilge scrapings!” he shouted
with enough force to carry over storms. “Can’t you see I’m thinking? Get out! Get to the wench house
where you belong.”
The group quickly broke up. Most left the inn with quiet words of apology, leaving one of their own
dead drunk at a table in his own drool. The men passing before  me were  thin and  wiry, or  bulky and
muscular, but they all had an untamed look about them that wasn’t entirely unattractive and made me glad
Duncan was beside me.
The innkeeper took up a tankard and wove through the exodus to the squat man in the corner  with
the blue coat. It had to be Captain Borlett. The innkeeper whispered a few words into the captain’s ear,
and he eyed us from under a faded blue hat. I shivered, unable to say why.
“Books?” Duncan grunted. “His mood won’t get better no matter how much he drinks.”
I sourly agreed, and  I followed Duncan across  the quieter  room.  The song started  up again in the
yard.  The  captain  visibly  sighed  and  ran  a  hand  across  his  eyes  and  down  his  face,  ending  with  a
white-knuckled grip on his short, graying beard.
“Keep your mouth shut,” I said as we neared. “I’ll do the talking.”
Duncan made a noise deep in his throat. “I can do more than play cards, Tess.”
I gave him a raised-eyebrow look. “I’m sure you can, but all I’ve done the last ten years is purchase
things.”
He took a breath to protest, then nodded, his face blank in thought. “Will he talk to you?” he asked.
“The sailor wouldn’t.”
I  nodded,  fairly  sure  he  would.  The  captain  of  a  reputable  merchant  ship  was  generally  a
book-learned man who had developed an unfortunate taste for adventure. Educated and from an affluent
family, he was a step up from his superstitious crew. He could read and write, and had some  skill with
sums as he had to prove to his backers  that he was  making a  profit.  He  was  often set  apart  from his
crew, so much so that many captains maintained quarters to entice passengers for long trips, hoping for
the diverse conversations he couldn’t get from his crew.
We came  to  a  standstill before  Captain  Borlett.  An oil lamp shone  over  the scattered  papers,  his
tankard making a blurred smear out of the notes under it. The mess was atrocious, and I couldn’t imagine
anyone working in such a haphazard way.
“Captain?” I said when he didn’t look up. I pronounced the word carefully to tell him I was educated
despite my slovenly dress.
“What do you want?” he barked, eyes still on his papers.
I jumped in surprise, elbowing Duncan into silence when he opened  his mouth. I would wait to  be
recognized properly. The captain’s jaw clenched, then relaxed. His shoulders shifted as he glanced at me

from under his hat. His eyes seemed tired, and the wrinkles about them vanished under a shaggy frazzle
of a beard. “Yes,” he said with a sigh.
It was likely the best I would get, and I extended my hand. “Good evening, Captain,” I said, and he
took it for a moment. My hand felt lost engulfed in his, thick with knobby knuckles and salt-parched skin.
“May we join you? It won’t take but a moment. I can see you’re busy.”
Captain Borlett’s gaze flicked behind us to the innkeeper. Leaning back in his chair, he made a puff of
amused acceptance  and  gestured  for us to  sit. Duncan grabbed  a  stool,  but I waited  with  a  growing
warmth. I wouldn’t sit unless someone  helped  me.  It  was  imperative  the  captain  think  I  was  a  lady
despite my true birth being lower than everyone’s in the room.
Grimacing, Duncan got to his feet. The innkeeper chose this moment to intrude with a basket of warm
buns from the kitchen and two tankards of murky water. “Unknot your hair, Tess,” Duncan whispered as
he helped me sit. “This isn’t how normal people act.”
“I have to make up for you telling everyone we’re in a hurry,” I nearly hissed back.
“I only told the innkeeper,” he protested.
The bench slid smoothly beneath  me and  I sat  down.  “And his wife,” I said.  “Who told  the dock
women, who told the stableman, who told every burning soul outside.”
Duncan slumped to sit beside me in exasperation. By unspoken agreement, we silently waited until the
innkeeper left. The moist smell of hot grain drifted to me, and I forced my hands into my lap. I wished I
could take a roll as Duncan had, but I didn’t want to look hungry. “We would like to get to Brenton,” I
said as my stomach rumbled. Angel’s Spit, I was tired.
Captain Borlett dipped his quill into his ink, dismissing me.
“Two passengers,” I continued, undeterred, “and three horses.”
Never looking up, the squat man muttered, “If you have horses, ride it.”
“If  I  wanted  to  ride  it,  I  wouldn’t  be  speaking  with  you,”  I  said,  putting  the  proper  amount  of
arrogance and irritation into my voice. “The Sandpiper is empty. Your crew is spending the last of their
pay. What will they do tomorrow except cause trouble? You’re harbor-tied, sir, unless you want to sail
with half your hold empty.” He looked up with a mix of surprise and worry, and I smiled. “We would like
to get to Brenton,” I repeated pleasantly.
The captain set  his quill aside  and  put a  thick hand atop  his papers.  A thrill went through me. He
would consider it. “You two,” he said, his gaze taking in our dirt and exhaustion, “and three horses.” He
hesitated. “Expensive.”
Duncan shifted, and  with that telling him we  didn’t have enough, I vowed  to  leave the man in  the
stables the next time I had to buy anything. Cheat he may be, but he was ruining everything. “May I?” I
asked as I reached for the captain’s quill. I had an idea of how I could make up the difference in our fare,
but if the captain thought it was his idea, then all the better. Under his watchful eye, I wrote out a sum that
would leave an unsettlingly few coins in my pocket.  The amount wasn’t  as  important as  much as  him
knowing I knew my numbers.
He made a long, “Mmmm,” as I pushed the paper to him. I had just elevated myself from a beggar to
a lady of stature down on her luck. His weary blue eyes were a shade softer, and he took his hat off as
he leaned back with the beginnings of interest. “You’re right,” he admitted, smoothing his greasy, graying
hair. “I’m in a  bind.  But I would rather  be  cargo-light at  Saltwood  than  at  Brenton.”  He  tapped  the
paper. “This here will pay for the horses.”
Duncan stiffened. “Come on, Tess,” he said. “There’re other boats.”

I ignored Duncan as  he stood  and  grabbed  the bowl  of rolls. “Captain,”  I said,  trying to  insinuate
Duncan’s opinion wasn’t mine. “I like the Sandpiper. She’s small and fast.”
“In a hurry?” he asked, chewing his lip to send his mustache dancing.
I nodded since the damage had already been done.  “There’s  a  storm  breaking  upon  the capital,”  I
admitted. “We’re six days ahead of it.”
Captain Borlett leaned forward until I could smell the ale on him. “Aye,” he said softly. “You look it.
What happened?” Fear crossed him. “Plague?”
I shook  my head.  “Worse.  A wedding,  sir.  An unexpected  hastening  of  the  wedding  with  Prince
Garrett by month’s end.” Captain Borlett’s eyebrows rose. Clearly the news hadn’t come this far yet. It
was a  valuable piece  of information that could  make  fortunes.  “They will want wine at  the  capital,”  I
continued softly. “Good  mountain wine from Lovrege.  It’s  a  two-week  sail from Brenton  this time  of
year. It would bring a fine price in the capital harbor.”
“If the timing was right,” he breathed, his mind clearly thinking as was mine. Duncan sat back down. I
squashed my guilt for sending the captain to the capital, but it would be won or lost by the time he got
there.
Captain Borlett shook his head, but the gleam in his eye told me he wasn’t saying no. “Good advice,”
he said. “But I can’t take advantage of it. My backers will beach me if I don’t have my year-end figures
to them soon. I can’t think on the water. There isn’t enough time to make the run from Lovrege  to  the
capital and do my books as well.”
I smiled. We had passage. It was only a matter of the formalities—if Duncan didn’t make a chu pit of
it. My pulse quickened. “I have a small skill in figures,” I said. “Perhaps I could do your books  for the
price of passage?”
Turning over a paper, he scrawled two rows of numbers. “Show me.”
Duncan leaned to watch as I rewrote the numbers in tidy rows and added them up. He sat back with
a puff of disgust.  A flash of memory sent  the smell of gardenias  through me, a  memory of me by the
solarium pond,  sunlight warming my back  as  I frantically scribed  what Kavenlow  shouted  at  me from
across the garden. He nonchalantly trimmed greenery  while I struggled to  work  out on paper  what he
added in his head.
“That will gain one of you passage,” the captain  said,  jerking me back  to  the now.  “But you?” He
pointed to Duncan with a stubby finger. “I’ll take you if you work.”
Duncan’s eyes went alarmed. “Me? I can’t do sums.”
Captain Borlett took a long draught of his tankard and carefully wiped his beard. “I’m short a hand.
He didn’t duck fast enough last night. He needs a day or two to remember how to focus. You filling in for
a short hop won’t be too dangerous—for you or my crew.”
“I don’t know how to sail!” he exclaimed. “I’ve never been on a boat before!”
The captain snorted as he capped his inkpot and shoved everything pell-mell into his satchel. “I’ll be
the one sailing, not you.” Suddenly somber, he leaned close, and I held my breath against the stench of
ale. “She wasn’t supposed to wed till the new year. Are you sure?”
I  nodded,  thinking  it  wouldn’t  happen.  Someone  would  die  first.  Or  shortly  thereafter.  And  it
wouldn’t be me.
Captain Borlett rubbed a hand across his belly and looked to the innkeeper. “No more for my crew!”
he shouted as he rose. “We leave with the tide.”
The innkeeper bobbed his head to show his bald spot. There was  a  groan  from the hearth  and  the

card  game. Duncan had  been  eying them throughout the conversation,  worrying me. “Be at  the  dock
within the hour,” Captain Borlett said. “I want to see how your horses take to the water. I’m not feeding
them or you, ma’am. But he can eat with the crew.” He pointed to Duncan. “He can sleep with the crew,
too.” His eyes pinched. “I don’t know what to do with you, and that’s the honest truth. Putting you under
the deck is asking for trouble.”
“I’ll sleep by the horses,” I said. I’d rather be on deck than in a rank hold, though if it rained, I might
change my mind. My thoughts returned  to  the dark  clouds  building. Rain. I had  escaped  Jeck,  found
Duncan, and gained passage across the bay. It was about time for fate to swing my luck back  around,
and sleeping on deck during a storm while Duncan was comfortable below had a certain poetic justice.
Then again, it might be the only way I’d ever get my bath.
“So… the horses’ fare?” Captain Borlett said pointedly.
Embarrassed for having forgotten, I pulled out the cloth and  counted  it out.  Twice.  Captain  Borlett
pocketed the money and put on his hat. “I’ll set you up with the books after we  cast  off. If you aren’t
done when we get to Brenton, you aren’t leaving my deck.”
I nodded, and he put on his hat and left. Duncan went to the stewpot with our bowls. Shifting chairs, I
put my back to the wall as Captain Borlett talked to the innkeeper. Their eyes landed on me once during
the conversation. Two of the men carding left with the captain, dragging the drunken man between them.
There were shouts from outside as the news spread.
“An hour,” Duncan said as he returned and set my bowl before me. I slumped against the wall, and he
stared. “What?” he asked. “All you have to do is scratch a quill across paper. I’m going to be ruining my
hands scrubbing decks for the next two days.”
“An hour isn’t enough time to buy a hot bath,” I complained.
“So take it cold.” Sitting down beside me, he put his elbows to either side of his bowl.
Disgusted, I watched him slurp, deciding it would be pointless to ask him to remove his elbows. And
I was so tired it didn’t seem to matter. I wearily reached for a roll. “You know,” I said as I broke it in
two and breathed in the heavenly scent of new bread, “there might be time to wash our clothes, at least.
And maybe you could buy a shave.”
Duncan nearly choked on his stew, standing with a harsh scraping of his stool. “I’m going to check on
the horses.” His eyes darted to the door. Taking his bowl in one hand and two rolls in the other, he left,
making me wonder if it would be possible to civilize him.

Eighteen
The last hour waiting for departure was nerve-racking. I had gotten us passage. We had arranged for
supplies.  The  tide  was  running.  And  Jeck,  I  was  sure,  would  find  me.  I  was  waiting  for  his  voice,
expecting his arm to  wrap  around  my  waist  from  the  shadows,  and  I  found  myself  watching  for  his
silhouette against the lowering sun as we stood on the dock before the Sandpiper. Rumors had begun to
fly about the small town like embers from a bonfire, and Captain Borlett was as eager as I was to go.
I had left Jeck’s pack with the innkeeper of the Three Crows along with a description of Jeck and a
coin for his trouble. All but the knives and game pieces. The knives were safe in the bottom of my pack,
and the pieces were set up on a board scratched on one of the inn’s tables.
Jeck had made a bold move by shifting his king to the middle of the field. It freed me to take it before
his remaining knight took my king—if he didn’t see the trap before it was  too  late.  My imagination put
Jeck at the inn right now, hunched over the table, pondering his next move.
I alternately fussed with the mane of Jeck’s horse and glared at the crew as they lowered a ramp for
the horses. The men were being unconscientiously noisy with it, uncaring that the horses were watching. I
knew they wouldn’t like walking on something they’d just seen boom and rattle.
The sun was a mere two hours from setting. To the bay side, a featureless bank of clouds threatened,
purple and even. Behind me over the land, the sun set in a clear sky. The strong beams of light outlined
everything with a silver-edged shadow. If I had been less nervous, I would have enjoyed the unusual look
to the sky.  As  it was,  I was  more  concerned  with  Tuck  balking  at  the  ramp  shifting  under  his  front
hooves.
“Hey! Hup!” Duncan shouted, giving an impatient tug on his lead. “Get up here. Flaky beast.” Duncan
was in a foul mood since the innkeeper hadn’t sold him any ale, cutting him off with the rest of Borlett’s
crew. It had come as a nasty shock, dreadfully unfair in his eyes.
Tuck took another step, then flung his head, almost pulling the rope from Duncan’s hand. The horse’s
eyes were wild. He backed up nearly into the water as Duncan alternately shouted soothing words and
curses. The crewmen ignored us, carrying aboard the bundles of hay we had dropped shipside earlier. It
had gotten noisy. We weren’t the only ones leaving, and the dock had become busy surprisingly fast as
last-minute details were found and dealt with.
Anxious, I sent my eyes over the ship, starting as I found a crewman scowling at me from the railing.
He wore a red cap, and he seemed to be important enough to not have to  be  working.  First  mate? I
thought, sure of it when the captain pulled him aside. Our locked gaze broke,  and  I turned  to  Duncan.
“Let me take Pitch up first,” I said. “Tuck might follow a mare.”
“Go ahead,” Duncan said crossly, clearly not expecting it to work.
I dropped  the lead  to  Jeck’s  horse  and  headed  up the ramp  with Pitch.  Duncan fell  into  place.  I
looked behind me to see Tuck’s ears flattened at the sound of his hooves echoing on the ramp,  but he
followed the mare’s  sedately  shifting  rump  up  and  onto  the  ship.  Jeck’s  horse  pricked  his  ears  and
followed Tuck by himself. I waited breathlessly by the railing, hoping he wouldn’t step  on his dragging
lead and scare himself, but the black horse took the incline like an experienced war animal.
Duncan muttered a curse when he realized Jeck’s  horse  was  boarding  without direction,  but I was
delighted, especially when the black horse came to find me, dropping his head into my hands. My palms
were tingling again, and the horse seemed to enjoy the warmth on his sensitive nose. “You are  a  sweet
horse,” I murmured as the first mate strode toward us.

“Duncan?” the man barked, and Jeck’s horse laid his ears back for an instant. The man never looked
at me, his animosity plain enough.
I glanced at Duncan, seeing his entire body shift as he sighed. “Yes,” he said flatly.
The first mate frowned. “That’s ‘Yes sir,’ ” he said. “Or you’ll miss your ale rations.”
“Yes sir,” Duncan muttered, not as excited about the ale as I thought he would be.
The man grunted, apparently satisfied. “Tie the horses against the galley wall, stow your things, then
find me,” he said. “Captain says I’m to keep you busy and out of the way.”
“Yes sir,” Duncan repeated sullenly.
The first mate ran his eyes from my filthy boots to my topknot falling apart. He made a sniff of distaste
and turned away. It was his sole acknowledgment I existed. Where I would have demanded an apology
and lorded over him for the rest of the trip, I now felt more inclined to hold my tongue. I found it easier
than I imagined. They were all fools, except the captain.
“Where’s the chu pit of a galley?” Duncan said, surprising me with his bad temper.
I gave Jeck’s horse a final pat. “Probably up there,” I said, and headed for the small shack at the bow
with my horses clattering behind me. I wondered what was bothering Duncan, not thinking anymore that
it was the ale.
We found precious little space  for them between  the galley and  the second  mast,  but at  least  they
would be out of the wind. And there were rings already in the wall telling me they had carried livestock
before. Ignoring Duncan’s not-so-soft comments of who was likely going to be cleaning up after them, I
took off the packs and dropped them in a pile.
“Where?” Duncan asked shortly as he stood with his riding pad and pack in his grip.
A shout from the wheel brought us spinning around. “Down below!” the first mate shouted, gesturing
at the rise that took up much of the middle deck. It was about thigh high to  give the area  below  some
headroom. A doorlike hatch was at one end, and it was here that the first mate was  pointing to.  “And
hurry up!” he added.
Jaw clenched, Duncan stomped across the deck. Growing more unsure, I hastened to follow with my
things. The crew moved around us with very little direction as they prepared to cast off. Duncan tossed
everything down the opening before turning to go backwards down the steep ladder. Waiting for my turn,
I tried to remember if I’d done something to make him angry.
I headed down after him, my feet faltering on the steps when the clean smell of wind and salt turned
dank: wet rope, mold, unwashed man, damp wool—and rats. I had known it was going to be bad, but
this was awful. I shot a look at Duncan, glad I would be shivering on deck tonight.
Duncan muttered  under  his breath  as  he looked  for somewhere  to  put his things. Slowly my  eyes
adjusted to the precious little light that came  in slatted  vents in the sunken room’s  sides.  There  was  a
cleared space where a table was fixed to the floor. Around it were a handful of narrow, low bunks built
right into the walls of the ship. The few personal belongings I saw were carefully arranged, and most of
the beds had a locked chest beside them.
Both fore and aft of the living quarters was storage, and I left Duncan so I could investigate. Barrels
lined the center of the ship, the symbols burned into them telling me some held water but most had  ale.
Bags hung from the ceiling like fruit. I spotted a few sheepskins piled in a corner, and I wondered if the
captain was  keeping  them  for  a  favored  customer.  Actually,  I  decided  as  I  investigated  further,  the
captain seemed to have kept a little of everything from past shipments.
There was a small cask of very good wine with a Lovrege stamp, a crate of pottery from the lower

islands, and three bags of sand, pure and white for making glass. It was rare in the rocky  beaches  that
made up most of the kingdom. Clearly the captain was well traveled.
There was  a  sudden  commotion of voices  and  thundering feet  followed by a  series  of  chants  and
rhythmic clatters. Something bumped the side of the ship. The calling voices didn’t turn angry, just louder.
I felt the floor move, and my breath hissed in from excitement.
Duncan saw my thrill and gave me weary look. Lips pressed together, he clambered back on deck,
grumbling about his hands. I hastened after him, refusing to let his mood ruin my first sail. Kavenlow had
never taken me on the sea  despite  my pleading. Costenopolie’s  strength was  on the water,  and  I had
always thought the situation grossly unfair.
As I emerged after him, blinking into the odd, silver light of sunset, my gaze went to the rigging. The
mainsail was up and full with a  light wind. Dizzy, I dropped  my eyes.  We  were  already  free  from the
dock, and I watched it fall away with relief. There was one  more  obstacle  between  Jeck  and  me, one
fewer between Kavenlow.
Before us with their masts showing sharp against the clouds were two ships. Beyond them was only
the black line of the wide bay’s horizon. The evening sun shimmering on the flat skin of the ocean against
the  backdrop  of  the  purple  clouds  was  breathtaking.  My  shoulders  eased  from  the  beauty  of  it.  “I
should’ve been born a man so I could go to sea,” I murmured.
“Aye,” came the captain’s voice behind us, and Duncan and I spun. I put a hand to my face, feeling
the warmth of  embarrassment.  “It’s—nice,”  the  squat  man  said  haltingly,  clearly  loath  to  divulge  his
feelings. “I always thought the sea, in any weather,  was  a  sight not to  be  taken  lightly. But I can’t  tell
those louts.” He glanced at the crew divided into two teams to hoist the second sail. Before I could say
anything, he straightened with an official air. “Got your belongings stowed?” he asked, and I nodded.
Duncan  opened  his  mouth  to  say  something,  but  someone  was  calling  his  name,  and  he  turned.
“What?” he shouted, then realizing it was the first mate, added, “I mean, yes sir?”
“I talk to the captain, not you!” the man yelled from the wheel. “You’re crew, not passenger. Get on
one of those ropes!”
Duncan’s shoulders  hunched.  “This is why I do  what I do,”  he muttered  for my ears  alone  as  he
moved away. “I hate people giving me orders.”
My breath slipped out in a sound of sympathy as I realized where his bad mood was coming from. It
was going to be a long two days for him.
Captain  Borlett  gazed  intently at  the larger boats  in front of us.  “We’ve  time afore  we  catch  their
backwind,” he said, gesturing for me to accompany him. “I’ll show you my desk.”
I couldn’t help but notice  the captain’s  squat  stature  suited him well as  he moved  with confidence
across the level deck.  The first mate’s  stare  was  heavy as  we  approached  the wheel and  the second
half-sunken room before it. Skin prickling, I ignored him as  I passed  him to  get to  the hatch.  Captain
Borlett went down before me, his mood splendid as he offered me a hand. Remembering the stink of the
other room, I held my breath as I descended. But my first hesitant sniff drew a smile from me. The small
room smelled of leather, twine, and metal polish.
A  small  table  and  two  chairs  took  up  most  of  the  tiny  space  cluttered  with  charts  and  shiny
instruments  I  didn’t  know  a  thing  about.  A  marvelous  map  showing  the  entire  coast  and  the  four
kingdoms bordering  it took  up  much  of  the  fore  wall,  and  I  envied  him  in  that  he’d  probably  been
everywhere on it. There were two doors, one on either side of the common room, and Captain  Borlett
opened one. “This one is mine,” he said. “The other is my first mate’s.”
I lifted my skirts as I stepped over the raised sill. He didn’t come in but remained in the outer room,
and for that I was thankful. It wasn’t that his room  was  small as  much as  it was  so  full of things both

wonderful and odd that there was no room for him. If I hadn’t guessed it before,  I would have known
now that the captain liked collecting expensive, beautiful things.
Captain Borlett leaned in. Lifting a coat from the cluttered desk, he tossed it to the narrow bed built
into the wall. His attempt to tidy made no difference, but now I could see the papers hiding the desktop.
There were three small windows at head height looking out at a shin-high view of the deck, but it was a
gimbaled oil lamp that lit the clutter. I swallowed, feeling a slight alarm. If this was any indication of how
he kept his books, I was in trouble.
“Some of the records are  in the bag  there,”  he said,  pointing. “But most are  on the desk.  There’s
paper in the drawer—I think.” Not looking at all embarrassed for the mess, the stocky man rubbed his
hands together as if pleased. “I’ll be on deck if you can’t read my writing.”
“Yes.  Thank you.” I picked  up a  scribbled  note.  Five  cases  of  granite,  no,  grain  from  Geants.  I
frowned. It had to be granite if it was from Geants. “Captain?” I asked, as he disappeared into the small
outer room.
He poked his head back in, looking eager to escape. “Yes, yes. What?”
I brought my attention up from the pungent ink. “The barrels in the first hold…”
His eyebrows arched. “The ale? I told you that you’d have to feed yourself.”
“It’s the water I’m asking about,” I said patiently. “How much am I allotted?”
“What you can drink, I suppose. No washing or cleaning.” A smile came over his round face. “Your
man can ask my first mate for the leftovers from his work if you want any of that. He’ll be scrubbing the
deck soon enough. But Haron is stingy with his water. He got caught in deep  ocean  without once  and
would have died  had  he not snared  birds  and  rats.  He  won’t  let any water  go over  the  side  until  its
blacker than my beard used to be.”
My brow furrowed as I found myself hoping for rain. I had very little money, but I had been trying to
take a bath for the last four days. “Can I buy some?” I asked. “I can pay for the trouble of replacing it at
Brenton.”
Now  it was  Captain  Borlett’s  turn to  frown. “I don’t  rightly know  how much  that  would  be,”  he
admitted, rocking back. “I’ll ask Haron and tell you when you finish the books.”
It wasn’t a threat—more like a carrot. I suddenly felt like Tuck, lured into finishing a distasteful act by
the promise of a nicer one.
A series of shouts came through the walls, and the captain looked up as if able to see through the low
ceiling. “That’d be Sky Dancer,” he said. “We’re passing her. That tub is so  heavy, she  would sink in
waves I could make in my washbasin. I’ll be on the wheel deck.”
“Thank you,  Captain,”  I  said  as  he  backed  away.  “Perhaps  when  I’m  done,  we  can  find  some
diversion together. I can play cards or even recite poetry.”
He smiled. “Aye,” he said. “Some company  who doesn’t  think with their stomach  would be  nice.”
The door snicked shut behind him. I turned to the desk, blushing at the sailors’ catcalls as we passed Sky
Dancer. Clearly the rivalry I had seen at the palace docks was commonplace.
I  shifted  a  stack  of  papers  to  find  the  desktop  was  a  dark  wood.  “This  is  going  to  be  nigh
impossible,” I whispered  as  I leaned  against the wall. Sighing, I spun the oil lamp up high and  set  to
finding the desk under the mess. It was going to be a long night.

Nineteen
My shoulder  hurt. Pulling the strand  of my hair out of my mouth yet again, I balanced  against the
swaying of the boat and the force of the wind, focusing on the three chicken feathers stuck into the rope
coiled and tied to the railing. Exhaling, I drew my whip back. With a practiced motion, I flung it out and
back  in a  series  of rapid  motions. All three  feathers  exploded  with a  satisfying, crack,  crack,  crack.
From behind me came a scattering of muttered oaths.
I grinned, not looking behind me as I heard money exchanging hands. The crew had  been  watching
since I’d come on deck after finishing the captain’s books this afternoon. Their condescending banter had
since turned to respect.
The squat form of the captain came forward from where he had been watching, and I met his smile
with my own. “Ma’am,” he said, nodding to the whip. “You have a right nice skill there. Don’t think I’ve
ever seen a woman wanting to know how to do more than whip her horse or her servant.”
“Thank you,” I said. “I haven’t practiced in a while, and it helped me find the balance of the boat.” A
pained twinge came from my shoulder as I coiled the whip up and tied it to my hip. I should have quit an
hour ago, but the scornful laughs of the crew and my desire to  find the accuracy  I was  accustomed  to
kept me practicing long past where I should have stopped.
His head  bobbed  in  understanding  as  he  stood  with  his  hands  clasped  behind  his  back,  looking
embarrassed. I squinted up at him, wondering what was bothering him. The splash of a stingray pulled my
gaze to the waves, and I wished I had been quicker so to have seen more.
“I’ve been over my books,” he finally said, his words halting and reluctant  as  he drew  my attention
back to him. “I hope my notes weren’t too difficult.”
I coughed  to  cover  up the beginnings of a  hysterical laugh. “Oh,” I hedged,  “it was  easier  after  I
started using the map in your common room. I simply followed the dates and made guesses at the next
harbor if I couldn’t read something. It wasn’t hard, seeing as I knew the cargo you had  just picked  up
and where you might be going with it.”
He ran a hand over his beard in an endearing motion of chagrin. “Aye,” he muttered. “That’s what I
usually do.”
The sun was bright, but now that I had stopped moving, I felt cold. The threatened rain of last night
had never materialized, but I could  feel the chill in the air being pulled off the water.  Taking my filthy
cloak from where I had dropped it, I settled it about my shoulders. My sweat was cooling rapidly, and I
felt awful, sticky and cold all at the same time. “Captain,” I hedged. “Have you had a chance to talk to
your first mate about the water?”
“Yes ma’am,” he said quickly. “That’s why I came  to  talk  to  you.  He’s  not pleased,  and  he set  a
price so high I’m shamed to tell you. Haron is in charge of the stores, though, and a good man. I’d hate
to drive him to another ship over this.”
A sigh slipped from me as I held my cloak closed at my neck while the wind stole what little heat  I
had under it. I understood too well the politics of small groups. The captain could overrule his first mate’s
decision, but it might cause a rift between them. My comfort came out a distant second to that. “To be
honest,” I said as I looked askance at him, “I was thinking that instead of outright purchasing the water, I
might try to win it from you over a hand or two of cards? Perhaps tonight?”
The captain blinked. A slow smile curved over his face, and his attention went to the helm where the

first mate stood with the wheelman, eying the ribbons trailing from the edges of the sails. “That’d work,”
he said.
I felt a thrill of anticipation. “I’d be willing to wager more of my time. Perhaps tidy your room or help
Duncan organize your hold. Seeing as he’s not much good with the rigging.”
His blue eyes grew brighter in what I thought might be avarice. “Yes ma’am,” he said. “I would play a
hand or two with you tonight. Why don’t you get yourself out of the wind, meantime? The crew  seems
right impressed by you, but I’d stay out from under the deck anyway. Your man Duncan is in the galley,
though.”
“I will, thank you,” I said, chilled to the pit of my being from the wind and my exertions.
“Good,” he said shortly. “Have some tea. You look cold, if you don’t mind me saying.”
Nodding emphatically, I held my cloak to me and headed across the sloping deck.
The glow of acceptance warmed me as much as the sudden lack of the wind when I peeped  round
the archway and into the small kitchen. Duncan was alone, and he looked up from where he was leaning
against a wall, keeping himself steady as he plucked a chicken.
“Tess.” He wiped his stubbled chin with the back of his hand, only managing to stick more feathers to
him. “I saw some of that. Very nice.”
“Thank you.” I touched the familiar loops on my belt. Holding on to the archway, I moved inside and
perched myself on the tiny counter space to get out of his way.
The minuscule fire in the gimbaled pan kept the small space plenty warm, and  Duncan had  stripped
down to only a worn pair of trousers and a thin shirt despite the wind whipping just beyond the archway.
It was a shade too small for him, pulling tight to show the curve of his shoulders  as  he worked.  Haron
had put him here  after  he  had  loosened  the  wrong  rope  and  brought  a  sail  halfway  down.  I  had  a
suspicion Duncan had done it intentionally. His mood had lightened considerably since he had taken over
the galley and put some distance between himself and the first mate’s barked orders.
“The captain said I could have some of the crew’s tea,” I said, looking around for a pot.
Duncan flopped the messy bird onto the counter  and  wiped  his hands  on his pants.  “I’ll get it,” he
said, finding a pot from somewhere in the mess. “It should still be warm.”
He poured out a dark stream of liquid into a  thick-walled  mug, and  I murmured a  grateful “Thank
you,” as I took it. The boat’s motion was rougher closer to the bow, and I tucked  myself back  on the
counter until I was wedged into a corner. A patch of sun moved from the floor to the cabinets and back
again as the Sandpiper took the waves. My one hand went to rub my shoulder, and I thought pride was
responsible for the hurt, nothing more.
Duncan picked the chicken up, turning so he could watch me. “I won a bet with one of the crew,” he
said. “I knew you’d be hitting all three feathers before you quit.”
I smiled as I took my hands from my neck and sipped my tea. It was bitter without honey, but I drank
it greedily, glad for its warmth. “It took longer than I thought to find the boat’s balance,” I admitted.  “I
don’t know how they walk about like they do.”
His long, expressive hands worked  fast against the damp  bird,  and  the cleared  patch  rapidly grew
larger. “I knew the moment you found the pattern of the waves,” he said. “Crack, crack, crack.”
My  smile  deepened.  I  liked  being  on  the  water,  glad  I  hadn’t  gotten  seasick  as  Kavenlow  had
staunchly claimed I would. “It’s like being rocked  by your mother,  or  the kingdom’s chancellor in my
case,” I said, half-serious.
“I wouldn’t know.” Gathering a wad of feathers, he dropped them in a bucket.

Embarrassed, I eyed him over a slow sip. “Sorry.”
“About what?”
“That you don’t remember your parents.”
He laughed harshly. “I remember  them all  right.  But  as  the  eighth  child  out  of  nine,  I  was  never
rocked. More likely told to ‘Stop yer bellyaching and go to sleep!’” he said, shifting his voice to a harsh,
low-street accent on the last word.
“Oh.” I set my cup aside and swung my hair to my front, running my fingers through my curls to get
the worst of the tangles out. “Sorry. Where are they?”
A shrug shifted his shoulders. “They have a  farm on the edge  of the forest  about  a  week  from the
capital. I left when I was twelve.” His voice was bland. “Gone before the sun set on the day they buried
my grandfather. See, I was at the end of the children. Kind of scrawny. I should’ve been in the fields, but
someone had to look after my grandfather, and I didn’t mind spooning soup into his toothless mouth. My
sister thought he smelled. He didn’t like her either and wouldn’t eat unless I fed him. So while everyone
else worked, I took care of him. He was the one who taught me cards. I left the day he died.”
“Sorry.”
His eyes were dark with irritation as he pulled them up. “Will you stop saying that?”
My fingers stilled themselves in my hair, moving instead  to  rub  my stiff shoulder.  “You  must  have
loved him very much,” I said, my sympathy mixing with the grief of my own loss.
There was the sound of boots, and a crewman passed the open archway. “Nah. See,  once  he was
dead, they were going to make me work the fields. That’s why I left.”
I made a small sound. He  was  lying; we  both  knew  it. Sighing heavily, I continued to  work  at  my
neck. Angel’s Spit, I was sore. And dirty. If the filth I was covered in didn’t keep me awake tonight, the
pain in my neck would. And I wasn’t even going to think about rain.
“Stand up and turn around,”  Duncan said  suddenly as  he rinsed  his hands  clean and  dried  them. I
stared, not understanding as he tossed the towel into a dry sink. “It’s your neck, right? You haven’t taken
your fingers off it since you came in. I’ll rub the knot out of it for you.”
I hesitated, my fingers dropping. My thoughts went back to having kicked the breath out of him when
he tried to do the same thing with my knees. Then they darted to his words said outside the inn. I froze in
consternation, not knowing what to do. Despite my better judgment, I liked Duncan, but the last thing I
could afford to do was give him the wrong impression.
He puffed in exasperation. “Go ahead. Hurt all night, then,” he said, sounding wounded.
“No,” I said as I slipped from the counter. “I’d like that. You— surprised me. That’s all.” Still unsure,
I got to my feet and turned to show him my back. I regathered my hair in front of me. Head  bowed,  I
heard the tension ease from him as he exhaled.
His  hands  touched  me,  cool  from  their  fresh  wash.  The  gentle  pressure  of  his  thumbs  steadily
increased  until it had  me almost moaning in relief. He  was  silent, and  I relaxed.  It  did feel  better,  his
coarse motion lacking the seductive  feeling I was  worried  about.  The square  of sunlight coming in the
door shifted from the waves, and I reached for the counter for support.
“So you’ve been on your own since you were twelve?” I asked. No one came up to the bow much
unless it was  time to  eat,  and  I felt the need  to  maintain  the  conversation  to  keep  the  situation  from
growing intimate.
“For the most part, though I’d have died that first week if it hadn’t been for Lan.” He sounded irate
as his fingers found a knot between my neck and shoulder and concentrated on it. God help me, but it felt

good, and I had to stifle a sigh. Kavenlow had often rubbed aches and pains from me. Duncan was right;
it didn’t mean anything.
“Lan took  me in,” Duncan said  as  he worked.  “He kept  food  in my belly, taught me how to  beg
properly. I never knew why we never spent more than a few days in any one town until I got too well-fed
to beg, and he took me off the street and taught me how to move cards.”
I didn’t know what to say, keeping my eyes on my hands braced against the counter.
“I was  so  stupid,”  Duncan whispered,  his ceaseless  motion moving outward  to  my shoulders.  My
eyes closed, my body shifting slightly under his hands. “By the time I’d figured it out, I didn’t care. I saw
him as a big brother. Better even, as he never hit me unless I deserved it. He  always dressed  well. He
always knew what to say. Always had money. I was so bewitched with the desire to be like him, I never
saw how he was using me.”
The boat  dipped  and  hit a  wave  wrong.  My eyes  flashed open  as  Duncan reached  to  steady  me.
“What happened?” I asked as he let go.
He turned me around, and I pressed back against the counter. His sudden nearness gave me pause
until his hands began rubbing away the deeper tension in the front of my shoulder.  My hands  dropped,
and I didn’t know what to do with them.
“Lan was more than a cheat,” he said. His gaze went distant, and I noticed he had a tiny scar above
his upper lip. “He was a thief, and a very good one, or so I found out. But one night he was caught and
somehow slid his thievery onto me. I had no idea what was going on.” The strength in Duncan’s fingers
grew less, and his face lost its expression. “He laughed with the rest when they dragged me through town
in chains and burned a thief-mark into me.”
Anything I might say would sound trite. My life looked suddenly worthless, my childhood worries and
disappointments petty.
“The man Lan had robbed wanted me hung, and  they would have,  but it rained  like the flood that
night, and Lan broke me out of the pillory. Expected me to thank him.”
“I’m sorry,” I whispered. I was so self-absorbed, it sickened me.
He shrugged, seeming far too at peace with himself. “Someday. Someday I’ll find a way to get back
at him. Make him pay for what they did to  me.” His voice was  calm and  relaxed,  standing in a  sharp
contrast  to  his words.  It  was  an old hate,  spoken  without passion.  It  almost  seemed  as  if  he  wasn’t
listening to what he was saying. His hands, too, had gentled their motions as my muscles loosened.
My face lost its emotion. The intent behind his touch had changed. It was deeper, slower. And it now
held an unspoken question of the possibility of more.
A spark of warmth flickered through me. My eyes darted to his, seeing anew how close he was. They
were dark and one thought ahead of me, waiting to see what I would do as I stood against the counter,
clearly having felt the difference in his hands, yet not moved.
His motions slowed, his touch becoming firmer, more demanding. My heart pounded. I was suddenly
filled with the desire  to  know  what it  was  like  to  kiss  a  thief,  a  dangerous,  clever  thief  who  wasn’t
fumbling or worried. Someone who knew what he was doing and felt no shame.
He was taller than me, but I would only have to tilt my head a little. Breath held, I leaned forward. My
chin lifted, and my lips parted.
Only  now  did  the  heat  in  his  eyes  falter  and  his  hands  on  me  go  still.  “You’re  a  princess,”  he
whispered, clearly having recognized the invitation. “You’re not serious.”
“I haven’t been a princess for the last seven days,” I said. “And I’ve kissed men before.”

He said nothing, but his look of doubt prompted me to reach up and cup my hand behind his neck,
pulling his head down to mine. It was only a kiss.
His beard was scratchy against me, a delightful contrast to  his lips, soft  as  they met mine. Relaxing
into the kiss, I let the warm feeling take me. My eyes closed,  and  I found my tension easing under  his
hands gripping my shoulders. He pressed into me, prolonging it. I willingly responded, parting my lips and
pushing gently back against him. My hand ran down his back, stopping just above his hip.
Slowly I pulled away, and Duncan leaned after me until our lips parted. Opening my eyes, I found him
waiting for me. Heart pounding, I kept my hand where it was, feeling the heat of him through his thin shirt.
It had been a very nice kiss. Much nicer than my last, even if he did smell like chicken and potatoes.
Duncan’s eyes were bright with surprise. “You have kissed a man before.”
A sly smile hovered over me. Did he think that royalty was  any less  randy  than common folk? We
were  perhaps  more  so  since we  had  to  be  so  discrete  about  it—especially princesses.  “It was  just a
kiss,” I said, believing it.
He nodded, his brown eyes dark with an unsaid emotion. “Just a kiss.”
Yet I was holding my breath when he cupped my cheek in his palm and leaned close. I let him draw
me in, and my eyes closed as he tilted his head and met my lips again. Stronger,  the feeling of warmth
rose in me. My breath slipped in, gathering my will and seeming to melt me into him. I sent my fingers to
link behind him, pulling him closer.
So slow it was almost unnoticed, his gentle kiss shifted from inquisition to a deeper heat. The growing
hint of his restrained need was like a spark, jumping from him to me. The feeling crashed  over  me in a
warm wash, shocking me to stillness as it drew from me a surprising, almost desperate need I’d never felt
before.
Shocked, I pulled away.  My hands  dropped  from him, and  I stood  with my back  to  the counter,
frightened. I knew better than to let a kiss become more than a kiss.
Duncan looked at me, seeming to have to catch himself. “You started it,” he said, his voice low and
husky as he stood with his arms at his sides, a heady mix of want and restraint in his stance.
I swallowed hard, frightened that I had slipped so badly. “I shouldn’t have done that,” I said  softly.
“I’m sorry.” Unable to meet his eyes, I headed for the open door.
“Sorry?” A jolt went through me as he grabbed my upper arm, halting me. His eyes were angry, and I
let him pinch me, thinking I deserved far worse for having mislead him like that. “You can’t tell me you
didn’t like that.”
“Of course I liked it,” I said. “It was the most—” My words caught. I couldn’t tell him it had been the
most  sensuous,  the  most  passion-lost  feeling  I’d  ever  let  myself  experience  and  that  I’d  do  almost
anything to feel it again. “I can’t do this, Duncan,” I whispered, frightened. “I can’t do  this, right now.”
His hand loosened, and I continued out into the sun. The wind beat at me, seeming to take the last of my
certainty with it.
“Well then, when can you?” he called belligerently after  me. I clutched  my cloak  about  myself and
went to  stand  at  the  railing.  I  would  have  thought  he  was  no  better  than  an  animal,  but  that  I  was
wondering the same thing about myself.

Twenty
The breeze  was  glorious up  on  deck,  lifting  through  my  hair  in  a  wonderful  sensation.  The  curly
strands were smooth and silky against my fingers—and about  a  foot  shorter  since I’d  cut them to  fall
midback instead of to my waist. I was finally clean, and it felt so good. My dress clung uncomfortably to
my shoulders, the waistband of my red underskirt was positively damp, and my stockings had fallen apart
to rags in their wash, but I didn’t care. I was clean.
I stood between the water and sky on the deck of the Sandpiper adrift off Brenton. The faint noise
from the small cluster of buildings was lost behind the excitement of the horses  being winched over  the
side, and it was only knowing I would be leaving the Sandpiper that dulled my satisfaction.
I had finally gotten my bath this morning, taking it in the captain’s quarters since the crew would have
mutinied had I bathed elsewhere. Duncan had toted the buckets of water across the deck from the galley.
He was sulking, now. I had confronted him about his mood, thinking it was from our kiss. I had said that
I was sorry, that he had every right to be angry but that he would do better to  forget about  it. He  had
turned belligerent then, telling me not to flatter myself and that he was angry I had gamed with the captain
without him, not about some fool kiss from a tease of a woman who couldn’t control herself.
I had soothed my injured pride by throwing the soap at him, thinking he probably believed that. And
he had good reason for being upset about my card game. As crew, Duncan wasn’t allowed to play cards
with the captain. He hadn’t even been allowed to watch, since only the first mate was  allowed  into the
captain’s common room. The small chamber had quickly become my favorite spot on the boat,  a  cozy
oasis from cold looks and cutting wind.
Thankfully, the captain’s  fatherly  coddling  had  vanished  as  soon  as  he  realized  my  skill  at  cards
rivaled his. By the end of it, I not only had the water for my bath but the fuel to heat it.
The captain and I were on excellent terms now, having shared much conversation and tea. He had a
tea leaf equaling the quality I had grown up on and, saint’s bells preserve us, the honey to  go with it. I
found he was quite the learned man, eager to tell an appreciative ear of his stories: dark-skinned women
who went about half-naked under a  sun strong  enough to  strike  a  man dead,  warriors  bedecked  with
feathers, spices that burned from the inside, clever animals with tiny faces and hands like men, and music
beaten from drums to drive one mad.
In return, I entertained him with anecdotes from the palace. He readily accepted my story that I was a
member of the court fleeing the possibility of war. It explained my skill at sums and why I spoke the way
I did. I thought the randy behavior of men and women of noble standing boring,  but he listened with a
rapt attention. Of the darker news of the capital, I was circumspect. I couldn’t bear that Captain Borlett
would become  an officer and  his trading of salt and  grain would turn to  flaming tar  and  metal. I  said
nothing of my parents’  death,  only that the Misdev  prince  was  making irrational demands,  forcing the
wedding  to  take  place  immediately.  It  wasn’t  a  lie,  just  a  very  large  omission  and  a  drastic
understatement of Garrett’s actions.
I would say nothing to start  a  war.  The memory of my people  stoning the assassin  to  death  in the
streets eight years ago was very clear in my mind. I didn’t want them to take matters into their own hands
when diplomacy and a well-placed knife could end the problem with no loss of life but Garrett’s.
“Tess!” called a voice behind me, and recognizing the captain’s bellow, I turned. Smiling, I pulled the
hair from my eyes, only now realizing I hadn’t worn my topknot and darts since the first night. “Tess,” he
repeated as he came close. “You’re looking… clean.”
“Thank you.” I squinted up at him, a hand held over my eyes. “It’s a charmer of a day.”

He nodded, his gaze going up the mast to where his flag fluttered. “Aye. We’ll be heading out of the
bay from here, and then to Lovrege.”
There was a warning shout, and we both looked to where Duncan was struggling to fasten a looping
harness around Tuck. The poor animal was near panic, his eyes wide and wild. Pitch had already gone
over the side, winched to the water and left to swim to the shore. Jeck’s horse would be last. The rude
shouts of the crewmen in the unseen dinghy floated up.
“I should go,” I said regretfully. “I don’t think the black gelding will give you much trouble.  Pitch is
almost to the beach. One of us should be there to make sure no one takes her.”
“My crew will keep an eye on her,” he said. “I’ve two ashore buying water and wood.”
Tuck whinnied when the straps tightened about him and his feet left the deck. I reached out, relieved
when the animal went stiff, all his legs into a four-posted position.
“See?” Captain Borlett said. “I knew he’d be all right. My lads know what to do.”
Duncan shouted a nervous encouragement from the railing as Tuck was swung out over the water and
three crewmen began slowly winching him down. The horse’s feet touched the water, and he exploded
into helpless motion. He was frantic, and the weighted ropes tangled.
“Hey, hup!” a sailor in the dinghy called. “He’s caught! He’s gonna drowned himself!”
“Tuck!”  Duncan  cried,  his  voice  cracking  in  fear.  He  watched  in  horror  as  the  horse  struggled.
Lunging over the railing, Duncan fell into the water. I ran to  the side,  but the horse  calmed as  Duncan
touched him. Talking loudly to Tuck, he untangled the rope, and the two started swimming for the nearby
shore.
“I should go,” I said, halting my motion to leave as the captain cleared his throat.
“Ma’am,” he said  formally, extending an envelope  sealed  with a  drop  of wax.  I took  it, mystified.
Seeing my confusion, he added, “It’s a recommendation. A written one.” He looked embarrassed as he
ran his grip over his graying beard. “You did a capital job with my books.  That’s  my recommendation
that any captain would be lucky to trade your figuring with numbers for passage.” His eyes crinkled. “In
case you find yourself in a hurry again.”
I beamed. It was the first time I had done something on my own, and I had done it well. “Thank you,”
I said, tucking the valuable paper away. He had no idea how delighted I was.
“And this,” the squat  man said,  handing me  a  cloth-wrapped  package.  He  stood  ramrod  straight
beside me and rocked on his heels, his gaze on the forested hills before us.
I unfolded it to  find a  small jar  of honey.  But then I noticed  what it was  wrapped  in, and  my lips
parted. I glanced from the square of fabric to the flag atop the highest mast. “It’s your flag!” I breathed as
the standard—a gold field with three black slashes—fluttered in the breeze.
“Aye,” he said. “It’s so I can find you this winter, wherever you might be—if you like. I’ll be looking
for it. And you can do my books again. I may have to go out to the southern islands. It will be a long trip.
You can bring your man, there. Just not his horse.”
My throat went tight. If only I could. “Thank you,” I said, suddenly loath to leave.
“Fly it from a pole in sight of the dock,” he said, staring off into nothing. “I’ll find you.”
I wrapped the honey back in his flag, unable to say anything. Throat tight, I gathered  my skirts  and
one-handedly levered myself over the railing and down the rope  ladder.  It  was  Haron  who helped  me
make the jump to the rocking dinghy. His small hand was rough in mine, and I appreciated his grudging
help. Jeck’s horse reached the water the same time as I did. The weighted ropes slipped smoothly from
him, and the levelheaded horse set out for the beach.

The Sandpiper fell from me in even, rhythmic surges of motion. The lump in my throat surprised me.
My hands drifted upward to bind my hair in a topknot with a bit of twine. By the time the dinghy scraped
the rocky beach, my few remaining darts were in place.
Miserable, I stood to disembark. Haron stepped into the water, and with no warning, scooped me off
my feet and sloshed the few steps to land. “Thank you,” I said, flustered, as he set me down. He smelled
of wind and sweat. I glanced at Duncan making baby sounds at his shivering horse. The men threw our
packs to land out of the surf. They were replaced  with a  bundle of wood  and  cask  of water  that  two
crewmen had rolled forward.
“I still think women on water are unlucky,” Haron said at my elbow, and I spun, surprised. “But the
captain… He says you can hear it. The sea, I mean.” His gaze flicked away,  then back  to  mine. “Can
you?”
Vision blurring, I looked at the Sandpiper and nodded. I had felt safe there. And free.
“It don’t seem right,” he said  as  he touched  his red  cap  and  stepped  barefoot  into the surf. “Why
would God let a woman hear the sea if she’s not supposed to brave the waves?”
He pushed  the boat  into deeper  water,  the  scrape  of  the  keel  seeming  to  grate  across  my  soul,
wounding me. His question wasn’t a taunt; he was confused. I’d cracked his beliefs.
Taking a quick breath, I wiped a hand under my nose and turned my back on the sea.
Brenton lay before me, small and disorganized. I nervously checked my topknot to see that all was as
it should be, and my worry about Jeck thundered down. The wind in the leaves became threatening, and
the slightest twitch of the horses’ ears caught my attention. There seemed to be an animosity or cunning in
the curious stares of the few passing townsfolk. They were dirty, and I had yet to see anyone with shoes.
The entire town stank of fish. I had never seen anything as filthy and poor as Brenton. I pulled my cloak
tighter about my shoulders, wondering what else I had missed living behind my walls.
Slipping awkwardly on the stone beach, I went to Duncan. “Is Tuck all right?” I asked, but he didn’t
answer, the back of his neck going red as he continued to fuss over his horse. Chu, I thought. He  was
worse than Heather, thinking he could punish me by ignoring me.
Frowning at his infantile behavior, I led Pitch and Jeck’s horse into the stream that bisected Brenton.
My skirts tied high to keep them from going damp, I dumped water over the horses using the bowl from
my pack to get rid of the salt. I used the remnant of my stockings to dry the back of Jeck’s horse before
arranging my pack and riding pad on him.
Duncan said  nothing, keeping  with his cold  silence. He  stomped  into  the  stream,  sitting  up  to  his
armpits to let the current wash out the salt. Dunking himself, he slicked his hair back as he came up. Still
dripping, he splashed off Tuck and led him up the steep embankment to the street.  I followed,  and  we
silently headed into town. There was no dock, but there was probably a tavern where I could ask after
Kavenlow.
I didn’t look back at the Sandpiper. My chest  was  tight with a  confused  frustration.  With Captain
Borlett’s  letter,  I had  freedom.  I had  no earthly reason  not to  abandon  my position as  the  princess’s
double. Except that to flee would allow Garrett to live. And I wanted him dead.
“Look  at  her,”  Duncan said  crossly  to  Tuck  as  we  found our  place  among the noise and  stink of
people  again. “Did I tell you she  made  me  carry  fourteen  buckets  of  water  across  the  deck  of  that
burning ship? Madam princess wants to burning wash her hair. Madam princess wants to burning wash
her clothes. It’s burning unfair. And what’s worse, she didn’t even let me watch her win it. She burning
well cheats, Tuck. Otherwise, she would’ve let me watch.”
“I didn’t cheat,” I said, frustrated. I still thought it was the kiss, not the cards.

“Hear that bird singing, Tuck?” Duncan mocked. “Have you ever heard such an annoying twitter in all
your life?”
I frowned. Duncan’s feet squished in his wet boots, keeping exact time with my pace.
“No one wins at cards that often unless they cheat,” he continued, speaking to his horse but talking to
me. “She cheats, Tuck, sure as you’re a gelding, poor sod. But how she  does  it, I can’t  tell.” He  was
silent for three heartbeats. “If she told me, I might talk to her again.”
“Duncan…” My shoulders slumped. “I don’t cheat. I grew up playing cards with someone who does.
I had to learn how to read people just to win my fair share. The captain was good, but he was careless.
He touched his beard when he had to think about which card to throw away. He leaned forward when
he thought I had a better hand than his, and he took a drink when he pulled a card higher than a sword. If
you would spend  as  much time watching your opponent  as  you do  the  cards,  you  wouldn’t  have  to
cheat.”
“Listen to her,” Duncan said to Tuck as he squashed the biting fly that  landed  on his horse’s  neck.
“Such pretty stories.” He glanced at me, his infant beard  making his ire look  ugly. “You make  a  good
storyteller, Tess. Ever think of changing your profession?”
Ignoring that, I angled to a hard-packed dirt yard that was as indicative of a  tavern  as  much as  the
sign above the door. “You don’t have to come in if you don’t want to,” I said, tired of inns and ale and
loud voices of men raised in tone-deaf salutations of friendly women with full tankards and ample breasts.
Duncan pushed Tuck’s head out of the way so he could see me. “Do you have enough for something
to eat?” he asked, apparently having forgiven me already at the prospect of food.
“You spent the last two days in the galley, and you’re hungry?” I said  feeling a  jolt of nervousness.
“Jeck’s behind us. We find out if or when Kavenlow was here. Then we leave.”
“Yes,” he drawled. “I can hardly wait to watch you go in there and ask if they’ve seen a wise old man
and a princess.”
My brow furrowed. “You have to go through Brenton to get to Bird Island. Either he’s in front of us
or already on his way back. I have to know which direction to take.”
“And Captain Jeck will do the same thing, won’t he,” he said. “He’s either chasing behind us by boat,
or waiting for us to walk right into him on the way back.”
For a moment, I could only hear the pounding of my heart in my ears. Why hadn’t I thought that far
ahead? “Shut your mouth, Duncan,” I said, the pit of my stomach cold.
“For a talented woman, you aren’t very bright.”
My lips tightened,  and  I tied Jeck’s  horse  and  Pitch  to  the  post  outside  the  inn.  The  stable  was
nothing more than a shaky-looking lean-to propped against a tree. I glanced back at the bay, fighting a
pang as I found the Sandpiper in full sail heading toward open ocean without me. The fear—the need to
be moving that had been absent from the time I has set foot on the Sandpiper—filled me again. I didn’t
want to advertise my presence, but I had to know if Kavenlow had been here. Garrett’s reinforcements
would reach the capital soon. I was running out of time.
Duncan entered the inn ahead of me. I followed, a small sound of disgust slipping from me as I took a
shallow breath. The place stank of soured fish and musty potatoes. Even Duncan wrinkled his nose as he
looked  to  the hearth  and  the cluster  of too-thin  men drinking. I took  in  the  slovenly  dressed  woman
draped across the loudest man and grimaced. The inn was nothing like the Three Crows. Not having any
competition, the inn did very little to attract customers. “It’s a wonder anyone is here at all,” I muttered.
“It reeks of fish.”
“Oh, someone new. Whatcha want?” a woman said as she came  out from a  back  room.  Her  eyes

roved over Duncan’s damp attire. “A late noon meal? Perhaps a room? Eh? Yes?”
My heart gave a pound as Duncan eyed me in speculation. “Two ales, please,” I said, laying out the
proper amount of money. Maybe ale would soften him where my words couldn’t. It would distract
him, if nothing else.
Her brow rose at my accent. Duncan took the first tankard. Holding my breath, I tried a tentative sip,
my eyes meeting his when I found it surprisingly pleasant. Duncan’s gaze slid from mine to the men by the
hearth. “I’ll be over there till you’re done,” he said shortly, drifting toward them as if flotsam on the tide.
“Yes, go,” I encouraged, thinking if he was over there, he wouldn’t foul up my careful question's over
 here. “Ma’am,” I said, “you brew a good ale.”
She sent her gaze over me again, clearly wondering what I was doing here. “My husband, he taught
me,” she  said,  dragging a  rag over  a  table  as  she  pretended  to  clean it.  “It  brings  the  ships  in  when
nothing else will, it does. You out from the capital?”
I thought back  to  the bitter  ale  in  the  casks  on  the  Sandpiper  and  nodded.  “We’re  just  off  the
Sandpiper.‘”
“You and your husband, there?” she interrupted, nodding toward the hearth.
“Ah, yes,” I stammered. “I was wondering—”
“Tymus is taking on passengers?” she blurted. “That’s not like him.”
Tymus? I thought, not liking that Captain Borlett and this woman were on a first-name basis. “It took
a fair amount to  convince  him,”  I  said.  “I’ve  been  trying  to  meet  up  with  someone.  An  older  man,
well-dressed? He was headed this way.”
The woman brushed her hands on her skirts, her eyes roving over the patrons. “I didn’t hear the call
of a boat coming in. Where’s Tymus’s crew? Is it a big cargo? Any fabric?”
“No,” I said in exasperation, realizing I had  lost what little control  I had.  “No  cargo.  He’s  already
headed out. He only stopped to let us off.”
“Oh.” The woman slumped. She eyed Duncan across the room. “He made you swim?”
“Just—my husband.” Her eyebrows rose, and I surged ahead. “I was  hoping you might be  able  to
help me find my father. He might have my sister with him?” The lies came out so easily, it was frightening.
“You don’t know if your sister was with him or not?” She looked at me as if I was stupid. Flushing, I
glanced at  Duncan,  his hands  waving in conversation.  I didn’t like  that  tart  of  a  woman  touching  his
shoulder. Neither did the man whose lap she was currently sitting in.
“Ah-h-h,” I said, remembering the innkeeper had asked me something. “He’s fetching her back to the
capital. He wouldn’t have gone by boat, and I don’t know if I passed him in my rush to  catch  up with
him.”
She nodded knowingly. “Oh. Old man with graying beard? Attractive,  if you don’t  mind me saying
se? Dressed up real fancy?”
I felt a wash of relief. Garrett’s assassin hadn’t found him. “Yes, that’s probably him.”
“Aye,” the woman said, wiping out a bowl with the corner of her apron. “You just missed them. He
came through two days ago off the Sea Mist. He bought the Ellisons’ horse and rode out of town like the
devil himself were after him.”
“Two days!” I exclaimed softly. I would never have guessed he would cross the bay.
“Shame you didn’t come in earlier,” the woman said. “He left this morning.”

My head rose, and I looked at her in confusion. “But you said…”
“With your sister and her man,” she added, and my brow smoothed in understanding. Kavenlow was
on his way back to the capital. Then I hesitated. Her man?
“They spent the night,” the chatty woman was saying. “Took my two  best  rooms.  She’s  a  beautiful
little thing, ain’t she? Hair long enough to sit on, and as fair as sunlight on water.”
I grimaced, touching my dull-brown hair. “Yes. That’s—her.”
“I can  see  why your father dotes  on her,”  she  said.  “Never  left  her  alone.  Kept  everyone  away.
Waited on her hand and foot. I hardly saw the frail wisp. She looks a mite ill, the tiny thing. So sad and
melancholy. Was she away for her health?”
“She’s fine,” I said,  trying to  hide my anger.  Kavenlow  waited  on her?  He  wasn’t  a  servant.  My
growing aversion for the princess shifted to a real dislike.
“It was a sight. The both of them tending her as if she was a queen,” the woman said.
“Queen. Yes,” I muttered.
“I tell you, if my husband had given me half that attention, I might have worked harder at keeping him
alive when he fell sick.”
Ill with jealousy, I put my ale down. “Yes. Thank you. I have to go now.”
“I expect if you hurry, you might find them yet tonight. Wagons are slow things.”
A wagon! I thought. No wonder she was taking so long to get to the palace. Little princess perfect
couldn’t ride. She needed a wagon. “I expect so,” I said, no longer trying to hide my bitterness. “Thank
you.”
“Good luck finding your father and sister.”
“Yes. Thank you.” I turned away before she could  say  anything else,  stomping across  the room  to
Duncan. I stood behind his chair, seething. The men ignored me, making me even angrier.  “Come  on,
Duncan,” I said, tugging at his sleeve. “We have to go.”
Duncan rose with a mocking slowness, tipping his hat at the unsavory woman in parting. She all but
leered at me, thinking I was his jealous wife, no doubt. Why would I be jealous of her? She had dirty feet
the size of a duck.
“They were here last night,” I said as I pulled him to the door.
Duncan tilted the bottom of his tankard to the ceiling and finished his ale in one  swill. “I know,”  he
said when he came up for air. “Chu, that’s good.”
“How did you find out?” I said, glancing behind me as the group sprawled about the hearth laughed,
probably at me.
“Thadd likes to roll the dice.”
“Thadd? Who’s Thadd?” I took his empty tankard and set it on a table as I hustled him back out into
the sun and to the horses.
“Thadd is her goat boy,” he said. “A sculptor, really. He’s delivering a statue. That’s why the wagon.”
“Goat boy?” Bewildered, I squinted at him in the bright glare.
Duncan untied Tuck and belched, earning my disgust and the admiration of the boy nearby throwing
pebbles at the chickens in the road. “Yeah. Goat boy. You know, the hero in the stories who helps the
princess save the kingdom.” Smirking, he added, “He’s sweet on her. Poor sod. I wonder if he knows
who she really is?”

Goat boy? Deep in thought, I swung up onto Jeck’s horse and arranged my dress and cloak. What
was the princess doing with a sculptor?
We headed out of town at a fast pace. Behind me I heard small belches coming from the stableboy as
he tried to outdo Duncan. “Look what you started,” I said, disgusted.
Duncan grinned, his nasty red  and  black  beard  looking awful. “Don’t you know  how to  show  the
proper appreciation for such a fine ale as that? Who ever heard of an assassin who didn’t know how to
belch?”
My stomach tightened, and I looked  over  my shoulder  to  see  if anyone had  heard  him. “You’re  a
stark-raving idiot, you know that?”
“And you’re an assassin, Tess,” Duncan said cheerfully, as if he rather liked the idea. “Not a thief or a
cheat. You’re an assassin. And together, we’re going to make a fortune. After you save the kingdom and
all.”
“Some cheat you are,” I scorned. “One ale, and you lose what little sense you had.”
“I’m not drunk,” he claimed, and the clear look in his eye made me believe it. “Think about it. What
else are you good for?”
What  else,  indeed?  I  thought  as  we  left  the  smelly  harbor  of  Brenton  behind,  slipping  into  a
mile-eating canter headed back to the capital. I wondered what it said  that  the skills of a  princess  and
that of an assassin were so alike that no one had noticed the difference.

Twenty-one
What am  I  going  to  do  about  the  princess?  The  thumps  of  Jeck’s  horse’s  hooves  pounded  the
thought into me as we cantered up the path to the capital. Though rutted with the imprints of hooves and
wheels, the trail was blessedly empty.  Jeck’s  horse  never  stumbled,  and  the gentle motion that  usually
soothed me only made things worse. Each hesitation of hoofbeats  seemed  like the gathering of breath,
tightening me until I was ready to break. My mind kept circling back to the question I had blinded myself
to. What am I going to do about her?
If the princess took the throne,  I’d  never  be  able  to  convince King Edmund that  I was  justified in
killing his son for the murder of my parents. Only if I was a fellow sovereign would he listen to me. Only
by taking the throne could I find my revenge for the murder of my parents.
“But it’s not my kingdom,” I whispered, hearing my voice quaver.
It should be, a selfish thought whispered. A tremor took me, and I hid it by tapping the horse with my
heels to get him to step it up. She might be heir to the throne, but she would lose it in three years, taken
by Misdev or any of the other kingdoms watching the wealth pass through our harbors. War would erupt
up and down the coast whether I killed Garrett or not. Captain Borlett would carry  soldiers,  not grain.
People would starve. People would die.
I angled Jeck’s horse to a branch impaling one of Kavenlow’s leaves. It ripped from the branch with
a wet sound, and anxiety tightened my stomach. They were close. Perhaps as little as  just out of sight.
Fingers trembling, I dropped the leaf.
“Duncan,” I said as I pulled Jeck’s horse to a standstill. “We’re stopping.”
He brought  Tuck  to  a  neck-arched  halt, his shoulders  bunching as  he reined  the horse  in. “Now?
Look at those ruts. They’re right in front of us.” His eyes were wide in the early dusk under the trees.
“It’s getting dark,”  I said.  “They’ll have stopped,  too.  We’ll catch  up with them tomorrow.”  Face
flaming at his questioning silence, I dismounted and walked Jeck’s horse and Pitch off the trail to a small
clearing beside the path.
“All right,” he said slowly and dismounted. I could feel his eyes on me as I wound the reins of Jeck’s
horse into a bush and started up the trail. I had to see her. I had to see the princess. Perhaps she wasn’t
as frail and stupid as the woman had made out.
“Tess? Where are you going?”
Duncan’s voice brought me spinning around. “To find something to  eat,”  I lied, not knowing why I
did. “I’ll be right back.”
He scratched a finger through his vile, sparse beard. “You never have before.”
My lips pressed together, and I belligerently tossed a stray curl out of my eyes.  “Would you rather
have me try to cook again?”
Misdirected  anger  made  my words  harsh,  but instead  of reacting in turn, he  stared  at  me.  “What
about your horses?”
“Oh,” I said, returning. “Yes.” With abrupt motions, I removed the riding pad and packs from Jeck’s
horse. Leaving them where they lay in the dirt beside the trail, I dusted my hands and  backed  up three
steps. “There,” I said. “I’ll be back.”
I strode down the path. The hairs on the back of my neck pricked, but I wouldn’t turn around. My

pulse quickened. “Hey!” he called, and I spun. My hands dropped from my topknot to catch the water
sack he tossed me. “See if you can find running water, too.”
“Yes. Fine,” I said, hastening down the trail. As soon as I was around a bend, I gathered my skirts
and went faster. My tension didn’t dissipate with the motion; it worsened.
A low murmur of voices pulled me to a standstill. One was high-pitched, the other low.  Hunched,  I
edged off the trail and continued. My heart pounded, and my hands trembled. I smelled the smoke from
their fire before I saw them. In a low crouch, I crept forward.  The canes  of wild berries  caught at  my
skirt and hair, and the sharp stabs of thorns were like guilty accusations for my spying. I stifled a cry as
my sleeve ripped to leave a long scratch in my arm. I brushed at the pain, a sliver of motion making me
go still.
Shifting a small branch, I peered through the vegetation. My eyes narrowed. A young woman sat on a
log beside  a  fire, huddled  under  a  thick  woolen  cape.  Her  arms  were  wrapped  around  herself.  She
looked cold and lost. And beautiful.
The tips of her yellow hair brushed the ground as she sat. It was straight where mine was curly. Her
skin was sun-starved while mine was dark. She looked unfit for anything useful, with ample curves where
I only had suggestions. She smiled up at the short, powerfully built young man who draped a blanket over
her shoulders, and I hated her. I was no princess. This is a princess, I thought as I wiped a hand under
my nose. I was a fool to ever think I had been one.
“Goat Boy” crouched beside her to arrange the fire. He was too muscular to have any sense in him.
His feet were bare, and he had broad shoulders and thick legs, looking as if the cold couldn’t touch him.
I frowned when he flicked the black bangs from his eyes.
Pulled off the trail in the shadows was a narrow wagon holding a box the shape of a coffin. There was
only one horse to pull it. The draft  animal was  enormous,  looking as  if he had  pulled stumps from the
ground the day he fell from his dam. No wonder it was taking them forever to get to the capital.
My attention returned to them as the man murmured something to get her to smile. Anger filled me.
Where was she when Father died on a sword? Where was she when Mother’s blood stained my fingers?
I was their daughter, not her!
I watched her take a comb from a small sack  and  brush  her hair. The curve  of her cheek  and  her
position struck me as familiar. With a shock that twisted my stomach, I realized the statues in the solarium
were of her. The beautiful statues in the garden were of her!
Goat  Boy  leaned  closer  and  rested  a  hand  on  her  shoulder.  “Do  you  want  another  blanket,
Contessa?” he asked in a slow country drawl.
I felt as if my breath had been knocked from me. She had taken my future, she had taken my parents.
How dare she take my name?
Stomach churning, I stood. Thorns caught at my skirts, the soft sound of them ripping adding to  my
anger. “That’s my name,” I said softly.
Goat Boy spun, his eyes wide and his mouth open.
The princess stood, her blanket falling to almost catch fire. “It’s you!” she exclaimed, a weak-looking
hand going to her neck. “You’re her!” She hesitated, and my face burned as she ran her gaze over me,
taking in my scratches and travel-stained clothes. I drew myself straighter, refusing to  touch  my hair or
dress  to  straighten them. “What are  you doing here?”  she  asked,  her country drawl  a  hint  under  her
attempt at a noble accent. “You’re supposed to be at the palace.”
My breath  came  in a  shuddering  sound,  I  was  so  angry.  “You  have  no  right  to  question  me,”  I
whispered, drawing on every ounce of hard-won protocol to not shout at her.

The princess  pursed  her lips, her chin rising. “I’m the princess,  not you.  I can  ask  you  anything  I
please. Why aren’t you at the palace?”
My hands trembled, and I took a step toward her, my motion not as graceful as  I would’ve hoped
because of the thorns. Jerking free  of them, I stumbled into the clearing. Though her words  had  been
bold, the princess went pale, clutching Goat Boy’s arm. She made a conscious effort to let go, nervously
smoothing her dress. The woman at the inn was  right. This was  a  weak-minded  nothing. Costenopolie
would fall under her.
“Don’t question me again,” I said, matching her highbrow speech though I was seething inside. “You
are a little country bumpkin who doesn’t know the first thing about ruling a country. You’re going to lose
it without my help.”
“It’s my kingdom, not yours,” she asserted, her chin high and spots on her cheeks. “And I’ll do just
fine without you. Be sure you remember that.”
I took  another  step  forward,  and  Goat  Boy shifted uncertainly. “Your kingdom?”  I  said,  and  she
sniffed, clearly thinking my soft voice meant a soft temper.
“Yes,  my  kingdom.  Thadd  was  right.  You’re  a  grasping  little  beggar,  angry  that  you  aren’t  the
princess and I am.”
I struggled to keep my breathing even.  “I kept  you alive for twenty years,”  I said,  my voice rising
despite my efforts. “And you call me a grasping beggar? I didn’t ask for this. You ruined my entire life
with that damned Red Moon Prophesy of yours!”
Face tight, she looked me over. “Your speech is foul, and you’ve torn your dress. Mother wrote and
said I was to speak to you as my sister, but you’re not worthy to be her daughter. They never thought of
you as anything but a way to protect me. You aren’t their daughter. How could they ever love you?”
“You… you little… chu mouth!” I stammered, standing before her, shaking. My mother,  not  hers.
My father, not hers.
“I’ll have the chancellor beat you for your insolence,” she said, her nose in the air.
My breath hissed out. A flash of fear  crossed  me that  she  could  make  him do  it. Anger washed  it
away. If Kavenlow was going to beat me, I’d give him something to beat me for.
Striding around the fire, I swung the flat of my hand to smack sharply onto her cheek.
She gasped, taking a step back. The imprint of my hand showed an ugly red. Shock froze her for an
instant, then she flung herself at me, crying out in rage.
I backpedaled, but not fast enough. We went down in a tangle of skirts and flying hair. She hit my eye
with her fist. Stars exploded in my vision, and I rocked my head back. Her grip tightened in my hair, and
I smacked her again, hitting her ear by the feel of it. She fell back, and as the stars still danced before me,
I grabbed her shoulders and rolled her over to the ground.
Straddling her, I sat  on her back.  “They are  my parents!”  I shouted,  forcing her pretty  little blond
head into the dirt and leaf mold. “Don’t you ever try to take them away from me again. Do you hear me?
I’m their daughter as much as you are! I am. I am!”
The princess was crying, her arms reaching behind her to find me with the sleeves of her dress down
about her elbows. Her hair was full of sticks and leaves, and I thumped her head into the ground, jerking
when Duncan grabbed my shoulders and pulled me off her.
His eyes were bright in amusement, and I wondered how long he had been watching. Goat Boy was
wisely staying out of it, standing at  the edge  of camp,  pale  and  shaking. Laughing, Duncan shook  his
head, his hand still gripping my elbow. “Tess, what are you doing?”

“Let me go!” I cried, and when he didn’t, I punched him solid in the stomach.
Clutching his middle, he rocked back with a breathless, “Ooof.”
I swung the hair from my eyes and looked for the princess. She was tripping on her skirts and cloak
as she tried to rise and get to Goat Boy. Her dress was mussed, and her hair was in disarray. She was
sobbing, and my eyes narrowed. “I don’t think you fully understand the situation yet,” I said, lunging for
her.
A shadow darted between us, and I ran right into Kavenlow.
“Kavenlow!” I cried, jerking to a stop. He was dressed as a huntsman in black linen and leather. His
dagger  was  in plain view  instead  of  hidden,  and  his  dart  pipe  was  tucked  into  his  hatband,  already
loaded. Worry pinched his brow, but his lips were firm in disapproval.
Fear flashed through me, then anger. “You lied to me!” I shouted, the heartache of the last eight days
thundering down upon me. “You lied—then left me!”
His face melted into understanding, and he put a hand on my shoulder. “Easy,” he soothed. “I never
meant for you to find out this way. But do you really think slapping the princess is the best way to make
her acquaintance, Tess?”
At the sound of my name, something in me broke. “That’s not my name!” I shouted, furious. I hit his
shoulder to drive him away, but he wouldn’t let go. “It’s her name!” I cried, shoving his chest  with my
palm. “I don’t even have my own name. You lied to me. My entire life is a lie!” My throat closed, and I
felt the tears threaten, hating myself for them.
“Hush,” he soothed as the first one trickled down. “It will be all right.”
“No it won’t!” I exclaimed, pushing against him to  get away,  but he pulled me closer.  The familiar
smell of horse and ink drew from me memories of books, and riding lessons, and  long evenings of idle
diversion and talk. My angry resolve faltered as I admitted it was all gone. Everything.
I held my breath, my head pounding. My throat ached for release, and a cry broke free. My parents
were dead. My life was gone. He was the only one left to me. I clutched at  his coat,  burying my head
against his chest. Sobs shook me as the last of my will dissolved.
“Shhhh,” he said,  bringing my head  against him as  he used  to  when I fell from a  horse.  His  hand
brushing my hair was soothing and familiar. “It’s all right. It’s going to be all right.”
“But I don’t know who I am,” I wept, unable to stop. “Why didn’t you tell me? Why?”

Twenty-two
Kavenlow set a cup of tea within my grip. I took, it without looking. My hands were stiff with cold,
but the warmth of the cup did nothing to shift the chill that had taken me. Feeling numb and drained, I sat
upon the log beside the fire. The princess was at the edge  of the camp,  glaring at  me from behind the
wagon as she brushed her hair to get the dirt out of it. Goat Boy, or Thadd rather, was standing beside
her looking laughably out of place. Her face was red where I had slapped it, and she had a bump on her
forehead where I had pummeled her into the ground.
My breath eased from me. She had snapped my temper as if it had been a dry twig, and I had acted
like the gutter trull she claimed I was. But she had said they hadn’t loved me.
Duncan was talking with Kavenlow in a hushed, intent voice. It took a decisive sound and went silent.
There was  a  rustle of fabric,  and  Kavenlow  sat  beside  me. “You  cut  your  hair,”  he  said  by  way  of
greeting, distress heavy in his voice.
My heart seemed to clench, and I wondered if he would beat me. I certainly deserved it. “Kavenlow,
I’m sorry,” I whispered.
He stopped my words with a raised hand. “I’m not the one you need to apologize to.”
I glanced at the princess. She sneered at me, showing no control of her emotions at  all. “She is the
one who should apologize,” I said. “She said I was filthy. A grasping beggar.”
He stretched his legs out to the fire, pulling his long cloak away so the flames could warm him better.
“You are filthy.”
My throat closed. Her insults weren’t why I had slapped her, but I couldn’t make myself tell him that
my parents were dead. It should be raining. It couldn’t get any worse. “She said they didn’t love me,” I
breathed.
“Of course they loved you.” He tried to meet my eyes. “You were their daughter.”
“Kavenlow…” I took a breath to tell him they were dead,  then hesitated.  He  had  put them in past
tense. Eyes warming with unshed tears, I looked to see his face gentled in shared sorrow. “You know?” I
warbled.
He nodded, his gaze deep into the fire. “Duncan told me. I’m sorry. I had  guessed  as  much by the
assassin I found yesterday. They were good people, deserving of far better. Tell me what happened? Of
Garrett’s reasons, if nothing else.”
I could do that. “Garrett is acting on his own,” I said, wondering at my even tone. I must be  dead
inside. “He killed my mother to force my father to tell them where she was.” I glanced  at  the princess.
She couldn’t hear me, but her face had gone blank at my obvious misery. “Father died… to avenge her
death and give me the chance to escape.” I took a slow breath, remembering the guard’s knife shaking
against my throat. “Garrett wants to make his claim to  the throne  legal by marriage so  his father can’t
take the ships and harbors through an act of war started by his son.”
“Garrett gets a kingdom by his own hand,” Kavenlow breathed. “Clever…”
“My parents are dead!” I exclaimed. “There is nothing clever about it!”
There was  a  gasp,  and  the princess’s  face  went white. “Dead?”  she  quavered.  Her  beautiful  face
twisted with panic as  she  stood.  She  clutched  at  Thadd’s  arm,  her  eyes  on  Kavenlow.  “You  said  I
wouldn’t be queen for years and years,” she cried. “You promised!”
Kavenlow slumped. “Tess…” he murmured. “You have the timing of a hurricane.” Straightening, he
turned  her.  “I  apologize,  Princess  Contessa,”  he  said  formally.  “I  was  unaware  Prince  Garrett  had

planned treachery.”
My heart sank deeper. “How could you let them give me her name?” I whispered. Wasn’t anything
mine? Was she going to take everything, even down to my name?
“You promised!” the princess wailed as Thadd fussed over her. “I want to go home! I don’t want to
live in a  city.  I  never  wanted  to  be  a  princess.  I’m  not  going  to  marry  a  prince.  I  don’t  care  how
handsome he is!” she blubbered, her straight hair falling to hide her face.
I sighed, finding myself agreeing with her. Kavenlow rubbed his temples with his fingertips. Glancing
between me and the panicking princess, he stood. “Tess, come with me to get your horses. You’re not
on foot, are you?”
Numb, I shook my head and set my cup aside. Thadd and Duncan were hunched over the princess,
trying to soothe her as she sat by the wagon in tear-strewn hysterics. Kavenlow’s neck was stiff, and he
refused to look at her as he took my elbow and hustled me down the dark path.
I settled into his pace, pulled into matching him stride for stride.  It  was  comforting, his hurried gait,
which he had often strode about the garden with. The realization he chose to walk with me in the dark
rather than console the princess was more of a comfort than it should be.
“I’m sorry, Tess,” he said as soon as we were out of earshot.
“Don’t call me that. It’s her name,” I said, scraping up enough feeling to put some weight behind it. “I
don’t even have my own name.”
He harrumphed. “Stop feeling sorry for yourself. You have your own name. I gave it to you. The king
and queen christened her after you, adding to it to get Contessa.”
It was a small thing, but I fastened on it greedily. Kavenlow had named me? I had been named first?
Then my shoulders slumped. What did it matter, really?
“If I could do it over, I would have told you before I left,” he said.
“Tell me what?” I said bitterly. “That I’m a whore’s get or that you’re a player?”
Kavenlow gripped my arm and pulled us to a stop. “H-how…” he stammered, his white face a blur in
the chill darkness under the trees. “Who told you that?”
His surprise gave me strength. So it was true. Jeck hadn’t lied. “You’re a player,” I said, trying to pull
away only to find his grip tighten. “That’s all I am to you, a piece in a game.”
“Who?” Kavenlow demanded, but his anger wasn’t directed at me. “Who told you?”
“Jeck,” I said. “The captain—”
“—of King Edmund’s guard,” he interrupted. “What else did he say?” he demanded.
His fervor shocked me, and I took a step back, still in his grip. “That you control  Costenopolie,”  I
said, suddenly afraid. “That he controls Misdev. That there are more of you, and the rule of the kings and
queens are a sham that even they don’t know—”
“The fool!” Kavenlow exclaimed, wire-tight as he dropped my arm.
My eyes widened. I had never seen Kavenlow this angry. Except the time I hid in the palace well and
couldn’t get myself out. I had shouted myself hoarse before Heather found me. “It wasn’t Jeck’s fault,” I
said,  only wanting him to  calm. “He thought I was  a  player,  seeing as  I  downed  him  with  darts  and
escaped  right under  his nose.  He  didn’t tell me anything once  he knew  I wasn’t  one,  but  I  pieced  it
together from what he didn’t say as much as what he did. And with the note I found hanging in the ‘safe’
tree—”
A flash of pride crossed him, banishing his anger. “You found it. I knew you would.”

“How could I not?” I said bitterly. “You trained me like a dog to find it. Bent my life for escape and
murder. You made me fit for nothing but frivolous games and dealing out death, and I’m not even good at
it. Why didn’t you tell me?” I exclaimed, desperate for answers.
His head bowed, he started slowly up the path. “I couldn’t,” he said as I followed him. “There was a
chance the real heir wouldn’t live to see her coronation, and you’d be put on the throne. I couldn’t risk
that happening with you knowing who you are.”
“Why?” I asked, angry as I paced beside him.
Pain crossed his brow. “If you reached the throne knowing you were destined to be a player, I would
have broken one of the strongest-held rules of the game. A player can’t sit on the throne. It would give
them too strong an advantage. The rest  would have banded  together  and  swamped  us until there  was
nothing left of Costenopolie but a tattered flag hidden under a straw mattress.” He frowned. “Just building
your resistance to the venom was a risk, but one I was willing to chance. The danger was minimal until
Captain Jeck fouled it.”
My arms swung in quick, short motions as I paced beside him. “My entire life has been a  game for
you,” I said caustically. “All of it.”
Kavenlow avoided a low branch and my eyes both. “Aye,” he said, “a game, Tess, but a very real,
complex, deadly game, and I’d like to make you a willing participant.”
“Then you admit you used me! I’m nothing but a pawn to you!”
He drew me to a stop, his eyes pained. “You’re not a pawn. I made you a thief. The most powerful
piece in the game. The only one not of noble birth that can take the king.”
“A thief! Don’t you mean an assassin?” My breath caught, and I turned away, refusing to cry again. I
was frustrated, angry, and very confused.
“Tess…” Taking my hands, he led me off the path to a fallen tree. I sat stiffly, listening to the frogs,
unwilling to look at him, as I was sure whatever he might say would be a lie. Jeck was right. How could I
ever trust Kavenlow again?
Still standing, he ran a hand down his beard in thought. “When the first assassin gained the princess’s
chambers, the queen asked me to find a child,” he said.
“Me,” I said, though it sounded much like a sob. My head hurt, and I held my breath.
“You were one of three that I found that day and took behind palace walls,” he said, not sounding at
all repentant for it.
“Who were they, my real parents?” I managed.
The darkness hid his eyes. “I don’t know. I found you with a  woman who took  you mewling from
your dead mother’s arms two days previous. I had no intention of finding my successor,  but you were
strong, Tess. Clinging to your short life as tight as a soldier. I lost myself to you the moment I held you.”
“How much silver?” I said bitterly, determined to know my worth.
“I don’t remember.”
“Yes, you do.”
He hesitated. “Enough for a loaf of bread,” he said, and I made a helpless moan. “I don’t know my
parentage either,” he said, trying to catch my gaze. “No player does. I came from the docks. My mother
was a tavern wench and my father probably a sailor.”
I sniffed, miserable. I didn’t want to hear any more. None of it.
Kavenlow took my chin and turned me to him. The lines of his face were softened by shadow. “The

king and queen bought you, Tess, but I stole you from them.” He made a short, unhappy laugh. “Perhaps
it is more accurate to say you stole me. I was completely unprepared.”
My eyes rose to his, and I saw the love in him.
“You were so clever and bright,” he said with a  faint smile. “You were  the daughter  I could  never
have. And when you survived the assassin’s darts that killed the others?” His smile turned full with a soft
memory. “That was when I convinced the queen the only way to insure her daughter’s survival would be
to send her away. I had found my apprentice, and I would have her raised with all the skills and grace of
a princess.”
“Apprentice?” I whispered, my hope almost painful.
“The king and  queen  are  legally your parents,  but I raised  you,  Tess,”  he said,  pride  crinkling the
comers of his eyes. “You’re more my child than theirs.”
The tightness in my chest loosened, and I took a breath. In my soul, I knew he was right. Our  long
hours spent in diversion, his attentive interest in my studies—these were not faked, put on to lull me into
thinking  he  cared.  I  was  not  his  plaything.  I  was  not  the  princess’s  decoy  to  be  cast  aside.  I  was
Kavenlow’s apprentice.
He nodded, seeing the beginnings of forgiveness in my eyes. Shoulders bowed in relief, he moved us
back to the path. My thoughts were spinning too fast to say anything, and we went to fetch the horses in
an awkward silence until he cleared his throat. “Did Captain Jeck tell you anything about his plans?” he
asked, his voice mixing with the singing frogs.
“No,” I said, amused at the intentness in his voice. Imagine, Kavenlow looking for information from
me. “Garrett has only enough men to hold the palace and outer garrisons, and they aren’t very good. He
expects more in about… ten days. Jeck did say he thought Garrett could manage it and that he wouldn’t
mind tending our ships as well as Misdev’s farms.”
Kavenlow frowned. “Then he thinks King Edmund will claim Costenopolie when the dust  settles.  A
player can only manipulate one kingdom. If Jeck wants to use Costenopolie in play,  King Edmund will
have to take it first.” He was silent, his movements going jerky as they did when he was worried.
“Just how many rules are there?” I questioned, not liking the idea.
His  teeth  gleamed  from  the  dark.  “Very  few,  of  which  I’ll  acquaint  you  in  due  time.  Some  are
self-imposed and can be broken, such as  knowing who another  player  is in reality, like Captain  Jeck.
Others can’t and will result in being pulled down should you flaunt them.”
“Like putting yourself on the throne,”  I said,  and  when he nodded,  the fear  slipped  back  into me,
twice as strong. “Yes, but if I’m not on the throne, how will we keep the royals from swamping us? You
saw her,” I accused, walking almost sideways as I pleaded. “She is a pathetic, soft know-nothing.”
His eyebrows rose. “Don’t be harsh. Her life has been upended as much as yours. She may be having
hysterics, but she wasn’t the one pounding her sister’s head into the ground.”
“She’s not my sister,” I said, flushing. “She doesn’t even want to be the princess.”
“She is Costenopolie’s heir, and she will be put on the throne.” His jaw was set.
“But she can’t control a kingdom!” I protested. “She can’t even control her mouth! When it’s made
common knowledge that Prince Garrett murdered my parents and the princess was raised in a nunnery,
the assassination attempts will redouble. That’s assuming our neighbors don’t declare outright war on us.
Garrett should be sent back to his father in a box. You can convince King Edmund that  his death  was
justified. That’s why I came looking for you! You have to smooth the political waves after I kill him.”
“Political waves!” Kavenlow said, aghast. The horses were just ahead, and he pulled me to  a  stop.

“Tess. We can’t kill Prince Garrett and not expect retaliation under any circumstances. It doesn’t matter
how much blood money we give them.”
My lips pursed. Kavenlow didn’t understand. Garrett was  going to  die.  He  couldn’t  be  allowed  to
think his actions would go unpunished. “The easiest way to end this is to kill Garrett,” I said sullenly.
Kavenlow shook his head. “No. I won’t start a war over one person’s pride.”
I stiffened. “Pride! He murdered them! If that’s not justification, what is?”
“It’s not necessary, and I won’t let you.”
“Kavenlow!”
“No.  Costenopolie  is mine, not yours.  There  can’t  be  two  players  for  one  kingdom.  Technically,
you’re still a piece. I’m the player. And you won’t kill Prince Garrett. I forbid it!”
Embarrassment covered my surprise at him giving me a  direct  order.  I was  no longer the princess,
even in play. I was his apprentice. I didn’t mind as  much as  I would have expected—seeing  as  I had
spent the last few days being nothing. “But they’re dead,” I protested, and we shifted back into motion. I
could say the words, now that I’d found Kavenlow.
His face  was  sad  as  he glanced  from the shadows  of the waiting horses  and  back  to  me.  “Tess,
Costenopolie’s player before me wasn’t a pleasant man. He used people badly, and it was  because  of
him Costenopolie and Misdev warred upon each other.”
“What does that have to do with letting Garrett live above justice?” I asked.
“Listen and I’ll tell you,” he said, and I grimaced. “I was far into my apprenticeship when I decided I
wouldn’t use aggression to increase my sovereign’s standing. I wanted to try commerce. My master and
I argued, and he tried to kill me when it became obvious I wouldn’t continue his plan of conquest by sea.
I barely escaped him, exchanging his life for mine.”
I stifled a tremor, imagining the terror of finding someone I trusted trying to kill me.
“Once my peers found out I had killed my master, it took all my cunning to convince them I wasn’t
going to manipulate Costenopolie’s king to directly threaten their individual games.  They thought I was
staging a continent-wide takeover, not believing I had  killed my master  to  prevent  him from doing the
same.  Someone,  I  haven’t  figured  out  who,  yet,  started  the  Red  Moon  Prophesy  to  try  to  end
Costenopolie’s royal family line and set me back.”
“Then it’s fake?” I asked in disbelief, my feet scuffing to a halt. “It’s all been a lie?”
His apologetic look was obvious, even though it was fully dark. “Most prophesies are continent-wide
statements of a player’s future intent.”
As I stood there, trying to take that in, Kavenlow  took  my shoulder  and  moved  me to  the horses.
They were watching us, Jeck’s horse tossing his head in impatience. “I wasn’t unhappy when Misdev’s
player died of consumption,” Kavenlow said. “I only know Captain Jeck by reputation, seeing traces of
his will in the upcoming marriage plans.”
I was silent as we loosely cinched riding pads and draped packs on the horses. There were too many
thoughts swirling through me, most circling back to the Red Moon Prophesy. The burning-hell thing had
been a fake? What had all my misery been for?
“Where did you get these horses?” Kavenlow asked as he looked at the underside  of Pitch’s  hoof.
Blinking, he set it down and patted her hindquarters.
I turned from knotting a pack onto Jeck’s horse, glad the moonless night hid my face.  “The gray is
Duncan’s. The other two—” I warmed. “Why?” I asked. If he knew where I had gotten them, he would
make me give them back and the princess would have them.

Kavenlow looked at me over the back of Jeck’s horse. “These are my horses.”
My face went empty in dismay. Kavenlow had bought them? For her? “You bought her horses?”  I
said, hearing the smallness of my voice. “As a betrothal gift?”
“No!” Kavenlow came around the back of the horse and gripped my shoulder.  I looked  up,  hating
the warmth of unshed tears in my eyes. “They’re yours, goose,” he said softly. “I bought them for you.
What would a princess do with two black horses she can’t even ride?”
“B-but the stableman,” I stammered. “He said they were a gift for the princess.”
“I couldn’t tell him they were for the princess’s changeling, could I?” he said gruffly. “How on earth
did you end up with them?”
“Thank you, Kavenlow!” I said, giving him a hug. They were my horses. It seemed like such a foolish
thing to cry over, but I had so little left.
“I take it you like them?” he asked, awkwardly patting my back. He gripped my shoulders and set me
back upright. I wiped my eyes with the inside of my sleeve, and he turned away, clearly uncomfortable.
“How did you get them?” he asked again. “I told that man to keep them until I sent for them. They were
going to soften the blow of, er—”
“Of me not being the princess,” I said, imagining the news would have spoiled my delight with them
quite thoroughly, even if his intentions had  been  good.  “I  sort  of  stole  me  mare,  and  Jeck  stole  the
gelding, though in actuality I paid for mine—well, I paid for a horse, but the girl ran away with it, so you
see I had to take one of the others—”
Kavenlow  waved  me to  silence, and  I winced.  I thought he would be  angry, but his look  was  of
concern. “Captain Jeck stole one?” he asked. “He’s not at the palace? He’s is out here?”
I nodded, suddenly worried. “Garrett sent him to find me. He caught up with me two days out from
the capital. That’s when he let it slip about players. He was going to take me back, but I escaped with his
horse.” Embarrassed at my double thievery, I dropped  my gaze.  “I left his pack  in Saltwood  for him,
except for his knives. I kept those. He’s either behind us or ahead, depending on whether he cut across
the bay like I did.”
Kavenlow went still, as if looking for strength. “You escaped him, stole  everything he had,  then left
most of it for him to find a day down the road?”
“Yes.” My voice sounded defensive, even to me. “I didn’t need anything he had.”
Kavenlow silently untied Pitch and Tuck and led them to the path, leaving me to wonder if I had done
something wrong. “Let’s get back to the others,” he said, his thoughts clearly on something else. “As you
say, he might be before us, or behind. Either way, we will want to meet him together.”
I followed with Jeck’s horse, my thoughts uneasy at his continued silence. We  were  nearly back  to
the camp when I scraped up enough courage to break into the noisy frogs. “Kavenlow?”  I questioned,
his dark shadow beside me seeming suddenly foreign. “Did I do something wrong?”
He was silent for so long I was sure I had, but then he shook his head. “I don’t think so. Have you…
told anyone?” he asked, his tone carrying a forced casualness. “About players? Duncan, perhaps?”
“No.” I took a long step to match his pace. “But he accidentally darted himself and now thinks I’m an
assassin. I told him I was the princess’s decoy, but he doesn’t believe me.”
His motion hesitated for an instant so  brief I might have imagined it. “Ah, how did you explain the
venom?” he asked guardedly.
I met his eyes, black in the dusk. “I told him you made me immune to it so I could defend myself from
assassins. It only enforced his belief that I was one.”

“And he probably thinks I’m the same,” Kavenlow said around a sigh. “No,” he said, raising a hand
as I took a breath to apologize. “It’s my fault. It’s not against the rules for someone to know about the
venom, but it’s risky. They might jump to the proper conclusion.” His head drooped. “I’ll try to reinforce
the idea that I’ve been training you to be the princess’s armed chaperone. It’ll be all right.”
“I’m sorry,” I said, really meaning it.
Kavenlow smiled thinly. “He hasn’t had much opportunity to  tell anyone else.  And it’s only been  a
few days. It shouldn’t be too hard to cloud his thoughts.”
“But he nearly died!” I exclaimed.
“Really? I’ll make it food poisoning so it’s a small shift of his memory.”
I frowned, not liking that I had cooked dinner that night and would be  blamed  for it. But a  thought
stopped me cold. “What do you mean by shift of his memory! Duncan’s memory?”
We rounded a turn and found camp. Duncan stood up from beside the fire as the sound of the horses
reached him. The princess was still crying, but at least she was being quiet about it. “Kavenlow, what did
you mean by shift of his memory?” I asked again.
Kavenlow waved a distant greeting to Duncan. “Did Jeck tell you about the venom?” he asked,  his
eyes bright.
I made a small face. “He implied it came from an animal of some kind.”
He nodded. “It does. But he didn’t say anything else?” I shook  my head,  and  he leaned  close  and
whispered, “It’s rather special, Tess. I said I will shift Duncan’s memory, and that’s exactly what I can
do.”

Twenty-three
I pulled my cloak,  tighter against the cold.  My  bedroll  was  some  distance  from  the  fire,  and  the
dampness of the ground had soaked into me. The princess was sleeping sweetly right before  the coals,
her sundry blankets—which she had haughtily told me she had purchased in Brenton—were strewn in a
careless disarray. Kavenlow  sat  upon the log across  the fire from her drinking his tea,  keeping  watch
over us as we tried to sleep through the freezing spring night.
Everyone had  agreed  a  watch  was  necessary.  Duncan  and  I  were  slated  to  stand  together  later,
Thadd and Kavenlow again just before dawn. The princess had protested she could stand guard as well,
and I found a  perverse  satisfaction  in  that  Kavenlow  told  her  to  sleep.  Only  Kavenlow  and  I  were
resistant to Jeck’s darts; one of us would remain awake all night.
I pulled my blanket  to  my  chin,  accidentally  exposing  my  feet.  I  still  had  on  my  boots—just  the
thought of which made  my lips curl—but  it was  either that  or  suffer  all  the  more  from  the  cold.  My
evening had been a frustrating mix of awkward hesitations and Kavenlow’s put-offs. All my requests that
he  explain  his  last  words  before  we  rejoined  the  camp  had  been  brushed  away  with  an  infuriating,
“Later.” Depressed, I sat up to tug my blanket down over my feet.
“Can’t sleep, Tess?” Kavenlow said softly, and I met his eyes over the fire. “Come sit.”
Freezing, I rose and, draped in my blankets and cloak, shuffled to where he made room for me on the
log. “Is it later now?” I asked dryly.
Kavenlow’s salt-and-pepper beard shifted as he smiled. Pulling a  sheaf of wormwood  from behind
him, he threw  it on the fire. A musty smell came  up,  tickling my nose  and  memory.  My  eyes  shifted
closed, then jerked open. “You didn’t burn it,” I said, snapping full awake.
“Beg your pardon?”
“The gypsy. You didn’t beat her, you didn’t kill her horse, and you didn’t burn her van.”
“No.” He poured a second cup. “Have some tea. It will help keep you awake.”
I almost slopped the dark brew in excitement as he handed it to me. He  wasn’t  trying to  lull me to
sleep; he was making sure no one else woke up! “The gypsy is a player, isn’t she?” I asked, not caring to
get my jar of honey for fear Kavenlow would make me share it with the princess in the morning.
“She used to be.” Kavenlow watched the princess’s slow breathing. “She willingly handed her sphere
of influence to her successor almost a decade ago. Now she wanders, acting as an arbitrator and judge
over the rest of us. I don’t like her. Players don’t ever stop playing. They just use more powerful pieces.”
I pushed my frozen toes up almost into the coals. “You took me to see her. Why?”
He sipped  his tea,  his fingers still showing the ink from my last history lesson,  black  shadows  the
firelight flickered against. “I took you as my apprentice long ago, but I never cared to present you to her
before. It was nothing. Don’t waste time trying to find significance in it.”
“She tested me,” I said, remembering it now. A shaft of anger  colored  my words.  “She said  I was
lacking.”
The wrinkles across his brow deepened, and he looked pained. “By her definition, you are  lacking:
you’d rather work to find a compromise than face a conflict directly, and though you can defend yourself,
you can’t bring yourself to kill, even when you think it’s deserved.”
Miserable, I lowered my cup to rest on my knees. How had he known I hadn’t been able  to  kill
Garrett? “I’m no good at this, am I? That’s what she said. That you should start over.”
Much to my astonishment, he put an arm across my shoulders and gave me a sideways  hug. “Tess,

you lack  those  abilities because  that’s  what I wanted  my successor  to  be.  I  didn’t  want  a  soldier.  I
wanted an intelligent, sophisticated, beautiful woman who would search for an answer rather than go in
with arrows flying and swords flashing. Someone who could enslave with charm instead of chains.”
I smiled weakly, and his arm fell away.  “The game is changing,” he said.  “The old methods  aren’t
going to work much longer. When opposing forces fight, there’re no choices. When one side refuses to
fight, they have all the options.  Your  skills give you possibilities your competition will only wonder  at.
That bitter old woman doesn’t see that. She never will.”
I failed to see it either, not reassured at all by Kavenlow’s proud smile. Despite what he said, I knew
I had no skills. But then I wondered. Kavenlow had  said  he could  shift Duncan’s  memory. The gypsy
had said the same about me, and Kavenlow had told her it wouldn’t work.
Curious, I pulled my toes from the fire before my boots caught. “The gypsy,” I said, not sure I was
remembering everything properly. “She asked me if I could ride a horse? And—if I had dreams? No. If
my dreams came true.”
Kavenlow started. “You remember all that? Tie me to a stake at low tide, I warned her you would.”
Smiling past his beard, he threw a second sheaf of wormwood on the fire and fanned the smoke away.
From behind us came a stomp from the horses.
“It’s the venom,” he finally said. “It’s a player’s first weapon, yes, and I imagine players began strictly
as assassins. But it was found long ago that if one increased their natural immunity by repeated exposure
to the venom as  a  way to  protect  against a  rival’s dart,  they were  able  to  take  on the abilities of the
animal it came from.”
I stared at him, not understanding. “Abilities?” I prompted. “Like what? What animal?”
He leaned closer, his eyes catching a glint of the fire. “A punta,” he said, deadly serious.
My mouth dropped open. “A punta?” I finally said. “They’re all dead.”
He straightened. “No, they’re not, and the next time I need to replenish my venom, you’re  going to
help me. It’s about time you start earning the poison I’ve been giving you.”
“They’re just stories,”  I protested.  “Big magical cats  that…”  My words  trailed off, and  my breath
caught. Magic?
Kavenlow grinned through his beard. “I’ve waited so long to tell you. Every player has cheated death,
surviving a  killing dose  of venom to  balance  on the edge  of oblivion, returning with  the  magic  puntas
possess. You were three months old, struck by an assassin’s dart. I think it ironic that a rival player found
my successor for me. I’d thank him, if I knew who it was.”
He had to be jesting. “A punta?” I looked at him quizzically. “I can’t do  anything a  punta  can  do.
Neither can you.” I hesitated. “Can you?”
“I’ll show you,” he said. It was just what I was going to demand, and it took me aback. “See Pitch
over there?” he asked, pointing with his chin. “Try to get her to come to you.”
Pitch had wandered from the other horses, trying to get at the hay in the wagon’s bed. My eyebrows
rose, giving him a pained look. “You mean, here, horsy, horsy, horsy…”
He  gave  me  a  severe  look,  but  his  eyes  were  glittering  in  a  repressed  amusement.  “Don’t  be
impertinent. Put the thought into her head that you have a handful of grain in your pocket.”
“Like calling wandering sheep…” I said, and he inclined his head as if I had said something wise. He
was in a grand mood despite the cold pinching his cheeks red.
I took a deep breath and slowly let it out. I stared at Pitch, thinking thoughts of grain overflowing my
pocket. My heart pounded when Pitch swung her head and looked  at  me. She  didn’t move,  though. I

flushed, and  a  whisper  of  vertigo  swept  me.  My  knees  started  to  tremble  from  the  cold,  and  I  felt
nauseous.
Kavenlow  silently eyed  me rubbing my knees.  Reaching up,  he plucked  a  dart  from  my  topknot.
Before I knew his intent, he stabbed it through my blanket and cloak and into my thigh.
“Ouch!” I cried, shaking the spilled tea from my hand. “Why did you do that?”
“Try again,” he said as he set the dart on the log between us.
My leg throbbed—from the needle, not the venom—and I rubbed it. Irate, I nevertheless imagined a
juicy apple. My dizziness eased, and I stared at Pitch, feeling like an idiot. “Nothing is happening, except
my leg hurts,” I said sourly. In fact, Pitch seemed utterly sleepy, her tail going still and her head drooping
as the wormwood smoke swirled about her hooves.
Something  shoved  me  from  behind.  Cup  dropping,  I  spun  on  my  seat  to  find  Jeck’s  horse.
Frightened,  I  raised  my  hands  to  touch  him  as  he  dropped  his  head  and  snuffed  at  me  with  his
prickle-velvet nose. “Kavenlow?” I quavered, frightened.
He  chuckled,  pushing  the  horse’s  head  out  from  between  us.  “That  wasn’t  quite  what  I  had
envisioned, but you did it.”
“I did it?” I said, not really believing. Jeck’s  horse  stomped  impatiently, waiting for the nonexistent
apple. I rubbed his ears in apology, thinking I’d have to get him an apple as soon as we got back to the
capital. Much to my amazement, he blew heavily and turned away. Chu, I thought. I not only enticed him
to me but told  him to  go away,  as  well! “Is that  why I’ve  been  so  dizzy?”  I  said,  pulse  hammering.
“Saint’s bells, I almost passed out the night I got over the palace wall when I told Banner to stay. Was
that magic? I thought he was just obedient.”
Eyes catching the amber light, Kavenlow picked up my cup. “He is, but a portion of that is because
he’s used to taking venom-induced direction from me. Animals become sensitive to it and respond better.
And your abilities  gain  strength  as  you  build  up  your  resistance  to  the  poison.  You  can  also  find  a
temporary boost by taking some, such as I did here, though that’s a good way to end up unconscious on
the floor and vulnerable. You might get dizzy when you try to do more than your skills have risen to, or
your muscles might spasm—just as if you had an overdose of venom. Your knees were shaking before I
darted you, yes?”
“Oh!” Excited, I turned to snatch a glance at Jeck’s horse. “Is that why my hands hum?”
His eyes widened. “Your hands…” He grabbed one, alternating his attention  between  my eyes  and
my palm, looking small in his. “Oh, Tess,” he said softly, frightening me. “I had  no idea.  They really…
How long have they been doing that?”
“Since Jeck tried to down me with about six darts. Why? Is it… wrong?”
His smile went proud. “No. It’s right. Maybe it’s because you were first darted so young, but it’s rare
to come back from the brink of death  with that  particular  ability.” He  swallowed,  his brow  furrowing.
“You say they hum? Does it hurt?”
“Not…  really.”  He  said  nothing,  pressing  his  lips  so  his  mustache  stuck  out.  He  looked  almost
worried. “Kavenlow?” I questioned. “Is that all right?”
He flashed me a  quick  smile that did nothing to  ease  my mind. “Yes,  yes  of course.  I’m trying to
figure out how I’m going to teach you something I can’t do, is all.”
I didn’t like seeing him feel inadequate, so I smiled—though it probably looked rather ill. “What else
can I do? Vanish in a whirl of wind like a punta in one of the stories?” I jested.
He chuckled.  “No.  As  a  novice  you  can  nudge  thoughts  into  quiet  animals  with  nothing  on  their

minds—like that black gelding there. I have a  greater  span.”  He  sifted his attention  to  the trees,  and  I
listened to the night, waiting for something to happen. My breath caught as a black shadow ghosted over
the camp and an owl dropped to my abandoned bedroll.
“Oh, isn’t he grand?” Kavenlow whispered, a delighted smile making him look younger as the horned
owl shifted on his thick talons, hissing at us. “When there is a good match between player and animal, it’s
almost as if you can speak to them.” Kavenlow reached out to the owl,  and  with three  heavy beats,  it
took to the air and vanished. We both sighed.
“People are too complex to manipulate like that,” he added, his voice still soft with wonder from the
owl. “But you can cloud a person’s memory and sight. And from that stems your wonderful ability to play
hide-and-seek.”
“I knew it!” I exclaimed, then covered my mouth, looking over the silent bumps of the people sleeping
around us. “You were teaching me how to get out of the palace, weren’t you?”
He nodded. “Magic or not, puntas aren’t any faster than any other animal; they just seem to appear
and disappear from nowhere because they can cause a person to not see  them until they want to.  The
venom gives you the same  ability. Right now the best  you can  hope  for is to  keep  from being seen  if
you’re trying to hide. I can walk the streets unnoticed if I work at it.”
I slumped on my log. “So all those times I won at hide-and-seek it was the venom?”
Kavenlow took a finger and raised my chin. “Tess, it was never a game to me. It was practice. Don’t
think of it any other way.”
It didn’t make  me feel any  better.  It  seemed  like  cheating  to  me.  “Have  you—ever  clouded  my
memory?” I asked, afraid of the answer.
“If you remember the gypsy, then you remember what I said.”
“You said you couldn’t. But she did,” I blurted.
“She’s stronger than me. Apparently, though, even her skills aren’t infallible. Some of that is your will,
but  most  is  because  of  the  venom  slowly  building  up  in  you  gives  you  some  protection  against
venom-induced  trickery.  That’s  why  she  used  wormwood  to  reinforce  her  attempt  to  cloud  your
memory. That you recalled so much tells me you’ve been sandbagging, my girl.” He patted my knee. “I
had no idea I had built up your resistance so high. It’s past time I start teaching you how to consciously
draw upon your talents and find out what you’re especially good at.” He hesitated. “Besides healing.”
It was almost a mutter, and I heard the concern he was trying to hide. “The gypsy,” I said, reluctantly.
“She asked if my dreams ever came true.”
Kavenlow’s  eyes  went worried  in the  flickering  light.  “Be  careful,  Tess.  Even  a  novice  can  have
prophetic  dreams,  especially when under  an overdose  of venom needed  to  build their resistance.  But
dreams can be manipulated by your own feelings, giving you false truths. The gypsy has so much venom
in her she can see the future even when awake. I don’t trust dreams, and neither should you.”
An uneasy feeling took me. “She forecasted for me. Before you came in,” I said softly.
Kavenlow stiffened. “What did she say? Did she say anything about war?”
I shook my head. Everything she had said had happened. I had just been interpreting it wrong. “She
said I would be traveling with a man who had dark hair.” I looked over the camp to Duncan. “The rest
was fluff and patter,” I said, not knowing if it was or not.
“Good,” he breathed. “It’s no guarantee we won’t find ourselves there, though.”
I nodded, my attention on the coals. My eyes rose  to  the sleeping princess.  The gypsy hadn’t  said
anything about her. What else had she left out?

“She really isn’t a bad sort, is she,” I said, gesturing to the sleeping woman with my eyes. “Just rough.
How is she ever going to learn the polish she needs to survive?”
There was a creak of leather as Kavenlow turned to me, seemingly surprised. “I was hoping you’d be
able  to  help  her  with  that.  She  didn’t  know  who  she  was  until  last  year,  and  I’m  afraid  she  is
very—ah—provincial in her reactions and expectations. I think the nuns realized who she was and let her
have her way in everything.”
I cringed, thinking of the political retaliation if her mouth ran amok with a  visiting dignitary as  it had
with me. “She has no idea how many disappointments a princess must swallow with a smile, does she?”
He shook his head. “She thinks being a princess means doing what she wants.”
“It’s the exact opposite.” I hesitated as my brow smoothed. I wasn’t the princess anymore. Perhaps
this was a good thing. “What is going to happen to me?” I asked, warming when my thoughts drifted to
Duncan and that kiss. “Now that I’m not the princess?”
Chuckling, he downed the last of his tea. “I wanted her to take  you as  her attendant  guard,  though
that might be difficult since you thrashed her.”
I was quite sure I didn’t fancy the idea of being a member of her court. It was insulting, and I would
probably be stuck behind walls sewing all day. God help me, I would go insane if I had  to  make  one
more useless doily. Kavenlow refilled my cup before doing the same with his. He set it in my hands, and
my fingers tingled at the new warmth. “Kavenlow,” I mused aloud. “Just how strong  can  you become?
Do you just keep dosing yourself to increase your strength?”
His head shook an emphatic no. “There are two reasons not to. One, you have to kill the punta to get
the  venom,  and  they  are  hard  to  find  and  devilishly  harder  to  subdue.  And  two,  players  that  push
themselves beyond a reasonable level tend to die quickly. Though you were born with a natural immunity
to the venom that most people  lack,  there  are  limits.  Oddly  enough,  it  takes  more  venom  to  kill  an
apprentice than a master, but an apprentice will pass out sooner, saving his life. A master  won’t,  giving
the impression that they’re  safe,  which leads  to  the dangerous  assumption that  they can  tolerate  more
than they can.”
“Meaning…” I prompted, not understanding.
“The more venom you’re able to tolerate before passing out— or the stronger you are,  rather—the
more careful you need to be about reaching your death  threshold.  An apprentice  may fall unconscious
after three darts, but it might take ten more to kill them. That’s ten darts that no player will waste upon
someone who is down. A master can stay active after as many as eight darts, but one more after he falls
unconscious might be enough to kill him or her.”
“With more power comes more risk and a lower threshold,” I murmured. My head rose in a sudden
alarm, and I searched Kavenlow’s face. Was he in danger?
“Look at you!” he exclaimed, teeth glinting in the firelight. “I’m nowhere near overdosing on venom.
I’m very careful to keep a  safe  balance  of strength and  safety.  And speaking  of that,  here.  You need
these more than I do.” He twisted to reach his pack  behind him. Silently he placed  several  palm-sized
darts in my hand. They were made of metal instead of bone, looking like wickedly long needles as they
glinted with a gray sheen of oil.
“I had them made almost ten years ago,” he said, his gaze on the fire. “These three are all I have left.
Be careful. They hold a great deal of venom and will kill a large man very quickly. They’re used to bring
down a player,” he finished, and my eyes widened in understanding.
“These are for Jeck,” I said. Lips pursed, I extended the darts to him on the flat of my palm. “I don’t
want to kill him. I just want him to leave me alone.”

The wrinkles about his eyes deepened as he curled  my fingers over  the darts.  “I’m sure  there  isn’t
enough there  to  kill him—unless he makes  a  practice  of dosing himself up to  temporarily increase  his
skills. Use them to knock him unconscious.”
Reassured, I obediently tucked the lethal darts in my topknot.
“Tess,” he said slowly, a new hesitancy to his voice, and I put my hands between my knees to try to
warm them. “There’s a price for this. And I wanted to tell you before it’s too late. The venom—it takes
away your ability to have children.”
Eyes wide, I stared at him, reading the truth behind it in his sorrowful gaze.  “No  children? Ever?” I
asked, hearing the smallness of my voice.
He looked pained. “It’s not too late. I think you have a few years yet before the venom asserts itself
so deeply  inside you that it would be  difficult to  carry  a  child  full-term.  It’s  one  of  the  reasons  why
players can’t rule. There would be no heirs.”
Turning away, I clenched my blanket to  me, colder  than the night warranted.  I rubbed  at  my thigh
where the dart had penetrated. Magic—real magic—or children. “None?” I asked.
“No.” His gaze was weary as he stared at the coals. “But it’s not a bad option to take a child from
the street as your own. They’re full of surprises—like you.” He cupped my chin and  made  me look  at
him. “Tess? I forced this beginning upon you, but it’s not too late.”
My gaze fell from him. I felt an unexpected tingle of tears. No children of my own? Probably not even
a husband, as I was sure anyone close to me would be a target for player-sent assassins, just as  I had
been.
“Most apprentices are given no choice,” he said, “but you’re a woman, Tess. The decision should be
yours.  There  aren’t  many women players,  but what you can  bring to  the playing  field—  compassion,
empathy, and  the ability to  compromise—are  desperately  needed.  You can’t  be  a  player  without  the
strength of the venom. If this is something you don’t want, I’ll find another. But, please. You could hold
the future of thousands of children in your choices. You would be a magnificent player.”
I said nothing, putting an elbow on my knees and dropping my forehead onto my stiff fingertips. No
children? Ever? Why was he asking me to choose? I had always known what to do when I had been a
princess; there never were any choices.
Kavenlow shifted his yellow-lined cloak about his knees, clearly uncomfortable at my distress.  “Get
some sleep,” he said gruffly. “As I said, you have time to decide. Years. I’ll wake you when it’s time for
you to stand watch.”
He took my cup from my fingers, replacing it with the bone dart he had stuck me with. Not looking at
him, I slowly tucked the spent dart away and rose. Edging around the sleeping princess, I numbly went to
my bedroll. An owl feather rested on it. I picked it up, gripping it as if it were a talisman. I lay down with
my back to Kavenlow and stared unseeing into the night.
A child of my body, or a lifetime manipulating vast forces and hidden agendas. A husband to
grow old with, or a kingdom. I recalled my delighted shock when Jeck’s horse bumped me, looking for
an apple that existed only in my thoughts. The owl’s feather was softer than silk as I brushed it against my
chin. My children taken from me before I had begun to think of them?
But there really was no choice to make. I knew my answer. If I wanted  a  husband,  I’d  find a  man
able to defend himself from assassins. If I wanted  a  child, I’d  take  one  who needed  me as  Kavenlow
had. To do otherwise would say he had been wrong, that he loved me less because I wasn’t of his body.
And to say that would be a lie.
“Kavenlow?” I whispered, knowing he could hear me, “I’ll stay your apprentice.”

Twenty-four
It was the sound of someone rustling in their pack, that woke me, and I knew we had made it through
the night without Jeck finding us. The birds were clamoring again, and faint through the twittering uproar
were Duncan and Thadd’s whispers. My eyes opened, and I stared at my odd view of matted leaves and
grass, dim with the scarcely risen sun. I was finally warm, so I didn’t move, hoping everyone would leave
me alone and perhaps make me breakfast.
Sighing, I closed my eyes. It felt good to be hungry. It felt good to be warm. It felt good  to  have a
purpose. I was a player, and not the princess—not anyone—could take that from me. This, I thought,
would be what I shape myself on, now that I’m not the princess.
My eye opened at a crackle of leaf litter. It was a mouse, silver and small, hardly big enough to be out
of its mother’s nest. Creeping forward, it pushed its way over and under the sticks and leaves looking for
food. A smile curled the comers of my mouth.
Steadying myself, I tried to put an image of a pile of seeds into the sweet-looking rodent’s thoughts.
The mouse hunted on, seeming unmoved by my attempt. My vision swam, and vertigo took me as I tried
to use my skills past what my venom levels would allow. Ignoring it, I tried again, squinting as I tried to
imagine a link between my thoughts and the mouse.
From my stomach came a pang of want so strong and fast,  I almost bent  double.  I clutched  at  my
middle, breath catching when I realized it wasn’t my hunger but the mouse’s! Thrilled, I shuddered as the
eerie feeling of emotions-not-mine trickled through me. It was fascinating, and not at all comfortable.
Slowly I found the emotions that were mine and focused on them. The pained hurt in my belly grew
less, making it easier  to  sense  the mouse.  He  was  hungry  and  cold,  confused  by  the  absence  of  his
littermates. More confident, I again tried to put a thought into his head, overpowering his hunger with the
idea that over here, inches from me, was a pile of seed.
The background noise of the birds disappeared, the scent of earth grew strong. My pulse pounded as
the mouse rose up onto two feet and tested the air with his shifting whiskers. He  took  a  humping step,
then paused.  I forced  my excitement down,  imagining  the  pile  topped  with  a  strawberry.  My  mouth
watered with the memory of its tart taste.
The tiny mouse was clearly not bid enough to have seen a strawberry before, but it hastened forward,
scrambling carelessly toward the nonexistent seed. It halted when it got to the point I had  imagined the
food, sitting up and  twitching its nose.  His confusion poured  through me, making the space  I had  put
between our emotions turn blurry. Pity went through me, and I was sorry I had tricked it.
“A mouse!” shrieked the princess, sending the rodent into a crouch. “Thadd! Get it!”
I sat up. Thadd was standing with his long shirt untucked, wide-eyed and alarmed as he tried to spot
the small shadow the princess was pointing at. I sent a thought of safety from birds and nasty princesses
under my cupped hand. The mouse darted under the dome my palm made, shocking and delighting me. I
could feel him, warm and shivering.
“It’s in your blankets!” she wailed, twisting her skirt up to show her tiny ankles. God save me, they
looked so thin they might break. How could she walk about on them without falling down?
“I know,”  I said,  sending soothing thoughts as  I cupped  my hands  to  pick  him up from the damp
ground. “Would you stop shrieking? You’re scaring him.”
“But it’s a mouse!” she cried, then hesitated when she realized everyone was staring at her. Duncan
chuckled. Going red, she spun and stalked into the scrub,  balancing perfectly  on her tiny, thin, perfect

little ankles wrapped in homespun wool.
“Princess,” Kavenlow called. “Take someone with you. We stay in pairs from now on.”
“But I need to—” she stammered, her eyes going from Thadd to me. “Come on, Thadd,”  she  said,
flushing even more. “You’ll just have to look the other way.”
I made an ugly face at her back and cuddled the mouse close. What did I care if little princess perfect
ankles would rather have Thadd  accompany  her for her morning ritual than me, another  woman? The
mouse nibbled on the flat of my hand, and I cracked my fingers.
Kavenlow shook the leaves from the princess’s thick bedroll and folded it. He looked fully rested and
tidy, though he had slept less than anyone. “A mouse?” he questioned dryly.
“I want to keep him,” I said, and he sighed as if gathering strength.  “It’s  not as  if he’s  going to  eat
much,” I protested.
“Let it go,  Tess,”  he said.  Showing me his back,  he went  to  stack  the  princess’s  blankets  in  the
wagon, but my bad  humor eased  as  he muttered,  “I suppose  I ought  to  be  glad  the  first  animal  she
charmed wasn’t a moose.”
I opened my hands, and a whiskered nose poked out, then withdrew. Duncan’s shadow fell over me,
and I squinted up. “Let me see?” he asked.
I smiled, and taking that as an invitation, he dropped down beside me on my blankets. The memory
of our kiss shocked through me, and I searched his face with a feeling of guilt. I flicked my attention to
Kavenlow, seeing his brow furrowed. Duncan took  my cupped  hands  in his, and  jolted,  I opened  my
palms. The mouse sat unmoving for a moment, then washed his whiskers.
“He’s a sweet little thing, isn’t he?” Duncan said,  and  I nodded,  tense  as  I noticed  how warm his
hands were under my fingers. My breath caught, and Duncan’s  eyes  met mine, drawn  by the sound.  I
froze at the intentness of his gaze. When, then? his eyes seemed to ask.
“Don’t ask me that,” I whispered, closing my hands to hide the mouse.
Eyebrows high, he said nothing. His hands cupping mine were very still, and I couldn’t find the will to
pull away. My thoughts spun back to his touch, rubbing my shoulder in time with the waves’ motion, and
then that kiss  pulling from me a  want I’d  never  let myself feel before.  My heartbeat  quickened.  How
could I have been so foolish? Why did I hesitate now? Why didn’t I pull my hands away? Chu pits, I’m
not the princess anymore. I can do what I want.
Kavenlow cleared his throat, and my hands slipped from Duncan’s. Unable to bring my eyes to meet
his, I opened my hand and watched the mouse dart into the leaves. Duncan rose, and I refused to look as
he stretched. How had my life gotten so muddled? No one told me being able to make your own choices
would be so… so confusing.
I slowly stood.  My back  was  sore,  and  my eye  where  the princess  had  hit me was  tender  to  the
touch. “Pairs, Kavenlow?” I asked. I had my own morning ritual to attend  to,  and  I could  do  it alone,
thank you very much.
“Even you, Tess,” he said. I looked  at  Duncan,  then sent  my eyes  pleading to  Kavenlow.  His jaw
grew tense, and his brow furrowed. “Be quick,” he added, and my shoulders eased.
I touched my topknot, then my whip on my belt, then finally one of the knives that I had taken from
Jeck at the small of my back. Reassured, I gathered my skirts and crossed the path to find some privacy.
My thoughts were a slurry of emotion, giving my steps only half my attention. Duncan was far away
and distant from the safe, tidy, fumbling nobles with cold lips and light hands that I had spent time with.
He smelled. He was prickly. He shouted at me and told me I was wrong.

And he pulled from me feelings I thought I had control over with no more than a look. I didn’t know
what I was feeling. It wasn’t love. I wasn’t that foolish. Duncan was a cheat—not that it mattered. Did it?
Almost under my feet, a duck exploded into the air. I gasped and reached for my topknot, then burst
into laughter as all thoughts of Duncan were driven away. “Oh, what luck!” I said as I spotted the nest at
my feet. Crouching, I felt the warmth of the eggs, wondering how long she had been  sitting. It  couldn’t
have been long; it was early spring. Thinking I’d found a capital-fine breakfast, I piled the eggs into the
fold I made of my top skirt, leaving five for the hen.
“Eggs!” I cried  triumphantly as  I crossed  the trail again and  entered  the camp.  “I found a  nest  of
eggs!”
The princess had returned with Thadd and had already claimed my usual spot before the fire. “Let me
see?” she asked, somehow making it both  mocking and  demanding. My good  mood  faltered,  and  my
mood soured. I felt like a beggar beside her. She had been sleeping on dirt same as me. How could she
look so clean after sleeping on dirt?
Sore eye pounding from my tension, I knelt beside her, intentionally putting myself too close to make
her move away. She didn’t, but a new color rose in her cheeks as she watched me carefully unload the
eggs on my far side. With a hurried quickness, she reached across me for one. “They’re fine,” she said as
she gave it a tap with her fingernail. “The hen had just started to sit.”
I frowned in disbelief. “How can you tell?”
She ran a quick gaze over me, making me feel even more dirty. “By the way the weight shifts inside
the shell,” she said, her scorn thinly veiled. “I grew up on Bird Island. I’d find nests all the time. There’s
nothing worse than cracking an egg to find a nestling. Learning what a good egg feels like is easy.”
I watched, unbelieving, as she took the eggs one by one and set them on her other side. “What are
you doing?” I asked, affronted.
“I’ll cook them with some of that watercress I saw by the river. Thadd? Would you fetch me some?”
“Yes, Contessa.” The short bear of a man got to his feet and gestured for Duncan.
“I can cook them,” I said indignantly.
Duncan jerked to a stop,  halfway out of camp  with Thadd.  “No,  you don’t!”  he cried.  “Princess?
Don’t let her touch those eggs. You cook them. I’ve had Tess’s cooking. Made  me sicker  than a  dog
eating five-day-old carrion.”
Appalled, I looked at  Kavenlow,  and  he shrugged.  Apparently  he had  been  successful in clouding
Duncan’s memory of the true reason he had fallen into convulsions. But why did my cooking have to be
the scapegoat? I turned back to find the princess humming, her motions vindictive as  she  rubbed  a  flat
rock clean with the water I had been planning on using for my tea.
“Kavenlow?” I complained as I rose and strode to him. “I want to cook the eggs. I found them.”
He folded up my blanket and set it beside the princess’s in the wagon. “Do you know how to cook
eggs?”
“It can’t be that hard,” I said. “I eat eggs.”
He flicked his gaze to the sickening picture of domestic bliss the princess was making beside the fire.
“Let her do it,” he said. “She seems to know what she is doing.”
I turned with a huff and went to brush the horses. I’d let the princess cook the fool eggs. I was willing
to wager she’d burn them—or do whatever you do to eggs to ruin them. What would she know  about
cooking? She had been raised in a nunnery.

Twenty-five
The heavy smell of eggs rose thick as I sat under the wagon and sulked. The princess can  cook, I
thought bitterly as I choked down the last fluffy, mouthwatering piece of egg. Not only could she cook,
but she could cook well, having fashioned a pan from a flat rock and plates from the tightly woven reeds
she had  sent  Thadd  to  gather  while  the  cattail  roots  Duncan  had  dug  softened.  “The  next  thing  you
know,” I grumbled, “she’ll make us forks from sticks and leaves.”
Kavenlow made a choking cough, and I glanced up. He was tending the horses, and I hadn’t known
he was close enough to, hear. My attention went back to princess perfect ankles. Duncan was sitting at
her elbow, his brown eyes bright and eager as he entertained her with a bit of card play. While she had
been  cooking,  he  and  Thadd  had  gone  to  the  river,  both  coming  back  refreshed  and  suspiciously
clean-shaven.
The princess was duly appreciative of Duncan’s sleight of hand. Thadd, too, seemed impressed. He
had quietly tended to the princess all morning, treating her as if she might break. The two men had hardly
left her side since she cracked the first egg, and it sickened  me. Kavenlow  didn’t seem  to  notice  them
fawning over her, apparently not caring that Jeck might find us at any moment. The sun was well up, and
no one showed the slightest concern. It was if we were out for an afternoon of hawking, not running for
our lives.
The princess laughed, and I grimaced at the pleasant sound. I could take no more. Standing, I stalked
out of camp, ripping my skirt as I jerked it free from a briar.
“Tess?” Duncan called. “Where are you going?”
“To the river,” I said, never slowing.
“Pairs!” Kavenlow called. “We stay in pairs!”
Ignoring him, I stormed  across  the path  and  into the woods.  I bullied my way  through  the  brush,
coming to an abrupt halt at the water’s edge with my arms about myself.
It was quiet, since the morning birds had finally ceased their noise. The sound of the current  against
the rocks was soothing. Morning air, cold and biting, cooled me. My shoulders eased. I wished I was on
the Sandpiper. I would’ve enjoyed seeing Lovrege’s hillsides wreathed in fog.
Finding peace in being alone,  I took  off my boots  and  gathered  my skirts.  I waded  into the river,
shocked at how cold it was before remembering it was running with snowmelt. The rocks were slippery,
shifting under  my toes  without  warning.  I  looked  toward  the  unseen  camp  and  wondered  if  I  might
chance a bath— seeing as we weren’t going anywhere soon. An urgent need to be clean had filled me.
There wasn’t a smudge on the princess. I didn’t understand it. She was the one who had been pounded
into the dirt, and I was the one who was filthy.
Brow furrowed, I decided I’d take a bath even if they were  packed  and  ready  to  go when I went
back for my clean dress. Feeling a stir of self-worth, I waded to the bank.
There was a rustle in the brush and my head snapped up. My skirts fell as I reached for my dart tube.
I had it to my lips when the bushes parted to show the top of the princess’s fair head. Her attention was
on the  ground.  One  dart,  I  thought  bitterly.  It  wouldn’t  kill  her,  but  rolling  about  on  the  ground  in
convulsions would get her dirty. I could say it was an accident.
She looked up. Fear flickered in her blue eyes. They looked like Mother’s.
Shame filled me, and I tucked the tube away. “Sorry. I didn’t know it was you,” I lied. I pulled my
dripping skirts from the water, then let them fall in disgust. Now I was dirty and wet. I looked to the sky

and the clouds that ought to be threatening. Rain would top this off nicely.
“It was my fault,” she said as she stepped to the bank. “I should have let you know  I was  coming.
The chancellor says no one should be alone.”
My first caustic retort died at her hesitant admission of blame, and I said nothing as  she  picked  her
way to the water, mincing in her little black boots. Her heart-shaped face and transparent skin made me
feel like a crass bumpkin. I wanted to tell her I never dressed like this, that I normally wore  silk and  a
circlet, that I usually had clean hands and face, that I could do sums and read—that I wasn’t the gutter
trash that she thought I was.
My skirt dragged in the current as I lurched to  dry  ground.  Ignoring her,  I picked  up my boots  to
return to camp barefoot. I was as clean as I was going to get. Why wasn’t it raining?
“Would you—like to use my soap?” she said, and I froze.
I hadn’t any soap. I had used the last of mine on the Sandpiper. I met her eyes. “Yes,” I said warily,
wondering why she was being nice. “Yes, I would. Thank you.”
Unfolding a cloth, she revealed a thick cut of brown soap, its edges smoothed by use. She set it on
the bank and stepped away. I eyed her suspiciously as  I took  it. Knotting my wet  skirts  up,  I waded
back out to wash my face. I set the soap on a rock as I scrubbed, jerking in hurt when I touched my eye.
The soap smelled of mint, and I wondered if the nuns had given it to her or if little princess pretty ankles
had made it herself.
Though unable to watch her with lather threatening my eyes, I was painfully aware of her as she took
off her boots  and  stockings  to  step-hop  out over  the river across  a  path  of dry  rocks.  Sitting on  the
largest, she dipped her feet in. The silence grew.
The water dripped from me, and the current pulled the ripples away. My face tightened from the cold
as I snuck a glance at her. I had escaped guards and a rival player, crossed the bay with money I earned,
and made  the mistake  of kissing a  cheat  and  learning what a  real  kiss  could  do  to  a  person.  I  could
pretend to be nice to her.
I lurched closer, holding the soap like an offering. Her narrow chin looked tense as I set it beside her
and backed  away.  “Thank you,” I said,  trying to  keep  it unsullen. She  gave me a  nervous  smile  and
started to wash her feet. They were tiny, and turning blue with cold.
I shifted to find better footing. My toes were going numb. “I’m sorry for—uh—slapping you,” I said,
thinking I should exert myself lest I end up making doilies the rest of my life.
“It wasn’t all your fault.” She didn’t look  up,  and  I wasn’t  sure  how sincere  she  was.  “I shouldn’t
have called you a beggar, and I’m—” Her expression went anxious, looking almost frightened. “I’m sorry
for saying they didn’t love you,” she  blurted.  “It was  cruel and  untrue. But I…” She  looked  into  the
woods, her blue eyes  going wide.  My lips parted  in surprise  as  she  pulled her knees  to  her chin and
wrapped her arms about her legs. Her eyes went dark and watery, and I realized the young woman was
on the verge of tears.
“I was jealous,” she whispered, “and afraid. I wanted  to  hurt you.  You had  everything. You knew
everything. You came into camp looking so strong; I got frightened. I don’t know how to be a princess.
And when I saw you standing there, I realized I can’t do it!”
I stood, shocked by her admission. She wiped her eyes, the pale  skin around  them flashing into an
ugly red. Sniffing, she managed  a  weak-sounding  bark  of laughter. “I was  going to  marry Thadd,  you
know. And have children with him, and live in the house his grandfather built for his grandmother, and die
there happy. And then last year, a man riding a  beautiful horse  and  wearing the finest clothes  I’d  ever
seen comes to my room and tells me I am a princess? That I have to  leave my mountains and  go to  a
city? That a prophesy said I might cause of a war if I didn’t! Do you know what that’s like? To have the

fate of the world take your life away from you?”
She wiped her eyes on her sleeve in a very unprincess-like manner, and my heart went out to her. My
throat closed in sympathy. I knew. I knew all too well.
“And then you walked into camp,” she said, her voice bitter with self-incrimination as she looked at
the moisture on her sleeve. “I’d never seen anyone like you.” She met my eyes, and I saw the misery in
them. “How am I supposed to be like you? You’re so tall and graceful. Even when you had dirt on your
face and had torn your dress, you looked  like a  princess,  proud  and  calm. And you spoke  so  well. I
could tell you were angry, that I was hurting you, but you stayed civil as long as you could. I hated that
you knew everything that I didn’t. I had to prove I was better than you, and when I tried, I only proved
how low and common I was.” Her gaze went across the river and into the woods. “I can’t do this.”
“Yes, you can,” I said, shocked to hear the words come out of me.
She sniffed, looking up. “Chancellor Kavenlow said you could help me.” Fear flickered over  her as
she met my eyes. “Will you? Please? I can’t ask anyone else. I don’t know  what to  do.  I don’t  know
how to act. I don’t know anything, and I’m scared someone will find out!”
My eyes went to the water swirling about my shins, shamed for how I had treated her. Bringing my
head up, I gave her a weak, comrade-in-arms smile. Her pinched face melted into relief as I nodded and
sloshed to the rock beside her. Silently I sat down and arranged myself, finding the stone only marginally
more bearable on my bare feet than the cold water. I looked at my toes, then shifted my dress to cover
them, thinking they looked ugly.
“Do you want our name?” she stammered in a rush. “We can’t both be Contessa. And since no one
but you has the right to call me by my first name, you may as well have it…”
I looked past her fear and worry to the simple woman beneath. The tips of her fair hair had slipped
into the water to make her look guileless. She utterly lacked the polish and sophistication of the people I
grew up with, her emotions—good and bad—shining like stars in winter. If I didn’t help her, she would
be  eaten  alive.  “You  can  be  Contessa,”  I  said.  “Unless  I’m  in  trouble,  everyone  calls  me  Tess
or—um—Princess.” My gaze dropped.
She shifted uncomfortably. “What were they like? Our parents?” she asked hesitantly.
Our parents? I mused. I really didn’t want to talk about it, but I knew I’d be asking the same thing.
“Father was nice,” I said, my eyes on the opposite shore. “He was losing his hair, but it used to be black.
Blacker than Kavenlow’s. He was loud in the morning, deliberately shouting for everything, waking me
and anyone else  sleeping beyond  the sunrise.” I was  surprised  to  find  a  faint  smile  coming  over  me.
“Mother was  very  stern,”  I  continued.  “But  if  she  said  no,  I  could  usually  get  what  I  wanted  from
Father… eventually.”
It felt odd, referring to them like that: Mother, not my mother;
Father, not the king. “She taught me how to sew,” I said, warming to the task. “She would never miss
our appointments where we would talk as we sewed or collected flower seeds for next year.”
“Appointments?” The princess looked shocked. Perhaps even appalled.
I shifted my shoulders.  “She was  very busy.  Both of them were.  But  I  never  felt  as  if  I  couldn’t
interrupt them if it was important.”
Contessa grimaced as she realized the tips of her hair were  wet.  Taking them in hand,  she  tried  to
pinch the water out. “Appointments,” she said, her eyes on her pale fingers.
“Have you known Thadd long?” I asked, thinking it was my turn.
The anxious expression she wore eased, and it was with a flash of worry that I recognized the same

look my father had  for my mother.  She  loved  him. It  would make  things difficult, but by no accounts
insurmountable with discretion, something I imagined they both utterly lacked. “I grew up with him,” she
said softly.
My eyes widened. “In the convent?”
The princess flashed me a  smile to  make  her a  vision of my mother.  No,  our  mother. “His father
sculpted the saints and angels,” she said. “When his father was on the grounds we played together.”
“I grew up with a girl named Heather.” I pulled a leaf from an overhanging branch  and  shredded  it.
The pieces fell to  the current  and  scattered.  “You’ll like her.  She  can  make  daisy chains and  steal  an
entire pie from the kitchen without getting caught.” I sent a  silent prayer  that  she  be  all right. “And the
guards are nice,” I said, sending a second prayer for them.
Her attention jerked up from the leaf I had thrown in. “Guards?”
I smiled to ease her thoughts. She was wary enough of the palace. The least I could do would be to
try to make it less forbidding. “Yes. They have to do everything you say,  you know.  Once,  I had  one
stand below my window and catch me when I jumped out.”
“No!” she cried, clearly shocked.
I bobbed my head, grinning. “Three stories down. I broke his arm.  It  was  the autumn star  shower,
and I wanted to get past the smoke from the city to see it. My—our parents wouldn’t allow it, even when
I sulked for two days. Kavenlow was furious. He wouldn’t take me out to buy anything for two weeks. It
was terrible.”
The princess silently took that in. “Is the city large?” she blurted. “I’ve seen Brenton.”
I tore another leaf and tossed it into the current, realizing how sheltered a life she had led. “It’s ever
so much larger than Brenton. And it doesn’t smell like fish.” I wrinkled my nose.
“How much bigger?” she asked, looking frightened but anxious to not show it.
“Lots,” I said, starting to enjoy myself. “You could get lost in the streets there are so many, but you’ll
never be  alone,  so  don’t  worry.  Some  of the buildings have  three  stories.  There  are  several  liveries,
bunches of inns, and two markets, one by the docks and the other up in the high streets. We have twelve
docks  in the harbor.  One  is reserved  for the palace.  I’ve  been  down  there  with  Kavenlow.  And  the
markets are open until sundown every day but Lastday. On festivals, they stay open all night.”
She was silent, her eyes on the bubbles trailing from her rock. “I went to a festival once,” she finally
said. “I’d dearly love to know how to dance.”
I turned in surprise. “You don’t know how?”
“The nuns were very reserved.”
And probably boring, I thought. “Oh. Well, Kavenlow can show you. He taught me.”
Much to my surprise, she shook her head. “No,” she said, and when I didn’t say anything, she added,
“What if he laughed at me?”
I felt a pang of sympathy. “I can show you,” I offered, not knowing why I did.
Spots of color appeared on her cheeks. She was the image of our mother, and grief stabbed into me.
I couldn’t help but feel my dark skin and narrow hips were wrong compared to her.  I pushed  the ugly
thought away.
“You’ll teach me?” she asked, clearly relieved.
I nodded, refusing to feel sorry for myself that she looked like Mother and I didn’t. “I can teach you a
little, and when you think you know enough, Kavenlow can teach you the rest. He’s better than I am.”

She smiled, and I found I didn’t mind that she looked like an angel. “All right,” she said, eyes eager.
“And I can teach you a crochet pattern Thadd’s grandmother taught me. It’s a secret.”
I froze, cringing inside. “Oh… how wonderful,” I lied.
A twig snapped behind us, and I twisted, my dart tube to my lips. My heart pounded hard enough to
make my head hurt. But it was Thadd, and my held breath exploded from me in a  relieved rush.  “Will
you people stop creeping up on me!” I shouted, trying to burn away the flush of angst.  “One  of you is
going to end up convulsing on the ground!”
Thadd’s eyes narrowed suspiciously. His broad shoulders hunched.  “Contessa?”  he said  in a  slow,
country drawl. “You should come back to the fire.”
Head bobbing, she dried her feet with her white underskirt.
“You don’t have to do what he says, you know,”  I said,  surprised  to  find I didn’t like him lording
over her.
She smiled lopsidedly to make her look simple. “I know.” My eyes widened as she leaned across the
narrow band of water between us and gave me a hug. “Thank you,” she  whispered.  “I don’t  think it’s
going to be as bad as I had feared.”
My mouth hung open as she stood and hopped from rock to rock to  the shore.  Thadd  extended  a
hand to help her onto the bank. He gave me a jealous look as she leaned comfortably against him to slip
on her stockings and boots. I didn’t know what to think. I had been ready to hate her from this lifetime
and into the next, and here I was starting to like her.
“Are you coming, Tess?” she asked as she straightened. Thadd stood beside her, his squat bulk just
besting her petite height. “We can wait if you aren’t done with your wash.”
Her question caught me off guard. I was safe enough, but if I didn’t go back, Kavenlow would come
looking for me with a lecture. “No. I’m coming.” I stood and gathered my wet skirt up, lurching across
the rocks to shore. Putting my back against a tree, I brushed the dirt off my feet and struggled to put my
boots on without stockings.
Thadd  took  Contessa’s  elbow  and  started  to  lead  her away  before  I had  finished. “Why are  you
being nice to her?” he said in a too-loud whisper. “She tried to pull out your hair.”
I flushed, my chagrin not abating even when the princess said, “I deserved it after what I said. And I
like her. Leave her alone.”
His shoulders tensed, and he held a branch out of her way.
“You can’t trust  her,”  he said,  his low voice carrying better  than he knew.  “She could  have killed
you.”
“Thadd,” she said, the new sharpness of her voice bringing my head up. “She’s my sister. She’s all I
have left of my kin. And I don’t want to talk about it!”
I blinked,  taken  aback  at  how quickly she  had  gone  from  pliant  friend  to  angry  fishwife  in  three
heartbeats.  Giving  him  an  irate  look,  Contessa  tugged  from  his  grasp  and  stormed  away.  A  cry  of
frustration  slipped  from  her  when  she  caught  her  skirt  on  a  stick.  Thadd  scowled  at  me  as  if  their
argument was my fault, then hastened to catch up. “Contessa…” he pleaded.  “Please.  I didn’t mean it
like that.”
I smoothed my brow  and  started  after  them, wondering if turning Contessa  into a  proper  princess
might be harder than I thought. Their short exchange had the sound of an old pattern.
“Thadd?” I heard the princess say loudly from up ahead.  It  sounded  as  if she  had  gotten  over  her
temper already. “Thadd!” she shrieked.

My head came up. There was a blur of a brown horse running through the woods. A black-cloaked
rider was on it. Jeck! “Contessa!” I shouted, panicking. “Get down!”
She didn’t. Thadd was weaving on his feet. He had been darted.
Jeck thundered down upon them. Jolted into motion, I ran.
Jeck  picked  the princess  up and  flung her shrieking  over  his  horse’s  shoulders.  Thadd  fell  as  his
support  was  ripped  away.  I  stumbled  onto  the  path,  then  flung  myself  back  into  the  scrub  as  Jeck
wheeled the animal into a two-legged turn right before me. He gave me a wild grin as his horse screamed.
Tuck answered.
I scrambled  for my dart  pipe.  Heart  pounding, I aimed for the horse.  Either I missed or  one  dart
wasn’t enough to  affect the heavy animal. His gray cloak  furling, Jeck  put his  heels  to  his  horse  and
bolted down the path in a wild cadence of hooves.
I stared across the open space at Kavenlow. For a heartbeat, our eyes locked.
Kavenlow  lunged for Pitch.  “Watch  them,  Tess!”  he  exclaimed  as  he  swung  onto  the  horse  and
shouted Pitch into a wild run. The thumping rhythm of hoofbeats faded to nothing.
My astonished gaze fell on Duncan. He was sitting dumbfounded by me fire, not having had time to
even rise to his feet.
“Angel’s Spit!” he swore, throwing a pot of water across the camp to slam clanking into the wagon
and send Tuck shying. “I’ve lost another princess. The same way as the first!”
Thadd was clenched into a ball, still conscious under Jeck’s weaker darts. I crawled to him and felt
his pulse. It was strong and steady. His eyes were closed, and his face was lined in agony. “Oh God. No,
no, no,” he moaned. “I lost her. I’m going to die. She’ll be all alone.”
“You aren’t  going to  die,”  I  said  harshly,  remembering  his  mistrustful  words.  “And  we’ll  get  her
back.” I turned to Duncan. “Help me get him in the wagon.” I pulled at Thadd. “Get up!” I said, trying to
drag him. “It will wear off. Get up, you lout! If you love her, get up!” Where is the rain? It ought to be
raining.
Thadd lurched to his knees, doubled over in pain. Duncan took his other arm, and together we lifted
the short but hard-muscled man into a staggering walk.
“Wagon!” I gasped, struggling to keep him from falling on me.
“Chu, Tess,” Duncan muttered. “You might be nicer. Those darts hurt.”
“I know,” I said belligerently, surprised that Kavenlow’s blurring of Duncan’s thoughts hadn’t taken.
But my anger slipped into a grudging empathy as  I helped  Duncan move Thadd  to  the wagon.  Jeck’s
darts held half the venom I used. Goat Boy probably wouldn’t even pass out.
Thadd collapsed heavily into the wagon’s bed beside the long box. “Harness the horse,” I said tersely
as Thadd groaned, his thick shoulders hunched and trembling.
Duncan jumped from the wagon. I listened with half my attention as he coddled  the frightened draft
animal into position. Jeck’s old horse nickered in recognition, and I spun.
I loosed a dart, my hand covering my mouth when I hit Kavenlow. “Be careful with those,” he said in
annoyance, plucking the bone needle from his shoulder and frowning.
“Kavenlow, I’m sorry!” I cried, embarrassed.
Scowling, he nudged Pitch closer and handed me my dart back. He glanced at Thadd. “Is he going to
be all right?”
I  nodded,  then  scooted  across  the  hay-strewn  wagon  and  back  to  the  ground.  I  wildly  threw

everything that wasn’t packed in beside Thadd. It’s my fault. I should have been  with  her.  I should
have been closer.
Kavenlow dismounted and tied Pitch to the back of the wagon. He levered himself up on the bench
and slapped the reins. I joined him, gripping the bench  as  we  rattled  and  bounced  back  onto  the trail.
Duncan mounted Tuck  and  paced  in front of us down  the path.  The flighty gray arched  his neck  and
pranced as if on parade.
“He must have been watching us for hours,” Kavenlow said tersely. “Perhaps as early as last night. I
thought we’d have more time.”
My  stomach  clenched,  and  I  felt  ill.  “It’s  my  fault.  I  should  have  walked  her  back  to  camp,”  I
whispered, and Kavenlow gave me a grunt and a sideways look.
“Your fault? No.”  I said  nothing, and  Kavenlow’s  frown deepened.  “Leave  it be,  Tess,”  he  said.
“Jeck made a move. Now we counter it. We’re going to the palace; he’s going to the palace. It doesn’t
matter whose company she arrives in. Garrett won’t harm her.”
“He might marry her,” I said, realizing I had worsened the tear in my top skirt. I glanced behind me at
Thadd. His eyes were unfocused, but he seemed to be gripped more by remorse man pain.
“Not until he can prove to the people that she is the real princess,” Kavenlow  said.  “He can’t  pass
her off as you. The people know you, especially the merchants.” He made a short, mirthless laugh. “This
is the middle game, Tess, not the end. It’s not over.”
His voice held an eager, intent tone, and I watched him chew his lower  lip as  we  jostled  down  the
path at too fast a gait. A familiar light was in his eyes. It was the same I had seen when we stayed up late
to finish a  game of thieves and  kings. Though  worried,  a  tension  that  had  been  building  in  me  since
yesterday began to unravel into a steady anticipation.
Jeck had taken Contessa, but that didn’t mean we would let him keep her.

Twenty-six
Kavenlow  pulled the draft  horse  to  a  stop  where  the trail branched.  I leaned  past  him  to  see  the
hoofprints pressed deep in the soft earth. From atop  Tuck,  Duncan came  to  a  halt. I looked  from the
tracks to Kavenlow. “He went straight,” I said. “He’s still carrying her.”
A  frown  creased  Kavenlow’s  forehead,  and  he  ran  a  hand  across  his  trim,  graying  beard.  “If  I
remember, there’s a river ahead. I’d be willing to wager the crossing is too difficult for a wagon the way
Captain Jeck took. That’s why the two paths. See?” He pointed straight ahead. “It tapers down to little
more than a horse path that way. I think we should go left, but I don’t want to diverge from Captain Jeck
unless we have to.”
I glanced  behind me to  Thadd  sitting miserably in the wagon’s  bed  beside  the  long  box.  He  had
quickly recovered, his squat bulk throwing off Jeck’s weaker venom faster than I would have imagined
possible.  But  he  had  yet  to  banish  his  depression.  I  felt  bad,  as  nothing  was  his  fault.  Duncan  had
repeatedly told him so, but Thadd might not believe it until Contessa said the same. Even then,  I didn’t
think he would.
“Duncan,” Kavenlow continued. “Go see if the water is too high for a wagon crossing.”
“Let’s leave the wagon,” I complained. “We’ve enough horses to follow on horseback.”
It was the third time today I had suggested it, and Kavenlow grimaced. “Duncan?” he prompted. The
cheat grinned at my impatience from under his grimy hat.  Pulling Tuck’s  head  up,  he gave his flanks a
smart kick. The flighty horse bolted down the thin trail. I would have liked to follow him. The slow pace
the wagon had reduced us to had me almost frantic.
We had been steadily falling behind Jeck. Kavenlow wouldn’t leave the wagon and  its heavy load.
Thadd’s statue couldn’t be that good. He wasn’t much older than I was.
The draft horse’s ears pricked, and I wasn’t surprised when Duncan and Tuck slid back around the
corner faster than they had left. “He’s at the river!” he said as he reined up. “Captain Jeck is on the other
side sitting on his horse waiting for us. I think he wants to talk.”
My heart jumped into my throat. Jeck was waiting.
Thadd lurched upright in a clatter of noise. “Contessa! Did you see her?” he exclaimed.
Duncan shook his head, and a severe determination came over Thadd’s square face. Bare feet sliding
in the  bed  of  the  wagon,  he  pushed  a  spot  for  himself  between  Kavenlow  and  me  on  the  bench.
Snatching the reins from Kavenlow, he clicked at the horse. The sedate animal flicked an ear and rocked
into motion.
“This is what I was  waiting for,” Kavenlow  said,  peering at  me from around  Thadd  as  we  rattled
forward. “It’s a game, Tess. One where the pieces don’t always do what you want.”
I grasped the bench as the pace grew fast. “He has Contessa. What else does he need?”
The river wasn’t far ahead, and Thadd kept us to a fast clip. The edges of the wagon began scraping
the encroaching branches with an alarming amount of noise. I wondered how we were going to get back
to the main trail if we couldn’t cross here. Thadd’s pace was substantially faster than Kavenlow’s, and I
started to feel queasy as we rocked and lurched along.
I  heard  the  river  before  seeing  it.  My  first  glimpse  of  it  did  nothing  to  instill  any  confidence.  It
stretched before us, a rumbling icy tumble of water  running high with snowmelt. It  would be  foolish to
cross here if there was an easier way upstream.

My gaze roved the far bank for Jeck. I pulled my cloak tighter about my shoulders as I found him at a
small rise in the trail atop a brown horse. He must have gotten it at Saltwood. He sat tall, unmoving but
for the wind shifting his cape. Like a mysterious figure from a story, he tipped his hat and waited.
Contessa wasn’t with him. I was willing to wager she was tied to a tree out of shouting distance, her
hair down and her boots and stockings off for whatever reason. I didn’t think Jeck would hurt her, but if
he had, I would see he got twice what she received.
Frowning, I wondered where my loyalty had come from, finding it odd she should have earned it so
quickly with her offer to share a sliver of soap and her honest plea for help.
Kavenlow took the reins out of Thadd’s hands and pulled the horse to a stop before the man could
drive the wagon directly into the river. Immediately I swung to the ground and reached for Jeck’s horse
tied to the back of the wagon.
“You’re not going,” Duncan said as he wedged Tuck between the black horse and me.
“The devil I’m not!” Shoving Tuck  out of my way,  I glared  up at  Kavenlow  still  on  the  wagon’s
bench. “And don’t give me any chu pit of an excuse  like I have to  stay  behind and  guard  the wagon.
Someone has to watch your back.”
Kavenlow  took  his eyes  from across  the  river.  He  looked  grim  and  uncertain.  “I’m  going  alone.
Duncan? Off your horse.”
“What?” the cheat exclaimed.
“I need a horse. Yours is the only one ready to ride.”
He shook his head, slow and controlled. “I’m coming with you. Tess is right. You can’t go alone.”
My shoulders tensed. “I’m the one going. And neither of you can stop me!”
Kavenlow’s face darkened, and he gathered his breath to protest. I raised my chin, and he frowned.
“All right,” he said. “But I want your promise you’ll do everything I tell you.”
“Don’t I always?” I countered, wanting to keep my options open.
He hesitated, knowing I hadn’t said yes.
“I should go, not her,” Duncan said as he tried to still Tuck’s nervous sidestepping. “What’s to keep
him from knocking you on the head and taking you again, Tess? Then he’d have both of you. It’s a trap.”
Kavenlow jumped to the soggy ground. “She escaped him before,” he said. “She could do it again if
she had to. I’ll take Tess.”
My flush of pleased vindication shifted into excitement. Duncan slipped reluctantly off Tuck and held
the  horse’s  head  as  Kavenlow  took  his  place.  The  horse  shifted  at  the  heavier  weight.  My  brow
furrowed as Kavenlow held a hand for me to ride before him.
“One horse?” I said. “I’ve got my own, thank you.”
Kavenlow’s eyes looked tired under his eyebrows streaked with gray. “You want to put the animal
you stole from him back within his reach?”
Sighing, I accepted his hand and  arranged  myself before  Kavenlow  like the princess  I used  to  be.
Thadd was scanning the shore, his expression of hope waning.
“Be careful,” Duncan called as we splashed into the shallows. “Tuck doesn’t like water.”
“Tuck doesn’t like anything,” I said softly. But either the weight of an extra  person  was  enough to
calm him, or the soothing thoughts I was attempting to wedge into his foolish head were getting through,
and we started the crossing without difficulty. It wasn’t  as  deep  as  it looked.  The statue-heavy  wagon

should be all right.
I kept the stained hem of my dress out of the water and my eyes on Jeck. The powerfully built man
looked nothing like the captain of King Edmund’s guard anymore. The lack of a uniform and  overdone
hat left him all the more dangerous, dressed in his simple but well-made black shirt and trousers. Even his
thick-soled boots were black. He sat atop his horse, unmoving, with a sure confidence, his cloak drifting
about his stirrups.
The memory of the firelight flickering against his damp  skin as  I sponged  the blood  from his back
made my stomach clench. My hands had tried to heal him. His had warmed in return. Flushing, I put the
back of my hand to my cheek to cool it. Of all the things I should be thinking about, this was the last.
We neared the bank, and Tuck heaved out of the water, blowing hard to take in the scent of the other
horse. Seeing Jeck so self-possessed, I had a stab of doubt. Regardless of what Kavenlow said, I knew
Jeck held all the cards. Together we might subdue him with venom, but I knew that Kavenlow wouldn’t
violate the truce of a parley.
My eyes widened as I realized Jeck’s saddle was the one I had sold in Saltwood. The packs behind
it were his own, and I was glad the innkeeper had been honest enough to give them to him. We came to
a halt before Jeck, and I felt Kavenlow shift in a sigh.
Jeck’s eyes flicked briefly to Kavenlow, then fastened on me. “Good to see you again, Princess,” he
said, his resonant voice lacking even a hint of malice or sarcasm.
I flushed deeper, the memory of his smooth muscles slick with ointment under  my fingertips coming
unbidden to me. “Captain Jeck,” I said, sure Kavenlow had noticed my red face. My eyes  lingered on
my bag still fastened to Jeck’s belt.
Seeing where my attention was, Jeck unknotted it and extended it to  me. “I believe this belongs  to
you,” he said. “You forgot it in your rush to leave my company.”
I carefully accepted  it and  looked  inside  to  find  everything  there  but  my  bone  knife  and  venom.
“Where’s the rest?” I asked, very aware of one of Jeck’s knives at the small of my back.
“Where are my knives? My horse?” he drawled, his gaze drifting across the river.
Kavenlow cleared his throat, and I grew nervous. “You’ll get them back later,” I said.
“As will you.” Jeck turned to Kavenlow and inclined his head in a respectful greeting. His eyes never
shifted from Kavenlow’s. “She ought not be here,” he said, clearly having turned to the matter at  hand.
“Technically, she’s still a piece, not a player.”
“She would still be a piece in truth if you hadn’t  opened  your mouth,” Kavenlow  said,  anger  in his
usually calm voice. “What am I supposed to do? Pretend she knows nothing? You forced my hand with
my apprentice; you will tolerate a few irregularities.”
Jeck’s horse shifted, and he took up the slack in the reins. “You have my formal apology for having
interfered with your student. My inexperience misled me into divulging her status. I apologize.  It  wasn’t
intentional.”
My eyebrows  rose.  Jeck  sounded  not only sincere  but also  meek.  That wasn’t  the captain  of  the
guard I had known. I turned to Kavenlow, surprised at the deep look of anger on him.
“You have severely compromised my game,” Kavenlow said. “One of my most valuable pieces—I’m
sorry,  Tess—has  lost  her  versatility  because  of  you.  It  has  furthered  your  position  tremendously.
Unintentional or not, you broke a rule. Your comparatively new status of player is no excuse. If you can’t
play properly, you will be removed—Captain.”
Jeck reddened. “I made an error,” he said, his meekness gone,  “but it was  an honest  one.  I won’t

make any large concessions for it. The only compensation I’ll give is to help insure the rightful heir gains
the throne, thereby eliminating the possibility of you and your apprentice being persecuted  for putting a
player in a direct position to rule.”
“As if that makes up for it,” Kavenlow growled.
Jeck’s  jaw  tightened behind his black  beard.  “It’s  all I’ll give you.  You  bear  some  of  the  blame,
teaching her to use the venom before giving her the wisdom of what it meant.”
I felt Kavenlow relax. “I’ll accept that. Yes. I will refrain from lodging a formal protest, providing the
proper Costenopolie princess gains the throne. Agreed?”
Jeck nodded, the tightness in his eyes easing. I wasn’t sure if I should be happy or not.
Kavenlow whispered in my ear, “Good. We will at least walk away with our lives.”
“Our lives?” I questioned. “What about Costenopolie?”
His gaze flicked to Jeck and back to me. “Kingdoms rise and fall, Tess. Only the players endure, their
teaching lineages stretching back  farther  than most royal bloodlines.  We’ll simply begin again if worse
comes to worst. But I don’t think it will.”
Jeck cleared his throat to bring our attention back to him. “The reason I asked for this meeting was to
try to eliminate unnecessary loss or injury for the next few days.”
I sniffed, taking on a haughty expression. “And what is that supposed to mean?”
“Tess…” Kavenlow warned, but Jeck seemed amused.
“I’m saying that having Costenopolie’s princess does me little good unless I have someone to verify to
the populace that she is the legal heir, not Tess.”
“Is that you speaking or Garrett?” I asked tartly, and Kavenlow nudged me to be quiet.
“I’m going to take both princesses back,” Jeck continued. “It’s the only way I can ensure the proper
heir gets the throne. Rather than expend a lot of wasted effort, I propose you simply give Tess to me.”
My breath hissed in. Frightened, I forced my hands to stay in my lap instead of reaching for my darts.
I would make it one of the metal ones. See how much venom the wicked things held. Garrett would kill
me. I knew it. “That is ridiculous,” I said boldly to hide my shaking voice. “Expecting us to believe you’re
doing us a favor. Taking me by force is more than you can manage. And you know it.”
“Care  to  wager  your thief’s life on it?” He  moved  his brown  horse  closer,  circling  us  to  turn  the
ground where Tuck had dripped into mud. My pulse pounded as I felt his eyes on me. I remembered my
missing venom, wondering if it was on his darts now.
“I will harry you, Princess,” he said, his low voice and the intensity of his brown eyes pulling a strike
of fear through me. “Pick you off one by one. I’m giving your master the chance to save himself and you
a lot of unnecessary pain.”
My heart hammered. “I don’t think you can do it.”
“Enough,” Kavenlow said  tightly, backing  Tuck  away  and  out of his circle.  “Stop  arguing with the
captain,  Tess.  He  is simply looking forward.  We’re  all going to  the  same  place.  I’d  rather  get  there
unwounded. I’m going to take him up on his offer.”
I spun to face him. “But Garrett will kill me!” I cried, uncaring if Jeck saw my fear.
Kavenlow’s gaze was decidedly apprehensive. “Which is why I’m going instead of you.”
Jeck started. “You!” he exclaimed. “I won’t take a player when a piece is available. I want her.”
“Then I step down,” Kavenlow said. “I give my position to Tess and  become  the chancellor in full.

She’s the player; I’m the piece.” He put a hand atop my shoulder, fixing an aggressive look upon Jeck.
“You won’t have her, Captain. In any way.”
“Kavenlow!” I cried. “Don’t!”
“Hush.” His teeth gritted and his eyes went fierce. “This is not what I had planned, but if Garrett gets
you under his thumb, he will kill you.”
“Which is exactly what he will do to you!”
He shook his head. “I’m not the one who made him into a fool. I’m a mild man who does the books.
Jeck can’t breathe a word otherwise. There is little honor among players, but on this, we hold tight.” He
turned to Jeck. “Promise me you’ll tell her how to  kill a  punta  if I don’t  see  the end  of this. She  also
needs to know the formal rules.”
I could say nothing. My mind was empty in panic. He is going to leave me? Kavenlow is going to
leave me again? The thought I should have just killed Garrett flitted through me, taunting. Jeck’s horse
shifted nervously. Jeck’s expression was dark and irritated.
“You’re putting your entire game in jeopardy,” he said. “She’s a novice. Your  game is mature,  and
only you know it. She will break a hundred rules.”
Kavenlow  was  unperturbed.  “There aren’t  a  hundred  rules.  There  are  only six.” His eyes  went to
mine. “Trust your feelings, Tess, and you won’t break any.”
“Fine,” Jeck said tightly, pulling his horse’s reins to make the animal prance and arch its neck. “Bring
your horse. I have only the two.”
I stared blankly, not believing this was happening.
“Down you go.” Kavenlow offered me a hand to descend with.
Frightened, I shook my head. “No. He’ll kill you!”
“Here.”  Kavenlow  twisted  an  unadorned  ring  from  his  finger.  “It’s  just  a  ring,  but  with  Jeck  as
witness, it serves as proof that I give my game to you willingly.”
“Kavenlow, no!” I cried, clenching my fist when he tried to force it into my hand. “I don’t know what
to do. Garrett will kill you!” Don’t leave me again! my thoughts screamed.
“Garrett won’t kill me,” he said. “You, though, he will. This way we’re all alive to see the end of the
game.” He kissed my forehead, and my fist loosened from surprise. The smooth shape of a ring fitted my
palm, and he closed my fingers about it. “You can’t do anything when you’re dead. Keep to your heart. I
know you’ll bring us through  with  more  than  we  went  in  with,  my  little  thief.”  He  leaned  close  and
whispered, “I’ve venom in my saddlebags. And if I don’t see the end of this, stay away from Jeck.”
“I won’t get down,” I said belligerently.
“I’m sorry,” he said, and he pushed me off the horse.
I  hit  the  muddy  ground  with  a  gasp.  Both  horses  jumped.  I  scooted  backward  as  Tuck  shied.
“Kavenlow!” I cried, sprawled on the ground. “Don’t leave me!”
He never looked back. Jeck touched his hat and followed Kavenlow in a slow canter.
“Kavenlow!” I shouted, stumbling to my feet. “Kavenlow. Don’t!” But he was  gone.  I looked  over
the river to Duncan standing helplessly on the bank.
What was I going to do now?

Twenty-seven
I stood  beside  the wagon,  a  hand over  my eyes  as  I squinted  up.  The tree  Duncan  was  climbing
shivered, and a green leaf drifted down. We had been  following Jeck  for two  days  with hardly a  rest.
Our  frantic  pace  had  put  us  outside  the  capital’s  walls  in  record  time.  We  had  been  meeting  an
increasingly small  stream  of  refugees.  None  had  any  real  news,  simply  running  from  rumors.  It  was
fortunate we had hay within the wagon, or the horses would be  ailing. I hoped  for Duncan’s  sake  that
Tuck was all right.
“Well?” I shouted up. I was nervous and ill-tempered, and I impatiently tugged the hem of my gray
dress  down.  It  was  now  too  tight  as  well  as  too  short.  I  had  shrunk  it  in  my  laundry  aboard  the
Sandpiper. My ankles showed, and it bothered me.
“They’re  stopping  everyone  at  the  gate,”  came  Duncan’s  voice.  I  craned  my  neck  to  spot  him.
“They’re looking for us, sure as rain is wet and the sea is salty.”
Frustration and anger spilled over. Mostly frustration. “Curse you, Kavenlow!” I shouted, kicking at a
wagon wheel. “Why didn’t you tell me what to do?”
Thadd looked up from the front bench, his round face depressed.
Branches snapped as  Duncan slid down  the tree  to  land lightly on the path.  “Chu, Tess,”  he said.
“You didn’t expect us to walk in the front gate, did you?”
Not wanting to  hear  his opinions, I kicked  the wheel again with a  cry of frustration.  It  hurt, and  I
decided to find something else to abuse. Duncan, maybe.
“How about that?” Duncan said to Thadd, his hands on his hips. “A princess with a temper. I never
would have expected that.”
A rare smile crossed Thadd’s stubbled face, vanishing quickly. Duncan brushed the bark and needles
from himself, chuckling. I wanted to pace but forced myself to be still. “All right,” I said, thinking aloud.
“We can’t walk in like this. Jeck knows everything: our horses, the wagon,  everything.” I found myself
moving and stopped. “Duncan, you go in first with the two black horses. When you get inside, take them
to the dockside stables and leave them there. Meet Thadd and me at that inn we played cards at. We’ll
come in with the draft horse.”
Duncan looked up from rubbing the dirt from a  boot.  “Take  them back?”  he said,  his face  empty.
“You want me to take the horses you stole back?”
I nodded.  “I’m not going to  risk everything coming down  around  us because  someone  recognizes
them.”
“I’m not taking them back!” he exclaimed, surprising me with his sudden vehemence.
Hands on my hips, I strode to him. “They aren’t mine yet,” I said, almost in his face. “And I’m not a
thief. Leave them in the yard if you like. Take Thadd with you if you’re afraid.”
Duncan’s jaw clenched and he pointed at me. “I’m not afraid,” he said in a low, forced voice. “And
I’m not a thief, either.”
I backed up a step. “Don’t point your finger at me!”
“I’ll point my burning finger at you whenever I damn well please!” Duncan shouted. He took a  step
forward, and I backed up, finding myself against a tree. My eyes were wide, and I didn’t know what to
do. I wasn’t used to having someone shout back at me.

Angry and red-faced, Duncan jerked his shirt from his left shoulder. A thick, raised scar in the shape
of a circle—God no, it was a crown—was branded  into him. “If I’m caught with those  horses,  they’ll
hang me!” he said, screaming though his voice was just above a whisper. “If you want to risk a hanging
by taking them back, fine. But don’t ask me to do it—Princess.”
My face went cold. I’d forgotten. “Duncan.” My anger turned to shame. “I’m sorry. I forgot.” Damn
my mouth, I thought in harsh guilt. Why can’t I keep it shut?
Duncan spun on a heel and went to rummage in his pack in the wagon. “Here,” he said, tossing me a
wad of clothing.
I shook it out, finding it was his spare shirt and a pair of trousers. My face flamed. “What is this for?”
I said tightly as I threw it back. What he wanted was obvious.
Duncan grimaced. “I’m going to cut your hair, too. They’re looking for a woman. You’re going in as
a man. You almost look like one.”
Jaw dropping in outrage, I glanced down at my straight hips and nearly flat chest. “I am not going to
wear your disgusting clothing,” I said hotly. “And you aren’t coming near me with a  knife.” If I cut my
hair any shorter, I wouldn’t be able to use it to hold my darts.
Duncan took a step forward. “Thadd, grab her arms.”
My breath quickened as I retreated, hand atop the knife at  my back.  “Stay  away.  Both of you!” I
demanded. The pounding of my heart was so loud, I was sure they could hear it.
Thadd snorted. “I’m not touching her,” he said in his slow voice. “You’re on your own.”
Duncan stopped his advance. “Well, she can’t go in like that,” he said, gesturing.
Watching them warily, I relaxed. “The woods are rife with black string,” I said, recalling having seen
the thorny vine in the brighter patches of forest. “It will dye anything black. I’ll go in with black hair…”
My words trailed off as a thought took their place. “I could go in as a gypsy. We all could. Gypsies come
into the capital to sell horses all the time, especially matched pairs.”
“You don’t look like a gypsy,” Duncan protested. “And neither do I.”
“Thadd almost does,” I said. “Give me a hot fire and three hours, and I’ll be a  raven-haired  beauty
with a bad temper.”
“You’re halfway there  with the bad  temper,”  Duncan muttered,  crossing  his  arms  before  him  and
taking a stance to look nearly unmovable. “And I’m not going to dye my hair to play gypsy. If you don’t
put on those trousers, I’m not coming in with you.”
“I don’t care if you come or not,” I lied, feeling a  stab  of worry.  “Thadd  and  I can  do  this on our
own. You can stay here with the wagon where it’s safe.” .
“Oh, I’m coming,” he said tightly. “But I’ll be behind you. You’re going to get caught if all you do is
dye your hair and fake an accent, pretty little thief. I want to see that.”
My  eyes  narrowed,  but  before  I  could  say  anything,  Thadd  interrupted.  “Um,  I’m  not  leaving
Contessa’s statue,” he said in his somber voice. “We’re bringing the wagon with us.”
I closed my eyes and rubbed at  the beginnings of a  headache.  Neither  man was  capable  of taking
direction. I would be better off darting them and tying them to a tree like goats than trying to find a plan
that satisfied all their inane, sundry requirements.
Ignoring Duncan’s increasingly barbed  comments,  I spent  the remainder  of the afternoon  dying my
hair and  weaving strips  of my red  underskirt  into it and  the mane of the  draft  horse.  It  emulated  the
younger gypsies I had seen perfectly. I tied my two black horses to the back  of the wagon with ropes
stained red to signify they were for sale. I’d probably be all right unless I ran into real gypsies.

Thadd was frantic about his statue,  insisting he sit in the back  with it instead  of up front where  he
ought to be. I had found some prickle stick in my search for hair dye, and after rubbing it on his foot, he
developed swollen, itchy welts. No one would be poking about in our wagon with his foot  looking like
that, and it was a good excuse for me to be driving.
Surly and bad-tempered, Duncan watched us prepare to leave, claiming he would visit our heads on
the palace gate tonight. And it was  well past  noon  by the time I drove  the wagon out from under  the
woods. The sun pressing down felt heavy after the chill shade of the trees. My toes were cold. Gypsies
wouldn’t have boots, and I’d  hidden mine under  the hay with the statue.  The closer  we  rattled  to  the
sentries, the more nervous I became. I had my handful of darts, but the entire point was to get in with no
one the wiser. The stone walls of my city loomed gray and cold. My pulse hammered. This isn’t going
to work, I thought. Jeck  would come  out of the guardhouse,  pin my arms to  my sides,  and  drag  me
away.
“Are you ready?” I asked Thadd as we neared the gates. He said nothing, and  I turned  to  find the
man gaping at the walls like a peasant. My shoulders slumped. I was on my own. I’d have to talk to the
guard myself. If he had any brains at all, he would know my accent was false.
“Ho there,” I murmured, pulling the horse to a stop as the guard came forward. He had dried food on
his jacket, and I frowned. He wore my father’s colors, but I didn’t recognize him.
“First time to the capital?” he said, his gaze flicking behind me to Thadd.
Heart pounding, I turned in my seat. The sculptor was staring wide-eyed at the buildings, the people,
everything. “For him,” I said, wrangling my tongue around the Rs. “He wants a surgeon to look at his foot
afore Momia chops it off.”
“It isn’t catching, is it?” the guard said, backing up.
I shook my head, tucking my feet under my skirt as I realized they were a shade whiter than the rest
of me. “Momia can’t cure it. Which street has a surgeon?”
The guard smirked. “Five coppers,” he said, and I stared at him for a heartbeat before remembering
to keep my eyes down. “Trading tax,” he added, grinning as a second guard came out of the guardhouse,
blinking at the brighter light. “You want in, you pay the tax.”
My stomach clenched. I had no money. “I burning-well told you I was here for a surgeon, not trading.
The horses are for fetching city medicine.”
Thadd threw five coins on the bench, and the guard took them, his grubby fingers grasping. “Go on,”
the thieving sentry said. “You’re blocking the road. Stinking gypsies.”
Nervous, I clicked at the horse and slapped the reins a  shade  too  hard.  Head  bobbing,  the animal
ambled peacefully forward. Trading tax? I questioned as we passed the gates. Right into their pocket,
I’d wager.
“Does Duncan have money?” I asked as soon as we were out of earshot, not knowing why I cared.
Thadd grunted an unknowing answer. I longed to turn and watch the gate but didn’t dare. Taking the first
right I came to, I halted beside a smithy. I had made it past the gate despite Duncan’s dire predictions.
Now, would he?
The hot smell of the forge tickled  my nose,  and  I wiggled my fingers at  Thadd  for my boots.  His
somber gaze roved  over  the narrow  houses,  the people,  and  the few open  shops.  There  should have
been masts showing above the roofs, but there were none. I felt sick, wanting to drive to the docks and
see if Garrett had burned them to the waterline or if they had simply abandoned the harbor  because  of
rumors.
“I didn’t know you had money,” I said as my second heel thumped into a boot. “I’ll get it back to you

when I can. There’s no such thing as a trading tax.” I reached for the water bag  and  handed  it to  him.
“Better wash your foot. If you keep scratching, those welts will turn real.”
He accepted the water, his wide back hunched as he sponged the irritating sap from him. I anxiously
watched the top of the road for Duncan. The foot traffic was thin. Shops were  open,  though the stock
looked scanty. The few people about were tense, getting what they needed and moving on.  There  was
very little banter. The veneer of normalcy was thin.
My nerves had me ready to bolt when I spotted Duncan’s jaunty profile at the top of the road. Relief
slumped my shoulders. I whistled, and he turned on a heel to make his unhurried way to us. “Since when
does the capital have a foot tax?” he asked when he was close enough.
“Why didn’t you tell me you had money?” I answered.
Duncan froze. “Because you would have spent it on something stupid, like a bath.”
“Baths aren’t stupid,” I snapped. “They keep your hair from falling out.”
“Look,” he said belligerently, tugging on the hair showing from under his begrimed hat. “No bath.”
My hands trembled. “All right,” I said through gritted teeth. “We’re here. Let’s get something to eat
while I decide how to get into the palace.”
Thadd silently dumped his water over the side of the wagon and shifted his work-hardened  bulk to
the front bench. He took the reins from me and got the horse  moving. Duncan gripped  the side  of the
wagon and, with a graceful motion, pulled himself over the edge.  “Don’t you have a  plan already?”  he
said as he knelt in the wagon’s bed behind Thadd and me.
“Not yet,” I admitted. I felt my stringy hair, hating the greasy texture. I thought longingly of the bath I
had bought but never gotten. “How much money do you have?”
Duncan grew wary. “I’m not buying you a bath. It’s my seed money. I can’t start a game without it.”
His words were laced with spite, and my worry flared to anger. “Why are you being so mean to me?”
I asked, turning to see him.
“Because  this stinks like a  chu pit!” he  exclaimed  under  his  breath,  brown  eyes  narrowed.  “You
should have gone with me and left this to sort itself out.”
My brow  rose.  “That’s it?” I exclaimed. “That’s why you’ve been  badgering  me  all  day?  You’re
angry because I won’t leave her to be raped and killed so  I can  pursue  a  career  cheating people  with
you?” Thadd  clenched  his jaw  in mental anguish, and  I  added,  “Pardon  me  for  having  a  whisper  of
morals, but there’s nothing stopping you from leaving. Go on. Leave! Thadd and I will be fine.”
I spun from him and  stared  straight ahead.  My hands  were  clasped  tight in my lap,  and  my throat
closed. I didn’t need his help.
I sensed, rather than saw, Duncan look between Thadd and me. “That’s not what I meant,” he finally
said.
“What did you mean, then!” I exclaimed. “Stop questioning my decisions or come up with something
better!”
“Contessa?” called a feminine voice across the street. “God save us. Tess?”
My head turned. “Heather?” I cried, wiping my eyes and standing up as I saw her.
Thadd pulled the horse to a stop, and Duncan grabbed my arm to keep me from falling.
“Look at you!” my friend said as she ran across the street. “I was coming to see if anyone had picked
up your circlet. I do it every day, hoping for news. Oh, pig feathers! You have a black eye? And what
are you doing in the streets without Kavenlow— and in a wagon!”

I lurched to the hard cobbles and touched my cheek. I had a black eye? Why hadn’t anyone told
me? Heather  reached  us,  and  I gave her a  hug. “Heather!”  I exclaimed,  almost  crying.  “I’m  so  glad
you’re all right.”
She pushed away, her red cheeks bunched as she beamed. “Well, why wouldn’t I be? I heard  you
arguing with”—she looked  Duncan over  appraisingly—“this man,” she  continued,  “and I knew  it  was
you. I’ve heard you put a servant in his place enough times. Lord help me, who did that to your hair?”
I glanced up at Duncan’s scowl. “He’s my friend, not a servant,” I said softly. She went to touch my
eye, and when I pulled away, she plucked the sleeve of my dress instead.
“I thought I threw this away,” she chattered, then gave me another breath-catching hug. “I’ve missed
you,” she said as she pulled away, her eyes bright. “Why won’t they let anyone into the palace?” She ran
her fingers over  my greasy  hair in dismay. “They said  you’re  getting married  next month. I knew  you
weren’t. You can’t get married without me. And so soon!”
“This is Duncan,” I said when she paused for breath. “And Thadd.”
“Pleasure,” she said, her eyes darting from them to me. Then her eyes went back to  Duncan,  and  I
sighed. “Why won’t they let anyone in or out of the grounds?” she asked again. “The rumors put the king
and queen dead. Then the next day they’re alive but you’re dead. But here  you are!  I don’t  recognize
any of the guards on the gate. They tried to tell me it’s practice  to  lock  the gates  when there’s  foreign
royalty on the grounds. I told them that was chu on my shoe and gave them what for. But you look  all
right, except for your black  eye.  Who  hit you? Saints  preserve  you,  you’re  filthy! I hardly recognized
you. How did you get that dirty?”
“We need a place to rest,” I wedged in, starting to get depressed. “Do you know somewhere?”
“My house,” she said breathlessly, touching my hair and making a face. “Oh,  Tess.  I don’t  know  if
this will come out. It’s my parents’ house, actually. I’ll get you a bath. And a good meal.” She glanced at
Duncan and Thadd. “And your man-friends, too. They both have horses, do they?” She gave me another
hug.  Her  blue  eyes  were  wide  as  she  put  me  at  arm’s  length.  “Heaven  save  you.  Is  that  your  red
underskirt in your hair?”
“Heather!” I exclaimed, embarrassed. “Can we go? We don’t want to be noticed.”
Her  mouth  made  an  O  of  understanding.  “You  ran  away?  Shame  on  you!  Prince  Garrett  was
handsome enough.” She hesitated, dismay coming over her. “He wasn’t  the one  who hit you,  was  he?
Why is it always the pretty ones who have the worst tempers?”
“Um, it wasn’t him,” I said, and she looked at Thadd. “It wasn’t either of them, either.”
“Help the princess into the wagon,” she said pertly, as if Thadd should have already.
“Burning chu pits,” Duncan muttered. “Does the woman ever shut her mouth?”
Thadd extended a thick hand, and I lurched up to sit beside him. Heather held a hand to her fair hair
and pursed her lips until he offered her a hand as well. She sat next to me, adjusting her dress  and  she
glancing at  Duncan with the edge  of her attention.  “How long have you been  out of the palace?”  she
asked again. “Thank heaven I found you. You shouldn’t be out alone.” She looked at Thadd. “Though I
see you have a guard—of a sort.”
“They aren’t guards,” I said dryly. “And I would have found you sooner, but I was at Saltwood and
then Brenton.” She gasped, and I glanced behind us. The few people who had seen  our  reunion didn’t
seem interested. “I was chasing Kavenlow and the real princess.”
“Real princess? How…” Heather’s blue eyes opened wide,  and  she  put her hands  to  mouth. “Oh,
Tess,” she wailed. “You’re the real—”

“No!” I cried, reaching past Thadd to cover her words. I felt the prick of tears. This was not what I
needed.
“But, Tess,” Heather said in a hushed voice as I pulled my hand away. “How?”
I shook my head. “It doesn’t matter. I just want to take a bath and eat something. The horses have to
be  returned  to  the stables  before  someone  recognizes  them, and  I have to  figure out what Kavenlow
would do.”
Heather took a breath to demand I answer her, but years of taking direction were hard to overcome.
Swallowing, she  pointed  down  the street  with  a  quivering  finger.  “There,”  she  said.  “Turn  left  down
there.” She forced a nervous smile. “I’ll get you a bath. And see you in some  proper  clothes,  though I
don’t know where, since the shops close early now. I’ll get you cleaned up, and you’ll see. You’re the
princess, Tess. You are.”
I closed my eyes as her prattling washed  over  me, both  comforting and  irritating. I could  smell the
smithy going distant behind us. The scent of cooking potatoes and fish was making me dizzy with hunger.
I didn’t mind the stink of people, or that my dress was too tight, or my feet  hurt from the pinch of my
boots without stockings.
It was hard, though, seeing Heather as I last saw her, rosy-cheeked and dressed in white. And even
harder that she was treating me as if I was still the princess. Deep in my heart I knew I wasn’t.

Twenty-eight
The water was blessedly hot, and I slid downward until it threatened my nose.
“Sit up, Tess,” Heather complained. “I’m not ready to rinse your hair yet.”
My breath bubbled out as I straightened. Heather scrubbed at my scalp with a vengeance until it hurt.
“What were you thinking?” she scolded. “You should have used that new dye from the docks. I would
have picked some up for you. You had such nice hair. I may as well finish cutting it all off for you, now.
We can say you had a fever. That, at least, is romantic.”
“Mmmm,” I murmured, knowing her threat was idle.
She wiped her hands on her skirt and turned to a bucket of waiting water. “Hold your breath,”  she
said as she dipped out a ladle.
I leaned forward and closed my eyes as it cascaded over me, making me shiver.
“Oh… dear,” she said slowly, and my eyes opened.
“What?” I asked  as  the soap  dripped  into them. The harsh bubbles  stung, and  I waved  my  hand
frantically for a towel.
“Nothing,” she warbled, her voice a shade too high.
A towel hit my hand, and I wiped my face. I squinted up at her. Her brow was pinched, and her blue
eyes looked worried. A strand of my hair lay in the water, and my breath hissed in. It was red. The black
had washed out to leave my hair the color of a fine roan horse. My eyes closed in misery. “It’s all right,
Heather,” I said, trying to find the strength to deal with this latest indignity. “Just rinse it the best you can.”
Heather’s hand shook as she tilted my forehead back and poured a second ladle of water over me.
Apart from her horrified silence, I could almost believe the last thirteen days were a nightmare and I was
in the bathing room in the palace. My eyes opened. The sight of Kavenlow’s ring on a cord hanging from
a hook brought it all back, and I slumped.
Heather’s parents lived in one of the better sections of town, in a house, she had proudly explained,
that she bought for them with her palace stipend. Right now, the two-story home was empty,  since her
parents had left the third night Prince Garrett’s guards had taken the streets. They had tried to convince
Heather to go with them, but she stayed, claiming I’d need her.
A flock of children ran chattering down the narrow lane between the houses, and I smiled. That was a
sound I hadn’t heard in ages. A dog was with them, adding to the happy confusion. There had been no
children in the palace since I had grown up. I thought the princess  should do  her best  to  remedy  that.
There should be laughter in the garden again.
Heather  dumped  a  third ladle,  and  I wiped  the water  from  my  eyes.  “What’s  the  news  from  the
palace?” I asked. Heather had pointedly kept to frivolous topics since I told her about Garrett killing my
parents and my escape. She dealt with the uncomfortable by ignoring it—unless it was gossip, which she
then talked about until everyone believed it true.
She shook  out my old dress,  her pursed  lips making it clear  she  wanted  to  throw  it  into  the  fire.
“Officially?” she said as she folded the filthy thing up and set it carefully aside. “The Costenopolie guards
that are usually in the streets  have gone to  inform the summer-festival guests  that  it will be  a  wedding
instead of a betrothal. Unofficially, Prince Garrett has killed everyone  and  taken  over  the palace.”  Her
eyes dropped. “His guards are scavenging for livestock and food since the regular vendors aren’t coming
in  anymore.  Most  of  the  ships  have  left,  too.  The  harbor’s  almost  deserted.  There’s  to  be  an

announcement tonight in the large square.”
My eyes dropped to my torn and ripped fingernails. Thirteen days of grime couldn’t be washed out.
“Then that’s where I’m going,” I said, gripping the sides of the tub and standing.
“Tess!” Heather wailed, rushing to a towel. “You can’t go out.  I haven’t had  time to  find a  proper
dress for you!”
The rough towel smelled of lavender, and I breathed the clean scent in, relishing it. “I can wear one of
yours,” I said, then hesitated. “If you’ll loan me one?” I asked in a small voice.
“I—I’ve nothing good enough for you,” she said, taking a panicked-looking step back.
I waited until her frightened eyes met my gaze. “I’m not the princess,” I said evenly, finding no pain in
the statement for the first time. “I’m a beggar’s child.” Heather took a breath to protest, and I frowned,
halting her words. “I’d rather not put either of my old dresses back on until I’ve a chance to wash them,”
I said, finding it ironic Heather would be the first person I begged from. “Do you have anything that might
fit me?”
Heather’s eyes filled. Her hand went to her mouth. Hunching into herself, she ran from the room. She
didn’t shut the door, and I heard her shoes whisper on the wooden floor. A door slammed, then nothing.
“That went well,” I said to the walls. Dripping everywhere, I reached to shut the door, hoping she’d
bring a dress back with her. I toweled off, giving my black eye a close, unhappy scrutiny in the flecked
mirror. My red curls were ghastly, and I arranged them, still damp, atop my head  in a  topknot.  Thadd
had brought up my things before he had left to return the horses. Duncan had gone with him, saying he’d
stay ten steps behind in case there was trouble. Kavenlow’s small bag with the venom looked dirty and
out of place, tossed aside against the wall. Beside it was my coiled whip. I felt just like them, worn, tired,
and abandoned.
I glanced at the shut door before I dug through the bag for more darts. Testing the potency of each
with  the  flat  of  my  tongue,  I  added  a  veritable  plethora  of  deadly  ornamentation.  I  was  setting
Kavenlow’s three metal darts in place when Heather’s hesitant knock startled me.
“Come in,” I said, tightening the towel around me as the door creaked open.
“I think this one  will fit you,” she  said.  Even with her head  lowered,  I  could  see  by  her  splotchy
cheeks that she’d been crying. My heart went out to her.
“Your yellow one!” I said, forcing a cheery tone. “I always liked that one. Thank you.”
Silent, she miserably helped me into the clean undergarments she had brought with her. I remembered
the last time she had worn this dress: a picnic in the garden last spring. It  hung rather  loose  in front no
matter how tight she tied the bodice, and I grimaced at my slight figure.
Heather sniffed, and I had  caught her twice wiping her eyes.  “The overskirt  needs  a  dunk  in fresh
dye,” she said as she adjusted the lace around the collar. “And the trim has frayed around the underskirt
hem. I had to put a new cord in the bodice, so they don’t match—”
“It’s the nicest thing I’ve had on all week,” I said, giving her a quick hug. “Thank you.”
“But, Tess, it’s one of mine,” she wailed as her composure broke. Standing miserably before me, she
started to cry. Her shoulders shook, and her hands  helplessly gripped  her elbows.  “Don’t let her take
your place,” she sobbed. “She can’t be nicer than you, or prettier.”
I gave her shoulders a squeeze. “Heather? Heather!” I exclaimed, forcing her to  pay  attention.  “It’s
going  to  be  all  right,”  I  said,  quieter,  as  her  red-rimmed  eyes  flicked  to  mine.  “She’s  nice—in  a
backwards sort of way.” That was putting it mildly. “You’ll like her. I promise.”
Heather hiccupped. Encouraged, I wrangled the corner of my hem up and dried her tears. “I told her

about you. She’s going to need so much help. You’ll have to give her advice  and  tell her which of the
guards will let her walk in the garden in the moonlight and which ones won’t. You’re going to teach her to
dance, and make cut-out snowflakes, and how to plan a dinner. Heather?” I squeezed her shoulder until
she looked up. “She’s going to need you.”
“But what about you?” Heather warbled.
From somewhere inside of me I managed a smile. “I’ll be all right. Kavenlow thinks she will take me
as one of her advisors, and she’s asked me to help her learn how to act properly, which she desperately
needs. But she’s going to need a friend, too.”
“I’m your friend,” she said, dropping her gaze.
My chest  hurt, and  hot tears  filled my eyes  in that  she  hadn’t  shunned me after  learning the  truth.
“You’re my friend, too,” I said, giving her a hug. “Give her a chance?”
Heather took a breath as if readying herself for a chore. A familiar tightness came into her expression.
“If she tries to push me around, she’ll be sorry.”
Her voice had its more familiar bossy tone, and I smiled thinly, thinking. Heather could do more than I
to put an uppity princess in her place and tame a ferocious temper. An unhappy staff made for miserable
living, and an arrogant, overbearing royal usually caught on quickly when dinners were served cold  and
fires were neglected.
“I’m sure  she  will be  nice to  you. She  was  raised  in a  nunnery,” I hedged  as  I put on my  boots.
Headier had oiled them, and they looked almost presentable, peeping past the yellow hem. My whip was
next, and Heather watched with wide eyes as I coiled it about my waist, hiding it and the handle beneath
a scarf. I tucked one of Jeck’s throwing knives behind the impromptu belt at the small of my back. Her
brow pinched in worry at the weapons, and I shifted my shoulders in a sheepish apology. The thump of a
downstairs door shifted the air.
“We’re back!” Duncan shouted, his voice muffled.
“Oh, good.” Heather spun to the door, clearly ready for a distraction. “The men are here. Let’s  get
downstairs before they eat everything I left out. You need to eat,  too,  before  we  leave for the square.
Why you wanted to return those horses was beyond me. We could have ridden in style. Now we have to
take the cart so we don’t get crushed.”
I preceded Heather down the stairs, and she started in on one of her prattling commentaries about the
dangers of the street, bringing up past calamities and near misses that crowds just seemed to attract like
wasps to an orchard. I relaxed in the sound of her voice,  making the expected  ums at  the appropriate
places as she led the way to the dining room.
As promised, a cold supper had been laid out. My stomach rumbled, and I remembered how long it
had been since I had eaten real food instead of whatever Duncan dug out from the bottom of his pack.
Thadd and Duncan were already filling their plates. The squatting sculptor looked up as I entered,  men
hastily got to his feet, his eyes wide. I warmed, thinking I must look better than I thought. Thadd kicked
the leg of Duncan’s chair, and he glanced up.
“Oh, hey. I like the red  hair, Tess,”  he said,  stuffing a  piece  of meat into himself. “Good  disguise.
Move the potatoes over here, will you, Thadd?”
My glimmer of self-worth vanished; Thadd’s gaping stare  was  due  to  my hair, not my clean dress.
Thadd  awkwardly  held a  chair for me  and  then  Heather.  Duncan  piled  more  than  his  share  of  cold
potatoes on his plate. “Does anyone else want these?” he asked.
No one spoke a word, so I raised  my eyebrows  and  said,  “Go ahead.”  He  fell to  with a  grunt of
satisfaction. Rubbing my forehead, I gestured for Heather to fill her plate  as  well. Hesitant  and  unsure,

she reached for a bowl. We had eaten together before, but never  at  a  table.  Her  habits with me were
going to be hard to break, and  I didn’t think she  would ever  see  me as  anything other  than her fallen
princess, unjustly robbed of her throne.
“Thank you for taking the horses back,” I said, and Duncan paused in his chewing.
“Mmmm,” he grunted around a  full mouth. “We  left them in the yard.”  He  smirked  as  he wiped  a
smear of grease from two days of stubble. “We were three streets away when the stableman found them.
You’d think an angel had left a bag of gold on his doorstep.”
“An angel did,” Heather said primly, and Duncan made a scoffing bark of laughter. His eyes were on
his plate, so he missed her murderous look. I thought I would have to  watch  them both.  Heather  was
likely going to kill him or marry him.
Indignant, she stood with a scraping of her chair. Thadd hastily got to his feet. Duncan did not. “I’m
going to harness  the pony,”  she  said.  “Prin—” She  bit her lip. “Tess  would like to  take  some  air this
evening and listen to the palace announcement.”
“Take some air,” Duncan mocked, and Heather’s eyes narrowed.
Thadd put his napkin on his chair. “I’ll help you, ma’am,” he said, his slow drawl seeming deeper in
the close confines of the room.
“Thank you.” Heather raised her chin, her cheeks flushed. “I would appreciate some assistance from
a gentleman.” Heels thumping, she stalked out with Thadd a pace behind. My shoulders shifted in a sigh.
Heather needed a husband—badly.
The meat was cut thin and ran with its own juice. It was just as well Heather wasn’t here since I ate
with little regard to manners. Stretching halfway across the table, I wondered if there might be something
to this commoner birth if I was allowed to jam as many sweet roll tarts in my mouth as I wanted.
“So-o-o-o,” Duncan drawled, leaning back in his chair. “What’s your plan?”
I  put  my  elbows  on  the  table,  enjoying  that  no  one  frowned  at  me.  “I  want  to  hear  Garrett’s
announcement before I decide anything.”
His eyebrows rose, and he looked at me as if I was insane. “Angel’s Spit,  I knew  it. You’ve  been
soaking in a bucket of hot water for over an hour, and you still don’t have a plan?”
“I have a plan.” I kept my eyes firmly on my travel-torn nails as I peeled a green fruit, but I could feel
his disbelief clear across the table. “I’m going to get into the palace, kill Garrett, and free Kavenlow and
Contessa.” I hesitated. “Not necessarily in that order.”
“That’s it?” he said. “Chu, Tess. If you want ideas, I have them.”
I took a bite of the fruit, only to nearly spit it out when I found it to be exceptionally tart. Swallowing,
I looked for the honeypot, not finding it. “I told you, I want to hear what Garrett says first. Or we could
do what Thadd wants and storm the front gate and die with swords stuck in us after three steps. But I’ve
seen that,” I said, feeling cold. “I’d rather avoid it if I can.”
Duncan scowled, his hair flat where his hat had  been  all afternoon.  “You aren’t  getting me in there
without a plan on how to get out.”
“You aren’t going in anyway,” I said, setting the fruit aside on the rim of my plate.
His jaw clenched. “Like hell I’m not!”
There was a clatter of small hooves in the street, and I guessed Thadd and Heather were  ready  for
us. A thrill of excitement went  through  me  when  Heather  burst  in  through  the  front  door.  She  went
directly to a trunk against the wall in the hallway, rummaging in it to pull out two shawls and a yellow hat
to match my dress. “Leave everything on the table,” she said as she clattered into the dinning hall. “Here,

Tess. I have a wrap for you. It’s going to be cold. People are in the streets  already.  If we  don’t  leave
now, we won’t get close enough to hear.”
“Right,” I said around my full mouth as I got to  my feet  and  brushed  off my front.  Chu pits,  I had
gotten it dirty already. But at least I had stockings again.
“Thadd?” Duncan said as the squat man anxiously hovered in the archway. “You owe me a copper.
She doesn’t have a plan.”
An indignant sound escaped me, and I spun. “I just told you I can’t make a decent plan until I know
what Garrett is doing!”
I waved Heather away as she tried to put her best shawl over my shoulders. Dodging me with a grace
born from long practice, she darted close and fastened it about me with a decorative pin. I glanced at the
mirror over the hearth and touched my topknot. My black eye looked atrocious, and I’d grown thin. But
excitement made my movements quick as I checked my darts. It was akin to the feeling that I had when I
was  finishing  a  game,  moving  my  pieces  to  where  my  opponent  had  no  choice  but  to  lose.  It  was
addictive, the feeling. I wondered if I should dart myself to heighten my abilities, then decided against it.
Duncan came to stand behind me as I primped in the mirror. The room had grown dark as we hadn’t
bothered with lighting any candles. “I’m going in with you, Tess,” he breathed, low and threatening. “You
can’t stop me.”
A flush of angst went through me. My thoughts returned to him shouting at me this afternoon, pinning
me to the tree with only his voice. I met his eyes through the mirror. His stubbled jawline was tight with
determination; shadows made him ominous. My heart thumped.
Thadd shifted from foot to foot  in the doorway,  his big hands  clasped  tight. “We  all want to  help,
Tess. Tell us what we should do,” he said slowly.
It was the first time he had used my name, and I hadn’t realized until now how much his distrust had
bothered me. I turned to face them with a  sick  feeling. I couldn’t  ask  them to  risk  their lives. What  if
something happened to them? “I’m going in by myself,” I said, and Duncan made an exasperated noise
and half turned away. “I’ll free Kavenlow and the palace guards. Unless Garrett moved them, they’re in
the cells under the guards’ quarters. While they retake the palace, I’ll find Contessa  and  keep  her safe
until it’s over. If Garrett interferes, I’ll kill him.”
Heather gasped, a trembling hand to her mouth.
“That’s not a plan.” Duncan’s shoulders were hunched, and his face was cross. “That’s a vague idea.
You go in there with nothing more than that, and  you won’t  be  coming out.  And what about  us?  You
can’t do all that by yourself.”
I cringed inside, certain he knew I was trying to keep him out of the way. “I need a distraction so I
can sneak in over the walls,” I said.
“A distraction!” Duncan’s vehemence shocked me. “I’m no one’s distraction, Princess. Not for you.
Not for anyone! Not again.”
I warmed as my anger grew. “There’s nothing wrong with being a distraction. I was one  for twenty
years!”
“Yeah?” Duncan stood with his feet spread, solidly planted on the wooden floor. “You need us,” he
said, pointing at me with a stiff finger. “And for more  than the time it will take  for you to  get over  the
walls!”
He was shouting at me, and flustered, I turned back to the mirror, pinching my cheeks to try to hide
how pale I was. My knees were weak, and my stomach was in knots. “I need you to stay in the streets,”
I said to my reflection. “Stir up some Misdev-dog sentiment. Raise a fuss at the gates. Something to keep

Garrett’s thoughts off me. If the gates open, everyone leaves.”
Heather’s eyes were pinched as she came forward with a wide-brimmed hat. “What about me?” she
said. Her chin was trembling, and the fear was so thick in her blue eyes I wanted give her a hug and tell
her it was going to be all right. “I know the palace as well as you do. What should I do?”
I couldn’t send her behind the walls. I couldn’t send any of them. “Can you talk to the people?” I said
hesitantly as I took her hands. They were trembling and cold. “I can’t bear the thought they might believe
I ran away.”
She nodded. “I’ll tell them,” she said, clearly glad she wouldn’t be storming the palace.
“Damn it, Tess,” Duncan said as he crossed his arms. “You’re going to need our help. Thadd and I
will drive the cart in with the statue. He has a commission paper. What are they going to do? Call him a
liar? You can hide in the box instead of trying to climb that wall, and once we’re free of the guards, we’ll
get you out.”
Bile rose, and I swallowed it down. The box looked like a coffin. “No.”
“You’re afraid of a  box?”  Duncan mocked.  “A strong,  tall woman like you is afraid of being in a
box?”
I stiffened, affronted.  When I had  been  in the wilds,  it  had  been  easy  to  remember  I  wasn’t  the
princess, but here, in the capital with clean clothes and Heather fussing over me, it was  harder.  Fingers
trembling, I ran them over the blunt ends of my darts in my topknot.  “Jeck  knows  about  the statue,”  I
said, fighting Heather’s flustered attempts to put a hat on my head. “I’d be a fool to get in it.”
Duncan snorted, earning a dark look  from Heather.  “You’re  afraid,” he taunted.  “But you go right
ahead and climb that wall. Thadd and I will take the wagon in and wait for you.”
“No.” I pulled my shawl tight. Heather took the opportunity and covered my damp hair with that ugly
yellow hat. But it hid my face, so I took it off for a moment to shirk a few darts to my sleeve and tuck my
dart pipe into my waistband beside the knife. The thought of being in that box  made  me shudder.  “I’m
surprised they didn’t stop us at the city gate with that wagon,” I said. “If you try to get in the palace with
Thadd’s statue, you’ll end up in chains.”
Duncan’s face went empty, and for the first time, he seemed to hesitate.
“What’s the matter?” Heather said with a sniff. “Big strong man afraid of a little iron?”
“No.”
“Don’t think your plan is going to work?” she mocked, and he reddened.
“Heather,” I said, thinking Duncan had earned the right to be afraid of iron around his ankles. “Leave
him alone. It’s a bad plan, anyway.”
Duncan regained some of his bluster. “It’s a sound plan,” he insisted. “Once we’re all inside, Thadd
can get the guards from their cells, and I’ll help you protect Contessa.”
Thadd cleared his throat and shifted uneasily from foot to  foot.  “I’m going to  rescue  Contessa,  not
you,” he said, his voice thick with determination.
I made a small noise of disbelief. It was the same conversation that we had had this morning, all over
again. I was in charge. Why the chu pits didn’t they understand that?
“You?” Duncan glanced at Thadd. “You wouldn’t hurt a fly, Thadd. And there might be swordplay.”
I stared between them, appalled. As if either one of them had been in battle before. “Listen to me!” I
all but shouted in frustration. “Garrett isn’t playing a game. He will kill you! None of you are going!”
Duncan shifted into  quick  motion.  He  strode  toward  me,  his  face  tight.  Startled,  I  backpedaled.

Thadd grabbed Heather’s arm, keeping her from flying at Duncan as he all but pinned me to the wall. “I
am not letting you go in there alone,” Duncan said, the width of my hat between us. His breath stirred the
wisps of hair floating about my face.  I felt the heat  from him through my thin dress  as  he came  close,
bullying me.
My breath came fast, and my heart pounded. Fists clenched, I refused to push him away lest he think
his nearness  bothered  me. Which it did.  “You’re  a  branded  thief,  Duncan,”  I  whispered,  knowing  it
would hurt him but desperate for a way to get him to back up. “You can’t risk it.”
He stiffened. Jaw clenched, he dropped his head and took a step back. My hands were shaking, and
I couldn’t seem to get enough air. I felt guilty for having said it, but I wanted him—all of them—safe.  I
wouldn’t risk his life. I wouldn’t risk any of them.
“That was foul of you, Tess,” he said tightly. Turning, his hunched figure moved soundlessly into the
hallway. He slammed the front door as he went out.
Feeling like the bottom  of a  chu pit,  I looked  up to  find  Thadd  and  Heather  both  downcast  and
uncomfortable. The sound of excited people in the street was loud. I wished I hadn’t eaten; my stomach
had turned into knots. “We’d better get going,” I said faintly, and  Thadd  and  Heather  silently followed
me out.

Twenty-nine
Duncan wouldn’t look at me as I came out onto the stoop. I hesitated, wondering if we would all fit
into the small city cart Thadd strode down to. A surly pony was harnessed to it, and I surmised Thadd’s
huge draft animal was busy churning up the tiny yard where Heather said she kept the pony  in the rare
instance it wasn’t in the field.
With much shifting and broken comments,  we  arranged  ourselves  with Thadd  and  me in the back,
and Heather and Duncan in the front, facing us. Thadd ran the reins between Duncan and Heather, and
we started off after an initial balking from the pony at the heavy load.
Unhappy, I sat crammed into the small space, comparing it to the few times I had toured the city by
coach. I was closer to the people in the cart—hearing the worry in their voices and seeing the excitement
in their eyes—but still detached. I caught snippets of talk of war, and that the war was already over and
we had lost. No one was even considering that the changes in the palace were due solely to my botched
marriage arrangements. It was depressing.
Even worse was Duncan’s continued stiff silence. I wished now I had never opened my mouth. Any
apology from me would be rebuffed; he wouldn’t even meet my eyes. But he had scared me, and I had
lashed out. The memory of our kiss intruded, turning me even more miserable. At least I wouldn’t have to
decide what to do about that now.
“Turn around,” Heather  said  breathlessly  when we  found the main entrance  to  the square  blocked
with people. “Go down that alley there, then up and to the left. We can get in through the smaller side
entrance between the yarn shop and the confectioner’s.”
People swarmed to take our place as Thadd hupped and called, expertly backing  the pony  up.  He
kept us to a good clip, and we dodged around other carts and mounted riders bent on the same thing. “Is
it too  close?”  I questioned  as  we  slipped  back  into  the  square.  We  were  almost  next  to  the  hastily
constructed, raised stage. Misdev guards in Costenopolie colors stood three deep, making a ring nearly
thirty paces from the scaffold’s footing. The young soldiers looked tense, and the crowd was voluntarily
keeping back from them. We were past accurate dart range, but I had known Jeck wouldn’t make it that
easy for me. A movement on the high stage incited the crowd into more noise, and  I stared  along with
everyone else.
Garrett, Contessa, Jeck, and Kavenlow were filing into the small box atop the scaffolding, having just
climbed the stairs. Dressed in furs and silks, they arranged themselves behind six sentries forming a living
wall.  A  closed  wagon  waited  nearby  to  whisk  them  back  behind  the  palace  walls.  Thadd  looked
desperate, helpless pain thick on him.
Shouts of, “Where are the king and queen?” and, “Where’s the princess?” were put forth.  I shrank
down on the bench, praying I wouldn’t be recognized. It might start a bloodbath.
Clearly Garrett was going to begin Jeck’s endgame, proclaiming he had the real princess and that he
was  going  to  marry  her.  Kavenlow’s  word  would  be  sufficient  to  convince  the  crowd  it  wasn’t  a
convenient lie. The real question was how the Misdev dog was going to explain our parents’ death.
“Duck your head,  Tess,”  Duncan murmured, and  I glanced  up to  see  a  Misdev  guard  circling the
crowd. My heart pounded and my fingers touched my whip as he passed us murmuring, “Proud beggar
woman with a black eye and good boots,” over and over like a litany. I was fervently glad I had come as
middle-class, and I no longer minded my hair was red.
My gaze rose to Kavenlow’s, willing him to look at me. He didn’t. My brow  pinched  as  he shifted
with an odd, shuffling walk. He was fettered with chains. He looked weary, dressed in a black robe that

hindered his motions rather  than his usual form-fitting trousers  and  jerkin.  I wondered  if he had  eaten
today, feeling guilty for my full stomach.  His hair looked  freshly combed  and  his face  washed.  It  was
obvious someone  had  tried  to  disguise the abuse  he had  suffered.  I was  torn  between  my  hatred  for
Garrett  and  my  heartache  for  Kavenlow.  The  pain  at  seeing  him  like  this  and  being  helpless  to  do
anything was unexpected, and my heart clenched.
“I’m sorry, Tess,” Heather said, seeing the direction of my gaze. “I’m so sorry.”
Garrett  leaned  to  the princess  and  said  something. She  recoiled,  her face  aghast.  Kavenlow’s  lips
barely moved, and a sentry hit the back of his legs. I gasped. Duncan caught my hands as I reached out.
Garrett  shouted  something  at  the  guard,  and  the  sentry  backed  off.  Duncan’s  grip  tightened  in
warning, then released. Thadd looked as if he might pass out, so tense with the effort to  not storm  the
scaffolding was he. Giving the sentry a barked order, Garrett moved forward past him, raising his hands
to the crowd. The murmuring eased to a background hum.
“Where are the king and queen?” someone shouted, and it was repeated several times.
Garrett raised his hands higher. I could see—and hate—his beautiful, reassuring smile from where  I
sat in the pony cart. “I have answers,” he said as his hands lowered and the crowd  settled.  He  took  a
breath.  “As you good  harbor  folk  have  surmised,  I’m  Prince  Garrett  of  Misdev,  come  to  beg  your
princess’s hand in marriage and usher in an era of cooperation and trade between your kingdom and my
father’s.”
“Where’s the princess?” someone shouted, and several more took up the call.
Not distressed in the least, Garrett turned to the first voice. “She is safe beside me.”
“Take your whore away,” a voice bellowed. “Princess Contessa shops at my stores.”
The crowd surged into noise, drowning out Garrett’s words. My heart hammered, and I wondered if
they would swamp  him, forcing  a  battle  they  couldn’t  win.  The  ring  of  guards  about  the  scaffolding
braced themselves, and the angry crowd stopped shy of their reach.
“The woman you were  betrayed  into calling princess  isn’t one!”  Garrett  shouted  over  their  noise.
“She was a changeling, bought in your very streets to occupy assassins while the real princess was raised
in safety.”
The people at the front went silent, shocked. A slow murmur rose as his words were carried to  the
back of the crowd. I heard, “He’s lying. The Misdev dog has killed them all,” and Garrett surged ahead
before he lost control.
“I didn’t know, either,” he said, allowing a hurt, innocence-wronged tone to enter  his voice.  “I was
betrayed as much as you. But your true princess has returned, brought back by your chancellor and my
captain of the guards in a show of solidarity.” Jeck stepped forward and touched his hat before stepping
back.
The crowd’s voices strengthened.
“The chancellor will affirm this woman is the true and rightful princess, heir to Costenopolie,” Garrett
said.
My throat tightened as Garrett gestured to Kavenlow.  He  stepped  forward,  pride  making him hide
that he was shackled. His eyes roved the crowd. I willed him to see me, almost crying out as  our  eyes
met and he forced himself to look away. He saw  me, I thought. Tears  threatened,  and  I clenched  my
fists. Damn Garrett. Damn him for what he has done.
“The woman standing beside me,” Kavenlow said, his resonant voice, stilling the crowd, “is the heir to
Costenopolie’s throne. At the queen’s request, I took her daughter upon her third month of life to safety,

and upon her twentieth year, I brought her home again.”
The crowd  didn’t like that.  “Where  are  the king and  queen?”  someone  said.  It  was  repeated  and
taken up until Garrett raised his hands. Silence grew. Slowly his hands dropped.
“Your false princess has murdered them,” Garrett said.
I gasped, turning to Duncan. His long face mirrored my own shock. The crowd roared, and I shrank
down, feeling as if I was being beaten. I couldn’t breathe. I couldn’t think.
“She killed them,” Garrett shouted. The crowd tried to listen, but their outrage wouldn’t allow them to
be still. “She killed them when they told her she wasn’t the princess. She  murdered  them, then tried  to
murder me because I knew the truth. She left me for dead to find and kill the true heir so she could take
her place.”
I watched from under my hat, shocked as Garrett pulled the princess  forward.  “Tell them who you
are and how she attacked you,” he said, and the crowd went silent. I felt as if I was going to pass out.
The princess’s lips moved, and I heard nothing. “Louder!” Garrett demanded.
“I am Princess Contessa of Costenopolie,” she said, her voice trembling. She looked like our mother,
more so for being dressed in her clothes. It was enough to convince the most doubting citizen. “She did
attack me, but it was—”
Jeck  gently pulled her back,  and  fear  paled  her cheeks.  Thadd  groaned.  Sweat  trickled  down  his
neck as he kept himself unmoving.
“Your false princess killed your king and queen, and tried to kill their daughter,” Garrett said. “She is
here now, in the city, plotting another attempt on her sister’s life even as I speak.  I will knight the man
who brings her to me.”
The crowd erupted into noise. I slumped onto the cart’s bench, putting my head on my knees more to
keep from passing out than to hide. Someone draped a lavender-scented blanket  over  my shoulders.  I
numbly stared at the yellow floorboards as the clamor shook the wood under my feet. How could he be
so foul as to blame my parents’ deaths on me?
“I will find your murdering, gutter-slime, false princess!” Garrett shouted over the tumult. “Your future
queen has agreed to wed me at month’s end, and with her, I will bring justice to Costenopolie!”
The sound of the crowd, fierce with its conflicting opinions of denial and acceptance, beat upon me. I
felt the cart shift and heard the call of our frightened pony.
“Get her out of here,” Duncan said. “Thadd, get down and lead the pony out of here.”
The cart  jerked,  inched  forward,  then  moved  faster.  The  press  of  the  people  grew  less.  With  a
shocking suddenness, the noise dulled. It was replaced by the sharp clips of our pony’s hooves  against
the cobbles when we found an empty street. There was a pause, and the cart shifted as Thadd  lurched
into it. I could hear the muted roar of the crowd come and go like storm surf as Garrett continued his lies.
The air was cool with evening, and  when I pulled my head  up,  I saw  Duncan sitting across  from me,
waiting.
“What are you going to do, Tess?” he asked. He looked severe, the tiny scar above his lip pale in the
gathering shadows of the streets.
I remembered Kavenlow in chains and the princess’s interrupted confession. A feeling of inevitability
and determination pushed out my confusion. I couldn’t afford it anymore. Costenopolie was mine, and I
had to win my master’s game for him. I took a deep breath.
“I’m going to need some rope.”

Thirty
The jostling of people looking for answers  at  the palace  gate  square  was  overwhelming. I couldn’t
even see the open latticework of worked metal. Putting my back  against a  lamppost,  I shifted the bag
that contained my rope higher onto my shoulder and tried to ward off my panic at  the crush.  It  wasn’t
dark enough to go over the wall yet, and  I had  come  to  estimate  the amount of distraction  the crowd
would provide since Duncan was sulking, refusing to  help me. My people  weren’t  angry yet,  but they
were  working themselves up to  it. Already  the guards  behind the gate  had  moved  back,  showing  an
increasingly uncomfortable indifference to the shouts.
My hands were damp, and I brushed them on the trousers I had borrowed from Duncan. I felt naked,
as if I was in my underthings, and the trousers caught at my legs with every step. Thadd had covered my
topknot with a cap and firmly pronounced me a fine-looking lad, but Heather’s pinched expression had
told me it was a thin disguise. For the first time, I was glad of my tall, less-than-womanly figure.
“Hoy! Make a way!” came a familiar voice, and I spun in surprise. My lips parted as I saw Duncan
and Thadd in the wagon with the statue, forcing it through the crowd.
“No,” I whispered,  realizing why he had  been  so  adamant  he was  staying behind and  would have
nothing to do with my plan. He was going in anyway. After I had told him not to!
“Get out of the way!” he shouted as he stood from the wagon’s bench and waved a dirty hand at the
people. “Official palace business. Make a path!”
His  cursed  pride  led  him  to  this,  nothing  more.  Frightened,  I  avoided  eye  contact.  He  looked
confident, having put his trust in a plan that was going to fail. Thadd, though, looked  properly  petrified,
and I cursed Duncan for pulling him into this.
The sculptor’s blocky hands gripped the reins with a fervent intensity. His attitude went perfectly with
his story of artisan delivering a promised commodity, and  I was  sure  it wasn’t  an act  Duncan shouted
again, and heads began to turn, both guard and citizen. A reluctant path opened to show the palace gates
and the peaceful grounds beyond. A sentry came forward. His hand was on his sword hilt. “No, no, no!”
I whispered. I should have darted them all into unconsciousness! I should have locked them in a closet! I
should have turned them in myself!
I elbowed  my way backwards  as  the wagon creaked  to  a  stop  before  the tall gates.  “Sit  down,”
Thadd  said,  yanking Duncan back  down  on the bench.  The  sculptor  pushed  the  reins  into  Duncan’s
hands and slipped off the wagon.  His fingers trembled  as  he passed  a  paper  to  the guard  through the
gate. The collective noise of the gathered people swelled in question.
“I have a delivery for the palace,” Thadd said, his slow drawl bringing the murmur of voices to almost
nothing. My people were curious, if nothing else. “My father received a commission to make a series of
statues. I have the last here. It was to be an engagement gift for the princess from the king and queen.”
I strained to watch the guard make a show of trying to read the note.  He  nodded  as  he folded  the
paper and tucked it behind his jerkin. “No one gets in,” he said. “Go home.”
“I can’t  take  it back,”  Thadd  protested,  his  thick  hands  clenching.  “It’s  too  heavy  to  get  up  the
mountain. And give me my paper. I need that to get my money.”
The crowd pressed closer. I was pushed almost to the front. Wiggling, I put a tall man between the
gates  and  me.  “Give  him  his  money,”  someone  called.  “Let  him  in,”  another  said.  The  phrase  was
repeated, becoming louder.
“The king and queen bought it for their daughter,” someone cried. “Let him deliver it.”

“The king and queen are dead!” the guard said. “All of you go home.”
It wasn’t the best thing for him to have said, and the crowd turned ugly. Duncan looked behind him as
the once-sedate horse nervously tried to back up.
“Let him in!” the shout came again. “He has a paper. Let him do his job.”
I shrank down. Curse Duncan to the ends of the earth. He was going to get himself killed.
The noise clamored. A sharp crack of a whip brought a temporary silence, then the crowd returned
to a soft murmur. I put an unnoticed hand on the shoulder of the man in front of me to stand on tiptoe.
My heart gave a pound and alarm rocked me back. Jeck.
The captain was behind the gate, still dressed in his smart uniform of black and green, again wearing
that  overdone  hat  with  drooping  black  feathers.  He  was  reading  the  letter.  A  guard  stood  with  an
uncomfortable stiffness beside him. Jeck’s brow furrowed,  then smoothed  as  he folded  the paper.  His
eyes rose to Thadd and Duncan.
Duncan’s casual  stance  flashed into a  tense,  dangerous  pitch.  My  breath  quickened  as  I  saw  his
understanding  that  they  were  found  already.  The  two  men  locked  gazes  over  the  crowd.  Duncan’s
shoulders went stiff, realizing he would never  be  able  to  flee. Jeck’s  eye  twitched,  and  Duncan’s  jaw
clenched as he acknowledged whatever silent conversation had passed between them.
“Get them in here,” Jeck said, his eyes riveted to Duncan, and the assembled people buzzed between
themselves. I scrunched down.
“But sir…”
“Get them in here,”  Jeck  repeated,  aggressively shoving the note  behind the guard’s  jerkin.  “They
have a paper signed by the late King Stephen. We will honor it. Use a detail of guards to keep the crowd
back, but I want them in here.” He leaned close. “Now.”
They were caught. I had known this would happen,  and  my breath  quickened  in frustration as  two
ranks  of sentries  came  out the guard  door  in the wall. The people  voluntarily  backed  up,  and  I  was
pressed to the edges. Their shouts grew loud when Jeck  came  into the streets  with shackles.  “What’s
going on?” someone called out as his intent became obvious.
I all but panicked, torn between my inability to help them and  my need  to  try.  Jeck  raised  a  hand.
“Assassins have infiltrated palaces through the front gates before,” he said, showing a soothing smile. “If
they are who they say, nothing will happen. If they’re impostors, you’ll find their heads on the wall in the
morning.”
My hand went to my mouth and Duncan was roughly pulled from the wagon. The clank of the metal
was loud as  his  boots  were  pulled  off  and  the  rings  were  fastened  around  his  and  Thadd’s  ankles.
Duncan’s face was tight and angry. Thadd’s fists were clenched.
Jeck made a show of tucking the shackles’ key into his pocket, his gaze roving over the crowd.
The crowd’s noise swelled as the gates were unlocked. A guard mounted the wagon and slapped the
reins. Neck sweating, the horse bolted from the crowd and into the dusky palace  grounds.  The ring of
sentries before the crowd backed up to follow the wagon in. Thadd  and  Duncan were  roughly pushed
into motion. Jeck was the last to return. He looked over the crowd  as  the gate  swung shut. The clank
shocked through me, and my face went cold.
“What do you want done with them, Captain?” one of the better-dressed guards asked.
“Send word to Prince Garrett that we have them,” he said, his eyes on the crowd through the gates.
“And find me a  lever and  hammer. I want to  open  that  box.”  Saying no more,  Jeck  strode  after  the
wagon, that awful hat crushed in his grip and his cloak furling behind him. The guard’s fingers fumbled as

he checked  the lock  on the gate  and  hurried  to  follow.  Swords  drawn,  the  remaining  guards  struck
aggressive poses in the safety behind the gate.
As if Jeck’s absence was a signal, the crowd surged past me. I stood rooted to the cobbles, bumped
and jostled. Their noise grew ugly, and the soldiers threatened to stab through the bars. I backed up until
the crush thinned. Almost unseeing, I turned and paced quickly down the road, feeling light and unreal. I
had to get in there. Jeck would kill them both.
The tree overhanging the wall wasn’t far, but it seemed  to  take  forever.  Shadows  were  thickening.
The moon wouldn’t rise until late,  giving me a  smothering darkness  until then.  My attention  alternated
from the cobbles to the unbroken line the top of the wall made with the sky. I reached to touch my whip
and then my knife as I looked for my tree.
The lamps were being lit, and my feet slowed as  I passed  one.  A bad  feeling settled  over  me as  I
recognized this corner. I had burned Kavenlow’s note here. Confused, I spun to the line the wall made
against the lighter sky. It stood unbroken, cold, and empty.
My tree was gone.
Shocked, I stood as if frozen. They  had  cut  it  down.  They  cut  my  tree  down! An unreasonable
anger flashed through me. How dare Jeck  cut down  my tree!  That was  my safe  tree,  the heart  of my
games with Kavenlow. It was as if he had killed a favorite pet. And how was I supposed to get in now?
Frustrated and angry, I slumped against the wall, sliding down until I was sitting on the thin grass that
eked out an existence  where  the stone  wall met the cobbles.  This wasn’t  fair. I had  to  get in, rescue
Duncan and Thadd, and save the princess. Jeck was ruining everything!
I crossed my arms around my knees and fought between my desires to cry and rail at  the wall. If I
didn’t get in, Duncan and Thadd were going to die. Why hadn’t he listened to me?
A cluster of jabbering people passed before me, faceless in the waning light. They ignored me as they
would a  beggar,  and  if I didn’t get over  the  wall,  that’s  just  what  I’d  be.  But  how?  It  was  built  to
withstand short sieges. A hundred men couldn’t take it.
Hopelessness turned my heart black, worse than the night I had  left my dog,  Banner,  to  be  kicked
and beaten for his steadfast obedience. My tree was gone, probably no more than a stump. I couldn’t tie
my rope around a stump.
My head came up. “But Banner could,” I whispered. A hundred  men couldn’t  take  the wall, but a
lone woman might—if no one saw her. My eyes flicked across the empty street. Heart pounding, I took
one of my preciously few darts from under my cap and stabbed it into my thigh. I grimaced at the sharp
hurt, hating it. One dart wouldn’t lower my resistance too far, and I needed all the help I could  find to
remain unnoticed and convince Banner to do the impossible.
I tugged my hat back on and looked up and  down  the street.  It  was  quiet this far from the palace
gate. I pulled my rope from my pack and recoiled it loosely. There was a knot every arm length, and they
bumped through my fingers.
“Banner,” I whispered as I stood  before  the wall and  closed  my eyes.  Now  that  I knew  what the
venom  did,  I  could  feel  it,  trace  the  tingling  flow  from  where  I  had  stabbed  myself.  I  followed  the
sensation as  it ran through my veins, settling on the space  behind my  eyes.  It  seemed  as  if  my  nose
burned, and I willed the sensation to grow. “Banner?” I whispered again, thinking of sticks  and  bones,
and games of fetch. “Banner, I’m back. Come play with me.” What if they had killed him?
A  muffled  whine  and  a  short  bark  from  behind  the  wall  set  my  heart  racing.  He  was  alive  and
free—and at the foot of the wall. It was working. It was really working!
Remembering the quick feel of the mouse’s thoughts, I tried to slip into Banner’s. The impressions of

the night seemed to fade, then strengthen when I found him, his paws shifting restlessly against the damp
ground. Like a rising tide, his emotions ebbed into mine, twining in an uncomfortable slurry. I struggled to
fit his impressions into a context I could relate to.
He was far more complex than the mouse. Making sense of his view of the world was very much like
composing poetry while hovering on the edge of sleep.  My concentration  wouldn’t hold,  distracted  by
the process itself. Every time I managed to separate us enough to remember what I was trying to do,  I
would lose my place and have to start over. It was frustrating, and only the knowledge that I had done it
before kept me trying.
Slowly I began to understand. He was hungry. Hungry and wet. His hip hurt where he had slept on it,
and one of his paws had a torn pad. But Banner’s drives were more complicated than a mouse’s  want
for food  and  warmth. He  had  the ability to  reason,  to  learn to  expect  an  outcome  from  a  seemingly
unrelated action. It was the ability to play that I had to exploit.
He whined, and I found a twin sigh slipping from me. Frightened from so close a tie, my eyes flashed
open. The sight of the smooth wall shocked me. I had half expected to see Banner’s tangled beard and
rough coat. Checking to see that the end of the rope would uncoil properly, I flung as many loops  as  I
could at the top of the wall.
Grunting from the effort, I caught my balance and watched the rope arch up. It settled over the wall
with a soft hush. “Take it, Banner,”  I whispered,  hoping the rope  hung over  the wall within his reach.
“Take it and pull. Let’s play tug.” My hands tightened on the rope’s  rough strands.  “Take  it from me,
boy. Come on. Pull.”
I held my breath as the knots bumped through my fingers in a series of jerks. He was doing it! Banner
was a  heavy dog,  but his weight wouldn’t be  enough to  hold me. I had  to  get him to  wrap  the rope
around the stump, if the Misdev guards were lazy and had left one.
A faint roar from the gate rose,  and  I risked  a  glance at  the street.  I had  my distraction,  but what
would be the price? Sealing my emotions away, I settled myself. This was going to  be  nigh impossible,
even if Kavenlow had sensitized Banner to venom-induced instruction.
“Banner,” I whispered  to  myself, imagining the shattered  remains of my tree.  “Bring  me  the  rope.
Come on, boy. I’m hiding behind the stump.”
The thought of me crouched behind the stump made Banner go wild. He  barked  sharp  and  high in
greeting. The rope went slack. I felt his paws shift in confusion, and his disappointment was so thick I felt
guilty for trying to manipulate him. Shoving my heartache aside, I tried again. “Get the rope,  Banner,”  I
whispered, forming the thought he ought to be quiet and take it in his teeth. “I’m hiding. Just around the
stump. Bring me the rope, and we’ll play. Get your rope, Banner. Get your rope.”
His confusion shifted to hope, and I reinforced the idea that only with the rope  in his teeth  would I
praise him and tell him he was a good boy. I imagined he saw the corner of my heel disappearing just out
of his sight around the stump. I heard an eager bark. My pulse hammered. He was so excited, I didn’t
know if he had the rope or not.
“Pull, Banner,” I said. “Come on. Try to take it from me.”
I gave a tug on the rope. My heart sank as it moved freely. I pulled again until it held firm. Elated, my
breath caught. I had taken up the slack, that was all. Banner had wrapped it around the stump. I hoped.
My hands were sweaty as I gripped the rope. Lips moving in a silent prayer, I forced myself to trust
Banner and  my unseen work.  The rope  held as  I put my weight upon  it.  I  took  a  step  up  the  wall,
balancing against it and pulling myself up a step, then another. My arms ached at the strain and the faint
lethargy from the venom, but I couldn’t stop.
Up a man length, then another. My jaw ached from clenching it, and sweat dotted my forehead. My

hands were cramping, and my arms felt like cloth. By the time I found the top,  my pulse was  racing. I
tried to swing a leg over the top, but missed. The sudden pull of my weight on my shoulders drew a low
cry from me.
Banner barked a frantic greeting. I took a breath, wishing he would be still. Holding it, I flung my leg
up and  over,  bruising my ankle through  my  boot.  My  breath  exploded  from  me  in  a  sob,  but  I  lay
straddling the wall. My cheek pressed against the cool rock as I caught my strength. My legs felt useless,
and my arms were numb, but I’d made it.
I  looked  down  at  the  street,  glad  no  one  had  seen  me.  Banner  barked  again—a  playful,  eager
sound—and I turned toward the quiet palace. A stir of pride filled me until I saw my tree, cut and left to
rot, its green leaves souring into decay. Nothing was left but an oozing three-foot stump—the stump my
rope carelessly circled.
There were no guards. Duncan’s distraction had worked.
“Hey, Banner,”  I whispered  as  he stood  with his front paws  against  the  wall.  “Good  boy.  Just  a
moment. I’ll be right down.” The big dog’s tail whipped the ground.
I pulled the rope up from the street, then dropped it into the garden. Taking a deep breath, I closed
my eyes and slid from the top of the wall. It was the most frightening thing I’d ever done.
There was an instant of stomach-dropping motion. My eyes flew open as it seemed I should have hit
the ground by now. With a shocking suddenness, the ground pushed my feet, jamming my knees into my
chin. Stars exploded. I fell sideways. Pain throbbed in my hip and lip. I tasted blood; I must have bitten
it. Banner covered  my face  with his tongue,  and  that,  more  than anything else,  pulled  me  to  a  sitting
position.
“Down. Down,  Banner,”  I gasped,  trying to  fend him off. He  would  have  nothing  to  do  with  my
commands, both verbal and in his head. He covered me with his body, refusing to let me do more than sit
up. My tears flowed as I gave him a long hug before I scooted backward to hide under a bush.
He whined and fawned at my feet, and I ran my hands over his ears, telling him he was a good boy,
the best dog anyone could have. His fur was matted with mud. His paws were caked with it. He  stank
like wet dog, and I breathed it, knowing he had already forgiven me for everything. “Good boy,” I said,
wiping my tears away with the back of my hand. “You’re a good boy.”

Thirty-one
Banner’s hunger-thin form vibrated as he growled at the sight of Garrett’s guards. I felt it through the
arm I’d draped across his shoulders. He had clearly endured a hard time. His ribs showed, and his head
looked too large for the rest of him. “Easy, Banner,” I soothed as I peeked out from under the bank of
shrubs we  were  lying under,  and  his rumble turned  into a  plaintive tail thump.  My  fingers  felt  for  the
smooth finish of my dart tube. Kavenlow’s venom had filled very few of my darts, but I wouldn’t let them
hurt Banner again.
The palace grounds were a shambles. Garrett’s stolen livestock  had  been  given free  pasture  of the
gardens, churning the grass into mud and digging up the roots of the rare and delicate plants I had spent
years tending. It was appalling, convincing me further that Garrett was an ill-mannered barbarian.
Banner and I were overlooking a circular patio surrounded by budding roses. At the center stood the
wagon and a flurry of guards. The horse had been taken to the stables, leaving Duncan and Thadd with
their hands bound and metal shackles on their bare feet. There was no more pretence that they might be
freed.
Jeck  stood  unmoving  directly  across  from  them,  his  powerful  outline  obvious  in  the  flickering
torchlight. He had that gaudy hat on again, and the black feathers draped brokenly across the back of his
neck. Even as I watched, he took it off, crushing it in a gloved hand. He looked irritated.
In sharp contrast was Garrett. The prince’s  motions were  quick  with excitement as  he paced  from
one end of the patio to the other. His cape furled about his ankles, showing flashes of his elaborate outfit
as he moved. He looked every bit the prince and desirable husband. I bitterly thought of how innocent I
had been.
My gaze rose to the dark tower. Kavenlow’s window was black, but a faint glow of light shone from
my sitting room. I was sure Contessa was there, and I hoped she was well.
A series  of shouts  and  harsh scraping  sounds  broke  the dusky  silence, pulling my attention  to  the
patio. Six guards wrestled with the box  Thadd  had  carted  halfway across  the kingdom. It  was  heavy;
Thadd worked in marble. Jeck stood well back. He was watching not the box but the surrounding area. I
slowly let my held breath out, shivering in the chill.
“Be careful!” Thadd said, his bound hands  reaching out when the box  thudded  to  the ground.  The
stone pavement under it cracked, and I could see his distress-even from here. A guard cuffed him to be
quiet, and  only Duncan’s  quick  reactions  kept  the  short  man  from  going  down.  Another  shove,  and
Duncan and Thadd were separated again.
Garrett strode impatiently to the box. Banner growled at him. “Be still,” I whispered, thinking I’d like
to bite the prince again, too, and his threat turned into a confused whine.
“Get back!” Garrett  shouted  at  the three  sentries  trailing him. “Your hovering is going to  drive me
insane. Get away, damn you all to hell!”
The three men dropped back when Jeck raised a hand and took their place. “More torches,” Garrett
said loudly. “I want to see the guttersnipe’s blood run when I ferret her out.”
My face went slack. They thought I was in the box! That’s why they had ringed it. I closed my eyes in
a long blink, thankful I hadn’t taken Duncan’s advice.
Garrett paced as two sentries pried at the slats. “So this is how she planned on gaining the grounds,”
Garrett said, sneering at Duncan and Thadd. “Not very clever, is she?”
Jeck said nothing. His eyes continued to scan the surrounding grounds.

“I don’t know why I pay you, Captain Jeck,” Garrett taunted. “You spent a week chasing a fool slip
of a woman and couldn’t catch her. All it took me was some patience.”
Jeck stiffened. His hand was  never  far from the opening of his jerkin,  and  I wondered  if that  was
where he kept his dart pipe. The sentries returned with more torches, and Jeck pointed, placing them at
the fringes of the circle. The patio was as brightly lit as if for a festival, and my stomach  churned  at  the
irony of it all.
“Please,” Thadd begged as they levered the box upright. “Please be careful.”
Garrett rubbed his hands together in anticipation. “See?” he chortled. “She’s in mere.”
I watched breathlessly while the guards continued to pry at the box with little success. Unable to take
the suspense, Garrett strode  forward.  Snatching up an ax,  he pushed  a  guard  out of the way.  With a
grunt of effort, he swung it at the thick wood.
“No!” Thadd shouted, lunging forward. I covered my mouth as four guards fell upon him, pinning him
to the ground.  Jeck  didn’t move.  He  wasn’t  watching Thadd,  focused  instead  upon  the  edges  of  the
circle. He was looking for me.
Thadd struggled until he had a view of Garrett. He watched, horror etching his face while the prince
beat upon the box. “I am surrounded by fools!” Garrett shouted as he swung again and again. The front
of the box splintered with a frightening crack. He dropped the ax with a cry of victory and pulled at the
shards of wood. Several guards grasped the edges, and with a cascade of sawdust, the front of the box
fell apart.
The patio went silent. The sawdust spilled from Princess Contessa’s statue, falling to reveal Thadd’s
heartfelt tribute to the woman he loved. In the softness of evening, the pale folds of her dress looked light
enough to drift in the breeze. She was holding a  dove,  her head  tilted to  show  the graceful line of her
neck and me fall of her hair. The vision held sway for three heartbeats as all took in the vision of grace
and beauty.
Face ugly, Garrett drew his blade. “It’s not her!” he shouted, swinging it.
“No! Don’t!” Thadd cried, desperately struggling to rise.
Garrett’s blade hit the statue with a dull clank. My eyes widened as a fold of exquisitely carved stone
broke away to crack the paving stones. Shocked, I glanced at Jeck. His lips were tight, and he had his
hands on his hips. He gestured brusquely to one of the guards, and the man came close, unable to tear his
gaze from the prince’s tantrum as Jeck whispered in his ear.
“It should have been her!” Garrett exclaimed. Thadd bowed his head as Garrett’s blade hit the statue
again and, with a sharp ping, broke. “Aargh!” Garrett shouted, flinging the broken hilt into the shrubbery.
Furious, he strode to Thadd, still on the ground under the guards.
“Where is she?” he shouted, pulling the man up as the sentries got off him. “Where?”
“You’re a  murdering dog,”  Thadd  said,  almost weeping over  the destruction  of his life’s work.  “I
wouldn’t tell you before. I won’t tell you now.”
Garrett reached for his sword. His hand slapped into his empty scabbard. Clearly furious for having
forgotten he had broken it, he swung his fist into Thadd’s belly. The squat, powerfully built man doubled
over, almost pulling the sentries down with his deadweight.
Enraged, Garrett strode to Captain Jeck. “I want them questioned,” the prince all but spat. “Pur the
taller one on the rack first. We’ll find out where the guttersnipe is.”
I put a hand to my mouth, deathly afraid for them. Beside me, Banner’s growling became audible.
“There’s no rack, Prince Garrett,” Jeck said. “King Stephen didn’t use one.”

“Then improvise something—Captain,” Garrett said caustically. “You, though, will go into the city and
burn it street by street until she surrenders herself. She isn’t here.”
“With all respect, Prince Garrett, I will not be leaving the palace grounds.”
Garrett jerked to a halt. The surrounding guards glanced uneasily between themselves. “I gave you an
order!” Garrett shouted, spittle glinting in the torchlight as his voice echoed off the distant walls. “Go and
find her!”
“I will not leave the grounds—Prince  Garrett.”  As  I watched  in breathless  anticipation, Jeck  stood
before Garrett and defied him. “I told you she wasn’t in that box. This was a distraction. Pulling the men
from the walls was  a  mistake.  If  she  isn’t  on  the  grounds  already,  she  will  be  soon.  I  will  take  the
prisoners to their cell, then return to look for her here.”
“I gave you an order!” Garrett cried. “I am the king! You’ll do what I say, or you’ll hang with them!”
The grove of roses had gone deathly quiet. Stiff-necked and angry, Jeck said, “You are not my king.
Your father is my king. I take direction from him. I was  told  to  keep  you alive. That is what I will do
down to my last breath. If I leave, she will kill you— Prince Garrett.”
“We are not in my father’s kingdom!” Garrett said, his voice shrill. “We are in mine. I am your king
!”
A shutter banged from the palace walls, and my gaze shot to the lit window. Contessa stood framed
by the light. “You are not a king, Prince Garrett,” she said, her clear voice ringing out. “This is my land.
You are a second son and will never be anything more.”
My breath escaped me in a frightened hiss. It had to be bravery. No one was that foolish.
Garrett went red with a fury so deep, it had to be born from insanity. “Get her back in her room!” he
shouted, and a shadow pulled her, protesting, away from the window. Thadd groaned in frustrated anger.
Garrett  spun from the palace  and  back  to  Jeck.  “Give me your blade,  Captain,”  he said,  his  clipped
words giving no clue as to his intent.
I watched,  unbelieving, as  Jeck  reached  for his  sword.  The  smooth  sound  of  it  coming  from  the
scabbard chilled me. Garrett’s hand was outstretched. The flickering shadows from the torches glinted on
the blade, making it flame. My pulse raced. Jeck handed it to him hilt first.
Garrett snatched it, slamming it into his scabbard to replace his broken one. My shoulders slumped in
a relief I didn’t understand. “I want them questioned,” Garrett snarled. “I don’t care if it kills them. I want
to know  where  she  is by dawn.”  The prince  strode  away,  trailing the three  unlucky guards  that  Jeck
motioned to accompany him.
Jeck waited until he was out of earshot before muttering, “I’m sure she will tell us exactly where she
is—Prince Chu-head—  within half that  time.”  Clearly  angry,  he  turned  to  the  statue  and  the  ring  of
guards. “You,” he said, pointing to one gawky in adolescence.  “Give me your weapon.”  The boy  did,
and Jeck took it as his own. “Go to my quarters and fetch my second blade. I’ll be in the cellblock  or
with the prince. Those of you on the wall, stay in pairs.”
“Pairs?” a young guard muttered. “Who does he think is coming? The angel of death?”
Jeck spun, surprising the sentry. “That’s exactly who I think is coming, and unless you want to meet
her early, I suggest you treat every breath of wind as an intruder. Understand?”
The sentry stiffened. “Yes sir!” With a creaking of leather, all but six of the guards left the patio. They
passed me, unknowingly. All I had to do was sit and be still. I placed a hand on Banner’s head, and his
faint growling ceased. He had been bred to hunt elk and wolf. He knew how to be silent, postponing the
attack until a more favorable opportunity arose.

Jeck motioned for the remaining guards to escort Duncan and Thadd. The sculptor shuffled forward
with his head  down.  Pity  filled  me  as  I  watched  his  slow-moving  shadow.  There  was  nothing,  save
threatening Contessa, that would move him now.
Duncan was  hunched with determination and  anger  as  he was  led away.  He  was  a  branded  thief,
risking death should he be caught thieving again. I had told him no, but he had done it anyway. And if I
couldn’t free him, he would die with that same defiance glittering in his eye.
Jeck looked back once as he followed the tight group across the grounds to the guards’ quarters, his
hat in his grip. The light from the torches  went with them. The rose  patio  went silent. Thadd’s  dream
stood alone and broken. I lay under the shrubs, knowing it was safe but unable to move.
What was  I going to  do?  I had  to  have  the  key  in  Jeck’s  pocket  to  free  Thadd  and  Duncan.  I
couldn’t get the key until I retook the palace.  I couldn’t  take  the palace  without Thadd  and  Duncan’s
help. It was a tight circle bound with iron.
“Why the chu pits isn’t it raining?” I whispered. Depressed, my eyes lingered on the shattered remains
of Thadd’s statue. It had been beautiful. Even now I could recall the lovingly shaped curve of her cheek
and the graceful line he had made of her dress. Garrett had damaged it beyond repair before his sword
had broken. Thadd worked in marble, and his tools were made of stronger stuff than Garrett’s sword.
Thadd’s tools? I thought, my gaze shifting to the wagon.
I slowly backed up from under the bushes to sit upright. Thadd’s tools were bound to still be under
the wagon’s bench. His chisels and mallets might be able to break locks.
Banner sensed my excitement and stood, his tail wagging. I glanced at the palace walls, imagining the
eyes. I’d have to risk going into the open. It was dark enough now, perhaps.
Telling Banner to stay, I crept down to the patio, hesitating by a tall briar of climbing rose to  gather
my nerve. Down here, the chipped mutilation of Thadd’s work was heartbreaking. Shards of stone and
scuffed sawdust  littered  the ground.  I took  a  deep  breath  and  ran  to  the  wagon.  Standing  upon  the
spokes of the wheel, I reached for the bag  under  the bench.  My hand searched  unseeing. A soft  sigh
escaped me when I found the fold of cloth and dragged it to where I could use two hands to lift it over
the side.
It was heavy, and I held it close as I shuffled back into hiding. “Banner,” I whispered. Before I could
count to three, he had loped to me with his rolling gait. He pushed his nose into my hand and looked for
approval, nearly as excited as when I had dropped over the wall and back into his world.  “Good  boy,
Banner,” I said, juggling the tools as I fended him off.
I’d have to do something with him, but he wouldn’t stay for long with me out of his sight. Eventually
he would come find me, his odd behavior leading Jeck to me. I needed a distraction for the loyal dog. A
smile drew the corners of my mouth up. The kitchen was on the way to the guards’ quarters.
“Come on, boy,” I said, giving him a pat as I started into motion. A sense of purpose filled me. “Let’s
go get you a well-deserved bone.”

Thirty-two
“Come, Banner,” I whispered as I slunk down  the hedgerow.  The massive dog  trotted  beside  me,
happy to  be  moving. Banner’s  bone  would have to  wait,  since  I  had  found  two  sentries  outside  the
kitchen door. It seemed Jeck was taking me seriously now.  As  I made  my sporadic  way from tree  to
wall to rock, I heard the occasional shout when a pig or sheep caught the attention  of a  guard.  Having
livestock on the grounds was an unexpected boon. I’d have to remember that.
The soft footfalls of two men brought me to a heart-pounding halt. Hissing to Banner to follow, I flung
myself off the sawdust path to crouch at the foundation of the palace. Banner growled, and I forced him
to lie down.  I hardly breathed  as  two  men passed  within a  stone’s  throw.  Hands  slow and  careful, I
checked  my topknot,  then winced as  Thadd’s  tools  clanked.  Kavenlow’s  three  metal  darts  felt  cold
among the bone needles.
“Put extra guards on the perimeter,” I heard Jeck’s intent low voice say, and I jerked with a thrill of
angst. “It’ll be dark enough for her to come over the walls until the moon rises.” He looked toward the
distant, unseen city. “Are the off-shift sentries searching the palace yet?”
“Yes, sir,” the other said. “Devil of a girl. Shall I double the guard on the princess?”
“And Prince Garrett. Keep him in his room if you can.” Jeck’s voice went faint as they passed me. I
took a grateful breath and gave Banner a  pat,  excitement tingling to  my toes.  My heart  slowed  as  the
quiet reasserted control of the night.
Rising from my crouch, I looked toward the guards’ quarters: a one-story building at the center of an
open area. Underneath were the cells, dug out and lined with stone. I had used one once as a playhouse
and remembered it was dry and smelled of earth. The guards  still teased  the poor  unfortunate sentry  I
had drafted as my “husband.” My face burned at my innocence.
I slunk the last few paces  to  the edge  of the field. There  was  nowhere  to  hide,  and  even with the
darkness, the idea of crossing it was  daunting. Keeping  to  an even pace,  I walked  down  the sawdust
path as  if  I  belonged.  Either  Banner  and  I  would  be  seen  or  we  wouldn’t.  A  trembling  in  my  legs
quickened, the vertigo coming with it telling me I was drawing too heavily upon my venom-induced skills
to stay unnoticed. The boost from the dart was fading already?
My stomach was in knots as my feet found the wide covered porch. Breath held, I stood in the entry
room and listened for a call of question or recognition behind me. There was none. Worried, I looked at
Banner cowering at the smell of Garrett’s guards. I couldn’t take him with me. “Stay,” I said firmly as I
made a tentative step from him, and he whined. I took his heavy jaw in my hands and put my face beside
his. “Stay,” I said, giving his head a small shake. A wave of dizziness took me, but he lowered himself to
sit in the doorway.
My focus returned and I straightened, indecision pulling at me. Should I supplement my skills, making
it easier for Jeck to dart me into unconsciousness should he find me, or should I keep my levels of venom
low, relying on luck and chance? I had a feeling this was the question  that  haunted  all players,  and  my
fingers went to my topknot, counting what I had  left. There  weren’t  enough to  reassure  me, and  since
Banner seemed inclined to stay where he was, I gave him a final stern command and headed inside. With
him sitting there, I’d have some warning if anyone tried to pass this way.
The stairway to the cells was in the common room in the middle of the building. I’d  have to  pass  a
score of bunks. No one was here, though. Everyone was looking for me. I was sublimely confident the
situation would be different below in the cellblocks.
My hair on the back of my neck rose as I strode through the open barracks, my dart tube  ready.  I

was shivering when I finally gained the stairway. My nose wrinkled at the foul smell wafting up the stairs.
There ought to be two sentries at the top of the stairs, but by the faint rumble of conversation, it seemed
they had foolishly joined the others.
I took  my cap  off and  stuffed it into the back  of my trousers  before  I slunk down  into the  softer
darkness. Only a faint shadow of light showed the way. The oil lamps had their wicks too low, and they
were smoking. I eased my pack to the lowest stair. My hand shook as I checked my darts, then palmed
another. As I passed the first cell, there was a quick intake of breath.
“No,” I mouthed frantically at  the grimy face  pressed  against the floor-to-ceiling  bars.  I shook  my
head, surprised to find myself grinning at the excitement in the guard’s eyes. I recognized him. More men
saw me, holding themselves still to keep me from being found.
I glanced up the dark corridor to the brightly lit alcove and Garrett’s guards. “Two men?” I asked the
man before me. “Are they here?”
“In the thell acroth from the thable,” he intentionally lisped to keep the sharp sounds from carrying to
the sentries.
I  wanted  to  hold  my  breath  against  the  stink  of  him.  It  was  worse  than  a  chu  pit  in  summer.
“Kavenlow?” I asked, my hopes plummeting as he shook his head.
“The Mithdev dog thaid you were a beggar, a thangeling. I knew he wath lying.”
My eyes dropped. “He was telling the truth,” I admitted. “But the real heir is here now.” I bit my lip,
wounded at his shocked expression. “I’m going to try to get you out. Be ready.”
He nodded, pulling away from the light. I heard the barest whisper and felt the air change to one  of
repressed excitement. The word of my presence went faster than my progress, and eager, hopeful eyes
silently watched me pass.
Boots a whisper, I crept forward until I was close enough for the guards to see me if they bothered to
look up from their dice game. I cringed as I took in the six soldiers. They looked huge, crammed into a
space designed for four. My chances of bringing them all down were slim to none.  Futility slumped my
shoulders, but an arm raised in encouragement gave me strength.
Trembling, I crouched. Why they hadn’t seen me was obvious and an outrage.  The cells should be
bright so no one could hide in the shadows. That I could get this close undetected was atrocious, magic
or not. I had yet to see Thadd or Duncan, and my fear for them tripled.
Three sentries sat on chairs, two on the edge of the table, and the last stood. He rolled a pair of dice,
and rough condolences were made. Having them jammed together might be a boon. They’d get in each
other’s way while trying to reach me, giving me the time I’d need for the venom to  work.  Garrett  may
have been able to take the palace with such inexperienced guards, but to  keep  it with the same  was  a
jest. Clearly his father had given him the worst of the lot.
Breath held, I pulled five more darts from my topknot to make seven, counting the one  in my hand
and the one in my dart tube. Inexperienced or not, they were big and armed. I felt a collective holding of
breath from my father’s men as I let the first dart fly.
“Ah,” a guard cried, slapping at his calf beneath the table. “Damn fleas.”
The second was away as he reached down and pulled the needle out for everyone to see.
The third found the neck of a guard when they realized they were under attack.
The fourth landed in the chest of the man who pointed at me.
My eyes widened as all six got to their feet. “It’s her!” one shouted. Panicking, I couldn’t remember if
I had shot him already, and so put a dart into him. My precious moments of confusion were  gone.  No

one had fallen. One man, perhaps two, was undarted.
The hall dimmed when they eclipsed the light. Frightened, I stood. My fingers jammed a dart into the
pipe the wrong way and  I pricked  myself. Dropping  it, I plucked  a  bone  dart  from  my  topknot  and
physically drove it into the chest of the guard grabbing my arm.
“Princess!”  someone  shouted.  Panicked,  I  pried  at  the  man’s  grip  on  me.  I  stumbled  as  a
Costenopolie  guard  reached  past  the  bars  and  yanked  him  backward.  Gasping,  I  jerked  away,
backpedaling until my head hit a wall. Stars filled my vision. I couldn’t breathe, it hurt so bad.
Struggling to stay upright and  conscious,  I saw  that  the guard  who had  grabbed  me was  moaning,
curled up in a ball. I felt the back of my head to find a lump but no blood.
A single man was standing. His hands were raised in surrender. He was scared, not even old enough
to have a beard. “You,” I wheezed, catching my breath. “Put your back against the bars  where  one  of
my men can reach you.” The young guard’s eyes widened, and I gestured with my empty dart  tube.  “I
can down you from here,” I said. “Go stand by the bars.”
White-faced, he did, and a hairy, eager arm snaked out and pinned him to the bars by his neck. My
shoulders slumped. I had done it.
“She did it!” someone exclaimed in a hushed voice.
“Duncan?” I called, finding him pressed against the bars with his mouth hanging open.
“He’s got the key!” Duncan exclaimed, pointing with a blood-smeared hand. “That one there has the
key to the cell. But Captain Jeck has the shackle key.” Hunched in hurt, he held one arm with the other.
His face was bruised and swollen! “Leave us here, Tess. We can get out, but what good will we be with
these?” He shuffled his feet, the iron at his ankles clanking.
I  picked  my  careful  way  through  the  guards  trembling  on  the  floor  to  Thadd.  The  sculptor  was
slumped in a miserable huddle, clearly convinced he had failed his love. “Get up!” I whispered. “I think I
can get those off of you. And you were right, Duncan. I needed your help. I never would have made it
over the wall if it hadn’t been for you.”
“But we don’t have the key for the shackles,” Duncan protested as I crouched to pat the clothing of
the guard with the cell key.
I grinned at the buzz of muted excitement from my guards. “But I have Thadd’s tools.”
Thadd’s  head  came  up,  his  hollow  eyes  flickering  with  hope.  “You  have  my  chisels?”  he  said,
reaching out past the bars.
“And mallet.” I lurched over  a  writhing sentry  and  shoved  the key  into the simple lock.  The door
swung  open.  The  light  fell  upon  them  cleanly  without  the  shadow  of  the  bars.  “Can  you  break  the
shackles?”
“I’ll try.” He emerged from the cell like a young bear, nudging aside a downed guard. I ran back to
the foot of the stairs to get his tools. Duncan hovered beside the table, anxiously watching as  I handed
them to Thadd. I silently took in Duncan’s bruises, feeling sick. In the bare minutes he had been  out of
my sight, they beat him for that defiant gleam he still wore.
The clank of clean metal as Thadd chose  the largest  chisel drew  my attention.  I was  torn  between
watching and the hushed calls of men from the cells. They were shackled as well, but I could at least get
them out. Thadd swung his foot up onto the table and positioned his chisel.
I was unlocking the first door when a sharp clank rang out. Thadd said nothing, and I handed the key
to the first guard  and  returned  to  the table.  Brow  furrowed  in concentration,  Thadd  shifted the  chisel
against  the  lock  and  raised  the  hammer  again.  His  muscles  tensed,  and  with  strength  and  exquisite

precision, he brought the mallet down. “Chu!” he exclaimed as the chisel slipped from the metal to tear a
gash in his leg.
“You did it!” Duncan exclaimed in a whisper, and an excited babble rose behind us.
“Yes, but look what I did to my leg.” Thadd pulled the shackle from his ankle and swung the other up
onto the table. He began to hammer at the second ring of metal.
The Costenopolie guards  blinked at  the brighter light as  they rattled  out of their cells. Their smiles
were grim but honest. With very little conversation,  they moved  the five comatose  guards  and  the last
frightened one to a cell and locked it. The feeling below-ground had turned.
“Got it,” Thadd said, the sharp sound of metal against metal breaking the tension. It sounded different.
“Saint’s bells,” he swore. “I broke my chisel.” Thadd straightened. His eyes were hopeful as he threw the
chains into his empty cell. “Duncan?” he said, and the man carefully eased his leg up onto the table,  his
breath held against the pain. He wasn’t using his left arm,  holding it close  and  unmoving. His face  was
drawn, and bruises peeked from behind his shirt. Garrett was an animal.
While two Costenopolie sentries kept a hidden guard near the top of the stair, the rest of us watched
with waning hope as Thadd broke every chisel he had. “I’m sorry,” the sculptor said as the last cracked
to a thin shaving. “Duncan, I should have done yours first.”
I solemnly met the ring of determined faces. They were hungry. They were brave. They smelled. They
would do anything for me. “We will retake the palace while shackled,” I said.
Duncan went still. His bowed head rose in a smooth motion, fixing the brown of his eyes on me with a
surprising intensity. His lips pressed together. “Thadd, give me that last chisel.”
“I broke it.” Thadd put the handle in his grasp. “It’s not good for anything.”
Duncan was silent for three heartbeats. His carefully empty face shook me. He’d shown me only what
he wanted to before— and now I would see more. A spark  struck  through me, more  potent  than our
kiss. He had seemed so safe. He wasn’t. Seeing my breath catch, he nodded almost imperceptibly, as if
agreeing with me.
A  guard  chuckled  as  Duncan  carefully  placed  the  chisel  into  the  opening  of  the  lock.  His  brow
furrowed, and he twisted the metal until it was at an odd angle. “Hairpin,” he whispered. His eyes were
fixed upon the rusted lock balancing against his leg, and his voice demanded obedience.
Fumbling at my topknot, I handed him a  hairpin—no venom, just a  mundane hairpin. My hair was
ready to fall about my ears, and I rearranged Kavenlow’s metal darts to hold it. “Do you think he can do
it?” I heard someone ask. “Look at his hands,” another said. “He’s a thief sure as chu pits stink!”
“I’m not a thief,” Duncan insisted, his breath slipping from him in a rush as the lock clicked open. “I’m
a cheat.” He eyed me from under his brow. “There’s a difference.”
“You did it!” Thadd exclaimed, and Duncan confidently tossed the shackles aside.
Duncan nodded, his eyes still fixed to mine. The guards had clustered around him, but I couldn’t look
away. I saw him there in his dirty clothes and thick stubble, holding his beaten body at an awkward angle
to ease his hurts, and my knees felt like water. The heat of our kiss washed through me. He wasn’t who I
thought he was. God help me. What was I feeling?
“Princess,”  a  guard  said,  jolting  my  eyes  from  Duncan.  “We  heard  Prince  Garrett’s  men  leaving
upstairs.  What’s  happened?”  I blinked as  I recognized  Resh,  the  captain  of  my  father’s  guard.  “I’m
retaking the palace,” I said. “Do you know where Kavenlow is being held?”
“No. I’ll find him. You stay here.” He gestured for two men to act as my guards.
“No,” I said. “I’m not the princess. And I won’t stay here when I can do something.”

“Princess—” he started, halting as I frowned at him. Old habits die hard.
“I can’t wait until you’re all free,” I said. “Princess Contessa needs me now. You retake the palace.
Thadd and I will see  that Prince  Garrett  doesn’t  escape  with her before  you regain the grounds.”  His
brow furrowed, and I glared. “Until you get out of your shackles, there isn’t much you can do about it,
Captain Resh,” I said, gesturing for Thadd to join me.
The man hesitated, and in his confusion, I broke away.
“You’ll get them free?” I said, and Duncan looked up from a shackle. The gleam in his eye took me
aback.  Under  it  was  the  sly  knowledge  I  had  seen  past  his  innocuous  exterior  to  the  real  man
beneath—and  that  despite  the  stubble  and  grime,  I  was  attracted  to  him.  Save  me  from  myself,  I
thought, thinking my desire for men of power would be the end of me if Jeck wasn’t.
“Save the princess, Tess,” he said, his look warming through me, unexpected and surprising. “I’ll do
this.”
Our gaze broke as Thadd handed me the jacket from the smallest Misdev guard. I shrugged into it,
not liking how it smelled or that it fell almost to my knees. Thadd looked frightened but determined in his
borrowed Misdev jerkin. Someone’s boots were on his feet, and he moved with only a  slight limp. He
wasn’t much taller than I was, but I felt safe with his powerful bulk beside me. Despite his earlier mistrust,
I knew he would sacrifice his life for mine if he thought it would help Contessa.
Passing through my father’s guards to reach the bottom of the stairway, I wondered if anyone would
ever love me like that.

Thirty-three
“Slow down,” I said breathlessly to Thadd as he paced to the door of the guards’ quarters  and  the
lighter rectangle of dark. “And don’t look around so much,” I added. “Drop your shoulders, and swing
your arms. You look as if someone is going to fall out of the sky on you.”
Thadd caught his pace,  and  I came  even with him. “I’m sorry,  Tess,”  he said,  his voice slow and
worried. “I’m no good at this.”
“Yes you are,” I encouraged, thinking I wasn’t either. Thadd said nothing, his grip tight on his heavy
mallet. My pulse quickened as we neared the entryway, and I strained to see  past  the door.  A savage
growl brought us to a standstill. My panic melted as I recognized Banner.
“God save us,” Thadd  whispered,  clutching my arm and  pushing me behind him as  Banner’s  large
silhouette rose in the threshold. “What the devil is that monster?”
“Banner,” I said, more for the dog than Thadd. “That’s my dog. Stay here.”
Thadd’s head bobbed loosely, and I went to the agitated animal. It took more than a few moments,
but with encouragement and a firm demand for obedience,  Banner accepted  Thadd  as  someone  to  be
tolerated. It didn’t help we both stank like Misdev guards.
“I don’t know how we can reach Contessa,” Thadd said, tentatively patting Banner. “They’re looking
for us. And no disrespect, Tess, but you don’t look like a guard. You don’t even look like a man.”
“Thank  you,”  I  said  as  I  peeked  outside,  meaning  it.  I  felt  awful  in  Duncan’s  trousers,  and  my
borrowed jerkin stank so  badly  of sweat,  I didn’t think it had  been  washed  since being taken  off the
loom. “But if we can gain the halls, I can get us into my room without being seen.”
“What about the guards outside her door?” he protested.
I edged into movement. I had snuck in and out of my room so often, I had worn the stone clean under
my window. “Even with the guards,” I said, motioning for Thadd to follow.
We saw no one on the way to the kitchen. Most of the sentries on the walls had  torches,  and  they
were too distant to worry about. A loud, fire-lit commotion was at the stables. I heard a horse call and
frowned. It sounded like Tuck.
The sentries were still at the kitchen door  when Thadd  and  I eased  into hiding nearby.  They were
eating something sticky by the amount of finger licking going on. My head shook in disgust at the quality
of Garrett’s  men. They fell with a  brief moment of confusion, each  pierced  with a  dart.  Thadd  and  I
dragged the convulsing men into the shadows.
“What do you want to do with them?” Thadd asked, his voice shaking more than his thick hands.  I
knew I could count on him, but he looked ready to fly apart.
Banner had  his tail tucked,  looking both  aggressive  and  afraid.  It  was  a  dangerous  combination. I
took off my pack and pulled out a length of cord. “Tie them up and put them in one of the cooking pits,”
I said as I cut it into usable lengths with my knife. “I’ll be right back.”
“Tess,” he protested, but I slipped to the door of the kitchen. I peeked in to find it empty. A pot of
water was steaming, and several beheaded chickens waited on a table. Garrett  had  to  be  eating better
than that, though, and I found a flesh-strewn bone in the refuse barrel. Banner wouldn’t move from this
for a week, I thought in satisfaction.
A wisp of song brought my head up. Someone was coming. Face tight in alarm, I glanced at the door.
It was too far away. I dove  for a  nook  beside  the pantry.  Crouching,  I pressed  against the wall. The

singing grew louder as a man entered. My heart pounded. “Stay put, Thadd,” I whispered. “Please, stay
put.”
“Oh-h-h-h, I don’t have to man the walls,” the man sang heartily off-key. “I don’t have to clean my
boots. I only have to clean the chickens and pull out all their goots.”
“That’s guts,” I muttered, “and it doesn’t rhyme.” It was the Misdev guard-turned-cook. Apparently
he had been enjoying his change of profession from spitter of men to spitter of chickens. I cringed in tired
weariness as he launched into a ballad of the warmth of entrails on one’s fingers when it was cold. “You
can take the man off the battlefield…” I breathed.
I peeked  around  to  see  the apron-clad,  ex-soldier  contentedly  dipping  a  chicken  in  hot  water  in
preparation to pluck it. “Kurt!” came a faint summons from what sounded like the banquet hall, and the
cook looked up. “The chancellor wants some water!”
Kavenlow! I thought, tensing. They had him in the banquet hall?
The guard hummed happily. “Water for the chancellor, not rain upon my head. I’d rather be a cook
than a soldier who is dead.”
I crouched, torn with indecision, as the cook left with a pitcher. I wanted to see Kavenlow, but if I left
Thadd much longer, he’d come looking for me sure as Banner would. There were scornful laughs from
the banquet hall, and I wondered what they had done. Worried, I glanced  over  the empty kitchen and
made a dash for the garden with the bone for Banner.
“Hey!” the cook cried, and I spun, my face warming. Setting his pitcher  by the door,  he wiped  his
hands across this filthy apron. “Aren’t you the one—”
“Guts and boots don’t rhyme.” Pulling my dart tube to my lips, I made a puff of air.
He frowned as it hit him in the neck. “You little harlot,” he said, plucking it out and stepping forward.
A pained look crossed him. He groaned, clutching his shoulder. My held breath slipped out as he fell, out
cold by the time he reached the floor. Heart pounding, I watched him. He wasn’t even twitching. I hoped
he wasn’t dead.
Banner whined from the doorway. Thadd stood beside him looking whiter than I felt. Knees weak, I
glanced from the empty doorway to the prostrate cook. No one was coming. No one had heard. “Come
on,” I hissed, grabbing the cook’s arm. “Help me get him outside.”
Thadd dragged him out by his heels and I gave Banner his bone. The huge dog promptly sat where he
was and began gnawing. I joined Thadd at the pits, binding the guard’s hands and  feet  and  tying a  rag
over his mouth. Thadd shoved the unconscious cook into the pit atop the others, and I tugged the cover
over it.
“Banner, come,” I whispered, coaxing the massive dog  to  sit on it. “Stay.”  The dog’s  tail mumped
hollowly on the wooden  cover  as  he resettled  himself. He  was  more  interested  in  the  bone  than  my
praise.  He  would stay  put,  and  when the  cook  and  guards  were  found  missing,  no  one  would  dare
disturb the huge, half-starved animal that they had been tormenting.
Thadd took my arm as I turned to the door. “Here,” he said, extending a belt and sword.
I stared at the length of steel, not liking it. “I can’t use it,” I protested in a hushed voice.
“Then it’s for show,” he said, draping the belt around my waist and frowning since there wasn’t a hole
in the strip  of leather  small enough to  fit  me.  “Take  your  knife  back,  too,”  he  added,  and  I  shakily
accepted it. I didn’t like this. I didn’t like it at all.
Armed with a  weapon  I couldn’t  use,  I reentered  the kitchen and  skulked  past  the  boiling  water.
“Wait here,” I whispered. “I want to see Kavenlow.”

“What do I do if someone comes in?”
“Hit them on the head with your mallet?” I suggested, and he looked at it in horror, as if never having
considered it as a weapon before.
I edged  into the small, unlit dining room.  My gaze went to  the  tapestry  that  had  saved  my  life.  I
swallowed hard as I found nothing left of the curtain but three rings and a scrap of cloth. Sitting on a stool
in the hearth where the fire would be was a game of thieves and kings. My face burned when I realized it
was the game I had left for Jeck on the inn table. Obviously he had guessed I had hidden in the fireplace.
With a  sudden  determination,  I went to  the board  and  moved  my thief. There  were  moves left in the
game, but it was over. His king was mine. It wasn’t smart. I knew with an undying certainty I’d pay for it
later. But I couldn’t help it.
An echoing conversation filtered out from the banquet hall. The lamps were high, and a rectangle  of
light made it to where I stood. Edging closer, I peered around the archway. My hand rose to cover my
mouth in heartache.
Kavenlow was slumped on the floor in chains in the center of the room. His chin was on his chest. He
didn’t move when I willed with all my soul for him to turn and see me. Guards surrounded him, leaning
casually against the walls. He was dripping wet. My shock turned to anger. How could they treat him like
that? Leaving him in chains on the floor!
But then I realized Jeck’s  intent. In the center  of the  room,  Kavenlow  had  little  to  work  with  to
escape. Worse, if I wanted to help him, I’d have to show myself. Even trying to gain his attention might
result in my capture. But if Duncan could pick locks with a broken chisel and a hairpin, I was willing to
wager Kavenlow could do the same with two bits of fire-hardened needles.  I had  one  that  was  empty
already from taking the cellblock. And I didn’t think dosing him with the venom from the second would
endanger him since he couldn’t have had any contact with venom for days. It might even help him escape.
It felt decidedly wicked to take aim at my instructor. He jumped when the first dart struck his thigh,
pulling him into an alert  readiness.  I  put  the  second  right  next  to  it,  and  he  returned  to  his  slumped
position.  I  waited  to  be  sure  he  wasn’t  going  to  pass  out.  The  guards  continued  to  talk  among
themselves, wondering if they should send  someone  for  more  lamps.  Kavenlow  shifted  his  hand  and
plucked the darts. They disappeared under the concealment of his palm. I smiled as his hands edged to
the lock on his shackles. I only had  one  bone  and  one  metal dart  left, but having Kavenlow  free  was
worth a hundred darts to me.
“Good luck, Kavenlow,” I breathed as I left, knowing he wouldn’t risk looking at me.
Full of a new and probably  unwarranted  confidence,  I backtracked  into the kitchen.  “This way,” I
said, and Thadd  lurched into motion. I appreciated  him not asking anything. He  looked  frightened for
such a powerful young man.
I was torn between skulking from spot to spot or trusting my thin disguise and boldly making my way
in the open. We did a little of both as we rose two floors, seen from a distance but unchallenged. Some
of the hallways were entirely unlit, and I frowned, thinking that if Garrett couldn’t even run a palace, how
did he intend to run a kingdom?
“No,” Thadd said, drawing me to a stop at the base of the stairs on the third floor. “I saw her from
the garden. She is on this floor.”
I pulled on his sleeve at the shuffle of approaching boots. “Come on!” I pleaded, my efforts having as
much effect as  pushing on a  tree.  “My old nursery is up  a  level.  We  can  rope  down  from  there,”  I
explained, and  he let me pull  him  up.  My  pulse  hammered  as  we  reached  the  shadows  of  the  next
landing. We had made it just in time.
“You there!” a masculine voice below us called. “Have you been up to the tower yet?”

I looked at Thadd, panicking. “Answer him,” I whispered, my heart in my throat.
“Uh, no,” Thadd said, pitching his voice deeper than usual. “We’re going to recheck the fourth floor.
Uh…” He hesitated. “See any sign of her?”
“Naw,” the man said, putting a foot on the first step. “She ain’t here. I was supposed to be on leave,
and I’m spending it searching for a damned wench I can’t  even take  a  tumble with.” He  took  a  noisy
breath through his nose and spat on the floor.
Thadd moved a step farther into the dark. “Hard luck.”
I eyed the two guards and drew back into the shadows, trying to hide my pack. Their light made  it
difficult for them to  see  us.  My sword  felt heavy, and  my knife was  cold  at  the small  of  my  back.  I
fingered my whip. It had a distinctive noise, and I didn’t want to use it.
The first sentry stared up at us, his stance sullen. “Captain Jeck has gone mad. Have you heard he’s
got six men guarding that chancellor? Why not make them search the palace? That old man is so meek,
you could tell him to stay put and he would.” The surly guard snatched the light from the first sentry and
stalked away. “Come on, Wilk. The sooner we finish, the sooner we eat, though it won’t be much, seeing
as everyone is searching for a fool woman!”
The last was an angry shout, and I swallowed hard as it echoed. The other guard gave us a wave and
cheerfully followed his dour companion. He was persuasively telling him that the captain  knew  what he
was doing, and if the chancellor was under  heavy guard  in the middle of an empty room,  there  was  a
reason for it. Thadd and I let out our held breath simultaneously.
Thadd’s  hands  were  trembling  as  he  shifted  his  grip  on  his  mallet.  I  took  his  arm  as  if  seeking
protection, and he straightened. “Thank you, Thadd,”  I said.  “I think you just saved  my life.” He  said
nothing, but his breath shook as he exhaled.
We continued. A wry smile crossed my face when we found the door to my old nursery and I ran my
fingers over a nick in the doorframe. I had chipped out the sliver of wood when I was nine, hitting it with
a sword  while playing dragon  and  slayer.  No  one  had  ever  mentioned the missing wedge  of wood.  I
don’t think the guard I had nearly decapitated told anyone either.
“Here?” Thadd whispered. He glanced at the end of the hallway where two guards stood in a pool of
torchlight. They were talking among themselves, eying us.
“Yes, this is it. Wave at them before we go in,” I said, and Thadd did.
I  pushed  open  the  nursery  door,  breathing  in  the  familiar  scent  of  old  stuffing  along  with  the
smothering darkness. My mother had almost turned the chamber into a sewing room. Afraid I’d lose my
second, questionable door, I had protested it should stay the same for my children. She had dabbed at
her  eyes  and  pronounced  it  would  remain  unchanged.  Heartache  took  me,  and  I  pushed  it  away.
Children I would never have. Children she would never see.
Working in shadow,  Thadd  barred  the door  with his sword.  Looking about,  he shoved  the heavy
dress-up wardrobe in front of it. It wasn’t much, but I felt better. He strode to the largest  window and
opened the shutters. A chill wind shifted my hair. The moon would be up soon. “We can get to her from
here?” he asked, leaning out.
“Yes.”  I  set  my  pack  on  the  too-short  table  and  pulled  out  the  knotted  rope.  Striding  to  the
westernmost window, I opened the shutters and looked over. Down and to the left, the window of my
sitting room beckoned with a bright square of light.
“Good,” I whispered. Tight with tension,  I went to  the wooden  hatch in the wall that  opened  to  a
hollow chimney leading to the servants’ kitchen. There was a box and pulley that I had once rode up and
down in before Kavenlow found out and had it removed. I tucked the end of the rope  behind the iron

hook that latched it closed, drawing it through until one of the knots I had tied caught. I gave it a tug, and
it bumped through. A frown crossed me. I hoped the knots wouldn’t be a problem. Usually I shimmied
down a double length of rope, then pulled the one end back through once I reached my room. The knots
might  make  that  difficult.  Giving  Thadd  a  worried  look,  I  drew  the  rest  through,  knotting  the  ends
together before I lowered it over the sill.
Thadd looked uncertain. “It will hold?” he said, and I nodded, giving it a tug. Unconvinced, he set his
mallet down and took a long pull on the twin lengths as if he were trying to draw a net from the water.
A rattle at the door pulled our heads up. Thadd’s hand went to his mallet. We stared at each other,
afraid to speak. “Hey,” someone called faintly. “You need help in there?”
“You go first,” Thadd whispered, then louder, “The door is stuck!”
I bobbed my head and scrambled onto the sill. My sword smacked into my leg, and seeing as his was
barring the door, I gave it to him. Excitement thrilled through me as I swung my legs over.  There  were
lights at the rose  patio  and  the mews.  My breath  caught when I thought I saw  Jeck’s  silhouette by a
bonfire where the gardener’s shed once was. I started down, faster than usual because of the knots and
Duncan’s trousers.
“Hurry, Tess,” Thadd called in a whisper as he leaned out the window. “I don’t think they believe me
that the door is stuck.”
Swallowing, I turned back to the cold stone and shimmied down to the sill of my sitting room. No one
was there. Not even a guard. Reassuring myself, I swung my leg over and dropped to the floor. Breath
held, I listened. Nothing.
I sat up as the rope slipped from the sill and back into the night to hang from the nursery window. I
peered  out to  find Thadd  already  on  his  way.  At  least  the  guards  hadn’t  gained  the  nursery  yet.  A
feminine sniff from my bedchamber brought my head up.
“Contessa?” I whispered, shocked when instead of her, an old guard bolted out of my bedchamber
with his sword drawn. We stared at each other for a heartbeat.
I reached  for my dart  tube.  He  took  a  breath  to  call out.  I darted  his neck,  hitting  him  perfectly.
Backing to the window, I fitted Kavenlow’s last metal dart into the tube. I had nothing left. He would call
for help before the venom took effect. I had failed.
There was  a  dull thunk, and  he groaned.  Eyes rolling to  the back  of his head,  the man started  to
topple. Behind him with a fireplace shovel raised high over her shoulder was Contessa, white-faced and
frightened.
I lunged forward to catch him. Any noise would bring more men in from the hallway. He was heavy,
and I only managed to slow his fall. We went down together. My breath whooshed out as he pinned me
to the floor, and I frantically tried to push him off. My dart tube rolled from my grasp, lost in the folds of
the rug.
“Tess!” the princess whispered, setting the shovel down and pulling on the guard. “Are you all light?
What are you doing here? Garrett wants to kill you! He’s absolutely insane!”
“Is this the only one?” I gasped, struggling to get out from under him and sit up.
“The only one in here.” Her eyes were wide, and a flush was on her cheeks. “There are three others
outside the door,” she said breathlessly. “Bird feathers! You’re dressed like a man!” Her hand went to
her hair, an unspoken question in her eyes about the new color of mine.
She gasped as her attention was drawn to the window and her face was lit by the sudden love in her
eyes. Elation, hope, and desire all swirled together, making her look like her statue in the garden come to
life. I knew  without turning  Thadd  was  at  the  window.  Pain  struck  deep  within  me.  I  couldn’t  love

anyone. They would only be used against me.
“Thadd!” she exclaimed in a hushed voice, rushing to  him with a  little sob.  I was  left to  wiggle out
from under the guard alone. I didn’t watch, telling myself it was so they could have a moment of privacy
but knowing it was because it would hurt too much.
“I thought I’d never see you again,” Thadd said, his voice muffled. “Did he touch  you? Are  you all
right?”
Trying to ignore her tear-strewn whispers, I crawled to the ends of the rope and struggled to get the
knot out. I had to pull the rope through before the guards gained the nursery and followed it down.
Seeing what I was  doing, Thadd  put his hands  upon  Contessa’s  shoulders,  firmly sitting her down
upon my couch. As tears silently slid across her cheeks, he took his knife and sawed through the rope. It
gave way with a  snap.  I backed  up as  Thadd  pulled upon  one  end.  It  hesitated,  then surged  free.  It
caught again, and his muscles bunched.
“The rope!” came a faint call. “Get the rope!”
Frantic, I reached to help, but Thadd pulled as if heaven was on the other end, almost falling when the
rope jerked free. It writhed past the window to hang to the ground.
From the nursery, the guards redoubled  their noise.  It  wouldn’t be  long until they figured out what
room we had entered and would be down here.
Heart pounding, I leapt to my door and carefully set the lock. It eased into place with a well-greased
silence. Jeck would have the key, but we had a few moments more.
“Out the window, Contessa,” Thadd said, and  tied  the remaining end  of the rope  to  the leg of the
couch. His eyes were wide and his thick hands shook. “Just a short ways down.”
“Tess first,” she demanded.
“Go to the cellblock,” I told Thadd, ignoring her. “You’ll be safe there.”
Thadd scooped her up and set her on the sill. Giving him a dark look, the princess pushed him away,
moving his compact bulk with a single finger. “You’re coming, too,” she said tersely to me.
I glanced at the door. Jeck was going to burst in at any moment. I knew it. “I said I was going to kill
Garrett,  and  I  will,”  I  said,  handing  her  my  knife.  She  needed  something,  and  I  had  my
dart—somewhere. “Take this, and get out.”
Her jaw stiffened as she refused it. “You’re not going to kill that man, not even for our parents. It will
start a war, and you know it. You’re  going to  come  with us until we  can  free  the outer  garrisons  and
retake the palace.”
“If I had wanted to involve our army, I would have freed them ten days ago,” I said sharply. “I can
take back the palace with only one man’s death. Get out.”
“Please, Contessa,” Thadd pleaded, his large hands opening and closing helplessly. “It was so hard to
get to you. Please don’t ruin everything with your stubbornness.”
Her eyes flashed, and red spots appeared on her cheeks. “I’m ordering you as your sovereign,” she
said. “You will not try to retake the palace. You will escape with us.”
I glared at her. Who was she to tell me what to do? Behind her, Thadd fidgeted. “Just say you will,”
he mouthed, his expression pleading.
Frustration  fought with pride,  and  I drew  my anger  in. “I’ll follow you,” I said,  and  Thadd  visibly
relaxed. When I’m good and ready, I added silently.
She frowned warily at me, weighing the validity of my words against my defiant look. The expression

would have looked cross on me. On her, it looked charming.
A soft conversation  in the hall drew  our  attention.  I  recognized  Garrett’s  voice,  and  my  stomach
clenched.
“Now, Contessa,” Thadd said as the knob rattled. “If not for you, then your kingdom.”
I couldn’t have said it better myself. The princess’s protest shifted to fear when the rattle turned into a
pounding. Her leg went over the sill and she looked toward the dark ground. She gave me a  last look,
then bowed her head and started down.
“I’m not coming. Make sure she takes this,” I said as I pressed my knife into his hands.
“Thank you,” Thadd said. Then he was gone.
I anxiously watched them descend, going jittery when I thought I saw Jeck running from the bonfire.
He must have finally heard the guards at the nursery window.
The conversation in the hall continued with terse answers to Garrett’s barked questions. The pale face
of the princess was a spot of white as she looked up. Thadd reached the ground and took her arm and
ran her away. I silently pulled the knot  free  from the sitting couch,  and  the rope  slid from the room.  I
wasn’t going anywhere.

Thirty-four
The sound of my lock turning pulled my head up. Garrett had  the key?  I wasn’t  ready  yet!  For  an
instant I thought to jump out the window but knew I would nearly kill myself. I had lost my chance, and I
panicked as the door opened to show a slice of lamp-lit hall and Garrett’s shoulder.
“I tell you what to do, not that damned-fool captain,” he said caustically. He was framed by the open
doorway, his back to me. “One of you in here with me is enough. Stay out.”
He turned. Our eyes met. Surprise froze his fair features, then a slow, wicked smile curved over him.
Chu  pits, I thought, but  Garrett  said  nothing  to  the  unseen  guards  as  he  crossed  the  threshold  and
confidently pushed the door shut with a single hand. The latch clicked shut. He reached behind him and
locked the door, slipping the thick key into his pocket.
My fingers twitched to reach for my missing dart pipe. I didn’t dare even shift my eyes to look for it.
My heart raced. This was not what I had planned.
“Oh, this is nice,” he said, his eyes going to the guard upon my rug. “Is he dead?”
“No.” I backed up a step. Where the devil was my pipe?
“The princess?” he questioned, moving forward to keep the same distance between us.
“Gone.”
He nodded as if the news was neither unexpected nor bothering. “I like the red hair. And trousers?”
He leered as if I was naked, and I felt as if I was. “I think I will dress you in them all the time. Such fun
we will have, my play-pretty.”
“You’ve lost, Garrett,” I said with a false boldness. “The princess is gone. You can’t marry me. The
city knows the truth. Or at least part of it.”
He shook his head, his dominating smile never faltering. “Why would I marry a whore’s  get when I
have a beautiful woman of royal blood? She won’t get far.”
My legs turned to wet rags. Where was my pipe? I only had  the one  dart,  but it was  a  metal one,
carrying twice the venom; it would be enough for Garrett. I shifted backward to put more space between
us as I fumbled at the knot holding my whip to me.
“What to do? What to do?” Garrett said in a singsong voice, stepping forward until his toes nudged
the fallen guard. “Call for help, or kill you myself?” His jaw clenched and he reached for his sword hilt.
“Oh, I do believe I’ll kill you myself.”
I thought of my taunts about his low worth, wishing I could take them all back. The sound of the metal
sliding against the sheath paralyzed me. I froze where I stood. He had killed my parents. He could kill me
just as easily. Where was my pipe?
Garrett took a sideways step, making a show of placing his foot. The sound of splintering wood cut
through me like a pain. My pipe. “Oh,” he said as he ground his heel. “Sorry. That was yours, wasn’t it.”
He unexpectedly took a deep breath and raised his sword high over his head, bringing it down like a
pike into the helpless guard.
“No!” I shrieked, reaching out. Though unconscious, the man groaned as his belly was punctured. His
eyes riveted to  mine, Garrett  twisted  and  pulled his sword  free.  I covered  my mouth in horror  as  the
guard’s life spilled onto my rug. The stink of bile rose strong, choking me.
“Prince Garrett?” came a muffled inquiry from the hall.

“Stay out!” Garrett shouted at the locked door. His eyes were wild, the blue of them vivid against his
yellow hair. “I’ll kill the man who tries to get through that door!” He listened for a heartbeat, then flipped
his hair back with a toss of his head. From the hall came a hushed argument. “Witnesses never remember
things properly,” he said calmly.
“No one deserves to die like that,” I said, my voice quavering.
“I wouldn’t expect a commoner to understand.”
His barbs at my low birth meant nothing. If he had hoped to anger me, it wasn’t working.
Eyes  never  leaving  mine,  Garrett  crouched  to  take  the  dead  man’s  sword.  Flinging  it  into  my
bedchamber and out of my reach, he stepped over the guard. My heart pounded and I shook my whip
out, the sliding hush as it coiled on the floor chilling me.
He paused in thought. “You don’t know how to use that.”
I licked my lips, trying to find enough spit to swallow. “Of course not.”
His stance went casual, and he laughed. “Stupid woman. You’re already dead. I have everything. The
princess is very malleable. I only need to threaten an innocent to get her to do what I want.” He smiled,
licking his lips suggestively. “Anything.”
Anger burned through my fear. “You won’t touch her.”
“Oh, I’ll touch her,” he said, eying my trembling hand. “I’ll touch her all I want.”
He lunged for me. Panicking, I flung my whip up and out, practice shifting me into a firmer stance. My
muscles  moved  by  rote.  The  crack  shocked  through  me.  I  froze  as  Garrett  cried  out  and  lurched
backward. He stumbled, never going completely down. Straightening, he touched his jaw, looking at his
hand to find blood.
“You little trull!” he cried out, anger turning him pale and ugly. “You hit me!”
“I’m sorry,” I said, my voice high-pitched and frantic. It was the most foolish thing I’d ever said. I’d
never struck anyone before. “Stay back! Don’t come any closer.”
“No one hits me!” His hands clenched, and his teeth gritted. Blood dripping from his jawline, he took
a step to me. Heart pounding, I extended my free hand, warning him to stop, but it was the rush of boots
in the hall that stilled his feet.
“She’s in there!” an approaching guard shouted.
I held my breath to keep from passing out as Garrett looked to the door.
“The false princess,” he cried again. “They roped down from the third floor. She’s in there.”
“But Prince Garrett is in there!” the frightened guard gasped.
Garrett  frowned,  irritation  pulling  his  brow  into  furrows.  “Stay  out!”  he  shouted,  his  eyes  never
moving from mine. “There’s no one in here but me and… my love.”
There was silence, followed by a buzz of intense, muted conversation.
“Captain Jeck,” came a relieved cry from the hall, and Garrett’s beautiful face  twisted  with a  black
rage. “Thank the Almighty you’re here.”
I locked gazes with Garrett as the sound of Jeck’s running boots was eclipsed by the captain’s shout,
“Break it down! Now!”
There was a thunderous boom, and the door shivered. The doorframe shifted with a cracking splinter.
Garrett’s expression went furious. “Damn that  farmer,” he snarled.  Wiping the blood  from his jaw,  he
shouted through the door, “The man who lets Captain Jeck into this room will be quartered. And all of

your heads will be on the wall tomorrow. Kill him!”
The hall went deadly silent. I imagined the exchange of nervous glances. It was eight of them by my
reckoning to their captain’s one. Even a player couldn’t best eight men with swords. The silence ended
with a fury-driven shout and the clang of blades.
Garrett straightened  and  smiled confidently, the bloodied  score  mark  red  against his freckled  skin.
“My late captain of the guard was never one to appreciate the precious time spent between a man and a
woman,”  he  mocked,  having  to  raise  his  voice  above  the  noise  of  battle  in  the  hall.  “He’s  always
interrupting. Now, where were we? Ah, yes.”
I backpedaled as he took three quick steps across the room. Again I sent my whip out. It scored on
his arm, ripping his shirt. Jaw clenched, he swung his sword up into my next strike, and my whip coiled
about his wrist.
“That’s the bad  thing  about  whips,”  he  snarled.  “They  only  work  on  animals  and  cowards!”  He
grabbed my whip and gave a firm yank.
A cry slipped from me. I dropped it lest he pull me into him. Red spots appeared on his cheeks, and
he showed his teeth. “Come back here,” he said, throwing it into a corner, and I ran for the shattered ruin
of my dart tube. I fell beside the dead guard, grasping for the feel of metal among the slivers. My breath
came in what sounded like a sob.
“Stand up so I can kill you properly.” Garrett gripped my shoulder and pulled me up.
I twisted,  trying to  writhe away  from him. Eyes fixed  to  his  bloodied  sword,  I  sent  my  free  arm
searching blindly behind me on my dressing table for anything. Bottles clattered and rolled. He drew back
his sword arm, his eyes fervent.
“Let go!” I shrieked. My fingers found a perfume bottle. Gripping it, I swung at him. My closed fist hit
him in the face. He loosened his hold and backed away. His look shifted to an affronted surprise. I threw
the bottle at him. He ducked. It shattered on the floor. The smell of lilac overwhelmed the guard’s blood
and bile. Garrett felt his jaw, his expression growing murderous.
“You slattern!” he shouted over the sound of booming at the door.
Beyond him on the floor was  the sheen  of metal among my crushed  dart  pipe.  I  dove  for  it.  My
fingers fumbled in the splinters. My breath came in a gasp as I found the metal dart  whole.  Kneeling, I
gripped it in my fist.
There was  a  thunderous  boom  as  the bolt  on my door  gave way.  My head  jerked  up.  The  door
slammed into the wall. Jeck stood in the doorframe. His face was wrathful, and his jaw was set. Bodies
lay beyond him, shifting in pained surges of motion. As I watched, a guard slumped against the wall and
slid down to a crumpled heap atop his companions. Jeck had been using them as a battering ram.
Fear gave me strength. I lunged to the window. Jeck couldn’t catch me! I’d risk the fall.
“I told you to stay out!” Garrett snarled.
“No!” Jeck shouted. “Prince Garrett! Get away from her!”
A hand gripped  my shoulder  and  spun me around.  Garrett  crushed  my back  to  his front,  his  arm
wrapped around my neck. I grasped his wrist, trying to pull it away so I could breathe. He backed to the
wall, dragging me. His breath filled my ear in heavy pants. His sword was pressed into my side. I closed
my eyes,  remembering the sound  of the guard’s  clothing tearing. The memory of the knife across  my
mother’s throat pulled tears from my eyes.
“I’m going to kill her, Captain,” Garrett shouted, and my eyes opened. “Get out so I don’t have to kill
you as well.”

Jeck stopped in apparent indecision. Beyond him in the hall, the moans became  calls for help.  My
pulse  hammered.  Panting,  I  shifted  my  fingers  to  show  Jeck  the  dart  I  had  pressed  against  Prince
Garrett’s arm wrapped about my neck. A smile came over me when Jeck saw it and his face went still in
understanding.
“Close the door, if you would?” I asked, seeming to be  Garrett’s  prisoner,  but in reality it was  the
other way around. “Or he dies. Right here.”
Garrett  laughed,  squeezing  my  neck  until  it  hurt.  I  gritted  my  teeth,  and  my  fingers  trembled,
threatening to stab him.
“Wait,” Jeck said, putting a hand up. “I have an idea.”
Still not seeing his danger,  Garrett  snickered.  “I don’t  pay  you to  think, Captain,”  he said.  “She’s
worth nothing now but to my pride, and my pride will see her dead.”
“The door?” I asked calmly though I was shaking inside.
Not taking his eyes from mine, Jeck nudged a guard’s foot clear and shut the door.
“Bar it with your sword,” I said, “and move away from it.” And he did.
Garrett’s grip on me faltered. “What the devil are you doing?” he asked Jeck. “Get out! Get out, or
I’ll have you strung up for sedition.  The princess  is on the grounds.  Go  find her,  if you think you can
manage it.”
Jeck frowned, sending a leather-gloved hand over his beard. “You’re making it very difficult for me to
justify keeping you alive, Prince Garrett.”
“Kill me?” he exclaimed, his breath shifting my hair. “I’m the one with the sword!”
Jeck’s eyes narrowed. “And you’re the one with the poisoned dart to your pulse—fool.”
Garrett’s breath was a quick intake of fear. He tensed to pull away, and I gripped  his arm until my
knuckles turned white.
“Don’t move,” I whispered, and the smell of his fear  rose  over  the scent  of lilac and  bile from the
dead guard. “Drop your sword.”
“Drop your needle, sea whore,” Garrett said. “Or I’ll run you through right now.”
Jeck shook his head. “That’s my blade,  Prince  Garrett.  It’s  a  bone  crusher.  It  doesn’t  have a  fine
enough edge to cut without a full swing behind it, and she knows it.”
“Damn you all to hell!” Garrett shouted. “Get her off of me, Captain!”
I pushed my fingernail into him, and his breath quickened in fear. My back, pressed against his front,
felt damp from his sweat. If he tried, he might get away, but I didn’t think he would risk it. He’d already
tasted the poison once. “Drop it,” I said, and the blade hit the floor with a thunk. I took a shallow breath.
“Let go of my neck.” He did.
Easing myself away from his stink of fear, I shifted until I was behind him and had my dart to his neck.
He held himself stiffly. His blood beat hard and  fast.  Striking him here  would go right to  his brain.  He
would drop in seconds, die almost as quick. “I’m listening, Captain Jeck,” I said. “Though as you said,
it’s getting harder to put this off.”
Jeck stood in the center of my sitting room, his toes edging the dead guard. “I’d just as soon see him
dead, but there’s no reason to kill him now and several to let him live.”
Garrett  took  a  shuddering  breath.  “You  traitorous  dog!”  he  exclaimed.  “I’ll  have  you  before  my
father, and his wolves will rip your insides out!”

“Shut your mouth,” I said, then softer to Jeck, “I promised to kill him, and I will.”
Jeck smiled. It was an honest smile, very much like the first one I had seen from that very spot. “Let
him live with the memory you beat him.”
“Nothing I’ve done means anything,” I said bitterly. “Not until I kill him.”
Jeck shook his head. “You’ve convinced me you can keep  what you hold,” he said.  “The rest  will
follow my lead.”
I bit my lip, wondering if I could trust him. It sounded too easy. “The royals, then,” I insisted, knowing
Garrett was hearing too much, but he was going to  die,  so  it didn’t matter.  “They’ll tear  Costenopolie
apart if I let Garrett get away with killing my parents.”
Jeck’s face went grim. “It’s always a risk, but—ah—no one of import will be actively plotting against
you. If you kill Garrett,  though, it will be  impossible for me to  keep  King Edmund where  he belongs.
Thinking you can convince him you were justified in killing his son is a  delusion. No  matter  how stupid
Garrett is, he is still his son. It will start the war you wanted  to  prevent.  You know  it. That’s  why you
didn’t kill him the first time.”
“But he murdered them,” I protested.  My grip shifted as  I remembered  he had  buried  them in the
garden like animals. Garrett caught his breath, and the point pricked  his skin, not breaking  it. “They’re
gone,” I said, hearing a plaintive, hurt tone in my voice and wishing I could keep it from me.
Jeck’s eyes went cold behind his black beard. “Yes. They’re  dead  when they could  have lived for
years more. But to make a kingdom suffer for your want for revenge? You’ve won, Tess.  Don’t  make
the next game take place on the battlefield.”
Anger filled me,  and  Garrett  gasped  as  I  gripped  him  tighter.  “You’re  telling  me  that  revenge  is
wrong,” I said. “That I should be above it, to let him live. Well I can’t! I can’t let him live, Jeck. I can’t!”
Jeck raised his hands in placation. “Easy, Tess. You aren’t  listening. I’m the last person  to  tell you
revenge is a wasted emotion. It’s sweet  and  warm,  and  for a  time, it was  the only thing that  kept  me
going. But there’s quick revenge that’s fast and ultimately unsatisfying, or there’s the lasting, sticky-sweet
honey revenge.” He cocked his eyebrows, and Garrett’s breath shuddered. “There are  ways  to  wreak
revenge other than death, and some can serve a purpose.”
I hesitated, surprised he seemed to understand. My thoughts went back to our night together before
his fire and him telling me of his past. “What do you suggest?” I said, hearing my voice as if it wasn’t my
own.
“Don’t kill him. He’s worthless.”
“I am a prince!” Garrett shouted. “If you harm me, my father will descend upon you. Your homes will
be burned. Your ships sunk. Your—”
“Shut your mouth,” I said. I could smell his sweat and knew he was afraid.
Jeck clasped his hands behind his back. A faint smile hovered on him. “There are  worse  fates  than
death,” he said. “And Garrett has made a very large, embarrassing mistake. If you let him live, he will be
sent home in disgrace like a boy pilfering apples from a neighbor’s grove.” I felt Garrett stiffen. “Beaten
by Costenopolie’s false princess? A child from the gutter? I’ve walked King Edmund’s halls, and Tess, it
will be a living hell.”
I hesitated, hearing the truth in what he said, but my soul begged me to not listen, to just kill him and
deal with the consequences later.
“King Edmund has a third son,” Jeck said. “He isn’t a man of action but a  son  nonetheless.  If your
princess will consider him—”

“Alexander!” Garrett exploded. “You can’t call Alexander a man. He’s a worthless—”
“Shut your mouth!” I shouted.  I tossed  a  curl of red  hair from my eyes  as  my topknot  slowly fell
apart. “I wouldn’t have one Misdev dog in my palace. Why would I trust another?”
Jeck shifted eagerly. “The union between Misdev and Costenopolie—”
My eyes widened. “This is to save your hide!” I interrupted. “If you go back to King Edmund with a
dead prince, he will demote you to where you can’t effectively play.”
“Play…” Garrett whispered.
Jeck straightened, glancing uncomfortably at Garrett. “Tess…” he warned.
“That’s if he doesn’t outright kill you,” I continued hotly, not caring that  Garrett  was  hearing more
than he should.  “Here’s  my  idea.  I  kill  Garrett,  and  the  princess  won’t  wed  at  all.  The  Red  Moon
Princess will stay unwed, and that damned prophesy won’t mean anything!”
Jeck’s expression  was  open  and  honest.  “You’re  right. I’m looking out for myself, and  that  could
work,  but Tess…”  His words  took  on a  conspiratorial  tone,  and  I  met  his  sly  gaze.  “Consider  how
strong we could be together. Misdev and Costenopolie can still make an official alliance by marriage as
Kavenlow intended through King Edmund’s youngest son.  I’ve  studied  your master’s  past  games.  He
does nothing without a reason. He sees farther ahead then I am used to. Just look what he saw in you.
But now?” His smile went devious. “I see what he intended here. I wish he could have approached me
openly, but I never would have trusted him. Killing Garrett  will limit you to  one  option,  and  you don’t
want war. I’ve seen it, Tess. It will kill you slowly.”
Garrett  shifted under  my fingers. “You think you rule us,” he said  in wonder.  “The  captain  of  the
guard and a changeling think they rule us!”
I frowned, wishing there was another way to do this. Jeck took a small step forward, and I tightened
my grip on Garrett, my fingers going slippery with his sweat.
“Your ships and harbors?” Jeck said. “My fields and men? No one would dare raise a finger to either
of us.  Your  people  would be  free  to  extend  their reach  by commerce,  and  my  people  could  devote
themselves to working the land as they want instead of sending their young men to die in constant battle.
And if the need ever arose for a force on the land, you would have a group of very easily trained  men
only a few weeks away. But for even a chance of it working, you can’t kill Garrett.”
Garrett trembled in his desire to move, knowing it would mean his death.  “Players,”  he whispered.
“I’ve heard  of you,” he said,  his voice rising. “We  will  ferret  you  out  and  crush  you  as  we  did  five
hundred years ago!”
That didn’t sound good, and I tightened my grip. “He knows too much. I have to kill him.”
“Tess,” Jeck  protested.  “Killing a  pawn  doesn’t  make  you strong.  Forging a  peaceful  union does.
And that’s what Garrett has made himself into. He has gone from a knight to a pawn  in his failure. It’s
your decision, your move, but the way you win this game decides how the next will be set up.”
Hands clasped behind himself, Jeck took a symbolic step backward. I hesitated, thinking. The pain in
my soul demanded vengeance, that Garrett shouldn’t be able to feel the sun when my parents no longer
could. But knowing he had been beaten by a woman, one not of royal birth but a guttersnipe, would prey
upon him. Having everything taken from him by a child from the streets might… be enough.
An unexpected relief came over me. My breath whispered out,  and  my shoulders  eased.  Jeck  saw
my decision to let Garrett live, and the tension slipped from him. “Alexander?” I asked.
“No,” Garrett said, panic staining his beautiful voice. “You can’t do that to me.”
I smiled. He would be remembered as the pathetic son who tried to start a war and escaped with his

life. The one who could have had everything but was beaten by a beggar’s child. Jeck was right. Revenge
made a warm spot that couldn’t be put out.
“There will have to be a long courtship,” I said. “I’ll not rush her.”
“Of course. I expect nothing else.”
“And there will be the understanding I can back out at any time, right up to the I dos,” I continued,
not moving my dart from Garrett. “And if you are lying to me, I’ll see you dead.”
“As is always a woman’s right,” Jeck acknowledged, inclining his head.
His brown  eyes  glinted in the shine from the  lamps,  and  I  wasn’t  sure  if  he  was  commenting  on
backing out of a marriage or a woman’s  right to  kill the one  who wronged  her.  “So,  how do  we  end
this?” I asked. “You still have the palace.”
Clearly pleased, Jeck raised a finger like a lecturing nobleman. We  froze at  the sudden  cries  in the
hall. “Get the door open!” someone shouted.
Garrett twisted, gripping my hand with the dart and forcing it away from him. I cried out when bones
ground together and pain flamed. “Stop!” I shrieked. He pushed me from him as my hand opened  and
the dart dropped to the floor. I hunched over my wrist and backed away, terrified, as he scooped up his
sword.
“I’ll kill you both,” he snarled. “I will be king!”
Jeck pulled his sword  from the door  in a  beautiful arc  of motion, leaping to  stand  between  Prince
Garrett and me. It was all for nothing, I thought miserably as I held my numbed hand to  me. All  for
nothing.
But it was Kavenlow who burst in, trailing a handful of dirty, smelly, unshaven, barefoot Costenopolie
guards.
“No!” Garrett cried, diving at me.
“Stop him!” I cried, seeing the shimmer of my dart in his hand. Feinting with the sword, Garrett drove
the fire-hardened  needle  through Jeck’s  jerkin.  Jeck  stumbled back.  He  fell to  the floor,  clutching his
chest. Garrett shouted and leapt at me. His bloodied sword gleamed red.
I stood, horrified, as Jeck lay still on the floor.  I couldn’t  move,  couldn’t  take  my eyes  from Jeck,
though Garrett was coming at me. The guards dove for Garrett, bringing him down three feet before me
by sheer weight of numbers.
Terrified, I ran to Jeck. He wasn’t moving. Had he put himself at the edge of his tolerance to best me,
making this a killing dose? He has to be all right, I thought frantically. He had to be.
“Jeck!” I cried, falling to my knees before him. “Jeck! Look at me!”
His eyes cracked open, and I slumped. He swallowed and waved his fingers weakly.  “I’m all right.
Give me a minute. Damn, you pack a punch, woman.”
Immeasurably relieved, I pulled my gaze up from his, finding Kavenlow watching me with an amazed
surprise. I opened my mouth to explain, then shut it, shocked to realize I cared if Captain Jeck lived or
died. Confused, I got to my feet and left him on the floor. Two guards descended upon him, pulling him
roughly to his feet. I reached out in protest, then forced my hands to my side.
Duncan’s low voice drifted into the room. “… and then he slammed the one  with the pike  into the
wall headfirst. It made a dent the size of my fist.” His lanky frame came to a halt in the doorframe, and he
stared in at the chaos. Behind him was Resh, the captain of my father’s guard.  “Angel’s Spit!” Duncan
swore. Then his eyes rose to mine. “Tess!” Surging in, he moved  through the guards  as  if unseen.  He
took my hand to pull me toward him, and I yelped.

“No, I’m all right,” I protested as he leaned close, holding my arm carefully to look at my hand. His
fingers were stained with rust and dirt. “Ow. Let it go,” I insisted as I glanced at his bruised face. “It’s all
right.”
“It’s not all right,” Duncan said, his breath  warm on my hand.  “I think it’s broken.”  His gaze went
hard and he looked at Jeck hanging in the guards’ grip. “Did he do this to you?”
“No,” I said. “Prince Garrett did. And it’s all right. See?” Steeling myself, I tried to close my fingers.
Nausea and relief swept me as they moved as they should. I looked up, my eyes probing his. “You’re a
thief,” I whispered. “Only a thief could have done that.”
He stiffened, then relaxed.  A flash of hidden promise  flickered  behind his eyes.  “Only if you’re  an
assassin,” he said.
Flustered, I pulled my hand from him.
“Get off me!” Garrett shouted, his voice muffled. “Give me my sword. They’re traitors to the crown.
Both of them. They rule, not the kings! It’s a sham! A conspiracy! Get off!”
I glanced  at  Kavenlow  with a  sick  look.  He  was  grim, accepting  Garrett’s  sword  when  someone
brought it to him. “Let him up,” Kavenlow said, his tired  gaze going over  the room.  I watched  his lips
move as he counted the number of people. There were a lot, and all would need their memories clouded.
He gave Jeck an angry grimace as if he should have known better. I got an exasperated sigh.
My face went cold at the princess’s lyrical voice in the hall. She above all shouldn’t hear what Garrett
was saying. Kavenlow leaned toward a guard.  “Keep  her out of here,”  he said,  his eyes  falling to  the
dead guard on my rug. “She ought not see this.”
The guard nodded and left. There was a murmur, and the princess’s voice rang out, “My sister is in
there. You said the room was secure; let me through.”
Eyes wide, I looked at Kavenlow. “Get out,” he mouthed. But I wasn’t fast enough, and before I had
pulled from Duncan, the princess entered with Thadd tight behind her. Her eyes went wide at the guard
dead upon my floor, then filled with relief as she found me.
“She’s  a  fraud!”  Garrett  said,  spittle  flying  as  he  struggled  to  free  himself  from  the  two  guards
restraining  him.  “A  fraud!”  He  started  laughing.  The  high-pitched  sound  made  my  skin  crawl.  “The
farmer,” he gasped, “and the dock whore. They rule. Not you.” He pointed a finger at the princess and
laughed hysterically. “She doesn’t rule. The whore does. You’re a fraud. My father is a fraud. We’re all
frauds. The farmer rules. The farmer rules us all!”
I stared in dismay at Garrett laughing, held up only by the guards supporting him. Kavenlow couldn’t
cloud so firm a thought. I glanced at Jeck and read the truth of it. If we couldn’t shut him up, he would
have to die or risk us all being exposed.
I bit my lip in dismay. Garrett couldn’t die. It would ruin everything!
The princess  stood  with her hand over  her mouth as  Prince  Garrett  laughed. He  nearly pulled the
guards down as they struggled to keep him upright. “He’s mad,” she said, her eyes wide in a  fortunate
misunderstanding. “He is utterly mad! First he kills my parents, then takes over the palace, and now he
thinks my kingdom is ruled by a farmer!”
I blinked. My gaze shifted between Kavenlow and Jeck. Prince Garrett was mad? That would work.
Sent home in disgrace as mad. He would never be taken seriously again. Garrett’s life would be a living
hell. The warm spot in me grew brighter.
The princess lifted her skirts to delicately sidestep the dead guard, the most disturbing thing being that
tile sight of a disemboweled man upon my rug didn’t faze her at all. Her face was severe as she settled
herself before me, her white dress somehow still spotless. Chu pits, how does she do it?

“You didn’t listen to me,” she accused. “I told you to follow me. You disobeyed the very first order I
gave you. It was the very first order I gave anyone.”
I shifted uncomfortably, caught in my lie. It didn’t matter I was taller than her; I still felt like a child. “I
was going to,” I said. “After I made the palace safe for you—ah—Your Highness.”
She smiled. All her ire drifted  to  nothing. “As if I could  ever  be  angry with you,  Tess.  Come  on.
There’s a fire in our parents’ room. Let me look at your hand in the light. I often helped the nuns heal the
lame and bury the destitute.”
She took my arm and led me out. Duncan had  Thadd’s  elbow,  pulling the reluctant  sculptor  into a
corner to tell him of his battle. I passed Kavenlow, his desire to demand an explanation from me heavy
on him. I ignored Jeck’s worried frown for whether I would hold to our agreement. It could wait. They
all could wait. It would do the men good.
The air in the hallway was cool, and the Costenopolie guards had moved  the battered  Misdev  men
somewhere. “Put the captain in my old cell,” I heard the captain of my father’s guard say, and I drew to a
stop.
“Please, Princess Contessa,” I said, stumbling over the words. “Captain Jeck—this isn’t his fault. He
tried to protect me from Prince Garrett—at the end.”
She smiled to look like our mother. “Call me Contessa,” she said. “I hate the princess part, and since
you’re the only one who has the right to call me by my real name, I wish you would.” She looked back
into the room.  “Captain  Jeck  is to  be  confined to  a  stateroom  as  well as  Prince  Garrett.  The captain
treated me with the utmost civility when he took me prisoner, and I will return his kindness. I want to hear
what Tess says concerning what happened before I decide anything. Keep the palace gates manned from
a distance. I don’t want the streets to know what has happened until I do.” She took my arm, her eyes
worried. “Tess, I need your help in finding a way to tell my neighbor his son is insane.”
Kavenlow  caught my gaze and  smiled. I couldn’t  help but grin back  as  the  princess  escorted  me
down the halls that were once again mine.

Thirty-five
“Will you rattle  your teacup  a  mite softer?  You’re  going to  wake  her,”  Kavenlow  said,  his  voice
slipping from the next room and into my sleep to stir me awake.
“But  the  morning  is  almost  gone,”  Duncan  complained,  his  tone  more  conniving  than  respectful.
“She’s got to see them. If she waits, they might take them down.”
Kavenlow chuckled. “They won’t come down until she says so. She’s behind them somehow. I know
it.”
Curiosity pulled my eyes  open.  “Behind what?” I shouted,  staring at  my wall. My beautiful barren
white wall with no dirt or leaves or sticks.
“Tess!” Duncan called from my sitting room. “Get dressed. It’s almost noon. Hurry up. You have an
appointment with the princess.”
I flung the heavy covers from me. I’d never slept so late. But then I’d been up half the night: ferreting
out Prince Garrett’s guards, freeing the cook  and  sentries  from under  Banner,  telling Kavenlow  of the
agreement I’d come to with Jeck. “An appointment?” I called as I splashed tepid water on my face.  “I
didn’t make an appointment.”
“The  princess  did,”  Kavenlow  said  dryly.  “She  is  slipping  into  her  new  role  with  a  frightening
sureness. Put on something nice.”
He sounded irate, and I dressed quickly, arranging my hair with my usual darts and a new dart pipe
Kavenlow had given me. I fingered the bullwhip, then left it on my bedside  table.  It  had  failed me; the
darts  hadn’t.  The back  of my  dress  half-undone,  I  went  to  the  doorway  of  my  sitting  room  to  find
Duncan and Kavenlow resting companionably at my small table.
Duncan had found his tattered boots, and his heels were among the empty dishes and plates  strewn
before them. Kavenlow gazed wearily out my window to the mangled gardens. A cow ambled across my
line of vision, a sight both disturbing and amusing. There was a new colorful rug where the Misdev guard
had been,  and  the scented  candle  still burned  to  cover  the lingering smell of death.  It  struck  me how
easily the permanence of death could be covered up.
“Could one of you lace my dress for me?” I said, and they both started.
“Sit,” Kavenlow said darkly to Duncan as the thief pulled his feet from the table.
Embarrassed, I turned so Kavenlow could reach the laces. He tugged gently as  he moved  upward,
leaving me more room to breathe than Heather ever did. Heather, I thought. I’d send a runner for her.
She was probably worried sick. “Thank you,” I said as he finished.
He made a soft noise of agreement. “Sleep well?” he asked and held a chair for me.
“Yes,  thank  you.” As  I sat,  his  ring,  still  on  its  cord  about  my  neck,  swung  into  my  sight.  Eyes
crinkled, I pulled it up and  over  my head.  “I forgot  to  give this to  you last night,” I said,  extending it
toward him on my palm.
Kavenlow eased himself into his chair. Smiling from behind his graying beard, he reached across the
table.  The ring disappeared  into his thick hands.  “Thank  you.”  He  cut  the  cord  with  his  dagger  and
replaced the band of gold on his finger, clearly relieved.
Duncan looked  between  us,  clearly knowing something had  happened  but not what.  His shirt was
hanging out from the rope holding up his trousers, and his boots  had  clearly not seen  oil in quite some
time. With that nasty attempt at a  beard,  he looked  like a  vagabond.  There  was  nothing in him of the

dangerous  man I’d  seen  in the cells below  the guard’s  quarters,  even  if  his  eyes  were  glinting  rather
roguishly. I wondered if I had imagined his hidden strength in the heat of the moment.
The light glinted on Kavenlow’s ring as he poured a cup of long-cold tea for me. “If you will excuse
me, Princess Contessa wanted to know when you awoke. She has requested to see you at your earliest
convenience.” His eyes tightened in warning. “That means now, Tess.”
I nodded and sipped my tea. Saint’s bells, but she could wait until I had breakfast.
“There’s to be a coronation this afternoon in the city square,” Kavenlow continued as he stood. “The
official one will be during the summer festival when her neighbors will be here.”
A coronation instead of a wedding. It would be  the grandest  event I’d  ever  plan.  I would make
Contessa shine. No gypsies, though.
“Other than that, your day is yours. I suggest you stay clear of the streets for a while.”
Wincing at his wry tone, I took an apple from a bowl. I did have to collect my horses.
“I’ll see you at supper, Duncan,” Kavenlow said. He gave me a nod and left, having to use two hands
to shift the door since it hung loose on its hinges.
Duncan waved a careless  hand in dismissal and  continued to  shove  cold  toast  into his mouth. The
silence grew, and I became uncomfortable.  Though the door  was  cracked  ajar,  I’d  never  had  anyone
alone with me in my room but for Heather and Kavenlow. I wasn’t the crown princess. It was the small
things that would likely take the longest to get used to.
“How’s Tuck?” I asked, knowing Duncan had spent the night in the stables with his horse. It was his
choice, not anyone’s request.
“Fine,” he said brightly around a mouthful, then swallowed. “He needed  a  solid brushing. And he’s
thin. That captain all but starved him on the way back.”  He  hesitated  as  if I might say  something, and
when I didn’t, he added, “but he’s all right.”
The tea was too cold to enjoy. Setting it aside, I tucked the apple into a draping sleeve for my new
gelding. It was my first official day as a commoner; I didn’t know what to do.
“So how about it?” Duncan asked.
I looked up in bewilderment. “How about what?”
“You’re done.” He propped his heels on the table and clasped his hands behind his head. “You saved
the princess, rescued the kingdom, blah, blah, blah… Are you coming with me?”
Surprised, I straightened in my chair. “I—uh—thought you would stay.”
Duncan shook his head, not looking at me. “No.” A hint of shadow was in his voice, a hue of power,
a whisper of a past unshared. It was there. I hadn’t imagined it.
I slowly let out my breath. “I can’t,” I said, stifling a shiver when I found I was tempted.
He took his heels from the table and leaned across it. The brown of his eyes fixed on me. I knew he
saw my fluster, and as I watched, his mien of capable but friendly cheat dissolved to leave a dangerous
man I knew nothing about. “Why not?” he asked, his voice soft.
“I—I told you,” I stammered. “I won’t make my way by stealing.”
“I’m not asking you to.” The intensity in his tone pulled my gaze up. “You can do people’s books, or
write their letters for them, or nothing at all. You don’t ever  have to  play another  hand with me. I like
you, Tess. I want you to come with me.”
“Contessa needs me,” I said, then my breath caught. “Y-you like me?”

Leaning back in his chair, he picked up the last piece of toast. His air of bound portent vanished like
one of his cards. “Well, yeah,” he said lightly. “I’m still here, aren’t I?” He shoved the wedge of toast into
his mouth and rose. He held out his hand, then drew it back and wiped it on the back of his trousers. “I
want to show you something,” he said as he extended it.
I stared. It was gone. He had let slip enough of his true danger to pique my interest, then hid it away.
My words to Heather resonated in my mind. A man of power, not necessarily wealth. Saint’s bells, I
was a fool. A very confused fool who couldn’t hide behind being a princess anymore.
Swallowing, I took his hand, not wanting to let him know how muddled I was. His grip was warm in
mine, the calluses on his fingers soft. I remembered their strength on my shoulder and neck, and a warm
tingle rose through me. “What is it?” I said as I got to my feet.
“You can see it from your window.”
Curiosity overwhelmed  caution,  and  I let him draw  me to  the window.  He  left  his  hand  upon  my
shoulder as he stood behind me. My breath caught as I saw the city.
Flags. The city was  draped  with flags. From  the  tops  of  the  buildings  to  the  lower  spires  of  the
church, they hung from walls, and roofs, and trees. And they were all alike: gold with three  black  bars
slashing diagonally across them. “Captain Borlett’s flag!” I exclaimed, tearing my gaze away to look over
my shoulder at Duncan. “Is he here? But how?” Amazed, I leaned forward to scan  the harbor  and  the
paltry few ships resting there. “And why?”
There was a scuffing behind me. I didn’t turn, recognizing Kavenlow’s grumble as he edged  around
my broken door. He settled behind me, and  Duncan’s  hand slid away  with a  reluctant  slowness.  “We
thought you might be able to tell us what they meant,” Kavenlow said.
I shook my head, at a loss for words. Apart from the flag atop the Sandpiper there was only the one
in my pack. And Heather had that. “Heather!” I cried, my gaze on the distant  blur of streets.  “Heather
must have found Captain Borlett’s flag in my things. I told her to rally support for me. To tell the people
the truth, that I didn’t run away. She must have told them to  fly it so  I would know  they believed  me.
They believe me!” I said, elated. I stared at the scores of banners unfurled in the morning breeze,  each
one a shout that I was trusted, that my word was good enough for them.
“Of course they believe you,” Kavenlow said gruffly. “Did you honestly think they would believe a
Misdev prince?”
“I suppose not,” I said as I turned. “But look at all of them…”
Kavenlow made a worried sound. “Yes. I was going to put the crown on Contessa this afternoon, but
perhaps you should so everyone sees you accept her as your sovereign.”
“Yes,  all right,” I said,  not really caring. I looked  past  Kavenlow  at  the  scraping  of  boots  in  the
hallway. It  was  a  sentry.  After over  a  week  in a  cell, his clothes  hung loosely upon  him,  but  he  was
clean-shaven and alert. “Kavenlow? Princess?” he said as he came to stand apologetically just inside the
broken doorway. “They are ready for you.”
“Of course.”  Kavenlow  reached  for  my  arm.  So  did  Duncan.  Kavenlow  frowned  and  physically
removed  Duncan’s  hand from me. “It’s  a  private  audience,”  he said  without a  trace  of  apology,  and
Duncan shrugged good-naturedly.  He  remained with the guard  when  we  left.  It  occurred  to  me  that
Duncan, a self-proclaimed cheat and probable thief, was in the unique position of being known by all the
palace guards. Having freed them, he had their trust and could breeze freely into every part of the palace
as if invisible. I wasn’t sure that was entirely a good thing.
The hallway had been washed clean of last night’s ugliness. The news of our  retaking of the palace
had gone out this morning, and  from the looks  of it, most of the usual  palace  staff  was  back.  Every
window was open, and the cool spring air swept to the corners. A bowl of uneaten, untrampled flowers

was at the end of the hall. Violets. My favorite.
“Have you talked with Captain Jeck?” I asked as we went down the first stairs.
“Yes,” he said, lips barely moving. “I don’t like going into an alliance this openly. Trust doesn’t come
easily to me, Tess. Watch him closely.”
I went silent, concerned. I had no delusions that Jeck’s motives in saving Prince  Garrett’s  life were
anything other than to keep his own hide intact. Still, we were coming out of this better than I could have
imagined. “Didn’t he help you cloud Garrett’s thoughts?” I asked.
Kavenlow ran a hand down his tidy beard in worry. “Captain Jeck and I worked until nearly sunrise
under the guise of interrogating Prince Garrett. Neither one of us is good at manipulating memories. All
we managed was to shift a few key thoughts so he appears to  be  more  insane than a  man lost at  sea.
There will be no breach of confidence.”
“Good,” I said, relieved. I didn’t want the question of broken rules hanging over me. We  continued
throughout the palace, making brief greetings and assuring the staff that we were well. My face went cold
as I found myself in the hallway leading to the solarium. “Why here?” I said, pulling Kavenlow to a halt
before the guards standing at the door.
Kavenlow’s eyes were sad. “It’s all right, Tess. This is where she feels most at home. The garden is
duplicated at the convent. Except the statues there are of you.”
Surprised, I let myself be led in. My tension eased at the changes. The round table where my parents
had died was gone.
Even the paving stones had been  torn  up,  replaced  with new plants too  small for the space.  I had
been to my parents’ grave last night with Banner, explaining everything to them by torch and moonlight,
asking for their forgiveness. If it were up to me, I’d consecrate the ground and let them rest among the
laurels and ivy.
Kavenlow led me to a distant corner where the sun shone  dappled  through large potted  trees.  The
princess sat with Thadd at a table, her long, fair hair falling freely to rest amongst their clasped hands as
they discussed a topic known only to them. The sculptor had shoes now, and a new shirt. It looked tight,
but I was willing to wager it was the only thing to be found on such short notice to fit him. Several aides
stood nearby, following their practice of staying in the background. I waved my fingers at them and got
happy smiles in return.
My pulse quickened as I found Jeck standing a small distance apart. Though his Misdev uniform was
clean, he looked irate. He had on his gaudy monstrosity of a hat, making him look foolish despite his trim
and powerful build. Too many guards stood by him. He wore no chains, but he had no sword, either. I
touched my hip where a sword would hang, and he shrugged.
The princess looked up when Kavenlow cleared his throat. “Tess,” she called eagerly, and my heart
ached at how much she sounded like our mother. “Come and sit. I’ve been waiting.”
“Good morning, Princess. I trust you slept well,” I said formally.
“Oh, don’t,” she almost moaned as she indicated  a  chair to  her other  side.  “I am so  sick  of that  I
could throw my chamber pot out the window. Please talk normally to me? I can take it from me guards
and such, but not you.”
I grinned and nodded in understanding as the aides shifted uncomfortably. And whereas I always had
to bow  to  proper  decorum,  she  had  a  capital-fine excuse  to  ignore it, being raised  by  wolves,  so  to
speak.  The  next  few  months  were  going  to  be  rather  interesting  as  she  met  her  neighbors.  “Good
morning, Contessa,” I amended. “Sleep well?”
Sighing in relief, she bobbed her head to look artlessly alluring.

Captain Jeck took a step forward to help me with my chair. The nearest guard half pulled his sword
in response, and Jeck fell back in exasperation. Thadd got to his feet as Kavenlow helped me with my
chair.  All  the  men  remained  standing,  Kavenlow  pointedly  putting  himself  between  the  princess  and
Captain Jeck.
“Thank you for coming to  see  me, Tess.  I just don’t  know  what to  do,”  the princess  said  as  she
resettled herself, and  I cringed inside at  her admitting it where  others  could  overhear.  Maybe  being a
bumpkin princess might not be such a good idea.
Seeing my face,  her eyes  widened  and  she  flushed. “I find myself in a  somewhat  tight spot,  and  I
would like your advice,”  she  amended,  making her words  clear  and  precise.  She  managed  a  courtly
accent,  and  I  wondered  if  she  had  been  practicing.  “I  can’t  marry  Prince  Garrett.  But  if  I  remain
husbandless, I remain an enticing target for the next Red Moon Prophesy assassin.”
The guards stiffened, and Kavenlow frowned. “That won’t happen, Princess,” he said.
“I  would  hope  not,”  she  said  tartly,  then  winced  as  she  recognized  she  had  misspoken  again.
“Perhaps,”  she  added  mildly.  “But  it’s  something  I  need  to  consider.”  Her  blue  eyes,  so  much  like
Father’s, were confused, and I felt a wash of pity. It was easier to die from a prophesy than live with it.
“I talked with Prince Garrett this morning,” she  said.  “The man is completely insane. There’s  not a
breath of reason in him.”
Kavenlow eased back a step. “I’m pleased you have agreed to begin a dialog with King Edmund’s
youngest son,” he said to Contessa.
The princess’s gaze on mine faltered as Thadd took a pained-sounding breath. “It is my duty to wed.
I understand that,” she whispered.
Jeck stepped forward. A guard reached out and pulled him back. Giving him a black look, Captain
Jeck  brushed  the man’s hand from him. “I believe you will find Prince  Alexander  to  be  an  equitable
match, Princess. May I be blunt?” He hesitated, then at her solemn nod,  he added,  “Prince Alexander
has refused to consider taking a wife since he became fond of a commoner woman. Until now his father
hasn’t cared.  That’s  going to  change.  I would wager  Prince  Alexander  won’t  be  opposed  to  a  royal
joining if he was allowed to, ah, bring his mistress with him.”
Contessa stiffened, spots of color appearing on her sun-starved cheeks. “Have a courtesan under my
roof?” she said loudly. “Eating my food? Bedding my husband?”
I put a hand to my forehead and closed my eyes in a strength-gathering  blink. Did the woman lack
even a  hint of polish? She  sounded  like  a  fishwife  who  had  caught  her  husband  pinching  the  tavern
barmaid.
“Your legal husband, Your Highness,” Jeck said, amusement hinted behind his carefully blank  face.
“It would leave you free to find your own company.”
Contessa bit her lip, and I vowed to never do the same again. It made her look like a girl. The blush
that rose to turn her face red didn’t make her look any more mature either.
“It’s done more often than not, Princess,” Kavenlow offered in a  low voice.  “It’s  a  lucky few who
marry for love, even among the meanest of your streets.”
Her  eyes  were  on  her  clasped  hands,  ignoring  Thadd’s  distress.  “I  would  like  to  meet  Prince
Alexander,” she said hesitantly. “I will have a letter for him when Prince Garrett returns to Misdev.”
“Of course,” Kavenlow said, easing back in relief. “I’ll see to the travel arrangements myself. Is next
week too late for your liking? I would see the palace secure before I go.”
“Go!” I exclaimed. I was the only one in the room who would dare interrupt either of them, and I was

going to take full advantage of it. “You can’t go.”
Kavenlow’s eyebrows rose in warning. “Someone has to accompany them to be sure they reach their
borders safely, Tess.”
“Yes,” the princess said. “I agree. But you, Chancellor Kavenlow, will be staying here.”
Kavenlow froze. I thought it was in shock. I couldn’t be sure, since I had never seen the emotion on
him before. “Princess?” he almost stammered.
Contessa smiled, turning herself into an angel that rivaled the surrounding statues. “The Chancellor’s
place is in the palace with his books and ink, not running my errands. I’ll rely upon your advice, and I see
no reason  to  change something that worked  so  well for my parents.”  Grief furrowed  her brow  at  the
thought of them. “Tess will escort Captain Jeck and Prince Garrett to their holdings as my ambassador.”
My breath caught and my mouth dropped open. Me?
The princess was  beaming. “Look,  Thadd,”  she  said,  gripping his arm and  shifting in her seat  in a
pleased excitement. “Duncan was right. She can hardly wait.”
“But…” I stammered,  thinking, Duncan?  Duncan  had  talked  to  her?  The  snake!  The  devious,
contriving, clever, wonderful, snake! This was all a plot to get me out of the palace. “But I can’t!”  I
said, wanting to shout out I would. “I said I’d help you!”
“Oh, Tess,” she pleaded as she reached across the table with our mother’s grace and took my hands.
“Please be my ambassador. You’ll be my ears and  eyes.  You’ll carry  my decisions  and  speak  for me
before  kings and  queens.  You will have the courtesies  and  authority  that  you’re  used  to  and  will  be
treated  with respect.”  Her  smile turned  wry.  “I  imagine  it  will  be  like  being  the  princess  without  the
responsibilities.”
I looked at Kavenlow. His face was creased with irritation. Contessa drew my attention back as she
gave  my  hands  a  squeeze.  “Tell  me  you  will  accompany  Captain  Jeck  and  Prince  Garrett  back  to
Misdev?” she asked. “Take the king my regrets.  Explain what happened,  that  we’re  sorry,  and  would
like to inquire as to the health of his son Alexander?” Her gaze flicked to Captain Jeck. Whispering, she
added, “And when eyes aren’t on you, cast about for any hint of betrayal. You’re so suited for it, with
your palace manners and,” she hesitated, her eyes flicking to my topknot, “unique abilities.”
Elated, I nodded.  No  walls. No  doilies. New  places  to  buy things. “Yes.  Thank you,  Contessa.  I
would be honored.”
A distant commotion from the halls brought the sentries to a bristle, but I brightened as I recognized
Captain Borlett’s voice. He was here? He should be halfway to Lovrege by now.
“Leave me sitting in the hall all the morning while my flag is fastened to every last standard,” he said
loudly, as yet unseen. “I have a thing or two to put in your princess’s ear I do, concerning the right and
lawful property of a free man. That’s my flag. And I’ll not have anyone take it because it goes well with
her burning hair.”
He turned the corner, escorted by two sentries. Bluster and bother had reddened his round face, and
his frazzled beard was more scattered than usual. Eyes flashing, he took in the princess and the score of
guards. His anger vanished, and he snatched his faded hat from his head. “Uh, Your Highness,” he said
gruffly, his eyes fixed on her as he bobbed in an unaccustomed bow.
“Excuse my impertinence, ma’am. And I beg your pardon, but why is my flag waving from atop your
tower?”
Contessa opened her mouth, and I leaned close.  “You can’t  talk  to  him until you’re  introduced,”  I
prompted.

“Oh,” she  murmured,  clearly  embarrassed.  She  turned  to  Thadd.  “Please  introduce  us  so  I  may
address him,” she said, squaring her shoulders to find an air of formality.
Before Thadd could move, I rose. “I’ll do it,” I said. “I know Captain Borlett.”
“Tess?”  The  wrinkles  about  Captain  Borlett’s  eyes  deepened  as  he  recognized  me.  Hands
outstretched in greeting, he stepped forward only to be blocked by the sentries.
“Leave him be,” I said irately. “Not everyone is trying to kill me.” I pushed the sentries aside and took
his hands, beaming into his startled eyes. I could smell the sea on him, and I breathed it in like a  balm.
“Captain, you have no idea how good it is to see you again. But I thought you were going to Lovrege.”
Captain Borlett shifted his gaze from the princess  to  me, his eyes  lingering on my red  hair and  my
black eye. “I had to deliver my books before I was beached. But what are you doing here? Was it you
who put up my flag?”
I grinned. “I think it was a member of my old court. I’m sorry. It was an accident. She found it in my
things, and  knowing I would recognize it, had  the city put it up to  show  their  belief  that  I  didn’t  run
away.”
He bobbed his head in understanding, then he paused. “Your parents,” he said. “That would mean…”
His eyes grew wide and his fingers gripped his hat all the tighter. “The burning princess did my books. I
made the burning princess sleep on my floor. Oh, Your Highness. If you would have said anything…”
Delighted at his fluster, I took his elbow and led him forward. “Princess Contessa of Costenopolie, I
would be honored to introduce you to Captain Borlett of the Sandpiper. It was because of his fast ship
and skillful reading of the wind that I was able to reach you before, ah,” I glanced at Jeck, “anyone else,”
I finished.
Captain Borlett shifted his work-stained hat from one hand to another. “Your Highness. Forgive my
harsh words earlier concerning my paltry flag. If you want it, I’ll find another.”
The princess glanced at me, and at my subtle prompting, she extended her hand.
“Take it,” I whispered to Captain Borlett, and he jumped to do so. I fought to keep from rolling my
eyes. I had never seen such a backward court. Not one of them knew what to do.
“A pleasure to meet you, Captain,” the princess said. “I’m sure  we  can  convince everyone  to  take
your flag down once they see Tess beside me where she belongs.”
Captain Borlett fidgeted as he let go of her hand. “It’s only a bit of cloth, Your Highness.”
I made a subtle gesture with my fingers, and the guards dropped back from him. Contessa  saw  the
motion, and I smiled when she repeated the motion as if memorizing it.
“Perhaps you can help me,” she said, keeping  her pronunciation slow and  precise,  “being from the
docks as you are. I have just asked Tess to be my ambassador. Unfortunately, it’s a new position and
lacks a few essentials. She is going to  need  a  fast ship. One  with a  low draft  to  manage the rivers.  It
strikes me that the Sandpiper—”
“I’ll do it,” he interrupted, then reddened for his impertinence. My heart leapt. A ship of my own, to
sail as I wanted. “That is if I can buy my backers  out,  and  the princess—ah—your  sister  here…”  His
brow  furrowed  as  he glanced  at  me. “Uh, Tess  agrees,”  he said.  “We  weren’t  very gentlemanly. My
crew, I mean. Tess and I, though, had a fine evening of cards.”
I didn’t look at Kavenlow, but I saw his stance turn disapproving.
“Then it’s settled,” Contessa said, clearly pleased. “I’ll buy your backers out. The Sandpiper will be
the ambassador’s boat. My chancellor will see to your retaining fee, Captain.”
I beamed at Kavenlow—a boat of my very own!—and he frowned, looking as  eager  as  the time I

told him I wanted to climb a cliff to catch my own peregrine chick.
The princess leaned close to Thadd. “How long until we have to go?” she whispered.
He glanced at one of her statues and the light falling on it. “A little over three hours,” he said, starting
to rise. “I’ll see that the coach is ready.”
She touched his arm, and he stopped. Head tilted confidently, she made a slight hand gesture, and the
sentry closest to the door vanished, his place taken by another. Chu, I thought, both pleased and worried
at how fast she was picking this up.
“Time enough to tell Prince Garrett of his return home,” she said. “Or at least try to.”
Captain Borlett shifted from foot to foot. “Ma’am, uh, Your Highness?” he stammered. “If it’s all the
same to you, I should get back to my boat before my men start setting the ships afire that have my flag
flying from them.”
Contessa’s eyes widened, and I nodded, imagining Haron giving the order to start lobbing flaming tar.
“Of course,” the princess said, then motioned to Kavenlow. “My chancellor here can fund anything you
need to outfit your ship for its new duties. And welcome to the palace, Captain Borlett.”
Captain Borlett’s eyes lit up with a sudden avarice. He made an awkward bow to the princess  and
beckoned to Kavenlow. “I’ve got a few things I’ve been wanting,” he said.
Kavenlow  gave me a  pained  look  as  he  obediently  followed  Captain  Borlett  out.  The  short  man
grabbed his elbow, spouting phrases like a third lateen sail, and a new galley stove, and perhaps a coat of
paint. Black if they could find it.
“That’s the man who took you across the bay?” Jeck said  as  he leaned  close,  and  I nodded.  “I’m
glad I was here to see this,” he murmured. “Your new sovereign is rough but clever. King Edmund will
be taken by surprise should he think to start mischief with her.”
I smiled. “Did you expect anything less? She is my parents’ daughter.”
The remaining sentries shifted closer, and Thadd set a protective hand upon Contessa’s shoulder  as
Prince Garrett was bought in. I straightened, nervous for what he might say.
His wrists were  bound  with a  soft cloth.  Metal  hobbles  were  about  his  stockinged  feet.  He  was
dressed in the same rumpled uniform from last night. A whisper of blond stubble was on him, looking out
of place. His mien was cold and stiff as he stalked into the informal court. Jangling his shackles as if they
were a badge of honor, he came to a haughty standstill before the table, a red mark on his face where my
whip had reached him. “Princess,” he said, sweeping into an exquisite bow. Bringing his head up, he spat
at my feet.
The sentry behind him grabbed the scruff of his neck and almost pulled him from his feet.
“No!” Contessa called, and the guard hesitated. The prince hung in his grip, a taunting smile hovering
about him despite the pain he must be under. “Put him down,” she said, and the guard reluctantly did. My
pulse slowed, and I settled into my seat. I hadn’t realized I had risen.
The princess looked distressed  at  the haggard,  innocence-wronged  look  he had  draped  about  him
like a cloak. “I told you to offer him food,” she said. “He looks hungry.”
“He won’t eat, Princess.”
Her brow pinched. “We will get him home as quickly as possible, then.”
“You are a fool,” Garrett said, his beautifully clear voice shocking through me. “I told you last night to
kill her.”
Contessa shifted uncomfortably. “I’m sorry, Tess. I didn’t want you to hear this.”

“They’re going to kill us all,” Garrett said loudly. “The farmers and the whores. They’ll kill us all when
it suits them. They rule the world from their rows of soil and beds of lust.”
His voice had an eerie edge to it. The silky sound  grated  across  the back  of my neck,  making me
shudder. I wondered if Kavenlow and Jeck really had made him insane.
“I demand you return me to my father. He must be warned,” Garrett continued. “He must slaughter all
the farmers and unmarried women in the streets.  They can’t  be  allowed  to  live.” His green  eyes  went
distant. “No,” he breathed. “That isn’t right. Just  the whores  in Costenopolie.  And only the farmers in
Misdev.” Garrett’s brow furrowed. Losing his upright stance, he hunched in on himself. “But not all the
farmers,” he muttered. “Just those with swords. And the whores with red hair. The rest are just whores.
Yes,” he said, his voice going crafty. “Whores with red hair. That’s what I’ll do.  Kill all the red-haired
whores.”
A wash  of uneasy relief went through me. Clearly the blurring  of  memory  was  imperfect,  but  the
indecision in his story and the muddled state of his words would make him seem all the more insane. Still,
there was enough truth in his words to make my nights occasionally sleepless.
The princess looked pained. “I’m sorry,  Captain  Jeck.  Be  careful with him on the way home.  I’m
afraid he might hurt someone.”
The sincerity behind her simple words outweighed their lack of tact. I wondered if I should give up on
giving her royal polish and instead capitalize upon her earthy, honest nature.
Jeck gave her a bow. “Yes, Your Highness. I’ll put him safely in his father’s keep.”
Garrett jerked out of his soft mumbling. “My father is a fool!” he shouted. “He will have me beaten.
My brother will treat me like a child. I’ll have to kill them all if I want to be king!”
The princess gasped, then steadied herself. “Please give my deepest  regrets  to  King Edmund,” she
said, her eyes on Jeck. “I feel responsible somehow.”
Jeck bowed again. “I will do my best to assure him it wasn’t your doing.”
Of that, I was sublimely certain, and I made a tight, mirthless smile.
“May I go rest?” Garrett asked, his beautiful face twisted. “I feel ill.”
“Of course.” Pushing her hair from her eyes, Contessa gestured for the guards to take him.
“Not them!” Garrett shouted wildly as he fell back a step. “Where are my guards? I don’t trust you.
Your red-haired whores will poison me.”
The princess sat very still, clearly thinking. She  looked  to  me, and  I shrugged.  “Tess,  will you and
Captain Jeck please accompany him?” she asked.
The captain of my father’s guard stiffened. “Princess!”
She raised her eyebrows, and he fell silent. “Prince Garrett is mad,” she said, “not his captain of his
guard. But please, follow at a discreet distance.”
Garrett made a mocking bow, almost returning to the man he had been. “Your Highness is gracious
and kind,” he taunted, making it an insult.
I rose and gathered my skirts as he strode regally from the room with Jeck at  his elbow.  I touched
Contessa’s hand in parting, giving her a reassuring smile. She hadn’t done badly in her first formal court.
She would be fine with Kavenlow, and I knew Heather would love Contessa with all her heart,  finding
her a suitable companion worthy of telling all her gossip to.
There were a slew of Costenopolie guards between Jeck and me, and it wasn’t until I gained the hall
that I managed to bully my way through them and catch up with Jeck and Prince Garrett. Jeck gave me a

sideways look as I came even with him. Here  in the hallways, I was  reminded how tall the man was,
standing over  me  by  almost  a  full  head.  Garrett  strode  before  us  like  an  injured  hero.  The  sentries
followed obediently out of earshot. Jeck’s brow was furrowed, and he kept a terse silence. I wondered if
I had done something wrong.
We entered  a  hall lit from wide,  interspersed  windows,  and  Jeck  muttered,  “You managed  to  get
yourself a devil of a fine position, Princess. Congratulations.  It  took  me six years  to  get the ear  of my
sovereign. How nice it was so easy for you.”
“Easy!” I said, offended, as I looked up to see his jaw clenched behind his trim beard. “You call the
last week and a half easy?”
“The only thing that would have made it easier for you was if it had rained to cover your tracks,” he
muttered.
My anger swelled. “You don’t want me to go, do you,” I said in sudden understanding. “You don’t
want me in your lands.”
Jeck’s lips pressed together, going unseen behind his beard and mustache. “You couldn’t be farther
from the truth,” he said, but he looked angry, and it confused me. His pace was stiff, and his neck was
red. Reaching into an inner pocket, he pulled out my bone knife. “Here.”
The knife thrust belligerently into my hand was warm from his body. He had kept it. I had thought he
had sold it to buy a horse. “Thank you,” I said sharply. “I thought Kavenlow searched you.”
“That’s what he thought, too.”
I frowned, tucking my knife into the wide sash of my dress where  it belonged.  The weight of it felt
comfortable. “Your knives are with my handmaiden. I’ll get them when I can.”
“I would appreciate that.”
We continued. Confused and angry, I walked beside him, Garrett before us. Jeck took a deep breath
as we passed a window, glancing up and down the hall. There were sentries at either end, but they were
too far away to hear. “Has Kavenlow explained to you about  your—hands?”  he asked,  and  I started,
shocked from my anger at the shift in topics.
I said nothing, looking at Garrett in concern as I came to a  wide-eyed  halt. Jeck  stopped  with me,
and when Garrett continued Jeck pulled him back, pushing him roughly into the wall. The young prince’s
eyes narrowed, but he stayed put.
Frowning, Jeck  took  off his foolish-looking hat,  his gaze drifting over  my  shoulder  to  the  sentries
coming to a halt out of easy earshot. “It’s just that…” He hesitated. “Oh, to hell with it,” he muttered. My
eyes widened as he made a fist. Drawing it back, he swung it at Garrett with a small grunt, as smooth and
sweet as honey.
I gasped. The prince saw it coming but had no time to react.
Jeck’s fist smashed into his chin. Garrett’s head snapped back and hit the wall with a hollow thunk.
Shocked, I gathered my skirts and stepped back as the royal crumpled.
Satisfaction heavy on Jeck,  he shook  his hand free  of the pain.  “You have no idea  how long I’ve
wanted to do that.”
My gaze rose to the guards jogging our way. “It’s all right,” I called, and they hesitated. “We’re fine.
Prince Garrett is fine. Thank you.” They came to an uncertain halt. “Go on back.”
Laughing among themselves, they returned to a respectful distance, gossiping. I faced Jeck squarely, a
quiver in my middle as I waited to hear what he didn’t want Garrett to know.
Jeck rubbed his hand, meeting my gaze from under his shock of black hair. “Tess, Kavenlow is your

master. And that he cares  for you is obvious.  But he…” His stance  shifted from foot  to  foot,  and  his
shoulders hunched. “Has he told you why your hands hum?” he asked.
“He…” I hesitated. “He said I returned from me dead with the punta’s ability to heal.”
He nodded, a tension easing in him. “Did he also tell you that you can kill with them?”
I took a step back, frightened. Seeing my cold face, Jeck nodded as  if I had  confirmed something.
“No. He hasn’t,” he said.
“Why are you telling me this?” I demanded, my stomach light and my knees weak.
He leaned close, his brown eyes carrying a sly anticipation that settled over me like a chill. “I’m saying
Kavenlow is your master, but nothing says it has to stay that way.”
Shocked he dared make his offer a second time, I drew back. “Kavenlow is my teacher. I am young,
Captain. Not stupid.”
I turned with a flounce, gasping when he grabbed my upper arm. “Wait,” he demanded.
I froze in fear as I heard the snick of steel from learner. It wasn’t Jeck but the sentries at the end of
the hall. Swallowing hard, I tugged free of Jeck’s loose grip and waved the guards back. I was shaking
inside, but if I was going to have this conversation, I wanted them close.
Jeck  took  a  step  from me, darting a  glance at  the sentries.  “Tess,  hear  me out,”  he said  softly as
Garrett lay slumped between us. “You’re young, and raw with talent. I can see why Kavenlow took you
as a  student.  But you’re  just that.  A  student.  What  I’m  proposing  isn’t  uncommon.  Apprentices  are
wooed from their original teachers more often than not. It’s hard to trust the man who continually poisons
you.”
My anger faltered at the truth of what he was saying. Seeing it, his brown eyes probed mine. “That’s
why  Kavenlow  didn’t  have  you  recognized  for  so  long.  Your  high  tolerance  to  venom  makes  you
extremely valuable. But, Tess, he can’t teach you to heal with your hands. He didn’t even recognize you
had the ability, did he.”
It wasn’t a question, and he read my answer in that I was unable to look at him.
The tips of Jeck’s black boots shifted under my gaze. “The force you can direct through you swings
both ways, and willy-nilly experimentation is likely to get you or the one you are trying to heal killed.”
I felt a stab of fear and  I looked  up.  I wondered  if that  was  why Kavenlow  had  been  so  worried
when he told me why my hands hummed.
“I can teach you things he can’t, Tess,” Jeck said, his low voice running through me like ice in a river.
“Things he won’t. I know he has high ideas and plans for conquest by commerce. But he’s wrong. The
world doesn’t change that quickly. Be my apprentice, and  I will teach  you things Kavenlow  can’t—or
won’t.”
“Kavenlow knows what he’s doing,” I said, but even I could hear the doubt in it.
Jeck smiled, straightening to look over my shoulder. “Your loyalty suits you. But ask him… ask him if
what I say is true. He has never been honest with you with about his past—your past. It’s ugly, Tess, the
things he’s done, the atrocities he’s capable of. He has outright lied to you. I never have. I never will.”
My eyes fell from his as a seed of doubt wedged itself deep, buried under my denial.
“While you’re in Misdev, let me at least teach you how to heal with your hands,” he continued. “I’m
sure once you know enough, you’ll decide I’m right and stay. If not, return to Kavenlow.”
It sounded too easy. But then I realized I could take him for all his knowledge and  bring it back  to
Kavenlow.

A pleased expression was in Jeck’s eyes when I met them. “You just had a thought to take what you
could from me and leave,” he murmured.
Fear washed through me, shortly followed by a  flush. Jeck  chuckled,  making me feel foolish. “I’m
better  at  this than you, Tess,”  he said.  “Come  and  learn from me with the sole  intent  to  steal,  and  I
guarantee I’ll come out of the arrangement better than you.”
Though my knees were weak, pride narrowed my eyes.  “You’re  mistaken,  Captain  Jeck.  I accept
your offer. Teach me what you will, but I will stay Kavenlow’s apprentice.”
There was a scuff from behind us, and we both spun. My hand was at my topknot, and Jeck’s was
tucked behind his jerkin. It was Kavenlow, his venom-induced skills allowing him to get this close without
alerting either of us. He was better than both of us combined.
“What are  you two  doing in the middle of  the  hallway?”  he  demanded,  ignoring  Garrett  slumped
unconscious on the floor.
Squinting in the bright light from the window, I looked at Jeck. “He asked me to be his apprentice,” I
said, feeling vindicated when Jeck clenched his jaw and his eye began to twitch.
Tension pulled Kavenlow tight. “Chull bait!” he muttered. “You couldn’t wait, could you,” he said, his
face red  behind his salt-and-pepper  beard.  “You think you can  come  here  and  charm my  apprentice
from me? She spat in your face, didn’t she?”
Jeck crouched, and grunting in effort, he slung Garrett over his shoulder. “She said she would take me
as her instructor,” he said, puffing as he rose to a stand and put his hat back on.
Kavenlow gripped my arm in sudden fear. “Tess!”
Face warm, I frowned at Captain Jeck. “I said nothing of the kind,” I replied  hotly, walking almost
sideways as I followed Jeck down the hall as he carried Prince Garrett. “I said I’d let him teach me how
to heal with my hands while serving as ambassador. I’m using Captain Jeck, and he knows it.”
Jeck chuckled, and Kavenlow went white. “Tess, no,” he said urgently as he paced beside me. “That
decides it. You aren’t going. He’ll wring what he can from you, then use it to take Costenopolie. That is,
if he doesn’t outright kill you!”
“He won’t kill me. He wants me to be his apprentice,” I said, not caring that Jeck was listening. “And
he can’t  watch  me all the time. When will another  opportunity  to  walk freely in King Edmund’s  halls
come again? Let me go, Kavenlow. I’ll be all right.”
“No,” Kavenlow said, sounding as if he had bit the word off, it was so sharp.
“But I want to go,” I insisted. “Kavenlow, let me go!”
Under the weight of Garrett, Jeck laughed breathlessly.
“What the devil are you laughing about?” Kavenlow asked, his eyes angry.
Jeck shifted Garrett to a more comfortable position and started down the hall. “Let me go. Let  me
go,” he said in a high falsetto. “That’s all she has been saying since I met her.” He eyed Kavenlow from
under his hat. “Let her go. Or don’t you trust your own work?”
Hunched  and  muttering  obscenities,  Kavenlow  strode  down  the  hallway  between  us,  the  guards
trailing behind. “I have a  week  before  Garrett  goes  back,”  Kavenlow  said.  “You are  not leaving with
Captain Jeck, Tess.”
I said nothing, smug in the knowledge that Contessa  would listen to  me before  him. I was  going. I
would learn how to heal with my hands  if nothing else.  The other  thing—the killing—I wasn’t  so  sure
about.

Duncan’s raggedy silhouette appeared at the distant end of the hallway. Hands moving expressively,
he talked with a sentry until the soldier gestured toward us. Duncan followed his gaze,  an eager  stance
coming over him. “Tess?” he called from the top of the hall, “Do you want to go get your horses?  We
have a few hours before your sister’s coronation.”
I  looked  from  Kavenlow  to  Jeck,  feeling  the  weight  of  an  apple  in  my  pocket.  I  wasn’t
Costenopolie’s princess—I was Kavenlow’s apprentice—and I had a present to collect. “Yes,” I called
out as I slipped from them both and went to walk the streets with Duncan, free for what was  probably
the first time in my life. “I’m coming.”

