de Gruyter Series in Logic and Its Applications 6
Editors: W. A. Hodges (London) · R. Jensen (Berlin)
S. Lempp (Madison) · M. Magidor (Jerusalem)


One Hundred Years of Russell’s Paradox
Mathematics, Logic, Philosophy
Editor
Godehard Link
Walter de Gruyter
Berlin · New York
≥

Editor
Godehard Link
Philosophie-Department
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
Ludwigstr. 31/I
80539 München
Germany
Series Editors
Wilfrid A. Hodges
School of Mathematical Sciences
Queen Mary and Westfield College
University of London
Mile End Road
London E1 4NS
United Kingdom
Steffen Lempp
Department of Mathematics
University of Wisconsin
480 Lincoln Drive
Madison, WI 53706-1388
USA
Ronald Jensen
Institut für Mathematik
Humboldt-Universität
Unter den Linden 6
10099 Berlin
Germany
Menachem Magidor
Institute of Mathematics
The Hebrew University
Givat Ram
91904 Jerusalem
Israel
Mathematics Subject Classification 2000: 03A05; 00A30, 03-06

 Printed on acid-free paper which falls within the guidelines
of the ANSI to ensure permanence and durability
Library of Congress  Cataloging-in-Publication Data
One hundred years of Russell’s paradox : mathematics, logic, phi-
losophy / edited by Godehard Link.
p.
cm.  (De Gruyter series in logic and its applications; 6)
Includes bibliographical references and indexes.
ISBN 3-11-017438-3 (acid-free paper)
1. Paradox.
2. Liar paradox.
I. Title: 100 years of Russell’s
paradox.
II. Link, Godehard.
III. Series.
BC199.P2O54
2004
165dc22
2004006962
ISBN 3-11-017438-3
ISSN 1438-1893
Bibliographic information published by Die Deutsche Bibliothek
Die Deutsche Bibliothek lists this publication in the Deutsche Nationalbibliografie;
detailed bibliographic data is available in the Internet at http://dnb.ddb.de.
 Copyright 2004 by Walter de Gruyter GmbH & Co. KG, 10785 Berlin, Germany.
All rights reserved, including those of translation into foreign languages. No part of this book may be
reproduced in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or
any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Printed in Germany.
Typesetting using the Authors’ TEX files: I. Zimmermann, Freiburg  Printing and binding: Hubert & Co.
GmbH & Co. KG, Göttingen  Cover design: Rainer Engel, Berlin.

Preface
In June 2001 an international conference was held at the University of Munich, Ger-
many, to commemorate the centenary of the discovery of Russell’s paradox. It brought
together leading scholars from the following ﬁelds:
• Russell Studies
• Mathematical Logic
• Set Theory
• Philosophy of Mathematics
The aims of the event were twofold, historical and systematic. One focus was
on Russell’s logic and logical philosophy, which were shaped so much by his own
and related paradoxes, in particular since new material has become available in recent
years from the rich sources of the Russell Archives through the publication of the
Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell. But the second aim was of equal importance:
to present original research in the broad range of foundational studies that draws on
both current conceptions and recent technical advances in the above-mentioned ﬁelds.
It was hoped to contribute this way to the well-established body of mathematical
philosophy initiated to a large extent by Russell a hundred years ago.
The conference featured plenary sessions with distinguished invited speakers, sec-
tion meetings with both invited and contributed papers, and as special events two panel
discussions, “Russell in Context” and “The Meaning of Set Theory”, as well as two
symposia, one on “Propositional Functions” and the other on the “Finite Mathematics
of Set Theory”. The Russell panel, chaired by A. Irvine, was composed of N. Grifﬁn,
P. Hylton, D. Kaplan, and A. Urquhart. Y. Moschovakis chaired the panel on Set The-
ory, with S. Feferman, H. Friedman, D. C. McCarty, and W. H. Woodin as panelists.
The symposiasts of the ﬁrst symposium, chaired by R. Wahl, were G. Landini and
B. Linsky, those of the second S. Lavine and K.-G. Niebergall, chaired by the editor.
The papers collected in this volume represent the main body of research emanating
from the proceedings of the conference. All authors delivered a talk at the conference
except J. Mycielski, who was unable to attend but sent his invited paper, and H. Field,
who attended the conference as a discussant and was invited by the editor to contribute
his present paper. G. Jäger and H. Schwichtenberg were each joined by a co-author
for their paper included here. A number of invited speakers delivered a talk, but
were unable to contribute a paper to the volume because of other commitments; these
are W. Buchholz, P. Hylton, H. Kamp, P. Martin-Löf, Y. Moschovakis, C. Parsons,
G. Priest, and A. Urquhart.

vi
Preface
The papers were all originally written for this volume, with two exceptions. The
original place of publication of H. Field’s paper “The Consistency of the Naive Theory
of Properties” is The Philosophical Quarterly, volume 54, No. 214, January 2004.
It is reprinted here by kind permission of Blackwell Publishing and the author. A
condensed version of Hazen’s paper appeared as A. P. Hazen and J. M. Davoren,
Russell’s 1925 logic, in: Australasian Journal of Philosophy, volume 78, No. 4,
pp. 534–556, December 2000. Reprint of this material as part of the present paper by
kind permission of Oxford University Press and the co-author.
The occasion to publish this volume would never have arisen without the essen-
tial ﬁnancial support from a number of institutions that made the conference possible
in the ﬁrst place. It is therefore ﬁtting to express my deep appreciation here to the
Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG ) for covering the main bulk of the confer-
encecoststhroughfundsmadeavailabletotheinterdisciplinaryDFGgraduateprogram
Graduiertenkolleg “Sprache, Information, Logik” (SIL ) at Munich University, and
specialconferencefunds; furthermoretothefollowinginstitutionsandprivatesponsors
for ﬁlling the remaining ﬁnancial gaps: the Bayerisches Staatsministerium für Wis-
senschaft, Forschung und Kunst, the Philosophy Department, University of Munich,
the Gesellschaft von Freunden und Förderern der Universität München (Münchener
Universitätsgesellschaft e.V. ), the University of the German Federal Armed Forces
Munich, Apple Computer Germany, and Alpina Burkard Bovensiepen GmbH & Co.
Many people helped in various ways to organize the conference and to prepare
this volume. I wish to thank all of them, in particular Solomon Feferman for his
encouragement, and Andrew Irvine for generous advice, in the early stages of the
conference project. Ulrich Albert carried the main organizational burden of the con-
ference as “front liner” on the internet and at the conference site; Sebastian Paasch
was responsible for the technical part of the preparation of the volume. My thanks
to both of them for their efﬁciency and their commitment far beyond the call of duty.
Ulrich and Sebastian were assisted at different stages by Marie-Nicole Ehlers, Martin
Fischer, Roland Kastler, Uwe Lück, Michaela Paivarinta, Hannes Petermair, Marek
Polanski, Christian Tapp, Mai-Lan Thai, Julia Zink, and Mauricio Zuluaga. Daniel
Mook helped with checking the English of non-native speakers.
I owe a special debt to Karl-Georg Niebergall, who was always close at hand for
any advise on matters of content pertaining to the contributions of the volume, and
whose philosophical seriousness, enthusiasm and unfailing technical judgment I have
had the privilege to enjoy in many years of joint seminars and private discussions.
Finally, I wish to extend my thanks to Dr. Manfred Karbe of Walter de Gruyter
Publishers for supporting the decision to publish the volume, and for his sustained
encouragement, advice, and patience during the phase of its preparation.
May 2004
G. L.

Table of Contents
Preface
v
Godehard Link
Introduction. Bertrand Russell—The Invention of Mathematical Philosophy
1
W. Hugh Woodin
Set Theory after Russell: The Journey Back to Eden
29
Harvey M. Friedman
A Way Out
49
Sy D. Friedman
Completeness and Iteration in Modern Set Theory
85
Kai Hauser
Was sind und was sollen (neue) Axiome?
93
Gerhard Jäger and Dieter Probst
Iterating  Operations in Admissible Set Theory without Foundation:
A Further Aspect of Metapredicative Mahlo
119
Solomon Feferman
Typical Ambiguity: Trying to Have Your Cake and Eat It Too
135
Karl-Georg Niebergall
Is ZF Finitistically Reducible?
153
Tobias Hürter
Inconsistency in the Real World
181
Michael Rathjen
Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
191
John L. Bell
Russell’s Paradox and Diagonalization in a Constructive Context
221

viii
Table of Contents
Peter Schuster and Helmut Schwichtenberg
Constructive Solutions of Continuous Equations
227
Kai F. Wehmeier
Russell’s Paradox in Consistent Fragments of Frege’s
Grundgesetze der Arithmetik
247
Andrea Cantini
On a Russellian Paradox about Propositions and Truth
259
Hartry Field
The Consistency of the Naive Theory of Properties
285
Ulrich Blau
The Signiﬁcance of the Largest and Smallest Numbers
for the Oldest Paradoxes
311
Nicholas Grifﬁn
The Prehistory of Russell’s Paradox
349
Gregory Landini
Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’ and Their Solution by Russell’s Substitutional Theory
373
Philippe de Rouilhan
Substitution and Types: Russell’s Intermediate Theory
401
Francisco Rodríguez-Consuegra
Propositional Ontology and Logical Atomism
417
Bernard Linsky
Classes of Classes and Classes of Functions in Principia Mathematica
435
Allen P. Hazen
A “Constructive” Proper Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory (The Logic of
Principia Mathematica, Second Edition, Appendix B)
449
Andrew D. Irvine
Russell on Method
481
Volker Peckhaus
Paradoxes in Göttingen
501

Table of Contents
ix
David Charles McCarty
David Hilbert and Paul du Bois-Reymond: Limits and Ideals
517
Jan Mycielski
Russell’s Paradox and Hilbert’s (much Forgotten) View of Set Theory
533
Shaughan Lavine
Objectivity: The Justiﬁcation for Extrapolation
549
Geoffrey Hellman
Russell’s Absolutism vs. (?) Structuralism
561
Robert S. D. Thomas
Mathematicians and Mathematical Objects
577
Holger Sturm
Russell’s Paradox and Our Conception of Properties, or: Why Semantics
Is no Proper Guide to the Nature of Properties
591
Vann McGee
The Many Lives of Ebenezer Wilkes Smith
611
Albert Visser
What Makes Expressions Meaningful? A Reﬂection on Contexts and Actions
625
List of Contributors
645
Name Index
649
Subject Index
653


Introduction. Bertrand Russell—The Invention of
Mathematical Philosophy
Godehard Link
1. The Grand Conjunction
It is a theorem of elementary logic that, given an arbitrary two-place relation R, there is
no object y such that for any x, x bears R to y just in case x does not bear R to itself. If
the domain is the universe of sets, and R is the membership relation, then the theorem
says there is no set consisting of those and only those sets that are not members of
themselves. However, the ‘naïve’, unrestricted, comprehension scheme claims the
contrary and thus produces Russell’s paradox. By the same token, if R is the relation
of predicability and the domain consists of predicates then there is no predicate that is
predicable of just those predicates that are not predicable of themselves. A collection
schema assuming the contrary yields the form of the paradox in which it was ﬁrst
formulated by Russell in May 1901. In the 1901 draft of Part I of his Principles of
Mathematics he writes:
The axiom that all referents with respect to a given relation form a class
seems, however, to require some limitation, and that for the following
reason. We saw that some predicates can be predicated of themselves.
Consider now those … of which this is not the case. … [T]here is no
predicate which attaches to all of them and to no other terms. For this
predicate will either be predicable or not predicable of itself. If it is
predicable of itself, it is one of those referents by relation to which it was
deﬁned, and therefore, in virtue of their deﬁnition, it is not predicable of
itself. Conversely, if it is not predicable of itself, then again it is one of
the said referents, of all of which (by hypotheses) it is predicable, and
thereforeagainitispredicableofitself. Thisisacontradiction. ([70]:195)
It is of some historical interest that Russell should ﬁrst write down his paradox in the
predicate version. According to his own account ([80]: 58) he had discovered it by
analyzing Cantor’s paradox of the greatest cardinal, where the context was set theory.
Given that, it seems that Russell had already isolated the precarious scheme inviting
paradox, viz., diagonalizing a relation and negating it, which is the common core of

2
G. Link
the Liar, Cantor’s Theorem, and Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem. As Gödel would
put it years later:
By analyzing the paradoxes to which Cantor’s set theory had led, he
freed them from all mathematical technicalities, thus bringing to light the
amazing fact that our logical intuitions (i.e., intuitions concerning such
notions as: truth, concept, being, class, etc.) are self-contradictory. ([28]:
131)
Of course, the historical record suggests that it took Russell some time to realize
that he had discovered something that fundamental.1 In particular, it was not before
Frege’s reaction of shock, a full year later, upon receiving Russell’s famous letter
describing the paradox—now also in its class form—that Russell came to appreciate
its real impact and felt reassured enough to publish his ﬁndings. Thus the paradox
ﬁrst appeared in print with the publication of the Principles in May 1903.
According to existing reports the paradox was independently discovered by Ernst
Zermelo. The ﬁrst reference to this appears in a letter that Hilbert wrote to Frege in
late 1903 thanking him for a copy of the second volume of the Grundgesetze which
Frege had sent to him. “The example you give at the end of the book,” says Hilbert,
referring to the afterword in which Frege acknowledges Russell’s paradox, “has been
known to us here,” adding in a footnote: “I think it was 3-4 years ago that Dr Zermelo
found it after I had communicated my [own] examples to him” ([24]: 24). It is likely
that by his “[own] examples” Hilbert meant what has become known as “Hilbert’s
Paradox”,2 to which I return presently.
Given the small step from the proof idea of Cantor’s Theorem to the idea of the
Russell class it should come as no surprise that an astute mind like Zermelo hit upon
it by himself. What might be surprising is that Zermelo didn’t publish it. Before
arriving in Göttingen—and this is less known—he had already left a mark in the
history of science in quite a different ﬁeld. As an assistant of Max Planck in Berlin
he had, drawing on a theorem of Poincaré’s, devised what is called the recurrence
paradox, which together with Loschmidt’s reversibility argument put a serious threat
to Boltzmann’s program of reducing thermodynamics to statistical mechanics.3 So
why didn’t he ‘strike’ again, this time threatening Cantor’s newly erected ediﬁce of
set theory? The usual speculation about this is that at the time “the example” wasn’t
taken seriously by him, nor by Hilbert, for that matter.4 Most likely, Zermelo, who
had become a convinced Cantorian, viewed the problem as belonging to the same
category as Cantor’s paradox of the greatest cardinal and Burali-Forti’s problem of the
greatest ordinal. Presumably, these were all problems of a ‘regional’ kind, rather to
1See Grifﬁn’s contribution in the present volume.
2See [57], and also Peckhaus’s paper in this volume.
3The father of quantum theory seemed to be impressed by it, which might have been part of the reason
why he remained skeptical about Boltzmann’s atomism for such a long time; see, e.g., [46]: 26f.
4For instance, assuming the paradox was discovered and communicated to him before the Paris meeting
in August 1900, Hilbert could have mentioned it there in his famous lecture on mathematical problems.

Introduction
3
be played down than exaggerated,5 having to do with extrapolating arithmetic into the
transﬁnite, and living within the bounds, or even on the fringes, of Cantor’s theory; or
so it seemed.
By the time he wrote his letter to Frege, however, Hilbert at least must have
changed his attitude regarding these anomalies. For there he called his own exam-
ples “even more convincing contradictions” ([24]: 24), more convincing because he
considered them to be of a “purely mathematical nature.”6 He continues with the
explicit assessment that there is something seriously amiss in the very foundations of
logic and mathematics. So the diagnosis was there now, and it was the same that the
philosopher Russell had arrived at. However, the cure was not to come for years. As
for Hilbert’s part, the main focus of attention at the time lay elsewhere, on classical
number theory, culminating in his proof of Waring’s theorem in 1908, on integral
equations and on mathematical physics, activities intensiﬁed by his close cooperation
with H. Minkowski, up to the latter’s premature death in 1909 (see, e.g., [68]). Thus
in Göttingen, progress in the foundational work was basically left to Zermelo, who,
however, had a different, much more mathematical, perspective, being preoccupied
with the axiom of choice and its justiﬁcation. While he did lay the foundations of
modern set theory in the course of it, these circumstances nonetheless gave Russell a
start of a number of years which he needed, after many abortive attempts full of blind
alleys and frustrating toil, to ﬁnd his own way out of the paradoxes. By bringing all
the ‘regional’ versions of the paradoxes together, including the ‘semantical’ ones, he
was able to broaden the scope of the investigation and to contribute to the foundations
of logic proper.
Paradoxes like the Liar or those about the nature of inﬁnity had been around as
famous puzzles since antiquity, but the tools to tackle them had not been forthcoming
in all that time. What counted as logical discourse, in Cambridge and elsewhere7 was
replete with ambiguity and obscurity. Precision and rigor were missing, and traditional
logic had no way to come to serious terms with such genuinely logical problems as
the paradoxes, old and new.
It is a curious fact about the history of knowledge that early on, at the time of the
Greeks, logic should have dissociated itself from mathematics. Perhaps this is simply
due to the contingent fact that the man who invented formal logic, Aristotle, was for
all his greatness not known for excelling in the ﬁeld of mathematics. At that time
5Those earlier problems didn’t even seem paradoxical to Cantor and Burali-Forti, as G. Moore [54]
argues.
6See ([57]: 168), for the phrase used by Hilbert. The authors explain that Hilbert’s construction doesn’t
make use of the particular rules of ordinal and cardinal arithmetic set up by Cantor. Also, the editors of
[24] add a footnote to the passage quoted in which they refer in turn to a remark by O. Blumenthal in
his biographical essay of Hilbert [6]. There Blumenthal speaks of “the example, devised by Hilbert and
nowhere leaving the domain of purely mathematical operations, of the contradictory set of all sets formed
by union and self-mapping [Selbstbelegung]” ([6]: 422).
7The work of the neo-Hegelian philosopher F. Bradley, for instance, marks a point of reference for the
appreciation of the tremendous change that the subject of logic was to undergo in the course of Russell’s
contribution.

4
G. Link
began what I like to call the Babylonian captivity of logic in the realm of metaphysics,
lasting for over 2000 years. When in the age of the scientiﬁc revolution Aristotelian
metaphysics became the target of modernizers like Galileo, logic was considered part
and parcel of metaphysics and was dismissed together with the philosophy Galileo
fought against. For him, formalization of logic was obsolete; what was needed from
logic he considered as natural and no real subject of study, certainly no precondition
for founding the new science of physics. In his polemic The Assayer [25] Galileo said
famously:
[Natural] philosophy is written in this grand book, the universe, which
stands continuously open to our gaze. But the book cannot be understood
unless one ﬁrst learns to comprehend the language and read the letters in
which it is composed. It is written in the language of mathematics, and
its characters are triangles, circles, and other geometric ﬁgures without
which it is humanly impossible to understand a single word of it. ([25]:
237f.)
Thus, if even syntax was in the domain of geometry, little room was left for logic. In
fact, the subject of logic was not only ignored, it acquired an outright bad reputation
with scientists and mathematicians over the centuries, still to be felt in Poincaré’s
polemics. Even Kant, while certainly not prejudiced against logic, said nonetheless
that logic hadn’t made any progress since Aristotle. He saw this subject as a beautiful
ﬁnished ediﬁce which could only suffer from further additions to it:
If some of the moderns have thought to enlarge it [logic] by introducing
psychological chapters on the different faculties of knowledge (imagina-
tion, wit, etc.), metaphysical chapters on the origin of knowledge or on the
different kind of certainty … or anthropological chapters on prejudices,
their causes and remedies, this could only arise from their ignorance of
the peculiar nature of logical science. ([44]: Preface, B VIII)
Here Kant should not be taken to mean that logic cannot be applied to other ﬁelds of
knowledge, but rather that the subject matter of logic proper is neither psychology nor
metaphysics. But what Kant complained about had happened all the time and was
soon to culminate prominently again in Hegel’s work and that of his followers. This
was also the situation in England when Russell arrived at the scene.
So what was Russell’s point of departure? In hindsight, it can be said that Russell
didn’t discover his paradox quite by accident. The late 1890s saw him deeply involved
in studying what was known among idealist philosophers as the ‘contradictions’ of
the inﬁnitely large and the inﬁnitely small. At the time, philosophy in Cambridge was
dominated by neo-Hegelians, and Russell adopted their point of view.8 Thus, in spite
of his mathematical training, he took a philosophical interest in mathematics and its
foundations. Even after he had given up his idealist convictions he kept his thoroughly
8See, for instance, [41], [37], [54].

Introduction
5
philosophical outlook. His ontology had become pluralistic, but the ‘theoretical terms’
ofhislogicconsistedofthesamekindofphilosophicalentitiesthattraditionallogicians
like Bradley would use, viz., propositions, concepts, and, with a novel emphasis on
their importance, relations.
In contrast, for instance, reﬂection on language as a
prerequisite to modern logic played no particular role yet in Russell’s work. The
Principles, even in those parts where he introduced the innovation of the denoting
relation for the ﬁrst time, were written in a rather traditional philosophical style,
certainly not apt to draw a large readership among mathematicians.9 The situation
was just like Frege described it in the Preface of his Grundgesetze [23], where he said
that he had to give up on the mathematicians who would call his work “metaphysics”
because of expressions like ‘concept’, ‘relation’, ‘judgement’ occurring in it. There
were those two separate communities, and it seemed hard to imagine how they should
take interest into one another. Mainstream mathematicians did not only care little
about philosophy but considered even Cantor, who was really one of them, as too
philosophical to be taken seriously. It is a telling historical detail that Felix Klein’s
widely read lectures on the development of mathematics in the nineteenth century [45]
mentions Cantor only in passing. Russell clearly expressed this state of affairs in My
Philosophical Development [80], where he says:
The division of universities into faculties is, I suppose, necessary, but it
has had some very unfortunate consequences. Logic, being considered to
be a branch of philosophy and having been treated by Aristotle, has been
considered to be a subject only to be treated by those who are proﬁcient
in Greek. Mathematics, as a consequence, has only been treated by those
who knew no logic. From the time of Aristotle and Euclid to the present
century, this divorce has been disastrous. ([80]: 51)
Here is now what I consider Russell’s historic achievement. Open-minded, quick,
and polyglot, he was able to engage philosophers and mathematicians alike in an
excitingly new foundational debate. And crucially, this was not just another episte-
mological enterprise, important as meta-reﬂections are for clarifying the conceptual
and methodological premises of a given discipline. It was all that, but it was more:
it opened up new horizons for technical research of an unprecedented kind, deriv-
ing from a few basic logical premises. Russell, who was surely not equipped with
the most advanced mathematical expertise of his time,10 nevertheless almost single-
handedly produced viable solutions to the new problems that were rigorous enough to
spark interest in the mathematicians’camp, in particular, with Poincaré and the Hilbert
school. Poincaré, highly skeptical about symbolic logic, still had a hand in uncovering
the presuppositions of quantiﬁcation, while Hilbert was of course the one inﬂuential
mathematician who recognized early on that the paradoxes did pose a problem for
9For instance, Peckhaus [this volume] cites G. Hessenberg in Göttingen for “scathing” comments on
Russell’s book.
10Mathematics at Cambridge was not the best to be had in Europe at the time, as Russell admits ([80]:
29).

6
G. Link
the foundations of mathematics, and that something had to be done about it.11 Some
of the ﬁnest younger mathematicians who came to specialize in the new discipline
or at least substantially contributed to it at some point in time (Weyl, Bernays, von
Neumann, Gödel) took their starting point from the framework of Principia in one
way or the other. On the philosophers’side, Wittgenstein, Ramsey, Carnap, and Quine
stand out; each of them adopted the Russellian outlook as well, although Wittgenstein,
of course, was soon to strike out in quite a different direction.
It is this combination of transdisciplinary philosophical query, mathematical train-
ing and logical expertise that characterize Russell’s paradigm of mathematical philos-
ophy. Russell therefore occupied a unique role in bringing about what I like to call,
in an astronomical metaphor, the Grand Conjunction of the old and venerable ﬁelds
of philosophy, logic, and mathematics.
Let us remind ourselves of some important features of Russell’s work that are
representative for this new enterprise.
1.1. Some Russellian Themes
1.1.1. Symbolic Explicitness
Today it is hardly necessary to stress the beneﬁts of symbolism, and in particular,
the salutary role of a good symbolism. The Peano–Russell notation of Principia was
indeed a good one, serving a generation of logicians well (Frege, for instance, was less
lucky in convincing others to use his symbolism, in spite of his clarity of insight and
meticulous exposition). At ﬁrst, when Russell seized upon Peano’s notation, it was
perhaps not more than an expedient to express ideas succinctly; historically, however,
it is more than that. It was a unique way, in philosophy and even in mathematics, of
‘making it explicit,’ to use a catch phrase of today. Distinctions could be drawn that
wouldn’tbenoticedotherwise, thuspreparingthegroundfornewquestionsandlinesof
research. The organizing power of the symbolism made Russell become deﬁnite about
his primitives, aware of what could be deﬁned in terms of what, and what was needed
to prove an assertion. In his case in particular, it also led to productive strictures with
the conceptual apparatus he started out with. This is most clearly seen in his gradual
retreat from the received metaphysical approach towards his fundamental innovations,
as documented in his writings from the Principles leading all the way up to Principia.
In the latter work, he ﬁnally was in the position to give proofs and derivations from
ﬁrst principles, more geometrico. It strikes the eye that he had thereby left behind
everything that was so far considered ‘logic’ in the philosophers’ sense.
Even so, we should not pass over the weak points that could not be covered up by
the extensive formalism; as Gödel said: “It is to be regretted that this ﬁrst compre-
hensive and thorough going presentation of a mathematical logic and the derivation
11See again Peckhaus’s paper in this volume with references therein, and also [50].

Introduction
7
of Mathematics from it is so greatly lacking in formal precision in the foundations
(contained in *1–*21 of Principia), that it presents in this respect a considerable step
backwards as compared with Frege” ([28]: 126). Also, what we today take as the
hallmark of modern mathematical logic, a notion of metatheory, was barely to be
found (but see below). Related to this failure is the notorious laxity in matters of use
and mention, which Quine famously harped on and induced him to basically rewrite
Principia from scratch. Thus I think it is fair to say that Russell’s logic was still
in a pre-paradigmatic stage of development. The real ‘founding document’ of the
new discipline was Gödel’s paper on formally undecidable propositions [27]; but as
its complete title shows, the point of reference were the Principia Mathematica of
Whitehead and Russell.
1.1.2. On the Road from Metaphysics to Logical Syntax
In his unique laboratory of ideas reﬂected in the Principles,12 Russell worked with
traditional philosophical entities like propositions and concepts. Propositions were
certain complexes of ‘terms’, that is, objects,13 which—though clearly patterned after
their syntactic form—were no syntactic entities.
Rather, they were conceived in
analogy with regular physical objects consisting of various extra-linguistic parts. The
notion of ‘constituent’ used in this connection was ambiguous, meaning both a part
of an expression and a part of complex entity. Real syntactic leverage is introduced,
however, when Russell begins to inquire into the notion of substitution, with which
he experimented a lot over the years. This investigation had the natural tendency
to acquire a syntactic character almost by itself. But for Russell the transition to
syntax was by no means automatic. Quite to the contrary, he struggled with the
formalism and its interpretation for a long time, trying to do equal justice to the
demands of metaphysics and the emerging discipline of symbolic logic. This is the
kind of tension mentioned above that led to all the endemic ambiguities that modern
readers of Russell justly complain about,14 wondering time and again whether Russell
is talking about entities or expressions. I think that the failure to distinguish clearly
between the expression and the object it signiﬁes stems from a neglect of language
in Russell’s early work where it is not expressions but concepts that denote ([71]:
chap. V). Philosophically, his own ‘linguistic turn’was still to come, in spite of all the
symbolic machinery he had already adopted.15 Even in his seminal essay On Denoting
12As Quine says of this book: “It is the more remarkable, then, that this prelogical logic of Russell’s, this
morass of half-formulated problems, should already contain the embryo of twentieth-century philosophy”
([62]: 5).
13Recall that the word ‘term’ in the Principles means an entity and not an expression.
14For instance, even in Principia he could still write: “A function, in fact, is not a deﬁnite object, … it
is a mere ambiguity awaiting determination” ([85]: 48).
15This judgement seems to contradict what Russell himself says about that time: “I was very much
occupied, in the early days of developing the new philosophy, by questions which were largely linguistic. I
was concerned with what makes the unity of a complex, and, more especially, the unity of a sentence” ([80]:
49). However, the very example he gives—involving the philosophically charged concept of part-whole—is
an indication of the fact that it is still mainly metaphysics that he worries about.

8
G. Link
[72] we ﬁnd him wavering between the newly introduced ‘denoting phrases’ and the
old ‘denoting complexes’. The infamously obscure Gray’s Elegy argument occurring
there bears ample witness of the fact that Russell had not quite worked out the basic
semiotic relations.16
The other principal case is point is the ambiguous status of the propositional func-
tions, which, after Russell had abandoned classes as regular objects, had to carry the
main ontological burden of Principia’s philosophy. The exact criterion of identity of
propositional functions—or of some equivalent intensional notion of property—has
remained a matter of debate up to the present day, that is, whether they should be
conceived as equipped with outright syntactic granularity or something more coarse-
grained yet short of extensionality.
When I speak of Russell’s road to syntax I don’t mean to say that he left metaphysics
behind completely; not so, as his theory of logical atomism shows. But in his hands
metaphysics or ontology became more amenable to a logical treatment in the modern
sense. The development also showed, however, how problematic the old metaphysical
conception of ontology became which still constituted the philosophical underpinning
of Principia. Russell’s intellectual crisis in 1913, produced by the events surrounding
the unﬁnished Theory of Knowledge manuscript [75], testiﬁes to this; however great
the role of Wittgenstein’s criticisms was in “paralyzing” Russell, the internal problems
of traditional metaphysics still occupying his mind were such that they led the whole
program of logical atomism into an impasse.17
1.1.3. The Re-Invention of Ockham’s Razor As a Logical Tool
This is, of course, Russell’s famous method of eliminating dubious entities by the
technique of incomplete symbols in his theory of description, ﬁrst laid down in On
Denoting and elaborated in *14 of Principia. It not only swept away the notorious
round square and all its lookalikes, but also expelled classes as ﬁrst-class citizens from
his ontology. Now it is one thing to proclaim that entities should not be multiplied
beyond necessity, and quite another to devise an impeccable logical method of ﬁlling
this slogan with meaningful content. That this was not an altogether trivial matter is
shown by the complication arising from the presence of, ﬁrst, logical operators, which
are sensitive to scope, and secondly, more than one descriptive phrase, where the order
of elimination becomes an issue. Russell provided viable solutions to these problems,
albeit reﬁned by others later on in various directions. Thus, his theory of descriptions
is rightly hailed as a landmark of genuine logical philosophy.
The advent of this method marked a decisive point on Russell’s road to logical
syntax. The denoting concepts of the Principles evolved into denoting phrases and
dissolved altogether as an ontological substance. Incomplete symbols are plainly
16However, Landini’s paper in this volume contains an intriguing case for the claim that in spite of all
this, Russell’s “substitutional theory” can be reconstructed rather faithfully in a way as to contain a viable
solution to the paradoxes and a surprising justiﬁcation of logicism prior to Principia.
17On this, see also Rodríguez-Consuegra’s paper in this volume.

Introduction
9
expressions, there are no ‘incomplete entities’to be had. Incompleteness in this sense
derives from the semiotic function attached to linguistic expressions. Not every part
of a meaningful expression needs to be meaningful, some parts may require a context
to become so. This notion of context doesn’t make sense with extra-linguistic objects,
which (usually) lack a semiotic role. In the special case of mathematical objects, it
is true that Frege called functions “incomplete” or “unsaturated”; but we mustn’t take
that literally here: in fact, Frege ﬁrst models logic after mathematics by assimilating
concepts to mathematical functions, and then uses the syntactic (indeed, chemical)
metaphor of saturation to characterize functions again.
In the foundations of mathematics, the main beneﬁt Russell derived from the
technique of incomplete symbols was, of course, the prospect of doing mathematics
without a commitment to classes.
The following theory of classes, although it provides a notation to rep-
resent them, avoids the assumption that there are such things as classes.
This it does by merely deﬁning propositions in whose expression the sym-
bols representing classes occur, just as, in *14, we deﬁned propositions
containing descriptions. … The incomplete symbols which take the place
of classes serve the purpose of technically providing something identical
in the case of two functions having the same extension. ([85]: 187)
In view of current discussions about anti-Platonist approaches to an understanding of
mathematical practice18 we have to remember that Russell’s no-classes theory didn’t
spring from any nominalist convictions—quite the opposite, he was a realist regarding
universals, in particular, relations. The Quinean extensionalist reform, which basically
equated all universalia with classes, was still to come, so ousting classes was not a
nominalist project for Russell. Rather, it seems that the effects the paradoxes had
on him were such that he never trusted classes again, which he took responsible for
engendering the antinomies. By reducing class talk to propositional function talk
Russell paved the way for a conceptualist approach to set theory.
1.1.4. The Nature of Quantiﬁcation
As far as quantiﬁcation is concerned Russell had to come a particularly long way
from where he started out. For instance, in his Principles he cannot make up his
mind about the semantic mechanism involved in the assertion of a noun phrase like
some man. He wonders “whether an ambiguous object is unambiguously denoted,
or a deﬁnite object ambiguously denoted” ([71]: 62). To save his newly discovered
denoting relation from this ambiguity he shifts it to the object denoted, with obviously
little convincing results. Metaphysical constraints about what can or cannot not be
part of the proposition expressed by an assertion involving phrases like some man
or all men make him come up with an account that is squarely at variance with the
Frege–Peano style of quantiﬁcation which Russell uses elsewhere in the same book.
18See, e.g., [21], [40].

10
G. Link
But there is a piece of linguistic philosophy emerging, which Russell puts to logical
use, when he draws a distinction between the genuinely universal quantiﬁer all and
the logical meaning of free-choice any. This distinction, which appears in [74] and
made it into the ﬁrst edition of Principia, can be viewed as an instance of Russell
stepping out of his single, all-encompassing formal system and moving towards some
sort of metalanguage.19 In [74], after reviewing the paradoxes, he concludes that they
all have in common “the assumption of a totality such that, if it were legitimate, it
would at once be enlarged by new members deﬁned in terms of itself. This leads us
to the rule: ‘Whatever involves all of a collection must not be one of the collection’ ”
([74]: 63). This is one form of the Vicious Circle Principle, which however, as
Russell goes on to say, makes “fundamental principles of logic” meaningless, such
as ‘All propositions are either true or false’. Here he ﬁnds a role to play for any:
“Hence the fundamental laws of logic can be stated concerning any proposition, though
we cannot signiﬁcantly say that they hold of all propositions” ([74]: 68). This is
because in Russell’s type theory, the logical tool of overt quantiﬁcation is, by necessity,
parametric, i.e., relative to a given type; truly universal claims can only be made by a
quantiﬁer-free, schematic assertion. That might be interpreted as foreshadowing the
ﬁnitary assertions of Hilbert’s metamathematics. However, Russell never made the
step to distinguish between an object language and a metalanguage, and so he didn’t
really know what to do with this observation in technical terms. Consequently, the
separate role of any was given up in the second edition of Principia. It seems to me,
though, that what Russell hinted at comes closer to what has been reconstructed in
recent years as the concept of arbitrary object,20 which is a philosophical idea.
Sufﬁce it to say, then, that Russell did arrive at the modern notion of a quantiﬁed
sentence as a separate form, equipped with a speciﬁc range for the bound (“apparent”)
variable. But, as Goldfarb [35] rightly points out, since there was no notion ofmodel, in
which the quantiﬁers and some non-logical vocabulary could be variously interpreted,
neither he nor Frege, for that matter, can be said to have developed the full-ﬂetched
concept and machinery of current quantiﬁcation.
1.1.5. The Hierarchy of Types
It was suggested above that it took Russell’s original logico-philosophical frame of
mind not only to recognize the serious nature of the problem of the paradoxes but
to sit down and work out a ‘non-regional’, comprehensive solution as well. Putting
the paradoxes in a proper philosophical perspective Russell also tried to include the
so-called semantical paradoxes into his solution. Having absorbed Cantor’s work,
and with Peano’s symbolic logic at his disposal, he now felt that he ﬁnally had in his
hands the technical means to deal with the whole array of paradoxical phenomena
besetting the foundations of logic and mathematics. The ﬁnal result he came up with
was the theory of ramiﬁed types, RTT for short ([74], [85]). RTT consists of two main
19This was noticed by Hazen [38].
20See Kit Fine’s [22].

Introduction
11
components, a simple theory of ﬁnite types, STT, and the device of ramiﬁcation. STT
is designed to take care of the set-theoretic paradoxes, while ramiﬁcation is a way to
resolve the semantical paradoxes.
The basic idea of STT is simple enough. It derives from a platonist ontology of
individuals and properties (concepts, propositional functions), regimented into levels,
in which not only individuals fall under properties but properties in turn under other
properties, provided the subsuming property is always one level higher up. Assum-
ing individuals to have type 0, we get properties of individuals as type 1 properties,
properties of type 1 properties as type 2 properties, etc.; thus, the above concept of
self-predicability cannot be expressed anymore. There is a syntactic ban on reﬂex-
ive predication, negated or not. The same is true, derivatively, for classes, blocking
Russell’s paradox.
Virtually all of the usual mathematics (except set theory proper, of course) can
be carried out in the framework of simple type theory; indeed, only a few types will
be actually used to ascend from the natural numbers, which can be either given as
individuals or constructed as second-order properties in the Frege-Russell style,21 to
the higher systems of the rational and real numbers, and on to real-valued functions,
function spaces, etc.
However, not STT, but Zermelo’s system Z of set theory (plus the axiom of choice,
and strengthened by Fraenkel’s replacement axiom) carried the day as the standard
framework for mainstream mathematics. This was inevitable; mathematics had been
moving towards a uniﬁcation of its disciplines, but Bourbaki style, not for the price
of being put in a syntactic straitjacket. In standard set theory, the types can easily be
retrieved from the notion of rank, and the axiom of foundation blocks ∈-cycles. More-
over, while Russell’s logicist conception assimilates membership to predication, with
its characteristic trait of non-transitivity, membership in set theory is relational from
the outset, allowing for, and indeed making essential use of, transitivity in modelling,
for instance, the well-ordering on the ordinals by the ∈-relation. The predicational
view precluded that, and with it the related idea of cumulativity, which was to become
the central idea of the Zermelo–Gödel hierarchy of sets, typically pictured as the ‘fun-
nel of sets’. Iteration along transﬁnite types was essential for this hierarchy, whereas
in the predicational picture, Russell could see no use for transﬁnite types. These were
the main limitations of the non-ramiﬁed part of Russell’s theory of types.
While type theory did not become the general framework for everyday mathemat-
ics it did survive in important quarters of specialization, in particular, foundational
studies, recursion theory, and an array of applications, from computer science (see,
21Of course, the inﬁnitely many objects the logicist needs to construct in order to be able to interpret
arithmetic don’t come for free. Russell saw no way of avoiding an axiom of inﬁnity (but see Landini’s paper
in this volume for an argument to the contrary, at least as far as Russell’s substitutional theory is concerned).
In contrast, the (consistent) system of second-order logic with ‘Hume’s Principle’ added, which has been
called ‘Frege Arithmetic’[5], does produce the inﬁnite number series; isn’t the neo-logicist thereby making
good on his claim after all that arithmetic is logic? I don’t think so. Hume’s Principle adds ‘ideology’ (in
Quine’s sense) to second-order logic, by introducing the operator ‘the number of . . .’. Even Frege himself
didn’t seem to regard Hume’s Principle as a primitive truth of logic; see ([39]: 286).

12
G. Link
e.g., [10], [3]) and artiﬁcial intelligence to categorial grammar theory ([2], [55]) to
higher-order intensional logic ([53], [26]). The foundational work was mainly con-
cerned with justiﬁcation; in the course of these developments, the original setup was
either simply used, as, e.g., in Robinson’s non-standard analysis [69], or modiﬁed,
either by the introduction of functional types22 or more recently through amendments
towards greater ﬂexibility.23 There is also the inﬂuential Martin-Löf style intuition-
istic type theory [51], important both for its underlying philosophy and its range of
applications.
1.1.6. Predicativism
This issue is a paradigm case of the kind of intimate connection between logic and
philosophy described above. Brought into the discussion by Poincaré, the idea of
a predicative deﬁnition was taken up by Russell and turned into a technical tool for
dealing with the semantical side of the paradoxes, that is, the ramiﬁcation of the type
hierarchy.24 It was only natural for Russell, who had come to deny the existence
of classes beyond a convenient notation, to adopt a constructivist attitude towards
propositional functions, which served as non-extensional proxies for classes. But
then, classes depended on the deﬁnitional history of the propositional functions which
gave rise to them. In particular, no propositional function could be introduced by
referring to a totality to which it already, in an intuitive sense, belonged. This is the
Vicious Circle Principle; Russell’s formulation of it in [74], quoted above, is carried
over to [85], where it is paraphrased as “If, provided a certain collection had a total,
if would have members only deﬁnable in terms of that total, then the said collection
has no total” ([85]: 37). Now Gödel ([28]: 135) pointed out that these two versions
are not really synonymous, and that not ‘involvement’, but rather ‘deﬁnability only in
terms of’is the critical notion. It is the Vicious Circle Principle in this latter sense that
found its technical expression in the predicative comprehension principles of Principia
and, later on, of the standard systems like NBG set theory or the fragment ACA0 of
second-order arithmetic. According to Gödel, the principle applies
… only if the entities involved are constructed by ourselves. … If, how-
ever, it is a question of objects that exist independently of our construc-
tions, there is nothing in the least absurd in the existence of totalities
containing members which can be described (i.e., uniquely character-
ized) only by reference to this totality.
([28]: 136; two footnotes omitted)
This is Gödel’s well-known pronouncement of his platonist convictions. Thus the
issue of predicativity brought into focus two major and opposing philosophies re-
garding mathematical objects: platonic realism and constructivism. They have been
22Beginning with Hilbert’s andAckermann’s effort in the twenties to Church’s lambda calculus to Gödel’s
famous Dialectica interpretation.
23See especially Feferman’s [12], and up to the system W of [14].
24For an comprehensive overview of predicative logics and their philosophy, see [38].

Introduction
13
described at length in the literature, and need not be rehearsed in detail here. But the
interesting thing is that there are two historical developments deriving from one and
the same source, while conﬂicting in their philosophies: On the one hand, there is the
predicativist tradition starting with Hermann Weyl and leading up to the modern ﬁeld
of predicative proof theory initiated by Feferman and Schütte; but on the other hand
there is Gödel who transformed the idea of ramiﬁcation in such a way as to produce the
ﬁrst model of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (given ZF is consistent), the constructible
universe. He achieved this by adopting an explicit non-constructivist attitude towards
the objects of set theory (or towards the ordinals anyway, working constructively from
there). Another often quoted remark of Gödel’s, in a letter to Hao Wang, makes this
clear: “However, as far as, in particular, the continuum hypothesis is concerned, there
was a special obstacle which really made it practically impossible for constructivists
to discover my consistency proof. It is the fact that the ramiﬁed hierarchy, which had
been invented expressly for constructivistic purposes, has to be used in an entirely
non-constructivistic way” ([34]: 404).
I’d like to make two points here. The ﬁrst concerns the relationship, in the history of
the exact sciences, between the genesis of new results and the underlying philosophical
outlook (if any) that inﬂuences them. When new ideas possess at least some degree
of technical explicitness they can be exploited and recombined in quite productive
and unforeseen directions regardless of their original purpose or philosophy. In the
case of Russell’s ramiﬁed type theory this is one of the beneﬁts ﬂowing from the
effort made in Principia, quite independently of its subsequent fate as foundational
system. Secondly, the case shows the futility of constructing continuous genealogies
in the history of ideas. In my view, there is little substance in claims of the form, “It
was all in X”, where ‘X’ stands for ‘Russell’, ‘Frege’, or whoever the favorite hero
of an historiographer happens to be. For instance, in spite of the credit that Gödel
himself gave Russell regarding the sources of the constructible universe, we would
rather agree with R. Solovay, the commentator of pertinent writings of Gödel in the
Collected Works, who says: “There seems to me to be a vital distinction between the
precise notion of Gödel and the somewhat vaguer discussions of the ramiﬁed hierarchy
found in Russell’s writings. Thus Gödel’s well-known comments … to the effect that
his notion of constructibility may be regarded as a natural extension of Russell’s
ramiﬁed hierarchy into the transﬁnite now strikes this writer as much too generous”
([83]: 120). There was indeed both a decisive conceptual break and a new level of
technical sophistication that distinguishes Russell’s notion of ramiﬁcation from what
it became in Gödel’s hands. Even so, the historical importance of Russell’s efforts is
not diminished by the fact that they were superseded by later developments; rather it
should be measured by its potential for generating fruitful lines of research.
Let me shortly mention two more such lines of research that can be traced back to
Russell’s predicativism. One is the theory of truth; comparing Russell’s approach to
the semantical paradoxes with that of Tarski, A. Church concludes: “Russell’s reso-
lution of the semantical antinomies is not a different one than Tarski’s but is a special
case of it” ([9]: 301). Thus Tarski can be said to have extended the ramiﬁed hierarchy

14
G. Link
in his theory of truth, albeit introducing essential innovations in the course of it. The
other development, already mentioned above, concerns the modern research program
of predicative mathematics. It ﬁnds its crystallization in a recent work of S. Fefer-
man’s [14] which takes Weyl’s predicative program in Das Kontinuum and moulds it
into a rigorous theory, called W, of ‘ﬂexible’ ﬁnite types. There is a proof, jointly due
to Feferman and Jäger ([17], [18]), that W is both a conservative extension of, and
proof-theoretically reducible to, Peano Arithmetic. Thus W is drastically weaker than
any theory of the order of ZFC. Yet Feferman claims that basically all scientiﬁcally
applicable mathematics could be formalized in W.25 This is a much more speciﬁc ar-
gument than those usually given in the debate on the indispensability of mathematics
for the sciences initiated by Quine and Putnam. In fact, Quine acknowledges Fefer-
man’s program, calling it “a momentous result”, if realizable: “It would make a clean
sweep of the indenumerable inﬁnites and unspeciﬁable sets” ([64]: 230). For further
discussion of this, see [15].
1.1.7. Reductionism
We have already touched upon major reductionist issues in Russell’s work which
met with some success, like the elimination of deﬁnite descriptions, the reduction of
classes to propositional functions, and the predicative reform of logic. However, the
main logicist research program Russell embarked on, the reduction of mathematics to
logic, turned out to be a failure. The principal reason was, of course, that substantial
existence assumptions needed in mathematics (i.e., axioms of inﬁnity) are alien to
the province of pure logic.26 But the program also foundered on technical problems,
like those related to the infamous axiom of reducibility.27 Also, the extension to
epistemology of the reductionist method, hailed by Russell as the “supreme maxim in
scientiﬁc philosophising” [76], and followed by Carnap in his Logischer Aufbau der
Welt, did not succeed; for many respectable reasons it was abandoned in the course of
the last century.28
25See also the postscript to [14] in [16], 281–83.
26It is a curious fact that Russell never seemed to have acknowledged this failure. As his discussion in
[78], for instance, clearly shows, he is fully aware of the fact that the Peano axioms have no ﬁnite models,
and that the injectivity of the successor function cannot be proved from pure logic. In fact, he calls the
axiom of inﬁnity a “hypothesis”, like the multiplicative axiom (choice) and the axiom of reducibility, which
he doesn’t consider logically necessary. Yet in the same book he squarely equates mathematics with logic:
“Pure logic, and pure mathematics (which is the same thing), aims at being true, in Leibnizian phraseology,
in all possible worlds, not only in this higgledy-piggledy job-lot of a world in which chance has imprisoned
us” ([78]: 192).
27See, e.g., [38] for the relevant background, but also [9] for the claim that, contrary to what has been
common coin about this ever since Ramsey’s criticism, repeated by Quine, the axiom by no means defeats
Russell’s purpose of ramiﬁcation if only the essentially intensional character of Principia’s logic is taken
into account. As far as the last point is concerned, Linsky’s paper in this volume is also relevant here.
28Basically, a theory of the physical world just cannot be a deﬁnitional extension of a phenomenalist
theory of sense-data. For a recent discussion of the philosophical ﬂaws of the phenomenalist viewpoint
see, e.g., [60].

Introduction
15
Yet in the domain of logic and the philosophy of mathematics, the reductionist
spirit has survived and even grown stronger as more sophisticated logical tools became
available, like the concepts of relative interpretation between theories, conservativity
of one theory over another, or proof-theoretic reduction. This line of research ﬂowed
from two main sources, Hilbert’s metamathematics and the nominalist tradition in
modern logical philosophy.
As for the former, it is true that Hilbert’s original program of ﬁnitary consistency
proofs was given up in the aftermath of Gödel’s incompleteness theorems; but modern
proof theory kept the basic methodology while relaxing ﬁnitist requirements [30], cali-
brating theories according to their relative consistency strength, investigating reductive
relations between them [13], and quite generally exploring the wealth of subsystems
of analysis, i.e., of second order number theory, for the development of most of every-
day mathematics. In addition to the predicativist research program mentioned above
there is the important program of “Reverse Mathematics” [82] singling out various
set existence principles which are not only sufﬁcient but also necessary for speciﬁc
portions of positive mathematics, thereby uncovering the precise resources used.
The other major source of reductionist philosophy of mathematics is the nominalist
program initiated by Goodman and Quine [36]. While Quine in his famous turn [61]
embraced classes as indispensible for scientiﬁc practice, H. Field [21] tried to justify
this practice by showing its conservativity over a nominalist ground theory. Yet another
approach is S. Lavine’s intriguing “theory of zillions” [48], which is committed to the
justiﬁcation of unrestrained impredicative set theory on the basis of the resources of
“ﬁnite mathematics” present in J. Mycielski’s concept of locally ﬁnite theories [56].
The leading rationale common to all these approaches is a kind of reasoning that
is “conscious of its resources” [49]. The typical question would not only be, “Can
we prove it?”, but more speciﬁcally, “In which theory can we prove it?”, or “What is
the weakest theory for establishing the result or, more generally, for justifying usual
mathematical practice?” Note that from a foundational point of view the question of
accepting a theory is thereby ‘factorized’ into two component steps: (i) the technical
question as to what the necessary principles are which the theory rests on, and (ii)
the (mainly) philosophy-driven decision to embrace or repudiate the principles and
thereby the theory.
According to the received view, ﬁrst principles (“axioms”) have to be not only
true but self-evident. But as A. Irvine’s paper in the present volume reminds us,
there is an element in Russell’s methodology, called the “regressive method” [73],
which calls for admitting principles that might suggest themselves as axioms only
after a considerable amount of technical work. Thus, the above decision (ii) may after
all not be grounded—or at least not exclusively grounded—in some philosophical
predilection or other, a situation deﬁnitely to be welcomed. It is interesting to note
that Gödel was aware of this feature in Russell’s work and supported it.29
29Remarks that make direct reference to Russell can be found in ([28]: 127f.); see also his well-known
statement on the question of new axioms in set theory, in ([29]: 521).

16
G. Link
Now there is a striking analogy here to a methodological maxim in the otherwise
uncompromisingly mathematical work of H. Woodin, expressed for instance in the
popular [86] and also in his contribution to this volume. Woodin’s paradigm case for
mathematical truths that might be discovered only a posteriori is descriptive set theory.
This ﬁeld of research, which amounts to the deﬁnability theory of the continuum, saw
a period of rapid progress in Russell’s time through the work of the French school
of analysts led by E. Borel, R. Baire, and H. Lebesgue, and the Russian group round
N. Luzin, but then reached a stalemate when it met with independence phenomena,
unrecognized as such at the time.30 There is a hierarchy of complexity, very similar to
the analytic hierarchy in classical recursion theory, in the subsets of the real numbers
called the hierarchy of the projective sets. Central regularity properties for these
sets, like the measure-theoretic question of Lebesgue measurability, turned out to be
undecidable on the basis of the usual axioms of set theory already after a few stages
up the hierarchy. In recent decades a group of so-called Determinacy Axioms were
isolated emerging from the investigation of inﬁnite games. It could be shown that
the axiom geared to the projective sets, projective determinacy, settles their regularity
properties in the context of ZFC, thereby providing a remarkably closed body of
mathematical knowledge. Woodin says about this axiom:
It is interesting to note that the understanding of this axiom took quite a
number of years of research and that the credible claim for the truth of
the axiom was only possible after this research was accomplished—there
is no known elementary argument for the truth of the axiom. This fact
creates something of a challenge for the skeptic to explain. ([88]: 31)
Woodin also gives us his opinion on the ‘degree of truth’ of the axiom vis-à-vis other
more familiar axioms: “I believe the axiom of Projective Determinacy is as true as the
axioms of Number Theory.” (ibid.) This statement is of course patently at variance
with the persuasions of many, including some authors of the present volume. It urges
nothing else than that ‘Cantor’s paradise’of the actual inﬁnite cannot easily be divided
into an ‘indispensible’ and a ‘recreational’ (Quine [63]: 400) province.
1.2. Conclusion
What is the status of Russell’s work and his project of mathematical philosophy a
hundred years later? Russell’s role in logic seems to me similar in many respects to
Galileo’s role in the ﬁeld of physics. Today Galileo’s law of falling bodies is derived in
the ﬁrst pages of any standard textbook of physics, just like Russell’s paradox occurs
on page 2 or so of treatises on set theory. Galileo was quite wrong in many important
scientiﬁc issues of his time. For instance, rather than joining Kepler not only in his
general Copernican outlook, but also in his bold hypothesis of the elliptical movement
30See [43] for a historical sketch of the problems involved.

Introduction
17
oftheplanets, Galileosomewhatstubbornlystucktotheprincipleofcircularmovement
of the heavenly bodies, blaming measurement errors for the observed deviations. A
quarter of a century after his discovery of the Law of Free Fall he claimed that a stone
dropped from a tower would describe a uniform linear movement superimposed on
a likewise uniform circular movement.31 Again, eager to ban reference to “obscure
qualities” he came up with a faulty analysis of the tides, denying any inﬂuence of the
moon. But Galileo is not only—and not even mainly—remembered for his simple
law; rather, his deep structural insights into the nature of motion (relativity of motion,
Galilei invariance), and the mathematization of natural philosophy in general, marked
the beginning of the new ﬁeld of physical science.
Russell’s work can be viewed in quite a similar light. There are many points of
technical detail, and of general methodology as well, which did not stand up to later
developments. Yet his work changed the character of the traditional ﬁeld of logic in
a way that it was never the same again. The same holds true for philosophy. Russell
had a lasting impact on the way to do philosophy, in spite of the fact that almost all
of his positions were severely criticized later on, not only in non-analytic quarters but
also under the inﬂuence of Wittgenstein, Russell’s nemesis.
Mathematical philosophy in the Russellian style aspires to be informed by, and to
reﬂect on, the latest and most advanced results in the ﬁelds of logic and mathemat-
ics,32 and to inspire technical foundational work in turn. The centenary of Russell’s
discovery seemed a ﬁtting occasion to document current activities in this ﬁeld of
interdisciplinary research.
2. The Contributions
The authors of this volume are mathematicians, logicians or philosophers and histo-
rians of logic and mathematics, all of them with a characteristic multiple expertise in
more than one of these ﬁelds. Their contributions address different foundational issues
from varying viewpoints, and in a different style. Some papers are quite technical,
but even where the style is informal, the authors draw on solid technical knowledge.
Thus the collection of papers constitutes a body of mathematical philosophy in the
sense explained above. It also provides useful pointers to current developments in the
foundations of mathematics, in many cases shaped to a large extent by authors of the
present volume.
The contributions can roughly be divided into the following groups: (i) papers
on current, post-Cohen era, set theory; (ii) proof-theoretic reﬂections on various non-
standard approaches to set theory, and indeed on inﬁnity itself; (iii) constructive math-
ematics; (iv) some modern technical answers to the paradoxes; (v) papers on Russell’s
31This incoherent view was stressed by Feyerabend in his classic [20], where it is attributed to Galileo’s
‘tactics’ of persuasion: the important point to get across was the earth’s rotation, ‘never mind the details’.
32And in the sciences in general, although this is not at issue in the present volume.

18
G. Link
logical work; (vi) papers providing some additional historical context related to the
foundational crisis; (vii) philosophical papers reﬂecting on issues raised by Russell’s
philosophical logic. Although there is always some arbitrariness in a linear order the
papers are arranged following this subdivision, and within each group according to a
thematic or historical vicinity.
The work of W. H. Woodin (see [43], [87]) has become known outside expert cir-
cles for its staggering attack on anti-Platonist agnosticism regarding the meaning of
set theory, in particular for the claim, based on an impressive body of deep origi-
nal mathematics, that Cantor’s continuum problem is a meaningful question after all,
and that it should be settled in the negative. His paper Set Theory After Russell. The
Journey Back to Eden contains a succinct recapitulation of the main line of argument,
together with some new results mentioned and an exposition of the central notion of
-logic which differs from earlier accounts. — One of the major themes in H. Fried-
man’s rich and seminal foundational work has been the useful or even indispensible
role of abstract (large cardinal) set theory in lower and seemingly unrelated areas of
mathematics. His paper A Way Out is a remarkable exercise in this methodology. A
‘slight’amendment of the naïve comprehension axiom yields a single, rather strong set
existence axiom, which countenances only sets and which, with no additional axioms,
interprets ZFC . The price to pay for this uniformity is the appeal to a logical strength
of the order of subtle cardinals, which are beyond such “small” large cardinals as
Mahlo and indescribables, but still compatible with Gödel’s V = L. — In his paper
Completeness and Iteration in Modern Set Theory, the set theorist S. Friedman, who
made substantial contributions to the ﬁne structure theory, sketches a picture for the
universe of sets based on two principles of completion and iteration with respect to the
‘# (sharp) operation’, which was originally introduced as a device for transcending the
constructible universe. — Finally, in this ﬁrst group, the set theorist and philosopher
of mathematics K. Hauser addresses the on-going search for “new axioms” (for ad-
ditional background see [19]). In his essay Was sind und was sollen (neue) Axiome?
he ﬁrst gives an accessible overview of the technical issues involved and proceeds to
interpret the principles underlying the development of modern set theory in the light
of Husserl’s philosophy. This intriguing project gains additional interest in view of
the well-known fact that Gödel studied Husserl carefully, and because of a renewed
interest in Husserl in recent general philosophy.
There has been a development in proof theory for some time to analyse weak set
theories in the framework of the Kripke–Platek theory of admissible sets, KP (see [4]
for the general background on KP, and [42], [59] for its proof-theoretical aspects).
One of the major issues in this research program is to carry over from classical proof
theory the technique of ordinal analysis, i.e., the calibration of theories in terms of their
proof-theoretic strength, given by a characteristic ordinal number. The well-known
limit of predicative theories is the least impredicative Feferman–Schütte ordinal 0. A
particularKPtheoryofadmissiblesetswiththisstrength, KPi0, isthepointofdeparture
for the contribution of G. Jäger and D. Probst, Iterating  Operations in Admissible

Introduction
19
Set Theory Without Foundation: A Further Aspect of Metapredicative Mahlo. The
system describes a recursively inaccessible universe over the natural numbers taken as
urelements. If an axiom schema allowing for the iteration of  operations is added, a
theory is arrived at whose proof-theoretic ordinal is shown to be the metapredicative33
Mahlo ordinal ϕω00.34 The result is indicative of another aspect of modern proof
theory, viz., the emulation of large cardinals in a recursive setting.
The doyen of mathematical logic, S. Feferman, addresses the striking feature of
‘typical ambiguity’in Russell’s presentation of type theory that allows Russell to steer
clear of the paradoxes by working in type theory and yet to avoid syntactic clutter by
doingwithoutoverttypedistinctions, therebymakingsense, inparticular, ofstatements
like Cls ∈Cls. Feferman has been concerned repeatedly in his own work with related
issuesarisinginmodernmathematicalpractice. InhispaperTypicalAmbiguity: Trying
to Have Your Cake and Eat It Too, he introduces a system of reﬂective set-theoretic
universes, conservative over ZF(C), in which a rigorous meaning can be attached
to such self-reﬂective statements, including those of standard category theory. It is
stressed that statements of the form A ∈A cannot be made literally true this way,
of course; but in the author’s eyes this problem of genuine self-application has yet
to ﬁnd a satisfactory resolution. Two approaches in the literature, theories with the
anti-foundation axiom, AFA, and Quine’s system of New Foundations NF, are shortly
discussed in this respect.
K.-G. Niebergall is a logician and philosopher who, after Ph.D. work on the meta-
mathematics of non-axiomatizable theories and further work on Hilbert’s ﬁnitism,
has been engaged for some time in an in-depth analysis of the relation of reducibil-
ity between theories, both mathematical and non-mathematical. This is borne out
by his contribution Is ZF Finitistically Reducible? Finitistic theories in the sense of
Feferman, Mycielski, and Lavine are closely scrutinized, with a special focus on the
supposed paradigm of a ﬁnitistic theory, primitive recursive arithmetic, PRA. The
author singles out the fact that each closed theorem of PRA has a ﬁnite model, and
considers its generalization, with ‘T ’ for ‘PRA’, as a candidate criterion for being a
ﬁnitistic theory T . Drawing on Mycielski’s locally ﬁnite theories mentioned above, the
author shows that this feature has the unwelcome consequence of making ZF “ﬁnitisti-
cally reducible”, certainly a problem of intuitive adequacy for reductive proof theory.
— Finally, T. Hürter’s short, but intriguing paper Inconsistency in the Real World
constructs, in rigorous formal terms, a conceivable situation in which the conclusion
is reached by contradiction that there are only ﬁnitely many natural numbers. This
“worst case scenario” might be somewhat disquieting to a complacent Kroneckerian
worldview.
The next three papers add the perspective of constructive mathematics to the themes
of the volume. The proof-theorist M. Rathjen, who became known for his ground-
33This term is due to Jäger; it stands for the range of ordinals beyond 0 whose analysis can still be
carried out with methods from predicative proof theory.
34The function ϕ is a ternary version of the well-known Veblen function on the ordinals.

20
G. Link
breaking work on 1
2-analysis (see [65], [66], [67]), deals here with the ban on circular
deﬁnitions in the predicativist’s sense, and compares it with circularity phenomena
that have been studied more recently in computer science and knowledge representa-
tion by means of the anti-foundation axiom.35 The paper Predicativity, Circularity,
and Anti-Foundation uses a system of constructive set theory with AFA to model this
kind of circularity, thereby showing that it is conceptually different from the one aris-
ing in impredicative contexts. — The logician and philosopher of mathematics J.
L. Bell, who has been known for his extensive foundational work from the algebraic
and category-theoretic viewpoint, contributes a short note entitled Russell’s Paradox
and Diagonalization in a Constructive Context. In it he points out that of the two
classically equivalent methods of proving Cantor’s Theorem, viz., Russell’s construc-
tion and Cantor’s own diagonalization method, only the former remains constructively
valid, whereas the latter fails to be so. Hence, the author says, Russell’s paradox has a
claim to universal applicability. — The mathematician P. Schuster and his co-author
H. Schwichtenberg, who has been prominently active in recent years on the interface of
proof theory and computer science, choose a rigorously constructive approach to some
classical problems of analysis, in particular by circumventing the axiom of countable
choice. Their paper Constructive Solutions of Continuous Equations, while naturally
technical, works with a Bishop-style notion of set (as “identiﬁed with the deﬁning
property of its elements”) and hence shares its conceptualist ﬂavor with Russell’s
no-classes theory.
The papers in the next group, among which H. Friedman’s could also be counted,
all start from the classical paradoxes and use modern tools to explore the remaining
logical space in different directions. The logician and philosopher, and former Emmy
Noether scholar, K. F. Wehmeier gives a survey of various subsystems of Frege’s
(second-order) logic of the Grundgesetze which can be shown to be consistent, among
them the fragment with 1
1-comprehension, which was proved consistent in joint work
of the author with F. Ferreira. Apart from the question, how much mathematics could
still be derived, the logicist willing to retreat to such a system would face another
problem for his program, as the author points out: the system proves the existence
of objects other than value-ranges. — The logician A. Cantini, known especially for
his [8], addresses the paradox of propositions appearing in Appendix B of Russell’s
Principles. This paradox is of particular interest not only because it is genuinely
Russellian, but also because it inevitably calls for an analysis of the notion of truth. In
his paper On a Russellian Paradox about Propositions and Truth the author provides
resolutions of this paradox by dealing with it in two quite different types of theories:
one is an algebraic framework of propositions and truth based on combinatory logic,
the other a consistent subtheory of Quine’s New Foundations NF, which employs
the device of stratiﬁcation. — H. Field, whose inﬂuential work in the philosophy
of mathematics was already mentioned above, investigates the option of adopting a
35In the obvious graph-theoretic interpretation of set-theoretic membership, this axiom allows for loops
but requires a unique “decoration” for every graph.

Introduction
21
naïve comprehension scheme for properties and building a consistent theory around it
that weakens classical logic in an intricate way. This idea is developed and defended
in detail in the paper The Consistency of the Naive Theory of Properties, where an
explicit model for the resulting logic in a multi-valued semantics is constructed. —
The ﬁnal paper in this group, The Signiﬁcance of the Largest and Smallest Numbers
for the Oldest Paradoxes, is based on yet another and quite unique approach to the
paradoxes. Its author, the logician and philosopher U. Blau, has been working on a
comprehensive system of a multi-valued “reﬂexion logic” for many years,36 pursuing
Russell’s global strategy of ﬁnding a uniform resolution of all known paradoxes.
Another prominent feature of the approach is the distinctively Platonist and Cantorian
philosophy of mathematics underlying it. The paper deﬁnes and explores a novel
number system which extends the standard model of the ordinal and real numbers and
sheds new light on the old mysteries of counting, dividing, and motion.
The papers in the following group were written by logician-philosophers and
prominent Russell scholars. They deal with speciﬁc topics in Russell’s logical philos-
ophy. N. Grifﬁn, a specialist for the early Russell, contributes the paper The Prehistory
of Russell’s Paradox, in which he gives an overview of the genesis of Russell’s paradox
and dwells on the question, already hinted at above, why Russell, unlike the Canto-
rians, was particularly prone to engage in a serious analysis of the paradoxes. — G.
Landini has become known for his important work on Russell’s substitutional theory.
In his paper Logicism’s ’Insolubilia’ and Their Solution by Russell’s Substitutional
Theory he remarkably argues that the substitutional theory, which Russell entertained
in the years 1905–1907 and which has become available from the Russell Archives
in its full extant content only in recent years, contains all the ingredients not only for
the resolution of both the logical and semantical paradoxes but also for successfully
carrying out the logicist program. — Ph. de Rouilhan’s paper Substitution and Types:
Russell’s Intermediate Theory is concerned with the transition period in Russell’s log-
ical philosophy between the substitutional theory and the mature theory of ramiﬁed
types. Apart from two main versions of the former described in the literature the
author distinguishes and gives an interpretation of a third version, which he calls “the
intermediate theory” and which is contained in just a few pages of [74]. — In the
next paper, Propositional Ontology and Logical Atomism, F. Rodríguez-Consuegra
addresses the problems inherent in Russell’s theory of logical atomism, arguing that
its ontology was still haunted by the ghost of Bradley’s paradox of relations, which
Russell never succeeded in disposing of completely. — The next two papers deal with
the logic of Principia proper. The ﬁrst by B. Linsky, Classes of Classes and Classes of
Functions in ‘Principia Mathematica’, discusses a problem that was recently shown
to arise in connection with the no-classes theory. It is argued that in order to avoid
it a distinction is needed between classes of classes and classes of (propositional)
functions. The distinction was already considered by Whitehead and Russell but not
36This is the system Logik der Unbestimmtheiten und Paradoxien, referred to in the paper, which inter
alia subsumes the 3-valued logic in Kripke’s theory of truth and various other truth theories.

22
G. Link
pursued further; by showing how to resolve the problem with it the paper corrobo-
rates the intensional character of Principia’s logic even where it deals with classes.
— There is the technical issue regarding a claim made by Russell in Appendix B of
the second edition of Principia, to the effect that the amended type theory proposed
there (his ‘1925 logic’) proves unrestricted mathematical induction, with an axiom
of inﬁnity as the only non-logical assumption. The derivation given in Appendix B,
however, is defective, as Gödel [28] ﬁrst noticed. The 1925 logic was in fact not
described in any detail until Landini’s [47], where it is claimed that mathematical
induction can be derived in it after all. Drawing on joint work with J. Davoren, type
theory specialist A. Hazen provides a thorough analysis of the situation in his paper
A "Constructive" Proper Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory (The Logic of Principia
Mathematica, Second Edition, Appendix B). In it a semantics for the 1925 logic is
deﬁned, with a substitutional interpretation of its higher-order quantiﬁers. It is ar-
gued that Landini’s proof, albeit correct, is based on an added extensionality axiom,
which is incorrect on the given semantics and hence fails to be faithful to the sustained
“constructivist” spirit of the Russell of the second edition. — The ﬁnal essay in the
Russell group, Russell on Method by A. Irvine, discusses two conﬂicting attitudes in
Russell’s philosophy, his foundationalism on the one hand and his fallibilism on the
other. Russell’s theory of knowledge is reviewed in the light of the resulting tension.
The following two papers are devoted to the historical context of the discovery
of Russell’s paradox. V. Peckhaus, who wrote a monograph on Hilbert’s program
and German Kritische Philosophie, gives an interesting account of the interaction
between mathematicians and philosophers in Göttingen at the time. His paper Para-
doxes in Göttingen discusses the Zermelo–Russell paradox and Hilbert’s own paradox
(see above), and describes the reaction to Russell’s Principles and the debate on the
foundations of mathematics in the circle round the philosopher Leonard Nelson. —
D. C. McCarty, an expert on mathematical intuitionism, explores the prehistory of con-
structive mathematics in his contribution David Hilbert and Paul Du Bois-Reymond:
Limits and Ideals. The paper describes the contrast between Hilbert’s scientiﬁc op-
timism and the skeptical epistemology of the mathematician Paul du Bois-Reymond.
The latter shared with his brother, the physiologist Emil, the ‘Ignorabimus’ Hilbert
famously combated, deriving it from a constructive approach to mathematics which
anticipated a number of intuitionistic themes.
The ﬁnal group of papers contains reﬂections on various topics in the philosophy
of mathematics, the philosophy of science, and the philosophy of language, all relating
to foundational issues. In his paper Russell’s Paradox and Hilbert’s (much Forgotten)
View of Set Theory, J. Mycielski, whose work on locally ﬁnite theories was alluded
to above, contributes a mathematician’s view to the foundational debate, which the
author calls a rationalist perspective. — In the essay Objectivity: The Justiﬁcation
for Extrapolation, S. Lavine draws on his much acclaimed [48] to put to use the ﬁ-
nite mathematics of the indeﬁnitely large in the foundation of the theory of scientiﬁc
measurement. — Current philosophy of mathematics distinguishes a number of struc-

Introduction
23
turalist views on mathematical objects, their common core being that it is structures
that matter in mathematics, and not the particular way in which the objects occur-
ring in those structures are modeled. G. Hellman, author of “modal structuralism”
[40], discusses his own and three other main varieties of structuralism in his paper
Russell’s Absolutism vs.(?) Structuralism. He relates the modern discussion with
Russell’s views on these matters, in which he detects both “absolutist” and structural-
ist elements. Finding some points in Russell’s critique of Dedekind’s structuralism
relevant to the evaluation of its modern versions, he uses these insights to argue for
adopting modal structuralism, supplemented by a category theoretic outlook. — R. S.
D. Thomas, the editor of Philosophia Mathematica, argues for a ‘deﬂationary’ view
regarding the importance of ontology in mathematics. In his essay Mathematicians
and Mathematical Objects he compares the assumption of mathematical objects with
“training wheels”, needed at ﬁrst but eventually discarded to concentrate on what he
takes to be of real importance, the mathematical relations. — H. Sturm is an analytic
philosopher with a ﬁrm background in formal logic (with special expertise, e.g., in the
model theory of modal logic). His methodological reﬂections Russell’s Paradox and
Our Conception of Properties, or: Why Semantics is No Proper Guide to the Nature of
Properties add a skeptical note to the issue of how essential self-instantiation is when
it comes to developing a viable philosophical theory of properties. It is also argued
that in search of such a theory it is of little use to have recourse to semantics. — In
his well-known [52] V. McGee deals not only with formal theories of truth, but also
with the phenomenon of vagueness. His intimate knowledge of this topic is reﬂected
in the essay The Many Lives of Ebenezer Wilkes Smith, where modern discussions are
traced back to, and evaluated in the light of, Russell’s 1923 paper “Vagueness”. — In
yet another cross-over, ﬁnally, the formal truth theorist and specialist on interpretat-
ibility logic, A. Visser, looks at a central issue in the philosophy of language handed
down from the work of Frege and Russell. In What Makes Expressions Meaningful?
A Reﬂection on Contexts and Actions he takes issue with the commonplace version
of Frege’s context principle according to which the sentence is the unit of meaning.
It is argued that the principle is apt to block the way to a better understanding of the
mechanisms of discourse.
References
[1]
Abramsky, S., Dov M. Gabbay and Thomas S. E. Maibaum (eds.): 1992. Handbook of
Logic in Computer Science. Volume 2. Background: Computational Structures. Oxford:
Clarendon.
[2]
Ajdukiewicz, Kazimierz: 1935. Die syntaktische Konnexität. In Stud. Phil. 1: 1–27. En-
glish translation in: S. McCall (ed.), Polish Logic, 1920–1939, Oxford 1967, 207–231.
[3]
Barendregt, Henk P.: Lambda calculi with types. In [1]: 117–309.
[4]
Barwise, Jon: 1975. Admissible Sets and Structures. Berlin: Springer.

24
G. Link
[5]
Boolos, George: 1987. The consistency of Frege’s Foundations of Arithemetic. In: J. J.
Thomson (ed.), On Being and Saying: Essays in Honor of Richard Cartwright, Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 3-20. Reprinted in [11]: 211–233.
[6]
Blumenthal, Otto: 1935. Lebensgeschichte. (Biographical essay of Hilbert.) In: David
Hilbert, Gesammelte Abhandlungen. Band III: Analysis. Grundlagen der Mathematik.
Physik. Verschiedenes. Lebensgeschichte, Berlin: Springer, 388–429.
[7]
Buss, Samuel R. (ed.): 1998. Handbook of Proof Theory. Elsevier: Amsterdam.
[8]
Cantini, Andrea: 1996. Logical Frameworks for Truth and Abstraction. An Axiomatic
Study. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
[9]
Church, Alonzo: 1976. Comparison of Russell’s resolution of the semantical antinomies
with that of Tarski. Journal of Symbolic Logic 41, 747–60. Reprinted (with corrections)
in: R. L. Martin (ed.), Recent Essays on Truth and the Liar Paradox, Oxford: Clarendon
1984, 289–306.
[10]
Constable, Robert L.: 1998. Types in logic, mathematics and programming. In [7]: 683–
786.
[11]
Demopoulos, William: 1995. Frege’s Philosophy of Mathematics. Cambridge, MA: Har-
vard University Press.
[12]
Feferman, Solomon: 1977. Theories of ﬁnite type related to mathematical practice. In: J.
Barwise (ed.), Handbook of Mathematical Logic, Amsterdam: North Holland, 913–971.
[13]
Feferman, Solomon: 1988. Hilbert’s program relativized: Proof-theoretical and founda-
tional reduction. Journal of Symbolic Logic 53: 364–384.
[14]
Feferman, Solomon: 1988. Weyl vindicated: “Das Kontinuum” 70 years later. In: Temi
e prospettive della logica e della ﬁlosoﬁa della scienza contemporanee. Vol. I. Bologna:
CLUEB, 59–93. Reprinted in [16]: chap. 13, 249–283.
[15]
Feferman, Solomon: 1993. Why a little bit goes a long way: Logical foundations of
scientiﬁcally applicable mathematics. In: PSA 1992. Vol. 2. East Lansing: Philosophy of
Science Association, 442–455. Reprinted in [16]: chap. 14, 284–298.
[16]
Feferman, Solomon: 1998. In the Light of Logic. New York, Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
[17]
Feferman, Solomon, and Gerhard Jäger: 1993. Systems of explicit mathematics with
non-constructive µ-operator, I. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 65: 243–263.
[18]
Feferman, Solomon, and Gerhard Jäger: 1993. Systems of explicit mathematics with
non-constructive µ-operator, II. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 79: 37–52.
[19]
Feferman, Solomon, Harvey M. Friedman, Penelope Maddy, and John R. Steel: 2000.
Does mathematics need new axioms? Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 6 (4): 401–446.
[20]
Feyerabend, Paul: 1978. Against Method. London: Verso.
[21]
Field, Hartry: 1980. Science without Numbers. A Defence of Nominalism. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
[22]
Fine, Kit: 1985. Reasoning with Arbitrary Objects. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

Introduction
25
[23]
Frege, Gottlob: 1883. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik. Begriffsschriftlich abgeleitet. Vol. I.
Jena: Pohle.
[24]
Gabriel, Gottfried, Friedrich Kambartel and Christian Thiel (eds.): 1980. Gottlob Freges
Briefwechsel mit D. Hilbert, E. Husserl, B. Russell, sowie ausgewählte Einzelbriefe
Freges. Hamburg: Meiner.
[25]
Galilei, Galileo: 1623. Il Saggiatore. English: The Assayer. Quoted from the abridged
translation in: Discoveries and Opinions of Galileo. Translated with an Introduction and
Notes by Stillman Drake, Garden City, NY: Doubleday 1957.
[26]
Gallin, Daniel: 1975. Intensional and Higher-Order Modal Logic. With Applications to
Montague Semantics. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
[27]
Gödel, Kurt: 1931. Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und
verwandter Systeme I. Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik 38, 173–198. Reprinted,
with an English translation, in [31]: 144–194.
[28]
Gödel, Kurt: 1944. Russell’s mathematical logic. In: P. A. Schilpp (ed.), The Philosophy
of Bertrand Russell, LaSalle: Open Court, 125–153. Reprinted in [58], 192–226, and in
[32]: 119–141.
[29]
Gödel, Kurt: 1947. What is Cantor’s continuum problem? American Mathematical
Monthly 54, 515–525. Reprinted in [32]: 176–187.
[30]
Gödel, Kurt: 1958. Über eine bisher noch nicht benützte Erweiterung des ﬁniten Stand-
punkts. Dialectica 12: 280–287. Reprinted, with an English translation, in [32]: 240–251.
[31]
Gödel, Kurt: 1986. Collected Works. Volume I: Publications 1929–1936. Edited by S.
Feferman et al. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[32]
Gödel, Kurt: 1990. Collected Works. Volume II: Publications 1938–1974. Edited by S.
Feferman et al. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[33]
Gödel, Kurt: 1995. CollectedWorks.Volume III: Unpublished Essays and Lectures. Edited
by S. Feferman et al. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[34]
Gödel, Kurt: 2003. Collected Works. Volume V: Correspondence H–Z. Edited by S. Fe-
ferman and J. W. Dawson Jr. et al. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[35]
Goldfarb, Warren D.: 1979. Logic in the twenties: The nature of the quantiﬁer. Journal
of Symbolic Logic 44: 351–68.
[36]
Goodman, Nelson and Willard V. Quine: 1947. Steps toward a constructive nominalism.
Journal of Symbolic Logic 12: 105–122.
[37]
Grifﬁn, Nicholas: 1991. Russell’s Idealist Apprenticeship. Oxford: Clarendon.
[38]
Hazen, Allen P.: 1983. Predicative logics. In: D. Gabbay and F. Guenthner (eds.), Hand-
book of Philosophical Logic. Volume I: Elements of Classical Logic, Dordrecht: Reidel,
331–407.
[39]
Heck, Richard G. Jr.: 1993. The development of arithmetic in Frege’s Grundgesetze der
Arithmetik. Journal of Symbolic Logic 58: 579–601. Reprinted with minor revisions and
a Postscript in [11]: 257–294.
[40]
Hellman, Geoffrey: 1989. Mathematics withour Numbers. Towards a Modal-Structural
Interpretation. Oxford: Clarendon.

26
G. Link
[41]
Hylton, Peter: 1990. Russell, Idealism, and the Emergence of Analytic Philosophy. Ox-
ford: Clarendon.
[42]
Jäger, Gerhard: 1986. Theories for Admissible Sets. A Unifying Approach to Proof Theory.
Napoli: Bibliopolis.
[43]
Kanamori, Akihiro: 1997. The Higher Inﬁnite. Large Cardinals in Set Theory from Their
Beginnings. Berlin: Springer.
[44]
Kant, Immanuel: 1787. Kritik der reinen Vernunft. 2nd edition. Hartknoch: Riga. English
translation: Critique of Pure Reason. London: Macmillan 1933.
[45]
Klein, Felix: 1926–27.Vorlesungen über die Entwicklung der Mathematik im 19. Jahrhun-
dert. Teil I, II. Berlin: Springer.
[46]
Kuhn, Thomas S.: 1978. Black-Body Theory and the Quantum Discontinuity, 1894–1912.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[47]
Landini, Gregory: 1996. The deﬁnability of the set of natural numbers in the 1925 Prin-
cipia Mathematica. Journal of Philosophical Logic 25: 597–615.
[48]
Lavine,Shaughan:1994.UnderstandingtheInﬁnite.Cambridge,MA:HarvardUniversity
Press.
[49]
Link, Godehard: 2000. Reductionism as resource-conscious reasoning. Erkenntnis 53:
173–193.
[50]
Mancosu, Paolo: 2003. The Russellian inﬂuence on Hilbert and his school. Synthese 137:
59–101.
[51]
Martin-Löf, Per: Intuitionistic Type Theory. Napoli: Bibliopolis.
[52]
McGee, Vann: 1991. Truth, Vagueness, and Paradox. An Essay on the Logic of Truth.
Indianapolis: Hackett.
[53]
Montague, Richard: 1974. Formal Philosophy. Edited and with an introduction by Rich-
mond H. Thomason. New Haven: Yale University Press.
[54]
Moore, Gregory H.: 1988. The roots of Russell’s paradox. Russell. The Journal of the
Bertrand Russell Archives 8: 46–56.
[55]
Moortgat, Michael: 1997. Categorial type logics. In: J. van Benthem and A. ter Meulen
(eds.), Handbook of Logic and Language, Amsterdam: Elsevier, 93–177.
[56]
Mycielski, Jan: 1986. Locally ﬁnite theories. Journal of Symbolic Logic 51: 59–62.
[57]
Peckhaus, Volker, and Reinhard Kahle: 2002. Hilbert’s paradox. Historia Mathematica
29: 157–175.
[58]
Pears, David S. (ed.): 1972. Bertrand Russell. A Collection of Critical Essays. Garden
City, NY: Doubleday.
[59]
Pohlers, Wolfram: 1998. Subsystems of set theory and second order number theory. In
[7]: 209–335.
[60]
Putnam, Hilary: 1999. The Threefold Cord. Mind, Body, and World. NewYork: Columbia
University Press.
[61]
Quine, Willard V.: 1960. Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Introduction
27
[62]
Quine, Willard V.: 1972. Remarks for a memorial symposium. In [58]: 1–5.
[63]
Quine, WillardV.: 1986. Reply to Charles Parsons. In: L. E. Hahn and P.A. Schilpp (eds.),
The Philosophy of W. V. Quine, LaSalle: Open Court, 396–403.
[64]
Quine, Willard V.: 1991. Immanence and validity. Dialectica 45: 219–230.
[65]
Rathjen, Michael: 1995. Recent advances in ordinal analysis: 1
2-CA and related systems.
Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 4: 468–485.
[66]
Rathjen, Michael: To appear. An ordinal analysis of stability. Archive for Mathematical
Logic.
[67]
Rathjen, Michael: To appear. An ordinal analysis of parameter-free 1
2 comprehension.
Archive for Mathematical Logic.
[68]
Reid, Constance: 1970. Hilbert. With an Appreciation of Hilbert’s Mathematical Work by
Hermann Weyl. Berlin: Springer.
[69]
Robinson, Abraham: 1966. Non-Standard Analysis. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
[70]
Russell, Bertrand: 1901. Part I of the Principles, Draft of 1901. In:The Collected Papers of
Bertrand Russell, vol. 3: Towards the “Principles of Mathematics” 1900–1902, London:
Routledge, 1993, 181–208.
[71]
Russell, Bertrand: 1903. The Principles of Mathematics. London: Allen & Unwin.
[72]
Russell, Bertrand: 1905. On denoting. Mind 14, 479–493. Reprinted in [79]: 41–56.
[73]
Russell, Bertrand: 1907. The regressive method of discovering the premises of mathe-
matics. In [81]: 272–283.
[74]
Russell, Bertrand: 1908. Mathematical logic as based on the theory of types. American
Journal of Mathematics 30: 222–262. Reprinted in [79]: 59–102, and in [84]: 150–182.
[75]
Russell, Bertrand: 1913. Theory of Knowledge. The 1913 Manuscript. Edited by E. R.
Eames in collaboration with K. Blackwell. London: Routledge 1992.
[76]
Russell, Bertrand: 1914. The relation of sense-data to physics. Scientia 14: 1–27.
Reprinted in [77]: chap. 8.
[77]
Russell, Bertrand: 1917. Mysticism and Logic. London: Allen & Unwin.
[78]
Russell, Bertrand: 1919. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. London: Unwin.
Reprinted by Routledge.
[79]
Russell, Bertrand: 1956. Logic and Knowledge. Essays 1901–1950. Edited by R. C.
Marsh, London: Unwin.
[80]
Russell, Bertrand: 1959. My Philosophical Development. London: Allen & Unwin.
Reprinted by Routledge.
[81]
Russell, Bertrand: 1973. Essays in Analysis. London: Allen & Unwin.
[82]
Simpson, Stephen G.: 1999. Subsystems of Second Order Arithmetic. Berlin: Springer.
[83]
Solovay, Robert M.: 1995. Introductory note to Gödel *1939b and Gödel *1940a. In [33]:
114–126.
[84]
van Heijenoort, Jean (ed.): 1967. From Frege to Gödel. A Source Book in Mathematical
Logic, 1879–1931. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

28
G. Link
[85] Whitehead, Alfred N. and Bertrand Russell: 1910–13. Principia Mathematica. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press. Second edition, 1925–27.
[86] Woodin, W. Hugh: 1994. Large cardinal axioms and independence: The continuum prob-
lem revisited. The Mathematical Intelligencer 16 (no. 3): 31–36.
[87] Woodin, W. Hugh: 1999. The Axiom of Determinacy, Forcing Axioms, and the Nonsta-
tionary Ideal. Berlin: De Gruyter.
[88] Woodin, W. Hugh: 2004. Set theory after Russell: The journey back to Eden. In: G. Link
(ed.), One Hundred Years of Russell’s Paradox. Mathematics, Logic, Philosophy. Berlin:
Walter de Gruyter 2004, 29–47.
Seminar für Philosophie, Logik and Wissenschaftstheorie
Philosophie-Department
Universität München
Ludwigstraße 31/I
80539 München
Germany
E-mail: glink@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

Set Theory after Russell:
The Journey Back to Eden
W. Hugh Woodin
Abstract. Can the fundamental questions such as the Continuum Hypothesis be solved? Or
are these questions simply questions without answers? Are there any questions in Set Theory
which are formally unsolvable and yet answerable? If so what distinguishes these questions
from the Continuum Hypothesis and is this distinction a meaningful one?
The issues are examined in the context of -logic.
1. Introduction
Does the phenomenon of formal independence in Set Theory fulﬁll the prophecy some
might claim is the content of Russell’s discovery of the now famous Russell Paradox?
This claim of course is that there can be no meaningful axiomatization of Set Theory
because the concept of set is inherently vague, moreover any choice of axioms is an
arbitrary one and this is the reason that to date essentially all investigations have rather
quickly led to inconsistency or to unsolvable problems.
Perhaps the most well known example of a problem of Set Theory which is known
to be formally unsolvable is the problem of Cantor’s Continuum Hypothesis. Does
the formal independence of the Continuum Hypothesis from the axioms of Set Theory
imply that the question has no meaning? Some, including Cohen himself, have argued
that the answer to this question is “yes” [1]. But for this position to be credible either
the other classical problems in set theory which have been similarly shown to be
formally unsolvable would also have to be regarded as without meaning, or there must
be an explanation as to why the problem of the Continuum Hypothesis is different. I
have in mind here the classical questions of descriptive set theory for they arose not
long after the Continuum Hypothesis was ﬁrst posed.1
The projective sets are those subsets of R which can be generated from the closed
sets in ﬁnitely many steps of taking continuous images, by continuous functions
f : R →R,
1Some of the issues to be discussed here have been discussed in two articles which have appeared in
the Notices of the AMS, [12] and [13] but there is an important expository change in this account which
concerns the deﬁnition of -logic. There are also some new results mentioned in this account.

30
W. H. Woodin
or taking complements. One classical question is simply: Are the projective sets
Lebesgue measurable?
The sets which can be generated in 4 steps are the analytic sets and their comple-
ments. It is a classical theorem that these sets are Lebesgue measurable. What about
the sets generated in 5 steps? This question is formally unsolvable. So is this question
without meaning? If not, then how is the problem of the Continuum Hypothesis any
different?
2. The Structure of All Sets of Finite Ordinals
The structure,
⟨P(ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩
is of course the standard structure for Second-Order Number Theory.
Within this structure one can formulate many of the classical questions concern-
ing the projective sets, including the question on the Lebesgue measurability of the
projective sets generated in 5 steps from the closed sets. Therefore if the axioms for
set theory are not sufﬁcient to formally provide answers, one must seek new axioms.
A set A ⊆P (ω) is deﬁnable in the structure,
⟨P(ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩,
from parameters if there exists a formula φ(x, y) in the ﬁrst order language for this
structure and b ∈P(ω) such that
A = {a ∈P(ω) | ⟨P (ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨φ[a, b]} .
The projective sets correspond with subsets A ⊆P (ω) such that A can be deﬁned,
from parameters, in the structure,
⟨P (ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩.
More precisely, let π : P (ω) →[0, 1] be the surjection where for each a ⊆ω,
π(a) =

i∈a
2−i
if a ̸= ∅and π(∅) = 0. Then X ⊆[0, 1] is a projective set if and only if the preimage
of X under πis deﬁnable from parameters in the structure, ⟨P (ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩.
Now suppose A ⊆P (ω). Associated to the set A is an inﬁnite game, GA, involving
two players. The players alternate choosing elements of {0, 1} with Player I moving
ﬁrst. After ω many moves a sequence ⟨ϵi : i < ω⟩is speciﬁed. Let
a = {i < ω | ϵi = 1} .

Set Theory after Russell
31
Player I wins this run of the game if a ∈A. Otherwise Player II wins. When a
player moves in this game the state of the game is a ﬁnite sequence of 0’s and 1’s; the
sequence is of even length when it is Player I’s turn to move, and the sequence is of
odd length when it is Player II’s turn to move. A strategy is a function,
τ : SEQ →{0, 1}
where SEQ is the set of all ﬁnite sequences of 0’s and 1’s. The strategy τ is a winning
strategy for Player I if following the strategy Player I always wins, no matter how
Player II plays. Similarly the strategy τ is a winning strategy for Player II if following
the strategy Player II always wins, no matter how Player I plays. The game, GA, is
determined if there is a winning strategy for one of the players. Clearly, there can be a
winning strategy for at most one of the two players. It is a consequence of the Axiom of
Choice that there exist sets A ⊂P(ω) for which neither player has a winning strategy
in the associated game, GA. So the axiom which asserts that all of the games GA are
determined is inconsistent (with the axioms of set theory).
Projective Determinacy is the axiom:
For each set A ⊆P(ω) such that A is deﬁnable from parameters in the
structure,
⟨P(ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩,
the game GA is determined.
This axiom is the correct (and missing) axiom for the structure,
⟨P(ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩.
Projective Determinacy settles (in the context of ZFC) the classical questions con-
cerning the projective sets and moreover Cohen’s method of forcing cannot be used to
establish that questions of second order number theory are formally unsolvable from
this axiom.
Finally the intricate connections between this axiom and large cardinal axioms
provide compelling evidence that this axiom is true. For me, granting the truth of the
axioms for Set Theory, the only conceivable argument against the truth of this axiom,
would be its inconsistency. I also claim that, at present, the only credible basis for
the belief that the axiom is consistent is the belief that the axiom is true. This state
of affairs could change as the number theoretic consequences of the axiom become
more fully understood.
It is interesting to note that the understanding of this axiom took quite a number of
years of research and that the credible claim for the truth of the axiom was only possible
after this research was accomplished—there is no known elementary argument for the
truth of the axiom. This fact creates something of a challenge for the skeptic to explain.
Should the axiom of Projective Determinacy be accepted as true? One argument
thatisfrequentlycitedagainstthisaxiomisthatthereareinterestingalternativetheories
for the projective sets, indeed there are some very difﬁcult open questions about the

32
W. H. Woodin
possible theories for the projective sets in the context where Projective Determinacy
is false. But this argument confuses two issues. Accepting Projective Determinacy as
true does not deny the study of models in which it is false. For example, it is certainly
the prevailing belief that the axioms for Number Theory are consistent. Nevertheless
the study of models of Number Theory in which the axioms are inconsistent seems
clearly an interesting program and a deep understanding of these models probably
entails resolving the P = NP question of computational complexity.
Do I believe the axiom of Projective Determinacy is true? This I ﬁnd to be a rather
frequently asked question of me. My answer is this. I believe the axiom of Projective
Determinacy is as true as the axioms of Number Theory. So I suppose I advocate a
position that might best be described as Conditional Platonism.
3. The Structure of All Sets of Countable Ordinals
What is the next structure, from the standpoint of complexity, to consider beyond the
structure,
⟨P(ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩?
Letting P (Ord) denote the class of all sets of ordinals, it is a consequence of the Axiom
of Choice that the universe of sets is logically equivalent to the structure,
⟨P(Ord), Ord, ·, +, ∈⟩.
Therefore a natural hierarchy of structures is given by the sequence of structures,
⟨P (α), α, ·, +, ∈⟩,
where α is an (inﬁnite) ordinal which is closed under the operation · (so for all β < α
and for all γ < α, β · γ < α).
For each such countable ordinal, α, the structure
⟨P (α), α, ·, +, ∈⟩
is reducible to the structure,
⟨P (ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩.
Therefore I claim that the next natural structure is
⟨P(ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩,
which is the standard structure for all sets of countable ordinals. It is well known that
this structure is equivalent to the structure of all sets of hereditary cardinality less than
ℵ2.
Whether or not CH holds is a ﬁrst order property of this structure. Therefore any
reasonably complete axiomatization for this structure should resolve CH.

Set Theory after Russell
33
As I have noted, Projective Determinacy is the correct axiomatization for the
structure,
⟨P (ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩.
Is there a generalization of this axiom to the structure,
⟨P(ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩?
This of course is a vague question. To make it more precise requires a logic which
transcends ﬁrst order logic. Before discussing the relevant logic and to help motivate
the deﬁnition, I note the following theorem which gives an interesting reformulation
for an axiom slightly stronger than Projective Determinacy.
L(R) is Gödel’s constructible universe relativized to R; it is the smallest inner
model of the universe containing R, the ordinals, and in which the axioms of Set
Theory hold (except possibly the Axiom of Choice). AD is the axiom that for all
sets A ⊆P (ω), the game GA is determined. As I have previously noted, this axiom
contradicts the Axiom of Choice. However the axiom
L(R) ⊨AD
is not obviously inconsistent since the Axiom of Choice can fail to hold in L(R); if B
is the complete Boolean algebra given by the partial order that Cohen originally used
to establish the consistency of the negation of the Continuum Hypothesis, then
V B ⊨“L(R) ̸⊨Axiom of Choice”.
In fact the axiom, “L(R) ⊨AD”, is a natural strengthening of Projective Determinacy
since
P(R) ∩L(R)
is a natural extension of the projective sets.
If there exists a proper class of Woodin cardinals2 then
L(R) ⊨AD;
and moreover for all complete Boolean algebras, B,
V B ⊨“L(R) ⊨AD”.
Theorem 1. Suppose there exists a proper class of strongly inaccessible cardinals.
The following are equivalent:
1. For all complete Boolean algebras, B,
V B ⊨“P (ω1) ̸∈L(R)”.
2For the deﬁnition of a Woodin cardinal and related historical remarks, see [6].

34
W. H. Woodin
2. For all complete Boolean algebras, B,
V B ⊨“L(R) ⊨AD”.
3. For all complete Boolean algebras, B,
V B ⊨“L(R) ̸⊨Axiom of Choice”.
⊓⊔
Thus if there exists a proper class of strongly inaccessible cardinals and if the theory
of the inner model L(R) is generically absolute then necessarily, L(R) ⊨AD. Finally
this is a nontrivial claim; if there is a proper class of strongly inaccessible cardinals then
in Gödel’s inner model, L, there is a proper class of strongly inaccessible cardinals but
in L the axiom of Projective Determinacy is false. In other words, the assumption that
there is a proper class of strongly inaccessible cardinals does not imply L(R) ⊨AD.
4. -Logic
I deﬁne -logic. Following the exposition of [2], I ﬁrst deﬁne when a sentence φ in
the language for Set Theory is -valid as a consequence of a theory T (and eliminate
the deﬁnition of ∗-logic).
Suppose that T is a set of sentences in the language for Set Theory and that φ is a
sentence. Then T ⊨ φ if for all complete Boolean algebras, B, for all ordinals α, if
V B
α ⊨T
then V B
α ⊨φ.
A remarkable fact is that if there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals then for
each theory, T , and for each sentence φ, the relation, T ⊨ φ, is generically absolute.
It is this fact that makes the notion, T ⊨ φ, interesting.
Theorem 2 (ZFC). Suppose that there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals, T is a
set of sentences and that φ is a sentence. Then for each complete Boolean algebra B,
V ⊨“T ⊨ φ”
if and only if
V B ⊨“T ⊨ φ”.
⊓⊔
The nontrivial direction is showing that if
V B ⊨“T ⊨ φ”
then V ⊨“T ⊨ φ”.

Set Theory after Russell
35
The notion that T ⊢ φ is more complicated to deﬁne and involves the deﬁnition
of a transﬁnite hierarchy of subsets of R which extends the hierarchy of the projective
subsets of R. I caution that the deﬁnition given here differs slightly from the deﬁnitions
given in previous accounts. The change is motivated by the deﬁnition of T ⊨ φ
which eliminates the need for deﬁning ∗-logic3. Thus the emphasis is now placed
on the satisfaction relation, T ⊨ φ, and the deﬁnition of the proof relation, T ⊢ φ,
becomes simply an attempt to isolate the corresponding notion of proof. Finally the
deﬁnition given here of the relation, T ⊢ φ, is given just in the context of ZFC, no
additional set theoretic assumptions are made.
A set of reals, A ⊆R, is universally Baire if for every compact Hausdorff space,
, and for every continuous function
F :  →R,
the set {x ∈ | F(x) ∈A} has the property of Baire: i.e., there exists an open set
O ⊆ such that the symmetric difference,
{x ∈ | F(x) ∈A} △O,
is meager, [4].
Assuming the existence of a proper class of Woodin cardinals then every projective
set is universally Baire. The following theorem shows that a much stronger claim is
true.
Theorem 3. Suppose that there exists a proper class of Woodin cardinals and that
A ⊆R is universally Baire. Then
1. L(A, R) ⊨AD+,
2. every set B ∈P (R) ∩L(A, R) is universally Baire.
⊓⊔
Here the axiom, AD+, is a technical variation of the axiom, AD, with the feature
that the assertion that L(A, R) ⊨AD+ is arguably the correct generalization of the
assertion that L(R) ⊨AD, [11]. In fact if L(R) ⊨AD then necessarily, L(R) ⊨AD+
but this is not an easy thing to prove.
Suppose that A ⊆R is universally Baire and that M is a countable transitive model
of ZFC. The set M is A-closed if for all countable transitive models, N, such that N
is a set generic extension of M,
A ∩N ∈N.
The notion that M is A-closed can be deﬁned without forcing [13].
Suppose that T is a theory and that φ is a sentence. Then T ⊢ φ if there exists a
set A ⊆R such that
1. L(A, R) ⊨AD+,
3In fact, the relation, T ⊨ φ, is the relation, T ⊢∗φ, of the previous accounts.

36
W. H. Woodin
2. every set in P(R) ∩L(A, R) is universally Baire,
3. for all countable transitive A-closed sets M, for all ordinals α ∈M, if Mα ⊨T
then Mα ⊨φ.
The universally Baire set, A, is the “-proof”. There is a natural notion of the length of
this proof which is given by the ordinal rank of A in theWadge hierarchy of complexity
[13]. This in turn allows one to deﬁne the notion of a shortest -proof of φ from T .
The deﬁnition works by virtue of the following theorem.
Theorem 4 ((ZFC)). Suppose that A ⊆R, B ⊂R and that A and B each witness
that T ⊢ φ. Then there exists a set
C ∈P (R) ∩L(A, R) ∩L(B, R)
such that C witnesses T ⊢ φ.
⊓⊔
With this deﬁnition of length, one can deﬁne the usual sorts of Gödel sentences
etc. Thus in many respects -logic is a natural transﬁnite generalization of ﬁrst order
logic.
Generally for the analysis of T ⊨ φ one assumes the existence of a proper class of
Woodin cardinals and for the analysis of T ⊢ φ, one assumes that for all universally
Baire sets A,
L(A, R) ⊨AD+,
and that every set in P(R) ∩L(A, R) is universally Baire–both of these assertions
necessarily hold assuming there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals. Nevertheless
it is convenient to deﬁne the relations, T ⊨ φ and T ⊢ φ, without all of these
additional assumptions. However note that the deﬁnition of T ⊢ φ is vacuous if
interpreted in any inner model of the form L[A] where A is a set.
Theorem 5 (-soundness (ZFC)). Suppose that T is a set of sentences, that φ is a
sentence, and that T ⊢ φ. Then T ⊨ φ.
⊓⊔
A natural question is why this deﬁnition of T ⊢ φ should be the correct one. A
brief justiﬁcation is as follows. First for each a ∈R, for each set of sentences T , and
for each formula φ(x0) one can generalize the previous deﬁnition in a natural fashion
and deﬁne the relation T ⊨ φ[a]. More precisely T ⊨ φ[a] if for all complete
Boolean algebras, B, for all ordinals α, if
V B
α ⊨T
then V B
α ⊨φ[a].
Deﬁne a set A ⊂R to be -ﬁnite if there exists a formula φ(x0) such that
A = {a ∈R | ∅⊨ φ[a]}
and such that for all complete Boolean algebras, B, the following holds in V B:

Set Theory after Russell
37
For all a ∈R either ∅⊨ φ[a] or ∅⊨ (¬φ)[a].
Now suppose that ∅⊨ φ. Then by analogy with ﬁrst order logic, there should
exist a set A ⊆R such that A is -ﬁnite and such that for all countable transitive
models, M, of ZFC, if M is suitably closed under A then
M ⊨“∅⊨ φ”.
Given the deﬁnition of the relation, ∅⊨ φ, the requirement that M be suitably closed
under A should be:
For all Boolean algebras, BM ∈M, if B is the completion of BM and if
G ⊆B is V -generic then
AG ∩M[G ∩BM] ∈M[G ∩BM]
where AG is the set of a ∈RV [G] such that
V [G] ⊨“∅⊨ φA[a]”,
and where φA(x0) is a formula witnessing that A is -ﬁnite.
In short, the -ﬁnite sets should sufﬁce to “witness” the relation ∅⊨ φ, at least
for countable transitive models.
Theorem 6 (ZFC). Suppose that there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals and that
A ⊆R is -ﬁnite. Then every set in P(R) ∩L(A, R) is universally Baire and
L(A, R) ⊨AD+.
⊓⊔
Now suppose that there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals. It follows that for
each -ﬁnite set A, if M is a countable transitive set such that
M ⊨ZFC
and such that M is A-closed then M is suitably closed under A in the sense deﬁned
above. This suggests the deﬁnition of the relation, T ⊢ φ, and the Soundness
Theorem shows that the deﬁnition is not too strong.
The  Conjecture asserts that if there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals then
for each sentence φ, if ∅⊨ φ then ∅⊢ φ. Phrased this way the  Conjecture
is simply a generalization of the Gödel Completeness Theorem. It is important that
the  Conjecture be conditioned on the existence of large cardinals which are not
signiﬁcantly weaker than Woodin cardinals. This claim is evident from the following
theorem.
Theorem 7 (ZFC). Suppose there is a proper class of inaccessible limits of Woodin
cardinals. Then there exists a transitive inner model N such that
N ⊨ZFC + “ There is a proper class of inaccessible limits of Woodin cardinals”
and such that for all κ < δ, where δ is the least Woodin cardinal of N, if κ is strongly
inaccessible in N then in Nκ the following hold:

38
W. H. Woodin
1. ∅⊨ “There are no Woodin cardinals”;
2. ∅̸⊢ “There are no Woodin cardinals”;
3. For every universally Baire set, A ⊆R, L(A, R) ⊨AD+ and every set in
P (R) ∩L(A, R) is universally Baire.
⊓⊔
By varying the choice of κ one can arrange that in Nκ there is a proper class of
cardinals satisfying any given large cardinal notion “strictly weaker” than that of being
a Woodin cardinal. One difﬁculty (but this is not the main difﬁculty) in producing the
inner model N of the theorem lies in controlling the universally Baire sets of Nκ where
κ is below the least Woodin cardinal of N; i.e., in an inner model with no Woodin
cardinals. For example one can show that in L, every set of reals is the continuous
image of a universally Baire set. This generalizes to the rank initial segments of the
inner model of one Woodin cardinal below the Woodin cardinal and to the rank initial
segments of all suitably closed ﬁne structural inner models4 below the least Woodin
cardinal of the model. Another subtle aspect is that this property of these rank initial
segments (that every set of reals is the continuous image of a universally Baire set)
also holds of their set generic extensions for which no reals are added. So in these
rank initial segments forcing notions which are ω-closed can add universally Baire
sets, something which cannot happen if there is a Woodin cardinal.
The formally stronger conjecture that if there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals
then for all theories, T , and for all sentences, φ, if T ⊨ φ then T ⊢ φ, is probably
equivalent to the  Conjecture. At least the current approaches to proving the  Con-
jecture would, if successful, prove this stronger conjecture as well. Both conjectures
are consistent. For example, if the theory,
ZFC + “There is a proper class of Woodin cardinals”,
is consistent then so is the theory,
ZFC + “There is a proper class ofWoodin cardinals” + “The  Conjecture holds”.
This is also evidence that the deﬁnition of T ⊢ φ is correct. It is not known if the
 Conjecture is consistently false.
For each sentence φ, φ is ZFC-valid if ZFC ⊨ φ and φ is ZFC-provable if
ZFC ⊢ φ.
Assume there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals. Then for each sentence φ in
the language for the structure,
⟨P (ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩,
either the sentence “⟨P(ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨φ” is ZFC-provable or the sentence
“⟨P (ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨(¬φ)”
is ZFC-provable.
4Inner models of the form L[E] as deﬁned by Mitchell-Steel in [8].

Set Theory after Russell
39
This of course must fail for the structure,
⟨P (ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩,
and that is the basic problem. However there is a variation which is not obviously ruled
out. Before stating the question it is convenient to ﬁx some more notation. Suppose
ψ and φ are sentences. Then φ is ZFC-provable from ψ if the implication
(ψ →φ)
is ZFC-provable. Thus φ is ZFC-provable from ψ if ZFC ∪{ψ} ⊢ φ. A sentence ψ
is ZFC-consistent if its negation (¬ψ) is not ZFC-provable.
The search for an absoluteness theorem for the structure,
⟨P (ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩,
leads naturally to the following question.
Suppose there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals. Is there an ZFC-
consistent sentence  such that for all sentences φ in the language for
the structure,
⟨P(ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩,
either the sentence “⟨P(ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨φ” is ZFC-provable from 
or the sentence “⟨P(ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨(¬φ)” is ZFC-provable from ?
The answer is “yes” and I shall discuss one example of such an axiom shortly. For
the sake of brevity, I say an axiom, , is good; i.e., good for the structure,
⟨P (ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩,
if  is both ZFC-consistent and has the property that for all sentences φ in the language
for the structure,
⟨P(ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩,
either the sentence “⟨P (ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨φ” is ZFC-provable from  or the sentence
“⟨P(ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨(¬φ)”
is ZFC-provable from .
The relevance of good sentences to the problem of CH is given in the following
theorem.
Theorem 8 (ZFC). Suppose that there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals and
suppose that  is a sentence which is good. Then
ZFC +  ⊢ (¬CH).
⊓⊔

40
W. H. Woodin
In other words, if the theory of the structure,
⟨P(ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩,
is to be resolved on the basis of a good axiom then necessarily CH is false. Since there
are good axioms, one has an argument that CH is false based not on a speciﬁc choice
of an axiom but rather based simply on a completeness property the axiom is required
to have.
A sentence  is ZFC-satisﬁable if its negation, (¬), is not ZFC-valid. Thus  is
ZFC-satisﬁable if there exist a complete Boolean algebra and an ordinal α such that
V B
α ⊨ZFC ∪{} .
Two fundamental issues remain. Assume there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals.
1. Is there a good axiom, , such that  is ZFC-satisﬁable?
2. Suppose  is a sentence and that  is ZFC-satisﬁable.  is weakly good if for
all sentences φ in the language for the structure,
⟨P(ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩,
either the sentence
( →“⟨P (ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨φ”)
is ZFC-valid or the sentence
( →“⟨P (ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨(¬φ)”)
is ZFC-valid.
Suppose that  is weakly good. Must the sentence
( →CH)
be ZFC-valid?
Of course in light of the discussion above, it is evident that the  Conjecture settles
both these questions, afﬁrmatively.
5. Maximality Axioms
Suppose that α is an inﬁnite ordinal such that for all ordinals β < α and for all ordinals
γ < α, β · γ < α. A sentence, φ, in the language for the structure,
⟨P(α), α, ·, +, ∈⟩
is 2 if it is of the form, (∀x0(∃x1ψ)) where ψ is a formula with all quantiﬁers ranging
over α (so φ is in essence a 2 sentence in the second order language for the structure
⟨α, ·, +, ∈⟩).

Set Theory after Russell
41
It will be necessary to consider structures,
⟨P(α), A1, . . . , An, α, ·, +, ∈⟩,
where A1, . . . , An are subsets of P (α). The notion of a 2 sentence in the language
for this structure is more awkward to deﬁne. Here it is best to pass to the structure,5
⟨H(|α|+), A1, . . . , An, ∈⟩,
which is logically equivalent to the structure,
⟨P (α), A1, . . . , An, α, ·, +, ∈⟩,
and deﬁne φ to be a 2 sentence if it is of the form, (∀x0(∃x1ψ)) where ψ is a formula
with only bounded quantiﬁers.
The Shoenﬁeld Absoluteness Theorem recast in terms of -logic is simply the
following assertion. Suppose that φ is a 2 sentence in the appropriate language.
Then either the sentence, “⟨P(ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨φ” is ZFC-valid or the sentence
“⟨P (ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨(¬φ)” is ZFC-valid.
This result easily generalizes to the structures,
⟨P(α), α, ·, +, ∈⟩,
where α < ω1.
It is straightforward to show that there exists a 2 sentence, ψ, such that the
Continuum Hypothesis is false if and only if,
⟨P(ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨ψ.
Therefore the most one can hope to establish are results like the following: Suppose
that φ1 and φ2 are 2 sentences such that both
“⟨P(ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨φ1”
and
“⟨P(ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨φ2”
are ZFC-consistent. Then
“⟨P (ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨(φ1 ∧φ2)”
is ZFC-consistent. This would show that if φ is a sentence which is any “simpler”
than 2 then either the sentence, “⟨P(ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨φ” is ZFC-provable or the
sentence “⟨P(ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨(¬φ)” is ZFC-provable.
The next theorem shows that not only is this true for 2 sentences, but a stronger
version is true6. We require some more deﬁnitions. First we note that -logic can
5H(|α|+) denotes the transitive set consisting of all sets of hereditary cardinality less than or equal to
the cardinality of α.
6But only for 2 sentences, the analogous statement for 2 sentences—sentences which are expressible
as the negation of a 2 sentence—is false [11].

42
W. H. Woodin
be naturally expanded to the language with predicates for universally Baire sets (and
constants for reals) [13]. So if A is universally Baire, a ∈R, and φ(x0, x1) is a formula
in the language of set theory then one can generalize the deﬁnitions of -logic to deﬁne
when φ(a, A) is ZFC-valid and when φ(a, A) is ZFC-provable.
The second deﬁnition we require isolates a key new feature of the structure,
⟨P (ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩,
as compared to the structure,
⟨P(ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩.
A coﬁnal set C ⊆ω1 is closed if for all 0 < α < ω1, either α ∈C or C ∩α is not
coﬁnal in α. A set A ⊂ω1 is nonstationary if the set ω1\A contains a subset which is
a closed, coﬁnal, subset of ω1. It follows from theAxiom of Choice that the collection
of nonstationary subsets of ω1 is a σ-ideal—which is an ideal closed under countable
unions—denoted here as NS. Clearly the ideal, NS, is deﬁnable, without parameters,
in the structure,
⟨P(ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩.
Theorem 9 (ZFC). Suppose there exist a proper class of Woodin cardinals and that
A ⊆R is universally Baire. Suppose that φ1 and φ2 are 2 sentences such that both
“⟨P (ω1), A, NS, ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨φ1”
and
“⟨P(ω1), A, NS, ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨φ2”
are ZFC-consistent. Then
“⟨P(ω1), A, NS, ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨(φ1 ∧φ2)”
is ZFC-consistent.
⊓⊔
I now come to the main example of a sentence which is good. Let 0 be the
sentence:
For each projective set A, for each 2 sentence φ, if the sentence,
“⟨P(ω1), A, NS, ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨φ”,
is ZFC-consistent then
⟨P (ω1), A, NS, ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨φ.
Then 0 is good, this is the content of the next theorem.
Theorem 10 (ZFC). Suppose there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals. Then

Set Theory after Russell
43
1. 0 is ZFC-consistent.
2. For all sentences φ in the language for the structure,
⟨P (ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩,
either the sentence “⟨P (ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨φ” is ZFC-provable from 0 or the
sentence
“⟨P (ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩⊨(¬φ)”
is ZFC-provable from 0.
⊓⊔
The sentence 0 also settles the size of the continuum.
Theorem 11 (ZFC). Suppose there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals and that 0
holds. Then c = ℵ2.
⊓⊔
In fact, the version of 0 which refers only to those projective sets A ⊆R which
can be deﬁned in the structure,
⟨P (ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩,
without parameters—these are the “lightface” projective sets—is equivalent7 to 0
and the theorem that 0 is good is true with the sentences φ replaced by sentences
with real parameters.
The structures,
⟨P(α), α, ·, +, ∈⟩,
where ω1 ≤α < ω2 are each logically equivalent to the structure,
⟨P (ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩,
so the next structure to consider is the structure,
⟨P (ω2), ω2, ·, +, ∈⟩.
Here maximality fails not only for 2 sentences, it fails for 1 sentences. Very likely
maximality fails for 1 sentences as well but this is open.
6. Conclusions
It is important to note that if there exists a proper class of Woodin cardinals then for
all complete Boolean algebras, B,
V B ⊨ Conjecture
if and only if the  Conjecture holds in V .
7In -logic, assuming there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals [11].

44
W. H. Woodin
Therefore it is very unlikely that the problem of the  Conjecture is unsolvable in
the same fashion that CH is unsolvable. It could be unsolvable in the same fashion
that the measure problem for the projective sets is unsolvable. But in this case the
 Conjecture would most likely be resolved as being false.8
If the skeptic is going to accept the solution to the measure problem for the pro-
jective sets, but continue to claim that the problem of the Continuum Hypothesis is
meaningless, then the skeptic must explain why the problem of the Continuum Hy-
pothesis is different. The existence of good sentences (which are -satisﬁable) and the
theorem that good sentences must imply that the Continuum Hypothesis is false would
seem to narrow the possibilities for an argument that the problem of the Continuum
Hypothesis is fundamentally different from the measure problem for the projective sets
to essentially just the fact that neither CH or (¬CH) is ZFC-valid. But accepting this
as the reason that the problem of the Continuum Hypothesis is without meaning forces
one to make the stronger claim that if a 2-sentence is not ZFC-valid then the claim
that it is true is not meaningful (noting that both CH and (¬CH) are 2 sentences).
However the plausibility of such a claim critically depends on the  Conjecture.
In one extreme the  Conjecture is false and moreover the set
x = {φ | ∅⊨ φ}
can be complicated as its immediate deﬁnition suggests. How might this happen?
Consider the following sentence, 0[x], which involves x (so in the language of set
theory with a constant for x).
x is the set {φ | ∅⊨ φ} and x is recursively equivalent to the complete
2 set of integers.
Assuming there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals it follows that whether or not this
sentence is ZFC-satisﬁable is generically absolute. If this sentence is ZFC-satisﬁable
then the  Conjecture is false (and in a very strong sense). In this case the foundational
view that the only 2-sentences in Set Theory for which the claim of truth is mean-
ingful are those which are ZFC-valid (a “many worlds” view) becomes more credible.
A more persuasive case for this view could be made if for each 2 sentence, φ, such
that φ is ZFC-satisﬁable, the sentence (φ ∧0[x]) is ZFC-satisﬁable—whether or not
this is true is also generically absolute if there is a proper class of Woodin cardinals.
Of course the set,
x = {φ | ∅⊨ φ} ,
could be recursively equivalent to the complete 2 set of integers because there is a
sentence 1 such that for all 2 sentences φ,
V ⊨φ
if and only if {1} ⊨ φ. While such a sentence, 1, would be compelling as a
new axiom, this possibility seems rather unlikely at present. The reason is that if
8By a meta-mathematical argument involving hierarchies ofAxioms of Inﬁnity and Inner Model Theory.

Set Theory after Russell
45
such a sentence 1 exists (and holds in V ) then it should follow (by introducing real
parameters) that every set of reals which is ordinal deﬁnable in V , is universally Baire9.
Finally, suppose that there exist a proper class of Woodin cardinals and suppose that
every set of reals which is ordinal deﬁnable is universally Baire. Then the  Conjecture
holds in HOD in the strong sense that for every sentence φ, if φ is ZFC-consistent
then φ is ZFC-satisﬁable. While this is not a formal contradiction, it seems very
implausible that the  Conjecture could both fail in V and hold in HOD in this strong
sense.
In the other extreme, the  Conjecture is true. But then by a corollary of the
general theory of -logic, the set x is deﬁnable (without parameters) in the structure,
⟨P(c), c, ·, +, ∈⟩,
where c = |R|. In this case the foundational view that the only 2-sentences in Set
Theory for which the claim of truth is meaningful are those 2 sentences which are
ZFC-valid is no more credible than formalism. The view rejects any genuine notion
of the transﬁnite beyond c.
If the  Conjecture is false then one could simply conclude that the deﬁnition
of T ⊢ φ was not correct. But if the  Conjecture fails badly in the sense that
the sentence, 0[x], involving the set x is ZFC-satisﬁable then there is probably no
reasonable notion of the length of an -proof. Otherwise (assuming there is a proper
class of Woodin cardinals) there would be formulas, ψ(x0, x1) and φ(x0, x1), such
that the following hold (regarding x ⊆ω):
1. The set
z = {(i, j) | i ∈x, j ∈x, and ψ[i, j] is ZFC-valid}
well-orders x;
2. For each j ∈x,
{i | i ∈ω and φ[i, j] is ZFC-valid} = {i | (i, j) /∈z} .
However if x is recursively equivalent to the complete 2 set then this cannot happen.
If the  Conjecture is true then in understanding why it is true, arguably our
understanding of sets will have advanced considerably. We will be able to quantify
the limits of forcing and we will be able to give an abstract deﬁnition of the hierarchy
of Axioms of Inﬁnity. Nevertheless the challenge, if the  Conjecture is true, will be to
come up with a credible foundational view of the transﬁnite universe. A more speciﬁc
challenge is:
Exhibit a sentence φ such that assertion,
⟨P (R), R, +, ·, ∈⟩⊨φ,
is true but not ⊨ valid.
9The “least” OD subset of R which is not universally Baire should be -ﬁnite.

46
W. H. Woodin
This challenge is reasonably posed now to those advocating a notion of truth in
Set Theory which transcends mere formalism and yet maintain that the Continuum
Hypothesis has no answer.
There are many natural candidates for φ other than CH and its negation, for exam-
ple:
There is a 2
1-deﬁnable wellordering of R;
Every 2
1-deﬁnable set of reals is determined;
The pointclass, 2
1, has the prewellordering property;
The pointclass, 2
1, has the prewellordering property;
(and their negations) are each candidates (and less controversial than CH).
The
prewellordering property is deﬁned in [9].
I am optimistic. Our collective experience in Set Theory to date has revealed the
correct axioms for the structure,
⟨P (ω), ω, ·, +, ∈⟩,
and has provided candidates for the correct axioms for the structure,
⟨P(ω1), ω1, ·, +, ∈⟩.
I see no reason why this should stop here and I am not unduly discouraged by the fact
that these structures are negligible initial segments of the universe of sets.
References
[1]
Albers, Donald J., Gerald L.Alexanderson, and Constance Reid (eds.): 1990. More Math-
ematical People. Contemporary conversations. Boston, MA: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich
Publishers.
[2]
Dehornoy, Patrick: 2002–2003. Progrès récents sur l’hypothèse du continu [d’après
Woodin]. Séminaire Bourbaki 55ème année: # 915.
[3]
Feferman, Solomon, Harvey M. Friedman, Penelope Maddy, and John R. Steel: 2000.
Does mathematics need new axioms? Bull. Symbolic Logic 6 (4): 401–446.
[4]
Feng, Qi, Menachem Magidor, and Hugh Woodin: 1992. Universally Baire sets of reals.
In: Set Theory of the Continuum (Berkeley, CA, 1989), New York: Springer, 203–242.
[5]
Gödel,Kurt:1940.TheConsistencyoftheContinuumHypothesis.Princeton,N.J.:Prince-
ton University Press.
[6]
Kanamori, Akihiro: 1994. The Higher Inﬁnite. Berlin: Springer.
[7]
Martin,DonaldA.:1976.Hilbert’sﬁrstproblem:thecontinuumhypothesis.In:Mathemat-
ical Developments Arising from Hilbert Problems (Proc. Sympos. Pure Math., Northern
Illinois Univ., De Kalb, Ill., 1974), Providence, R. I.: Amer. Math. Soc., 81–92.

Set Theory after Russell
47
[8]
Mitchell, William J. and John R. Steel: 1994. Fine Structure and Iteration Trees. Berlin:
Springer.
[9]
Moschovakis, Yiannis N.: 1980 . Descriptive Set Theory. Amsterdam: North-Holland
Publishing Co..
[10]
Shelah, Saharon: 1993. The future of set theory. In: Set Theory of the Reals (Ramat Gan,
1991), Ramat Gan: Bar-Ilan Univ., 1–12.
[11] Woodin, W. Hugh: 1999. The Axiom of Determinacy, Forcing Axioms, and the Nonsta-
tionary Ideal. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter & Co., Berlin.
[12] Woodin, W. Hugh: 2001. The continuum hypothesis. I. Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 48 (6):
567–576.
[13] Woodin: W. Hugh: 2001. The continuum hypothesis. II. Notices Amer. Math. Soc. 48 (7):
681–690.
Department of Mathematics
721 Evans Hall # 3840
Berkeley, CA 94720-3840
USA
E-mail: woodin@math.berkeley.edu


A Way Out
Harvey M. Friedman
Abstract. We present a way out of Russell’s paradox for sets in the form of a direct weakening
of the usual inconsistent full comprehension axiom scheme, which, with no additional axioms,
interprets ZFC. In fact, the resulting axiomatic theory 1) is a subsystem of ZFC + “there exists
arbitrarily large subtle cardinals”, and 2) is mutually interpretable with ZFC + the scheme of
subtlety.
1. Newcomp
Bertrand Russell [1] showed that the Fregean scheme of full comprehension is incon-
sistent. Given the intuitive appeal of full comprehension (for sets), this inconsistency
is known as Russell’s Paradox (for sets). The modern view is to regard full compre-
hension (for sets) as misguided, and thereby regard Russell’s Paradox (for sets) as a
refutation of a misguided idea.
We ﬁrst give an informal presentation of the axiom scheme investigated in this
paper. Informally, the full comprehension axiom scheme in the language L(∈) with
only the binary relation symbol ∈and no equality, is, in the context of set theory,
Every virtual set forms a set.
We use the term “virtual set” to mean a recipe that is intended to be a set, but may be
a “fake set” in the sense that it does not form a set. The recipes considered here are of
the form {x : ϕ}, where ϕ is any formula in L(∈).
Other authors prefer to use the term “virtual class”, reﬂecting the idea that {x : ϕ}
always forms a class, with the understanding that x ranges over sets. Our terminology
reﬂects the intention to consider only sets, and construct a powerful set existence
axiom.
We say that {x : ϕ} forms a set if and only if there is a set y whose elements are
exactly the x such that ϕ. Here y must not be free in ϕ (and must be different from x).
Thus {x : ϕ} forms a set is expressed by
(∃y)(∀x)(x ∈y ←→ϕ).
Russell showed that
{x : x /∈x} forms a set

50
H. M. Friedman
leads to a contradiction in pure logic.
Our way out of Russell’s Paradox is to modify the inconsistent Fregean scheme in
this way:
Every virtual set forms a set, or _____.
We refer to what comes after “or” as the “escape clause”. The escape clause that we
use involves only the extension of the virtual set and not its presentation.
We are now ready to present the comprehension axiom scheme.
Newcomp. Every virtual set forms a set, or, outside any given set, has two inequivalent
elements, where all elements of the virtual set belonging to the ﬁrst belong to the
second.
To avoid any possible ambiguity, we make the following comments (as well as
give a formal presentation in section 2).
1. For Newcomp, we use only the language L(∈), which does not have equality.
2. Here “inequivalent” means “not having the same elements”.
3. The escape clause asserts that for any set y, there are two unequal sets z, w in
the extension of the virtual set, neither in y, such that every element of z in the
extension of the virtual set is also an element of w.
We will show that
a) Newcomp is provable in ZFC+ “there exists arbitrarily large subtle cardinals”;
b) Newcomp is provable in ZFC + V = L + SSUB, where SSUB is what we call
the scheme of subtlety;
c) Newcomp and ZFC + SSUB are mutually interpretable;
d) Newcomp is interpretable in ZFC + “there exists a subtle cardinal”, but New-
comp is not provable there, assuming that the latter is consistent;
e) alloftheaboveareprovableintheweakfragmentofarithmeticEFA (exponential
function arithmetic);
f) Newcomp and ZFC + SSUB are equiconsistent, in the sense that their consis-
tencies are provably equivalent in EFA.
As usual, ZFC is formulated with equality; i.e., in the language L(∈, =).
The interpretation of ZFC + SSUB in Newcomp presented here (or coming out of
here) takes the following form (when straightforwardly adjusted). Sets in ZFC+SSUB
are interpreted to be sets in Newcomp. Membership and equality between the sets
in ZFC + SSUB are interpreted as two separate relations between sets in Newcomp
deﬁned by two separate formulas with exactly two free variables (no parameters).
As normally required of interpretations, the usual connectives and quantiﬁers are

A Way Out
51
interpreted without change. Every theorem of ZFC + SSUB becomes a theorem of
Newcomp when so interpreted.
There is an appropriate sense in which this interpretation is a well founded inter-
pretation. Speciﬁcally, it is provable in Newcomp that every set has a minimal element
under the above interpretation of the epsilon relation of ZFC + SSUB. We can then
draw conclusions such as conservative extension results in the form: any sentence of
a certain kind provable in ZFC + SSUB is provable in Newcomp. However, the state-
ment of such results involves various coding apparatus available in Newcomp, and we
do not go into this matter here. Sufﬁce it to say that, in an appropriate sense, every
arithmetical theorem of ZFC + SSUB is a theorem of Newcomp (and vice versa).
In the interpretation of Newcomp in ZFC + “there exists a subtle cardinal”, the
sets in Newcomp are interpreted to be some portion of the sets in ZFC + “there exists
a subtle cardinal”, (an initial segment, possible proper, of the constructible hierarchy),
and membership between sets in Newcomp is interpreted as membership between sets
in ZFC + “there exists a subtle cardinal”. As normally required of interpretations,
the usual connectives and quantiﬁers are interpreted without change. Every theorem
of Newcomp becomes a theorem of ZFC + “there exists a subtle cardinal” when so
interpreted.
Of course, when interpreting Newcomp in ZFC+ “there are arbitrarily large subtle
cardinals”, we can use the identity interpretation, since Newcomp is provable there.
The system ZFC + SSUB has logical strength a shade below that of ZFC + SUB,
where SUB is “there exists a subtle cardinal”, and substantially stronger than the
well studied large cardinal axioms weaker than SUB, such as the existence of Mahlo,
weakly compact, or indescribable cardinals. In the well known Chart of Cardinals
in [6]: 471, subtle ﬁts strictly below κ →(ω)<ω
2 , and strictly above (in logical
strength) “indescribable”, well within the cardinals that are compatible with V = L.
In particular, it is provable in ZFC that
i) if κ is a subtle cardinal then there are κ cardinals < κ which are indescribable;
ii) if κ →(ω)<ω
2
then there are κ cardinals < κ that are subtle;
iii) the ﬁrst subtle cardinal, if it exists, is not indescribable or even weakly compact;
iv) every subtle cardinal is n-Mahlo for all n < ω.
2. Some Formalities
We let L(∈) be ordinary classical ﬁrst order predicate calculus with only the binary
relation symbol ∈(no equality). We assume that x, y, z, w are distinct variables among
the inﬁnitely many variables used in L(∈).
We write z ≡w for (∀u)(u ∈z ←→u ∈w).

52
H. M. Friedman
Newcomp. Let ϕ be a formula of L(∈) in which y, z, w do not appear. (∃y)(∀x)
(x ∈y ←→ϕ)∨(∀y)(∃z, w)(z, w /∈y∧¬z ≡w∧ϕ[x/z]∧ϕ[x/w]∧(∀x)((ϕ∧x ∈
z) →x ∈w)).
The following deﬁnition is used in [2] and [4]. We say that an ordinal λ is subtle
if and only if
i) λ is a limit ordinal;
ii) Let C ⊆λ be closed and unbounded, and for each α < λ let Aα ⊆α be given.
There exist α, β ∈C, α < β, such that Aα = Aβ ∩α.
It is well known that every subtle ordinal is a subtle cardinal, see [4]: 3.
We will use the following schematic form of subtlety. SSUB is the following
scheme in the language of ZFC with ∈, =. Let ϕ, ψ be formulas, where we view ϕ
as carving out a class on the variable x, and ψ as carving out a binary relation on the
variables x, y. Parameters are allowed in ϕ, ψ.
if ϕ deﬁnes a closed and unbounded class of ordinals C, and ψ deﬁnes
a system Aα ⊆α, for all ordinals α, then there exist α, β ∈C, α < β,
where Aα = Aβ ∩α.
This concludes the deﬁnitions that are used in the list of agenda items a)–f) at the
end of section 1.
In [5] we deﬁne λ to be inclusion subtle if and only if
i) λ is a limit ordinal;
ii) Let C ⊆λ be closed and unbounded, and for each α < λ let Aα ⊆α be given.
There exist α, β ∈C, α < β , such that Aα ⊆Aβ.
There is a corresponding scheme SISUB (scheme of inclusion subtlety).
if ϕ deﬁnes a closed and unbounded class of ordinals, C, and ψ deﬁnes
a system Aα ⊆α, for all ordinals α, then there exist α, β ∈C, α < β,
such that Aα ⊆Aβ.
Lemma 1. An ordinal is subtle if and only if it is inclusion subtle.
Proof. This is Theorem 1.2 of [5].
Theorem 2. SISUB and SSUB are provably equivalent in ZFC.
Proof. This is in clear analogy with Lemma 1. The proof is an obvious adaptation of
that of Lemma 1.
In [5] we deﬁne λ to be weakly inclusion subtle over δ if and only if
i) λ, δ are ordinals;

A Way Out
53
ii) For each α < λ let Aα ⊆α be given. There exists δ ≤α < β such that
Aα ⊆Aβ.
There is a corresponding scheme SWISUB (scheme of weak inclusion subtlety). This
is the natural principle used to prove Newcomp in section 3 (we will also use V = L).
if ϕ deﬁnes a system Aα ⊆α, for all ordinals α, then there exist arbitrarily
large ordinals α < β such that Aα ⊆Aβ.
Lemma 3. The least weakly inclusion subtle ordinal over δ ≥2, if it exists, is a subtle
cardinal.
Proof. This is Theorem 1.6 of [5].
Theorem 4. SWISUB and SSUB are provably equivalent in ZFC + ¬SUB.
Proof. This will be an adaptation of the proof of Lemma 3. We work in SWISUB +
¬SUB. Let a closed unbounded class C of ordinals, and Aα ⊆α, ordinals α, be
appropriately given. By Theorem 2, it sufﬁces to ﬁnd α, β ∈C, α < β, such that
Aα ⊆Aβ. By Lemma 3, there is no weakly inclusion subtle ordinal over 2. So for
each γ , we have a counterexample Dα ⊆α, α < γ , to γ is weakly inclusion subtle
over 2.
We now proceed exactly as in the proof of Theorem 1.6 in [5].
Corollary 5. ZFC + SSUB and ZFC + SWISUB are mutually interpretable and
equiconsistent (in the sense that the consistency statements are provably equivalent
in EFA).
Proof. The interpretation will be V if there is no subtle cardinal, and V (λ) if there is
a subtle cardinal and λ is the least subtle cardinal.
For the interpretation of ZFC + SSUB in Newcomp, we will use another modi-
ﬁcation of SSUB that is weaker than SWISUB. We call it the scheme of very weak
inclusion subtlety, written SVWISUB.
If ψ deﬁnes a system Aα ⊆α, for all ordinals α, then there exist 2 ≤α < β such
that Aα ⊆Aβ.
Theorem 6. SVWISUB and SSUB are provably equivalent in ZFC + ¬ SUB.
Proof. The same as for Theorem 4. In Theorem 1.6 of [5], set δ = 2.
Corollary 7. ZFC + SSUB and ZFC + SVWISUB are mutually interpretable and
equiconsistent (in the sense that the consistency statements are provably equivalent
in EFA).
Proof. Same as for Corollary 5.
In section 5, we will interpret SVWISUB in Newcomp + Extensionality.

54
H. M. Friedman
3. Proof and Interpretation of Newcomp
Theorem 8. Newcomp is provable in ZFC + V = L + SWISUB. In particular, it is
provable in ZFC + V = L + SSUB, and interpretable in ZFC + SSUB. Newcomp is
interpretable in ZFC + “there exists a subtle cardinal”.
Proof. We work in ZFC + V = L + SWISUB. Let S be a proper class given by a
formula with set parameters.
We construct a one-one surjective function F : S →On such that
*) for all x, y ∈S, if x ∈y then F(x) < F(y).
Let γα be the strictly increasing enumeration of all of the ranks of elements of S.
Let F0 map S ∩V (γ0 + 1) one-one onto an ordinal. Suppose Fβ has been deﬁned for
all 0 ≤β < α, mapping S ∩V (γβ + 1) one-one onto an ordinal, where each function
is extended by the later ones. If α is a limit ordinal, then take Fα to be the union of
the Fβ, β < α. Suppose α = β + 1. Take Fα to be an appropriate extension of Fβ.
It is clear that we cannot make this construction in a deﬁnable manner; e.g., S may
be all of V . However, V = L provides the needed deﬁnable well ordering of V to
make this construction go through.
We now deﬁne Aα ⊆α for all ordinals α. Recall that F is one-one onto. Take
Aα = {F(x) : x ∈S ∩F −1α}, where F −1α is the inverse of the function F at the
point α. Suppose x ∈S ∩F −1α. By condition *) in the construction of F, we have
F(x) < F(F −1α) = α. Thus we see that Aα ⊆α.
By SWISUB, let α < β be arbitrarily large ordinals such that Aα ⊆Aβ. Then
{F(x) : x ∈S ∩F −1α} ⊆{F(x) : x ∈S ∩F −1β}. Since F : S →On is one-one,
we have {x : x ∈S ∩F −1α} ⊆{x : x ∈S ∩F −1β}, S ∩F −1α ⊆S ∩F −1β. Also,
since F is one-one, F −1α and F −1β can be taken to lie outside any given set and are
distinct elements of S. We have thus veriﬁed the escape clause in Newcomp.
For the second claim, obviously SWISUB is derivable from SSUB, and ZFC+V =
L + SSUB is interpretable in ZFC + SSUB by relativizing to L. For the third claim,
obviously ZFC + SSUB is interpretable in ZFC + “there exists a subtle cardinal” by
using the model (V (κ), ∈) of SSUB, where κ is the least subtle cardinal.
Theorem 9. Newcomp is provable in ZFC + “there are arbitrarily large subtle car-
dinals”.
Proof. Let S be a proper class given by a formula with set parameters. We modify the
proof of Theorem 8. Let the ordinals γα be deﬁned as before, and let α be given. Let
κ > α be a subtle cardinal.
Suppose that for some β < κ, the number of elements of S of rank γβ is at least κ.
Fix β to be least with this property. Note that S ∩V (γβ) has fewer than κ elements.
Hence there are at least κ elements of S of rank γβ whose intersections with S are
equal. This veriﬁes the escape clause in Newcomp with x = V (α).
Now suppose that for all β < κ, the number of elements of S of rank γβ < κ.
Then build the one-one functions fβ, β < κ, as in the proof of Theorem 8. This will

A Way Out
55
require only AxC, and not V = L. Note that fκ : S ∩V (γκ) →κ is one-one onto.
Proceed to verify the escape clause in Newcomp with x = V (a), using the subtlety of
κ, as in the proof of Theorem 8.
Theorem 10. Newcomp is not provable in ZFC + V = L + “there exists a subtle
cardinal”, assuming the latter is consistent. Newcomp is not provable in ZFC together
with any existential sentence in the language of set theory with equality and the power
set operation, with bounded quantiﬁers allowed, assuming the latter is consistent.
Proof. Let M be a model of ZFC+V = L+ “there exists a subtle cardinal”. Let κ be
any subtle cardinal in the sense of M. Let M′ be the same as M if M satisﬁes “there
is no strongly inaccessible cardinal > κ”; otherwise M′ is the restriction of M to the
sets of rank less than the ﬁrst inaccessible cardinal > κ in the sense of M. Then M′
satisﬁes ZFC + V = L.
In M′, we construct a deﬁnable assignment Aα ⊆α, ordinals α, as follows. If
α > κ is a successor ordinal, let Aα = {0, α −1}. If α > κ is a limit ordinal of
coﬁnality < α, let Aα be an unbounded subset of α of order type cf (α) whose ﬁrst
two elements are 1, cf (α). If α > κ is the next cardinal after the cardinal β, let
Aα = {2} ∪[β, α). For α ≤κ, let Aα = α. Note that the strict sup of every Aα is α.
We claim that κ < α < β and Aα ⊆Aβ is impossible. If this holds then either
α,β are both successor ordinals, or α,β are both nonregular limit ordinals, or α,β are
both successor cardinals. The ﬁrst and third cases are dispensed with immediately.
For the second case, we have cf (α) = cf (β) and Aα, Aβ have order type cf (α) < α.
Since Aα has strict sup α and Aβ has strict sup β > α, this is impossible.
We can now convert this construction to a counterexample to Newcomp. The
conversion is according to the proof of Theorem 2.5, iii) →i), in [5], with λ = On
and δ = κ. For the convenience of the reader, we repeat the relevant part from there
with λ = On and δ = κ, in the next three paragraphs, working within M′.
We deﬁne f : On →V as follows. f (α) = {f (β) : β ∈Aα}. By transﬁnite
induction, each f (α) has rank α. Let S be the range of f . Then S is a transitive set
of rank λ, where S has exactly one element of each rank < λ.
We claim that f (α) ⊆f (β) →Aα ⊆Aβ. To see this, suppose f (α) ⊆f (β).
Then {f (µ) : µ ∈Aα} ⊆{f (µ) : µ ∈Aβ}. Since f is one-one, Aα ⊆Aβ.
Suppose there exists a 2 element chain {x ⊊y} ⊆S, rk(x), rk(y) ≥κ. Since
x ⊊y, we have rk(x) ≤rk(y), and hence κ ≤rk(x) < rk(y). Write rk(x) = α and
rk(y) = β. Then x = f (α) and y = f (β). Therefore Aα ⊆Aβ. Since κ ≤α < β,
this contradicts the choice of (Aα).
We now claim that S provides a counterexample to Newcomp in M′. Clearly S is
a proper class in M′. However, there are no x, y ∈S, x ̸= y, outside of V (κ), with
S ∩x ⊆y.
For the second claim, we again begin with a model M of ZFC + (∃x1, . . . , xk) (ϕ)
where ϕ is a bounded formula in ∈, =, and the power set operation. Fix a limit cardinal
κ in M such that (∃x1, . . . , xk ∈V (κ))(ϕ) holds in M. Choose a well ordering X of
V (κ) in M, and pass to the submodel L[X] of M. Finally, let M′ be L[X] if there is

56
H. M. Friedman
no strongly inaccessible cardinal above κ in the sense of L[X]; otherwise M′ is the
result of chopping off at the ﬁrst strongly inaccessible cardinal above κ in the sense
of L[X]. Then M′ satisﬁes ZFC + (∃x1, . . . , xk)(ϕ). Now repeat the above argument
for the ﬁrst claim to show that M′ does not satisfy Newcomp.
4. Newcomp + Ext in Newcomp
In this section, we give an interpretation of Newcomp + Extensionality in Newcomp.
Let us be precise about what these two theories are. Recall that Newcomp is
formulated as a scheme in L(∈); i.e., without equality. See section 2.
However, we formulate Newcomp + Ext in L(∈, =); i.e., with equality. This is
convenient for section 5. Let x, y, z, w be distinct variables throughout this section.
TheaxiomsofNewcomp+Ext, inadditiontothelogicalaxiomsforL(∈, =), including
the equality axioms for L(∈, =), are
Extensionality. (∀z)(z ∈x ←→z ∈y) →x = y.
Newcomp. Letϕ beaformulaofL(∈, =)inwhichy, z, w donotappear. (∃y)(∀x)(x ∈
y ←→ϕ) ∨(∀y)(∃z, w)(z, w /∈y ∧¬z = w ∧ϕ[x/z] ∧ϕ[x/w] ∧(∀x)((ϕ ∧x ∈
z) →x ∈w)).
We ﬁrst give the interpretation (and its veriﬁcation), where a few points remain
to be handled formally, as noted. We follow this by a formal treatment of the few
remaining points.
In Newcomp, we deﬁne x ≡y if and only if (∀z)(z ∈x ←→z ∈y).
Sitting in Newcomp, we call a set x extensional if and only if for any ﬁnite sequence
x1 ∈x2 ∈· · · ∈xk = x, k ≥2, for all y, we have x1 ≡y →y ∈x2. This is a
place where we need to ﬁll in some details, because we don’t have natural numbers
and ﬁnite sequences readily available in Newcomp.
We interpret the sets for Newcomp + Ext to be the extensional sets. Membership
is interpreted as membership. Equality is interpreted as ≡in Newcomp.
We ﬁrst check that the interpretations of the equality axioms of Newcomp + Ext
are provable in Newcomp.
For the equality axioms, it remains to prove the interpretations of
x = y →(z ∈x →z ∈y)
x = y →(x ∈z →y ∈z).
Let x, y, z be extensional. Assume the interpretation of x = y. This is (∀w)(w ∈
x ←→w ∈y). Obviously z ∈x →z ∈y. We need to check that x ∈z →y ∈z.
Assume x ∈z. We apply the deﬁnition of extensional to x ∈z. Since x ≡y, we have
y ∈z.
We now check that the interpretation of Ext is provable in Newcomp.
Extensionality reads
(∀z)(z ∈x ←→z ∈y) →x = y.

A Way Out
57
The ﬁrst crucial Lemma we need is that every element of an extensional set is
extensional. This is informally clear, but we will give a careful proof in Newcomp
later.
Let x, y, z be extensional. Assume the interpretation of (∀z)(z ∈x ←→z ∈y).
Then for all extensional z, z ∈x ←→z ∈y. Now let z be arbitrary. If z ∈x then z
is extensional, and hence z ∈y. If z ∈y then z is extensional, and hence z ∈x. Thus
we conclude that x ≡y, which is the interpretation of x = y.
We now come to the Newcomp axiom scheme. We want to interpret the universal
closure of the Newcomp axiom.
1) {x : ϕ} forms a set or, outside any given set, there exist y, z, ¬y = z, ϕ[x/y],
ϕ[x/z], with (∀x ∈y)(ϕ →x ∈z)
where y, z do not appear in ϕ. Let v1, . . . , vk be a complete list of parameters in
this Newcomp axiom, without repetition.
The interpretation of the universal closure of the above Newcomp axiom is the
sentence
2) For all extensional v1, . . . , vk, (∃extensional y)(∀extensional x)(x ∈y ←→
ϕ∗) or, for any extensional w, there exist extensional y, z /∈w, with ¬y ≡z, ϕ∗[x/y],
ϕ∗[x/z], and (∀extensional x ∈y)(ϕ∗→x ∈z)
where ϕ∗is the result of relativizing all quantiﬁers in ϕ to the extensional sets, and
replacing = with ≡. Here y, z, w do not appear in ϕ and v1, . . . , vk, x, y, z, w are
distinct.
We can rewrite 2) in Newcomp as
3) For all extensional v1, . . . , vk, (∃extensional y)(∀extensional x)(x ∈y ←→
ϕ∗) or, for any extensional w, there exist extensional y, z /∈w, with ¬y ≡z, ϕ∗[x/y],
ϕ∗[x/z], and (∀x ∈y)(ϕ∗→x ∈z).
We will actually prove the following strengthening of 3) in Newcomp. Let ϕ′ be
ϕ∗∧x is extensional.
4) For all extensional v1, . . . , vk, (∃extensional y)(∀x)(x ∈y ←→ϕ′) or, for any
w, there exists y, z /∈w, with ¬y ≡z, ϕ′[x/y], ϕ′[x/z], and (∀x ∈y)(ϕ′ →x ∈z).
Let us verify that 4) →3) in Newcomp. Clearly (∀x)(x ∈y ←→ϕ′) implies
(∀extensional x)(x ∈y ←→ϕ∗) since if x is extensional, then ϕ′ ←→ϕ∗. Also,
any such y, z in 4) are extensional because of the construction of ϕ′. In addition,
(∀x ∈y)(ϕ′ →x ∈z) implies (∀x ∈y)(ϕ∗→x ∈z). To see this, assume
(∀x ∈y)(ϕ′ →x ∈z), and let x ∈y and ϕ∗. Since y is extensional, x is extensional,
and so ϕ′, and hence x ∈z.
Note that we have just used the following ﬁrst crucial lemma: every element of an
extensional set is extensional.
Also note that 4) is almost in the form of the universal closure of a Newcomp axiom.
The problem is the displayed existential quantiﬁer. In Newcomp we obviously have
5) For all extensional v1, . . . , vk, (∃y)(∀x)(x ∈y ←→ϕ′) or, for any w, there
exists y, z /∈w, with ¬y ≡z, ϕ′[x/y], ϕ′[x, z], and (∀x ∈y)(ϕ′ →x ∈z).
It remains to prove in Newcomp,

58
H. M. Friedman
6) For all extensional v1,. . . ,vk, (∃y)(∀x)(x ∈y ←→ϕ′) →(∃extensional y)
(∀x)(x ∈y ←→ϕ′).
We ﬁrst claim that
7) For all extensional v1, . . . , vk, (∀x, u)(x ≡u →(ϕ′ ←→ϕ′[x/u]))
where u is not free in ϕ′ and not among v1, . . . , vk.
To prove 7), ﬁrst note that we have
8) For all extensional v1, . . . , vk, (∀x, u)(x = u →(ϕ ←→ϕ[x/u]))∗
since this is the interpretation of a theorem of logic, and we have secured the
interpretation of the equality axioms. Hence we have
9) For all extensional v1, . . . , vk, (∀x, u)(x ≡u →(ϕ∗←→ϕ∗[x/u])).
For the next paragraph, we will need a second crucial Lemma. If x is extensional
and x ≡y, then y is extensional. This is informally clear, but we will give a careful
proof in Newcomp later.
To ﬁnish the proof of 7), let v1, . . . , vk be extensional and let x ≡u. If ϕ′ then x is
extensional, and so u is extensional. Also ϕ∗, and so by 9), ϕ∗[x/u]. Hence ϕ′[x/u].
For the other direction, if ϕ′[x/u] then u is extensional, and so x is extensional. Also
ϕ∗[x/u], and so ϕ∗. Hence ϕ′. This veriﬁes 7).
We now complete the veriﬁcation of 6) in Newcomp. Let v1, . . . , vk be extensional,
and let (∀x)(x ∈y ←→ϕ′). Then y is a set of extensional sets. By 9), y is a set of
extensional sets, where any set equivalent to an element of y is an element of y. It is
informally clear that y itself is extensional.
Thus we need a third crucial Lemma.
If x is a set of extensional sets, and
(∀y, z)((y ∈x ∧y ≡z) →z ∈x), then x is extensional.
ThiscompletestheveriﬁcationoftheinterpretationofNewcomp+Ext inNewcomp.
We now formally treat extensional sets and the three crucial Lemmas used above.
We will work entirely within Newcomp.
Lemma 11. Separation holds. I.e., (∃y)(∀x)(x ∈y ←→(x ∈a ∧ϕ)), where y is
not free in ϕ.
Proof. {x : x ∈a ∧ϕ} does not have two inequivalent elements outside a. So it forms
a set.
By Lemma 11, we can use the notation y ≡{x : x ∈a ∧ϕ} for (∀x)(x ∈y ←→
(x ∈a ∧ϕ)). This determines x up to equivalence.
Lemma 12. Foranyx, y, thereexistszsuchthat(∀w)(w ∈z ←→(w ∈x∨w ≡y)).
Proof. {w : w ∈x ∨w ≡y} does not have two inequivalent elements outside x. So
it forms a set.
By Lemma 12, we can use the notation z ≡x ∪{y} for (∀w)(w ∈z ←→(w ∈
x ∨w ≡y)). This determines z up to equivalence. We also use the notation z ≡{y}
for (∀w)(w ∈z ←→w ≡y), which also determines z up to equivalence.

A Way Out
59
Recall that, informally in Newcomp, a set x is extensional if and only if for any
ﬁnite sequence x1 ∈x2 ∈· · · ∈xk = x, k ≥2, for all y, if x1 ≡y then y ∈x2.
To formalize this, we use the notion of an x-set, for any set x.
An epsilon closed subset of a set b is w ⊆b such that any element of an element
of w that lies in b lies in w.
An x-set is a set b such that
i) All sets equivalent to x lie in b;
ii) Every epsilon closed subset of b containing all sets equivalent to x, is equivalent
to b.
We say that x is 1-extensional if and only if every set equivalent to an element of x is
an element of x.
We say that x is extensional if and only if every element of every x-set is
1-extensional.
Note that it is provable in ZF that the x-sets are exactly the sets b such that all
sets equivalent to x lie in b, and every element of b is the ﬁrst term of a ﬁnite epsilon
chain of length ≥1 ending with a set equivalent to x. Thus our formal deﬁnition of
extensional matches the informal deﬁnition of extensional.
Lemma 13. Let b be an x-set. Assume y ≡{x}. Then any c ≡b ∪{y} is a y-set.
Proof. Clearly every set equivalent to y lies in c. Let z be an epsilon closed subset of c
containing all sets equivalent to y. Then all sets equivalent to x lie in z. Let w ≡z∩b.
We claim that w is an epsilon closed subset of b containing all sets equivalent to x.
To see this, let v ∈u ∈w, v ∈b. Then v ∈u ∈z and v ∈c, and so v ∈z, and hence
v ∈w. This establishes the claim.
Since b is an x-set, w ≡b. It remains to show that z contains all elements of c
that are not in b. I.e., z contains all sets equivalent to y. This we already have.
Lemma 14. Every element of an extensional set is extensional.
Proof. Let x
∈y, where y is extensional.
Every element of every y-set is
1-extensional. Let u be an element of some x-set b. Let y ≡{x}. Let c ≡b ∪{y}.
By Lemma 13, c is a y-set and u ∈c. Hence u is 1-extensional.
Lemma 15. If x ≡y then every x-set is a y-set.
Proof. Let b be an x-set. We verify that b is a y-set. Clearly every set equivalent to y
lies in b. Suppose z is an epsilon closed subset of b containing all sets equivalent to
y as an element. Then z is an epsilon closed subset of b containing all sets equivalent
to x as an element, and so z ≡b.
Lemma 16. If x is extensional and x ≡y, then y is extensional.

60
H. M. Friedman
Proof. Suppose z is an element of some y-set. By Lemma 15, z is an element of some
x-set, and so z is 1-extensional.
Lemma 17. Let b be an x-set and y be an element of an element of b. Then there is
an x-set c such that y ∈c.
Proof. Let b, x, y be as given. Let y ∈z ∈b. Let d ≡b∪{y}, and c ≡{z ∈d : z ∈b
∨z is an element of an element of b}. Clearly b ⊆c and y ∈c.
Suppose w is an epsilon closed subset of c containing all sets equivalent to x. Let
w′ ≡w ∩b. We claim that w′ is an epsilon closed subset of b containing all sets
equivalent to x. To see this, let v ∈u ∈w′, v ∈b. Then u, v ∈c, and so v ∈w′.
This establishes the claim. Hence w′ ≡b.
It remains to verify that c ⊆w. The elements of c that are not in b are elements
of elements of b. Since w is an epsilon closed subset of c, the elements of c not in b
lie in w.
Lemma 18. Let b ≡{u}. Then b is a u-set.
Proof. Clearly b contains all sets equivalent to u. Let z be an epsilon closed subset of
b containing all sets equivalent to u. Then obviously z ≡b.
Lemma 19. Let b be an x-set, y ∈b, ¬y ≡x. There exists z ∈x such that y is an
element of some z-set.
Proof. Let w be the set of all elements of b that lie in some z-set, z ∈x, together with
the sets equivalent to x. It sufﬁces to show that b ⊆w. For this it sufﬁces to show
that w is an epsilon closed subset of b containing all sets equivalent to x. I.e., w is an
epsilon closed subset of b.
Let u ∈v ∈w, u ∈b. First suppose v ≡x. Let c ≡{u}. By Lemma 18, c is a
u-set, u ∈x, with u ∈c. Hence u ∈w.
Now suppose ¬v ≡x. Then v lies in some z-set, z ∈x. By Lemma 17, since
u ∈v, we see that u lies in some z-set, z ∈x. Hence u ∈w.
Lemma 20. Let x be a 1-extensional set of extensional sets. Then x is extensional.
Proof. Let x be as given, and let y be an element of some x-set b. If y ≡x then y
is 1-extensional. If ¬y ≡x then by Lemma 19, y is an element of some z-set with
z ∈x. So y is 1-extensional.
Theorem 21. Newcomp + Extensionality is interpretable in Newcomp.
Proof. By the argument given before the Lemmas. The three crucial Lemmas that
were cited are Lemmas 14, 16, and 20, respectively.

A Way Out
61
5. ZFC + V = L + SVWISUB in Newcomp
In light of Theorem 21, we have only to interpret ZFC + V = L + SVWISUB in
Newcomp + Extensionality.
We will use the term “virtual set” whenever we have a deﬁnable property of sets
presented as {x : ϕ}, with parameters allowed.
Until the proof of Lemma 60 is complete, we will work entirely within the system
Newcomp + Ext.
We will use abstraction notation with braces to indicate virtual sets. We say that
these expressions exist to indicate that they form sets.
All lower case letters will represent sets (not virtual sets).
It is convenient to adopt the following terminology. Let A be a virtual set. An
expansion in A consists of two elements x, y ∈A such that x ̸= y and x ∩A ⊆y.
We say that an expansion lies outside z if and only if neither component is a member
of z.
We say that an expansion meets z if and only if at least one component is a member
of z.
Obviously, we can reformulate Newcomp in these two ways:
If all expansions in a virtual set meet some given set, then the virtual set forms a
set.
If no expansion in a virtual set lies outside some given set, then the virtual set
forms a set.
Lemma 22. Any virtual subset of a set forms a set. The empty set exists. The inter-
section of any virtual set with a set forms a set. For all x, y, x ∪{y} exists. For all
k ≥0 and x1, . . . , xk, {x1, . . . , xk} exists.
Proof. The ﬁrst claim is obvious since all expansions of the virtual subset lie in the
set. The second and third claims follow immediately from the ﬁrst claim. For the
fourth claim, note that every expansion in x ∪{y} meets x. The ﬁfth claim follows
from the second and fourth claims.
Lemma 23. Let A be a transitive virtual set. The expansions in A are exactly the
x, y ∈A with x ⊊y.
Proof. For the forward direction, let x, y ∈A, x ̸= y, x ∩A ⊆y. Then x ⊆y by the
transitivity of A. The reverse direction is immediate.
We write ⟨y, z⟩= {{y}, {y, z}}.
Lemma 24. x ∪{{y} : y ∈x} exists. x ∪{{y, z} : y, z ∈x} exists. x ∪{{y, z} : y, z ∈
x} ∪{{{y}} : y ∈x} exists. x ∪{{y, z} : y, z ∈x} ∪{⟨y, z⟩: y, z ∈x} exists.

62
H. M. Friedman
Proof. Observe that all four virtual sets are transitive, and so we can apply Lemma 23.
For the ﬁrst claim, note that no expansions lie outside x. For the second claim, note
that no expansions lie outside x ∪{{y} : y ∈x}. For the third claim, note that no
expansions lie outside x ∪{{y, z} : y, z ∈x}. For the fourth claim, we show that
no expansions lie outside x ∪{{y, z} : y, z ∈x} ∪{{{y}} : y ∈x}. Let ⟨a, b⟩,
⟨c, d⟩be an expansion in x ∪{{y, z} : y, z ∈x} ∪{⟨y, z⟩: y, z ∈x} outside
x ∪{{y, z} : y, z ∈x} ∪{{{y}} : y ∈x}. Then {{a}, {a, b}} ⊆{{c}, {c, d}}, a ̸= b,
c ̸= d. Hence the left and right sides have two elements, and each consist of a set with
one element and a set with two elements. So {a} = {c} and {a, b} = {c, d}. Hence
a = c and b = d.
We write x · x for {⟨y, z⟩: y, z ∈x}. A binary relation on x is a subset of x · x.
We often use R for binary relations, and write R(a, b) for ⟨a, b⟩∈R.
Note that by Lemma 22, all virtual binary relations on x exist (as sets). Using
(x·x)·(x·x), we can simulate all virtual 4-ary relations on x as sets in the obvious way.
We can continue doubling the arity in this way, thus making available all Cartesian
powers of x by obvious simulation. This is very powerful, in light of separation
(Lemma 22), and means that, in an appropriate sense, we have full second order logic
over (x, ∈) at our disposal.
We caution the reader that the existence of x · y is apparently not available in
Newcomp + Ext. Even the more fundamental x ∪y is apparently not available in
Newcomp + Ext.
We say that x is well founded if and only if for all nonempty y ⊆x, there exists
z ∈y such that z has no elements in common with y.
We deﬁne W(x) if and only if x is transitive and well founded.
We wish to extract an “ordinal” out of the x with W(x). Of course, we can’t
construct anything like von Neumann ordinals. Instead, we develop the usual rank
comparison relation on x, and use its equivalence classes to simulate ordinals.
We deﬁne C(R, x, y) if and only if
i) W(x), W(y), and x · y exists;
ii) R ⊆x · y;
iii) for all z ∈x and w ∈y, R(z, w) if and only if (∀a ∈z)(∃b ∈w)(R(a, b)).
Lemma 25. There is at most one R ⊆x · y with C(R, x, y).
Proof. Let C(R, x, y), C(R′, x, y), R ̸= R′. Then W(x), W(y), and x · y exists.
Let z ∈x be epsilon least such that (∃w ∈y)(R(z, w) ←→¬R′(z, w)). Then
(∀a ∈z)(∀b ∈y)(R(a, b) ←→R′(a, b)). Hence (∀a ∈z)(∃b ∈w)(R(a, b)) ←→
(∀a ∈z)(∃b ∈w)(R′(a, b)). Hence R(z, w) ←→R′(z, w).
Lemma 26. Let C(R, x, y) and z ⊆y be transitive. Then C(R ∩x · z, x, z).

A Way Out
63
Proof. By Lemma 22, W(z) and x · z exists. Let u ∈x and v ∈z. Then R(u, v) if
and only if (∀a ∈u)(∃b ∈v)(R(a, b)∧⟨a, b⟩∈x · z).
Lemma 27. Let C(R, x, y), C(R′, x, z). Then (∀z ∈x)(∀w ∈y ∩z)(R(z, w) ←→
R′(z, w)).
Proof. By Lemma 26, C(R∩x ·z, x, z), C(R′ ∩x ·z, x, z). By Lemma 25, R∩x ·z =
R′ ∩x · z.
Lemma 28. Let W(x), W(y), and x · y exist. Let A be a virtual set of transitive
subsets of y such that for all z ∈A, there exists R with C(R, x, z). Then there exists
R′ with C(R′, x, ∪A).
Proof. First of all, ∪A is a transitive subset of y, so W(∪A). By Lemma 25, for all
z ∈A, there exists a unique Rz with C(Rz, x, z). Since these Rz are subsets of x · y,
we can set R′ to be the union of the Rz, and know that R′ exists. Let a ∈x and
b ∈∪A. We verify that R′(a, b) ←→(∀c ∈a)(∃d ∈b)(R′(a, b)). Let b ∈z ∈A.
Then Rz(a, b) ←→(∀c ∈a)(∃d ∈b)(Rz(a, b)). By Lemma 27, for all a ∈x and
b ∈z, Rz(a, b) ←→R′(a, b).
Lemma 29. Let W(x), W(y), and x · y exist. There exists a unique R such that
C(R, x, y). In particular, if W(x) then there exists a unique R such that C(R, x, x).
Proof. Uniqueness is by Lemma 25. For existence, let x, y be as given. We ﬁrst
claim that every z ∈y is an element of a transitive set w ⊆y such that for some R,
C(R, x, w). Suppose this is false, and let z ∈y be an epsilon minimal counterexample.
Now every w ∈z is an element of a transitive set u ⊆y such that for some R,
C(R, x, u). Letz∗betheunionofalltransitiveu ⊆y suchthatforsomeR, C(R, x, u).
By Lemma 28, z ⊆z∗and z∗is a transitive subset of y and for some R, C(R, x, z∗).
Fix such an R. Now z∗∪{z} is a transitive subset of y. Deﬁne R′(a, b) ←→
(R(a, b) ∨(b = z ∧(∀c ∈a)(∃d ∈b)(R(c, d)))). Then C(R′, x, z∗∪{z}). This
contradicts the choice of z.
We have thus shown that every z ∈y is an element of a transitive set w ⊆y such
that for some R, C(R, x, w). To complete the proof, apply Lemma 28.
The second claim is from the ﬁrst claim and Lemma 24.
Lemma 30. Let C(R, x, x). Then R is reﬂexive, transitive, connected.
Proof. Let C(R, x, x). Suppose R is not reﬂexive, and let y ∈x be epsilon minimal
such that ¬R(y, y). Then R(x, x) is immediate.
Suppose R is not transitive, and let y, z, w be a counterexample to transitivity,
with y chosen to be epsilon minimal. Assume (∀a ∈y)(∃b ∈z)(R(a, b)), (∀a ∈z)
(∃b ∈w)(R(a, b)). Let a ∈y. Fix b ∈z, R(a, b). Fix c ∈w, R(b, c). By the
minimality of y, R(a, c).

64
H. M. Friedman
Suppose R is not connected, and let y, z be a counterexample to connectivity with
y chosen to be epsilon minimal. Now ¬(∀a ∈y)(∃b ∈z)(R(a, b)), ¬(∀a ∈z)
(∃b ∈y)(R(a, b)). Let a ∈y, (∀b ∈z)(¬R(a, b)). Let b ∈z, (∀c ∈y)(¬R(b, c)).
Then ¬R(a, b), ¬R(b, a). This contradicts the minimality of y.
Let W(x). We write ≤(x) for the unique R such that C(R, x, x). We write ≡(x)
for the relation ≤(x)(a, b) ∧≤(x)(b, a). We write <(x) for the relation ≤(x)(a, b) ∧
¬ ≤(x)(b, a). Analogously for >(x), ≥(x).
The mere appearance of any of the four expressions deﬁned in the previous para-
graph will be taken to imply that W(x).
Lemma 31. If W(x), a ∈b ∈x, then <(x)(a, b). If W(x) and x is nonempty then x
has the epsilon minimum element ∅and ≤(x) has the unique minimum element ∅. If
W(x) and x has more than one element then ≤(x) without ∅has the unique minimum
element {∅}.
Proof. Let a, b be a counterexample where a is epsilon minimal. We ﬁrst show that
≤(x)(a, b). Let c ∈a. Then <(x)(c, a). Hence (∀c ∈a)(∃d ∈b)(≤(x)(c, d)).
Therefore ≤(x)(a, b).
Now suppose ≤(x)(b, a). Then (∀c ∈b)(∃d ∈a)(≤(x)(c, d)). Let d ∈a,
≤(x)(a, d). This contradicts the epsilon minimality of a.
Now let W(x) and x be nonempty. Let u be an epsilon minimal element of x. Since
x is transitive, u = ∅. Obviously, ∅is ≤(x) minimum. Also if v ∈x is nonempty,
then <(x)(∅, x).
Now assume that x has more than one element. Let v be an epsilon minimal
element of x\{∅}. Since x is transitive, the only element of v is ∅, and so v = {∅}.
Also ≤({∅}, u) for all u ∈x\{∅}, since ≤(∅, w) for all w ∈x. Let b ∈x, b ̸= ∅, {∅}.
Let c ∈b, c ̸= ∅. Then ≤(x)(b, {∅}) is impossible since ¬ ≤(x)(c, ∅). Hence the
uniqueness of {∅} as a minimum element of ≤(x) without ∅is established.
Lemma 32. Assume W(x), a, b ∈x. <(x)(a, b) if and only if (∃d ∈b)(≤(x) (a, d)).
Proof. Let a, b ∈x be a counterexample to the forward direction, where a is epsilon
minimal. We have <(x)(a, b), ¬(∃d ∈b)(≤(x)(a, d)).
Now ¬ ≤(x)(b, a). Hence ¬(∀d ∈b)(∃c ∈a)(≤(x)(b, a)). Fix d ∈b such
that (∀c ∈a)(<(x)(c, d)). We need only show that ≤(x)(a, d). Let c ∈a. Then
<(x)(c, d). By the epsilon minimality of a, let ≤(x)(c, e), e ∈d. We have thus
shown that (∀c ∈a)(∃e ∈d)(≤(x)(c, e)). This veriﬁes that ≤(x)(a, d).
For the reverse direction, let d ∈b, ≤(x)(a, d). By Lemma 31, <(x)(d, b). Hence
<(x)(a, b).
Lemma 33. If W(x) then <(x) is well founded. ≤(x) is connected.

A Way Out
65
Proof. Let u be a nonempty subset of x. Let y ∈x be epsilon minimal such that
(∃b ∈u)(≥(x)(y, b)). Let <(x)(z, y). We claim that z /∈u. Suppose z ∈u. By
Lemma 32, let ≤(x)(z, w), w ∈y. This contradicts the epsilon minimality of y.
We have shown that no z ∈u has <(x)(z, y). We would be done if y ∈u. However,
let b ∈u, ≥(x)(y, b). We can rule out >(x)(y, b) since by Lemma 32, some element
of y would dominate b under ≥(x). Hence ≡(x)(y, b). Therefore b ∈u is <(x)
minimal as required.
Since C(≤(x), x, x), by Lemma 30, ≤(x) is connected.
This completes our treatment of “ordinals” in Newcomp + Ext. Speciﬁcally, we
use the ≤(x), <(x), ≡(x), for x with W(x).
A major difﬁculty arises because we apparently cannot prove the existence of x∪y,
even if W(x) and W(y). Because of this, we don’t have ﬂexibility in constructing
relations between different sets.
We have discovered a way of comparing ≤(x) and ≤(y) for at least the relevant
x, y, even though we don’t have x ∪y. This will be good enough for our purposes.
An x-system is an S ⊆x · x such that
i) W(x);
ii) (S(a, b) ∧≡(x)(a, c) ∧≡(x)(b, d)) →S(c, d);
iii) S(a, b) →<(x)(b, a);
iv) the least strict upper bound of the b’s such that S(a, b) is given by a;
v) for all a, b, if <(x)(a, b) and (∀y)(S(a, y) →S(b, y)), then a = ∅or a = {∅}.
In order to get a clear understanding of x-systems, look at the cross sections {b :
S(a, b}}. These cross sections are essentially sets of “ordinals” with “strict sup”
a. They have the property that the only proper inclusions between them are the cross
sections of ∅, {∅}, which are the “0” and “1” of <(x). In other words, from the point of
view of full set theory, an x-system is a counterexample to “rk(x) is weakly inclusion
subtle over 2”, in the sense of [5], using the elements of x under the equivalence
relation “having the same rank”, where the counterexample also obeys Lemma 2.3
of [5].
In Theorem 2.5 of [5], we use such a counterexample to weak inclusion sub-
tlety over 2 to construct a transitive set where the only proper inclusions among
elements have left side ∅or {∅}. We want to carefully perform this construction here
in Newcomp + Ext.

66
H. M. Friedman
We deﬁne D(S, f ) if and only if
i) S is an x-system for some necessarily unique x;
ii) f is a univalent set of ordered pairs (function) with domain x;
iii) for all y ∈x, f (y) = {f (z) : S(y, z)}.
We will need the following technical modiﬁcation. D(S, f, a) if and only if
i) S is an x-system for some necessarily unique x;
ii) a ∈x;
iii) f is a univalent set of ordered pairs (function) with domain {b : ≤(x)(b, a)};
iv) ≤(x)(y, a) →f (y) = {f (z) : S(y, z)}.
Lemma 34. Fix D(S, f, a) and D(S, g, b), where S is an x-system. f, g agree on
their common domain. If c ∈x then the restriction h of f to {d : ≤(x)(d, c)} has
D(S, h, c). f is one-one in the sense that for all y, z ∈dom(f ), if <(x)(y, z) then
f (y) ̸= f (z). For all y, z ∈dom(f ), f (y) = f (z) ←→≡(y, z). The range of f
is a virtual transitive set. For all y, z ∈dom(f ), if f (y) ⊆f (z) then Sy ⊆Sz and
≤(x)(y, z). All proper inclusions among elements of the range of f have left side ∅
or {∅}.
Proof. Let S be an x-system. Suppose f ̸= g, and let y be <(x) minimal such that
f (x) ̸= g(x). But f (y) = {f (z) : <(x)(z, y)} = {g(z) : <(x)(z, y)} = g(y).
For the second claim, the restriction h is a subset of f , and so exists. D(S, h, c)
is immediate by inspection.
For the third claim, let y, z ∈dom(f ) be such that <(x)(y, z), f (y) = f (z),
where y is chosen to be <(x) minimal. By the strict sup condition, let S(z, w),
≤(y, w). Then f (w) ∈f (z), and so f (w) ∈f (y). Let S(y, u), f (w) = f (u). Then
<(x)(u, y), ≤(y, w), and so the minimality of y is violated.
The fourth claim follows immediately from the third claim.
The ﬁfth claim is immediate from clause iv).
For the sixth claim, assume {f (u) : S(y, u)} ⊆{f (u) : S(z, u)}. Since f is
appropriately one-one, we have {u : S(y, u)} ⊆{u : S(z, u)}. By the strict sup
condition, ≤(x)(y, z).
For the seventh claim, suppose f (y) ⊊f (z). By the sixth claim, <(x)(y, z) and
Sy ⊊Sz. By clause v) in the deﬁnition of x-system, we have y = ∅or y = {∅}.
Hence f (y) = ∅or f (y) = {∅}.
Let S be an x-system. We use S∗for the virtual set of all sets that occur in the
range of some f with (∃a)(D(S, f, a)).

A Way Out
67
Lemma 35. Let S be an x-system. Then S∗is transitive and all proper inclusions
among elements of S∗have left side ∅or {∅}. x ∪S∗exists.
Proof. The transitivity of S∗follows from the transitivity of the range of each relevant
f . Let u, v ∈S∗, where u, v are in the ranges of f, g, and D(S, f, a), D(S, g, b).
By the comparability of a, b under ≤(x) and Lemma 34, we have f ⊆g or g ⊆f .
Hence any proper inclusion among elements of S∗is a proper inclusion among some
relevant h. So by the last claim of Lemma 34, the proper inclusion must have left side
∅or {∅}.
For the second claim, note that every expansion in x ∪S∗meets x ∪{∅} ∪{{∅}}.
The latter forms a set by Lemma 22. Hence x ∪S∗exists.
According to Lemma 24, (x ∪S∗) · (x ∪S∗) exists, and in fact we can simulate all
Cartesian powers of x ∪S∗, and hence also simulate full second logic over (x ∪S∗, ∈).
Lemma 36. Suppose S is an x-system, b ∈x, and for all a with <(x)(a, b), there
exists f such that D(S, f, a). Then there exists g such that D(S, g, b).
Proof. Let S, x, b be as given. By Lemma 34, for each a with <(x)(a, b), there is
a unique fa such that D(S, fa, a), and furthermore, these fa agree on their common
domains. Clearly b is either the minimum of <(x), a successor in <(x), or a limit
in <(x). If b is the minimum of <(x) then b = ∅by Lemma 31, in which case set
g = {⟨∅, ∅⟩}.
Assume b is the successor of c in <(x). We need to extend the function gc to be
deﬁned on {d : ≡(x)(d, b)} by g(d) = {f (z) : S(b, z)}. Note that this extension is a
binary relation on the transitive virtual set x ∪S∗∪{{f (z) : S(b, z)}}. By Lemma 35,
x ∪S∗exists, the triple union is transitive, and all expansions in the triple union meet
x ∪S∗∪{∅, {∅}}. Hence the triple union exists. Since the desired extension of the
function gc to gb is a virtual binary relation on the triple union, it exists.
Assume b is a limit in <(x). Let f be the virtual set which is the union of all fa,
<(x)(a, b). This is obviously a binary relation on x ∪S∗, and therefore it exists. By
Lemmas 34 and 35, this union is itself a function g with domain {a : <(x)(a, b)},
given by g(a) = {g(z) : S(b, z)}. We need to extend this function g to be deﬁned
on {d : ≡(x)(d, b)} by g(d) = {f (z) : S(b, z)}. We argue exactly as in the previous
paragraph.
Lemma 37. Suppose S is an x-system.
For all b ∈x, there exists f such that
D(S, f, b). There exists g such that D(S, g).
Proof. Let b ∈x be <(x) minimal such that there is no f with D(S, f, b). Then the
hypotheses of Lemma 36 hold, and we obtain a contradiction. For the second claim,
the case x = ∅is trivial. If there is a <(x) greatest element b of x then any f with
D(S, f, b) has D(S, f ). Finally suppose x is nonempty and there is no <(x) greatest
element of x. By Lemma 35, x ∪S∗exists. Thus the desired function is a binary

68
H. M. Friedman
relation on x ∪S∗. Therefore we can take g to be the union of the f such that for
some b, D(S, f, b). As in the proof of Lemma 36, D(S, g).
Let S be an x-system. We deﬁne S# to be the unique (set) function such that
D(S, S#), according to Lemma 37. Note that S# : x →S∗, S# is onto, and x ∪S∗is a
transitive set. In addition, for all b ∈x, S#(b) = {S#(z) : S(b, z)}, and by Lemma 34,
S#(b) = S#(c) ←→≡(x)(b, c). We refer to this equivalence as the one-one property
of S#.
Lemma 38. Let S be an x-system. W(S∗). For all a, b ∈x, ≤(x)(a, b) if and only
if ≤(S∗)(S#(a), S#(b)). ≡(S∗) is the identity relation on S∗. <(S∗) is a strict well
ordering.
Proof. By Lemma 35, S∗is transitive. To prove well foundedness, let y be a nonempty
subset of S∗. Let z = {w ∈x : S#(w) ∈y}. Let w be a <(x) minimal element of z.
We claim that S#(w) is an epsilon minimal element of y. To see this, let u ∈S#(w)∩y.
Let u = S#(w′) ∈y, S(w, w′). Then w′ ∈z, <(x)(w′, w), contradicting the <(x)
minimality of w. Hence W(S∗).
The second claim now makes sense since W(S∗). Recall the deﬁnition of ≤(S∗) as
the unique relation satisfying clauses i)–iii) given just before Lemma 25. To establish
the second claim, we have only to show that the binary relation R on S∗given by
R(S#(a), S#(b)) ←→≤(x)(a, b) obeys conditions i)–iii) with x = y = S∗. The
only clause of substance is iii).
Let z, w ∈S∗. We must verify that R(z, w) ←→(∀a ∈z)(∃b ∈w)(R(a, b)).
In other words, let a, b ∈x. We must verify that R(S#(a), S#(b)) ←→(∀u ∈
S#(a))(∃v ∈S#(b))(R(u, v)).
The left side is equivalent to ≤(x)(a, b).
The right side is equivalent to
(∀c|S(a, c))(∃d|S(b, d))(≤(x)(c, d)).
Suppose <(x)(a, b).
This is true because
S(a, c) →<(x)(c, a) and the strict sup condition for x-systems. Suppose ≡(x)(a, b).
This is true by setting d = c. For the inverse, suppose <(x)(b, a). Choose c such
that S(a, c), ≤(x)(b, c). Any d with S(b, d) will have <(x)(d, b), and therefore not
≤(x)(c, d).
From the third claim, using Lemma 34, we have ≡(S∗)(S#(a), S#(b)) if and only
if ≡(x)(a, b) if and only if S#(a) = S#(b). By W(S∗) and Lemma 33, <(S∗) is well
founded and connected, and so by the third claim, <(S∗) is a strict well ordering.
The S∗are our best approximations to genuine ordinals in Newcomp+Ext. <(S∗)
is a strict well ordering. Of course, S∗is not normally epsilon connected.
Lemma 39. Let S, S′ be two x-systems.
For all y, z ∈x, S#(y) = S′#(z) →
≡(x)(y, z). S = S′ ←→S∗= S′∗.
Proof. Let S, S′ be as given. For the ﬁrst claim, let y, z be a counterexample, with y
chosen to be <(x) minimal. We ﬁrst assume that >(x)(y, z). Now S#(y) = S′#(z).

A Way Out
69
By the strict sup condition on x-systems, let S(y, w), ≥(x)(w, z). Then S#(w) ∈
S#(y), and so S#(w) ∈S#(z). Let S#(w) = S′#(u), S′(z, u). Clearly ¬ ≡(w, u).
This contradicts the minimality of z.
Now assume <(x)(y, z). By the strict sup condition on x-systems, let S′(z, b),
≥(x)(b, y). Then S′#(b) ∈S′#(z) = S#(y). Let S′#(b) = S#(c), S(y, c). Clearly
¬ ≡(b, c), and so we have a violation of the minimality of z. This establishes the ﬁrst
claim.
For the second claim, the forward direction is obvious. Now let S∗= S′∗. Let
y, z be such that S(y, z) ←→¬S(y, z), where y is <(x) minimal. By symmetry, we
can assume S(y, z), ¬S(y, z).
An obvious transﬁnite induction (or minimal element) argument, shows that S#
and S′# agree below y in the sense of <(x).
We now show that S#(y) ̸= S′#(y). Suppose {S#(z) : S(y, z)} = {S′#(z) :
S′(y, z)}. Then S#(z) ∈{S′#(z) : S′(y, z)}. Let S#(z) = S′#(w), S′(y, w). Note that
¬ ≡(w, z). By the previous paragraph, S′#(w) = S#(w) = S#(z). This contradicts
the one-one property of S#.
By the one-one property of S#, S′#, we see that S#(y) is not equaled to any S′#(z),
≡(x)(y, z). By the ﬁrst claim, S#(y) is not equaled to any S′#(z), ¬ ≡(x)(y, z).
Hence S#(y) is an element of S∗that is not an element of S′∗.
Let S be an x-system and S′ be a y-system. We say that S, S′ are equivalent if and
only if S∗= S′∗.
We say that R is an isomorphism relation from ≤(x) onto ≤(y) if and only if the
following holds. We do not require that R exists; i.e., R may only be a virtual relation.
Since we have ordered pairs, R can always be viewed as a virtual set.
i) the domain of R is x and the range of R is y;
ii) if R(a, b) and R(c, d) then ≤(x)(a, c) ←→≤(y)(b, d).
We say that ≤(x) and ≤(y) are isomorphic if and only if there is an isomorphism
relation from ≤(x) onto ≤(y).
Lemma 40. Let x, y be given. Suppose some x-system is equivalent to some y-system.
Then ≤(x) and ≤(y) are isomorphic. If ≤(x) and ≤(y) are isomorphic, then every
x-system is equivalent to some y-system and vice versa.
Proof. Before we begin, we make some comments about the formalization of Lemma
40. The problem arises because the deﬁnition of isomorphic ≤(x) involves virtual
relations. For the second claim, this just means that we are making inﬁnitely many
assertions. For the ﬁrst claim, we mean that the virtual isomorphism can be given
uniformly in x, y, and the x-system and the y-system; i.e., by a single speciﬁc virtual
relation with parameters, as will be clear in the construction below.
Let S be an x-system, S′ be a y-system, S∗= S′∗. We deﬁne the virtual relation
R from x to y as follows. Let a ∈x and b ∈y. Take R(a, b) ←→S#(a) = S′#(b).
We claim that R is an isomorphism relation from ≤(x) onto ≤(y).

70
H. M. Friedman
To see that the domain of R is x, let a ∈x. Then S#(a) ∈S∗= S′∗. Let b ∈y,
S′#(b) = S#(a). Then R(a, b). Analogously, the range of R is y.
Now let R(a, b), R(c, d). By Lemma 38, ≤(x)(a, c) ←→≤(S∗)(S#(a), S#(c)),
and ≤(y)(b, d) ←→≤(S′∗)(S′#(b), S′#(d)). Hence ≤(y)(b, d) ←→≤(S∗)(S#(a),
S#(c)). So ≤(x)(a, c) ←→(y)(b, d).
Now let R be a virtual isomorphism relation from ≤(x) onto ≤(y). We now show
that every x-system is equivalent to some y-system. Let S be an x-system. Deﬁne S′
to be the binary relation on y given by S′(z, w) if and only if there exists a, b ∈x
such that R(a, z), R(b, w), and S(a, b). Note that S′ exists since it is a virtual subset
of the set y · y.
We have to verify that S∗= S′∗. I.e., that S# and S′# have the same ranges. It
sufﬁces to show that R(a, b) →S#(a) = S′#(b). Let a, b ∈x be a counterexample
with a chosen to be <(x) minimal. We can ﬁnd such a, b by using separation on
x, despite the fact that R is only virtual. Observe that S#(a) = {S#(c) : S(a, c)},
S′#(b) = {S′#(d) : S′(b, d)}. We have R(a, b), S#(a) ̸= S′#(b).
We ﬁrst show that S#(a) ⊆S′#(b). We will then show that S′#(b) ⊆S#(a), and
so S#(a) = S′#(b). This contradicts the choice of a, b.
Let S(a, c). We show that S#(c) ∈{S′#(d) : S′(b, d)} = S′#(b). Since R(a, b),
we let d ∈y be such that S′(b, d) and R(c, d). By the minimality of a, we have
S#(c) = S′#(d). Hence S#(c) ∈{S′#(d) : S′(b, d)} = S′#(b). This establishes
S#(a) ⊆S′#(b).
To establish S′#(b) ⊆S#(a), let S′(b, d). We show that S′#(d) ∈{S#(c) :
S(a, c)}. Since R(a, b), we let c ∈x be such that S(a, c) and R(c, d). By the
minimality of a, we have S′#(d) = S#(c). Hence S′#(d) ∈{S#(c) : S(a, c)} =
S#(a). This establishes S′#(b) ⊆S#(a).
WerefertotheconclusionofthesecondclaimofLemma40as“x, y haveequivalent
systems”.
Let W(x). The initial segments of x are the subsets of x closed under ≤(x). The
proper initial segments are written x< a, a ∈x. The initial segments of an x-system S
also has the obvious meaning, and the proper initial segments are written S< a, a ∈x.
We also use the notation x≤a, S≤a, with the obvious meaning. And we also use the
notation S#≤a, S#< a, again with the obvious meaning.
Lemma 41. Suppose that there exists an x-system. It is not the case that x and one
of its proper initial segments have equivalent systems.
Proof. Suppose x and x< a have equivalent systems. By Lemma 40, ≤(x) and ≤(x< a)
are isomorphic. This violates the well foundedness of x, using separation on x, even
if the isomorphism is virtual.
Lemma 42. Let x, y have systems, and assume that for every proper initial segment
of x there is a proper initial segment of y with equivalent systems, and vice versa.
Then x, y have equivalent systems.

A Way Out
71
Proof. Let x, y be as given. Suppose x< a and y< b have equivalent systems. Since
x, y have systems, so do x< a and y< b. By Lemma 41, y< b is the unique initial
segment of y such that x< a and y< b have equivalent systems.
Deﬁne the virtual relation R(a, b) if and only if x< a and y< b have equivalent sys-
tems. We claim that R is a virtual isomorphism from ≤(x) onto ≤(y). By hypothesis,
the domain of R is x and the range of R is y. Suppose R(a, b) and R(c, d). Then
x< a and y< b have equivalent systems. Also x< c and y< d have equivalent systems.
By Lemma 40, we obtain a virtual isomorphism from x< a onto y< b, and a virtual
isomorphism from x< c onto y< d. Suppose ≤(x)(a, c), and <(x)(d, b). Then we get a
virtual isomorphism from x< a onto an initial segment of y< d, and hence onto a proper
initial segment of y< b. But this gives a virtual isomorphism from y< b onto a proper
initial segment of y< b, which is a virtual subset of the set y·y. Hence using separation,
we have an actual isomorphism from y<b onto a proper initial segment of y< b, which
contradicts the well foundedness of <(y). The other direction is symmetric.
We have thus veriﬁed that R is a virtual isomorphism from ≤(x) onto ≤(y). By
Lemma 40, x, y have equivalent systems.
Lemma 43. Let x, y have systems. Either x and some proper initial segment of y
have equivalent systems, or y and some proper initial segment of x have equivalent
systems, or x, y have equivalent systems. The cases are mutually exclusive, and the
choice of proper initial segments is unique.
Proof. Let x, y have systems. Let B = {a ∈x : (∃b ∈y)(x< a and y< b have
equivalent systems)}. We claim that (≤(x)(c, a) ∧a ∈B) →c ∈B. To see this,
assume x< a and y< b have equivalent systems. By Lemma 40, we obtain a virtual
isomorphism from x< a onto y< b. This induces a virtual isomorphism from x< c onto
some y< d. By Lemma 40, we see that x< c and y< d have equivalent systems.
Note that for a ∈B, the associated b ∈y is unique up to ≡(y). We let C be the
set of all these associated b ∈y that are used in B, closing up under ≡(y). As in the
previous paragraph, C is also closed downward under ≤(y).
By the well foundedness of <(x), either B = x or B is a proper initial segment of
x. Also either C = y or C is a proper initial segment of y.
No matter which of these four cases holds, we can apply Lemma 42. We obtain
that B, C have equivalent systems. This establishes the ﬁrst claim, provided we can
rule out the fourth case where B is a proper initial segment of x and C is a proper
initial segment of y. Let B = x< a, and C = y< b. Then a ∈B, and so <(x)(a, a),
which is impossible.
For the second claim, if more than one case holds, or if the choice of proper initial
segments is not unique, then we obtain that x and a proper initial segment of x have
equivalent systems, or y and a proper initial segment of y have equivalent systems.
This violates Lemma 41.
Suppose x, y have systems. By Lemma 43, either x and some unique proper initial
segment of y have equivalent systems, or y and some unique proper initial segment of

72
H. M. Friedman
x have equivalent systems, or x, y have equivalent systems, and these three cases are
mutually exclusive. By Lemma 42, we obtain a (rather simple) virtual isomorphism
relation corresponding to these three cases. The relevant virtual isomorphism relations
are deﬁned uniformly in x, y. We call it the virtual comparison relation for x, y.
In light of the previous paragraph, we make the following deﬁnition, assuming
x, y have systems. COMP(x, y)(a, b) if and only if the virtual comparison relation
for x, y holds at a, b.
We now construct an x such that ≤(x) has “order type ω”. The idea is to construct
{∅, {∅}, {{∅}}, . . .}.
We say that x is simple if and only if
i) W(x);
ii) every nonempty element of x is the singleton of an element of x.
We say that x is very simple if and only if x is simple and x has an epsilon maximal
element.
Lemma 44. Let x be simple and y be an epsilon maximal element of x. x is the least
transitive set containing y as an element. The singleton of any element other than y
is an element. No simple set has more than one epsilon maximal element.
Proof. Let x, y be as given. Let z be a transitive set with y ∈z. We claim that x ⊆z.
First observe that x ∩z is nonempty, transitive and well founded, and so ∅∈x ∩z.
Now let b be an epsilon minimal element of x not in z. Then b ̸= ∅. Write b = {c},
c ∈x. Since z is transitive, c ∈z. This contradicts the minimality of b.
For the second claim, let z be the set of all elements of x whose singleton lies in
x, together with the element y. To see that z is transitive, let a ∈b ∈z. Then b is a
nonempty element of x, and so b = {a}. Therefore a ∈z. By the ﬁrst claim, x ⊆z.
The third claim follows immediately from the second.
Lemma 45. The very simple sets are comparable under inclusion.
Proof. Let x, y be very simple. Assume x is not a subset of y. Let b be an epsilon
least element of x that is not in y. If b = ∅then y is empty, in which case y ⊆x. So
we assume b ̸= ∅. Let b = {c}, c ∈x. Then c ∈y. By Lemma 44, if c is not the
epsilon maximal element of y, then b = {c} ∈y. Therefore c is the epsilon maximal
element of y. By Lemma 44, y is the least transitive set containing c as an element.
But x is a transitive set containing c as an element. Hence y ⊆x.
Lemma 46. In a very simple set, every proper inclusion between elements has left
side ∅. If x is a very simple set with epsilon maximal element y, then x ∪{{y}} is very
simple.

A Way Out
73
Proof. Let a, b ∈x, a ⊊b. Then b ̸= ∅, and so write b = {c}, c ∈x. Then a = ∅.
Let x be very simple with epsilon maximal element y. Clearly x∪{{y}} is transitive
and well founded. Let b ∈x ∪{{y}}, b ̸= ∅. If b ∈x then b = {c} for some
c ∈x ∪{{y}}. If b = {y} then just note that y ∈x ∪{{y}}.
It remains to show that {y} is an epsilon maximal element of x ∪{{y}}. Now {y} ∈
{y} is impossible since then {y} = y, and so y ∈y, violating the well foundedness of
x. It remains to show that no element of x includes {y} as an element. Let {y} ∈b ∈x.
Then {y} ∈x, violating that y is the epsilon maximal element of x.
Lemma 47. There is a unique simple set with no epsilon maximal element. It is the
union of all very simple sets. Every proper inclusion among elements of this set has
left side ∅.
Proof. Let A be the virtual union of all very simple sets. Let a ⊊b, a, b ∈A. Let
a ∈x, b ∈y, where x, y are very simple. By Lemma 45, we can assume a, b ∈x.
By Lemma 45, a = ∅. Therefore all expansions in A meet {∅}. Hence A exists.
To see that A is simple, we ﬁrst check that W(A). Clearly A is transitive since
it is the union of transitive sets. To see that A is well founded, let z be a nonempty
subset of A. Let x be very simple, where x, z have an element in common. Let b be
an epsilon minimal element of x ∩z. We claim that b is an epsilon minimal element
of z. This follows from the transitivity of x.
To ﬁnish the argument that A is simple, let b be a nonempty element of A. Then
b ∈x for some very simple x. Hence b = {c} for some c ∈x. Hence b = {c} for
some c ∈A.
We now show that A has no epsilon maximal element. Let b ∈x, where x is very
simple, with epsilon maximal element y. By Lemma 44, b = y or {b} ∈x. If {b} ∈x
then {b} ∈A and b is not an epsilon maximal element of A. Now assume b = y. By
Lemma 46, x ∪{{y}} is very simple. Hence again {b} ∈A, and so b is not an epsilon
maximal element of A.
We now prove that A is the unique simple set with no epsilon maximal element. It
sufﬁces to prove that for any two simple sets y, z with no epsilon maximal elements,
we have y ⊆z. Suppose this is false, and let b be an epsilon minimal element of y
that is not in z. Then b ̸= ∅, since z is nonempty and transitive. Let b = {c}, c ∈y.
Then c ∈z. Since c is not epsilon maximal in z, let c ∈d ∈z. Then d = {e} for
some e ∈z. Hence c = e and d = {c} = b ∈z.
By the ﬁrst paragraph, every proper inclusion among elements of A has left side ∅.
Lemma 48. The unique simple set with no epsilon maximal element is the least set
containing ∅as an element, and closed under the singleton operation.
Proof. This unique set is A = the union of all very simple sets, according to Lemma 47.
Obviously ∅∈A, because {∅} is very simple. Also by Lemmas 44 and 46, A is closed
under the singleton operation.

74
H. M. Friedman
Now let y be any transitive set containing ∅as an element, and closed under the
singleton operation. Suppose A is not a subset of y. Let x be an epsilon minimal
element of A that is not in y. Clearly x ̸= ∅since ∅∈y. Since A is simple, let
x = {b}, b ∈A. Then b ∈y, and so x = {b} ∈y.
We use the notation ωˆ for the set in Lemma 48, which is the union A of all very
simple sets.
Note that ωˆ with ∅as 0 and the singleton operation as successor forms a successor
structure with second order induction in the following standard sense. The successor
of any element is not 0. Any two elements with the same successor are equal. Every
set that includes 0 as an element, and is closed under successor, contains the whole
structure as a subset.
This means that we have full second order arithmetic at our disposal for use in the
rest of the section.
Lemma 49. W(ωˆ). ≤(ωˆ) is a well ordering with no greatest element and no limit
point.
Proof. W(ωˆ) since ωˆ is simple. Hence ≤(ωˆ) is well founded.
To obtain that ≤(ωˆ) is a well ordering, it sufﬁces to show that ≡(ωˆ)(x, y) →
x = y. Let x, y be a counterexample, where x is epsilon minimal. If x = ∅then
from ≤(ωˆ)(y, ∅) we obtain y = ∅. So x ̸= ∅. Let x = {b}. We argue similarly
that y ̸= ∅, and so let y = {c}. Since x ̸= y, we have b ̸= c. Since ≡(ωˆ)(x, y),
we have ≤(ωˆ)(x, y), ≤(ωˆ)(x, y). By the deﬁnition of ≤(ωˆ), we have ≤(ωˆ)(b, c),
≤(ωˆ)(c, b), and so ≡(ωˆ)(b, c). This contradicts the minimality of x.
That ≤(ωˆ) has no greatest element follows from the fact that ωˆ has no epsilon
maximal element, the ﬁrst claim, and Lemma 31.
ωˆ certainly gives us full second order arithmetic, but how are we going to use it
to interact with the binary relations on any x with W(x)? This is answered by the
following.
Lemma 50. If W(x) then x ∪ωˆ exists. In fact, W(x ∪ωˆ).
Proof. By Lemma 47, every proper inclusion between elements of ωˆ has left side ∅.
Therefore all expansions in x ∪ωˆ meet x ∪{∅}. Hence x ∪ωˆ exists. The second
claim follows easily.
This means that what is essentially the Cartesian powers of x ∪ωˆ, and therefore
separation on them, are available.
Lemma 51. Suppose there is an x-system. Then there is an x ∪{x}-system.
Proof. Let S be an x-system. Obviously W(x ∪{x}) since transitivity and well found-
edness are preserved. In Lemma 2.3 of [5], a construction is given that in our contexts

A Way Out
75
amounts to modifying S to another x-system with the property that every cross section
contains an element at the bottom level (i.e., 0), or an element at an odd level (i.e., odd
as in odd ordinal level). These levels refer to levels in ≤(x). Bringing this construc-
tion into this context requires ordinal arithmetic, which is fully available here. An
x ∪{x}-system is formed by augmenting the x-system with a top level cross section
which is the set of all elements of x that lie at a nonzero even level in ≤(x).
Note that ≤(ωˆ) has no greatest element. We want to extend Lemma 57 by con-
structing x ∪{x, {x}, {{x}}, . . . }, with this same property.
Lemma 52. Assume that there is an x-system. There exists a set z such that x ∈z
and z is closed under singletons. There is a least such z. There is an x ∪z-system.
≤(x ∪z) has no greatest element. ≤(x) is a proper initial segment of ≤(x ∪z).
Proof. We use ωˆ for the construction. By induction, for each n ∈ωˆ, there is a
unique function fn with domain {i : ≤(ωˆ)(i, n)} such that f (∅) = x and each
f ({i}) = {f (i)}. Using W(x), each fn is one-one. The union of the ranges of the fn
is a virtual set B containing x as an element and closed under singletons. Note that
every expansion within the virtual set x ∪B meets x ∪{x}. Hence x ∪B exists. Hence
B exists. Clearly B is contained in any set z such that x ∈z and z is closed under
singletons. Therefore B serves as the z.
We now verify W(x ∪z). By induction, every element of B = z is either x or the
singleton of an element of z. Hence x ∪z is transitive. For well foundedness, if the
nonempty subset of x ∪z meets x then take an epsilon minimal element in x. Show
that this is epsilon minimal by induction on the construction of z. Otherwise, also use
induction in the construction of z.
To see that there is an x ∪z-system, start with the x ∪{x}-system provided by
Lemma 51. Extend it to the rest of x ∪z by taking the cross section at each b ∈z\{x}
to consist of just the unique element of b. Obviously ≤(x ∪z) has no greatest element
since x ∪z has no epsilon maximal element. Also, ≤(x) is the proper initial segment
of ≤(x ∪z) determined by the point x.
We now wish to build the constructible hierarchy on every x with W(x). We
run into trouble if we wish to compare the constructible hierarchy on x with the
constructible hierarchy on y, where W(x), W(y). There is where we will need that
x, y have systems; i.e., there is an x-system and there is a y-system.
Rather than reinvent the wheel, we will use a fairly strong version of a standard
sentence σ in L(∈) used in standard treatments of the constructible hierarchy in set
theory with the property that the well founded models of σ are exactly the structures
which, when factored by the equivalence relation of extensional equality, are isomor-
phic to some (L(λ), ∈), where λ is a limit ordinal. This is normally done in L(∈, =)
in connection with the veriﬁcation of the generalized continuum hypothesis in L, but
here we stay within L(∈).

76
H. M. Friedman
We wish to be more explicit about σ for two reasons. One is for the sake of
expositional completeness, and the other is because we are going to use σ formally,
especially in Lemma 59.
We take σ to be the conjunction of the following sentences in L(∈). We do not
make much effort to be economical.
i) extensionality, pairing, union, every set has a transitive closure, every nonempty
set has an epsilon least element, every set has a cumulative rank function, every
set whose cumulative rank function is onto a ﬁnite ordinal has a power set, there
is no greatest ordinal;
ii) if there is a limit ordinal then the satisfaction relation of every set under epsilon
exists;
iii) if there is a limit ordinal then for all ordinals α, there is a function on α which
follows the usual deﬁnition by transﬁnite recursion of the constructible hierar-
chy;
iv) if there is a limit ordinal then every set lies somewhere in the constructible
hierarchy deﬁned in iii);
v) 0 separation.
Here an ordinal is an epsilon connected transitive set. A ﬁnite ordinal is an ordinal
which is not a limit ordinal and no element is a limit ordinal. A cumulative rank
function on x is an ordinal valued function f with domain x such that each f (y) is
the strict sup of the f (z), z ∈y. It is well known how to ﬁnitely axiomatize 0
separation in the presence of extensionality, pairing, and union. In ii), the satisfaction
relation is deﬁned using ﬁnite sequences from the set for the assignments, where a
ﬁnite sequence is taken to be a function from an element of the least limit ordinal into
the set.
Lemma 53. Let W(x), x ̸= ∅, and ≤(x) have no greatest element. There exists
A ⊆x · x and binary relation R ⊆A · A such that (A, R) satisﬁes σ, R is well
founded, and the relative level in the internal constructible hierarchy of an ordered
pair in A is given by its ﬁrst coordinates position in ≤(x), and every element of x
is the ﬁrst coordinate of an element of A. I.e., for all (a, b), (c, d) ∈A, (A, R)
satisﬁes “(a, b) occurs at an earlier stage in the constructible hierarchy (the L(α)’s)
than (c, d)” if and only if <(x)(a, c). Furthermore, equivalence (having the same
elements) in the sense of (A, R) is the same as the equivalence relation E on A given
by (a, b) E (c, d) ←→(≡(x)(a, c) ∧≡(x)(b, d)).
Proof. By Lemma 50, x ∪ωˆ exists. So we can simulate any of its Cartesian powers
and use separation on them. We can treat ≤(x) as a well ordering, provided that for
each b ∈x, we carry along all c with ≡(x)(b, c). We can build a coded version
of the constructible hierarchy up through ≤(x) (in fact well beyond that point) as a

A Way Out
77
binary relation on an appropriate subset of x ·x. There is no difﬁculty assembling this
construction so as to be a binary relation on an appropriate subset of x·x where the ﬁrst
coordinate is used for the level of the constructible hierarchy. We use the ωˆ in x ∪ωˆ
in order to code formulas and set up the needed satisfaction relations for the successor
steps in the constructible hierarchy. One delicate point is that we need to use a function
from the ﬁnite sequences from any given inﬁnite initial segment of ≤(x), mod ≡(x),
into that same initial segment, mod ≡(x). Since we don’t properly have the set of all
such ﬁnite sequences in this environment, we use a suitable mapping from any given
inﬁnite initial segment of ≤(x), cross ωˆ, into that same initial segment, which serves
as an appropriate ﬁnite sequence mechanism. Because we have what amounts to full
second order logic on (x ∪ωˆ, ∈) at our disposal, we can explicitly provide such a
ﬁnite sequence mechanism with the help of some relevant ordinal arithmetic.
The construction of (A, R) in Lemma 53 is done uniformly in x. So for x ̸= ∅,
W(x), ≤(x) with no greatest element, we write L[x] for the (A, R), A ⊆x · x,
R ⊆A · A, given by the proof of Lemma 53. We write dom(L[x]) for the A. The
idea of the notation is that this is the code for the initial segment of the constructible
hierarchy along ≤(x).
We use the obvious notions of initial segment and proper initial segment of L[x],
where we only cut off at limit stages. We also use the obvious notions of isomorphism
relations between initial segments of L[x] and initial segments of L[y].
It is convenient to deﬁne W ′(x) if and only if x ̸= ∅, ≤(x) has no greatest element,
and there is an x-system. Note that W ′(ωˆ). In particular, R ⊆ωˆ · ωˆ given by
R(n, m) ←→n = {m} is an ωˆ-system.
Recall the deﬁnition of the virtual relation COMP(x, y) after the proof of
Lemma 42.
Lemma 54. Let W(x), W(y). There is a virtual isomorphism relation from L[x] onto
a proper initial segment of L[y], or a virtual isomorphism relation from L[y] onto a
proper initial segment of L[x], or a virtual isomorphism relation from L[x] onto L[y].
The choice of cases and proper initial segments, as well as the comparison of levels,
is by COMP(x, y). Furthermore, at most one of the three possibilities can apply, the
proper initial segment is unique, and the isomorphism is unique.
Proof. We suppose that COMP(x, y) is an isomorphism relation from ≤(x) onto ≤(y).
The other cases are handled analogously.
COMP(x, y) obviously provides the right way of matching levels, but does not
give us the desired virtual isomorphism relation. For this, we have to use the systems.
Let S be an x-system, S′ a y-system, where S, S′ are equivalent. I.e., S∗= S′∗.
Since L[x] respects the equivalence relation ≡(x), we can forward image L[x] via
S# to get A∗⊆S∗· S∗and L∗[x] ⊆A∗· A∗. Similarly, we forward image L[y]
via S# to get B∗⊆S∗· S∗and L∗[y] ⊆B∗· B∗. Both of these forward images
also satisfy σ, are well founded, and the level in the internal constructible hierarchy
of an ordered pair is given by its ﬁrst coordinate’s position in ≤(S∗). It is not clear

78
H. M. Friedman
that L∗[x] = L∗[y]. However, S∗∪ωˆ, its Cartesian powers, and full separation are
available, and so we can prove that L∗[x] and L∗[y] are isomorphic, by an actual,
not merely virtual, isomorphism. This yields the desired virtual isomorphism relation
from L[x] onto L[y] by composition. The comparison of levels by COMP(x, y) is
preserved.
The ﬁnal claim is by obvious transﬁnite induction (or minimal element) arguments.
Firstly, observe that any virtual isomorphism must preserve levels in the constructible
hierarchy, since the levels are well founded (here we use only separation on x and
y separately). The uniqueness of the isomorphism constitutes inﬁnitely many state-
ments. These are again proved by obvious transﬁnite induction (or minimal element)
arguments. We do these arguments separately on x and on y, and do not need x ∪y.
For x, y with W ′(x), W ′(y), we let LCOMP(x, y) be the unique virtual comparison
isomorphism relation between L[x] and L[y] given by the proof of Lemma 54. Note
that LCOMP(x, y) is given uniformly in x, y.
We are now prepared to construct the full constructible universe. The points will
be pairs (x, b), where W ′(x) and b ∈dom(L[x]). The epsilon relation between points
(x, b) and (y, c) holds if and only if LCOMP(x, y)(b) is satisﬁed in L[y] to be an
element of c. We caution the reader that LCOMP(x, y) is not a function, but rather an
isomorphism relation. However, it is functional when we factor out by the equivalence
relations ≡(x) and ≡(y).
We use L for the virtual set of these points, and ∈L for this virtual epsilon relation
on L. Thus our notation for the full constructible universe in this context is (L, ∈L).
Both coordinates are virtual.
Lemma 55. (L, ∈L) is well founded in the sense that every nonempty subset of L has
an ∈L minimal element.
Proof. Let z ⊆L be nonempty. Let (y, c) ∈z, L. By W ′(y), let (x, b) be chosen such
that LCOMP(x, y)(b) exists and is of minimum level in the constructible hierarchy
of L[y].
Weclaimthat(x, b)isan∈L minimalelementofz. Toseethis, let(w, d) ∈L (x, b),
(w, d) ∈z, L. Then LCOMP(w, x)(d) is satisﬁed in L[x] to be an element of b, and
therefore is of lower level than b in the constructible hierarchy of L[x]. Therefore
LCOMP(w, y)(d) is of lower level than c in the constructible hierarchy of L[y]. This
contradicts the minimality of (x, b).
Let σ ′ be the following variant of σ: any set is an element of a well founded
transitive set satisfying σ.
Lemma 56. σ ′ logically implies σ.
Proof. Assume σ ′. Then any list of sets of standard integer length all lie in some well
founded transitive set satisfying σ.

A Way Out
79
To derive extensionality, let x, y have the same elements, and let z be given. Let
x, y, z ∈w, where w is a transitive set satisfying σ. Then x, y have the same elements
in the sense of σ, and hence x ∈z ←→y ∈z.
To derive foundation, let x be a nonempty set, and x ∈y, y a transitive set satisfying
σ. Then x has an epsilon minimal element in the sense of y. So x has an epsilon
minimal element.
We leave pairing and union to the reader.
Let x be given, and let x ∈y, where y is a well founded transitive set satisfying
σ. Then according to y, x has a cumulative rank function. Hence it is easily seen that
this cumulative rank function in the sense of y is a cumulative rank function.
To establish 0 separation, put all the parameters in some well founded transitive
set, and apply 0 separation inside there.
Let x be a well founded transitive set satisfying σ. Then the cumulative rank
function for x exists. It is easy to see that its range is a limit ordinal. From this we
obtain the ordinal ω as the least limit ordinal. We can apply induction to ω, as long as
the predicate forms a subset of ω. In particular, we have 0 induction.
We claim that every x is an element of some transitive set y satisfying σ where
ω ∈y. To see this, let x ∈y ∈z, where y, z are transitive sets satisfying σ. Then the
cumulative rank function for y exists in z, and hence ω ∈z.
To derive that x has a transitive closure, let x ∈y, where y is a transitive set
satisfying σ. Then x has a transitive closure u, in the sense of y. Clearly x ⊆u and
u is transitive. Now the characterization of the transitive closure as the set of terms in
backwards epsilon chains is provable from σ. Hence this characterization holds in y.
To verify that u is the actual transitive closure, we use 0 induction.
Suppose that the cumulative rank function of x is onto a ﬁnite ordinal. We claim
that all subsets of x lie in y. To see this, let z ⊆x. We show that the intersection of z
with the ﬁrst i elements of x lies in y by 0 induction on i, using the cumulative rank
function of x.
We now show that the satisfaction relation for any (x, ∈) exists. Write x ∈y ∈
z, where y, z are transitive sets satisfying σ. Then z satisﬁes that there is a limit
ordinal. So z satisﬁes that (x, ∈) has a satisfaction relation, and therefore (x, ∈) has
a satisfaction relation.
Let α be an ordinal, α ∈x, x a transitive set satisfying σ. The constructible
hierarchy as a function deﬁned by transﬁnite recursion on α exists in the sense of x.
Therefore the constructible hierarchy as a function deﬁned by transﬁnite recursion on
α exists.
Let y be a transitive set satisfying σ, with ω ∈y. The internal constructible
hierarchy in y exhausts y. As in the previous paragraph, the internal constructible
hierarchy in y is an initial segment of the external constructible hierarchy. Since every
x lies in some transitive set satisfying σ which also has the element ω, it follows that
every set appears in the constructible hierarchy.
Lemma 57. (L, ∈L) is a well founded model of σ ′ and hence of σ.

80
H. M. Friedman
Proof. By Lemmas 55 and 56, we have only to verify that σ ′ holds in (L, ∈L). Let
W ′(x). By Lemma 52, let W ′(y), where ≤(x) is a proper initial segment of ≤(y).
Look at the constructible hierarchy internal to L[y]. Internally, one of the points will
be an L(α) where, externally, the α is the length of ≤(x). Let b be such a point. Then
in (L, ∈L), (y, b) will be satisﬁed to be a well founded transitive set satisfying σ.
Also, every (x, a) ∈L will have (x, a) ∈L (y, b).
Recall the scheme SVWISUB, which we have only discussed in the context of
ZFC. We wish to discuss it in the context of σ. It is formulated identically.
Let # be the following scheme, which is a weakening of SVWISUB.
#. If ψ deﬁnes a system Aα ⊆α, for all ordinals α, where the strict sup of each
Aα is α, then there exist 2 ≤α < β such that Aα ⊆Aβ.
Lemma 58. SVWISUB is provable in σ + #.
Proof. By a straightforward adaptation of Lemma 2.3 of [5]. This requires only the
development of some simple ordinal arithmetic in σ.
Lemma 59. ZFC + V = L + SVWISUB is provable in σ + # + ¬SUB.
Proof. By Lemma 58, we already have SVWISUB. Also V = L follows immediately
from σ. We have only to obtain ZFC.
Note that Lemma 3 can be proved just from σ, and so there is no weakly inclusion
subtle ordinal over 2.
By an obvious use of SVWISUB, we obtain the existence of a limit ordinal. Let ω
be the least limit ordinal. Then it is easily veriﬁed that ω obeys the axiom of inﬁnity.
Next we verify replacement on ω. This is a strong analog of “On is uncountable”
for eventual use in the adaptation of the proof of Theorem 1.6 of [5].
Suppose α0 < α1 < · · · is unbounded, and deﬁnable. Pick a counterexample to
the weak inclusion subtlety over 2 of α0. Next pick a counterexample to the weak
inclusion subtlety over 2 of α1, and place the part of the assignment to ordinals ≥α0
on top. Continue in this way.
There is no problem making the construction in Lemma 2.3 of [5] in this context
for λ = αi and δ = 2, uniformly in i. In fact, we can adjust the “2x + 1” so that in
the sets assigned to the limit ordinals for λ = αi, the least integer present is always
2i + 1. This guarantees that we have given a counterexample to SVWISUB. Hence
we have replacement on ω.
Now we verify the analog of “λ is a cardinal”.
Speciﬁcally, that there is no
deﬁnable map from On one-one into an ordinal. This is a straightforward adaptation
of Lemmas 1.4 and 1.5 of [5].
We now wish to prove the analog of “λ is subtle” by adapting the proof of
Lemma 1.6 of [5]. We ﬁrst need the analog of Theorem 1.2 of [5], which is “On
is inclusion subtle implies On is subtle”. This is no problem. Here these notions
are, as always, formulated on On through deﬁnable assignments. We already have

A Way Out
81
“On is an uncountable cardinal” by the previous paragraph and ω replacement. The
adaptation of the proof of Theorem 1.6 of [5] is clear and shows that “On is subtle”.
It is now easy to verify replacement. Suppose replacement fails on α. Then we
obtain a deﬁnable mapping partially from α into ordinals which is unbounded. We
can adjust this map so that the range, C, is closed and unbounded. We can then give
an easy counterexample to the subtlety of On by assigning singletons to sufﬁciently
large elements of C.
We now verify separation. Separation can be proved from σ together with replace-
ment. It sufﬁces to ﬁx an ordinal α and ﬁnd a limit ordinal λ > α such that L(λ)
is an elementary substructure of L with respect to n quantiﬁer prenex formulas, for
any standard integer n. It is clear what we mean by the ﬁrst k stages L(α0), L(α1),
L(α2), . . . , of the obvious Skolem hull construction starting with L(α + 1), where
α = α0 < α1, . . . , and each αi+1 is picked minimally greater than αi, and k ≥0. Note
that we apparently cannot prove that this exists for all k ≥0. However, if it exists for
k then it exists for k + 1, and the construction for k + 1 extends the construction for k.
By replacement, we obtain β such that the above ﬁnite sequences that exist all
end with an ordinal < β. Now we can use foundation to conclude that there are such
sequences of every ﬁnite length, which can be put together into an inﬁnite sequence
with limit λ ≤β. Then L(λ) is the desired partial elementary substructure of L. This
sufﬁces to establish separation since the standard integer n is arbitrary.
Finally, we verify power set. Fix L(α), α ≥ω, and suppose that new subsets
of L(α) appear arbitrarily high up in the constructible hierarchy. Since there is a
bijection from L(α) onto α, we see that new subsets of α appear arbitrarily high up in
the constructible hierarchy. Let B be the unbounded class of all ordinals β > α such
that L(β + 1)\L(β) has an element from L(α). By ω replacement, B has a closed
unbounded class C of limits, none of which lie in B.
We deﬁne Aλ ⊆λ, λ ∈C, as the ﬁrst subset of α, in the constructible hierarchy,
lying in L(β + 1)\L(β), where β is the least element of B greater than λ. Since the
Aλ are all different subsets of α, we have a counterexample to the subtlety of On.
Lemma 60. ZFC + V = L + SVWISUB is interpretable in σ + #.
Proof. This follows easily from Lemma 59.
We now wish to verify that # holds in (L, ∈L). By Lemma 57, σ holds in (L, ∈L).
This will provide an interpretation of σ + # in Newcomp + Ext.
In ordinary set theoretic terms, the hypothesis for # is
H1) an assignment Aα ⊆α, for all ordinals α, where the strict sup of every Aα
is α.
The conclusion is
C1) the existence of 2 ≤α < β such that Aα ⊆Aβ.
Suppose the hypothesis H1) holds in (L, ∈L). This gives us a virtual assignment
Aα ⊆α, for all “ordinals” α, where we have to be careful about what notion of ordinal
is being used here. These will be the “ordinals” as given by pairs (x, d), where W ′(x)

82
H. M. Friedman
and d ∈x. These are “measured” according to the position of d in ≤(x). I.e., we
are factoring by the equivalence relation ≡(x). Of course, the same “ordinal” is also
“measured” by pairs (y, e), W ′(y), provided the position of e in ≤(y) is the same as
the position of d in ≤(x). These positions are compared by COMP(x, y).
A “set of ordinals” is therefore given by pairs (x, u), where W ′(x) and u ⊆x.
Here we require that u is closed under the equivalence relation ≡(x). There is the
obvious relationship between another such pair (y, v), representing the same “set of
ordinals”.
Thus H1) is represented by
H2) a virtual function F that maps the pairs (x, d), W ′(x), d ∈x, to sets F(x, d) ⊆
x<d, where F(x, d) is closed under ≡(x) and the strict sup of F(x, d) is d in the sense
of ≤(x). The function F will produce the same “set of ordinals” at other (x′, d′) that
represent the same “ordinal”.
Assume that C1) fails in (L, ∈L). I.e.,
H3) all “inclusions” among the Aα have α = “0” or “1”, all in the sense of (L, ∈L).
We need to appropriately interpret this statement using Lemma 31. The interpre-
tation is that
H4) if F(x, d) ⊆F(x, e) then d = ∅or d = {∅}.
To complete the contradiction, we now use this data to build a giant transitive set,
with a system, that goes through the roof of L.
This situation is a more exotic form of the construction used in Lemma 37 that
starts with an x-system S and deﬁnes S# and S∗. Also see the paragraph after Lemma
37.
It is convenient to rearrange F so as to assign an x-system to each x with W ′(x).
Thus we have the following, which heavily uses separation.
H5) Let G be the virtual function such that for each x with W ′(x), G(x) is the
x-system R ⊆x · x, where R(a, b) ←→b ∈F(x, a). We have the following crucial
coherence property. Let y be such that W ′(y). Then either the x-system G(x) is
isomorphic to a proper initial segment of the y-system G(y), or the y-system G(y) is
isomorphic to a proper initial segment of the x-system G(x), or the x-system G(x) is
isomorphic to the y-system G(y), where, in any case, the virtual isomorphism relation
is COMP(x, y).
We emphasize that, even though F, G are virtual, when localized to x with W ′(x),
they become actual in view of separation (i.e., every virtual subset of a set is a set).
We now use the construction arising out of Lemma 37. We consider the various
G(x)# and their ranges G(x)∗. Again, these cohere using the COMP(x, y). In partic-
ular, the G(x)∗cohere in the following strong sense. For any two G(x)∗, G(y)∗, one is
an actual initial segment of the other. This is formulated using ≤(G(x)∗), ≤(G(y)∗).
So when we take primes (′), the relevant isomorphism relations are identity functions.
In light of H4) or Lemma 35, we see that any proper inclusion among these G(x)∗has
left side ∅or {∅}.
To verify that # holds in (L, ∈L), it sufﬁces to derive a contradiction from the
hypothesis H5).

A Way Out
83
Lemma 61. Assume the hypothesis H5). Let E be the virtual union of the G(x)∗.
Then E is a transitive virtual set. Any proper inclusion among elements of E has left
side ∅or {∅}. E is well founded. E is nonempty. W ′(E). For all x with W ′(x),
COMP(x, E) maps all of x.
Proof. The transitivity of E is immediate since it is the union of transitive sets. Any
proper inclusion among elements of E is a proper inclusion among elements of some
G(x)∗by coherence. Hence by Lemma 35, it must have left side ∅or {∅}. Hence all
expansions in E meet {∅, {∅}}. Therefore E is a set. Now E is well founded because
it is the union of well founded transitive sets. E is nonempty because W ′(ωˆ) and
G(ωˆ)∗is nonempty. ≤(E) is a direct limit of the ≤(G(x)∗), each one of which has
no maximum element. Hence ≤(E) has no maximum element. W ′(E) has now been
established. For the ﬁnal claim, if W ′(x) then G(x)∗is an initial segment of E. Hence
COMP(x, E).
Lemma 62. The last two claims of Lemma 61, W ′(E), and for all x with W(x),
COMP(x, E) maps all of x, are jointly impossible.
Proof. By Lemma 52, we can ﬁnd x with W ′(x), where COMP(x, E) maps a proper
initial segment of x onto E. This violates trichotomy.
Lemma 63. H5) is false. # holds in (L, ∈L).
Proof. The ﬁrst claim is by Lemma 62. The second claim is by the ﬁrst claim and the
paragraph just before Lemma 61.
Theorem 64. ZFC + V = L + SVWISUB is interpretable in Newcomp + Ext.
ZFC + V = L + SSUB is interpretable in Newcomp.
Proof. By Lemma 60, ZFC + V = L + SVWISUB is interpretable in σ + #. By
Lemmas 57 and 63, σ +# holds in (L, ∈L), and this has been shown in Newcomp+Ext.
Hence σ + # is interpretable in Newcomp + Ext. This establishes the ﬁrst claim. For
the second claim without V = L, use the ﬁrst claim together with Theorem 21 and
Corollary 7. By standard relativization to L, we can add V = L.
Theorem 65. Newcomp, Newcomp + Ext, ZFC + SSUB are mutually interpretable.
Proof. ZFC+SSUB is interpretable in Newcomp by Theorem 64. Newcomp +Ext is
interpretable in Newcomp by Theorem 21. Newcomp is interpretable in ZFC+SSUB
by Theorem 8.
Acknowledgement.
This research was partially supported by NSF Grant DMS-
9970459.

84
H. M. Friedman
References
[1] Russell, Bertrand: 1902. Letter to Frege. In: J. van Heijenoort (ed.), From Frege to Gödel,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1971, 124–125.
[2] Baumgartner, James: 1975. Ineffability properties of cardinals I. In: A. Hajnal et al.
(eds.), Inﬁnite and Finite Sets, Colloquia Mathematica Societatis Janos Bolylai vol. 10,
Amsterdam: North-Holland, 109–130.
[3] Baumgartner, James: 1977. Ineffability properties of cardinals II. In: R. E. Butts and J.
Hintikka (eds.), Logic, Foundations of Mathematics and Computability Theory, Dordrecht:
Reidel, 87–106.
[4] Friedman, Harvey: 2001. Subtle cardinals and linear orderings. Annals of Pure and Applied
Logic 107: 1–34.
[5] Friedman, Harvey: 2003. Primitive independence results. Journal of Mathematical Logic
vol. 3, No. 1: 67–83.
[6] Kanamori,Akihiro: 1994. The Higher Inﬁnite. Perspectives in Mathematical Logic. Berlin:
Springer.
The Ohio State University
Mathematics Building
231 West 18th Avenue
Columbus, OH 43210
USA
E-mail: friedman@math.ohio-state.edu

Completeness and Iteration in Modern Set Theory
Sy D. Friedman
Abstract. As the result of work in modern set theory, a very attractive picture of the universe
of sets is starting to emerge, a picture based upon the existence of inner models satisfying
large cardinal axioms. In this article I shall argue for the correctness of this picture, using the
principles of completeness and iteration.
Set theory entered the modern era through the work of Gödel [8] and Cohen [2]. This
work provided set-theorists with the necessary tools to analyse a large number of math-
ematical problems which are unsolvable using only the traditional axiom system ZFC
for set theory. Through these methods, together with their subsequent generalisation
into the context of large cardinals, set-theorists have had great success in determining
the axiomatic strength of a wide range of ZFC-undecidable statements, not only within
set theory but also within other areas of mathematics.
Through this work a very attractive picture of the universe of sets is starting to
emerge, a picture based upon the existence of inner models satisfying large cardinal
axioms. In this article I shall argue for the correctness of this picture, using the
principles of completeness and iteration.
1. Constructibility
Gödel [8] provided an interpretation of ZFC whose structure can be thoroughly anal-
ysed. The universe L of constructible sets consists of all sets which appear within the
hierarchy
L0 = ∅,
Lα+1 = The set of deﬁnable subsets of Lα,
Lλ = {Lα | α < λ} for limit λ,
L = {Lα | α ∈ORD}.
This hierarchy differs from the von Neumann hierarchy of Vα’s in that only deﬁnable
subsets are considered at successor stages, as opposed to arbitrary subsets. By re-
stricting the power set operation in this way, one brings the notion of set much closer

86
S. D. Friedman
to that of ordinal number, and can achieve as clear an understanding of arbitrary sets
as one has of ordinal numbers. As an example, Gödel showed that in L the set of reals
and the set of countable ordinals have the same cardinality.
Jensen [9] went one step further, by dividing the transition from Lα to Lα+1 into
ω intermediate levels Lα ⊆L1
α ⊆L2
α ⊆· · · ⊆Lα+1. The power of Jensen’s idea,
which led to his ﬁne structure theory for L, is that these new successor levels Ln+1
α
consist of sets which can be enumerated in a way analogous to that in which the 0
n+1-
deﬁnable sets of arithmetic can be recursively enumerated using an oracle for the n-th
Turing jump 0(n). What is perhaps surprising is that this “ramiﬁcation” of levels can
be used to establish new results concerning the structure of the constructible universe
as a whole. For example, Jensen showed that the following combinatorial principle
holds in L:
The □Principle. To every limit ordinal α that is not a regular cardinal, one can
assign an unbounded subset Xα of α with ordertype less than α, such that if ¯α is a
limit of elements of Xα then X¯α = Xα ∩¯α.
Every known proof that this principle holds in L makes use of some version of the
ﬁne structure theory. Indeed, Jensen’s theory is so powerful that one has the impression
that any question in combinatorial set theory (not involving the consistency of ZFC)
can be resolved under the assumption V = L.
L is the least inner model, i.e., transitive class containing all ordinals, in which
the axioms of ZFC hold. Can we construct larger inner models which admit a similar
Gödel–Jensen analysis?
2. Completeness
It will be convenient to work now, not with the usual theory ZFC, but with the Gödel–
Bernays theory of classes GB. This theory is no stronger than ZFC, but allows us to
discuss classes which may not necessarily be deﬁnable. For an inner model M, a class
A belongs to M iff A ∩x belongs to M for every set x in M.
V = L (i.e., the statement that every set is constructible) is not a theorem of GB:
The forcing method allows us to consistently enlarge L to models L[G] where G is a
set or class that is P -generic over L for some L-forcing P , i.e., some partial ordering
P that belongs to L. Thus it is consistent with GB that there are inner models larger
than L.
Assume now that generic extensions of L do exist, and let us see what implications
this has for the nature of the set-theoretic universe. For this purpose we introduce the
notion of CUB-completeness.
Deﬁnition. A class of ordinals is CUB (closed and unbounded) iff it is a proper class
of ordinals which contains all of its limit points. A class X of ordinals is large iff it
contains a CUB subclass.

Completeness and Iteration
87
Largeness is not absolute: It is possible that a class X belonging to L is not large
but becomes large after expanding the universe by forcing.
Deﬁnition. A class X is potentially large iff it is large in a generic extension of the
universe.
Now we pose the following question: Can the universe be complete with respect to
the largeness of classes that belong to L? That is, can the universe be CUB-complete
over L in the sense that every class which belongs to L and is potentially large is already
large? Using the fact that Jensen’s □Principle holds in L, we have the following.
Theorem 1 ([5]). There exists a sequence Xn, n ∈ω of classes such that:
1. Each Xn belongs to L and indeed the relation “α belongs to Xn” is deﬁnable
in L.
2. Xn ⊇Xn+1 for each n and each Xn is potentially large.
3. If each Xn is large then the universe is CUB-complete over L.
Thus we have the following picture: Let n be least so that Xn is not large, if such
a ﬁnite n exists, and n = ∞otherwise. If n is ﬁnite then n can be increased by going
to a generic extension of the universe, further increased by going to a further generic
extension, and so on. The only alternative is that the universe be CUB-complete
over L.
Can there be many different ways of making the universe CUB-complete over L?
The next result says not.
Theorem 2 ([5], [12]). If the universe is CUB-complete over L then there is a smallest
inner model L# which is CUB-complete over L.
Thus L# is the “canonical” completion of L with respect to largeness of classes
that belong to L.
What is L#? This model is not a generic extension of L, but rather a new kind of
extension, which can be deﬁned in terms of the concept of rigidity: An embedding of
L is an elementary embedding π : L →L which is not the identity. We say that L is
rigid iff there is no such embedding.
Fact (Kunen, see [12]). The universe is CUB-complete over L iff L is not rigid. If this
is the case then L# is the smallest inner model to which an embedding of L belongs.
AmoreexplicitdescriptionofL# isthefollowing: Letπ : L →Lbeanembedding
of L and let απ be the least ordinal such that π ↾α is not an element of L. Then
L# = L[π ↾απ] for any choice of π.

88
S. D. Friedman
L# is usually written as L[0#], where 0# is a special set of integers [13], and the
hypothesis that L is not rigid is usually written as “0# exists”.
The hypothesis that 0# exists not only completes the universe with regard to the
largeness of classes that belong to L, but also solves another mystery: It can be shown
that P -generics cannot exist simultaneously for all L-forcings P . How can we decide
whether or not a P -generic should exist for a given P ? The next result leads us to a
good criterion, under the assumption that 0# exists.
Theorem 3 ([4]). Assume slightly more than GB (precisely: ORD is ω + ω-Erd˝os).
If 0# exists, P is an L-forcing which is deﬁnable in L (without parameters) and there
exists a P-generic, then there exists a P -generic deﬁnable in L[0#].
Thus the inner model L[0#] is saturated with respect to L-deﬁnable forcings.
The existence of P -generics for L-deﬁnable forcings P is thereby resolved by the
assumption that 0# exists: P has a generic iff it has one deﬁnable in L[0#].
3. Iteration
The above discussion leads us to the existence of 0#. We can go further: 0## relates to
the model L[0#] in the same way as 0# relates to L, and its existence follows from the
CUB-completeness of the universe with respect to L[0#]. Indeed, through iteration
of a suitable “# operation”, we are led to models much larger than L, which satisfy
strong large cardinal axioms.
We have said that the existence of 0# is equivalent to the non-rigidity of L, i.e.,
to the existence of an embedding of L. Let us use this as a basis for generalisation.
Suppose that M is a non-rigid inner model and let π : M →M be an embedding
of M. Let κ be the critical point of π, i.e., the least ordinal such that π(κ) ̸= κ.
(For technical reasons we assume that M is of the form LA for some class of ordinals
A and that π respects A in the sense that π(A ∩κ) = A ∩π(κ), H M
κ
= LA
κ and
H M
π(κ) = LA
π(κ).) For some least ordinal α, the restriction π ↾α is not an element of
M. Normally this ordinal is κ+ of M. We then deﬁne the # (or extender) derived from
π to be the restriction Eπ = π ↾(κ+ of M). A # for M is a # derived from some
embedding π : M →M. Thus M has a # iff M is non-rigid.
A # iteration is a sequence M0, M1, . . . of inner models where
M0 = L
Mi+1 = Mi[Ei], where Ei is a # for Mi
Mλ for limit λ is the “limit” of ⟨Mi | i < λ⟩.
The type of model that arises through such an iteration is called an extender model and
is of the form L[E] where E = ⟨Eα | α ∈ORD⟩is a sequence of extenders, see [3].

Completeness and Iteration
89
How large an extender model can we produce through #-iteration? A #-iteration
is maximal if it cannot be continued to a larger extender model. An extender model is
maximal if it is the ﬁnal model of a maximal #-iteration. Do such models exist, and
if so, how large are they?
Theorem 4 ([7]). There exists a maximal extender model, unless there is an inner
model with a superstrong cardinal.
Superstrength is a very strong large cardinal property, more than sufﬁcient to carry
out most applications of large cardinals in combinatorial and descriptive set theory.
Thus if we are interested in showing that there are inner models which satisfy useful
large cardinal axioms, we may without harm assume that there is a maximal extender
model.
Now we turn to the question of largeness for maximal extender models. There are
two ways in which an extender model M can be maximal: Either there is no # for M,
i.e., M is rigid, or M is not enlarged through the addition of a # for itself. The latter
possibility also leads to an inner model with a superstrong cardinal.
Theorem 5 ([7]). Suppose that M is a non-rigid, maximal extender model. Then in
M there is a superstrong cardinal.
Thus to obtain an inner model with a superstrong cardinal, it sufﬁces to build a
maximal extender model and then argue that it is not rigid.
But ﬁrst we must address a central problem in the theory of extender models:
How can we ensure that our maximal extender models satisfy the Gödel and Jensen
properties, GCH and □? Deﬁne an extender model to be good iff it satisﬁes GCH
and □. The construction of good maximal extender models is far more difﬁcult than
the construction of arbitrary maximal extender models. However using work of Steel
[14] and Schimmerling-Zeman [11] we do have the following, assuming slightly more
than GB (precisely: ORD is subtle and weakly compact).
Theorem 6. There is a good maximal extender model, unless there is an inner model
with a Woodin cardinal.
Thus if we can argue for the non-rigidity of good maximal extender models, we
obtain an inner model with a Woodin cardinal, a property still strong enough to carry
out many applications of large cardinals to combinatorial and descriptive set theory.
4. Completeness, Again
Using CUB-completeness we argued that L is non-rigid. Can this argument be gen-
eralised to good maximal extender models?

90
S. D. Friedman
Theorem 7 ([7]). Suppose that the universe is CUB-complete over a good maximal
extender model. Then there is an inner model with a measurable cardinal.
Measurable cardinals are much stronger than 0#, but still far weaker than Woodin
cardinals. To go further, we need to consider a variant of CUB-completeness.
Deﬁnition. A class of ordinals C is CUB+ iff C is CUB and for each limit cardinal
α in C, C ∩α+ is CUB in α+. X is large+ iff X contains a CUB+ subclass. X is
potentially large+ iff X is large+ in a generic extension of the universe.
Now we repeat what we did earlier for L, with CUB-completeness replaced by
CUB+-completeness.
Theorem 8. Suppose that M is a good maximal extender model. Then there exists a
sequence Xn, n ∈ω of classes such that:
1. Each Xn belongs to M.
2. Xn ⊇Xn+1 for each n and each Xn is potentially large+.
3. If each Xn is large+ then for some CUB class C: (α+ of M) < α+ for α in C.
Thus if the universe is CUB+-complete over a good maximal extender model M,
it follows that α+ of M is less than α+ for α belonging to a CUB class. Now we apply
the following reﬁnement of Theorem 6, see [14].
Theorem 9. Unless there is an inner model with a Woodin cardinal, there is a good
maximal extender model M with the following property: For no CUB class C is (α+
of M) < α+ for α in C.
Putting this all together:
Theorem 10. Assume slightly more than GB (precisely: ORD is subtle and weakly
compact). Suppose that the universe is CUB+-complete with respect to good maximal
extender models. Then there is an inner model with a Woodin cardinal.
In the sense of Theorem 10, completeness and iteration can be used to argue in
favour of the existence of inner models with large cardinals.
5. Speculations Beyond One Woodin Cardinal
Further work of Andretta, Jensen, Neeman and Steel (see [1], [10]) suggests that a
good maximal extender model should exist, unless there is an inner model with many
Woodin cardinals. But there have been serious obstacles to extending this work up to
the level of a superstrong cardinal.

Completeness and Iteration
91
Perhaps the difﬁculties come from deﬁnability. The good extender models M that
have been constructed until now satisfy:
(∗) M is a deﬁnable inner model (in the language of class theory).
Property (∗) is not used in our above discussion of CUB and CUB+ completeness,
nor in many applications of inner models, and may have to be sacriﬁced if one is to
reach the level of a superstrong cardinal.
One way to approach this question is to ask: Assume that a superstrong cardinal
exists. What kinds of inner models with a superstrong cardinal can one construct?
Conjecture. Suppose that there is a superstrong cardinal. Then:
(a) There is an inner model of GCH which has a superstrong cardinal.
(b) There need not be a deﬁnable such inner model.
If true, this conjecture implies that one should look not for “canonical” inner
models for large cardinals, but rather a family of inner models, any of which could
serve as a good approximation to the universe of all sets.
Acknowledgement. The author was supported by NSF Grant Number 9625997-DMS.
References
[1]
Andretta, Alessandro, Itay Neeman, and John Steel: to appear. The domestic levels of Kc
are iterable. Israel Journal of Mathematics.
[2]
Cohen, Paul: 1963. The independence of the continuum hypothesis. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, USA vol. 50: 1143–1148.
[3]
Dodd, Anthony: 1982. The Core Model. London Mathematical Society Lecture Note
Series, vol. 61, Cambridge University Press.
[4]
Friedman, Sy: 1998. Generic saturation. Journal of Symbolic Logic vol. 63 (1): 158–162.
[5]
Friedman, Sy: 1999. New 1
3 facts. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society
127: 3707–3709.
[6]
Friedman, Sy: 2000. Fine Structure and Class Forcing. De Gruyter Series in Logic and
its Applications, vol. 3. Berlin: De Gruyter.
[7]
Friedman, Sy: 2001–2002. Topics in Set Theory. Lecture Notes, Institut für Formale
Logik, Universität Wien.
[8]
Gödel, Kurt: 1940. The Consistency of the Axiom of Choice and of the Generalized
Continuum Hypothesis with the Axioms of Set Theory. Annals of Mathematics Studies #
3. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
[9]
Jensen, Ronald B.: 1972. The ﬁne structure of the constructible hierarchy. Annals of
Mathematical Logic vol. 4: 229–308.

92
S. D. Friedman
[10]
Neeman, Itay: 2002. Inner models in the region of a Woodin limit of Woodin cardinals.
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic vol. 116 (1–3): 67–155.
[11]
Schimmerling, Ernest and Martin Zeman: 2001. Square in core models. Bulletin of Sym-
bolic Logic vol. 7 (3): 305–314.
[12]
Silver, Jack: 1971. Some applications of model theory in set theory. Annals of Mathemat-
ical Logic vol. 3 (1): 45–110.
[13]
Solovay, Robert: 1967. A nonconstructible 1
3 set of integers. Transactions of the Amer-
ican Mathematical Society vol. 127: 50–75.
[14]
Steel, John: 1996. The Core Model Iterability Problem. Lecture Notes in Logic 8. Berlin:
Springer.
Department of Mathematics
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Cambridge, MA 02139
USA
E-mail: sdf@math.mit.edu

Was sind und was sollen (neue) Axiome?
Kai Hauser
Abstract. The paper examines some philosophical issues surrounding the ongoing search for
new axioms of set theory in the light of recent mathematical developments.
1. The standard axioms of set theory ZFC (Zermelo Fraenkel with the axiom of choice)
are successful in several respects. They provide a formal description of the intuitive
notion of a collection that is amenable to mathematical analysis. They also serve as a
foundation of mathematics in the following sense.
• All mathematical statements can be expressed in the language of set theory with
set and membership as the only primitive terms.1
• Every theorem of classical mathematics is provable in ZFC.
Nevertheless these axioms leave open many natural and fundamental questions. The
most famous one concerns the cardinality of the continuum (the set of real numbers).
Cantor’s ﬁrst publication on the theory of sets [4] contained a proof that the contin-
uum is uncountable. Unable to determine its exact cardinality, Cantor subsequently
conjectured that the continuum is of size the ﬁrst uncountable cardinal, i.e., the min-
imal value permitted by the aforementioned theorem.2 Under the name continuum
hypothesis (CH), Cantor’s conjecture soon became the outstanding problem of the
subject, and it appeared as the ﬁrst item on Hilbert’s famous list of unsolved mathe-
matical questions [28]. Roughly four decades later, Gödel [18] showed that ZFC, if
consistent, cannot refute CH.3 Finally, Cohen [10] established that CH is not provable
in ZFC, again assuming the consistency of the latter.4 The techniques developed by
Gödel and Cohen yield many more independent propositions including propositions
from other areas of mathematics not containing set theoretic vocabulary.5 One of the
1Formally speaking, ∈is the only extra-logical symbol of the language of set theory. But from the
epistemological point of view, ‘set’ and ‘membership’ are both autonomous owing to the difference in the
underlying cognitive acts.
2The conjecture appears in print for the ﬁrst time in [5]: 132.
3 Gödel proved that if ZF (Zermelo Fraenkel without the Axiom of Choice) is consistent, then so is ZFC
together with a global form of CH.
4The assumption that ZF is consistent sufﬁces in both cases by virtue of the ﬁrst half of footnote 3.
5Some examples are Suslin’s hypothesis [41], the Kaplanski conjecture [11], the Whitehead problem
[51] and the S- and L-space problems in general topology [56].

94
K. Hauser
main motivations for the introduction of new axioms has been the need to settle these
open problems. This could mean in particular that the proposition in question or its
negation is logically derivable from a new axiom. But more subtle interpretations of
‘settle’ are conceivable, as we shall see below. In either case, we must ask why those
statements that are proposed as new axioms really are axioms, and moreover, what we
mean by ‘axiom’ in the ﬁrst place.
The paper aims to shed some light on these questions. It is organized as follows:
Sections 1 through 6 outline the mathematical background and place it into a philo-
sophical context taking the philosophical views of Gödel as a point of departure.6 This
forms the basis of the philosophical argument contained in Sections 7 through 10. Al-
though it falls short of answering the above questions, that argument indicates the
direction where the answers may be found.
2. An inﬂuential proposal to search for new axioms was advanced in [20] along with
the suggestion that the role of the continuum problem in set theory is “that it will ﬁnally
lead to the discovery of new axioms which will make it possible to disprove Cantor’s
conjecture” (ibid., 186). Anticipating independence from ZFC, Gödel defended the
existence of a determinate truth value for CH on the grounds that the concepts of
classical set theory describe some well-determined reality.
For in this reality Cantor’s conjecture must be either true or false, and its
undecidability from the axioms as known today can only mean that these
axioms do not contain a complete description of this reality. ([20]: 181)
This immediately raises two questions: What exactly is this reality described by the
axioms of set theory, and how do we recognize axioms yielding a more detailed de-
scription? Gödel subscribes to a distinctive brand of platonism modeling the existence
of sets as mathematical objects as well as our epistemic access to them in direct anal-
ogy with physical objects and sense perception. At the same time he maintains that the
objects of transﬁnite set theory “clearly do not belong to the physical world, and even
their indirect connection with physical experience is very loose” ([23]: 267). That
makes it doubtful whether the causal theory of sense perception can provide a model
for the epistemology of set theory. Nevertheless, in the next paragraph Gödel insists
that mathematical intuition is a kind of perception of abstract objects enabling us to
formulate mathematical axioms. But he does not explain how these objects determine
our intuitions.
One way of circumventing these difﬁculties is to suspend judgement about ontol-
ogy, and to focus directly on epistemological matters. To begin with, it is undeniable
that we are in possession of relatively stable intuitions about the concept of set as
articulated by the ZFC axioms. With the exercise of reason new intuitions emerge and
6My reasons for choosing this somewhat biased approach are twofold. First, in his time Gödel had
the most deeply thought-out point of view on the philosophical foundations of set theory. Second, the
mathematical developments which are most relevant to the paper are to a large extent an outgrowth of
Gödel’s work.

Was sind und was sollen (neue) Axiome?
95
in turn give rise to additional candidates for axiomhood. In spite of the psychologist
ﬂavor, the key point here is that the whole process is anything but arbitrary. On the one
hand various formal constraints need to be obeyed (e.g., logical consistency). On the
other hand there is a kind of ‘informal rigor’involved that is much harder to pin down
and is implicit in locutions like ‘principle A is true by virtue of the intended meaning of
the concept of set’. An indication of its importance is that the standards governing the
acceptance of new axioms are de facto rather strict. Given our ability to successively
reﬁne mathematical intuitions in a ‘rule-like’ fashion, we may treat statements which
are undecidable in ZFC as determinately true or false without reference to the state of
affairs in a realm of mathematical objects.7 In effect this line of thought is adopted in
the supplement to the second edition of Gödel’s article of the continuum problem.
However, the question of the objective existence of objects of mathemat-
ical intuition (which, incidentally, is an exact replica of the question of
the objective existence of the outer world) is not decisive for the problem
under discussion here. The mere psychological fact of the existence of
an intuition sufﬁciently clear to produce the axioms of set theory and an
open series of extensions of them sufﬁces to give meaning to the question
of the truth or falsity of propositions like Cantor’s continuum hypothesis.
([23]: 268, emphasis added)
Actually Gödel held that the open-endedness of attempts to axiomatize the concept of
set is itself intrinsic to this concept.
For ﬁrst of all the axioms of set theory by no means form a system closed
in itself, but, quite on the contrary, the very concept of set […] on which
they are based suggests their extension by new axioms which assert the
existence of still further iterations of the operation “set of”. ([20]: 181,
[23]: 260)8
The concept Gödel had in mind is the iterative concept of set “according to which a
set is anything obtainable from the integers (or some other well-deﬁned objects) by
iterated application of the operation ‘set of’, and not something obtained by dividing
the totality of all existing things into two categories.”9 In formal terms the iterative
concept leads to a stratiﬁcation of the set theoretic universe into a cumulative hierarchy
of stages Vα indexed by ordinal numbers. It begins with V0 = ∅. In moving from one
stage to the next all subsets of the previous stage are collected, i.e., Vα+1 equals the
power set of Vα. At limit stages λ, we take unions, i.e., Vλ = 
α<λ Vα. The axiom
of foundation guarantees that any set appears in one of these levels. In other words
the class of all sets V (formally the class term {x : x = x}) is the union of the Vα
taken over all ordinals. One may thus visualize the universe as having the shape of a
7For an elaboration of this viewpoint see [25].
8See also [21]: 306f.
9Gödel expressively allows transﬁnite iterations of the operation ‘set of’. He also remarks that “as
opposed to the concept of set in general (if considered as primitive) we have a clear notion of this operation”
([20]: footnotes 12 and 13, 180).

96
K. Hauser
funnel with bottom end V0 = ∅and with the ordinals marking its height as illustrated
in Figure 1.
ORD
Vα
Vω
Figure 1. The cumulative hierarchy
How does this lead to new axioms asserting the existence of further iterations of
the operation ‘set of’? One possible answer is that implicit in the concept of set is the
fact that any operation on sets propagates its own iteration. For example, an operation
F acting on individual sets immediately gives rise to a new operation ˜F associating to
a collection of sets the collection of their images under F. The universe V is ‘closed’
under the passage from F to ˜F. (For deﬁnable F this is the replacement axiom.)
However, it would be unreasonable to expect that V is the only closure point, for this
would run counter to the intuition behind Cantor’s Absolute— the doctrine that the set
theoretic universe comprehends all possibilities.10
Roughly speaking, if something happened ‘for the ﬁrst time’ in V we should
not have stopped there, and the process of generating sets should have kept going.
It follows there are many levels allowing to pass from a given F to the associated
˜F. The ﬁrst such level is Vω which consists of all sets built up in ﬁnitely many
stages from the empty set. Uncountable indices of such levels are called inaccessible
cardinals indicating that they are unreachable from below by certain operations on
smaller cardinal numbers.11 The postulation of such indices is a large cardinal axiom
by virtue of their transcendence over smaller cardinals and in the sense that their
existence is unprovable in ZFC.
10In metaphysical terms, Cantor [6] (cf. [9]: 175, 205) maintained that “the true Inﬁnite orAbsolute does
not permit any determination”, a view he attributes also to Locke, Descartes, Spinoza and Leibniz. In addi-
tion he mentions Nicolaus Cusanus who had actually put forward this view in De Docta Ignorantia. From
the Absolute Cantor distinguishes another form of the actually-given inﬁnite calling it the the Transﬁnite.
Manifestations of the latter include cardinal numbers and order types that can be grasped in mathematical
thought and are capable of augmentation. The Absolute, by contrast, is “realized in highest perfection, in
wholly independent, other-worldly being, in Deo” ([7]: 378).
11The two operations are cardinal exponentiation and taking suprema over families of cardinals.

Was sind und was sollen (neue) Axiome?
97
After further extrapolation one arrives at reﬂection principles. Here the idea is that
any property holding in V must already be true in suitable initial segments Vα. Levy
[42] and Bernays [2] showed that the standard axioms and some of their generalizations
can be recast as reﬂection principles. Suitably formulated reﬂection principles also
prove the existence of Mahlo cardinals and illuminate their schematic arrangement into
a hierarchy studied originally in [44] and [45] via thinning operations on inaccessible
cardinals. As long as the reﬂecting formulas are only allowed to contain set parameters,
the corresponding reﬂection principles must themselves reﬂect to initial segments of
V. When second order parameters are allowed this yields indescribable cardinals12
which again fall into a systematic hierarchy, this time with a qualitatively new form
of transcendence in terms of deﬁnable ﬁlters. The mathematical results obtained in
this area so far vindicate Gödel’s claim that
these axioms show clearly, not only that the axiomatic system of set
theory as known today [i.e., ZFC] is incomplete, but also that it can be
supplemented without arbitrariness by new axioms which are only the
natural continuation of the series of those set up so far. ([20]: 182)
3. The large cardinals studied in modern set theory—measurable, strong, Woodin
and (super)compact cardinals and their relatives—are of much larger order than those
mentioned up to this point. They are deﬁned in terms of elementary embeddings, truth-
preserving transformations of the universe of all sets. Attempts to justify the existence
of such cardinals via reﬂection principles have so far not been entirely successful.13
Indeed a plausible intuition concerning elementary embeddings eventually led to the
postulation of a principle contradicting the axiom of choice [40]. This principle can be
viewed as the limit of a series of large cardinal axioms beginning with measurability
and continuing past supercompactness.14
It has also been pointed out that the larger large cardinal axioms are supported by
strong arguments of analogy. Typically, such arguments single out a combinatorial
property of the ﬁrst inﬁnite cardinal ω and posit the existence of uncountable cardinals
having an analogous property. This is usually justiﬁed by appealing to the uniform
generation of sets in the cumulative hierarchy on the grounds that this uniformity
should rule out the existence of ‘singularities’. It is fair to say that this line of rea-
soning is generally regarded as carrying less credence than justiﬁcations via reﬂection
principles.15 For instance measurable cardinals in their traditional deﬁnition as un-
12Given a collection of formulas 
, a cardinal κ is said to be 
-indescribable if for any formula ϕ(X) in

 and any A ⊂Vκ: if ϕ(X) holds in the structure ⟨Vκ, ∈, A⟩, then there is a λ < κ such that ϕ(X) already
holds in the structure ⟨Vκ, ∈, A ∩Vλ⟩.
13Arguably this series of axioms begins with cardinals derived from reﬂection principles as indescribable
cardinals possess a reformulation in terms of elementary embeddings [24].
14Its original motivation, however, came from investigations of the concept of set within broad notions
of class or property. See [48], [49] and also [38]: Sec. 23.
15Gödel, for example, held that “every axiom of inﬁnity should be derived from the (extremely plausible)
principle that V is indeﬁnable, where deﬁnability is to be taken in [a] more and more generalized and
idealized sense” ([57]: 8.7.16).

98
K. Hauser
countable cardinals κ carrying a non-principal κ-complete ultraﬁlter may be construed
as analogues of ω in virtue of the existence of non-principal ultraﬁlters on ω. (A ﬁlter
is by deﬁnition ω-complete.) However, in this analogy there is no counterpart at ω of
the crucial consequence of the existence of a non-principal, κ-complete ultraﬁlter on
κ, namely the associated elementary embedding into a subuniverse of V . If (strongly)
compact cardinals ([38]: §4) are conceived as strong analogues of ω by means of the
compactness theorem for ﬁrst order logic, their connection with intuitions about the
concept of set in its usual meaning becomes rather tenuous.
4. Besides the intrinsic evidence provided through mathematical intuition, Gödel
mentions “another (though only probable) criterion of the truth of mathematical ax-
ioms, namely their fruitfulness” in consequences ([23]: 269). Gödel was particularly
interested in consequences holding in concrete and elementary domains where the
meaningfulness and unambiguity of the concepts involved could hardly be doubted.
To the extent that those consequences are demonstrably not obtainable without the
axiom in question, this would in turn lend support to the view that the axiom is mean-
ingful and unambiguous as well.16 With respect to the natural numbers, this hope has
not been fully realized yet, the main reason being that no example is known of a previ-
ously studied number-theoretic question whose solution requires hypotheses beyond
ZFC.17 On the other hand, with respect to second-order number theory, Gödel’s view
of the role of strong axioms of inﬁnity has been vindicated. Second-order number
theory is concerned with deﬁnable sets of real numbers and their characteristic prop-
erties such as Lebesgue measurability. According to their logical complexity these
sets are arranged into a canonical hierarchy known as the projective hierarchy. ZFC
yields a structure theory for the ﬁrst two levels of the projective hierarchy, but gives
virtually no information about its further levels. Some partial results about higher
level projective sets were obtained in the 1960s from large cardinal axioms. Substan-
tial progress came with a different class of axioms which stipulate the existence of
winning strategies in inﬁnite, two-person games of perfect information played on the
integers.18 The hypothesis that all games with projective pay-off set are determined
(projective determinacy, PD) leads to a canonical extension of the theory of the ﬁrst
two levels provided by ZFC to the entire projective hierarchy which is ‘complete’ in
the sense that all ‘natural’ questions become decidable.19 Moreover, the exploration
of the projective sets under PD over the last ﬁfteen years has also resulted in a re-
16See [57]: 7.1.1–7.1.5, 7.4.1.
17There are, however, interesting examples of combinatorial statements which are provably equivalent
to the (1-)consistency of large cardinal axioms. See [14], [15], and [16]. Still practitioners of number
theory are reluctant to accept them as genuinely number theoretic questions on an equal footing with say
the Goldbach Conjecture or problems about the distribution of prime numbers.
18To each A ⊂[0, 1] associate an inﬁnite, two person game GA. Players I and II alternatingly choose
ni ∈{0, 1}, with I beginning with n0. Player I wins if ∞
i=0 ni 2−i−1 ∈A. Otherwise II wins. The set A,
or rather the game GA is determined if one of the players has a winning strategy, i.e., a ‘rule’ telling him
which numbers to play with the property that he will come out winning if he follows this rule no matter
what numbers the other player has chosen.

Was sind und was sollen (neue) Axiome?
99
markable interaction of set theory with other areas of mathematics. On the one hand
the notions and dichotomies occurring in second order number theory turned out to
have meaning in disciplines ranging from harmonic analysis, Banach space theory
and topological dynamics to control theory and mathematical economics. Conversely
sophisticated techniques from other branches of mathematics have been applied in the
solution of purely set theoretic problems and furnished new insights into the relation-
ship of the projective sets with various subdisciplines of mathematical logic.20 The
success achieved with projective determinacy brings to mind an often quoted passage
from Gödel’s 1947 article on the continuum problem.
There might exist axioms so abundant in their veriﬁable consequences,
shedding so much light upon a whole ﬁeld, and yielding such powerful
methods for solving problems […] that, no matter whether or not they
are intrinsically necessary, they would have to be accepted at least in the
same sense as any well-established physical theory. ([20]: 182n)
5. Nevertheless acceptance of PD as an axiom was hampered by its lack of intrinsic
evidence. That difﬁculty was overcome when it was shown that PD is implied by
large cardinal axioms. More precisely, PD follows from the existence of inﬁnitely
many Woodin cardinals [46]. Further work led to the realization that determinacy
axioms and large cardinal axioms are in effect one class of axioms and not two, cf.
[38] and [60]. This is highly remarkable from the epistemological point of view, for
it is anything but obvious that global principles motivated by a priori intuitions about
the length of the cumulative hierarchy are intimately related to local principles which
assert something about the width of a speciﬁc level near the bottom of this hierarchy
and are supported by extrinsic evidence.21
A key ingredient in these investigations was the possibility to build canonical mod-
els for large cardinal axioms which are minimal and whose structure can be analyzed
in detail. The earliest example of a canonical model of set theory is the constructible
universe L devised by Gödel in his proof of the consistency of the (generalized)
continuum hypothesis and the axiom of choice.22 This model is generated in stages
similar to V with the crucial difference that in the successor step only the subsets of
the previous stage that are deﬁnable in this structure make it into the next stage. Over
the years it has become clear that ZFC delivers a ‘complete’ theory for L in the sense
that all ‘natural’ ZFC questions are decidable within ZFC + V = L.23 The uniform
19 By the incompleteness theorems there is no hope to decide ‘unnatural’ propositions, i.e., propositions
encoding metamathematical pathologies such as Gödel sentences and consistency statements.
20Two of these subdisciplines are recursion theory (in connection with the global structure of Turing
degrees) and model theory (topological Vaught Conjecture). For an overview and further references, see
[39].
21The formulation of larger large cardinal axioms in terms of elementary embeddings involves coﬁnal
segments of the universe. By contrast winning strategies in integer games can be coded as real numbers
and thus belong to Vω+1.
22Working in ZF, Gödel showed that all axioms of ZFC and the (generalized) continuum hypothesis hold
in L [18].

100
K. Hauser
generation of the members of L which underlies this phenomenon can be generalized
to construct canonical models that are big enough to accommodate various large car-
dinals not occurring in L. Although the construction of these models presupposes the
existence of large cardinals, this still comes close to a consistency proof. For it is
expected that a hidden inconsistency in the large cardinal axiom would reveal itself in
the detailed structure theory of its associated model.24
In addition to underlining the coherence of large cardinal axioms, canonical models
play a central role in determining the logical strength of these axioms. Here strength
is measured in terms of relative consistency, i.e., axiom A1 is stronger than axiom A2
if it is provable in arithmetic that the consistency of ZFC+A1 implies the consistency
of ZFC + A2. Modulo equiconsistency this deﬁnes a partial order on the class of set
theoretic principles. It is an empirical fact that for ‘natural’ large cardinal axioms,
the partial order so deﬁned is a total order.25 Moreover, propositions with consis-
tency strength higher than ZFC (to the extent they have been analyzed) turned out to
be equiconsistent to some large cardinal axiom—including propositions from other
branches of mathematics not containing any set theoretic vocabulary.26 In view of
the ostensibly disparate ways in which ZFC may be extended, the arrangement of the
resulting theories into a linear hierarchy is surprising. The fact that the central markers
along this hierarchy are the large cardinal axioms, indicates that the latter provide the
natural superstructure for the standard axioms.
This also affords an improved understanding of the claim that PD is the ‘correct’
axiom for second order number theory. Not only does PD yield a complete structure
theory for the projective sets, it is also implied by and in fact equivalent to many
combinatorial principles which on the surface have nothing to do with determinacy.
Most importantly, however, second order number theory as given by PD is shared by all
sufﬁciently strong extensions of ZFC. The reason for this is the curious phenomenon
that propositions implying the consistency of PD actually imply PD.27
6. The success achieved in second order number theory with PD raises the hope that
somenewaxiommightsettlethecontinuumproblem, astatementofthirdordernumber
theory. However, here matters are more delicate because of the metamathematical
23 The assertion that every set belongs to L is abbreviated by V = L. There is of course no formal
deﬁnition of ‘natural statement’. What is meant by this is a statement expressing an ‘idea’ (for example a
combinatorial property) in contrast with encodings of metamathematical pathologies such as Gödel sen-
tences or consistency statements, cf. footnote 19. The completeness of ZFC + V = L in this sense is an
empirical fact.
24Thus the rationale of the inner model program resembles the idea behind Gentzen’s consistency proof
for Peano Arithmetic.
25Strictly speaking this has not yet been veriﬁed in all cases of interest, but there is no reason to doubt
that this will be achieved in the long run.
26For example the Lebesgue measurability of all sets of real numbers (in ZF) is equiconsistent with the
existence of an inaccessible cardinal (in ZFC) by Solovay [53] and Shelah [52].
27This hinges on the closure properties of the PD models supplied by sufﬁciently strong axioms of
inﬁnity. In somewhat analogous fashion, large cardinals yield ZFC models whose membership relation is
the standard ∈relation.

Was sind und was sollen (neue) Axiome?
101
limitations imposed by forcing. For example, soon after Cohen’s discovery of the
forcing method it became clear that (subject to modest restrictions) no large cardinal
axiom can decide CH [43].28 Nevertheless, new developments indicate that large
cardinalsarerelevantalbeitinsubtleandunexpectedways. Perhapsthemostintriguing
of these is the work done recently by Woodin [58].29 It rests on an abstraction from
the metamathematical situation in second order number theory under PD to the ‘next
structure’after second order number theory, i.e., the subsets of ω1 deﬁnable in P (ω1).
Assuming large cardinals, Woodin showed that if there is an axiom with a similar
effect on the theory of that structure as the one exerted by PD on second order number
theory, then CH must fail. Moreover, he presented an arguably plausible principle
having that desired effect and constructed a canonical model where it holds. In other
words, he proposed an axiom deciding CH together with an argument that there can
be no analogous axiom leading to the opposite outcome for CH. Such an asymmetry
criterion is what several principles proposed earlier had been lacking. It is worth
noting that a metamathematical asymmetry is also mentioned by Gödel [23] to argue
for the existence of inaccessible cardinals.
Another novelty in Woodin’s approach is the switch from the standard logical con-
sequence relation to a new logic – -logic – made necessary by the metamathematical
limitations imposed by forcing. The aforementioned abstraction from the metamath-
ematics of second order number theory is conceived in terms of -logic. In addition,
Woodin has explored connections of -logic with the large cardinal hierarchy. A re-
formulation of a plausible closure condition for large cardinal axioms in -logic yields
an ‘explanation’ for the linearity of a coarse version of the large cardinal hierarchy.
It is of course premature to tell whether these really are explanations. Moreover, the
utility of that reformulation hinges on a sweeping conjecture to the effect that -logic
is the strongest ‘reasonable’ logic which is immune to forcing. Further study will
be needed to know the full effect of the theory built around -logic. Similarly, it
is unclear whether a solution to the continuum problem will emerge from Woodin’s
deﬁnability analysis with its metamathematical accompaniments.30 In the end a de-
cision about CH may not even be based on a formal proof (or refutation) from a new
axiom. Conceivably the discovery of some new axiom(s) might assign a privileged
role to CH (or its negation) in what is then viewed as the ‘correct’ theory for P (ω1).
One possible criterion for correctness might be generic invariance of the theory (its
stability under forcing) in the presence of suitable large cardinals, cf. [54]: Sec. 2.8.
7. The preceding discussions provide partial answers to the two questions in the title
of this article in so far as they identify some candidates that have been proposed as new
axioms, and by describing their purpose primarily as a means to settle—in a manner
28This was noticed independently by Cohen.
29The two-part article [59] contains an accessible summary.
30Interestingly, Gödel ([20]: 182) conjectured that a more profound understanding not only of mathe-
matical but also of logical concepts is necessary for settling CH.

102
K. Hauser
that is deemed appropriate—problems left open by the ZFC axioms. But until now
very little has been said about the meaning of the term ‘axiom’ itself.
In ordinary language the word ‘axiom’ is used for self-evident propositions that
are accepted without proof. When it comes to mathematics, however, the criterion
of self-evidence—understood as applying to propositions that are evident or known
independently of all other propositions and evidence—is at best an ideal. For example,
already the self-evidence of some of the standard axioms may be challenged as can
be seen from the controversy surrounding the axiom of choice.31 If we move along
the large cardinal hierarchy, justiﬁcations in terms of self-evidence become more and
more tenuous. Determinacy axioms lack self-evidence altogether.
These different conceptions of ‘axiom’can in fact be traced back to Euclid. Among
the basic principles of the Elements which are not deﬁnitions he distinguishes between
postulates and “common notions”. Only the latter assume something “which is im-
mediately obvious and poses no difﬁculties to trained thought” whereas the former are
not evident in themselves and are adopted mainly because they are indispensable for
the theory one is aiming for.32 When Hilbert revived Euclid’s ideas at the beginning
of the twentieth century he declared this indispensability as the characteristic mark
of axiomhood. In [29] for example, intrinsic plausibility is not even mentioned.33
Hilbert viewed the primary role of axioms as lending orientation and order to math-
ematical theorizing. Like Euclid, he does not explain what axioms are, describing
instead the axiomatic method. Its idea is to study a mathematical theory by singling
out a small mumbler of principles that cannot be reduced to more elementary ones
and from which all others are logically derivable. In this manner the theory becomes
organized and can be surveyed as a whole.34 To this end axioms in the ﬁrst place need
to be consistent, and each axiom should be independent from the other axioms.
Hilbert’s account is inadequate in several respects. For one thing, he ignores the
principle that an axiom ought to have a higher degree of evidence than the theorems
it proves. Another more subtle inadequacy is brought to light by projective determi-
nacy: how could one possibly remain convinced of its consistency without believing
it is true? Indeed this was the motivation for the program to derive determinacy from
intrinsically plausible large cardinal axioms despite the overwhelming amount of ex-
trinsic evidence supporting PD (cf. Sections 4 and 5). The higher epistemic weight
of intrinsic plausibility appears to be a consequence of the fact that—in contrast with
31See [13] and the various views recorded in [47]. The intuitive origin of the axiom of choice is analyzed
in [27].
32See Proclus’ commentary on the ﬁrst book of the Elements. The statement “If two things are each
equal to a third thing, they must be equal to one another” is listed under the common notions whereas (an
equivalent of) the parallel axiom is included among the postulates.
33One reason for this was no doubt Hilbert’s insistence on a rather weak conception of mathematical
intuition that traces back to Kant and limits the meaningful part of mathematics to ﬁnitistic reasoning, cf.
[30]: 170f.
34Gödel’s formulation “shedding so much light upon a whole ﬁeld” in the passage quoted at the end
of Section 4 can be understood this way. In Hilbert’s view the axiomatization of theories is the basis of
scientiﬁc thought and guarantees the integral unity of knowledge, see [29]: 156.

Was sind und was sollen (neue) Axiome?
103
extrinsic evidence—there is at least one way in which it is directly linked with truth,
namely when an axiom is ‘implied’ by the concept(s) it aims to capture. This comes
close to the notion of analyticity described in [19]: 139, which applies when a proposi-
tion holds “owing to the meaning of the concepts occurring in it”, where this meaning
may perhaps be undeﬁnable (i.e., irreducible to anything more fundamental).35 A
paradigmatic example is the axiom of foundation which is ‘implied’ by the iterative
concept of set (cf. Section 2). Those who subscribe to this concept of set could per-
fectly well admit the existence of collections containing themselves as elements. Such
objects would, however, not fall under the concept of set in this intended meaning.36
By contrast, if V is to encompass all possible acts of collection and their iterations,
then V = L must look suspicious.
One manifestation of this is that only a short
initial segment of the large cardinal hierarchy is ‘realized’ in L. Moreover, the large
cardinals not found in L furnish a combinatorial analysis of the transcendency of V
over L, see [38]: ch. 2, §9. Many set theorists construe this as evidence that V = L
is false.
8. Given that the intrinsic plausibility of an axiom is inextricably bound to the mean-
ing of the primitive terms it contains, the next question is how that meaning should
be construed. Even without endorsing the thesis that meaning is determined by us-
age, a natural move would be to consult mathematical practice. For the manner in
which debates on fundamental issues are conducted should allow conclusions about
the meanings of the concepts in question. What we ﬁnd in virtually all situations is that
the opposing parties ultimately defend their position by invoking extra-mathematical
elements in addition to mathematical facts. For example, opponents of the ‘axiom’ of
constructibility argue that it runs counter to ‘the goals of set theory’ or that it violates
‘the intended meaning of the concept of set’. What these opaque phrases suggest is
that the meanings of mathematical concepts reside in the relationship in which the
mind stands to the objective reality of mathematics. Moreover, if the mind is assigned
a constitutive role with respect to mathematics as a whole, that relationship lies beyond
the explanatory reach of mathematical facts. Similarly, arguments why extrinsic evi-
dence really is evidence for the correctness of a given hypothesis in the last analysis
say something about how the mathematician adopting this hypothesis is intention-
ally related to the resulting theory. Evidence, by its very nature, is a phenomenon
‘occurring between’ the mathematician and mathematics, and it would therefore be
35Gödel distinguishes from this another notion of analytic which he calls tautological. It is understood “in
the purely formal sense that the terms occurring can be deﬁned (either explicitly or by rules of eliminating
them from sentences containing them) in such a way that the axioms and theorems become special cases of
the law of identity and disprovable propositions become negations of that law” ([19]: 138n). The distinction
between analytic and tautological is upheld in [21]: 321, where the comprehension scheme in second order
number theory is mentioned as an axiom that is implied by the concept ‘set of integers’. Gödel also points
out that analytic statements need not be decidable given that our knowledge of the world of concepts is
incomplete.
36Mathematically speaking, this is not a restriction since no interesting structures outside the wellfounded
sets have been discovered.

104
K. Hauser
countersensical to exclude his subjective perspective from the investigation of the role
that evidence plays in the selection of axioms.37 Admittedly, this contrasts with the
concerns of ‘ordinary science’where some standard of objectivity is presupposed and
subjectivity is regarded as a disturbing element. There the declared goal is to abstract
from the thinking subject by arranging experiments and deductions in such a way
as to minimize any reference to the observer. Here we seek to understand how the
subjective aspects of thought govern the rationale for selecting ﬁrst principles with a
claim to objective validity. In the remainder of this paper I want to outline some ideas
from Husserl’s phenomenology that will be helpful in this endeavor, and I will sketch
their connection with the two questions asked in the title.38
9. Husserl, who had originally been trained as a mathematician, developed his phi-
losophy out of a preoccupation with the epistemological foundations of mathematics.
His Logische Untersuchungen embark on a phenomenological clariﬁcation of logic,
i.e., an analysis of the essential structure of the cognitive acts by which we grasp the
ideas, concepts and laws of logic. More generally, Husserl was concerned with the
fundamental question of epistemology
… how it should be understood that the “in itself” of objectivity becomes
a “presentation” that it is “apprehended” in cognition, thus in the end nev-
ertheless becoming subjective again; what it means that the object exists
“in itself” and is “given” in cognition; how the ideality of the universal as
a concept or law can enter into the ﬂow of real psychological experiences
with a claim to knowledge by the thinking subject … ([32]: 8)39
This problem continued to occupy a central role in the development of Husserl’s
thought which in its later stages is characterized by a distinctive combination of ideal-
ism and platonism. Following Kant, Husserl relies on the synthetic activity of the mind
in examining how objective knowledge is possible given that experience begins with
immanent, sensory contents of subjective experience. His starting point is the obser-
vation that all acts of consciousness, i.e., actual episodes of seeing, believing, hoping
etc., are distinguished from other mental phenomena by a certain kind of directedness
or intentionality: to be conscious always means to be conscious of something. Tradi-
tionally, intentionality had been conceived as a relation into which the subject enters
37Intuitionism is an attempt to incorporate the subjective perspective into the foundations of mathematics,
but it does so by imposing unwarranted restrictions on what it regards as acceptable forms of mathematical
reasoning.
38That there is such a connection is suggested by Gödel in a draft for an undelivered lecture [22]. The
inﬂuence of Husserl’s phenomenology on Gödel’s philosophical program and his views on the foundations
of set theory are examined in [26].
39… wie es denn zu verstehen sei, dass das “an sich” der Objektivität zur “Vorstellung”, ja in der Erken-
ntnis zur “Erfassung” komme, also am Ende doch wieder subjektiv werde; was das heisst, der Gegenstand
sei “an sich” und in der Erkenntnis “gegeben”; wie die Idealität des Allgemeinen als Begriff oder Gesetz
in den Fluss der realen psychischen Erlebnisse eingehen und zum Erkenntnisbesitz des Denkenden werden
kann …

Was sind und was sollen (neue) Axiome?
105
with an object through a conscious act. This picture runs into problems in situations
where the intended object does not exist, or an intended state of affairs does not obtain,
but the corresponding act nevertheless exhibits intentionality.40 Husserl’s important
insight was that the actual existence of an object is not decisive for the directedness
of a given act. What matters for directedness is that our consciousness has a certain
structure when we perform the act. Husserl calls this structure noema, cf. [33]: part 3,
ch. 3. It is an abstract entity, distinct from both the act and its object, that can be
viewed as a generalization of the concept of ‘meaning’ from the sphere of linguistic
acts to all acts of consciousness.41
The function of the noema is not only to direct consciousness to objects that are
already there, but also to interconnect the multifarious contents of consciousness in
such a way that we have an experience as of an object.
But in a wider sense an object ‘constitutes’itself—‘whether it is actual or
not’—in certain concatenations of consciousness bearing in themselves
a recognizable unity in so far as they carry with themselves by virtue of
their essence the consciousness of an identical X. ([33]: §135, 281)42
Constitution is the main idealist ingredient in Husserl’s philosophy, however, it must
not be misunderstood as ‘creation’. What gets constituted in consciousness is sense
rather than objects, for example the sense of ‘object’. By examining certain compo-
nents of this sense, which Husserl called a Leitfaden for constitutional analyses,43 we
become acquainted with the platonist streak in his philosophy.
From the viewpoint of phenomenology objects44 are understood primarily as in-
variants or identities in the constantly changing stream of consciousness. This means
that awareness of an object comes about when distinct appearances are co-instantiated
asappearancesofsomethingthatremainsidenticalthroughoutthoseappearances([33]:
§41; [34]: §58).45 In this manner not only physical things, but also their abstract fea-
tures such as shape and color become objects to which consciousness is directed. Like-
wise mathematical items and other idealities assume their sense of objective existence
once they emerge as identities in manifolds. Two familiar examples are the contin-
uum with its various axiomatic characterizations in topology, algebra and analysis,
or the concept of a group as the common structure underlying diverse manifestations
40Examples are acts directed at contradictory concepts such as a round square, the set of all sets or an
elementary embedding of the universe into itself under AC.
41This interpretation of the noema and the ensuing reading of Husserl are due to Føllesdal. Although not
uncontested, it is supported by systematic and textual considerations [12].
42Im weiteren Sinne aber “konstituiert” sich ein Gegenstand – “ob er wirklicher ist oder nicht” – in gewis-
sen Bewusstseinszusammenhängen, die in sich eine einsehbare Einheit tragen, sofern sie wesensmässig das
Bewusstsein eines identischen X mit sich führen.
43See [36]: §§20–22, [33]: §§149, 150.
44In what follows the term ‘object’ is used in the broad sense encompassing not only physical things but
also concepts, multiplicities, predicates and state of affairs etc., cf. [32]: part 2, §45, 143.
45Invariance and identity across different experiences also play a central role in [50]: ch. XVI and in
[55]: p. 449 where they are related to Kant’s ideas about empirical objects.

106
K. Hauser
of symmetry. Among the large cardinal axioms, the existence of weakly compact
cardinals is justiﬁed by a multitude of equivalent deﬁnitions ranging from inﬁnitary
combinatorics to compactness properties of inﬁnitary languages, reﬂection principles,
model theoretic ideas and algebraic structures. Woodin cardinals—whose connection
with reﬂection principles is more tenuous than that of weakly compact cardinals—are
generally regarded as deﬁnite entities because they arise in at least three seemingly
unrelated contexts (stationary tower forcing, iteration trees and the extender algebra).
In each of those situations Woodin cardinals encapsulate a combinatorial property of
precisely the right kind to carry out the required argument, cf. [60]. The ‘object-sense’
of this large cardinal concept is then the noematic correlate of the act in which we
apprehend what remains invariant across these different experiences: “the pure X in
abstraction of all predicates” ([33]: §131).
Attesting to the platonist streak in Husserl’s philosophy is his insistence that per-
ception is inherently perspectival and incomplete. In every perceptual situation only
some of the determinations of the object, for example the front side or its length, are
present. Shape, color and other abstract features of the object are never fully given in
a single experience. Depending on the point of view of the perceiver, they are revealed
through a manifold of perspective variations (Abschattungen) with sufﬁcient afﬁnities
to be apprehended as perspective variations of one and the same objective entity ([33]:
§41, 74f). The aspectival nature of objects of perception is also in evidence in the
manner in which mathematical entities and other idealities are experienced, making
it appropriate to speak of objects and perception in this context as well. Measurable
cardinals, for example, were ﬁrst conceived as an afﬁrmative answer to the abstract
measure problem, cf. [38]: §2. They gained their recognition as objectively existent
by virtue of the various aspects under which they can be analyzed (inﬁnitary com-
binatorics, the ultrapower construction, transcendency over smaller cardinals, their
effect on the constructible sets, the connection with descriptive set theory, new forc-
ing techniques and the ﬁne structure of the associated inner model), and the fact that
measurability remains thematic throughout the numerous results obtained under each
particular aspect ([37]; [38]: ch. 4).
When visual experiences are examined phenomenologically, it is found that they
are not self-contained units of experience. For example, standing in front of a house I
cannot see its back. Nevertheless, what I perceive is the front of something having a
back which would be visible if I changed my position relative to the house. In general,
it belongs to the essence of any intentional experience that we always anticipate or co-
intend other determinations of the intentional object that are not in the current focus of
attention. These adumbrations and tacit allusions must be intrinsically related across
different acts as otherwise it remains unintelligible how any one of them can conﬁrm,
clarify or rule out any other. The whole system of predelineated potentialities that
surrounds every act is what Husserl calls its horizon. It is indispensable for explaining
how within the stream of consciousness the awareness of an enduring object is enabled
([36]: §§19, 20).

Was sind und was sollen (neue) Axiome?
107
The ideas presented so far suggest how an act of consciousness can possess the
intrinsic property of object-directedness irrespective of the ‘actual’ existence of its
object. What is missing is an explanation of how this leads to knowledge about
that object. To that end Husserl introduces the notion of fulﬁllment.46 It describes
the special mode of consciousness in which we comprehend that two qualitatively
different acts ﬁt together in a certain way. One of these acts is signitive and merely
points to an object. For example I can name a particular number by a compound
arithmetical expression like 172 + 293 without realizing that it is the number 24 678.
The other act is called intuitive because in its performance consciousness is explicitly
presented with an object. Perceptual acts are intuitive in this sense because their
objects are experienced directly and not as representations of some reality that is only
mediately accessible ([33]: §43). Husserl states as a fundamental phenomenological
fact that a signitive and an intuitive act may enter into a peculiar union.
We experience how in intuition the same objectuality is intuitively real-
ized which was “merely meant” in the symbolic act, and that it becomes
intuitable exactly as something determined in such a way as it was initially
merely thought (merely meant). ([32]: part 2, §8)47
This experience is what Husserl calls fulﬁllment. It is an act in its own right since it has
a particular intentional correlate: the identity of the intentional object of the signitive
act and the intentional object of the associated intuitive act (loc. cit.). According to
this theory cognition is an act complex involving a higher-order act of identiﬁcation
which is founded on lower-order signitive and intuitive acts.48
For the purpose of illustration consider how the existence of the transitive closure
of a set is recognized. For a given set a, we deﬁne its transitive closure as the smallest
transitive set containing a as a subset.49 The act A1 corresponding to this deﬁnition
is merely signitive since it fails to ‘produce’ an object in propria persona. Indeed, at
least initially, it remains unclear whether there are any transitive sets containing a as a
subset. In a separate act A2 the intuitions underlying the axioms of union, inﬁnity and
replacement deliver an object, namely the set a ∪ a ∪  a . . . , which is transitive
and contains a as a subset. Finally, an act of synthesis A3 brings to consciousness the
identity of the intentional object of A1 with the intentional object of A2.
Husserl’s strategy for reconciling the subjectivity of the act of knowing with the
objectivity of the content that is known exploits the idea of fulﬁllment in order to
46See §§1–29 and §§36–39 of the Sixth Logical Investigation in [32].
47Wir erleben es, wie in derAnschauung dasselbe Gegenständliche intuitive vergegenwärtigt ist, welches
im symbolischen Akte “bloss gedacht” war, und dass es gerade als das so und so Bestimmte anschaulich
wird, als was es zunächst bloss gedacht (bloss bedeutet) war.
48 The concept of foundation with regard to acts and their components is crucial in Husserl’s account of
knowledge. Formally, “a content of the species α is founded in a content of the species β if an α by its
essence ... cannot exist, unless also a β exists; where it is left open whether also the co-existence of certain
γ, δ is required or not” ([32]: Investigation 3, §21). Higher-order acts are acts that are founded upon other
acts in this sense.
49A set a is transitive if it is downward closed under the ∈-relation, i.e., if every element of a is also a
subset of a.

108
K. Hauser
accommodate the traditional view that knowledge requires the adaequatio rei ac in-
tellectus.
[W]here a presentative intention has achieved its ultimate fulﬁllment in
idealandperfectperception, therethegenuineadaequatioreietintellectus
has established itself: the objective is really “present” or “given” exactly
as that which is intended; no longer is any partial intention implied that
lacks its fulﬁllment. ([32]: part 2, §37)50
According to Husserl here the intellectus is the meaning intention of a signitive act,
and the adaequatio is realized if an objectivity is explicitly given in intuition51 exactly
as it was meant in the signitive act. At the same time he is forced to concede that
ultimate fulﬁllment by means of perception remains an ideal possibility.
The object is not really given [in perception], for it is not fully and wholly
given as what it itself is. It appears merely “from the front”, only “per-
spectively shortened and foreshadowed” etc. ([32]: part 2, §14b)52
Consequently the purported adaequatio seems to be conﬁned to the subjective sphere
of the perceiver.53 Husserl’s answer to this dilemma appeals to the horizon structure of
experience. Although an object of perception always appears under some aspect and
is only one-sidedly present in consciousness, that presence includes adumbrations to
other possible orientations in which it might be perceived. In this way misperceptions
may be exposed eventually. The decisive point is that the horizon of potential future
experiences is necessarily open-ended.
No perception of [a] thing is ﬁnal, there is always room for new percep-
tions that would determine indeterminations more accurately and fulﬁll
what is unfulﬁlled. With every continuation the sum of the determinations
of the thing-noema, which continuously belongs to the same thing X, en-
riches itself. It is a law of essence, that every perception and perception
manifold is expandable, whence the process is unbounded; accordingly
no intuitive grasping of the nature of a thing can be so complete that a
further perception could not contribute to it something noematically new.
([33]: §149)54
50[W]o sich eine Vorstellungsintention durch diese ideal vollkommene Wahrnehmung letzte Erfüllung
verschafft hat, da hat sich die echte adaequatio rei et intellectus hergestellt: das Gegenständliche ist genau
als das, als welches es intendiert ist wirklich “gegenwärtig” oder “gegeben”; keine Partialintention ist mehr
impliziert, die ihrer Erfüllung ermangele.
51 Husserl uses the terms ‘intuition’ and ‘perception’ interchangeably in virtue of their identical roles in
the fulﬁllment relation ([32]: part 2, §45).
52Der Gegenstand ist nicht wirklich gegeben, er ist nämlich nicht voll und ganz als derjenige gegeben,
welcher er selbst ist. Er erscheint nur “von derVorderseite”, nur “perspektivisch verkürzt und abgeschattet”
u. dgl.
53Optical illusions are a vivid illustration of this.

Was sind und was sollen (neue) Axiome?
109
Interestingly, this yields a characterization of the transcendence of things, their being
outside consciousness, in terms of the contents of consciousness. Objects, whether
real or ideal,55 have their determinate properties that go beyond what is experienced
or anticipated, and these properties are there to be explored. In the course of this ex-
ploration we encounter objective constraints for example by way of physical boundary
conditions or demands of logical consistency.56 A perceptual noema is therefore al-
ways subject to more or less radical adjustments in the face of recalcitrant experiences
or exposed misperceptions. This distinguishes perception from hallucination and other
modes of consciousness with explicit awareness of an object. Husserl maintains that
even though the resolution of ambiguous and indeterminate aspects of a given percep-
tion can proceed in inﬁnitely many directions, it nevertheless proceeds systematically
“in a strictly determinate fashion” ([33]: §44).57 As a consequence the noema must
furnish a rule for organizing the manifold of incoming perceptual data, recollections
of past experiences, anticipations of and adumbrations to possible other experiences
as well as the intrinsic relationships in which they stand to one another in such a way
that they can be synthesized into the coherent experience of one and the same ob-
ject. Thus the meaning of ‘objective existence’ consists in the progressive ‘ﬁlling’ of
an open-ended system of ‘unﬁlled’ noematic components that correspond to possible
perspectival variations of the object.
ThereaderwillhavenoticedthatthisroughoutlineofHusserl’stheoryofperception
and its epistemic role fails to address traditional metaphysical concerns. Clearly the
purpose of phenomenology is not to deliver a philosophical ‘proof’ of the existence
of the natural world or a mind-independent realm of mathematical objects. Rather, it
aims to lay open the sense of those claims and the meaning of the evidence in their
favor by consulting the intentional structures of consciousness. The reason why this is
feasible in the ﬁrst place is that all meaning, including what it means for an object to
be outside of consciousness, is constituted in and dependent on consciousness ([33]:
§44, §52, [34]: §94, 233).
10. If we agree that questions pertaining to the nature of axioms, their plausibility and
therationalebehindtheirselection, arelinkedtothemeaningsofthetermstheycontain,
and if we accept Husserl’s thesis that meaning goes hand in hand with intentionality,
54Keine Wahrnehmung des Dinges ist letztabgeschlossen, immer bleibt Raum für neue Wahrnehmungen,
die Unbestimmtheiten näher bestimmen, Unerfülltheiten erfüllen würden. Mit jedem Fortgange bereichert
sich der Bestimmungsgehalt des Dingnoemas, das stetig zu demselben Dinge X gehört. Es ist eine We-
senseinsicht, dass jede Wahrnehmung und Wahrnehmungsmannigfaltigkeit erweiterungsfähig, der Prozess
also ein endloser ist; demgemäss kann keine intuitive Erfassung des Dingwesens so vollständig sein, dass
eine weitere Wahrnehmung ihr nicht noematisch Neues beifügen könnte.
55The ﬁrst uncountable cardinal and its unresolved relation to the size of the continuum is a good example.
56The objection that the demand of logical consistency is our choice is quickly dismissed because if that
were so, then we could also choose to bring about consistency and certain theorems ([21]: fn. 22, 314).
57According to Husserl this strictly determinate fashion is predelineated by the category to which the
perceptual object belongs. In the case of spatial objects, e.g., one is bound by the laws of geometry. Cf.
§142 and §§149ff of [33].

110
K. Hauser
the next question is what kind of acts are involved in the constitution of the concept of
set. The answer is straightforward and can be gleaned from Cantor’s famous deﬁnition
of ‘set’.
By a “set” we understand any collection M of deﬁnite well-distinguished
objects m of our intuition or our thinking (which are called the “elements”
of M) into a whole. ([8]: 282)58
Husserl, who was a colleague of Cantor’s at the University of Halle from 1886 to
1900, had already analyzed the concept of set along these lines in his Habilitations-
schrift of 1887 [31].59 He actually distinguished two stages in the constitution of sets.
In the ﬁrst stage disjoint items are collected into a plurality that is a ‘Many’ not yet
apprehended as a ‘One’. At this point the set is preconstituted but it is not thematic
as an object. In the second stage, by reﬂecting on the preceding act of collection, the
unity of this plurality is brought to awareness, and we become conscious of the set as
a new object.
A [set] arises when a uniform interest and simultaneously in it and with it a
uniform awareness highlights distinct contents individually and contains
them. Thus the collective unity can only be comprehended by reﬂecting
on the mental act giving rise to the set. ([31]: 74)60
Here and elsewhere61 the reference to mental acts should not be misconstrued as saying
that sets are somehow created in the mind of the mathematician. In other words,
Husserl’s analysis is not concerned with metaphysical questions about the conditions
for the existence of sets. Rather he aims to show how our awareness of sets as objects
is enabled. Thus there is no conﬂict with a platonistic interpretation of set theory;
indeed, as noted earlier, mathematical objects are experienced as mind-independent.
The constitution of the concept of set requires a further act of abstraction in which
the “general form” of all sets is singled out ([32]: part 2, §44). The adequacy of this
analysis is apparent from the fact that it allows to ‘deduce’ the ZF axioms (i.e., ZFC
without the axiom of choice) from the concept of set in its intended meaning. In those
‘deductions’ one is identifying the mental acts through which we become conscious
58Unter einer “Menge” verstehen wir jede Zusammenfassung M von bestimmten wohlunterschiedenen
Objekten m unserer Anschauung oder unseres Denkens (welche die “Elemente” von M genannt werden)
zu einem Ganzen.
59It is worth noting that Cantor’s earlier deﬁnition of ‘set’ as a “Many which can be thought of as One”
([6]: 204), which predates Husserl’s arrival in Halle by three years, does not explicitly refer to an act of
collecting and has a more metaphysical ﬂavor with its appeal to ‘possibility’. Moreover, Cantor’s 1895
deﬁnition appears almost verbatim in the opening paragraph of Zur Lehre vom Inbegriff, a manuscript
prepared by Husserl in 1891 (cf. the Husserliana edition of [31]: 384).
60Ein Inbegriff entsteht, indem ein einheitliches Interesse und in ihm und mit ihm zugleich ein einheitliches
Bemerken verschiedene Inhalte für sich heraushebt und umfasst. Es kann also die kollektive Verbindung
auch nur erfasst werden durch Reﬂexion auf den psychischen Akt, durch welchen der Inbegriff zustande
kommt.
61The constitutional analysis of sets in terms of a two-tiered process that involves an act of collecting
followed by an act of reﬂection is fully upheld in §61 of the posthumously published [35].

Was sind und was sollen (neue) Axiome?
111
of the sets in question. Husserl essentially carried this out for the pairing, union and
separation axioms in the Philosophie der Arithmetik. To be sure, he did not yet have
the idea of fulﬁllment then, and he is only talking about ﬁnite sets of sensory objects
most of the time. But his arguments can be adapted to handle inﬁnite sets by means of
what he calls ﬁgural moments: directly perceivable Gestalt-qualities of symbolically
presented multiplicities which are indicative of set character ([31]: ch. XI).62 The
details of this are worked out for the replacement axiom in [27]: Sec. 12.63 It is worth
emphasizing that the usual informal arguments for the ZF axioms found in textbooks
of set theory de facto attempt to give a phenomenological justiﬁcation for the axioms.
Invariably these attempts, however, fall short of the latter in terms of transparency.
Similar remarks apply with respect to large cardinal axioms derived from reﬂection
principles. The informal discussion of the iterative concept of set and the cumulative
hierarchy in Section 2 can be recast as an analysis of the meaning of the expression V
in terms of mental acts of iterated collections and their idealizations. These acts are
linked into a complex network by the various kinds of dependence relations obtaining
between them. One way in which acts can be related is via the ﬁlling of unﬁlled
noematic components. For example, the intuitive act in which the progression of
the ordinals is brought to consciousness ﬁlls a noematic component of the idealized
notion ‘arbitrary iteration of the operation set of’.64
In addition, the foundation
relation between acts induces a hierarchical structure on the network.65 In the ﬁrst
instance this concerns acts of abstraction such as the setting into relief of a dependent
moment in a composite whole which is subsequently studied in its own right. Finally
there are also logical relations between the noemata of various acts. For example,
the noema of the act expressing the idea ‘arbitrary iteration of the operation set of’ is
logically related to the noema of the act in which the absolute indescribability of V
is grasped. Such relations introduce further dependences between acts of the sort ‘a
rational subject who performs act A1 must also perform act A2’.
By means of these kinds of dependence relations, i.e., in terms of the instrinsic
structure of this network of acts, the meaning of the axiom claiming the existence of
inaccessible cardinals in V can be explicated. Among other things, this makes use
of the fact that the meaning intention expressed in the deﬁnition of an inaccessible
cardinal is an instantiation of the type given by the meaning intention expressed in
62Ironically Husserl, worried about the logical impossibility of inﬁnite sets ([31]: 218ff), did not use
ﬁgural moments to that end.
63The main application of ﬁgural moments in that paper is to pin down the difference in evidential
character between the axiom of choice and the logically equivalent wellorder principle. There is also a
phenomenological argument why the immediate plausibility of the axiom of choice falls short of providing
evidence of its truth, see [27]: Sec. 12. Incidentally, the ideas underlying that argument may be used to
‘derive’the power set axiom phenomenologically. It is, however, a separate and difﬁcult issue to determine
the sense of the maximality principle which is implicit in the formulation of that axiom, cf. fn. 64. Some
light can be shed on a particular aspect of this when the related notion ‘arbitrary subset’ is considered in
the context of Husserl’s remarks on free variation in [35]: §§87, 88.
64 Another noematic component is ﬁlled by the intuition underlying the idea of the power set of a set M
as the set of all subsets of M.
65For the concept of foundation see footnote 48.

112
K. Hauser
Cantor’s doctrine of the Absolute. Furthermore the fact that the acts in which the
total indescribability of V is brought to awareness are appropriatly founded on the
basic intuitions entering into Cantor’s deﬁnition of ‘set’ allows to spell out the sense
in which the axiom of inaccessible cardinals is a “natural continuation” ([20]: 182) of
the standard axioms.
There is no analogous argument for measurable cardinals (cf. Section 3) when
the meaning of V is construed along these lines. However, new components may
be added to the noema of V , such as transcendence of V over Gödel’s L. These
components, although prima facie unrelated, are appropriately ﬁlled in the presence
of a measurable cardinal. Given the meaning of ‘objective existence’ in terms of
the progressive ﬁlling of new noematic components, and given our mathematical
experience with measurable cardinals, we cannot help but postulating their existence.
This is of course not a veriﬁcation of the belief in their existence, but it enables us to
understand that belief philosophically.
Projective determinacy is a principle whose formulation lacks an intuitive connec-
tion with the iterative concept of set. But the sense in which it provides a ‘solution’
to the problems of classical descriptive set theory is intimately linked to intuitive ex-
pectations contained in the meaning-horizon of ‘(projective) set’. From a geometric
point of view projective sets as point sets in Euclidean space are conceived as ‘simple’
and therefore ought to have regularity properties such as Lebesgue measurability. All
of these regularity properties provably obtain for the projective sets under PD. In
virtue of this, PD is said to yield the ‘correct’ theory for the projective sets. This
distinguishes descriptive set theory under PD from rival theories enjoying syntactical
features such as uniformity in proofs and completeness.66 But PD is itself a projective
statement when formulated as a schema and thus belongs to this supposedly ‘correct’
theory. Therefore it was natural to look for a proof of PD from strong axioms of
inﬁnity. When that program was ﬁnally completed, the theory under PD turned out to
be ‘correct’ in an even stronger sense (see the end of Section 5).
The point I wish to emphasize here is that in order fully to understand the sense in
which the solution offered by PD can claim objectivity we must abandon the one-sided
view that the objective is something entirely alien to the subjective and that it ought
to be studied with complete disregard of the mental life of the mathematician. As
illustrated by the previous section, already the intentionality inherent in the seemingly
straightforward perception of physical objects seriously undermines a conception of
objectivity derived from the Cartesian dualism of res extensa versus res cogitans.
Likewiseintheascenttohigherlevelsofobjectivityananalysisaimedatuncoveringthe
rationale behind the selection of ﬁrst principles and the meanings of claims pertaining
to their validity must incorporate the intentional structures of consciousness. To that
end
66Strictly speaking completeness is not a syntactic notion because it refers to the decidability of ‘natural’
statements. The latter is obviously not a syntactic notion, cf. fn. 19 and 23.

Was sind und was sollen (neue) Axiome?
113
it is not enough that logic, in the manner characteristic of positive sci-
ences, methodically fashion objective theories and reduce the forms of
possible genuine theory to principles and norms. We must rise above
the self-forgetfulness of the theorizer who, in his theoretical producing,
devotes himself to the subject matter, the theories and the methods, and
accordingly knows nothing of the inwardness of that producing—who
lives in producing, but does not have this productive living itself as a
theme within his ﬁeld of vision. Only by virtue of a fundamental clariﬁ-
cation, penetrating the depths of the inwardness that produces cognition
and theory, the transcendental inwardness, does what is produced as gen-
uine theory and genuine science become understandable. ([34]: 14, 15f
in the translation by D. Cairns)67
The need for such a reorientation is particularly evident in the current situation
with the continuum problem where there is some consensus among practitioners of
set theory that any solution would have to be accompanied by an analysis of what it
means to be a solution. Woodin’s recent work, which has added an intriguing twist
to this ongoing debate, serves as a case in point. In order to recover the sense in
which his results provide evidence for the falsity of CH it is clearly not sufﬁcient
to study mathematical facts and their formal relation with various abstractions and
idealizations. Rather one must examine how the mathematician is intentionally related
to those facts because it is on these grounds that he accepts certain abstractions and
idealizations as ‘natural’ or ‘reasonable’.
As one among many examples consider the theorem about the deﬁnability of the
set O() in the structure ⟨H(c+), ∈⟩.68 On the basis of the mathematical content,
there is no question that O() is a formal analog of O′ and that the application of
Tarski’s theorem for obtaining non-CH resembles the formal structure of the heuristic
argument for Gödel’s ﬁrst incompleteness theorem in [17]: 362f. Moreover, formal
analogies of that sort suggest that -logic is a non-arbitrary generalization of ﬁrst
order logic. However, this in itself does not tell us why the ﬁnite axiomatizability
of the theory of ⟨H(ω2), ∈⟩should be regarded as a criterion for determining the
true value of the continuum in the ﬁrst place. Clearly Woodin defends the realistic
attitude towards CH, in other words he aims at a resolution in V .69 And it is equally
clear that his approach involves a re-interpretation of the noema of V conceived no
67[kann es nicht damit sein Bewenden haben], dass die Logik in der Weise der positiven Wissenschaften
objektive Theorien methodisch gestalte, und die Formen möglicher echter Theorie auf Prinzipien und
Normenbringe. WirmüssenunsüberdieSelbstvergessenheitdesTheoretikerserheben, derimtheoretischen
Leisten den Sachen, den Theorien und Methoden hingegeben, von der Innerlichkeit seines Leistens nichts
weiss, der in ihnen lebt, aber dieses leistende Leben selbst nicht im thematischen Blick hat. Nur durch
eine prinzipielle Klärung, die in die Tiefen der Erkenntnis und Theorie leistenden Innerlichkeit, der trans-
zendentalen Innerlichkeit, hinabsteigt, wird, was als echte Theorie und echte Wissenschaft geleistet ist,
verständlich.
68See[59]: 688. ThisusestheexistenceofaproperclassofWoodincardinalsasabackgroundassumption.
69This is also implicit in his more cautious claim that these results—no matter whether they are the
solution—provide convincing evidence that there is a solution to the continuum problem ([59]: 690).

114
K. Hauser
longer as encompassing all possible acts of collection, but rather as an epistemological
attitude, the broadest possible point of view. In my opinion, the conceptual resources
of phenomenology with its nuanced distinctions will be crucial in spelling out what
exactly this means.
References
[1]
Benacerraf, Paul and Hilary Putnam (eds.): 1983. Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected
Readings, 2nd edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[2]
Bernays, Paul: 1961. Zur Frage der Unendlichkeitsschemata in der axiomatischen Men-
genlehre. In: V. Bar-Hillel et al. (eds.),
Essays in the Foundations of Mathematics,
Jerusalem: Magnes Press, 3–49.
[3]
Cantor, Georg:
1872. Über eine Ausdehnung des Satzes aus der Theorie der
trigonometrischen Reihen. Math. Annalen 5: 123–132. Reprinted in [9]: 92–101.
[4]
Cantor, Georg: 1874. Über eine Eigenschaft des Inbegriffs aller reellen algebraischen
Zahlen. Crelles Journal f. Mathematik 77: 258–262. Reprinted in [9]: 115–118.
[5]
Cantor, Georg: 1878. Ein Beitrag zur Mannigfaltigkeitslehre. Crelles Journal f. Mathe-
matik 84: 242–258. Reprinted in [9]: 119–133.
[6]
Cantor, Georg: 1883. Grundlagen einer allgemeinen Mannigfaltigkeitslehre. Math. An-
nalen 21: 545–586. Reprinted in [9]: 165–208.
[7]
Cantor, Georg: 1887. Mitteilungen zur Lehre vom Transﬁniten. Zeitschr. f. Philosophie
und philos. Kritik 91: 81–125. Reprinted in [9]: 378–419.
[8]
Cantor, Georg: 1895, 1897.BeiträgezurBegründungdertransﬁnitenMengenlehre.Math.
Annalen 46: 481–551 and 49: 207–246. Reprinted in [9]: 282–351.
[9]
Cantor, Georg: 1932. Gesammelte Abhandlungen mathematischen und philosophischen
Inhalts. Edited by E. Zermelo. Berlin: Springer. Page numbers refer to the reprographic
reproduction, Hildesheim: Georg Olms Verlagsbuchhandlung (1962).
[10]
Cohen, Paul J.: 1963, 1964. The Independence of the Continuum Hypothesis I & II. Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci., USA 50 & 51: 1143–1148, 105–110.
[11]
Dales, H. Garth and W. Hugh Woodin: 1987. An Introduction to Independence for An-
alysts. London Math. Soc. Lecture Notes Series 115. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
[12]
Føllesdal, Dagﬁnn: 1969. Husserl’s notion of the noema. J. of Philosophy 66, 680–687.
[13]
Fraenkel Abraham A., Yehoshua Bar-Hillel, and Azriel Lévy: 1973. Foundations of Set
Theory, 2nd edition. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
[14]
Friedman, Harvey: 1986. Necessary uses of abstract theory in ﬁnite mathematics. Ad-
vances in Math. 60 (1): 92–122.
[15]
Friedman, Harvey: 1998. Finite functions and the necessary use of large cardinals. Annals
of Math. 148 (3): 803–893.

Was sind und was sollen (neue) Axiome?
115
[16]
Friedman, Harvey: 2000. Normal mathematics will need new axioms. Bull. Symb. Logic
6: 434–446.
[17]
Gödel Kurt: 1934. On undecidable propositions of formal mathematical systems. In: M.
Davis (ed.), The Undecidable, Hewlett, NY: Raven Press (1965). Reprinted in: S. Fefer-
man et. al. (eds.), Kurt Gödel Collected Works, Volume I, New York: Oxford University
Press, 1986, 346–371.
[18]
Gödel, Kurt: 1938. The Consistency of the Axiom of Choice and the Generalized Contin-
uum Hypothesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., USA 24: 556–557. Reprinted in: S. Feferman et.
al. (eds.), Kurt Gödel Collected Works, Volume II, New York: Oxford University Press,
1990, 26–27.
[19]
Gödel, Kurt: 1944. Russell’s mathematical logic. In: P. Schilpp (ed.), The Philosophy
of Bertrand Russell, Library of living philosophers, vol. 5, Evanston: Northwestern
University, 125–153. Reprinted in: S. Feferman et. al. (eds.),
Kurt Gödel Collected
Works, Volume II, New York: Oxford University Press, 1990, 119–141.
[20]
Gödel, Kurt: 1947. What is Cantor’s continuum problem?
American Mathematical
Monthly 54: 515–525. Reprinted in: S. Feferman et. al. (eds.), Kurt Gödel Collected
Works, Volume II, New York: Oxford University Press, 1990, 176–187.
[21]
Gödel, Kurt: 1995. Some basic theorems on the foundations of mathematics and their
implications. In: S. Feferman et. al. (eds.), Kurt Gödel Collected Works, Volume III, New
York: Oxford University Press, 1995, 304–323.
[22]
Gödel, Kurt: 1961/?. The modern development of the foundations of mathematics in
the light of philosophy. Transcription of a shorthand draft, with translation by E. Köhler
and H. Wang, revised by J. Dawson, C. Parsons, and W. Craig. In: S. Feferman et. al.
(eds.), Kurt Gödel Collected Works, Volume III, New York: Oxford University Press,
1995, 374–387.
[23]
Gödel, Kurt: 1964. What is Cantor’s continuum problem? Revised and expanded version
of [20], in [1]: 258–273. Reprinted in: S. Feferman et. al. (eds.), Kurt Gödel Collected
Works, Volume II, New York: Oxford University Press, 1990, 254–270.
[24]
Hauser, Kai: 1991. Indescribable cardinals and elementary embeddings. J. Symb. Logic
56: 439–457.
[25]
Hauser, Kai: 2001. Objectivity over objects: A case study in theory formation. Synthese
128 (3): 245–285.
[26]
Hauser, Kai: Gödel’s program revisited. To appear in Bull. Symb. Logic.
[27]
Hauser, Kai: Is choice self-evident? Submitted for publication.
[28]
Hilbert, David: 1900. Mathematische Probleme. Göttinger Nachrichten: 253–257. En-
glish translation in Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics 28, Providence, RI:
Amer. Math. Soc., 1976, 1–34.
[29]
Hilbert, David: 1918. Axiomatisches Denken. Math. Annalen 78: 405–415.
[30]
Hilbert, David: 1925. Über das Unendliche. Math. Annalen 95: 161–190.
[31]
Husserl, Edmund: 1891. Philosophie der Arithmetik. Logische und psychologische Un-
tersuchungen. Halle a. d. S.: C. E. M. Pfeffer (Robert Stricker). Reprinted in Husserliana

116
K. Hauser
XII, The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1970.
[32]
Husserl, Edmund: 1913, 1968. Logische Untersuchungen, Zweiter Band. I. Teil: Un-
tersuchungen zur Phänomenologie und Theorie der Erkenntnis. Second Edition, Halle:
Niemeyer. II. Teil: Elemente einer phänomenologischen Aufklärung der Erkenntnis.
Fourth Edition, Tübingen: Niemeyer.
[33]
Husserl, Edmund: 1928.IdeenzueinerreinenPhänomenologieundphänomenologischen
Philosophie, Erstes Buch. Third Reprinting, Halle: Niemeyer.
[34]
Husserl, Edmund: 1929. Formale und transzendentale Logik. Versuch einer Kritik der
logischen Vernunft. Jahrbuch für Philosophie und phänomenologische Forschung 10:
1–298. English translation by D. Cairns, The Hague: Nijhoff, 1969.
[35]
Husserl, Edmund: 1964. Erfahrung und Urteil. Untersuchungen zur Genealogie der
Logik, Hamburg: Claassen, 1964.
[36]
Husserl, Edmund: 1977. Cartesianische Meditationen, Hamburg: Felix Meiner.
[37]
Jech, Thomas: 1978. Set Theory. New York: Academic Press.
[38]
Kanamori, Akihiro: 1994. The Higher Inﬁnite. Berlin: Springer.
[39]
Kechris, Alexander S.: 2001. Actions of Polish Groups and Classiﬁcation Problems,
Analysis and Logic. London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Series. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
[40]
Kunen, Kenneth: 1971. Elementary embeddings and inﬁnitary combinatorics. J. Symb.
Logic 36: 407–413.
[41]
Kunen, Kenneth: 1980. Set Theory. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
[42]
Levy, Azriel: 1960. Axiom schemata of strong inﬁnity in axiomatic set theory. Paciﬁc
Journal of Mathematics 10: 223–238.
[43]
Levy, Azriel and Robert M. Solvay: 1967. Measurable cardinals and the continuum
hypothesis. Israel J. Math. 5: 234–248.
[44]
Mahlo, Paul: 1911. Über lineare transﬁnite Mengen. Berichte über die Verhandlungen
der Königlich Sächsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Leipzig, Mathematisch-
Physische Klasse 63: 187–225.
[45]
Mahlo, Paul.: 1912, 1913. Zur Theorie und Anwendung der ρ0-Zahlen I, II. Berichte
über die Verhandlungen der Königlich Sächsischen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu
Leipzig, Mathematisch-Physische Klasse 64: 108–122, 65: 268–282.
[46]
Martin, Donald A. and John R. Steel: 1989. A proof of projective determinacy. J. Am.
Math. Soc. 2: 71–125.
[47]
Moore, Gregory H.: 1982. Zermelo’s Axiom of Choice. New York: Springer.
[48]
Reinhardt, William N.: 1970.Ackermann’s set theory equals ZF. Annals of Mathematical
Logic 2: 189–249.
[49]
Reinhardt, William N.: 1974. Remarks on reﬂection principles, large cardinals, and
elementary embeddings. In: T. Jech (ed.), Axiomatic Set Theory, Proc. of Symposia in
Pure Mathematics 13, part 2, Providence: American Math. Soc., 189–205.

Was sind und was sollen (neue) Axiome?
117
[50]
Rota, Gian Carlo: 1997. The pernicious inﬂuence of mathematics on philosophy. In:
Indiscrete Thoughts, Boston: Birkhäuser.
[51]
Shelah, Saharon: 1974. Inﬁnite abelian groups, Whitehead problem and some construc-
tions. Israel J. Math. 18: 243–256.
[52]
Shelah, Saharon: 1984. Can you take Solovay’s inaccessible away? Israel J. Math. 48:
1–47.
[53]
Solovay, Robert M.: 1970. A model of set theory in which every set of reals is Lebesgue
measurable. Ann. of Math. (2) 92: 1–56.
[54]
Steel, John R.: 2000. Mathematics needs new axioms. Bull. Symb. Logic 6: 422–433.
[55] Tieszen, Richard: 1995. Husserl and the philosophy of mathematics. In: B. Smith and
D. Smith (eds.), Cambridge Compagnion to Husserl, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press, 438–462.
[56] Todorcevic, Stevo: 1989. Partition problems in topology. Contemporary Mathematics 84,
Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society.
[57] Wang, Hao: 1996. A Logical Journey. From Gödel to Philosophy. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
[58] Woodin, W. Hugh: 1999. The Axiom of Determinacy, Forcing Axioms, and the Nonsta-
tionary Ideal. Berlin, New York: de Gruyter.
[59] Woodin, W. Hugh: 2001. The continuum hypothesis. Notices of the Amer. Math. Soc.:
567–576 and 681–690.
[60] Woodin, W. Hugh., A. R. D. Mathias, and Kai Hauser: The Axiom of Determinacy. To
appear in de Gruyter Ser. Log. Appl.
Technische Universität Berlin
Fachbereich 3
Sekr. MA 8-1
10623 Berlin
Germany
E-mail: hauser@math.tu-berlin.de


Iterating  Operations in Admissible Set Theory
without Foundation: A Further Aspect of
Metapredicative Mahlo
Gerhard Jäger and Dieter Probst
Abstract. In this article we study the theory KPi0 + (-TR) which (i) describes a recursively
inaccessible universe, (ii) permits the iteration of  operations along the ordinals, (iii) does not
comprise ∈induction, and (iv) restricts complete induction on the natural numbers to sets. It is
shown that the proof-theoretic ordinal of KPi0 + (-TR) is the metapredicative Mahlo ordinal
ϕω00.
1. Introduction
The theory KPi0, introduced in [3], is a natural set theory whose proof-theoretic
strength is characterized by the well-known ordinal 0. It describes a set-theoretic
universe above the natural numbers as urelements which is an admissible limit of
admissibles, i.e., recursively inaccessible. However, KPi0 is very weak with respect
to induction principles: ∈induction is not available at all, and complete induction on
the natural numbers is restricted to sets.
In this article we study the effect of extending KPi0 by exploring the possibility
of iterating  operations (on the universe) along ordinals. It will be shown that the
resulting system, we call it KPi0 + (-TR), has the proof-theoretic ordinal ϕω00 and
thus the same proof-theoretic strength as the theory KPm0 of [6], which plays an
important role in connection with the concept of metapredicative Mahlo; see [2] for a
discussion of this topic in a wider context.
There exists a close relationship between our KPi0 + (-TR) and the system of
second order arithmetic for 1
1 transﬁnite dependent choice which Rüede describes
in [8, 9]. Actually, we will adapt Rüede’s well-ordering proof in [9] to the theory
KPi0 + (-TR) in order to establish ϕω00 as its lower proof-theoretic bound. A
straightforward argument yields that ϕω00 is also the upper proof-theoretic bound of
KPi0 + (-TR).
The plan of this paper is as follows: In the next section we introduce the basic
deﬁnitions and describe the theories KPi0, KPi0 + (-TR) and KPm0. Section 3 is

120
G. Jäger and D. Probst
dedicated to delimiting the system KPi0 + (-TR) from above by embedding it into
KPm0. Section 4 deals with some important properties of KPi0 and KPi0 + (-TR),
whereas in Section 5 we carry through a well-ordering proof in KPi0 + (-TR).
2. The Theories KPi0, KPi0 + (-TR) and KPm0
Let L1 be some of the standard languages of ﬁrst order arithmetic with variables
a, b, c, d, e, f, g, h, u, v, w, x, y, z, . . .(possiblywithsubscripts), aconstant0 aswell
as function and relation symbols for all primitive recursive functions and relations.
The theory KPi0 is now formulated in the extension L⋆= L1(∈, N, S, Ad) of L1 by
the membership relation symbol ∈, the set constant N for the set of natural numbers
and the unary relation symbols S and Ad for sets and admissible sets, respectively.
The number terms of L⋆are inductively generated from the variables, the constant
0 and the symbols for the primitive recursive functions; the terms (r, s, t, r1, s1, t1, . . .)
of L⋆are the number terms of L1 plus the set constant N. The formulas (A, B, C, A1,
B1, C1, . . .) of L⋆as well as the 0, , , n and n formulas of L⋆are deﬁned as
usual. Equality between objects is not represented by a primitive symbol, but deﬁned
by
(s = t) :=
(s ∈N ∧t ∈N ∧(s =N t)) ∨
(S(s) ∧S(t) ∧(∀x ∈s)(x ∈t) ∧(∀x ∈t)(x ∈s))
where =N is the symbol for the primitive recursive equality on the natural numbers.
The formula As is the result of replacing each unrestricted quantiﬁer (∃x)(. . .) and
(∀x)(. . .) in A by (∃x ∈s)(. . .) and (∀x ∈s)(. . .), respectively. In addition, we freely
make use of all standard set-theoretic notations and write, for example, Tran(s) for the
0 formula saying that s is a transitive set.
Since the axioms of KPi0 do not comprise ∈induction, i.e., the principle of foun-
dation with respect to ∈, we build it directly into the notion of ordinal,
Wf(a, ∈) := ∀x(x ⊂a ∧x ̸= ∅→(∃y ∈x)(∀z ∈y)(z ̸∈x)),
Ord(a) := Tran(a) ∧(∀x ∈a)Tran(x) ∧Wf(a, ∈).
Thus Ord(a) is a  formula of L⋆; in the following lower case Greek letters range
over ordinals.
The theory KPi0 is formulated in the language L⋆; its logical axioms comprise the
usual axioms of classical ﬁrst order logic with equality. The non-logical axioms of
KPi0 can be divided into the following ﬁve groups.
I. Ontological axioms. We have for all function symbols H and relation symbols R
of L1 and all axioms A(⃗u) of group III whose free variables belong to the list ⃗u:

Iterating  Operations in Admissible Set Theory
121
a ∈N ↔¬S(a),
(1)
⃗a ∈N →H(⃗a) ∈N,
(2)
R(⃗a) →⃗a ∈N,
(3)
a ∈b →S(b),
(4)
Ad(a) →(N ∈a ∧Tran(a)),
(5)
Ad(a) →(∀⃗x ∈a)Aa(⃗x),
(6)
Ad(a) ∧Ad(b) →a ∈b ∨a = b ∨b ∈a.
(7)
II. Number-theoretic axioms. We have for all axioms A(⃗u) of Peano arithmetic PA
which are not instances of the schema of complete induction and whose free variables
belong to the list ⃗u:
⃗a ∈N →AN(⃗a).
(Number theory)
III. Kripke–Platek axioms. We have for all 0 formulas A(u) and B(u, v) of L⋆:
∃x(a ∈x ∧b ∈x),
(Pair)
∃x(a ⊂x ∧Tran(x)),
(Tran)
∃y(S(y) ∧y = {x ∈a : A(x)}),
(0-Sep)
(∀x ∈a)∃yB(x, y) →∃z(∀x ∈a)(∃y ∈z)B(x, y).
(0-Col)
IV. Limit axiom. It is used to formalize the assertion that each set is an element of an
admissible set, hence we claim:
∃x(a ∈x ∧Ad(x)).
(Lim)
V. Complete induction on N. The only induction principle included in the axioms of
KPi0 is the following axiom of complete induction on the natural numbers for sets:
0 ∈a ∧(∀x ∈N)(x ∈a →x + 1 ∈a) →N ⊂a.
(S-IN)
The monograph [1] provides an excellent introduction into general admissible set
theory. Theories of admissible sets without foundation, on the other hand, have been
studied, in particular, in [3, 4]. It is shown there, among other things, that the proof-
theoretic ordinal of KPi0 is 0.
In Section 5 we will also mention an auxiliary basic set theory BS0. It is obtained
from KPi0 by simply dropping the schema of 0 collection. In this article, however,
we are primarily interested in the axiom schema (-TR) about the iteration of 
operations, added to KPi0. To formulate this principle, we introduce, for each 

122
G. Jäger and D. Probst
formula D(⃗u, x, y, z) of L⋆with at most the variables ⃗u, x, y, z free, the formula
HierD(⃗a, b, f ) :=

Ord(b) ∧Fun(f ) ∧Dom(f ) = b ∧
(∀ξ ∈b)D(⃗a, ξ, f ↾ξ, f (ξ)).
KPi0 + (-TR) is now deﬁned to be the theory obtained from KPi0 by adding the
axiom
Ord(α) ∧(∀ξ < α)∀x∃!yD(⃗a, ξ, x, y) →∃f HierD(⃗a, α, f )
(-TR)
for all  formulas D(⃗u, x, y, z) of L⋆. This axiom says that the  operation deﬁned
by D (depending on the parameters ⃗a) can be iterated up to α.
KPi0 +(-TR) is an interesting theory which reveals a further aspect of metapred-
icative Mahlo. In the sequel we will show that this system is proof-theoretically
equivalent to the theory KPm0 and that it has proof-theoretic ordinal ϕω00.
The theory KPm0, introduced in [6], is also formulated in the language L⋆and
extends KPi0 by the schema of 2 reﬂection on the admissibles,
A(⃗a) →∃x(⃗a ∈x ∧Ad(x) ∧Ax(⃗a))
(2-RefAd)
for all 2 formulas A(⃗u) of L⋆with at most the variables ⃗u free. In [6] it is also
shown that KPm0, i.e., KPi0 + (2-RefAd), is of the same proof-theoretic strength as
a natural system of explicit mathematics.
3. Embedding KPi0 + (-TR) into KPm0
The only purpose of this very short section is to prove that KPi0 + (-TR) can be
directly embedded into KPm0. Given a  formula D(⃗u, x, y, z) of L⋆, parameters ⃗a
for which D deﬁnes a  operation and an ordinal α, the principle of 2 reﬂection on
admissibles tells us that there must exist an admissible set d, containing the parameters
⃗a and α, so that this operation maps d into d; working inside d allows us to iterate this
operation up to α.
Lemma 1. For all  formulas D(⃗u, x, y, z) of L⋆with at most the variables ⃗u, x, y, z
free, we have that
KPm0 ⊢Ord(α) ∧(∀ξ < α)∀x∃!yD(⃗a, ξ, x, y) →∃f HierD(⃗a, α, f ).
Proof. We work informally in KPm0 and choose an ordinal α and parameters ⃗a so that
(∀ξ < α)∀x∃!yD(⃗a, ξ, x, y).
(1)
By 2 reﬂection on the admissibles applied to (1) it follows that there exists an
admissible set d which contains α and ⃗a as elements and satisﬁes
(∀ξ < α)(∀x ∈d)(∃y ∈d)Dd(⃗a, ξ, x, y).
(2)

Iterating  Operations in Admissible Set Theory
123
Furthermore, because of  persistence and (1), we can now conclude from assertion
(2) that
(∀ξ < α)(∀x ∈d)(∃y ∈d)D(⃗a, ξ, x, y),
(3)
(∀ξ < α)(∀x, y ∈d)(D(⃗a, ξ, x, y) ↔Dd(⃗a, ξ, x, y)).
(4)
Working within the admissible set d, a straightforward adaptation of the usual proof
of  recursion yields
(∃f ∈d)(Fun(f ) ∧Dom(f ) = β ∧(∀ξ < β)Dd(⃗a, ξ, f ↾ξ, f (ξ)))
(5)
by transﬁnite induction for all ordinals β ≤α. Due to (4), the assertion of our lemma
follows immediately from (5).
This lemma states that (-TR) is provable in KPm0. Consequently, our system
KPi0 + (-TR) is a subtheory of KPm0.
Theorem 2 (Embedding). For all L⋆formulas A we have that
KPi0 + (-TR) ⊢A
⇒
KPm0 ⊢A.
In view of this theorem and the results of Jäger and Strahm [6], we know that the
ordinal ϕω00 is an upper bound for the proof-theoretic strength of KPi0 + (-TR).
4. Basic Properties of the Theories KPi0 and KPi0 + (-TR)
The foundation axiom is not available in KPi0, and thus it is not ruled out in general
that there are sets which contain themselves. Nevertheless it can be shown that this is
not possible for admissibles.
Lemma 3. In KPi0 it can be proved that
Ad(a) →a ̸∈a.
Proof. Suppose, to the contrary, that a is an admissible set which contains itself as an
element. By 0 separation within a this a then also contains the “Russell” set r,
r := {x ∈a : x ̸∈x}.
Hence we have that r ∈r if and only if r ̸∈r. This is a contradiction, and our lemma
is proved.
Now we turn to a further property of KPi0 which will be crucial for the well-
ordering proof in the next section: Every class C of admissibles that is deﬁnable by a
0 formula of L⋆using parameters ⃗a ∈ C, has a least element.

124
G. Jäger and D. Probst
If ∈induction (foundation) were available we could simply carry over the standard
recursion-theoretic proof. In the present context, however, a different strategy has to
be chosen.
Lemma 4. Let D(⃗u, v) be a 0 formula of L⋆with at most the variables ⃗u, v free.
Then KPi0 proves that
∃x(D(⃗a, x) ∧⃗a ∈x ∧Ad(x)) →
∃y(y = {x : D(⃗a, x) ∧⃗a ∈x ∧Ad(x)} ∧D(⃗a, y) ∧⃗a ∈y ∧Ad(y)).
Proof. We work informally in the theory KPi0 and ﬁx some arbitrary parameters ⃗a. The
assertion is obvious by the linearity of the admissibles if the class {x : D(⃗a, x) ∧⃗a ∈
x ∧Ad(x)} contains only ﬁnitely many elements. Hence we may assume that there
exist elements b, c, d, e with the properties
b ∈c ∈d ∈e,
(1)
b, c, d, e ∈{x : D(⃗a, x) ∧⃗a ∈x ∧Ad(x)}.
(2)
Now we use 0 separation in order to deﬁne the set
s0 :=

{x ∈e : D(⃗a, x) ∧⃗a ∈x ∧Ad(x)}.
Because of the linearity of Ad we obtain the following further properties of this set s0:
s0 =

{x : D(⃗a, x) ∧⃗a ∈x ∧Ad(x)},
(3)
s0 =

{x ∈c : D(⃗a, x) ∧⃗a ∈x ∧Ad(x)},
(4)
s0 ∈d.
(5)
Assertion (5) follows from (4) by 0 separation in d. In a next step the further set
s1 :=

{x ∈e : D(⃗a, x) ∧⃗a ∈x ∧Ad(x) ∧s0 ∈x}
is introduced. Given these sets s0 and s1, we convince ourselves that they are really
different,
s0 ̸= s1.
(6)
Assume, to the contrary, that s0 = s1 and employ 0 separation once more for deﬁning
the Russell set
r := {x ∈s0 : x ̸∈x}.
Then r ∈u for each set u satisfying Ad(u) and s0 ∈u. This implies r ∈s1 and
therefore, because of our assumption, also r ∈s0. Therefore we have
r ∈r ↔r ∈s0 ∧r ̸∈r ↔r ̸∈r.

Iterating  Operations in Admissible Set Theory
125
This is a contradiction, and so (6) is proved. This assertion (6), however, implies that
there exists a set t with the property
t ∈e ∧D(⃗a, t) ∧⃗a ∈t ∧Ad(t) ∧s0 ̸∈t.
(7)
It remains to show that s0 = t. The inclusion s0 ⊂t is obvious. In order to prove
t ⊂s0, we pick an arbitrary u ∈d with D(⃗a, u) ∧⃗a ∈u ∧Ad(u) and establish
t ⊂u. The linearity of Ad gives us
t ∈u ∨t = u ∨u ∈t.
(8)
In the cases of t ∈u and t = u, the property t ⊂u is clear. On the other hand, u ∈t
would imply that
s0 =

{x ∈u ∪{u} : D(⃗a, x) ∧⃗a ∈x ∧Ad(x)} ∈t,
contradicting the choice of t. Therefore, putting everything together, we know that
s0 = t, hence D(⃗a, s0) ∧⃗a ∈s0 ∧Ad(s0). Remembering (3), this concludes the
proof of our lemma.
This lemma implies, for example, that in KPi0 for any set a the intersection a+ of
all admissibles containing a is an admissible itself,
a+ :=

{x : a ∈x ∧Ad(x)}.
Given a set a and a binary relation b ⊂a × a, we write Lin(a, b) if b is a strict linear
ordering on a. A linear ordering is a well-ordering if any non-empty subset of its
domain has a least element with respect to this ordering,
Wo(a, b) := Lin(a, b) ∧∀x(x ⊂a ∧x ̸= ∅→(∃y ∈x)(∀z ∈x)(⟨z, y⟩̸∈b)).
We ﬁrst observe that in KPi0 +(-TR) all  operations can be iterated along arbitrary
well-orderings, not only along ordinals as stated by (-TR). To do so, we write,
for each  formula D(⃗u, x, y, z) of L⋆with at most the variables ⃗u, x, y, z free, in
analogy to HierD
Hier+
D(⃗a, b, c, f ) :=



Wo(b, c) ∧Fun(f ) ∧Dom(f ) = b ∧
(∀x ∈b)D(⃗a, x, {⟨y, f (y)⟩: ⟨y, x⟩∈c}, f (x)).
For the proof of Theorem 6 below it is convenient to convince ourselves that for every
well-ordering b on a set a there exists a function f —provable in KPi0—so that the
range Rng(f ) of f is an ordinal and f is a 1-1 mapping from a to Rng(f ) translating
the order relation b on a into the <-relation on Rng(f ). This function f is called the
collapse of b onto a;
Clp(a, b, f ) :=



b ⊂a × a ∧Fun(f ) ∧Dom(f ) = a ∧
(∀x ∈a)(f (x) = {f (y) : ⟨y, x⟩∈b}).

126
G. Jäger and D. Probst
The following lemma states that any well-ordering b on any set a has a collapse which
is uniquely determined by a and b.
Lemma 5. The following two assertions can be proved in KPi0:
1. Wo(a, b) ∧Clp(a, b, f ) ∧Clp(a, b, g) →f = g.
2. Wo(a, b) ∧a, b ∈d ∧Ad(d) →(∃f ∈d)Clp(a, b, f ).
Proof. The uniqueness property is obtained by straightforward induction along the
well-ordering b on a. For the proof of the existence of a collapse, we work informally
in KPi0 and choose any a, b, d so that
Wo(a, b) ∧a, b ∈d ∧Ad(d).
Writing a|u and b||u for the restrictions of a and b to the predecessors of u,
a|u := {x ∈a : ⟨x, u⟩∈b}
and
b||u := {⟨x, y⟩∈b : ⟨y, u⟩∈b},
we can easily establish by induction along b on a that
(∃!g ∈d)Clp(a|u, b||u, g)
for all elements u of a. With 0 collection we can now immediately derive what we
wish.
Theorem 6. For all  formulas D(⃗u, x, y, z) of L⋆with at most the variables ⃗u, x,
y, z free, we have that KPi0 + (-TR) proves
Wo(b, c) ∧(∀x ∈b)∀y∃!zD(⃗a, x, y, z) →∃f Hier+
D(⃗a, b, c, f )).
Proof. We work informally in KPi0 + (-TR) and choose arbitrary parameters ⃗a and
sets b, c so that
Wo(b, c) ∧(∀x ∈b)∀y∃!zD(⃗a, x, y, z).
(1)
By the previous lemma there exists a collapse h of c onto b, i.e., we may assume that
Clp(b, c, h)
(2)
for a suitable function h. Now set α := Rng(h) and apply the principle (-TR) to a
properly tailored modiﬁcation D′ of the formula D. This gives us a function g which
can then be modiﬁed to the desired witness for HierD. More precisely, let B(u, v)
be the  formula of L⋆which is the disjunction of the following three (mutually
exclusive) L⋆formulas:
(i) Ord(u) ∧v ∈b ∧h(v) = u,
(ii) u = ∅∧v = ∅,
(iii) ¬Ord(u) ∧(∀x ∈u)(∃y ∈b)∃z(x = ⟨h(y), z⟩∧⟨y, z⟩∈v) ∧
(∀x ∈v)(∃y ∈b)∃z(x = ⟨y, z⟩∧⟨h(y), z⟩∈u).

Iterating  Operations in Admissible Set Theory
127
In addition we set
D′(⃗a, u, v, w) := ∃x∃y(B(u, x) ∧B(v, y) ∧D(⃗a, x, y, w))
and observe that KPi0 + (-TR) proves
(∀ξ < α)∀x∃!yD′(⃗a, ξ, x, y).
(3)
In virtue of  reﬂection, the formula D′(⃗a, u, v, w) is provably equivalent in KPi0 +
(-TR) to a  formula. In view of (3) we can apply (-TR), and thus there exists a
function g for which we have
HierD′(⃗a, α, g).
(4)
To ﬁnish our proof, let f be the function with domain b which is deﬁned for all
elements u of b by
f (u) := g(h(u)).
From (4), the deﬁnition of the formula D′(⃗a, u, v, w) and this deﬁnition of f , we
obtain
(∀ξ < α)∃y∃z(B(ξ, y) ∧B(g↾ξ, z) ∧D(⃗a, y, z, g(ξ))).
(5)
Because of (2) this immediately implies that
(∀x ∈b)∃y∃z(B(h(x), y) ∧B(g↾h(x), z) ∧D(⃗a, y, z, g(h(x)))).
(6)
In view of the deﬁnitions of the function f and the formula B(u, v) we can transform
this assertion into
(∀x ∈b)∃z(B({⟨h(y), f (y)⟩: ⟨y, x⟩∈c}, z) ∧D(⃗a, x, z, f (x))).
(7)
Looking at the deﬁnition of B(u, v) once more, we see that (7) can be simpliﬁed to
(∀x ∈b)D(⃗a, x, {⟨y, f (y)⟩: ⟨y, x⟩∈c}, f (x)).
(8)
This means, however, that we have Hier+
D(⃗a, b, c, f ), and therefore the proof of our
lemma is completed.
Inhiswell-orderingproofforsecondorderarithmeticwith1
1 transﬁnitedependent
choice, Rüede often makes use of 1
2 reﬂection on ω-models of ACA0. In our present
context, this part is taken over by 2 reﬂection on Ad. The “topological closure” Ad
of the predicate Ad is obtained by adding the limits of admissibles to the admissibles,
Ad(d) := Ad(d) ∨(d ̸= ∅∧d =

{x ∈d : Ad(x)}).
Clearly each element of Ad satisﬁes 0 separation and models the theory BS0. We
prove a uniform version of 2 reﬂection on Ad in a form tailored for our later purposes.

128
G. Jäger and D. Probst
Lemma 7 (2 reﬂection on Ad). For any  formula A(⃗u, v, w) of L⋆with at most
the variables ⃗u, v, w free, there exists a  formula A♯(⃗u, v) of L⋆with at most the
variables ⃗u, v free, sothatthefollowingtwoassertionscanbeprovedin KPi0+(-TR):
1. ∀x∃yA(⃗a, x, y) →∃!zA♯(⃗a, z).
2. ∀x∃yA(⃗a, x, y) →
∀z(A♯(⃗a, z) →⃗a ∈z ∧Ad(z) ∧(∀x ∈z)(∃y ∈z)Az(⃗a, x, y)).
Proof. We work informally in KPi0+(-TR) and begin with introducing the following
abbreviations:
BA(⃗u, v, w) := ⃗u, v ∈w ∧Ad(w) ∧(∀x ∈v)(∃y ∈w)Aw(⃗u, x, y),
CA(⃗u, v, w) := BA(⃗u, v, w) ∧(∀z ∈w)¬BA(⃗u, v, z).
Obviously, BA(⃗u, v, w) and CA(⃗u, v, w) are 0 formulas, and with  reﬂection and
the limit axiom (Lim) we obtain for arbitrary parameters ⃗a that
∀x∃yA(⃗a, x, y) →∀v∃wBA(⃗a, v, w).
(1)
Hence Lemma 3, i.e., the fact that an admissible cannot contain itself, and Lemma 4
imply in view of (1) that
∀x∃yA(⃗a, x, y) →∀v∃!wCA(⃗a, v, w).
(2)
The operation described by this fact will now be iterated along the standard less relation
<N on the natural numbers N. To adjust everything to the formulation of Theorem 6
we deﬁne
DA(⃗u, x, y, z) := CA(⃗u,

{v : (∃w ∈N)(w <N x ∧⟨w, v⟩∈y)}, z).
Trivially, we have Wo(N, <N). Furthermore, (2) implies that
∀x∃yA(⃗a, x, y) →(∀x ∈N)∀y∃!zDA(⃗a, x, y, z).
(3)
In virtue of Theorem 6 we consequently know that there exists a function f whose
domain is the set N and which satisﬁes Hier+
DA(⃗a, N, <N, f ), i.e.,
∀x∃yA(⃗a, x, y) →∃f Hier+
DA(⃗a, N, <N, f ).
(4)
The function f which is claimed to exist in (4) has to be unique. Thus also the set d,
d :=

{f (x) : x ∈N},
is uniquely determined. Under the assumption ∀x∃yA(⃗a, x, y) it is now easily ver-
iﬁed that we have for this set d the desired properties ⃗a ∈d, Ad(d) and (∀x ∈d)
(∃y ∈d)Ad(⃗a, x, y)).
To ﬁnish the proof of our lemma, we set
A♯(⃗u, v) := ∃f (Hier+
DA(⃗u, N, <N, f ) ∧v =

{f (x) : x ∈N}).

Iterating  Operations in Admissible Set Theory
129
Our previous considerations make it clear that for this  formula A♯(⃗u, v) both asser-
tions of our lemma are satisﬁed.
5. The Well-Ordering Proof in KPi0 + (-TR)
Now the stage is set for extending the well-ordering proof in [5] to our set theory
KPi0 + (-TR), similar to how Rüede [8] adopts it for the treatment of 1
1 transﬁnite
dependent choice. We will show that all ordinals less than ϕω00 are provable in
KPi0 + (-TR).
As in, for example, [6] we work with the ternary Veblen functions for coping
with a sufﬁciently long initial segment of the ordinals. The usual Veblen hierarchy is
generated by the binary function ϕ, starting off with ϕ0β = ωβ, and often discussed
in the literature, cf. e.g., [7] or [10]. The ternary Veblen function ϕ is easily obtained
from the binary ϕ as follows:
1. ϕ0βγ is ϕβγ .
2. If α > 0, then ϕα0γ denotes the γ th ordinal which is strongly critical with
respect to all functions λξ.λη.ϕδξη for δ < α.
3. If α > 0 and β > 0, then ϕαβγ denotes the γ th common ﬁxed point of the
functions λη.ϕαδη for δ < β.
Let 0 be the least ordinal greater than 0 which is closed under addition and the ternary
ϕ. In the following we will work with a standard primitive recursive notation system
(OT, ≺) for all ordinals less than 0. All required deﬁnitions are straightforward
generalizations of those used for building a notation system for 0 (cf. [7, 10]) and
can be omitted.
In this section we let a b, c, . . . (possibly with subscripts) range over the set OT;
in addition, ℓis used for codes of limit ordinals; the terms ˆ0, ˆ1, ˆ2, . . . act as codes for
the ﬁnite ordinals. To simplify the notation we often write the ordinal constants and
ordinal functions such as,
0,
1,
ω,
λξ.λη.(ξ + η),
λξ.ωξ,
λζ.λξ.λη.ϕζξη
instead of the corresponding codes and primitive recursive functions. Another useful
binary operation on ordinal notations, introduced in [5], is given by
a ↑b := ∃c∃ℓ(b = c + a · ℓ).
For completeness we also recall how it is expressed that our speciﬁc primitive recursive
relation ≺is a well-ordering, that a formula is progressive with respect to ≺and how

130
G. Jäger and D. Probst
transﬁnite induction along ≺is deﬁned for arbitrary formulas:
Wo(a) := Wo({b : b ≺a}, {⟨c, b⟩: c ≺b ≺a}),
Prog(A) := ∀a((∀b ≺a)A(b) →A(a)),
TI(A, a) := Prog(A) →(∀b ≺a)A(b).
Maybe apart from a ↑b, all these notions are standard in the context of well-ordering
proofs.
For dealing with KPi0 + (-TR) we need further predicates Kn(u) and
Hn(a, u, f ) which are deﬁned simultaneously by induction on the natural number
n as well as the predicates (b, f, a) and Mn(b, f, a):
T (f ) := Fun(f ) ∧Dom(f ) = OT,
K1(a) := Ad(a),
Kn+1(a) := Ad(a) ∧[∀x∃f (T (f ) ∧∀a(Wo(a) →Hn(a, x, f )))]a,
Hn(a, u, f ) := T (f ) ∧(∀b ≺a)(f ↾b ∈f (b) ∧u ∈f (b) ∧Kn(f (b))),
(b, f, a) := (∀c ≺b)(∀x ∈f (c))TI(x, a),
Mn(b, f, a) := ∀c(∀d ⪯b)(ω1+a ↑d ∧(d, f, c) →(d, f, ϕ ˆnac)).
The ﬁrst lemma concerning this machinery states that each set a is provably an element
of a set b which satisﬁes the property Kn. It plays a key role in our well-ordering
proof.
Lemma 8 (Main lemma). For any natural number n > 0, there exists a  formula
Fn(u, v) of L⋆so that KPi0 + (-TR) proves
∀x∃!yFn(x, y) ∧∀x∀y(Fn(x, y) →x ∈y ∧Kn(y)).
Proof. We prove this assertions by complete induction on n. For n = 1 we simply
have to set
F1(u, v) := (v = u+).
Due to Lemma 4 and the discussion following this lemma we know that this formula
F1(u, v) satisﬁes our requirements. Now we assume n > 1 and apply the induction
hypothesis to provide a  formula Fn−1(u, v) so that KPi0 + (-TR) proves
∀x∃!yFn−1(x, y) ∧∀x∀y(Fn−1(x, y) →x ∈y ∧Kn(y)).
(1)
Based on this  formula Fn−1(u, v) we introduce the auxiliary  formula Bn(u, v, w),
Bn(u, v, w) := Fn−1({u, v}, w).

Iterating  Operations in Admissible Set Theory
131
From (1) we immediately conclude that KPi0 + (-TR) proves
∀x∀y∃!zBn(x, y, z).
(2)
Hence Bn(u, v, w) deﬁnes a  operation to which we want to apply Theorem 6 in a
next step. This theorem implies for any parameter u and any element c of OT that,
provably in KPi0 + (-TR),
Wo(c) →
∃g[Fun(g) ∧Dom(g) = {d : d ≺c} ∧
(∀d ≺c)Bn(u, g↾d, g(d))].
(3)
Now deﬁne En(u, c, g) to be the  formula
Fun(g) ∧Dom(g) = {d : d ≺c} ∧(∀d ≺c)Bn(u, g↾d, g(d)).
Untiltheendofthissectionweworkinformallyin KPi0+(-TR)andrewritestatement
(3) as
∀c∃g(Wo(c) →En(u, c, g)).
(4)
 reﬂection, the limit axiom (Lim) and  persistence in connection with (4) guarantee
the existence of an admissible set d such that
∀c(∃g ∈d)(Wod(c) →Ed
n(u, c, g)).
(5)
We further claim that for all elements g and g′ of d
Wod(c) ∧a ≺b ≺c ∧Ed
n(u, b, g) ∧Ed
n(u, c, g′) →g(a) = g′(a),
(6)
a fact that can be easily checked by inspecting the deﬁnitions of En(u, b, g) and
En(u, c, g′). A next step in the proof of our lemma is to set
f :=

{g ∈d : ∃c(Wod(c) ∧Ed
n(u, c, g)} ∪{⟨c, ∅⟩: ¬Wod(c)}.
f is an element of d+; by (6) we know that it is a function, and Dom(f ) = OT is
immediate from its deﬁnition. Assertion (5) and the deﬁnition of f yield, in addition,
that
Wod(c) →(∀d ≺c)(u ∈f (d) ∧f ↾d ∈f (d) ∧Kn−1(f (d)))
(7)
and this, in turn, implies because of  persistence and our previous remarks about f
that
∀x∃f (T (f ) ∧∀c(Wo(c) →Hn−1(c, x, f ))).
(8)
The last step of our proof consists in applying 2 reﬂection on Ad, to the  formula
An(u, v, w),
An(u, v, w) := (u = u) ∧T (w) ∧∀c(Wo(c) →Hn−1(c, v, w)).

132
G. Jäger and D. Probst
Lemma 7 implies the existence of a  formula A♯
n(u, v) so that from (8) we may
deduce for any parameter a that
∃!yA♯
n(a, y),
(9)
∀y(A♯
n(a, y) →a ∈y ∧Ad(y) ∧(∀x ∈y)(∃f ∈y)Ay
n(a, x, f )).
(10)
By choosing Fn(u, v) to be the formula A♯
n(u, v), the assertions (9) and (10) together
with the deﬁnition of the formula Kn(v) immediately imply
∀x∃!yFn(x, y) ∧∀x∀y(Fn(x, y) →x ∈y ∧Kn(y)).
This ﬁnishes the induction step, and therefore also the proof of our lemma is completed.
The proofs of the following three lemmas can be easily recaptured by (more or
less notational) adaptations of the corresponding proofs in [5] and [8]. Therefore we
omit all details and conﬁne ourselves to providing exact references.
Lemma 9. The following three assertions can be proved in BS0:
1. H1(ℓ, u, f ) ∧(ℓ, f, a) →(ℓ, f, ϕa0).
2. H1(ℓ, u, f ) →Prog({a : (ℓ, f, ϕ10a)}).
3. H1(b, u, f ) →Prog({a : M1(b, f, a)}.
Proof. For all details concerning the proof of these three assertions, see Lemma 5,
Lemma 6 and Lemma 7 of [5].
Lemma 10. For any natural number n > 0, the following three assertions can be
proved in BS0:
1. Kn+1(a) ∧[∀x∀f ∀b(Hn(b, x, f ) →Prog({c : Mn(b, f, c)}))]a
→∀c[(∀x ∈a)TI(x, c) →(∀x ∈a)TI(x, ϕ ˆnc0)].
2. Kn+1(a) ∧∀c[(∀x ∈a)TI(x, c) →(∀x ∈a)TI(x, ϕ ˆnc0)]
→Prog({c : (∀x ∈a)TI(x, ϕ(ˆn+1)0c)}).
3. Hn(b, u, f ) ∧∀a[Kn(a) →Prog({c : (∀x ∈a)TI(x, ϕ ˆn0c)})]
→Prog({c : Mn(b, f, c}).
Proof. For all details concerning the proof of these three assertions see Lemma 4,
Lemma 5 and Lemma 6 of [8].
Lemma 11. For any natural number n > 0, the following three assertions can be
proved in BS0:

Iterating  Operations in Admissible Set Theory
133
1. Ad(a) →[∀x∀f ∀bHn(b, x, f ) →Prog({c : Mn(b, f, c)})]a.
2. Kn+1(a) →∀c[(∀x ∈a)TI(x, c) →(∀x ∈a)TI(x, ϕ ˆnc0)].
3. Kn+1(a) →Prog({c : (∀x ∈a)TI(x, ϕ(ˆn+1)0c)}).
Proof. Start showing that the ﬁrst assertion implies the second and the second the
third. Then prove the ﬁrst assertion by induction on n. For details see Theorem 6 of
[8].
Theorem 12 (Lower bound). For any natural number n, we have that
KPi0 + (-TR) ⊢∀xTI(x, ϕ ˆn00).
Proof. Fix any natural number n > 0. Arguing informally in KPi0 + (-TR), let a be
an arbitrary set. In view of Lemma 8 we know that there exist a set b satisfying
a ∈b ∧Kn+1(b).
(1)
The second part of Lemma 11 yields, in addition, that
Kn+1(b) →∀c[(∀x ∈b)TI(x, c) →(∀x ∈b)TI(x, ϕ ˆnc0)],
(2)
and, consequently, if we set c = 0,
Kn+1(b) →(∀x ∈b)TI(x, ϕ ˆn00)].
(3)
From (1) and (3) we conclude TI(a, ϕ ˆn00), which is exactly what we had to show.
An ordinal α is called provable in the theory T—formulated in L⋆or a similar
language—if there exists a primitive recursive well-ordering ◁on the natural numbers
of order-type α so that
T ⊢Wo(N, ◁).
The least ordinal which is not provable in T is called the proof-theoretic ordinal of T
and denoted by |T|.
From Theorem 2, Theorem 12 above and the results of Jäger and Strahm [6], which
tell us that |KPm0| ≤ϕω00, we derive the following characterization of the theory
KPi0 + (-TR) in terms of their proof-theoretic ordinal.
Corollary 13. The set theories KPi0 + (-TR) and KPm0 have the same proof-
theoretic strength, namely
|KPi0 + (-TR)| = |KPm0| = ϕω00.
Of course, Theorem 2 and Theorem 12 also show that any ordinal less than ϕω00
is provable in KPm0. A direct proof of this result can be found in Strahm [11].
Acknowledgement. Research partly supported by the Swiss National Science Foun-
dation.

134
G. Jäger and D. Probst
References
[1]
Barwise, Jon: 1975. Admissible Sets and Structures. Berlin: Springer.
[2]
Jäger, Gerhard: To appear. Metapredicative and Explicit Mahlo: A Proof-Theoretic
Perspective. Logic Colloquium 2000.
[3]
Jäger, Gerhard: 1984. The strength of admissibility without foundation. The Journal of
Symbolic Logic 49 no. 3: 867–879.
[4]
Jäger, Gerhard: 1986. Theories for Admissible Sets: A Unifying Approach to Proof
Theory. Napoli: Bibliopolis.
[5]
Jäger, Gerhard, Reinhard Kahle, Anton Setzer and Thomas Strahm: 1999. The proof-
theoretic analysis of transﬁnitely iterated ﬁxed point theories. The Journal of Symbolic
Logic 64 no. 1: 53–67.
[6]
Jäger, Gerhard and Thomas Strahm: 2001. Upper bounds for metapredicative Mahlo in
explicit mathematics and admissible set theory. The Journal of Symbolic Logic 66 no. 2:
935–958.
[7]
Pohlers, Wolfram: 1989. Proof Theory: An Introduction. Lecture Notes in Mathematics,
vol. 1407. Berlin: Springer.
[8]
Rüede, Christian: 2000. Metapredicative Subsystems of Analysis. Ph.D. thesis. Institut
für Informatik und angewandte Mathematik, Universität Bern.
[9]
Rüede, Christian: 2003. The proof-theoretic analysis of 1
1 transﬁnite dependent choice.
Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 122 no. 1: 195–234.
[10]
Schütte, Kurt: 1977. Proof Theory. Berlin: Springer.
[11]
Strahm, Thomas: 2002. Wellordering proofs for metapredicative Mahlo. The Journal of
Symbolic Logic 67 no. 1: 260–278.
Institut für Informatik und angewandte Mathematik
Universität Bern
Neubrückstrasse 10
3012 Bern
Switzerland
E-mail: jaeger@iam.unibe.ch
probst@iam.unibe.ch

Typical Ambiguity: Trying to Have Your Cake
and Eat It Too
Solomon Feferman
Would ye both eat your cake and have your cake?
John Heywood, Proverbs1
Abstract. Ambiguity is a property of syntactic expressions which is ubiquitous in all informal
languages—natural, scientiﬁc and mathematical; the efﬁcient use of language depends to an
exceptional extent on this feature. Disambiguation is the process of separating out the possible
meanings of ambiguous expressions. Ambiguity is typical if the process of disambiguation can
be carried out in some systematic way. Russell made use of typical ambiguity in the theory of
types in order to combine the assurance of its (apparent) consistency (“having the cake”) with
the freedom of the informal untyped theory of classes and relations (“eating it too”). The paper
begins with a brief tour of Russell’s uses of typical ambiguity, including his treatment of the
statement Cls ∈Cls. This is generalized to a treatment in simple type theory of statements
of the form A ∈B where A and B are class expressions for which A is prima facie of the
same or higher type than B. In order to treat mathematically more interesting statements of
self membership we then formulate a version of typical ambiguity for such statements in an
extension of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory. Speciﬁc attention is given to how the “naive” theory
of categories can thereby be accounted for.
1. Ambiguity, Disambiguation and Typical Ambiguity
Ambiguity is a property of syntactic expressions which is ubiquitous in all informal
(if not formal) languages—natural, scientiﬁc and mathematical; the efﬁcient use of
language depends to an exceptional extent on this feature. Disambiguation is the
process of separating out the possible meanings of ambiguous expressions. Ambiguity
is typical, or systematic, if the process of disambiguation can be carried out in some
uniform way. In natural languages this is determined by speciﬁcation of context. For
example, the words ‘I’, ‘you’, ‘here’, ‘now’, ‘this’, ‘my’, and ‘your’ used in daily
1Ascribed to John Heywood (c. 1497–1580) in [3] at Heywood 13.

136
S. Feferman
language have meanings which vary with the context of utterance in a uniform way.
Other words with more than one meaning such as ‘bank’, ‘duck’, and ‘visiting’, such
as in the utterances ‘He sat by the bank,’ ‘I saw her duck,’ and ‘Visiting relatives can
be boring’, can also be disambiguated from the context but not in any uniform way.2
Ambiguity in mathematical language involving such words as ‘member,’ ‘union,’
and ‘complement,’ is typical in that they are disambiguated in a uniform way relative
to a context given by an underlying universe; similarly for the ‘identity map.’ In order
to disambiguate arithmetic and algebraic symbols such as ‘0,’ ‘1,’ ‘+,’ ‘×,’ and ‘≤,’
we need to be told just how these are to be interpreted in a given discussion.
I have not done a serious search of the use of the idea of typical or systematic am-
biguity in mathematics and logic. The ﬁrst employment of it that I’ve found (though
without its being named in that way) was in Bertrand Russell’s development of the
theory of classes, relations and cardinal and ordinal numbers in his 1908 paper “Math-
ematical logic as based on the theory of types” [18]. How he used it there will be
described in the next section. The idea is of course repeated and expanded in Principia
Mathematica, beginning in Vol. I, from *20 on. But I did not ﬁnd the words ‘typical
ambiguity’there either, except that in *65 there is talk of typically ambiguous symbols.
Later uses by others are due, to begin with, to Quine ([16] and [17]) in connection
with his system NF; the actual words ‘typical ambiguity’ are found in the second
of these papers, pp. 132ff. The seminal work by Specker [19] aimed at proving the
consistency of NF is entitled “Typical ambiguity”; that is tangentially related to what
we are concerned with here in a way that will be brieﬂy explained in the concluding
section to this paper.
Russell used typical ambiguity in the theory of types to make sense of sentences
like Cls ∈Cls, which can be read as justifying talk in some sense of the class of
all classes. In Section 3 this is generalized in a straightforward way to a treatment
in simple type theory of statements of the form A ∈B where A and B are class
expressions for which A is prima facie of the same or higher type than B. My main
aim here is to extend that to mathematically interesting statements of the form A ∈B
such as that the structure A we call the category of all categories is indeed a member
of the class B of all categories. A few other test challenges of that sort are listed in
Section 4. Then a version of typical ambiguity is formulated in an extension of ZF
set theory in Section 5 and applied to the test cases in Section 6. The ﬁnal Section 7
concludes with a discussion of the problem of justifying problematic membership
statements when read literally.
2According to Godehard Link, “Shared opinion in the philosophy of language has it that in the case of
indexicals like ‘I’, ‘you’, etc., it is not their meaning that varies with the context but rather their interpre-
tation … This is considered to be different from lexical ambiguity (‘bank’), syntactic ambiguity (‘visiting
relatives’) or a combination of both (‘I saw her duck’).” [e-mail communication of 12 August 2003] I have
received a similar comment from Thomas Wasow.

Typical Ambiguity
137
2. Russell’s Uses of Typical Ambiguity
The theory of types described in [18] is the ramiﬁed theory, but what is essential for his
use of typical ambiguity there is best explained in terms of the simple theory of types
(STT) with the Axiom of Inﬁnity. The types are thus indexed by the natural numbers
0, 1, 2, . . . with the objects of type 0 interpreted as the individuals (inﬁnite in number)
and for each n, the objects of type n + 1 interpreted as all classes of objects of type n.
We use x, y, z, . . . as variables for any type n ̸= 0 and a matching list of variables
X, Y, Z, . . . of type n + 1.3 Only atomic formulas of the form u ∈W where u is of
some type n and W of the next type n + 1 are considered to be meaningful.
The ﬁrst place that the issue of ambiguity comes up in [18] is on p. 251 (or p. 174
in its reprinting in [20]). For any type n ̸= 0, he deﬁnes Cls4 to be the class of all
classes of objects of type n −1 and then writes:
…theproposition‘Cls ∈Cls’…requiresthat‘Cls’shouldhaveadifferent
meaning in the two places where it occurs. The symbol ‘Cls’ can only be
used where it is unnecessary to know the type; it has an ambiguity which
adjusts itself to circumstances.
A little further down he deﬁnes the empty class  and the universal class V and says
that like Cls, these symbols are ambiguous “and only acquire a deﬁnite meaning when
the type concerned is otherwise indicated.” In our setting, these are particular objects
of type n. Moving on from there Russell deﬁnes the Boolean operations x ∪y, x ∩y,
and −x; this last is of course the complement relative to V . Later in the article he
deﬁnes Cl(x) to be the class of all subclasses of x; it is thus an object of type n + 1.
Extensionally, Cls is the same as Cl(V ).
The theory of types was created in order to save the logistic program from incon-
sistency, in particular to avoid Russell’s paradox. The use of variables x, y, z, . . . of
an indeﬁnite type and the notions just explained illustrates the use, when necessary,
of typical ambiguity to fall back on the underlying type structure for the security it
provides (“having your cake”) while regaining as much of the freedom of the informal
theory of classes as possible (“eating it too”).
Expanding the above form of STT to a theory of relations (as in Russell’s theory)
one can deﬁne the relation x ∼y to hold when the classes x and y are in one-to-one
correspondence. Then Russell deﬁnes Nc(x) to be the class of all y such that x ∼y,
i.e., Nc(x) is the equivalence class of x under ∼; it is of type one higher than that
of x. The class of cardinal numbers NC is then taken to be the class of all Nc(x)
for x ∈Cls; it is of type n + 2 for x of type n. The members 0, 1, 2, . . . of NC
are next introduced, respectively as Nc(), Nc({0}), Nc({0, 1}), and so on. Of these
deﬁnitions, Russell writes:
3Russell uses α, β, γ, . . . for class variables and x, y, z, . . . for variables for their elements. Our
choice of X, Y, Z, . . . for class variables of type n+1 has been made so that one can more easily compare
typical ambiguity in type theory with its use in set theory that we take up in Sec. 5 below.
4In [18], Russell wrote ‘cls’ where I write ‘Cls’; the latter is used in Principia Mathematica.

138
S. Feferman
It has to be observed … that 0 and 1 and all the other cardinals … are
ambiguous symbols, like Cls, and have as many meanings as there are
types. To begin with 0: the meaning of 0 depends upon that of , and
the meaning of  is different according to the type of which it is the null
class. Thus there are as many 0’s as there are types; and the same applies
to all the other cardinals.
Russell’s partial way out of this embarrassing situation is to note that if classes x
and y are of different types, for example x of a type n and y of type n+1, then we can
speak of x and y having the same cardinal number or of one having a larger cardinal
number than the other by comparing y with the class of singletons {u} for u ∈x. But
this still does not get out of the fact that one has a multiplicity of representatives of
the cardinals and in particular of the natural numbers. To an extent, the use of typical
ambiguity is a way of saving face in this respect.5
The general problem that concerns us here is how to interpret expressions of the
form A ∈B which are of indeﬁnite type, but where the prima facie type of A is
greater than or equal to that of B. Russell himself signaled this issue when suggesting
how to deal with the pseudo statement Cls ∈Cls; one simply interprets the second
occurrence of ‘Cls’ as being the class of all classes of type n + 1, when the ﬁrst
occurrence is interpreted as the class of all classes of type n. A simpler statement which
is meaningless on the strict account of type theory but which trades on the ambiguity
of the symbols involved is V ∈V , again legitimized by shifting the interpretation of
the second ‘V ’ one type higher.
There are other natural examples of this problem that Russell could have considered
but did not. For example, the following statements seem reasonable (on the Axiom of
Inﬁnity):
Inf ∈Inf,
Fin ∈Inf,
Inf /∈Fin,
Fin /∈Fin,
(1)
where Fin, Inf are deﬁned respectively to be the class of all ﬁnite classes and that of
all inﬁnite classes. So also are the statements:
{1} ∈1,
{2} ∈1,
{1} /∈2,
{1, 2} ∈2.
(2)
5Link has suggested that something like the treatment of the meaning of indexicals in natural language
(as quoted in footnote 3 above) could be applied to the notion of number in the theory of types: one could
say that the meaning of the number terms is always the same as deﬁned via an expression with bound class
variables but that only the “typical” context (namely a given type level) determines which classes are being
bound. While I am not advancing any theory of meaning here, in a sense this is what is done in Sec. 3,
where the meaning is determined by a formula ϕ. But the additional problem comes when meeting such
examples as (1), (2) in Sec. 2, so something more has to be done to specify the interpretations of the terms
in formulas of the form A ∈B, if both A and B contain the same terms, e.g., {1, 2} ∈2. This is what the
disambiguation conventions are supposed to take care of.

Typical Ambiguity
139
3. Disambiguation of Membership Statements
in Type Theory
Ambiguous expressions like Cls, , V , 0, 1, . . . can be assigned many types in STT;
they are examples of expressions which are stratiﬁed in Quine’s sense, i.e., result from
erasing type indices from all the variables of an expression of STT (keeping variables
of distinct types disjoint from each other). Given an expression S of STT, let e(S)
be the result of erasing all the type indices from variables of S. For A a stratiﬁed
expression let type(A) be the least n for which there is an S of type n with A = e(S);
this is what we call the prima facie type of A. We shall confuse a stratiﬁed expression
with the lowest expression of STT from which it results by erasing type distinctions.
The disambiguation of expressions of the form A ∈B where the type of A is greater
than or equal to that of B is ﬁrst done here for the special case that they are of the same
type and B is an expression of the form {x|ϕ(x)}, where ϕ is a stratiﬁed formula. Let
ϕ+ be stratiﬁed by replacing each variable in ϕ by the corresponding variable of next
higher type, and then let B+ be {X|ϕ+(X)}. Then the disambiguation convention is
simply:
A ∈B means A ∈B+ when type(A) = type(B).
(Dis 1)
Thus for B of the form {x|ϕ(x)}, A ∈B is equivalent to ϕ+(A). For example,
the statements (1) above may be inferred as an application of (Dis 1). Similarly, if
A is of prima facie type one higher than B = {x|ϕ(x)}, we agree to the following
disambiguation convention:
A ∈B means A ∈B++ when type(A) = type(B) + 1.
(Dis 2)
Then, for example, the statements (2) above may be inferred as an application of
(Dis 2).
The ambiguity in the kinds of formulas A ∈B considered here is typical because
disambiguation is systematic using the principles (Dis 1) and (Dis 2) depending on
the type of A relative to that of B, and similarly when A is of still higher type. It is
also typical because it doesn’t really depend on the choice of type assignments on the
basis of which the type of A is measured in comparison with that of B, as long as all
types are shifted by the same amount. This is because of the straightforward:
Theorem 1. If a sentence θ is provable in STT then so also is θ+.
It follows that if A ∈B is provable in STT where A, B are given by closed terms,
then so also is A+ ∈B+. More importantly, if A ∈B is provable then every property
of elements of B also holds of A. This is formulated as:
Theorem 2 (Transfer rule). For closed terms A, B, C with B = {x|ϕ(x)} and C =
{x|ψ(x)} and type(A) = type(B), if A ∈B and B ⊆C are provable in STT then so
also is A ∈C.

140
S. Feferman
Proof. This is because A ∈B means ϕ+(A). Since ∀x[ϕ(x) →ψ(x)] is a theo-
rem, so also is ∀X[ϕ+(X) →ψ+(X)], so ψ+(A) holds, i.e., A ∈C holds by the
disambiguation convention.
4. Some Mathematical Challenges
All the preceding is quite obvious; moreover the applications are of limited mathemat-
ical interest, because STT doesn’t lend itself to the ﬂexible expression of mathematical
properties in practice. Here are some statements of the form A ∈B with the prima
facie type of A greater than or equal to that of B that are intuitively true in a naive
theory of structures but cannot be veriﬁed directly in current systems of type theory
or set theory. The aim is to make sense of them by some form of typical ambiguity.
Note that in the following we use ( . , .) for the pairing operation, which is iterated
to form n-tuples. We assume understood the mathematical notions involved, cf. [13]
for the examples 4.2–4.4.
4.1 Let P be the class all partially ordered structures and let S be the substructure
relation. Then (P, S) ∈P .
4.2 Let Set be the category of all sets, AbGrp the category of all Abelian groups,
Top the category of all topological spaces, etc., and let CAT be the class of all
categories. Then, as should be, Set ∈CAT, AbGrp ∈CAT, Top ∈CAT, etc.
4.3 Also Cat ∈CAT where Cat = (CAT, FUNCT, ◦) is the category of all cate-
gories, whose objects are all categories and whose morphisms are the functors
between categories, and ◦is the partial operation of composition of functors.
4.4 If A ∈CAT and B ∈CAT then BA ∈CAT where
BA = (FUNCT(A, B), NAT(A, B), ◦),
whose objects are the class FUNCT(A, B) of all functors from A to B and
whose morphisms are the natural transformations between functors and where
◦is the operation of composition of such transformations.
4.5 Let BA be the class of all Boolean algebras. Then (℘(V ), ∪, ∩, −, ⊘, V ) ∈BA
where V is the universal class and ℘(V ) is the class of all subclasses of V.6
6This example was suggested to me by Godehard Link.

Typical Ambiguity
141
5. Typical Ambiguity in a System of Set Theory
with Universes
Let L be the language of ZF set theory, using variables x, y, z, . . . for sets. Adjoin to
L constants Un for n = 0, 1, 2, . . . for an increasing sequence of reﬂective universes;
the resulting language is denoted L(U<ω), where we use U<ω to indicate the sequence
of Un for n < ω. Each Un is supposed to be a set which is reﬂective in the sense
that—speaking model-theoretically—it forms an elementary substructure of (V, ∈)
when the membership relation is restricted to Un. As usual, to express this, we use the
operation ϕa of forming the relativization of all quantiﬁers in the formula ϕ of L to
a; we also write Rel(ϕ, a) for the resulting formula. The universes are also supposed
to be supertransitive, i.e., transitive and closed under the power set operation ℘; for
the latter it is sufﬁcient to assume that universes are closed under subsets of members.
The system of ZF, resp.
ZFC, with universes satisfying these properties is denoted
ZF/U<ω, resp. ZFC/U<ω. More ofﬁcially, the axioms are as follows.
Axioms of ZF/U<ω
I. All the axioms of ZF in L, and for each n = 0, 1, 2, . . . :
II. Un ∈Un+1.
III. Trans(Un).
IV. ∀x∀y[y ∈Un ∧x ⊆y →x ∈Un].
V. For each L formula ϕ(x1, . . . , xk),
∀x1 . . . ∀xk{x1, . . . , xk ∈Un →[Rel(ϕ, Un)(x1, . . . , xk) ↔
ϕ(x1, . . . , xk)]}.
The Axioms of ZFC/U<ω are obtained by adding the Axiom of Choice, AC.
Theorem 3. ZF/U<ω is a conservative extension of ZF.
Proof. This is by a straightforward extension of the result of Montague andVaught [14]
which in turn modiﬁes Levy’s well known reﬂection principle argument, see also [5]:
Sec. 2. We give here a brief sketch of the ideas involved. Note that for conservation
we need only show how, given any ﬁnite set of axioms of ZF/U<ω involving only
symbols Ui for i = 0, . . . , n for some n, to deﬁne sets in ZF satisfying the given
axioms for these universes. Working informally in ZF, let Vα be the αth set in the
cumulative hierarchy, i.e., for each α, Vα is the union of ℘(Vβ) for all β < α. For any
set x, the rank of x, ρ(x), is the unique α such that x ∈Vα+1 −Vα. One associates
with each existential formula (∃x)ψ(x, y1, . . . , ym) of L an m-ary function Fψ whose
value Fψ(y1, . . . , ym) for each y1, . . . , ym is the set of all x of least rank such that
ψ(x, y1, . . . , ym) holds. Thus
(∃x)ψ(x, y1, . . . , ym) →(∃x ∈Fψ(y1, . . . , ym))ψ(x, y1, . . . , ym).

142
S. Feferman
The Fψ act like Skolem functions, but without needing the Axiom of Choice
to pick a speciﬁc value of witness for the existential quantiﬁer. By the rank-hull
of a set b we mean the least Vα such that b ⊆Vα. For any ﬁnite set Q of for-
mulas (∃x)ψ(x, y1, . . . , ym), by the Skolem-rank-hull of a set b relative to Q, in
symbols HQ(b), we mean the least Vα such that b ⊆Vα and such that for each
(∃x)ψ(x, y1, . . . , ym)inQandeachy1, . . . , ym ∈Vα, Fψ(y1, . . . , ym) ⊆Vα. HQ(b)
is obtained as the union of bj for j < ω, where b0 = b and each bj+1 is the rank
hull of [bj union all Fψ(y1, . . . , ym) for all formulas (∃x)ψ(x, y1, . . . , ym) in Q and
all y1, . . . , ym ∈bj]. For simplicity, assume the formulas of L are generated from
atomic formulas x ∈y and x = y by ¬, ∧and ∃. Now, given the ﬁnite set of axioms
of ZF/U<ω to be modeled in ZF, let S be the closure under subformulas of all the
L formulas in the given set and let Q consist of all existentially quantiﬁed formulas
(∃x)ψ in S. Then it is proved by formula induction that for each set b and each ϕ in S,
∀x1 . . . ∀xk{x1 . . . xk ∈HQ(b) →[Rel(ϕ, HQ(b))(x1 . . . xk) ↔ϕ(x1 . . . xk)]}.
Since also each HQ(b) is supertransitive by construction, we can deﬁne Ui for
i = 0, . . . , n by taking U0 = HQ(0) and for each i < n, Ui+1 = HQ(Ui ∪{Ui}).
NB. If θ is any sentence of L then adding θ as an axiom maintains conservativity by
this theorem.
Corollary. ZFC/U<ω is a conservative extension of ZFC.
Note that each reﬂective universe Un satisﬁes all the axioms of ZF by taking closed
ϕ in Axiom V to be any one of these axioms. It follows by supertransitivity that each
universe contains the empty set 0 and the set ω of ﬁnite ordinals, is closed under
unordered pair, union and power set; moreover, these are absolute, i.e., have the same
values in the universe as in the universe of all sets. Moreover, each universe Un is
closed under the Separation Axiom and Replacement Axiom schemes. The latter can
be thought of as follows: if f is any function in the set-theoretic sense of the word
that is deﬁned in L (with respect to any given parameters in Un) and if a ∈Un and
f : a →Un, then {f (x) : x ∈a} ∈Un. If one wishes to drop here the assumption that
f is deﬁned, allowing it to be any function, then ρ(Un) would have to be a strongly
inaccessible cardinal, and assumption of that would no longer hold conservatively
over ZF; instead we would have to strengthen ZF by the assumption of the existence
of inﬁnitely many strongly inaccessible cardinals. This might be needed for some
applications (see the next section), but is not assumed here.
We now consider to what extent application of typical ambiguity in the system
ZF/U<ω (or the same augmented by AC as dictated by speciﬁc needs) can be used
to meet the mathematical challenges of the preceding Sec. 4.7 Looked at informally,
7Something like this was suggested as follows by Kurt Gödel in a letter to Paul Bernays dated 1 January
1963: “I ﬁnd it interesting that you speak …of the ‘newer abstract disciplines of mathematics’as something
lying outside of set theory. I conjecture that you are thereby alluding to the concept of category and to

Typical Ambiguity
143
what we have to deal with to begin with in the examples 4.1–4.3 are membership
relations of the form A ∈B, where B is a class and A is a (possibly) many-sorted
relational structure each of whose domains and relations are classes. In all the cases
considered, B is given as {x|ϕ(x)} for some L formula ϕ; the classes which are the
constituents of A are also deﬁned in L. We shall relativize the concepts involved in
A and B to universes. By a typical reﬂective universe U, we mean any Un; then by
the next universe U+ we mean Un+1. The ﬁrst step in interpreting the problematic
membership statements relative to any such universe U is to identify classes with the
corresponding subsets of U. The second step is to identify sets with the members of
U. Note that since the classes making up the structure A are subsets of U, we have
A ∈U+. Now, to make sense of A ∈B, the third step is to re-identify B with the
class of all sets in U+ that satisfy the deﬁnition of B; call this B+. More precisely, if
B is given formally as {x|ϕ(x)}, its ﬁrst identiﬁcation is with {x ∈U|ϕU(x)} which
is the same as {x ∈U|ϕ(x)}; then, the re-interpretation B+ of B is simply deﬁned to
be {x ∈U+|ϕ(x)}. This leads to the disambiguation convention:
A ∈B means A ∈B+.
(Dis 3)
To take the simplest example, 4.1, P is deﬁned to be the class of structures (x, y)
where y ⊆x2 is a partial ordering of x, and S is deﬁned to be the substructure relation
(x, y) ⊆(z, w) on P which holds just in case x ⊆z and y = w ∩x2. With the
variables x, y, z, w taken to range over the sets in any typical reﬂective universe U,
we have that P and S are subsets of U. According to the disambiguation principle
(Dis 3), (P, S) ∈P means that (P, S) ∈P +, where P + consists of all those sets
(X, Y) with X, Y in U+ such that Y ⊆X2 and Y is a partial ordering of X. It is
readily veriﬁed that in this case, we do indeed have (P, S) ∈P +, so it makes sense
by the disambiguation principle to assert that (P, S) ∈P . In words: the class of
all partially ordered structures (in a typical universe) together with the substructure
relation (in that universe) forms a partially ordered structure (in the next universe).
There is more to be said about the above disambiguation principle, again illustrated
by reference to 4.1. By the reﬂection axiom V of ZF/U<ω , P and P + share exactly
the same properties expressed in the language L of set theory, and each relativized
to any typical reﬂective universe can be considered as a surrogate of the class of all
sets (x, y) which form partial ordering structures. Moreover, consider any property
(x, y) formulated in L which is proved to be true of all such (x, y). Let C be
deﬁned as the class of all (x, y) such that (x, y) holds. This deﬁnition is taken to be
ambiguous, i.e., it can be thought of as pertaining to the class of all sets, or relativized
to any universe. Our assumption is that P ⊆C has been proved in ZF, i.e., when we
relativize to the class of all sets. It follows that P + ⊆C+ when P is interpreted as the
the self-applicability of categories. But it seems to me that all of this is contained within a set theory with
a ﬁnitely iterated notion of class, where reﬂexivity results automatically through a ‘typical ambiguity’ of
statements.” (The source for the German original of this letter is in the Bernays archives at the ETH in
Zürich; the full letter is to be found, along with much else between Gödel and Bernays, in the collection of
correspondence in [9].)

144
S. Feferman
class of all partially ordered structures in any typical reﬂective universe U. From the
disambiguation principle, it follows that (P, S) ∈C. In other words, (P, S) shares
all the properties that are veriﬁed of all partially ordered structures; this is an example
of the transfer rule in this framework. More generally, we have:
Theorem 4 (Transfer rule). If A ∈B and B ⊆C are provable in ZF where B, C are
class abstracts then A ∈C is provable there too.
Proof. For B given formally as {x|ϕ(x)} and C as {x|ψ(x)}, B ⊆C is read as
∀x[ϕ(x) →ψ(x)], and what it means for B ⊆C to be provable in ZF is that
∀x[ϕ(x) →ψ(x)] is provable in ZF. Then by the reﬂection axiom V, given any
universe U, (∀x ∈U+)[Rel(ϕ, U+)(x) →Rel(ψ, U+)(x)], i.e., B+ ⊆C+. From
provability of A ∈B, which means that A ∈B+ by (Dis 3), it follows that A ∈C+,
i.e., A ∈C, again by the disambiguation convention.
To look at things more generally, consider a type structure over sets, where sets
are considered to be at type level 0, classes of sets at type level 1, classes of classes
of sets of type level 2, and so on. We regard the type level of a structure A to be the
same as the maximum type level of the domains, relations, operations and individuals
that make up that structure. Thus in the examples 4.1–4.3 of problematic membership
statements of the form A ∈B the type level of both A and B is 1. But in the example
4.5, the structure A = (℘(V ), ∪, ∩, −, ⊘, V ) is of type level 2 since the class V of
all sets is of type level 1 and ℘(V ), the class of all subclasses of V , is of type level 2.
On the other hand the type level of B—in this case the class BA of all sets which are
Boolean algebras—is still 1. But unlike the case of type theory, where to disambiguate
A ∈B we had to go to A ∈B++ when the type level of A is one higher than that of B,
we can still disambiguate by (Dis 3). For, when we interpret the sets as ranging over
any typical universe U, A is interpreted as being the structure (℘(U), ∪, ∩, −, ⊘, U)
and since U and ℘(U) belong to U+, the structure A in this case also belongs to U+,
and in fact is a member of the subset BA+ of U+ consisting of all structures in U+
which satisfy the conditions to be a Boolean algebra. Thus it makes sense by (Dis 3)
to say that A ∈B holds in this case. The advantage over ordinary type theory given
to us by the set-theoretical framework is that the type level of U+ over U measured
in terms of the cumulative hierarchy is inﬁnite. A precise explanation of how (Dis 3)
may be applied more generally would require the introduction of an extension L+ of L
by variables of classes, which are assumed (unlike Gödel–Bernays or Morse–Kelley
theories) to satisfy all the axioms of ZF. Then for any application, the ZF objects are
interpreted as ranging over a universe U and the classes are interpreted as ranging over
the next universe U+. For the purposes here, it is sufﬁcient to see how (Dis 3) works
in a few speciﬁc cases, like that of 4.5 just discussed, or 4.4 to be treated in the next
section.

Typical Ambiguity
145
6. Category Theory in ZF/U<ω
The reader is assumed to be familiar with the basic notions of category theory. A
standard reference is [13]. We can take categories to be structures of the form A =
(O, M, C) where O is the class of objects of A, M its class of morphisms and C the
composition of morphisms in A; C is a partial operation on M2 to M considered as
a three-placed relation on M. Actually, we can identify O with the class of identity
morphisms, suitably deﬁned, and the domain and codomain of a morphism with its
left and right identities, so it is sufﬁcient to consider structures of the form (M, C).
Alternatively, and more intuitively, we can take categories to be structures of the
form A = (O, M, C, D0, D1, I) where C is as before, D0 and D1 are maps from
M to O giving the domain and codomain respectively, and I is a map from O to
M. As usual we write f : x →y or x →f y in A when f ∈M, D0(f ) = x and
D1(f ) = y; idx for I(x); and fg = h when (f, g, h) ∈C. When it is necessary
to compare objects from one category with another we subscript the terms of A by
‘A’ as A = (OA, MA, CA, D0A, D1A, IA). A is a large category if OA and MA
are both classes. A is said to be locally small if for any objects x, y of A the class
HA(x, y) = {f |f ∈MA ∧f : x →y} is a set; it is small if A itself is a set.
The following are standard examples of locally small categories.
The category of all sets. Set is the category whose objects are just the sets and
whose morphisms are all triples f = (u, x, y) where u is a function (in the usual set-
theoretical sense) whose domain is x and range is contained in y. Then D0(u, x, y) =
x and D1(u, x, y) = y. The composition fg is deﬁned for f = (u, x, y) and g =
(v, z, w) just in case y = z, in which case fg = (u; v, x, w) where u; v is the
relational composition of u and v. Finally I(x) is taken to be (u, x, x) for each x,
where u is the identity function from x to x.
The category of Abelian groups. AbGrp is the category whose objects are the sets
which are Abelian groups and whose morphisms are group homomorphisms with
speciﬁed domain and codomain. This is then spelled out as in 6.1.
The category of all topological spaces. Top is the category whose objects are the
members of U that are topological spaces, treated similarly.
The category of all categories.
Cat is the category whose objects are the sets
(o, m, c, d0, d1, i) that satisfy the conditions to be a category, and whose morphisms
are the functors between any two such categories.
Cat itself has the form
(CAT, FUNCT, . . .) where CAT = OCat and FUNCT = MCat.
Now by (Dis 3) we can make sense of the statements in 4.2 and 4.3 that Set ∈CAT,
AbGrp ∈CAT, Top ∈Cat and even Cat ∈CAT, i.e., (CAT, FUNCT, . . .) ∈CAT.
Disambiguated, these statements mean that relative to any typical reﬂective universe
U, each of Set, AbGrp, Top, and Cat is an element of CAT+, the class of all sets
A = (O, M, . . .) in the next universe U+ which satisfy the conditions to be a category.
Furthermore, the transfer theorem assures us that any properties that apply to all

146
S. Feferman
members of Cat, i.e., the class of all small categories, also hold for the large categories
Set, AbGrp, Top, Cat, etc.
The category of all functors between two given categories. When we turn to making
sense of the statement 4.4 that BA ∈CAT where A and B are large categories we
meet the problem that the prima-facie type level of BA is higher than that of both A
and B. In Mac Lane’s terminology, BA is beyond large, sometimes called superlarge.
But from the point of view of the method of disambiguation proposed in the preceding
section, the issue here is no different from that met with the example 4.5 concerning the
Boolean algebra on ℘(V ). But there are mathematical aspects of example 4.4 that are
worth a closer look. Consider the usual set-theoretical deﬁnition of BA: its objects are
FUNCT(A, B), i.e., the class of all functors F : A →B, and its morphisms are natural
transformations η : F →G between such functors. We can take functors to be classes
which are functions in the usual set-theoretical sense, so for each x ∈OA, F(x) ∈OB;
as usual, to be a functor, F is required to preserve composition and identity morphisms,
i.e., for f, g ∈MA and x ∈OA, F(fg) = F(f )F(g) in B and F(ix) = iF(x). By
a natural transformation η : F →G between two such functors F : A →B and
G : A →B is meant a map from OA to MB such that the following diagram is
commutative for any x, y ∈OA, whenever x →u y in A:
F(x)
F(u)
−−−−→F(y)
η(x)

η(y)
G(x)
G(u)
−−−−→G(y)
Composition of natural transformations is deﬁned in an obvious way. Though, as
noted above, BA is no longer a large category when A and B are large, we can still
make use of the disambiguation convention (Dis 3) as at the end of the preceding
section to make sense of the statement that it is a member of CAT, since, according to
it, this simply means that relative to any typical universe U, BA ∈CAT+. 8 There is
no problem with this, since now with the OA, MA, OB, and MB regarded as subsets
of a given universe U, the sets OC and MC belong by the above deﬁnition to U+
for C = BA. Again, the transfer theorem assures us that any property of all small
categories also applies to the superlarge category BA.
7. Discussion: Axiomatic Foundations of Category Theory
One of the usual foundations of category theory, due to Mac Lane [11], takes as its
setting the language of the Bernays–Gödel theory of sets and classes; this allows us to
talk about two kinds of categories, those that are small, i.e., are sets, and those that are
8This is in accord with Gödel’s idea quoted in footnote 7.

Typical Ambiguity
147
large, i.e., are classes which are not sets. In such a foundation, when A and B are both
large categories, such as A = AbGrp and B = Set, there is no place to locate BA,
since it is now of a type higher than the classes in the sense of the language of BG. Thus
one often is forced to restrict this construction to the case that A is small, so that the
functors from A to B are all sets, and BA is at most a large category in the BG sense.
The preceding shows that that problem is not met in the ZF/U<ω setting presented
here. Thus, for example, we can state the Yoneda Lemma as a natural equivalence
between any locally bounded (i.e., locally small) category A and the category SetA′,
where A′ is the opposite category to A.
Now it is to be noticed that we never needed more than two universes U and U+ to
take care of disambiguation in the various examples 4.1–4.5. Thus, we could just as
well have restricted the theory to the part of ZF/U<ω that concerns only U0 and U1.
One could go even farther, by dealing with only one reﬂective universe U, of which
(axiomatically) the full universe V is taken to be an elementary extension, thus with
U being treated like U0 and V like U1; call this form of the theory ZF/U0.9 Large
categories have as surrogates subcategories of U0, and functor categories for them
simply sit as sets in V . On the face of it, this would seem to make it similar to the
suggestion of Mac Lane [12] according to which one universe sufﬁces. But there is
an essential difference here in the further use of the reﬂection Axiom V to insure that
there is nothing special about the choice of the universe U0; with respect to properties
formulated in set-theoretical terms, it is indistinguishable from the full universe. Thus
any property established for subcategories of U0 holds of all categories, in particular
the category Cat and the functor categories of 4.4.
Actually, the idea of using a theory like ZF/U0 or ZFC/U<ω as a foundational
framework for category theory is an old one that I ﬁrst elaborated in the paper “Set-
theoretical foundations of category theory” [5].10 What ZF/U<ω, resp. ZFC/U<ω,
provides as an advantage is the ability to explain more directly the disambiguation
relative to any typical reﬂective universe in terms of the next universe. The adequacy
of ZFC/U0 as a framework for working category theory was considered with respect
to some prominent test cases, including: (i)Yoneda Lemma, (ii) FreydAdjoint Functor
Theorem, and (iii) the functors Extn in homological algebra. These, and others, should
be re-considered as test cases for a more ﬂexible development in the system ZFC/U<ω.
In some cases we may need somewhat stronger hypotheses; for example (as ex-
plained in [5]), it appears that the Kan Extension theorem requires the rank of the
typical universe U being considered to be a strongly inaccessible cardinal. To deal
with such cases we shall need to add as an assumption to our base system of set theory
9That was the form in which typical ambiguity in set theory was presented in a draft of this paper. The
reasons for the shift to a theory with many reﬂective universes are given below.
10A similar proposal has more recently been made by F. A. Muller [15], taking an extension of the theory
of sets and classes due to Ackermann, as the basic framework; this system is known to be interpretable in
ZF/U0 by interpreting the sets to be the members of U0 and the classes to be the sets in V . Muller incorrectly
asserts that my paper [5] required the assumption of inaccessible cardinals. For a critical review byAndreas
Blass of Muller (2001) and elaboration of its relation to my earlier work, see http://www.ams.org/mathscinet/
review 2002k:03008.

148
S. Feferman
that beyond any ordinal there is a strongly inaccessible cardinal. (Such an assumption
is considered to be innocuous by working set theorists.) A proposed foundation for
category theory ascribed to Grothendieck makes use of this assumption; by a universe
on that approach is meant any Vα for α a strongly inaccessible cardinal. What that
foundation does not explain is why such universes may be considered typical. That
is what the reﬂection Axiom V adds to the Grothendieck approach. But it is useful
to see when the much weaker system ZFC/U<ω, without the assumption of any in-
accessibles, sufﬁces for various parts of the development of category theory; in fact,
that assumption seems to be rarely needed.
Another, general, reason for dealing here with the system with a sequence of
reﬂective universes rather than a single one has been to show how the handling of
typical ambiguity in set theory parallels, in part, that in the theory of types as dealt
with above in Sec. 3.
There are other candidates for foundational frameworks for category theory em-
ploying typical ambiguity which would seem to have some advantages over ZF/U<ω
with or without AC, especially with respect to the treatment of functions. One is a
form of operational set theory, in which the system is extended further by variables for
a partial combinatory algebra over the universe.11 Another is to use one of the systems
of Explicit Mathematics introduced in [7] and studied in a number of publications since
then. There the operational structure in the form of a partial combinatory algebra on
the universe of all individuals is taken as basic. For a system of that kind to work we
would have to extend the formalism by symbols for typical reﬂective universes with
the appropriate axioms. Both treatments allow BA to be interpreted directly as a class
of type level 1 rather than type level 2. I have done some experimentation with both
of these approaches, but have not yet brought the work to a deﬁnitive form.
8. Trying to Have Your Cake and Eat It Too:
Naive Category Theory
Minimally, what one is after is to have a demonstrably consistent foundational frame-
work T for mathematically interesting cases of self-membership such as provided
by category theory. But, more than consistency, one would want (as with ZF/U<ω)
conservativity over an accepted framework (in that case over ZF); all that is done
here, though not without some clumsiness in the applications. Ideally, what one is
after—and that is not done here—is to provide a framework meeting these criteria
in which such objects as CAT exist in the universe of discourse and which are such
that (CAT, . . .) ∈CAT is literally true, and not reinterpreted according to context.
11See http://math.stanford.edu/ Feferman/papers/OperationalST-I.pdf for a draft article featuring such a
system. (NB. Theorem 4(i) p. 5 needs correction.) Incidentally, Vidhyanath Rao has informed me that
there are some theorems which require global choice for their proof. The system of operational set theory
referred to here incorporates a global choice operator.

Typical Ambiguity
149
For a discussion of the desiderata for that kind of foundation, see my paper “Cate-
gorical foundations and foundations of category theory” [8]. We have yet to obtain a
satisfactory solution of the problem posed by naive category theory in that form.
At ﬁrst sight, one direction in which such a solution might be sought is to make use
of theories like that of Aczel [1] as exposited in [4], in which the Foundation Axiom is
replaced by theAnti-FoundationAxiomAFA. That certainly allows many examples of
self membership such as a ∈a and (a, b) ∈a, and so on, with interesting applications
when suitably elaborated. In Ch. 20 of that book there is a proposed extension SEC0
of the theory of sets in which class variables are adjoined, that also allows some cases
of self-membership between classes such as A ∈A and (A, B) ∈A; grosso modo,
such statements are needed to deal with the kinds of mathematical applications from
category theory considered here. Some of the above desiderata are met by that system,
namely that of consistency relative to ZFC, of which it is an extension. But, as the
authors themselves point out, the mathematical usefulness of SEC0 in general remains
to be established.12
Another direction in which such a solution might be sought is via some form of
stratiﬁed theories like Quine’s NF. Though that is still not known to be consistent, the
system NFU with urelements allowed was shown to be consistent by Jensen [10], and
he also showed how it can be beefed up to include, conservatively, ZFC. However, the
formalism of NFU is not as it stands suitable to deﬁne {x|x is a relational structure of
signature σ} where σ is any speciﬁed signature. For example, if x is to be of the form
(y, z) with z ⊆y2 we need to assign to the elements of z, which are ordered pairs,
the same type level as the elements of y, and thus ordered pairs of elements of a set
need to be assigned the same type level as the elements of that set. None of the usual
deﬁnitions of ordered pair in NFU works to do that. However, one can formulate a
simple extension NFUP of NFU in which pairing is taken as a basic operation, and
stratiﬁcation is modiﬁed so as to allow us to assign the same type to an ordered pair as
to its terms. By an adaptation of Jensen’s proof, one can establish the consistency of
NFUP and again one can beef it up to obtain a version of it conservative over ZFC. I
carried this out in an unpublished MS, “Some formal systems for the unlimited theory
of structures and categories” (abstract in [6]).13 This system indeed serves to literally
verify examples like 4.1–4.4. But it has other defects as a proposed foundation of
naive category theory. One is that there is no way that one can establish existence of
the cartesian product  xi(i ∈I) of a collection {xi|i ∈I} of sets, since the collection
must be given by a function g with g(i) = xi for each i ∈I, and the elements of
the cartesian product f must be of the form (i, f (i)) with f (i) ∈g(i). Thus there
is no stratiﬁed type assignment for pairing which allows one to deal with both f and
g simultaneously. On the other hand, there is no obvious way to obtain a consistent
12According to one of the referees, the work of Barwise and Moss on SEC0 has been continued by
Alexandru Baltag in his doctoral thesis, and one publication resulting from that is [2]. I do not know how
relevant it may be to the questions dealt with here.
13The proof makes use of the existence of two inaccessible cardinals, an assumption which, as remarked
above, is regarded as innocuous by working set-theorists.

150
S. Feferman
extension of NFU allowing stratiﬁcation of pairs where the terms of a pair are of prima
facie mixed type.
As the title of Specker [19] attests, there is of course a non-trivial connection of the
consistency problem for stratiﬁed systems with typical ambiguity. Specker considered
one form of typical ambiguity in STT to be given by the scheme (ϕ ↔ϕ+) for all
sentences ϕ of type theory; he showed that NF is consistent just in case STT is
consistent when augmented by this scheme. One way to insure that would be to seek
models of type theory in which there is a shifting endomorphism which takes each type
level to its successor level, or a model of STT allowing negative types in which there is
a type shifting automorphism. Jensen succeeded in using Specker’s idea in his proof
of consistency of NFU, by combining it with the Ehrenfeucht–Mostowski theorem
on the existence of models with many automorphisms. But even if the consistency
of NF were established via Specker’s theorem or by some alternative approach, NF
would not, as it stands, provide the interpretation of structural notions needed to insure
literal self-membership in the sense of such examples as 4.1–4.4, as well as to satisfy
the additional criteria of [8] for ordinary mathematical constructions such as that for
product above.
Acknowledgement. Invited lecture for the conference, One Hundred Years of Rus-
sell’s Paradox, University of Munich, June 2–5, 2001. I wish to thank Godehard Link
for his exceptional work in organizing this conference and for his personal assistance in
connection with it. I have received useful comments on this paper from Tim Fernando,
Godehard Link, Karl-Georg Niebergall and two anonymous referees.
References
[1]
Aczel, Peter: 1988. Non-Well-Founded Sets. Stanford: CSLI Publications no. 14.
[2]
Baltag, Alexandru: 1998. STS: A structural theory of sets. Advances in Modal Logic 2:
1–34.
[3]
Bartlett, John: 1980. Familiar Quotations, Fifteenth edition. Edited by E. M. Beck.
Boston: Little, Brown and Co.
[4]
Barwise, Jon and Lawrence Moss: 1996. Vicious Circles. Stanford: CSLI Publications
no. 60.
[5]
Feferman, Solomon: 1969. Set-theoretical foundations of category theory (with an ap-
pendix by G. Kreisel). In: M. Barr et al. (eds.), Reports of the Midwest Category Seminar
III, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 106, 201–247.
[6]
Feferman, Solomon: 1974. Some formal systems for the unlimited theory of structures
and categories (abstract). J. Symbolic Logic 39: 374–375.
[7]
Feferman, Solomon: 1975.A language and axioms for explicit mathematics. In: J. Cross-
ley (ed.), Algebra and Logic, Lecture Notes in Mathematics 450, 87–139.

Typical Ambiguity
151
[8]
Feferman, Solomon: 1977. Categorical foundations and foundations of category theory.
In: R. E. Butts and J. Hintikka (eds.), Logic, Foundations of Mathematics and Com-
putability Theory, vol. 1, Dordrecht: Reidel, 149–169.
[9]
Gödel, Kurt: 2003. Collected Works, Volume IV. Correspondence A–G. Edited by S.
Feferman et al., Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
[10]
Jensen, Ronald: 1969. On the consistency of a slight (?) modiﬁcation of Quine’s New
Foundations. In: D. Davidson and J. Hintikka (eds.), Words and Objections: Essays on
the Work of W. V. O. Quine, Dordrecht: Reidel, 278–291.
[11]
Mac Lane, Saunders: 1961. Locally small categories and the foundations of mathematics.
In: Inﬁnitistic Methods, Oxford: Pergamon Press, 25–43.
[12]
Mac Lane, Saunders: 1969. One universe as a foundation for category theory. In: M. Barr
et al. (eds.), Reports of the Midwest Category Seminar III, Lecture Notes in Mathematics
106: 192–200.
[13]
Mac Lane, Saunders: 1971. Categories for theWorking Mathematician. Berlin: Springer.
[14]
Montague, Richard and Robert L. Vaught: 1959. Natural models of set theories. Funda-
menta Mathematicae 47: 219–242.
[15]
Muller, Frederik A.: 2001. Sets, classes, and categories. British J. Philosophy of Science
52: 539–573.
[16]
Quine, Willard V.: 1937. New foundations for mathematical logic. American Mathemat-
ical Monthly 44: 70–80.
[17]
Quine, Willard V.: 1938. On the theory of types. J. of Symbolic Logic 3: 125–139.
[18]
Russell, Bertrand: 1908. Mathematical logic as based on the theory of types. American
Mathematical Monthly 30: 222–262. Reprinted in [20]: 150–182.
[19]
Specker, Ernst: 1962. Typical ambiguity. In: E. Nagel et al. (eds.), Logic, Methodology
and Philosophy of Science. Proceedings of the 1960 International Congress, Stanford:
Stanford Univ. Press, 116–124.
[20]
van Heijenoort, Jean (ed.): 1967. From Frege to Gödel. A Source Book in Mathematical
Logic, 1879–1931. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press.
[21] Whitehead, Alfred N. and Bertrand Russell: 1925. Principia Mathematica, vol. I, second
edition. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press.
Department of Mathematics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-2125
USA
E-mail: sf@csli.stanford.edu


Is ZF Finitistically Reducible?
Karl-Georg Niebergall
Abstract. It follows from work done by J. Mycielski that each consistent r.e. ﬁrst-order theory
T is proof-theoretically reducible to a locally ﬁnite theory T ′. I present a different method
for obtaining the same result. A consequence of these results is: If each locally ﬁnite theory
is ﬁnitary, then ZF is ﬁnitistically reducible. Since the premiss “Each locally ﬁnite theory is
ﬁnitary” may be accepted by some proof theorists, we have the problem that ZF would turn out
to be ﬁnitistically reducible.
1. Introduction
I think that the answer to the question posed in the title of this text should be “No”.
Since the expression “ﬁnitistically” echoes the word “ﬁnite” from ordinary language,
this should be intuitively obvious. Even without having precise deﬁnitions of “T is
ﬁnitistically reducible” and “S is a ﬁnitistic theory”1 at hand—
S is ﬁnitary
⇐⇒
S does not make assumptions of inﬁnity
seems prima facie plausible from this perspective. Assumptions of inﬁnity are made by
ZF, however, to such a high degree that it would furthermore stretch our understanding
of “reducible” if ZF were declared to be ﬁnitistically reducible. It is reassuring that
in investigations belonging to proof theory the same judgement can be found: “For
example (to be extreme again), the system ZF, which is justiﬁed by the uncountable
inﬁnitary framework of Cantorian set theory, is not reducible to any ﬁnitarily justiﬁed
system.” ([6]: 7).
At the same time, J. Mycielski (in [29] and [30]) claims that ZF is syntactically
isomorphic to a locally ﬁnite theory FIN(ZF), which, in Mycielski’s words, “eliminates
ideal (inﬁnite) objects from the proofs of properties of concrete (ﬁnite) objects”.2 And
S. Lavine, in proposing an approach to the foundations of mathematics (see [24] and
1I use “S is a ﬁnitistic theory” and “S is a ﬁnitary theory” as synonyms.
2“It is the purpose of this paper to construct in a uniform way for any consistent theory T a locally
ﬁnite theory FIN(T ) which is syntactically (in a sense) isomorphic to T .” ([30]: 59). And he adds “From a
physicalistic point of view the theorems of ZF and their FIN(ZF)-counterparts may have the same meaning.
Therefore, FIN(ZF) […] eliminates ideal (inﬁnite) objects from the proofs of properties of concrete (ﬁnite)
objects.” ([30]: 59).

154
K.-G. Niebergall
[25]) which has some afﬁnities to Mycielski’s, adds that FIN(ZF) is a counterpart of
ZF which belongs to what he calls “ﬁnite mathematics” and does not even presuppose
the potential inﬁnite.3
Surely, the proof theoretician’s formulation “T is ﬁnitistically reducible” is not
the same as Mycielski’s “There is a locally ﬁnite theory which is isomorphic to T ”
or as Lavine’s “Each theorem of T has a counterpart in ﬁnite mathematics”. Thus
the claims of the latter do not directly contradict the assessment that ZF fails to be
ﬁnitistically reducible. Yet, ﬁnitistic and locally ﬁnite theories and those belonging to
ﬁnite mathematics on the one side, and the relations of proof-theoretical reducibility
and of being isomorphic with (or: being a counterpart of) on the other side, turn
out to be so closely connected that the investigations of Mycielski and Lavine can
be pulled over into the domain of proof theory—suggesting the result that ZF is
also ﬁnitistically reducible in the proof theoretician’s sense. That proof-theoretical
conceptions of ﬁnitistic reducibility might give the wrong answer to the question, “Is
ZF ﬁnitistically reducible?”, is the topic of this paper.4
2. Finitistic Reducibility Deﬁned
In the introduction, I have simply used “ZF is ﬁnitistically reducible” as if this phrase
were understood well enough as it stands. “T is ﬁnitistically reducible” calls for expli-
cation, however. For an answer to this problem, it is advisable to turn to investigations
belonging to proof theory.5
2.1. Proof-Theoretical Reducibility
In [4, 6, 7], we ﬁnd the following deﬁnition, which seems to be widely accepted by
proof theorists:
Deﬁnition 1. S is ﬁnitistically reducible : ⇐⇒there is a ﬁnitary theory T such that
S is proof-theoretically reducible to T .
But what about “S is a ﬁnitistic theory” and “S is proof-theoretically reducible to T ”?
For the second phrase, precise deﬁnitions have been formulated; but there are several
of them which are in use in proof theory. Before I discuss four of them (concentrating
3See ([25]: 389): “Each theorem of ordinary mathematics has a natural counterpart in ﬁnite mathematics.
[. . .] Finite mathematics does not even presuppose any form of the potential inﬁnite.”
4Thus, it does not contain a discussion whether ZF is ﬁnitistically reducible and, in particular, does not
question that it fails to be so.
5Actually, one usually has to turn to the writings of S. Feferman. Apart from these, there are not many
proof-theoretical texts which deal explicitly with philosophical themes. Most of the deﬁnitions discussed
in this paper, in particular, have been formulated by Feferman.

Is ZF Finitistically Reducible?
155
on the version from [4, 6, 7]), let me ﬁrst introduce some terminology and formal
background.
Most of the theories considered in this paper will be formulated in the ﬁrst-order
languages LPA and L(QF-IA) or in LPRA, the quantiﬁer-free fragment of L(QF-IA). The
vocabulary of LPA contains “ S ”, “ + ”, “ · ” and “ 0 ”, whereas the vocabulary of LPRA
(and L(QF-IA)) contains, for each primitive recursive function f , a unique function sign
f , i.e., a “primitive recursive function sign”. In each of these languages, there is, for
each natural number n, exactly one numeral n denoting it in N (= ⟨N, S, +, ·, 0⟩, the
standard model of arithmetic). PRA is a theory in LPRA whose axioms are, apart from
classical logic in LPRA, the recursion equations for all primitive recursive functions,
“¬Sx = 0”, “Sx = Sy −→x = y”; moreover, PRA is assumed to be closed under
the induction rule (formulated with formulae of LPRA). (QF-IA) is the theory that
results from PRA through the addition of ﬁrst-order logic.6
A theory is a set of sentences which is deductively closed. The theories T investi-
gated here will be axiomatizable; i.e., for each such T , there will be a recursive set 
of sentences such that T = . For axiomatizable theories S, T . . . , “σ”, “τ”. . . will
be used for 0
0-formulas of LPA representing sets of (Gödel numbers of) axioms for
T (with the exception of PA and (QF-IA), where I will take “pa(x)” and “(qf-ia)(x)”
for these formulas instead).7 Given a representation τ of (the set of Gödel-numbers
of) a set of axioms of T , the common arithmetizations of “proof in T ”, “provable in
T ” and “T is consistent” are:
Proofτ(x, y) :←→Seq(x) ∧y = xlh(x) ˙−1 ∧∀v < lh(x) (LogAx(xv) ∨τ(xv)∨
∃uw < v(xw = xu ˙→xv)),
Prτ(y) :←→∃x Proofτ(x, y),
Conτ :←→¬Prτ(⌜⊥⌝).8
Let L be a language with a recursive set of closed terms and ClT(u) be a 0
0-
formula of LPA representing “u is a closed term of L”; then “y is a closed equation in
L” is represented by the 0
0-formula ClEq(y) of LPA deﬁned by
ClEq(y) :←→∃uv ≤y (ClT(u) ∧ClT(v) ∧y = ⟨⌜=⌝, u, v⟩).
6For theories like Q, I	0 + Exp, I	0 + Supexp, ACA0, ZF and NBG, which are mentioned only at some
points in this paper and serve as mere examples, see [43], [9], [23], [41].
7Each of the expressions t which belong to LPRA, L(QF-IA) or LPA has a Gödel-number ⌜t⌝with Gödel-
numeral ⌜t⌝. If α is a k-place formula in LPA and A ⊆ωk, then “α is a representation of A” is deﬁned as
∀n1, . . . nk ∈ω (⟨n1, . . . , nk⟩∈A ⇐⇒N |= α(n1, . . . , nk)).
For the arithmetical hierarchy, see [9], [20].
8The “syntactic” metamathematical expressions “x is a sequence”, “the length of (sequence) x”, “x is
the negation of y”, “x is the conditional of y and z”, “x is a formula of LPRA” are assumed to be represented
by 0
0-formulas of LPA—for which I write “Seq(x)”, “lh(x)”, “x = ˙¬y”, “x = y ˙→z”, “l[pra](x)”—in
the usual way (see, e.g. [9] and [20]; for the “dot-notation”, see also [3]).

156
K.-G. Niebergall
Let g be a primitive recursive function with index e; then
σρp[e]τ
:←→
∀xy (Proofσ(y, x) ∧ClEq(x) →Proofτ([e](y), x)).
Deﬁnition 2 (see [4, 6, 7]). S ρT T : ⇐⇒S is (non-uniformly) proof-theoretically
reducible to T : ⇐⇒there is a primitive recursive function g with index e9 such that
(a) N |= σρp[e]τ, and
(b) T ⊢σρp[e]τ.
The problem with proof-theoretical reducibility as it is explained in Deﬁnition 2 is its
lack of transitivity: see [31] for an example of theories S, T, U such that S ρT T and
T ρU U, but not S ρU U. Of course, this difﬁculty vanishes if, instead of the varying
theories T mentioned in (b), there is just one uniformly chosen theory U in which
“σρp[e]τ” is proved. Quite often, PRA is adopted for U; I follow this practice10 and
deﬁne the uniform variant of proof-theoretical reducibility as follows:
Deﬁnition 3 (see [7]). S ρun T : ⇐⇒S is (uniformly) proof-theoretically reducible
to T : ⇐⇒there is a primitive recursive function g with index e, such that
(a) N |= σρp[e]τ, and
(b) (QF-IA) ⊢σρp[e]τ.
Proof-theoretical reducibility is also deﬁned as provable relative consistency.
Thus, let’s construe the following as deﬁnitions of proof-theoretical reducibility:
Deﬁnition 4. S is uniformly provably consistent relative to T : ⇐⇒
(QF-IA) ⊢
Conτ →Conσ.
Deﬁnition 5. S is non-uniformly provably consistent relative to T : ⇐⇒
T ⊢
Conτ →Conσ.
When these deﬁnitions are compared, what are their strengths and weaknesses?
First, simply proving the relative consistency of S to T is enough for many proof-
theoretical investigations. But the relation between S and a ﬁnitistic theory T estab-
lished by it seems to be too loose to make S ﬁnitistically reducible in an intuitively
convincing sense.11
Secondly, provable relative consistency has the advantage of
being applicable to theories S, T which are formulated in different, maybe even dis-
joint, languages. If Deﬁnitions 2 and 3 are to make sense, the languages of S and T
9This is the deﬁnition from [7]. Originally (in [4]), g was assumed to be merely partially recursive.
10To be precise, I use (QF-IA). For the purpose at hand, the difference between PRA, (QF-IA) and I1
is negligible from a theoretical viewpoint: for (QF-IA) and I1 are conservative extensions of PRA, and
(QF-IA) and I1 prove the same 
0
2-sentences. Practically, the choice of (QF-IA) is preferable because its
language contains both quantiﬁers and all primitive recursive function signs.
11This judgement may be too hasty; cf. the Theorem.

Is ZF Finitistically Reducible?
157
mentioned in them should at least share the closed equations. Thirdly, there is the
distinction between the uniform and the non-uniform versions: in cases of the latter,
it must be possible to formalize (perhaps restricted versions of) “x is a proof for y in
A” in the language of the theory T in which proofs are carried out. Thus, the theory
of groups, for example, although being a subtheory of the theory of abelian groups, is
hardly non-uniformly proof-theoretically reducible to the latter.
In sum, the uniform versions seem to be superior. We have, however, the interesting
and somewhat surprising situation that for many of the theories usually considered
proof-theoretical reducibility as deﬁned by Deﬁnitions 2, 3 and 4 amounts to the same.
More explicitly:
Theorem.12 Let L be an extension of LPA, and let S, T be consistent recursively
enumerable theories formulated in L with 0
0-formulas (in LPA) σ, τ representing
axiom-sets of S, T , such that Q ⊆S and I1 ⊆T . Then
S ρT T, S ρun T and “S is uniformly provably consistent relative to T ”
are equivalent with each other.13
Therestillremainsthequestionofwhy(QF-IA)shouldbetakenforU, the“uniform
proving theory”. Certainly, this choice is admissible: for it is the purpose of a proof of
“σρp[e]τ” in U to guarantee that “σρp[e]τ” actually holds; and in order to fulﬁll this
task, U has to be sound (for 
0
1-sentences, at least). The consistency and soundness
of PA seems to be as much beyond doubt as that of (QF-IA), however. Now, (QF-IA)
may be regarded as distinguished in virtue of being ﬁnitistic or ﬁnitistically reducible;
but I think this view is problematic (see below). Finally, why not prefer, for example,
I	0 + Exp to I1 when one has ﬁnitistic demands on U?
Even if strong conceptual reasons for the choice of (QF-IA) for U are hard to
ﬁnd, there are still some which speak for its adoption that may be called “pragmatic”.
On the one hand, if PA is taken for U instead of (QF-IA), too many theories would
become indiscernible with respect to proof-theoretical reducibility. The reason is
that PA proves the outright consistency—whence the relative consistency—of “weak”
theories, such as, e.g., all ﬁnitely axiomatizable subtheories of PA. But the resulting
proof-theoretical reducibility of, say, I1000 to propositional logic is certainly not
intended. On the other hand, theories which are (intuitively) considerably weaker
than (QF-IA)—like Q or I	0 + Exp—are too weak to do their job. Thus, consider the
pairsACA0, PA and NBG, ZF: thatACA0 (resp. NBG) is proof-theoretically reducible
to PA (resp. ZF) is commonly taken to be a paradigmatic case for this intertheoretical
relation.14 If proof-theoretical reducibility were deﬁned as above, but with I	0 + Exp
12See [7] and [31]. A similar theorem holds if L is assumed to be an extension of LPRA and “I1” is
replaced by “(QF-IA)”.
13In particular, ρT is transitive for these theories. This is not so, however, for non-uniformly provable
relative consistency, which fails to be transitive for a wide range of theories, see [31].
14Note that in both cases, we do not have relative interpretability results.

158
K.-G. Niebergall
in place of (QF-IA), however, these pairs of theories would cease to be examples for
proof-theoretical reducibility; for P. Pudlák has shown I	0 +Exp ̸⊢Conzf →Connbg
(see [37]; an analoguous result holds for ACA0 and PA). Theories between I	0 + Exp
and I1 could remain as reasonable candidates for U: I	0 + Supexp, for example,
does prove “Conpa →Conaca0”; but since it also proves “Conq” (see [9]), Q will be
proof-theoretically reducible to propositional logic in this case.15
At this point, I will not make a decision in favour of or against any of the deﬁnitions
2 to 4. Rather, I will deal with each of them as long as it makes sense, making it clear
in each particular case which one is under investigation.
2.2. Finitistic Theories: Background
From the foregoing subsection’s considerations, it is apparent that “S is ﬁnitistically
reducible” is precisely deﬁned if “T is a ﬁnitistic theory” is. But it is quite difﬁcult to
give a convincing explication of the latter. In the remainder of this section, I will deal
with several suggestions for carrying out this task. To start with, let me put together
some observations regarding the current status of the interpretation of “S is a ﬁnitary
theory” in proof theory.
(a) “PRA is a ﬁnitistic theory”—in short: “FIN-PRA”—is generally accepted.
(b) Often, [44] is cited as providing reason for the assessment that PRA is a ﬁnitistic
theory.16
(c) Sometimes D. Hilbert’s texts are taken to express FIN-PRA.17
(d) No general and precise deﬁnition of “S is a ﬁnitary theory” has been agreed
upon.
In principle, it is easy to close the gap mentioned in (d) and formulate a deﬁnition
of “S is a ﬁnitary theory” which supports FIN-PRA: one simply takes
S is a ﬁnitistic theory : ⇐⇒S = PRA.18
(D?)
On the one hand, such a deﬁnition has, to the best of my knowledge, not been
suggested in the relevant literature. On the other hand, apart from PRA and PA (or
rather the set of its 
0
2-theorems; see [22]), I do not know of any theory that explicitly
has been claimed to be ﬁnitary or the limit of ﬁnitary reasoning.19 Be this as it may: I
regard (D?) as quite unsatisfactory. Not that deﬁnitions by enumeration are something
15Thus, uniform proof-theoretical reducibility has its problems, too. In light of these considerations,
it should be interesting to ﬁnd theories which are weak in proving consistency claims yet strong in prov-
ing relative consistency claims. One should be aware, however, that this goal is not motivated by basic
conceptual considerations.
16See, e.g., [2], [19], [36] and, in particular, [40].
17For a recent example, see [36].
18Or instead, one could, for a ﬁnite list of theories T1, . . . , Tk, choose the adjunction of the equations
“S = Ti” as the deﬁniens.

Is ZF Finitistically Reducible?
159
which is not admissible;20 what is missing here is rather a conceptual analysis that
would support (D?) or its variant. After all, we are interested not in a mere stipulation,
but in an explication of “S is a ﬁnitistic theory”. And in order to determine whether
a suggested explicans is adequate for the explicandum, some pretheoretic, preformal
understanding of the latter has to be developed.
In the case of (D?), there is a further, more speciﬁc problem: it violates a prin-
ciple which—in light of the identiﬁcation of ﬁnitistic theories with those avoiding
assumptions of inﬁnity—seems quite plausible:
If S is a ﬁnitary theory and T ⊆S, then T is a ﬁnitary theory.21
(P1)
Now, the question emerges as to whose pretheoretic, preformal understanding it
should be that counts for determining “S is a ﬁnitistic theory”. I take it that the ﬁrst
answer is Hilbert, the father of ﬁnitism. Yet, I think one should be reluctant in ascribing
the view to him that PRA is a ﬁnitistic theory. To begin with, Hilbert simply did not
give a precise deﬁnition of “S is a ﬁnitary theory”. The vagueness of his writings on
conceptual themes notwithstanding, it seems quite clear, however, that both his general
conception of metamathematics and his understanding of ﬁnitism changed over the
years. Thus, I agree that in [17] and [18], PRA is accepted as being ﬁnitary (see
[39] for details); in [18] the same may hold even for PA. But I doubt that this is so in
Hilbert’s papers from the 1920s:22 unrestricted variables (whether free or bound) were
not allowed in ﬁnitistic reasoning then.23 When it comes to a proper understanding
and evaluation of Hilbert’s program, I think that particular attention should be paid
to this period, however. For it seems that its presentation in [17] and, particulary, in
[18] was inﬂuenced by P. Bernays’ view of the foundations of mathematics and was,
in part, an attempt to avoid the consequences that Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorems
seemed to have for the original form of Hilbert’s program.
If, however, it is one’s goal to develop a convincing conception of what it is to be
a ﬁnitary theory, it may be reasoned as follows: since Hilbert’s own formulation of
his program is vague and precise renderings of it fall prey to Gödel’s Incompleteness
Theorems and similar results,24 there is no way around making corrections to Hilbert’s
original claims—and develop one’s own, if possible superior, variant of ﬁnitism. Yet,
19In [44], W. W. Tait not only endorses FIN-PRA, but also the claim that the universal closure of each
theorem of PRA is ﬁnitistically provable. I do not think, though, that one should therefore ascribe the
acceptance of (D?) to him. Tait’s claim that ﬁnitistic means do not go beyond what can be proved in PRA
does not preclude subtheories of PRA from being ﬁnitistic and does not ﬁx the extension of “ﬁnitistic
theory” when dealing with theories which are not formulated in arithmetical languages.—When [44] gets
interpreted in this way, it does not contain a general deﬁnition of “S is a ﬁnitistic theory”, however.
20Although they hardly provide the general conditions I am asking for.
21Perhaps T should be restricted to recursively enumerable theories in (P1).
22For example, the passages from Hilbert’s texts cited by B. Rolf [38] and G. Kreisel [21] in support
of their analyses of his work are mainly taken from [17] and [18]. But these authors do not distinguish
between Hilbert’s program of the 1920s and that of [17, 18] and, accordingly, view their interpretations as
being correct for the former period, too.
23For details of this interpretation of Hilbert’s program, see [33].
24See, however, [34].

160
K.-G. Niebergall
what is the limit to this sort of deviation from Hilbert’s original? What are the criteria
for calling a position, a procedure or a theory “ﬁnitistic”? It may be “superior” in
virtue of being precisely deﬁned, free of logical and metamathematical ﬂaws – but
its philosophical motivation may be weaker or lost. With these remarks, the question
of the motivation of Hilbert’s own program is also addressed. As I see it, Hilbert
style metamathematics M has, brieﬂy put, the following role. In M, the consistency of
theories T of formalized mathematics has to be established.25 This is done by showing
in M that no proof in T can end with, say, “0 ̸= 0 ”. In order to fulﬁll this task, M
must be absolutely reliable—it must contain only “absolute truths” (see [10]: 35 in
[16]). Such reliability is supposed to be guaranteed by the fact that, given an arbitrary
ﬁnite string s of concrete objects (e.g., signs qua tokens), M merely contains reports
(like protocol sentences) about s and the results of simple manipulations on s—such
as extending, shortening and concatenation. This is where ﬁnitistic restrictions are
imposed on M; in short, their role is to secure the reliability of M.26
It is not the aim of this paper to formulate an adequate and still precise elaboration
of Hilbert’s program as sketched. In particular, I will not question the truth of FIN-
PRA in it; rather, I am interested in the informal conceptions of ﬁnitism underlying
this claim. Given (b), a discussion of [44] should be the ﬁrst natural step at this point;
in fact, I have done this elsewhere together with M. Schirn.27 Here, I will concentrate
on analyses of “S is a ﬁnitary theory” which are conceptually different from Tait’s—in
particular those suggested by Feferman’s, Mycielski’s and Lavine’s work—and see
whether they can be used to formulate general deﬁnitions of “S is a ﬁnitary theory”.28
25Hilbert’s program is sometimes taken to include a conservativity program as a central component, see,
e.g., [21], [8], [42]. That is, given a ﬁnitistic theory S and an arbitrary formal mathematical theory T , it is
said that Hilbert wanted to show:
If ψ is a real sentence and T ⊢ψ, then S ⊢ψ.
If this interpretation is supported by quotations from Hilbert’s own texts, merely one passage is usually
cited (from [11], see [46]: 376 ): “One can claim, however, that [the science of mathematics] is an apparatus
that must always yield correct numerical equations when applied to integers”. In fact, a similar claim is
made in [12] (see [46]: 471) and perhaps another one in [13]. But these are less than 10 lines on the theme
of conservativity in the more than 50 pages of [11, 12, 13]. And in the earlier papers collected in [16], there
is not a single sentence where Hilbert addresses this topic. In all of these texts, the aim of showing the
consistency of T by ﬁnitistic means is always in the foreground of Hilbert’s interests.
Thus, Hilbert’s papers from the 1920s do not contain enough textual evidence for the attribution of a
conservativity program to Hilbert. Let me add that the equivalence of T ’s consistency and T ’s soundness
for 
0
1-sentences (for 0
1-complete theories T ) does not constitute an argument for the assessment that
Hilbert was, after all, pursuing a conservativity program since he was interested in a consistency program.
For the predicate “being interested in showing ψ” is, like other contexts dealing with propositional attitudes,
hyperintensional: even from “a is interested in (has the goal of, program of) showing ψ” and “ψ is logically
equivalent to ϕ”, “a is interested in (has the goal of, program of) showing ϕ” does not follow.
26In some papers on ﬁnitism, justice is done only to the goal of reliability, whereas the demand for
ﬁniteness is simply ignored. An example is [22], where it is suggested that each sentence obtainable by the
iterated addition of certain reﬂection rules to PRA should be taken to be ﬁnitistically provable.
27See [35]. Actually, we do not share the common acceptance of [44]. In short, our complaint is that if
Tait had succeeded in showing that the principles put forward by him in [44] were ﬁnitistically correct, he
would obtain much more than PRA as the limit of the ﬁnitistically admissible.

Is ZF Finitistically Reducible?
161
2.3. Finitistic Theories: Feferman
In [6]: 8, Feferman writes: “[. . .] the use of classical quantiﬁcational logic in any
system containing the base axioms (1) x′ ̸= 0 and (2) x′ = y′ →x = y [. . .] implicitly
requires assumption of the completed countable inﬁnite.” In a more elaborated version
of this assertion appearing in [4]: 374, it is said that any such system or theory “[. . .]
implicitly requires for its justiﬁcation an appeal at least to the completed inﬁnite totality
of natural numbers, in other words to the countable inﬁnite.” Moreover, we ﬁnd in
([4]: 374): “On the face of it, we have the following [. . .] PRA is justiﬁed on ﬁnitary
grounds” and in ([6]: 8): “It is generally acknowledged that PRA is a ﬁnitarily justiﬁed
system, or to be more precise, that each theorem of PRA is ﬁnitarily justiﬁed.”
Yet, why should it be the case that each theorem of PRA is ﬁnitarily justiﬁed?
Feferman does not explicitly give an answer, but in light of the passage just quoted a
ﬁrst guess may be that this is so because for each theorem ψ of PRA, it is not necessary
to appeal to the “completed inﬁnite totality of natural numbers”. This in turn could be
made precise by the claim
Each formula ψ (of LPRA) provable in PRA has a ﬁnite model.
(AF-PRA)
But (AF-PRA) is false. Already the conjunction of the formulas mentioned in the
above citation from [6],
x′ ̸= 0 ∧(x′ = y′ →x = y)
(1)
cannot be satisﬁed in a ﬁnite model. Note that in this respect there is no difference
between (1) and its universal closure (formulated in L(QF-IA)). Now, an alternative to
(AF-PRA) worth considering is its version for closed formulas only:
Each sentence ψ (of LPRA) provable in PRA has a ﬁnite model.
(CAF-PRA)
Contrary to (AF-PRA), (CAF-PRA) is indeed true. Moreover, we have a relevant
difference between PRA and (QF-IA) (or I1) at this point: the universal closure of
(1) provides an example for a closed theorem of (QF-IA) without a ﬁnite model.
Generalizing from the case of PRA to arbitrary theories in a (ﬁrst-order) language
L, one obtains for a sentence ψ of L
ψ is ﬁnitarily justiﬁed : ⇐⇒ψ has a ﬁnite model.
(D1)
Now, Feferman called PRA a “ﬁnitarily justiﬁed system” because each of its theorems
is ﬁnitarily justiﬁed, cf. also [44]. Since that assertion is correct under interpretation
(CAF-PRA), but not under (AF-PRA), I suggest to abstract the following deﬁnition
28In these approaches, the main idea is ﬁnite models for ﬁnite systems. The other two types of precise
explications of “ﬁnitistic theory” I am aware of employ versions of the ω-rule (see most notably [44]) and
progressions of theories (see [22]). In comparison, the former type has the advantage of resting on claims
of Hilbert: see [14, 15]; similar suggestions made by him as regards the use of progressions are not known
to me.

162
K.-G. Niebergall
from the case of PRA:
T is a ﬁnitistic theory :⇐⇒Each sentence ψ (of LT ) provable in T
(D2)
is ﬁnitarily justiﬁed.
Note that by (D1), the deﬁniens of (D2) is just
Each sentence ψ (of LT ) provable in T has a ﬁnite model
(CAF-T )
Furthermore, (D2) clearly has (P1) as a consequence.
Let me mention that Feferman has not explicitly stated that all theories T which
satisfy (CAF-T ) are ﬁnitistic. But since I do not ﬁnd any other general explanation of
“T is a ﬁnitistic theory” in his (or, with the exception of Tait, in other proof theoreti-
cians’) writings, I will nonetheless go on with a discussion of the above deﬁnitions.
Now, with (D1) I am in agreement; for it is quite plausible to explain “ψ does not make
assumptions of inﬁnity” by “ψ has ﬁnite models”. Choosing “ψ has only ﬁnite mod-
els” as an explicans instead should be rejected, however. Such an explanation would
lead to the inacceptable result that, for example, the logical truths of ﬁrst order-logic
would make assumptions of inﬁnity (since they have inﬁnite models). Moreover, if
(P1) is accepted, this would imply that no ﬁnitely axiomatized theory formulated in
a ﬁrst-order language could be ﬁnitistic. Thus, a ﬁnitarily justiﬁed sentence will also
have inﬁnite models.
(D2), however, seems to be quite problematic. The criticism which immediately
comes to mind is that there are theories declared to be ﬁnitistic by (D2) which have
no ﬁnite models at all. PRA is an example, and others will play a major role below
(see section 3). Furthermore, there are theories of this sort which are even, in some
sense, paradigmatic for making assumptions of inﬁnity: take, for example,
T1 := {∃≥n | n ∈ω}—formulated in the ﬁrst-order language L1 containing only
the identity sign, where ∃≥n shall be a sentence satisﬁed only in models with at least
n elements; and
T2 := the ﬁrst-order theory of atomic Boolean algebras extended by {∃≥nAt | n ∈
ω}—formulated in a ﬁrst-order language L2 with “≤” and “=”, where ∃≥nAt shall be
a sentence satisﬁed only in models with at least n atoms.
T1 and T2 are both ﬁnitistic in the sense of (D2), but neither of them has ﬁnite
models. In addition, T1 is the theory in L1 that has only inﬁnite models: if there is
any theory in L1 having only inﬁnite models, it has to contain T1, whence it must be
identical with T1 (since T1 is complete in its language). Similarly, T2 is the theory in
L2 having only inﬁnite models which extends the ﬁrst-order theory of atomic Boolean
algebras.
Furthermore, in my opinion it is quite implausible that PRA should be “ﬁnitarily
justiﬁed”, whereas (QF-IA) should require the “completed inﬁnite totality of natu-
ral numbers”. Certainly, the theorems of ﬁrst-order predicate logic are true in each
(nonempty) domain: they are not transﬁnite axioms (to use Hilbert’s unhappy ter-
minology) in that they would require inﬁnite domains for their truth. Since (QF-IA)
results from PRA simply by superimposing ﬁrst-order logic on it and, by assumption,

Is ZF Finitistically Reducible?
163
PRA also does not require the “completed inﬁnite totality of natural numbers”, it seems
odd that (QF-IA) should do this. It may also seem hardly tenable that PRA should be
ﬁnitistic or potentially inﬁnitistic, but theories such as the theory of dense linear order-
ings without endpoints (DLO) and Q—which intuitively and from the point of view
both of relative interpretability and of proof-theoretical reducibility are much weaker
than PRA—fail to be so (since (CAF-DLO) and (CAF-Q) are false). One should be
aware of the fact, however, that all of the mentioned theories are ﬁnitistically reducible.
Of course, in these considerations I merely report what I view as tensions between
a ﬁrst, crude intuitive understanding of “S is ﬁnitistic” and its deﬁnition (D2). Whether
or not these are relevant to Feferman’s ideas is hard to decide, for no analysis of, for
example, “implicitly requires assumption of the completed countable” is forthcoming
in [4, 6]. To some extent, the criticism put forward here is terminological; accordingly,
it may be countered by a change of terminology. Since in the passages quoted from
[4, 6] (and some others) there are indications to the theme of the potential inﬁnite,
Feferman might accept a deﬁnition such as
T is a potentially inﬁnitistic theory : ⇐⇒Each sentence ψ (of LT ) provable
(D2′)
in T is ﬁnitarily justiﬁed.29
I will, however, postpone a more thorough discussion of how to understand “potential
inﬁnity” and a further criticism of (CAF-T ) to sections 2.5 and 3.
2.4. Finitistic Theories: Mycielski and Lavine
In [29] and [30], Mycielski has presented a method of obtaining for each recursively
enumerable ﬁrst-order theory T a locally ﬁnite theory FIN(T ), as he calls it, such that
T is translatable (in a speciﬁc sense) into FIN(T ). “T is locally ﬁnite” is explained
through “every ﬁnite part of T has a ﬁnite model” ([30]: 59). Thus, T is locally ﬁnite
if and only if (AF-T ) or (CAF-T ) holds.30
With respect to FIN(T ) and the translations  from T to FIN(T ) envisaged by
Mycielski, sufﬁce it to point out:
– the relevant axioms of FIN(T ) result from the axioms of T by relativizing their
quantiﬁers to predicates i (i ∈N) which do not belong to LT —through a
procedure called “regular relativization”: if the quantiﬁer Q′x (i.e., Q′ ≡∀or
Q′ ≡∃) occurs in the scope of the quantiﬁer Qy in some formula ψ of LT , and
if Qy gets relativized to i and Q′x to j, then i < j has to hold;
29In this case, PRA would be declared to be a potentially inﬁnitistic theory rather than a ﬁnitistic one,
though.
30Actually, although Mycielski’s deﬁnition is ambiguous with regard to these two readings, I think that
the examples he deals with suggest that he prefers (AF-T ); in this case, PRA would turn out to be not locally
ﬁnite.

164
K.-G. Niebergall
– each  is similar to a relative interpretation: it is a function mapping a formula ψ
from LT to a regular relativization of it; thus,  is the identity function on atomic
formulas, it commutes with the sentential operators and relativizes quantiﬁers
as mentioned;
– each such  maps T into FIN(T ).
As regards the relation between locally ﬁnite theories and what Mycielski takes to be
ﬁnitistic ones, there are two remarks in [29, 30] containing the predicate “ﬁnitistic”.
The ﬁrst (see section 4.5 from [29]), being a comment on the locally ﬁnite theory
FIN, expresses a position that seems to be close to the one described in the previous
section: it is compatible, for instance, with (D2) and (D2′). Mycielski’s presentation
is, however, too sketchy to determine what exactly he takes to be the relation between
ﬁnitistic theories, locally ﬁnite ones and those resting on the potential inﬁnite.31
The second passage is from [30]: 62: “Both PA and PA + (*) [i.e., PA + RFN[pa]]
deal only with ﬁnite objects and stem only from our experience with ﬁnite objects.
Therefore (P1) and (P2) constitute a ﬁnitistic reduction of the problem of local ﬁnite-
ness of FIN(A) to the problem of consistency of A”. The formulas (P1) and (P2) men-
tioned in this citation are “PA ⊢∀F [PA ⊢(Con(A) →(F has a ﬁnite model))]”
and “PA + (∗) ⊢(Con(A) →(F is locally ﬁnite))”. If what Mycielski writes is
understood as implying
PA and PA + RFN[pa] are ﬁnitistic theories,
it is unacceptable for the proof theorist.32
Moreover, PA and PA + RFN[pa] are
far from being locally ﬁnite and it is hard to see why they should rest merely on
the potential inﬁnite.33 Indeed, in saying that they deal only with ﬁnite objects and
stem from our experience with ﬁnite objects, Mycielski puts forward a new type of
argument for the supposed ﬁnitistic character of these theories. That PA and PA +
RFN[pa] do so is a quite plausible assessment; but it is not clear that this provides a
reason for calling them “ﬁnitistic”. After all, there are models of ZF containing only
“the” natural numbers, i.e., ﬁnite objects; furthermore, not all models of PA or PA +
RFN[pa] contain only “ﬁnite” numbers.34 Surely, one need not cling to model-theory.
Yet, even intuitively, it seems that PA + Conzf deals only with ﬁnite objects (if ZF is
consistent); and claiming that it does not stem from our experience with ﬁnite objects
is so vague that it hardly provides a reason to deny that PA + Conzf is ﬁnitistic.35
31In addition, such expressions as “… is syntactically isomorphic to …” and, in particular, “… has the
same meaning as … from a physicalistic point of view” also remain unexplained and undiscussed in [29, 30].
This makes it difﬁcult to understand and evaluate some of Mycielski’s (supposedly) central claims—such
as FIN[ZF] is syntactically isomorphic to ZF and From a physicalistic point of view the theorems of ZF and
their FIN[ZF]-counterparts may have the same meaning.
32Lavine claims that Mycielski accepts PA as being ﬁnitistic; see [25]: 415.
33In [30], the expression “potentially inﬁnite” is only applied to theories.
34Talk about the standard model should be problematic for such a devoted Anti-Platonist as Mycielski.
35If PA + Conzf were ﬁnitistic, ZF would not only be ﬁnitistically reducible in the sense of Deﬁnition 1,
but even be relatively interpretable in a ﬁnitistic theory; for a related reasoning, see section 3.

Is ZF Finitistically Reducible?
165
Let’s turn then to Lavine, who in [24] and [25], by applying some of the meta-
mathematical results of Mycielski, has developed an approach to the foundations of
mathematics which has some similarities with Mycielski’s, but is much more elabo-
rated in philosophical matters. In discussing Lavine’s contribution, let me focus on
its distinguishing features.
To start with, Lavine claims that both FIN(ZF) and PRA belong to what he calls
ﬁnite mathematics, see [24]. He explains “ﬁnite mathematics” as follows: “Only
ﬁnite entities are employed, and all quantiﬁers within ﬁnite mathematics have ﬁnite
ranges” ([25]: 389); “our commitments within a theory of ﬁnite mathematics are
consistent with a statement of the form ‘there exist at most n objects’for some natural
number n” ([25]: 394); and “The point of ﬁnite mathematics is not that its theories
have no inﬁnite models, but rather that its theories do have ﬁnite models” ([25]:
398). These assertions ﬁt (D1); but they make it hard to understand how FIN(ZF)
and PRA could be theories of ﬁnite mathematics: for these theories do not have ﬁnite
models. At this point, however, a speciﬁc conception of what a theory is enters the
picture. Usually, one regards a theory T as an inﬁnite set of formulas—the theorems
derivable from a set of axioms of T , say. And, for example, “FIN(ZF)” and “PRA”
are taken to be terms denoting such inﬁnite sets. Not so Lavine: he views theories as
something developing—perhaps growing.36 Furthermore, he should be interpreted as
construing, e.g., “PRA” not so much as a term—which denotes or purports to denote
a set of formulas—but rather as a one-place formula “PRA(x)” (or: as a predicate
“PRA”) which is true of these formulas, cf. [25]: 416. Since whenever “PRA(x)” is
applied to formulas, it is applied to actually presented ones, it is plausible to assume
that at each of its applications, “PRA(x)” is true of only ﬁnitely many formulas—of
ﬁnitely many PRA-theorems (if these words are understood as usual).37 Eventually,
the claim “FIN(ZF) and PRA belong to ﬁnite mathematics” is thus explained as “Each
ﬁnite subtheory of FIN(ZF) or PRA belongs to ﬁnite mathematics”. But this, in turn,
amounts to nothing more than “Each ﬁnite subtheory of FIN(ZF) or PRA has a ﬁnite
model”, if at this stage, “belongs to ﬁnite mathematics” is explained as quoted above.
Thus, we are back where we started: “T belongs to ﬁnite mathematics” gets deﬁned
as (CAF-T ) or perhaps as (AF-T ).
At this point, the failure of (AF-PRA) may be considered a difﬁculty for the state-
ment that PRA belongs to ﬁnite mathematics. Lavine could be perhaps be content
with (CAF-PRA); but as I understand him, he has a bolder answer to this challenge:
he views PRA as a schematic theory. Now, one problem is that, given a common un-
derstanding of “schematic theory”, PRA is not one. Typical examples for schematic
theories are PA and ZF: their (usual) axiom-systems encompass axiom schemata—the
induction schema and the axiom schemata of separation and replacement or collection.
36Of course, this is an old idea, to be found e.g. in the philosophy of Le´sniewski; moreover, it was also
suggested by Mycielski ([30]: 59): “The concept of a locally ﬁnite theory is interesting only if the theory
itself is regarded as a process of formation of axioms and theorems and not as an actually inﬁnite object.
But this internal view is of course the most natural view of any theory in which one proves theorems.”
37Similarly for FIN(ZF).

166
K.-G. Niebergall
PRA, however, simply has inﬁnitely many axioms, all of which are formulated with
free variables, and no axiom schema.38
Maybe Lavine takes the theory PRA to be the deductive closure of all the closed
instances of the usual PRA axioms.39 In this case, PRA would be a subset of the
deductive closure of PRAC which is deﬁned through
PRAC := {ψ | ψ sentence in LPRA ∧PRA ⊢ψ}.
Certainly, the theory PRA—as this term is usually understood—is not the same set as
PRAC (in distinction to PRA, PRAC has no open formulas as elements); but equally
trivially, PRA and PRAC contain and prove the same sentences. For the question
whether PRA and PRAC are the same theory, however, it is relevant whether PRA
and PRAC prove the same formulas of LPRA. Now if this were the case, because of
PRA ⊢(1), PRAC ⊢(1) would hold. Since (1) is just one formula, there would be a
ﬁnite subset E of PRAC such that E ⊢(1). But then, by (CAF-PRA), E has a ﬁnite
model, whence (1) has a ﬁnite model. But this cannot be the case. If Lavine interprets
“PRA” as PRAC or its deductive closure, he is simply not dealing with the theory PRA
as it is usually construed.
When understood in Lavine’s sense, theories may be regarded as examples for
“the potential inﬁnite”. Now, the topic of the potential inﬁnite is mentioned at several
places in my paper, but a discussion of it is still missing in it. Of course, I do not have
the place to close this gap; but in the following subsection, I will address some of the
difﬁculties that explications of “x is potentially inﬁnite” and “T assumes the potential
inﬁnite” have to face.
2.5. The “Potential Inﬁnite”
The statements “a is ﬁnite” and “a is inﬁnite” have found convincing and precise set-
theoretic explications.40 This is not the case for phrases of the sort “x is potentially
inﬁnite” and “T assumes the potential inﬁnite” (or “T rests on the potentially inﬁnite”).
It is granted that there are stereotypical assertions which could serve as explanations
for them, many of them taking Aristotle’s “In general, the inﬁnite is in virtue of
one thing’s constantly being taken after another—each thing taken is ﬁnite, but it is
always one followed by another” (see [1]: III 6.206a) as their starting point. But
formulations such as these are far from being precise deﬁnitions. That this is so is all
the worse since the distinction between the potential and the actual inﬁnite has often
been regarded as being of fundamental importance and has regularly been employed
as the motivational basis for further philosophical work. “x is potentially inﬁnite” and
38Actually, this also holds when the explications of “T is a schematic theory” presented in [5] are applied.
Let me add that I have found no deﬁnition of this phrase in Lavine’s texts.
39That’s not exactly what he does, but (I think) it amounts to the same; cf. [24]: VI.3/4 and IX.6.
40There are several of them which are S-provably equivalent to each other if (the set theory) S is not too
weak.

Is ZF Finitistically Reducible?
167
“T assumes the potential inﬁnite” are much too unclear, however, to be considered
acceptable end-points of an explication; rather, they themselves are much in need of
one.
In what follows, I will simply take for granted recent writings of philosophers and
logicians who have some sympathy for the topic of the potential inﬁnite; and I will use
them as the material for comments and further suppositions.41 Because of his quite
explicit assertions, I begin with P. Lorenzen. In [26], he presents a pair of rules as a
means to obtain inﬁnitely many objects
“(1) Start with I.
(2) If one has reached x, one should append I to x.”
and continues with “Now we can say at once that applying these rules, inﬁnitely many
numbers are possible: for each number x, x I has still to be constructed. One must
be aware that here the mere possibility is claimed [. . . ] The rule makes it possible to
construct xI, if x has already been constructed [. . .] Yet, to claim that inﬁnitely many
such numbers be real, i.e., had in reality been constructed following these rules—this
would, of course, be wrong”.42
First, it should be noted that this quotation contains no deﬁnition—be it precise
or not—of “x is potentially inﬁnite” and “T assumes the potential inﬁnite” at all.
Rather, theses are formulated in it which, generalizing from Lorenzen’s own case, the
potential-inﬁnitist—as I will call one who accepts assumption of the potential inﬁnite,
but rejects the assumption of the actual inﬁnite—should accept. Thus, I take it that he
proposes
(i) By applying rules (1) and (2), inﬁnitely many natural numbers can be con-
structed,
(i′) By applying rules (1) and (2), inﬁnitely many natural numbers are possible,
but rejects the claims
(ii) There are inﬁnitely many natural numbers,
(iii) Inﬁnitely many natural numbers have been constructed.
41I have to admit that, given the modern conception of sets in classical logic, I have never understood
“potentially inﬁnite” in a way which would give the potential inﬁnite any use—a place of its own different
from the ﬁnite and the inﬁnite. It seems to me that merely in intuitionistic frameworks the predicate
“potentially inﬁnite” may ﬁnd a reasonable rational reconstruction. Thus, in dealing with this discourse
I feel as if I were a (Quinean) linguist in the process of developing a radical translation from a foreign
language into his mother tongue.
42My translation; the original is “(1) Man fange mit I an.
(2) Ist man zu x gelangt, so füge man
noch x I an” and “Jetzt können wir sofort sagen, daß nach diesen Regeln unendlich viele Zahlen möglich
sind: zu jeder Zahl x ist ja noch x I zu konstruieren. Man muß darauf achten, daß hier nur die Möglichkeit
behauptet wird [. . . ] Die Regel ermöglicht xI zu konstruieren, wenn x schon konstruiert ist. [. . . ] Dagegen
zu behaupten, daß unendlich viele solche Zahlen wirklich seien, also wirklich nach diesen Regeln konstruiert
seien – das wäre natürlich falsch” ([26]: 4).

168
K.-G. Niebergall
Actually, it is quite common that theses containing the expression “potentially inﬁ-
nite” are stated instead of deﬁnitions for “x is potentially inﬁnite”. Thus, because
of the difﬁculties in ﬁnding such deﬁnitions, an approach such as Lorenzen’s has its
advantages. In fact, it is neither easy to extract the sought-after deﬁnitions from the
theses nor do the theses depend on prior deﬁnitions.
Second, (i) and (iii) are apparently assertions about what is possible for—what can
be done by—human beings; and the expression “is possible” occurring in (i′) should
probably also be understood in this sense, making (i) and (i′) equivalent with each
other. Under this reading, the rejection of (iii) is quite plausible; and whether the
negation of (i) is true depends on the exact interpretation of the word “can” occurring
in it.43 If “x is possible” is not interpreted as such a constructibility claim, however,
(i) and (i′) need not be equivalent; for it is certainly not evident that those entities
which can be constructed by human beings and those which are possible are one and
the same objects. Given the reigning conception of the ontology of mathematical
objects, in particular, such an identiﬁcation is bound to fail there—if it makes sense
at all: numbers, for example, are possible; but not a single one has ever been or can
be constructed.44 Moreover, in this case the denial of (iii) does not give a reason for
the denial of (ii).
For an example for what may be taken to be a deﬁnition of “x is potentially inﬁnite”,
let’s turn to an article of J. Thomson. Following Aristotle, he considers some divisible
object and distinguishes between “whatever ﬁnite number n you take, it is possible
for the thing to have been divided into more than n parts” and “it is possible that the
thing could have been divided into more than any ﬁnite number of parts” ([45]: 186).
These statements suggest the following pair of deﬁnitions (let’s write “♦ψ” for “it is
possible that ψ”):45
a is potentially inﬁnite : ⇐⇒∀n (n ∈N →♦(a has n parts))46
(D3)
a is actually inﬁnite : ⇐⇒∃z(♦(a has z parts) ∧∀n(n ∈N →n ≤z)).
(D4)
Ithinkthat, historically, muchcriticismoftheacceptanceofactuallyinﬁniteobjects
was, in effect, directed not against their very existence, but against treating them as
natural or real numbers. Surely, it is unacceptable also from a modern perspective
that a natural or real number z can satisfy “∀n(n ∈N →n ≤z))”. But only if all
the “numbers” taken into consideration are real numbers, the nonexistence of such a
z results. That z has to be a natural number is, however, not claimed in (D4).47 Thus,
43Of course, there is the well known general difﬁculty of interpreting modal terminology.
44The proper objects that can be constructed are numerals (qua tokens).
45Actually, other distributions of modal operators in the deﬁnientia may be plausible, too. Furthermore,
since an object can probably be potentially/actually inﬁnite for reasons other than having many parts,
implications from right to left seem to be more appropriate than equivalences.
46This is similar to [26], but there are two important differences: ﬁrst, that there are inﬁnitely many
natural numbers is presupposed in (D3); second, it is quite implausible to deﬁne “a is potentially inﬁnite”
by “inﬁnitely many objects could be larger than a”: i.e., the acceptance of (D3) as a deﬁniens builds on a
speciﬁc understanding of “part of”. Note in this connection that the unmodalized version of (D3) is closely
related to the axiom of inﬁnity known from mereology.

Is ZF Finitistically Reducible?
169
the development of the theory of inﬁnite ordinal numbers has saved the adherent
of the assumption of the actual inﬁnite—in short: the actual-inﬁnitist—from being
committed to an inconsistency: by elaborating the deﬁniens of (D4) as
∃z (z is an ordinal number ∧♦(a has z parts) ∧∀n(n ∈N →n ≤z)),
he can maintain that there are actually inﬁnite objects.
Can there exist a ﬁnite object a such that (D3) holds for it? If a is a concrete object,
perhaps—since in this realm, there is change. When it comes to pure mathematical
objects a for which “having parts” is meaningful, the deﬁnientia of (D3), (D4) and
“a is inﬁnite” seem to be equivalent, however. This is so, in particular, when “a has
z parts” is interpreted as “a has z elements” or as “a has z subsets”. For given the
common understanding of modal talk as applied to mathematical objects, whatever is
the case in this domain is necessarily the case. Thus, if the ♦’s are erased in (D3) and
(D4), the resulting deﬁniens of (D3) implies that of (D4): in both cases, a is inﬁnite;
and the object z whose existence is asserted in (the modiﬁcation of) (D4) may be taken
to be ω.
This reasoning is connected with a general problem for attempts to explicate “x is
potentially inﬁnite”. Assume that “x is potentially inﬁnite” is a meaningful phrase, and
assume that it is neither equivalent to “x is ﬁnite” nor to “x is inﬁnite” (which would
make “x is potentially inﬁnite” superﬂuous). Now, consider an arbitrary a which
is potentially inﬁnite. Is a ﬁnite or inﬁnite? By classical logic—which is assumed
here—one of these alternatives must be the case.48 Now, if a is ﬁnite, one has a
result which is even stronger then a being potentially inﬁnite; and if a is inﬁnite, the
additional claim that it is also potentially inﬁnite does not save it from being inﬁnite.
Thus, in both cases, the claim that a is potentially inﬁnite is irrelevant for someone
who cares about distinguishing between the ﬁnite and the inﬁnite, e.g., to someone
who wants to avoid assumptions of inﬁnity.
So far, I have expressed doubts as to the possibility of a non-trivial explication
of “a is potentially inﬁnite”. Let me now deal with the theme of the assumption of
the potential inﬁnite. As I have described him, the potential-inﬁnitist rejects not only
the assumption of inﬁnite objects—such as the set of natural numbers—but also the
assumption of inﬁnitely many objects. But he tends to accept assertions such as
(iv) Only the ﬁnite initial segments of the sequence of natural numbers exist.49
and
(v) As the systematic paradigm of the potential inﬁnite, rule-governed non-
terminating procedures like “always-counting-on” may be regarded.50
47It has to be admitted, though, that it is not implausible that a z such that ♦(a has z parts) should be a
natural number.
48The equivalence of “x is inﬁnite” with “¬(x is ﬁnite)” may be secured by deﬁnition alone or by some
weak uncontroversial set theoretical principles.
49—but not that sequence itself.

170
K.-G. Niebergall
On the face of it, however, there is a reference to the sequence of natural numbers51
in (iv) and to the procedure of always-counting-on in (v). For, e.g., the predicate “is
a ﬁnite initial segment of the sequence of natural numbers” must be true of some
object a when (iv) is true. In this case, “∃z (y is a ﬁnite initial seqment of z ∧z =
the sequence of natural numbers)” has to be true of a; and this can only be so when
the term “the sequence of natural numbers” denotes something—both intuitively and,
for instance, from a Quinean point of view. But since the sequence of natural numbers
and the procedure of always-counting-on are inﬁnite objects, we have assumptions
of inﬁnity—of the actual inﬁnite52—in these examples. It seems that in the very
pronouncement of his position, the potential-inﬁnitist makes the inﬁnity-assumptions
he wanted to avoid.53
As I see it, there could be two ways out of this quandary.
(First way: terms vs. predicates) Of course, the potential-inﬁnitist should reject
the claim that in (iv) we refer to the sequence of all natural numbers. Thus, he could
suggest a sentence such as
(vi) ∀n(Natural-number(n) →∃s(Sequence(s) ∧length(s) = n
∧∀i < n Natural-number(s(i))))
as a paraphrase of (iv). Note that in (vi) the term “the sequence of natural numbers”
occurring in the formal paraphrase of (iv) considered earlier has been replaced by the
predicate “is a natural number”. Moreover, the terms remaining in (vi) merely take
ﬁnite objects as their semantical values. This is also the case for a sentence like (vii) “5
is a natural number”—which intuitively should be acceptable to the potential-inﬁnitist.
In some sense, however, even (vii) makes an assumption of inﬁnity; and so does
(vi). For under the assumption of Tarskian (i.e., model theoretic) semantics, if (vii) is
true, the predicate “is a natural number” is assigned an extension which is the set of
natural numbers (or: a set playing the role of this set in a certain model of a suitable
theory), and this simply is inﬁnite (given common assumptions). Now, this type of
semantics can surely be relinquished in favour of a semantics containing conditions
of the sort
“5 is a natural number” is true
⇐⇒
“is a natural number” is true of 5
instead.54 Yet, even here, the predicate “is a natural number” is still true of inﬁnitely
many numbers.
50This is translated from the article unendlich/Unendlichkeit; in [28]: 389. Originally, it is “Als system-
atisches Paradigma der potentiellen Unendlichkeit können geregelte, nicht abbrechende Verfahren wie das
‘Immer-weiter-Zählen’ angesehen werden”.
51A sequence s is analyzed as a set of ordered pairs ⟨x, y⟩(both of which are natural numbers in our
example) such that with ⟨x, y⟩∈s and u < x, some v with ⟨u, v⟩∈s.
52I treat “a is actually inﬁnite” as a synonym of “a is inﬁnite”.
53See [45]: 186, for a similar view: “The inﬁnite sequence [1, 1/2, 1/4, . . . ] is a mathematical represen-
tation of the continued (potentially inﬁnite) operations of cutting …. But the sequence of winters to come
is nonetheless inﬁnite, and in just Cantor’s sense”.
54For details, see [27].

Is ZF Finitistically Reducible?
171
(Second way: linguistic vs. non-linguistic objects) In analogy to (iv), (v) and
Lorenzen’s claims seem to be committed to procedures and to rules; and one might try
to get rid of these commitments in the way just discussed (by employing predicates
“is a so-and-so procedure/rule” instead of terms). If, however, the non-terminating
procedure of ‘always-counting-on’ and Lorenzen’s rules (1) and (2) are entities, the
question turns up of what sort of entities they are. Are they inﬁnite objects in this
case? This seems plausible,55 in particular when rules and procedures are conceived
of as functions—as it is typical for the mathematical discourse: in our cases, one
would have a function mapping each natural number to its successor—certainly an
(actually) inﬁnite object. Of course, it could be responded that procedures and rules
can be stated in ﬁnitely many words; but this reply is just sloppily formulated. It
might mean that those procedures and rules are these ﬁnite expressions—a position
held by F. Waismann with respect to laws: “Actually applied are only such sequences
for which one knows a speciﬁc law of construction. Under such a law a formula has
to be understood or a description in words.”56 This construal may ﬁt assertions such
as (i) and (i′), for example. Or the above suggestion could mean that those ﬁnitely
many words express such a procedure or rule (which is closer to (v)). Yet, for the
present topic, it does not really matter whether rules are (ﬁnite) expressions which
apply or whether they are expressed by (ﬁnite) expressions; in neither case is there
any guarantee that assumptions of inﬁnity are avoided: a ﬁnite expression may apply
to inﬁnitely many objects, and a procedure or rule expressed by a ﬁnite expression
need not be a ﬁnite objects.
In sum, those two ways out do not really work: in both cases, there are assumptions
of inﬁnity—be it of inﬁnite objects or be it of inﬁnitely many objects;57 be it by
interpreting terms or be it by interpreting predicates. Yet, to close this part, let me
discuss a ﬁnal reply to this challenge. This was already addressed in the description
of Lavine’s conception of theories, which in a nutshell is that “[. . . ] schemas do not
commit us to the truth of a potential inﬁnity of instances but rather to the truth of the
ﬁnitely many instances that we actually come to invoke [. . . ]” ([24]: 260). Similarly,
if a procedure or a rule—such a adding 1—is taken to be applied only ﬁnitely many
times, only ﬁnitely many objects are obtained de facto. Furthermore, a predicate
like “is a natural number” should not be interpreted as being true of inﬁnitely many
numbers, but only as being true of the (ﬁnitely many) natural numbers it is applied to.
I do not know what this sketch exactly amounts to and if it can be worked out
properly. A formal (Tarskian-style) semantics along its lines is certainly missing, and
it is not clear if it can be developed without making assumptions of inﬁnity; but it
55Actually, I have assumed this above.
56My translation; the original is “Tatsächlich angewendet werden jedenfalls nur Folgen, für die man ein
bestimmtes Bildungsgesetz kennt. Unter einem solchen Gesetz ist entweder eine Formel zu verstehen [. . . ]
oder eine Beschreibung in Worten” ([48]: 119).
57I take for granted that in assuming the existence of inﬁnitely many objects one makes an assumption
of inﬁnity—even if each of them is ﬁnite.

172
K.-G. Niebergall
may be declared to be superﬂuous by the adherents of that approach.58 One problem I
have with it is the following: how can the potential-inﬁnitist express that one and the
same predicate—like “is a natural number”—is true of or can be true of the ﬁnitely
many objects it has actually been applied to and of the inﬁnitely many objects it
could be applied to? Or is it that claims of the sort “ ‘is a natural number’ could be
true of inﬁnitely many objects” are withdrawn? In this case, however, I do not see
that any assumptions of inﬁnity—be they of the potential or the actual inﬁnite—have
remained.59
To close this subsection, let me quickly deal with explications of phrases of the type
“theory T assumes (merely) the potential inﬁnite”. On ﬁrst thought, one will probably
tend to formulas containing “x is potentially inﬁnite” as their explicantia—such as
“∀x(x |= T ⇒x is potentially inﬁnite)” or “∃x(x |= T ∧x is potentially inﬁnite)”.
Sadly, deﬁnitions with deﬁnientia containing “x is potentially inﬁnite” are useless
as long as the latter formula has not been explained satisfactorily. Now, there are
model-theoretic explicantia of “T assumes (merely) the potential inﬁnite” which avoid
“a is potentially inﬁnite” altogether. One may take “∀x (x |= T ⇒x is ﬁnite)” or
“∃x (x |= T ∧x is ﬁnite)”.
These deﬁnitions make sense; but as we have already seen, they do not avoid trivi-
alizing counterexamples and, thus, cannot be accepted as explications. In comparison,
employing (AF-T ) or (CAF-T ) as explicantia of “T assumes (merely) the potential
inﬁnite” is certainly more sophisticated, and it has a higher chance of being intuitively
convincing. Yet, in this case, “T assumes (merely) the potential inﬁnite” is not used
as a means to motivate and explain the adoption of (AF-T ) or (CAF-T )—it is just the
other way round: the direction of the motivation is rather turned on its head. Nonethe-
less, taking (CAF-T ) as an explicans of “T assumes (merely) the potential inﬁnite” is
just what we may end up with.
3. Conclusion
An upshot of the previous sections’ considerations is: the proof theorist who does not
subscribe to (D2) and does not want to fall back on Tait’s analysis of “S is a ﬁnitistic
theory” has to face the problem that he does not have a general explication of that
phrase at his disposal. In this situation, he may well accept (D2) or (D2′).60 For
58[24] may be read as suggesting a non-Tarskian semantics for schemas.
59Another idea could be to replace talk of objects by talk of, say, processes. In Mycielski’s statement
that a theory T “itself is regarded as a process of formation of axioms and theorems and not as an actually
inﬁnite object”, this suggestion is clearly at work. Certainly, the stages of this process are ﬁnite objects or
processes or … But what about T itself? It is inﬁnite—actually inﬁnite. In general, I think that if processes
are that what is talked about, they are treated as objects; thus, I see no gain in such an approach.
60As I understand Lavine, he does assert that each theory T for which (CAF-T ) holds belongs to ﬁnite
mathematics; but it should be kept in mind that Lavine’s assessment rests on a speciﬁc conception of
theories.

Is ZF Finitistically Reducible?
173
he may dismiss the criticism of section 2.3 as being merely terminological. And the
challenge implicit in the result of the Mycielski-translatability of ZF into a locally
ﬁnite theory (i.e., into a theory belonging to ﬁnite mathematics in the sense of Lavine)
need not bother him either: he may regard this relation as being too wide.
Let me begin with a discussion of the second reply. In fact, the assertion that each
theorem of ZF has a counterpart in FIN(ZF) can be construed as a very weak claim.
For example, if the n-th theorem of ZF is mapped to the n-th tautology “(p ∨¬p)n”,
we have it that each theorem of ZF has a counterpart even in propositional logic. It
has to be noticed, though, that Lavine probably does intend his counterpart-relation
to be not that trivial. Thus, in the abstract of [25], he tells us that “a system of ﬁnite
mathematics is proposed that has all of the power of classical mathematics”61—which
may remind us of Mycielski’s assertion that FIN(ZF) is isomorphic to ZF.62 Let me
point out that neither [29, 30] nor [24, 25] contain a discussion of—let alone reasons
for—the appropriateness of their terminologies.63
In my opinion, employing the
predicates “is isomorphic with” and “has the same power as” for what I have called
“Mycielski-translation” (to have a “neutral” expression) is an exaggeration.64
What the proof theorist would consider to be disquieting should rather be a ﬁnitistic
reduction of ZF. It can be shown, however, that
ZF is proof-theoretically reducible to a theory T satisfying (CAF-T )
(2)
is the case. One way to obtain such a result is already contained in Mycielski’s informal
argumentfortheMycielski-translatabilityofZFintoFIN(ZF);moregenerally, wehave
the
Observation.65 For each recursively enumerable theory S, S ρun FIN(S) holds.
Sketch of the proof. An analysis of the argument for the corresponding informal claim
shows that for each Mycielski-translation ,
Proofσ(x, y) ∧ClEq(y) ∧lh(x) ≤z −→PrFIN(σ)((y))
can be proved by a formalized induction on z.66 Since this formula is 0
1 and  is the
identity-function on atomic formulas, what can be shown is actually
I1 ⊢∀y (Prσ(y) ∧ClEq(y) −→PrFIN(σ)(y)).
This establishes the claim.67
61Lavine does not repeat this strong assertion.
62Of course, the trivial translation mentioned above does not show that ZF and propositional logic are
isomorphic or have the same power.
63Moreover, there are no deﬁnitions of “is isomorphic with” and “has the same power as” in these texts.
64I do not argue for this claim here; but see [31] for more on this.
65In principle, this is noticed in [25].
66“FIN(σ)” is a 0
0-formula of LPA which represents the recursively enumerable set of axioms of FIN(S).
67This reasoning leaves it open whether S ρFIN[S] FIN(S) also holds.

174
K.-G. Niebergall
(2) follows since (CAF-FIN(ZF)) is the case. Let me now present another argument
for (2). In distinction to Mycielski’s construction, it employs only general proof
theoretical methods. I start with a simple, yet useful lemma.
Lemma 1. Let L be an extension of LPRA, T be a consistent theory in L, and let
T ⌈:= {ψ | ψ is a formula of LPRA ∧T ⊢ψ}.68
If PRA ⊆T ⌈, then T is a conservative extension of T ⌈(with respect to LPRA) and
(CAF-T ⌈) holds.
Proof. The conservativity-claim is trivial. In order to show (CAF-T ⌈), let ϕ be a
sentence of LPRA such that T ⌈⊢ϕ. Since ϕ is quantiﬁer-free, either PRA ⊢ϕ or
PRA ⊢¬ϕ; and because of PRA ⊆T ⌈and the consistency of T ⌈, PRA ⊢ϕ has to
be the case. Now, (CAF-PRA) holds; thus, ϕ has a ﬁnite model.
Theorem 1. Let S be a consistent recursively enumerable theory (in classical ﬁrst-
order logic); then there exist consistent recursively enumerable theories A, B such
that
(i) S is relatively interpretable in B;
(ii) B is a conservative extension of A and (CAF-A);
(iii) B ρun A;
If, in addition, LS is an extension of LPA and Q ⊆S, then
(iv) S ρun B and S ρun A.
Proof. For consistent axiomatizable S, let B := (QF-IA) +Conσ and let β, which is
deﬁned by
β(x) := (qf-ia)(x) ∨x = ⌜Conσ⌝,
be a 0
0-formula of LPA representing a set of axioms of B.
Let A := B⌈, and set α(x) := Prβ(x) ∧l[pra](x). α is a 0
1-formula of LPA
representing a set of axioms of A, and Prα is a representation of A (formulated in
LPRA).
(i) “S is relatively interpretable in B” follows from a theorem due to Feferman (see
[3] and, for reﬁnements, [47]).
(ii) Since LB extends LPRA, Lemma 1 is applicable, and therefore (ii) is the case.
(iii) Because of the deﬁnition of α,
(QF-IA) ⊢∀x (Prβ(x) ∧l[pra](x) −→Prα(x))
68T ⌈should be understood as being formulated in LPRA.

Is ZF Finitistically Reducible?
175
holds. Thus, we have
(QF-IA) ⊢∀x (Prβ(x) ∧ClEq(x) −→Prα(x)),
from which (iii) follows by the Theorem cited in section 2.1.
(iv) By (QF-IA)-provable 0
1-completeness of (qf-ia),
(QF-IA) ⊢Prσ(⌜⊥⌝) −→Pr(qf-ia)(⌜Prσ(⌜⊥⌝)⌝),
whence
(QF-IA) ⊢Con(qf-ia) +Conσ −→Conσ.
Due to the Theorem from section 2.1, this yields S ρun B. S ρun A follows by the
transitivity of ρun from the two previous claims.
The moral of these theorems is, then, that if Deﬁnition 1, (D1) and (D2) are
accepted, one has to swallow the fact that ZF is ﬁnitistically reducible.69 And it
is reducible to a potentially inﬁnite theory, if (D2′) is chosen instead of (D2). As
I said, in my opinion this is not only intuitively inacceptable; it would moreover
be a highly unwelcome result for the existing reductive proof theory. For it would
show the futility of the piece-meal attempts to proof-theoretically reduce larger and
larger—yet, when compared to ZF, small—portions of mathematics to theories which
are foundationally distinguished but, in general, non-ﬁnitary: all of those theories
would even be proof-theoretically reducible to a—single—ﬁnitistic theory. But, of
course, the above metatheorems do not imply that ZF is ﬁnitistically reducible (or
reducible to a potentially inﬁnite theory): for (D1) + (D2) (and (D1) + (D2′)), but
also the reducibility relation employed, may be rejected as being inadequate to our
preformal understanding of the corresponding concepts. Let me close this paper with
some suggestions along these lines.
Dealing with the reducibility-concept ﬁrst, it could be objected (similarly to the
suggested rebuttal of Mycielski-translatability) that too many theories are relata of
proof-theoretical reducibility. A natural proposal could be that nothing short of a
relative interpretation, for example, should be accepted as a relation of inter-theoretical
reduction.70 In fact, using relative interpretability, we can generalize (P1). For this,
let the theories considered be formulated in ﬁrst-order languages, and let “S ⪯T ”
abbreviate “S is relatively interpretable in T ”:
Lemma 2.71
(i) If S ⪯T and all models of S are inﬁnite, then all models of T are inﬁnite.
(ii) If S ⪯T and (CAF-T ), then (CAF-S).
69I view LZF as an extension of LPA in this case.
70See again [31, 32]; for a different opinion, see [7].
71This lemma also holds for local relative interpretability instead of (global) relative interpretability. See
[29] for related results.

176
K.-G. Niebergall
Proof.
(i) Assume that  is a relative interpretation of S in T and ∀M (M |= S ⇒
M is inﬁnite). Then, because of the completeness theorem of ﬁrst-order logic,
for each n ∈ω, S ⊢∃≥n. By the deﬁnition of “relative interpretation”, T ⊢∃≥n
follows for each n ∈ω, whence ∀A (A |= T ⇒A is inﬁnite).
(ii) Assume that S ⪯T and (CAF-T ); then T and, therefore, S are consistent.
Hence, if ¬(CAF−S), there is a sentence ψ in LS such that
S ⊢ψ and all models M of ψ have inﬁnite domain
(∗)
By the deﬁnition of “relative interpretation”, there is a sentence ϕ in LT such
that
T ⊢ϕ ∧{ψ} ⪯{ϕ}
(∗∗)
Now, (i), (∗) and (∗∗) yield that T ⊢ϕ, but ϕ has only inﬁnite models—contradicting
(CAF-T ).
In the light of this lemma, the following modiﬁcation of Deﬁnition 1 could be envis-
aged:
S is ﬁnitistically reducible : ⇐⇒there is a theory T such that
(D5)
(CAF-T ) and S ⪯T
Whereas, given Deﬁnition 1 and (D1), (D2) was too wide, (D5) seems to be too
narrow.72
For example, by Lemma 2 and (D5), theories like (QF-IA) and Q are
precluded from being ﬁnitistically reducible. In fact, Lemma 2 and (D5) imply that
“S is ﬁnitistically reducible” is equivalent to (CAF-S). Furthermore, for theories T
which are not formulated in a quantiﬁcational language—such as PRA in LPRA—
“S ⪯T ” and “T ⪯S” are not deﬁned; thus, PRA would not be ﬁnitistically reducible
for a trivial reason.73
72This negative assessment notwithstanding, I think that it is plausible that a reducibility relation ρ
should satisfy at least a weakened analogue of (i) from Lemma 2: for S, T (which should perhaps again be
recursively enumerable) formulated in ﬁrst-order languages,
(P2): If SρT and all models of S are inﬁnite, then some model of T is inﬁnite.
The intuition underlying (P2) is that a reducibility relation should respect the vast difference between the
ﬁnite and the inﬁnite and their respective assumptions. If S has only inﬁnite models, it makes assumptions
of inﬁnity. If T has only ﬁnite models, then there exists a number n such that each of these models has
less than n elements (for T is assumed to be a ﬁrst-order theory); such a T avoids assumptions of inﬁnity
altogether. Even this cautious principle fails, however, if uniformly provable relative consistency is taken
for ρ in (P2): let T be the ﬁrst-order theory in LPA with the single non-logical axiom “∀xy (x = y)”,
and let τ be the canonical representation of this axiom-set, see [3]. Since (QF-IA) ⊢Conq, we also have
(QF-IA) ⊢Conτ →Conq. But T has no inﬁnite models.
73The usual deﬁnition of “S is relatively interpretable in T ” can be quite naturally extended to theories S
formulated in a quantiﬁer-free fragment of a ﬁrst-order language. Yet, there is at least one such extension
which leads to the falsity of “PRA is ﬁnitistically reducible”.

Is ZF Finitistically Reducible?
177
Surely, if (D1) and (D2) together with Deﬁnition 1 are maintained, we have no
reasonable deﬁnition of “S is ﬁnitistically reducible”; and neither do we have one if
these deﬁnitions are replaced by (D5). But even if (D1) + (D2) (and (D1) + (D2′))
are relinquished, the fact remains that each consistent recursively enumerable theory
S is proof-theoretically reducible to a theory T such that (CAF-T ) holds. Seen from
this perspective, the problem is not so much that ZF is proof-theoretically reducible
to a theory which has been called “ﬁnitistic” or “potentially inﬁnitistic”. It is rather
that being proof-theoretically reducible to a theory T such that (CAF-T) holds is
an empty criterion for distinguishing between recursively enumerable theories.74 At
this point, one could certainly start thinking about constructing reducibility concepts
which conjoin the strengths of proof-theoretical reducibility and relative interpretabil-
ity. However, what seems to be at stake here is rather to ﬁnd a convincing explication
of “T is a ﬁnitistic theory”.75 Now, the main problem is that apart from Tait’s analysis,
we merely seem to have (CAF-T ) as a possible explicans of “T is a ﬁnitistic theory”.
But there are too many theories T for which (CAF-T ) holds which nonetheless intu-
itively fail to be ﬁnitistic ones. If, however, (D1) + (D2) is rejected, which general
reasons do we have to regard PRA as a ﬁnitary theory?76 Thus, from my point of
view, there remains a question at the end of this text: What could a convincing general
explication of “S is a ﬁnitistic theory” be?77
Acknowledgement. This paper is an elaboration of a talk held at the 2001 Munich
Russell Conference. I wish to thank the editor, Godehard Link, and Shaughan Lavine,
Daniel Mook and Michael McLaughlin for useful comments.
References
[1]
Aristotle: Physics. In: J. L. Ackrill (ed.), A New Aristotle Reader, Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1987.
[2]
Drake, Frank R.: 1989. On the foundations of mathematics in 1987. In: H.-D. Ebbinghaus
et.al. (eds.), Logic Colloquium ‘87, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 11–25.
[3]
Feferman, Solomon: 1960. Arithmetization of metamathematics in a general setting.
Fundamenta Mathematicae XLIX: 35–92.
74This is also the answer to the claim that the criticism of section 2.3 is a purely terminological one.
75I think that from the components of the deﬁniens of Deﬁnition 1, “S is reducible to T ” is intuitively
much clearer than “T is ﬁnitary”.
76One could go on and ask: by which features is PRA distinguished in its role as a foundational theory?
It is not only because (CAF-PRA) holds.
77In this text, I have presented this and related questions as being problems for the proof theorist rather
than for Mycielski and Lavine. I have two reasons for this: First, in distinction to the proof theorist,
Mycielski and Lavine should be quite content with (2); for them, the ﬁnitistic reducibility of ZF is simply
no challenge. Second, with respect to this assessment my intuitions seem to be so far away from Mycielski’s
and Lavine’s that I do not know what could count as an argument against (2) for them.

178
K.-G. Niebergall
[4]
Feferman, Solomon: 1988. Hilbert’s program relativized: proof-theoretical and founda-
tional reductions. Journal of Symbolic Logic 53: 364–384.
[5]
Feferman, Solomon: 1991. Reﬂecting on incompleteness. Journal of Symbolic Logic 56:
1–49.
[6]
Feferman, Solomon: 1993. What rests on what? The proof-theoretic analysis of mathe-
matics. In: J. Czermak (ed.), Philosophie der Mathematik, Akten des 15. Internationalen
Wittgenstein-Symposiums, Wien: Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, 147–171.
[7]
Feferman, Solomon: 2000. Does reductive proof theory have a viable rationale. Erken-
ntnis 53: 63–96.
[8]
Girard, Jean-Yves: 1987. Proof Theory and Logical Complexity, vol. 1. Naples: Bib-
liopolis.
[9]
Hájek, Petr and Pavel Pudlák: 1993. Metamathematics of First-Order Arithmetic. Berlin:
Springer.
[10]
Hilbert, David: 1923. Die logischen Grundlagen der Mathematik. Mathematische An-
nalen 88: 151–165. Reprinted in [16]: 178–191.
[11]
Hilbert, David: 1926. Über das Unendliche. Mathematische Annalen 95: 161–190.
Reprinted in [16]: 79–108. English translation ‘On the inﬁnite’, in [46]: 367–392.
[12]
Hilbert, David: 1928. Die Grundlagen der Mathematik, Abhandlungen aus dem Mathe-
matischen Seminar der Hamburger Universität 6: 65–85 [english translation ‘The foun-
dations of mathematics’, in [46]: 464–479].
[13]
Hilbert, David: 1928. Probleme der Grundlegung der Mathematik. Atti del Congresso
nazionale dei matematici, Bologna 3–10 settembre 1928 1: 135–141. With supplemen-
tations reprinted in Mathematische Annalen 102, 1929: 1–9.
[14]
Hilbert, David: 1931. Die Grundlegung der elementaren Zahlenlehre. Mathematische
Annalen 104: 485–494.
[15]
Hilbert, David: 1931. Beweis des Tertium non datur. Nachrichten von der Gesellschaft
der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen, Mathematisch-physikalische Klasse: 120–125.
[16]
Hilbert, David: 1964. Hilbertiana. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
[17]
Hilbert, David and Paul Bernays: 1968. Grundlagen der Mathematik I. Berlin: Springer.
[18]
Hilbert, David and Paul Bernays: 1968. Grundlagen der Mathematik II. Berlin: Springer.
[19]
Isaacson, Daniel: 1992. Some considerations on arithmetical truth and the ω-rule. In: M.
Detlefsen (ed.), Proof, Logic and Formalization, London-NewYork: Routledge, 94–138.
[20]
Kaye, Richard: 1991. Models of Peano Arithmetic. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
[21]
Kreisel, Georg: 1958. Hilbert’s programme. Dialectica 12: 346–372.
[22]
Kreisel, Georg: 1960. Ordinal logics and the characterization of informal concepts of
truth. Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathematicians, Edinburgh 1958,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 289–299.
[23]
Kunen, Kenneth: 1980. Set Theory. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Is ZF Finitistically Reducible?
179
[24]
Lavine, Shaughan: 1994. Understanding the Inﬁnite. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
[25]
Lavine, Shaughan: 1995. Finite mathematics. Synthese 103: 389–420.
[26]
Lorenzen, Paul: 1957. DasAktual-Unendliche in der Mathematik. Philosophia Naturalis
4: 4–11.
[27]
Martin, Richard M.: 1958. Truth and Denotation. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
[28]
Mittelstraß, Jürgen (ed.): 1996. Enzyklopädie Philosophie und Wissenschaftstheorie 4.
Stuttgart & Weimar: Metzler.
[29]
Mycielski, Jan: 1981. Analysis without actual inﬁnity. Journal of Symbolic Logic 46:
625–633.
[30]
Mycielski, Jan: 1986. Locally ﬁnite theories. Journal of Symbolic Logic 51: 59–62.
[31]
Niebergall, Karl-Georg: 2000. On the logic of reducibility: axioms and examples. Erken-
ntnis 53: 27–61.
[32]
Niebergall, Karl-Georg: 2002. Structuralism, model theory and reduction. Synthese 130:
135–162.
[33]
Niebergall, Karl-Georg and Matthias Schirn: 1998. Hilbert’s ﬁnitism and the notion of
inﬁnity. In: M. Schirn (ed.), The Philosophy of Mathematics today, Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 271–305.
[34]
Niebergall, Karl-Georg and Matthias Schirn: 2002. Hilbert’s programme and Gödel’s
theorems. Dialectica 56: 347–370.
[35]
Niebergall, Karl-Georg and Matthias Schirn: 2003. What ﬁnitism could not be. Critíca
35: 43–68.
[36]
Parsons, Charles: 1998. Finitism and intuitive knowledge. In: M. Schirn (ed.), The
Philosophy of Mathematics today, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 249–270.
[37]
Pudlák, Pavel: 1985. Cuts, consistency statements and interpretability. Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic 50: 423–441.
[38]
Rolf, Bertil: 1980. The ﬁnitary standpoint. Erkenntnis 15: 287–300.
[39]
Schirn, Matthias and Karl-Georg Niebergall: 2001. Extensions of the ﬁnitist point of
view. History and Philosophy of Logic 22: 135–161.
[40]
Simpson, Stephen: 1988. Partial realizations of Hilbert’s program. Journal of Symbolic
Logic 53: 349–363.
[41]
Simpson, Stephen: 1999. Subsystems of Second Order Arithmetic. Berlin: Springer.
[42]
Smorynski, Craig: 1985. Self-Reference and Modal Logic. Berlin: Springer.
[43] Tarski, Alfred, Andrzej Mostowski, and Raphael M. Robinson: 1953. Undecidable the-
ories Amsterdam: North-Holland.
[44] Tait, William W.: 1981. Finitism. The Journal of Philosophy 78: 524–546.
[45] Thomson, James: 1967 & 1981. Inﬁnity in mathematics and logic. In: P. Edwards (ed.),
The Encyclopedia of Philosophy vol. 4, New York: The Macmillan Company, 183–190.

180
K.-G. Niebergall
[46]
van Heijenoort, Jean (ed.): 1967. From Frege to Gödel. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
[47] Visser, Albert: 1991. The formalization of interpretability. Studia Logica 50: 81–105.
[48] Waismann, Friedrich: 1936. Einführung in das mathematische Denken. Wien: Gerold
und Co.
Seminar für Philosophie, Logik und Wissenschaftstheorie
Philosophie-Department
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
Ludwigstr. 31/I
80539 München
Germany
E-mail: kgn@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

Inconsistency in the Real World
Tobias Hürter
Abstract. It seems evident that there are inﬁnitely many natural numbers—but can we be sure?
To get a feeling for the strength of the this weakest axiom of inﬁnity, it is useful to ask under
what circumstances it may fail, while the elementary concept of number continues to hold.
Here, we construct a hypothetical situation in which we are forced to conclude that a term for
a large natural number cannot receive its intended interpretation. So from down below, we see
that there is a bound on the natural numbers far up.
1. Number-Theoretic Science Fiction
“God created the natural numbers, everything else is man’s work”, goes Kronecker’s
famous dictum. But how many of them did He create? Certainly enough for every-
day purposes. A spider has eight legs, and this eightness is a feature of the spider,
independent of all mathematical theorizing. In this sense, natural numbers appear as
given, almost like physical objects. However, physical theories describe the universe
as ﬁnite and discrete: Inﬂationary cosmology gives an explicit estimate of the number
of baryons in the universe from ﬁrst principles: 1087. The discreteness of space and
time is particularly striking in the recent theory of Loop Quantum Gravity, see e.g.,
[4]. So it seems likely that numbers like 2210 have no physical manifestation. We
have to derive formal properties of 2210 from our theories about the natural numbers,
whereas we can tell that eight is even by direct acquaintance, or we can verify that
173 · 12 = 2076 by counting.1 Edward Nelson distinguishes between a genetic and a
formal notion of number:
The point is that to regard 2 ⇑5 as standing for a genetic number entails
a philosophical commitment to some ideal notion of existence. To a
nominalist, 2 ⇑4 stands for a number, 65536, to which one can count,
but 2 ⇑5 is a pair of arabic numerals with a double arrow between them,
and there is not a scintilla of evidence that it stands for a genetic number.
([3]: 75)
1Can we verify by counting that 181 is prime? This is a borderline case, because we need the unrestricted
monotonicity of multiplication, which involves a step of reﬂection on the process of counting.

182
T. Hürter
On several occasions in the history of science, we saw our intuitions about appar-
ently well-understood concepts break down outside the scales of our everyday world.
Examples are the concepts of space, time and set. We cannot exclude the possibility
that the concept of number will join this list.
To understand what goes on in the transition from the genetic to the formal notion
of number, it is useful to ask under what circumstances the one holds while the other
fails. The axioms of formal number theory (Peano arithmetic and its relatives) codify
extrapolations from our pre-theoretical number concept, drawn from experiences in
the real world. The commitment to inﬁnitely many numbers or even of large ﬁnite
numbers is the foremost of these extrapolations. It is the weakest axiom of inﬁnity.
Evident as it may appear, it is a substantial assumption. To investigate under what
circumstances it could fail should be a worthwhile exercise—often it is healthy to step
back and check your premises.
If the existence of a number is purely formal, we should be able to express the
assertion of this existence in an adequate and consistent formal theory of numbers.
But Gödel’s second incompleteness theorem reminds us of the possibility that our
usual axiom systems of number theory are inconsistent. The line behind which such
an inconsistency would force us to retreat lies somewhere between the genetic and
the formal notion. It would not change a spider’s number of legs, but it would disrupt
our view about the truth of some 	1 sentences—and if things go really bad, it may
force us to reconsider the existence of 2 ⇑5. Here I want to take a closer look at this
worst-case scenario. Because we have no positive evidence for an inconsistency in
Peano arithmetic, the argument has to be highly hypothetical.
At ﬁrst sight, it is not clear whether such a situation can arise at all. It is conceivable
that the genetic notion of number has no extension into the inﬁnite, without any
accessible evidence. I want to argue that this is not so: We can make sense of the idea
that from down below, we see a bound for the natural numbers far up. For that, we
start from a weak number theory T0 intended to capture the strength (not necessarily
the spirit) of the genetic concept. In particular, T0 is indifferent to the existence of
inﬁnitely many numbers. We construct a 0 formula ϕ (x) and a number term t such
that T0 implies ∃x ϕ (x), we cannot refute the consistency of T0 + ∃x < t ϕ (x) by
elementary means, but T0+∃x < t ϕ (x) has models only up to a ﬁnite bound, because
t cannot receive its standard interpretation. The key point of the construction is that
we can arrange that for a given n, ϕ (¯n) can be decided inside an initial segment well
below the anomaly. ϕ is a bounded variant of the Gödel ﬁxed point. My account relies
heavily on [5].
2. The Theory T0
Let LA be the ﬁrst-order language with non-logical symbols
<, +, ·, 0, 1.

Inconsistency in the Real World
183
This is the language of arithmetic. Let T0 be the theory in LA with the axioms for
an irreﬂexive transitive order, the recursive deﬁnitions of addition and multiplication,
i.e., the universal closures of
¬x < x,
x < y ∧y < z →x < z,
x + 0 = x,
x + (y + 1) = (x + y) + 1,
x · 0 = 0,
x · (y + 1) = x · y + x,
as well as the universal closures of
x + 1 = y + 1 →x = y,
x < y →x + 1 ≤y,
x < x + 1 ↔x + 1 ̸= 0,
and the 0 induction scheme:
ϕ (0) ∧∀x (ϕ (x) →ϕ (x + 1)) →∀x ϕ (x)
for each 0 formula ϕ.
T0 has arbitrarily large ﬁnite models, the smallest with domain {0}. It does not
prove monotonicity of the arithmetical operations with regard to <. Adding
x + 1 ̸= 0
to T0 results in I0.2
Lemma 1. Let M = ⟨M, <, +, ·, 0, 1⟩be a model of T0. Then M is ﬁnite iff ⟨M, +, 0⟩
is the cyclic group generated by 1.
We deﬁne a canonical numeral ¯n for each natural number n by recursion. The
numeral for 0 is the symbol “0”. If n = 2k + 1, let ¯n be the string

(1 + 1) · ¯k + 1

.
If n = 2k + 2, let ¯n be the string

(1 + 1) · ¯k + 1 + 1

.
2At ﬁrst sight, it may seem contrived to allow 0 into the range of the successor operation. T0 is not
claimed to be a conceptually accurate codiﬁcation of some pretheoretical notion of number. The choice of
T0 was rather a matter of mathematical taste. (However, as Godehard Link remarked, there may be some
justiﬁcation in cultural history for casting elementary counting in terms of remainder classes.) Alternatives
would be to treat the arithmetical operations as ternary predicates representing possibly partial functions,
or to allow for a largest number “many”, which absorbs every nonzero companion argument in addition
and multiplication. But caution: The three approaches are not equivalent.

184
T. Hürter
The length of ¯n grows in proportion to log2 (n).
We need a more efﬁcient notation for large numbers of the form 22n. Set
t0 ≡(1 + 1) ,
tn+1 ≡(tn · tn) .
So tn represents 22n. The length of tn grows in proportion to n · 2n. Note that
lim
n→∞
n · 2n
22n
= 0.
Deﬁne sentences σn by
σ0 ≡1 < 1 + 1,
σn+1 ≡σn ∧∀x (1 < x ≤tn →tn < tn · x) .
σn asserts that the universe has size at least 22n + 1. The length of σn is bounded by
(say) 30 · (n + 30)2 · 2n. Note that
lim
n→∞
30 · (n + 30)2 · 2n
22n
= 0.
For every LA-term s (⃗x) deﬁne a formula εs (⃗x) (“s (⃗x) exists”) by induction on
the complexity of s:
ε0 ≡εxi ≡⊤,
ε1 ≡0 < 1,
εs0+s1 ≡εs0 ∧εs1 ∧(s0 + s1 ≥max (s0, s1)) ,
εs0·s1 ≡εs0 ∧εs1 ∧∀y < s1 (s0 · (y + 1) ≥s0) .
Note that
T0 ⊢εtn ↔σn.
Now for every bounded LA-formula ϕ (⃗x) deﬁne ϕ∗(⃗x) by another induction: For
atomic ϕ, set
(t0 (⃗x) = t1 (⃗x))∗≡εt0 ∧εt1 →t0 (⃗x) = t1 (⃗x) ,
(t0 (⃗x) < t1 (⃗x))∗≡εt0 ∧εt1 →t0 (⃗x) < t1 (⃗x) .
For ϕ of higher complexity, we can assume that ϕ is given in negation-free prenex
form, because over T0, every formula has a canonical equivalent of this form. Set
(ϕ ∧ψ)∗≡ϕ∗∧ψ∗,
(ϕ ∨ψ)∗≡ϕ∗∨ψ∗,

Inconsistency in the Real World
185
and
(∃y < t(⃗x) ϕ)∗≡εt →∃y < t(⃗x) ϕ∗,
(∀y < t(⃗x) ϕ)∗≡∀y < t(⃗x) ϕ∗.
for y /∈{⃗x}. In a sufﬁciently rich metatheory, we have:
Lemma 2. If I0 proves a bounded formula ϕ, then T0 proves ϕ∗.
Idea of the proof. Let ϕ be given, as well as a model M of T0. We show that M
satisﬁes ϕ∗. We can assume that M has at least two elements. Expand LA to LM
A
by adding constants for all elements of the domain M of M. These constants have
their canonical interpretation in M. (We do not distinguish between the constants and
their designations.) Unfold M by associating with every LM
A -term a ﬁnite sequence of
elements of M in the following way: ⟨a⟩is assigned to every a ∈M. For molecular t,
treat the sequences as numerals with generalized digits and order them accordingly—
so sequences of equal length are ordered lexicographically. For example, let t be
(t0 + t1) and assume that ti was assigned

⃗ai
. To get the sequence for t, add

⃗a0
and

⃗a1
just like you learned to add decimal numerals in elementary school. If the
resulting sequence has the form (say) ⟨b0, b1⟩, then b0 is tM, and b1 counts how often
you have to pass over 0M in the calculation of M. Analogously, multiplication is
performed by the elementary school algorithm.3 This way, we arrive at a term model
M′ for LM
A . Every term is interpreted by the associated sequence. M′ models I0.
The injection
e : M →M′, a →⟨a⟩
has the property
M′ ⊢ψ

e (⃗a)

⇒M ⊢ψ∗(⃗a)
for all bounded ψ (⃗x) in LA and all ⃗a ∈M. (M is mapped onto an initial segment of
M′.) In particular, M ⊢ϕ.
Slightly less expensive, but much more tedious is the proof-theoretical route to
Lemma 2 by inductively turning cut-free derivations in I0 into derivations in T0.
3. Metamathematics in T0
We now want to arithmetize syntax in T0. In general, this can be done adequately only
up to a certain limit, because a ﬁnite model cannot have codes for all ﬁnite sequences.
We proceed along the lines of Section V.3 of [2]. Many constructions done there for
I0 can be transferred to T0 with the help of Lemma 2. With an eye on the things to
3This idea is taken from the proof of [2]: Theorem IV. 2. 2.

186
T. Hürter
come, more elementary proofs are desirable. We will not carry out the details here,
but only indicate some crucial points, aiming to push the limit of adequacy as far as
possible. Deﬁne the 0 formula π (m, n, p) (“p codes the ordered pair (m, n)”) by
π (m, n, p) ≡∃x ≤p (ε(1+1)·x
∧([εx·(m+n)+m ∧(1 + 1) · x = m+n+1∧p = x · (m + n) + m]
∨[εx·(m+n)+m+1 ∧(1+1)·x =m+n ∧p = x·(m+n+1) + m])).
This provably satisﬁes the usual uniqueness conditions, but not totality of course.
With the ordered pair at hand, we apply Deﬁnition V.3.5 of [2] to get an efﬁcient
coding of ﬁnite sequences. An important property of this coding is that “s is a ﬁnite
sequence”, “m occurs in the sequence s” and “m is the i-th element of the sequence
s” can be deﬁned in T0 by formulae with all quantiﬁers bounded by s. This sufﬁces
to develop syntax in T0 as done for I0 in [2]: V.3(g). By standard deﬁnitions, we
represent terms, formulae, proofs, etc., as well as syntactical operations like substi-
tution. In particular, we arrive at a 0 formula Bewτ (x, y) for “x is a proof of y in
the theory deﬁned by τ”. Here we take τ (x) to be a 0 formula binumerating T0 in
inﬁnite models of T0. We can certainly demand that
T0 ⊢σ6 ∧ε¯n →

τ (¯n) ↔τ ∗(¯n)

for all n. The starred versions of the usual adequacy conditions can be derived in T0.
For example, we can express the consistency of T0 inside T0 by
¬∃x

Bewτ

x, ⌜0 < 0⌝
∗,
which by the way is a theorem of T0. (⌜θ⌝is the number which codes θ.)
4. “Armageddon”
Now let k be a natural number greater than eight. Apply the Fixed Point Lemma (for
formulae with only y free) in I0 to the formula
σk →¬∃x < tk Bewτ (x, y) .
We arrive at a sentence ϕk equivalent over I0 to
σk →¬∃x < tk Bewτ

x, ⌜ϕk⌝

.
A closer look at our coding and the proof of the Fixed Point Lemma reveals that
⌜ϕk⌝≪22k. Therefore
T0 ⊢σk →ε⌜ϕk⌝.

Inconsistency in the Real World
187
From our remark on quantiﬁer bounds in the coding of ﬁnite sequences together with
our demand on τ it follows that
ϕk ⇐⇒ϕ∗
k
over T0. ϕk is bounded. By Lemma 2, ϕk is a ﬁxed point over T0. Informally, ϕk
asserts that if the universe has a size of at least 22k + 1, there is no proof of ϕk below
22k.
Lemma 3. For every natural number k > 8, T0 implies ϕk.
Proof. Suppose not. Let M be a model of
T0 + ¬ϕk.
Then the universe of M has a size of at least 22k + 1, and in M, there is a proof from
T0 of ϕk with code p < 22k. By correctness of the proof predicate, there is a natural
number n such that p is the n-th successor of 0 in M and n codes a proof from T0 of
ϕk in the real world.4 But M satisﬁes T0, and therefore also ϕk. Contradiction.
So T0 implies ϕk. Can we hope to ﬁnd a proof for ϕk in T0? We better hope not!
Any proof surveyable to human or computer surely must have a code below 229. (If
you disagree, raise k.) Imagine we found a proof with code p < 22k. Then p turns
out to be a “witness for Armageddon” (Woodin’s words).
Theorem 1. Suppose p < 22k codes a proof of ϕk. Then T0 has no models with a size
greater than 22k.
Proof. The proof is that of Lemma 3 backwards. We show that T0 implies ¬σk.
Suppose that
M |= T0 + σk.
Then
M |= εtk,
i.e., tk has the standard interpretation. The same holds for ¯p and ⌜ϕk⌝. But now it
follows that
M |= σk ∧Bewτ

¯p, ⌜ϕk⌝

,
which contradicts
M |= ϕk.
So p forces us to conclude that 22k does not exist.
4This is the crucial step from the formal to the genetic notion of number.

188
T. Hürter
5. So What?
Let’s look back at the nightmare vision we just made up. We constructed a hypo-
thetical situation in which we see from down below (from the realm of the genetic
numbers) that a term intended to designate a large natural number cannot receive its
intended interpretation. Then the structure of arithmetic cannot be extended beyond a
certain ﬁnite point. This would be very bad news for number theorists, but shepherds,
accountants and astronomers wouldn’t need to care. Because we just wanted to show
that such a situation is conceivable, we were free to use metatheoretical inﬁnity as-
sumptions in our construction—as long as we keep them out of the object theory. So
we laid out our scenario as a hypothetical reductio ad absurdum argument: We started
from our received view of inﬁnity. Then we imagined we ﬁnd the dreaded p and are
thrown back to T0.5 Note that instead of conveniently transferring known results from
I0 to T0 by Lemma 2, we could do the work directly in T0.
A natural reaction to this scenario is: “Well, it’s just a roundabout argument that
ϕk has no short proof in T0.” But this means taking the existence of inﬁnitely many
numbers for granted. If you seriously drop the presupposition of inﬁnity, you cannot
ruleouttheexistenceofaproofcodedinp asabove. Tomorrow, abrightmathematician
might wake up and ﬁnd one.
Acknowledgement. Thanks to Dieter Donder, Stefan Iwan, Godehard Link, Uwe
Lück, Holger Sturm and especially Karl-Georg Niebergall for helpful comments and
criticism.
References
[1]
Hájek, Petr: 1984. On a new notion of partial conservativity. Computation and Proof
Theory (Lecture Notes in Mathematics 1104). Berlin: Springer, 217–232.
[2]
Hájek, Petr and Pavel Pudlák: 1993. Metamathematics of First-Order Arithmetic. Berlin:
Springer.
[3]
Nelson, Edward: 1986. Predicative Arithmetic. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
[4]
Rovelli, Carlo and Lee Smolin: 1995. Discreteness of area and volume in quantum gravity.
Nuclear Physics B442: 593–622.
5A modiﬁed construction could avoid the conceptual difﬁculties associated with the assumption of an
actual inconsistency in formal number theory. For that, we could allow a nonstandard bound on the length
of the inconsistency proof by working with versions of ϕk with k a parameter of the object theory. Then
the parametrized version of Lemma 3 fails. If we accept the analogy, we could extrapolate back to the
standard case. For example, we could investigate the possibility of local consistency proofs by excluding
inconsistencies up to 2k or 22k , based on evidence up to a nonstandard k. Results of [1] warn of some
pitfalls that may lure in this line of argument.

Inconsistency in the Real World
189
[5]
Woodin, W. Hugh: 1998. The tower of Hanoi. In: H. G. Dales and G. Oliveri (eds.), Truth
in Mathematics, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 329–351.
Technology Review
Helstorfer Straße 7
30625 Hannover
Germany
E-mail: tobias.huerter@technology-review.de


Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
Michael Rathjen
Abstract. The Anti-Foundation axiom, AFA, has turned out to be a versatile principle in set
theory for modelling a plethora of circular and self-referential phenomena. This paper explores
whether AFA and the most important tools emanating from it, such as the solution lemma and
the co-recursion principle, can be developed on predicative grounds, that is to say, within a
predicative theory of sets.
If one could show that most of the circular phenomena that have arisen in computer science
do not require impredicative set existence axioms for their modelling, this would demonstrate
that their circularity is of a different kind than the one which underlies impredicative deﬁnitions.
1. Introduction
Russell discovered his paradox in May of 1901 while working on his Principles of
Mathematics [28]. In response to the paradox he developed his distinction of logical
types. Although ﬁrst introduced in [28], type theory found its mature expression ﬁve
years later in his 1908 article Mathematical Logic as Based on the Theory of Types
[29]. In [29] Russell commences with a list of contradictions to be solved. These
include Epimenides’liar paradox, his own paradox, and Burali-Forti’s antinomy of the
greatest ordinal. In a ﬁrst analysis he remarks: “In all the above contradictions (which
are merely selections from an indeﬁnite number) there is a common characteristic,
which we may describe as self-reference or reﬂexiveness” ([29]: 224). On closer
scrutiny he discerns the form of reﬂexiveness that is the common underlying root for
the trouble as follows:
Whatever we suppose to be the totality of propositions, statements about
this totality generate new propositions which, on pain of contradiction,
must lie outside the totality. It is useless to enlarge the totality, for that
equally enlarges the scope of statements about the totality. ([29]: 224)
Here Russell declares very lucidly a ban on so-called impredicative deﬁnitions, ﬁrst
enunciated by Poincaré. An impredicative deﬁnition of an object refers to a presumed
totality of which the object being deﬁned is itself to be a member. For example, to
deﬁne a set of natural numbers X as X = {n∈N : ∀Y ⊆N F(n, Y)} is impredica-
tive since it involves the quantiﬁed variable ‘Y’ ranging over arbitrary subsets of the

192
M. Rathjen
natural numbers N, of which the set X being deﬁned is one member. Determining
whether ∀Y ⊆N F(n, Y)} holds involves an apparent circle since we shall have to
know in particular whether F(n, X) holds—but that cannot be settled until X itself is
determined. Impredicative set deﬁnitions permeate the fabric of Zermelo–Fraenkel set
theory in the guise of the separation and replacement axioms as well as the powerset
axiom.
The avoidance of impredicative deﬁnitions has also been called the Vicious Circle
Principle. This principle was taken very seriously by Hermann Weyl:
The deepest root of the trouble lies elsewhere: a ﬁeld of possibilities
open into inﬁnity has been mistaken for a closed realm of things existing
in themselves. As Brouwer pointed out, this is a fallacy, the Fall and
Original Sin of set theory, even if no paradoxes result from it. ([34]: 243)
When it turned out that the ramiﬁed theory of types rendered much of elementary
mathematics unworkable, Russell, oblivious of his original insight, introduced, as an
ad hoc device and for entirely pragmatic reasons, his notorious axiom of reducibility.
This ‘axiom’ says that every set of higher level is coextensive with one of lowest
level. Thereby he reconstituted the abolished impredicative deﬁnitions through the
back door, as it were, undermining the whole rationale behind a ramiﬁed hierarchy
of types and levels to such an extent that it might just as well have been jettisoned
altogether. Weyl derisively proclaimed:
Russell in order to extricate himself from the affair, causes reason to
commit hara-kiri, by postulating the above assertion in spite of its lack
of support by any evidence (‘axiom of reducibility’). In a little book Das
Kontinuum, I have tried to draw the honest consequence and constructed
a ﬁeld of real numbers of the ﬁrst level, within which the most important
operations of analysis can be carried out. ([34]: 50)
In his analyzes of the contradictions and antinomies, Russell frequently equates the
common culprit with self-reference (cf. above) and sees the problems as arising from
reﬂexive fallacies ([29]: 230). He bans propositions of the form “x is among x’s”
([28]: 105) and in his own so-called “no-class” theory of classes he explains that
propositional functions, such as the function “x is a set”, may not be applied to them-
selves as self-application would give rise to a vicious circle. Unlike his cogent analysis
of the problem of impredicativity, Russell’s charges against self-referential notions are
not that well explained. It might be that the scope of his criticism was just intended to
be conﬁned to questions of concern to his own type theories, though it is more likely
that he regarded self-referential notions as being incoherent or rather fallacious con-
ceptions that should be banned all the same. In the history of philosophy, the charge
of circularity is old and regarded as tantamount to delivering a refutation. In his An-
alytica Posteriora, Aristotle outlaws circular lines of arguments. Similarly, Aquinas
calls an inﬁnite series of reasons each of which is in some sense dependent on a prior
a vicious regress. On the other hand, in hermeneutics it has been a tenet that compre-
hension can only come about through a tacit foreknowledge, thereby emphasizing the

Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
193
inherent circularity of all understanding (the hermeneutic circle). In the same vein,
circularity has been found in much intentional activity related to self-consciousness,
communication, common knowledge, and conventions. For instance, on D. Lewis’s
account in his book Convention [20], for something to be a convention among a group
of people, common knowledge about certain facts must obtain in this group. If C
and E are modal operators such that Cϕ and Eϕ stand for ‘ϕ is common knowledge’
and ‘ϕ is known to everybody’, respectively, then the central axiom which implicitly
deﬁnes C takes the self-referential form Cϕ ↔E(ϕ ∧Cϕ).
In logic, circular concepts involving self-reference or self-application have proven
to be very important, as witnessed by Gödel’s incompleteness theorems, the recursion
theorem in recursion theory, self-applicative programs, and such so-called applicative
theories as Feferman’s Explicit Mathematics that have built-in gadgets allowing for
self-application.
The general blame that Russell laid on circularity was more inﬂuential then the
more speciﬁc ban placed on impredicative deﬁnitions. In the wake of Russell’s anathe-
matizing of circularity, Tarski’s hierarchical approach via meta-languages became the
accepted wisdom on the semantical paradoxes. On the other hand, the fruitfulness of
circular notions in many areas of scientiﬁc discourse demonstrated that these notions
are scientiﬁcally important. Thus one is naturally led to search for criteria that would
enable one to tell the benign (and fruitful) circularities from the paradoxical ones.
Kripke, though, in his Outline of a Theory of Truth [19], demonstrated rather convinc-
ingly that there are no such general ‘syntactic’ criteria for making this distinction, in
that whether or not something is paradoxical may well depend on non-linguistic facts.
Notwithstandingthelackofsimplesyntacticalcriteriafordetectingparadoxicalcir-
cularities, it is of great interest to develop frameworks in which many non-paradoxical
circular phenomena can be modelled. One such framework is Feferman’s theory of
explicit mathematics, cf. [13]. It is suitable for representing Bishop-style constructive
mathematics as well as generalized recursion, including direct expression of structural
concepts which admit self-application. Another very systematic toolbox for building
models of various circular phenomena is set theory with the Anti-Foundation axiom.
Theories like ZF outlaw sets like  = {} and inﬁnite chains of the form i+1 ∈i
for all i∈ω on account of the Foundation axiom, and sometimes one hears the mistaken
opinion that the only coherent conception of sets precludes such sets. The fundamental
distinction between well-founded and non-well-founded sets was formulated by Mir-
imanoff in 1917. The relative independence of the Foundation axiom from the other
axioms of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory was announced by Bernays in 1941 but did not
appear until the 1950s. Versions of axioms asserting the existence of non-well-founded
sets were proposed by Finsler (1926). The ideas of Bernays’independence proof were
exploited by Rieger, Hájek, Boffa, and Felgner. After Finsler, Scott in 1960 appears
to have been the ﬁrst person to consider an Anti-Foundation axiom which encapsu-
lates a strengthening of the axiom of extensionality. The Anti-Foundation axiom in its
strongest version was ﬁrst formulated by Forti and Honsell [16] in 1983. Though sev-
eral logicians explored set theories whose universes contained non-wellfounded sets

194
M. Rathjen
(or hypersets as they are called nowadays) the area was considered rather exotic until
these theories were put to use in developing rigorous accounts of circular notions in
computer science, cf. [3]. It turned out that the Anti-Foundation Axiom, AFA, gave rise
to a rich universe of sets and provided an elegant tool for modelling all sorts of circular
phenomena. The application areas range from modal logic, knowledge representation
and theoretical economics to the semantics of natural language and programming lan-
guages. The subject of hypersets and their applications is thoroughly developed in the
books [3] by P. Aczel and [5] by J. Barwise and L. Moss.
While reading [3] and [5], the question that arose in my mind was that of whether or
not the material could be developed on the basis of a constructive universe of hypersets
rather than a classical and impredicative one. This paper explores whether AFA and
the most important tools emanating from it, such as the solution lemma and the co-
recursion principle, can be developed on predicative grounds, that is to say, within a
predicative theory of sets. The upshot will be that most of the circular phenomena
that have arisen in computer science don’t require impredicative set existence axioms
for their modelling, thereby showing that their circularity is clearly of a different kind
than the one which underlies impredicative deﬁnitions.
2. The Anti-Foundation Axiom
Deﬁnition 2.1. A graph will consist of a set of nodes and a set of edges, each edge
being an ordered pair ⟨x, y⟩of nodes. If ⟨x, y⟩is an edge then we will write x →y
and say that y is a child of x.
Apathisaﬁniteorinﬁnitesequencex0 →x1 →x2 →· · · ofnodesx0, x1, x2, . . .
linked by edges ⟨x0, x1⟩, ⟨x1, x2⟩, . . . .
A pointed graph is a graph together with a distinguished node x0 called its point.
A pointed graph is accessible if for every node x there is a path x0 →x1 →x2 →
· · · →x from the point x0 to x.
A decoration of a graph is an assignment d of a set to each node of the graph in
such a way that the elements of the set assigned to a node are the sets assigned to the
children of that node, i.e.,
d(a) = {d(x) : a →x}.
A picture of a set is an accessible pointed graph (apg for short) which has a decoration
in which the set is assigned to the point.
Deﬁnition 2.2. The Anti-Foundation Axiom, AFA, is the statement that every graph
has a unique decoration.
Note that AFA has the consequence that every apg is a picture of a unique set.
AFA is in effect the conjunction of two statements:

Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
195
• AFA1: Every graph has at least one decoration.
• AFA2: Every graph has a most one decoration.
AFA1 is an existence statement whereas AFA2 is a strengthening of the Extensionality
axiom of set theory. For example, taking the graph G0 to consist of a single node x0 and
one edge x0 →x0, AFA1 ensures that this graph has a decoration d0(x) = {d0(y) :
x →y} = {d0(x)}, giving rise to a set b such that b = {b}. However, if there is
another set c satisfying c = {c}, the Extensionality axiom does not force b to be equal
to c, while AFA2 yields b = c. Thus, by AFA there is exactly one set  such that
 = {}.
Another example which demonstrates the extensionalizing effect of AFA2 is pro-
vided by the graph G∞which consists of the inﬁnitely many nodes xi and the edges
xi →xi+1 for each i∈ω. According to AFA1, G∞has a decoration. As d∞(xi) = 
deﬁnes such a decoration, AFA2 entails that this is the only one, whereby the different
graphs G0 and G∞give rise to the same non-well-founded set.
The most important applications of AFA arise in connection with solving systems
of equations of sets. In a nutshell, this is demonstrated by the following example. Let
p and q be arbitrary ﬁxed sets. Suppose we need sets x, y, z such that
x = {x, y}
y = {p, q, y, z}
z = {p, x, y}.
(1)
Here p and q are best viewed as atoms while x, y, z are the indeterminates of the
system. AFA ensures that the system (1) has a unique solution. There is a powerful
technique that can be used to show that systems of equations of a certain type have
always unique solutions. In the terminology of [5] this is called the solution lemma.
We shall prove it in the sections on applications of AFA.
3. AFA in Constructive Set Theory
In this section I will present some results about the proof-theoretic strength of systems
of constructive set theory with AFA instead of ∈-Induction.
3.1. Constructive Set Theory
Constructive set theory grew out of Myhill’s [23] endeavours to discover a simple
formalism that relates to Bishop’s constructive mathematics as ZFC relates to classical
Cantorian mathematics. Later on Aczel modiﬁed Myhill’s set theory to a system
which he called Constructive Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, CZF, and corroborated its

196
M. Rathjen
constructiveness by interpreting it in Martin-Löf type theory (MLTT), cf. [1]. The
interpretation was in many ways canonical and can be seen as providing CZF with a
standard model in type theory.
Let CZF−be CZF without ∈-induction and let CZFA be CZF−plus AFA. I.
Lindström [21] showed that CZFA can be interpreted in MLTT as well. Among other
sources, the work of [21] will be utilized in calibrating the exact strength of various
extensions of CZFA, in particular ones with inaccessible set axioms. The upshot is that
AFA does not yield any extra proof-theoretic strength on the basis of constructive set
theory and is indeed much weaker in proof strength than ∈-Induction. This contrasts
with Kripke–Platek set theory, KP. The theory KPA, which adopts AFA in place of the
Foundation Axiom scheme, is proof-theoretically considerably stronger than KP as
was shown in [26]. On the other hand, while being weaker in proof-theoretic strength,
CZFA seems to be “mathematically” stronger than KPA in that most applications that
AFA has found can be easily formalized in CZFA whereas there are serious difﬁculties
with doing this in KPA. For instance, the proof from AFA that the collection of streams
over a given set A exists and forms a set, seems to require the exponentiation axiom,
a tool which is clearly not available in KPA.
3.2. The Theory CZFA
The language of CZF is the ﬁrst order language of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory, LST,
with the non logical primitive symbol ∈. We assume that LST has also a constant, ω,
for the set of the natural numbers.
Deﬁnition 3.1 (Axioms of CZF). CZF is based on intuitionistic predicate logic with
equality. The set theoretic axioms of CZF are the following:
1. Extensionality. ∀a ∀b (∀y (y ∈a ↔y ∈b) →a = b).
2. Pair. ∀a ∀b ∃x ∀y (y ∈x ↔y = a ∨y = b).
3. Union. ∀a ∃x ∀y (y ∈x ↔∃z∈a y ∈z).
4. 0-Separation scheme. ∀a ∃x ∀y (y ∈x ↔y ∈a ∧ϕ(y)),
for every bounded formula ϕ(y), where a formula ϕ(x) is bounded, or 0, if
all the quantiﬁers occurring in it are bounded, i.e., of the form ∀x∈b or ∃x∈b.
5. Subset Collection scheme.
∀a ∀b ∃c ∀u

∀x∈a ∃y∈b ϕ(x, y, u) →
∃d∈c (∀x∈a ∃y∈d ϕ(x, y, u) ∧∀y∈d ∃x∈a ϕ(x, y, u))

for every formula ϕ(x, y, u).

Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
197
6. Strong Collection scheme.
∀a

∀x∈a ∃y ϕ(x, y) →
∃b (∀x∈a ∃y∈b ϕ(x, y) ∧∀y∈b ∃x∈a ϕ(x, y))

for every formula ϕ(x, y).
7. Inﬁnity.
(ω1)
0∈ω ∧∀y (y∈ω →y + 1∈ω)
(ω2) ∀x (0∈x ∧∀y (y∈x →y + 1∈x) →ω⊆x),
where y + 1 is y ∪{y}, and 0 is the empty set, deﬁned in the obvious way.
8. ∈-Induction scheme.
(IND∈)
∀a (∀x∈a ϕ(x) →ϕ(a)) →∀a ϕ(a),
for every formula ϕ(a).
Deﬁnition 3.2. Let CZF−be the system CZF without the ∈- Induction scheme.
Remark 3.3. CZF−is strong enough to show the existence of any primitive recursive
function on ω and therefore Heyting arithmetic can be interpreted in CZF−in the
obvious way. By way of example, let’s verify this for addition: As a consequence
of Subset Collection one obtains that for arbitrary sets a, b, the class of all functions
from a to b, ab, is a set. Using Strong Collection, { nω : n∈ω} is a set, and thus
Fin := 
n∈ω
nω is a set, too. Employing the axiom (ω2) one shows that
∀⟨n, m⟩∈ω × ω ∃!f ∈Fin θ(n, m, f ),
where θ(n, m, f ) stands for the formula
dom(f ) = m + 1 ∧f (0) = n ∧(∀i∈m)f (i + 1) = f (i) + 1.
Using Strong Collection, there exists a set A such that
∀⟨n, m⟩∈ω × ω ∃f ∈A θ(n, m, f ) ∧∀f ∈A ∃⟨n, m⟩∈ω × ω θ(n, m, f ).
Now deﬁne h : ω × ω →ω by letting h(n, m) = k if and only if
∃f ∈A

θ(n, m, f ) ∧f (m) = k

.
It is easy to show that h satisﬁes the recursion equations
h(n, 0) = n ∧h(n, m + 1) = h(n, m) + 1.
Deﬁnition 3.4. Unfortunately, CZF−has certain defects from a mathematical point
of view in that this theory appears to be too limited for proving the existence of the

198
M. Rathjen
transitive closure of an arbitrary set. To remedy this we shall consider an axiom,
TRANS, which ensures that every set is contained in a transitive set:
TRANS
∀x ∃y

x ⊆y ∧(∀u∈y) (∀v∈u) v∈y

.
Let CZFA be the theory CZF−+ TRANS + AFA.
Lemma 3.5. Let TC(x) stand for the smallest transitive set that contains all elements
of x. CZF−+ TRANS proves the existence of TC(x) for any set x.
Proof. We shall use a consequence of Subset Collection called Exponentiation which
asserts that for arbitrary sets a, b, the class of all functions from a to b, ab, is a set.
Let x be an arbitrary set. By TRANS there exists a transitive set A such that x ⊆A.
For n∈ω let
Bn = {f ∈n+1A : f (0) ∈x ∧(∀i∈n) f (i + 1) ∈f (i)},
TCn(x) =

{ran(f ) : f ∈Bn},
where ran(f ) denotes the range of a function f . Bn is a set owing to Exponentiation
and 0 Separation. TCn(x) is a set by Union. Furthermore, C = 
n∈ω TCn(x) is a
set by Strong Collection and Union. Then x = TC0(x) ⊆C. Let y be a transitive set
such that x ⊆y. By induction on n one easily veriﬁes that TCn(x) ⊆y, and hence
C ⊆y. Moreover, C is transitive. Thus C is the smallest transitive set which contains
all elements of x.
Deﬁnition 3.6. A mathematically very useful axiom to have in set theory is the De-
pendent Choices Axiom, DC, i.e., for all formulae ψ, whenever
(∀x∈a) (∃y∈a) ψ(x, y)
and b0∈a, then there exists a function f : ω →a such that f (0) = b0 and
(∀n∈ω) ψ(f (n), f (n + 1)).
For a function f let dom(f ) denote the domain of f . Even more useful in constructive
set theory is the Relativized Dependent Choices Axiom, RDC.1 It asserts that for
arbitrary formulae φ and ψ, whenever
∀x

φ(x) →∃y

φ(y) ∧ψ(x, y)

and φ(b0), then there exists a function f with dom(f ) = ω such that f (0) = b0 and
(∀n∈ω)

φ(f (n)) ∧ψ(f (n), f (n + 1))

.
A restricted form of RDC where φ and ψ are required to be 0 formulas will be called
0-RDC.
1In [2], RDC is called the dependent choices axiom and DC is dubbed the axiom of limited dependent
choices. We deviate from the notation in [2] as it deviates from the usage in classical set theory texts.

Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
199
The defect of CZF−concerning the lack of enough transitive sets can also be
remedied by adding 0-RDC to CZF−. It is perhaps worth noting that 0-RDC
implies DC on the basis of CZF−.
Lemma 3.7. CZF−+ 0-RDC ⊢DC.
Proof. See [27]: Lemma 3.4.
The existence of the transitive closure of any set can also be obtained by slightly
strengthening induction on ω to
1-INDω φ(0) ∧(∀n∈ω)(φ(n) →φ(n + 1)) →(∀n∈ω)φ(n)
for all 1 formulae φ. It is worth noting that 1-INDω actually implies
-INDω θ(0) ∧(∀n∈ω)(θ(n) →θ(n + 1)) →(∀n∈ω)θ(n)
for all  formulae θ, where the  formulae are the smallest collection of formulae
comprising the 0 formulae which is closed under ∧, ∨, bounded quantiﬁcation, and
(unbounded) existential quantiﬁcation. This is due to the fact that every  formula is
equivalent to a 1 formula provably in CZF−. The latter principle is sometimes called
the  Reﬂection Principle and can be proved as in Kripke–Platek set theory (one easily
veriﬁes that the proof of ([4]: I.4.3) also works in CZF−). -INDω enables one to
introduce functions by  recursion on ω ([4]: I.6) as well as the transitive closure of
an arbitrary set (on the basis of CZF−). It is worth noting that -INDω is actually a
consequence of 0-RDC.
Lemma 3.8. CZF−+ 0-RDC ⊢-INDω.
Proof. Suppose θ(0) ∧(∀n∈ω)(θ(n) →θ(n + 1)), where θ(n) is of the form
∃xφ(n, x) with φ 0. We wish to prove (∀n∈ω)θ(n).
If z is an ordered pair ⟨x, y⟩let 1st(z) denote x and 2nd(z) denote y. Since θ(0)
there exists a set x0 such that φ(0, x0). Put a0 = ⟨0, x0⟩.
From (∀n∈ω)(θ(n) →θ(n + 1)) we can conclude
(∀n∈ω)∀y [φ(n, y) →∃w φ(n + 1, w) ]
and thus
∀z

ψ(z) →∃v ( ψ(v) ∧χ(z, v) )

,
where ψ(z) stands for z is an ordered pair ∧1st(z) ∈ω ∧φ(1st(z), 2nd(z)) and
χ(z, v) stands for 1st(v) = 1st(z)+1. Note that ψ and χ are 0. We also have ψ(a0).
Thus by 0-RDC there exists a function f : ω →V such that f (0) = a0 and
(∀n∈ω)

ψ(f (n)) ∧χ(f (n), f (n + 1))

.
From χ(f (n), f (n + 1)), using induction on ω, one easily deduces that 1st(f (n))
= n for all n∈ω. Hence from (∀n∈ω) ψ(f (n)) we get (∀n∈ω) ∃x φ(n, x) and so
(∀n∈ω) θ(n).

200
M. Rathjen
We shall consider also the full scheme of induction on ω,
INDω ψ(0) ∧(∀n∈ω)(ψ(n) →ψ(n + 1)) →(∀n∈ω)ψ(n)
for all formulae ψ.
Lemma 3.9. CZF−+ RDC ⊢INDω.
Proof. Suppose θ(0)∧(∀n∈ω)(θ(n) →θ(n + 1)). We wish to prove (∀n∈ω)θ(n).
Let φ(x) and ψ(x, y) be the formulas x∈ω ∧θ(x) and y = x +1, respectively. Then
∀x [φ(x) →∃y (φ(y) ∧ψ(x, y))] and φ(0). Hence, by RDC, there exists a function
f with domain ω such that f (0) = 0 and ∀n∈ω [φ(f (n)) ∧ψ(f (n), f (n+1))]. Let
a = {n∈ω : f (n) = n}. Using the induction principle (ω2) one easily veriﬁes ω ⊆a,
and hence f (n) = n for all n∈ω. Hence, φ(n) for all n∈ω, and thus (∀n∈ω)θ(n).
4. Predicativism
Weyl rejected the platonist philosophy of mathematics as manifested in impredicative
existence principles of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory. In his book Das Kontinuum,
he initiated a predicative approach to the real numbers and gave a viable account
of a substantial chunk of analysis. What are the ideas and principles upon which
his “predicative view” is supposed to be based? A central tenet is that there is a
fundamental difference between our understanding of the concept of natural numbers
and our understanding of the set concept. Like the French predicativists, Weyl accepts
the completed inﬁnite system of natural numbers as a point of departure. He also
accepts classical logic but just works with sets that are of level one in Russell’s ramiﬁed
hierarchy, in other words only with the principle of arithmetical deﬁnitions.
Logicians such asWang, Lorenzen, Schütte, and Feferman then proposed a founda-
tion of mathematics using layered formalisms based on the idea of predicativity which
ventured into higher levels of the ramiﬁed hierarchy. The idea of an autonomous pro-
gression of theories RA0, RA1, . . . , RAα, . . . was ﬁrst presented in Kreisel’s [18] and
than taken up by Feferman and Schütte to determine the limits of predicativity. The
notion of autonomy therein is based on introspection and should perhaps be viewed
as a ‘boot-strap’ condition. One takes the structure of natural numbers as one’s point
of departure and then explores through a process of active reﬂection what is implicit
in accepting this structure, thereby developing a growing body of ever higher layers
of the ramiﬁed hierarchy. Feferman and Schütte [30, 31, 11, 12] showed that the or-
dinal 0 is the ﬁrst ordinal whose well-foundedness cannot be proved in autonomous
progressions of theories. It was also argued by Feferman that the whole sequence of
autonomous progressions of theories is coextensive with predicativity, and on these
grounds 0 is often referred to as the proper limit of all predicatively provable ordi-
nals. In this paper I shall only employ the “lower bound” part of this analysis, i.e., that

Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
201
every ordinal less than 0 is a predicatively provable ordinal. In consequence, every
theory with proof-theoretic ordinal less than 0 has a predicative consistency proof
and is moreover conservative over a theory RAα for arithmetical statements for some
α < 0. As a shorthand for the above I shall say that a theory is predicatively justi-
ﬁable. The remainder of this section lists results showing that CZFA and its variants
are indeed predicatively justiﬁable.
As a scale for measuring the proof-theoretic strength of theories one uses tradi-
tionally certain subsystems of second order arithmetic, see [14, 33]. Relevant to the
present context are systems based on the 1
1 axiom of choice and the 1
1 axiom of
dependent choices. The theory 1
1-AC is a subsystem of second order arithmetic with
the 1
1 axiom of choice and induction over the natural numbers for all formulas while
1
1-DC0 is a subsystem of second order arithmetic with the 1
1 axiom of dependent
choices and induction over the natural numbers restricted to formulas without second
order quantiﬁers (for precise deﬁnitions see [14, 33]). The proof theoretic ordinal of
1
1-AC is ϕε00 while 1
1-DC0 has the smaller proof-theoretic ordinal ϕω0 as was
shown by Cantini [7]. Here ϕ denotes the Veblen function, see [32].
Theorem 4.1.
(i) The theories CZF−+ 1-INDω, CZFA + 1INDω + 0-RDC,
CZFA+1-INDω+DC, and 1
1-DC0 are proof-theoretically equivalent. Their
proof-theoretic ordinal is ϕω0.
(ii) The theories CZF−+ INDω, CZFA + INDω + RDC, 
ID1, and 1
1-AC are
proof-theoretically equivalent. Their proof-theoretic ordinal is ϕε00.
(iii) CZFA has at least proof-theoretic strength of Peano arithmetic and so its proof-
theoretic ordinal is at least ε0. An upper bound for the proof-theoretic ordinal
of CZFA is ϕ20. In consequence, CZFA is proof-theoretically weaker than
CZFA + 0-RDC.
(iv) All the foregoing theories are predicatively justiﬁable.
Proof. (ii) follows from [27]: Theorem 3.15.
As to (i) it is important to notice that the scheme dubbed 0-RDC in [27] is not the
same as 0-RDC in the present paper. In [27], 0-RDC asserts for 0 formulas φ and
ψ that whenever (∀x∈a)

φ(x) →(∃y∈a)

φ(y) ∧ψ(x, y)

and b0∈a ∧φ(b0),
then there exists a function f : ω →a such that f (0) = b0 and (∀n∈ω)

φ(f (n)) ∧
ψ(f (n), f (n+1))

. The latter principle is weaker than our 0-RDC as all quantiﬁers
have to be restricted to a given set a. However, the realizability interpretation of
constructive set theory in PAr
 + -IND employed in the proof of ([27]: Theorem
3.15 (i)) also validates the stronger 0-RDC of the present paper (the system PAr

stems from [17]).
Theorem 3.15 (i) of [27] and Lemma 3.8 also imply that CZF−+ 0-RDC is not
weaker than CZF−+ 1-INDω. Thus proof-theoretic equivalence of all systems in
(i) ensues.

202
M. Rathjen
(iii) is a consequence of remark 3.3. At present the exact proof-theoretic strength of
CZFA is not known, however, it can be shown that the proof-theoretic ordinal of CZFA
isnotbiggerthanϕ20. Thelatterboundcanbeobtainedbyinspectingtheinterpretation
of CZFA in PAr
 + -IND employed in the proof of [27]: Theorem 3.15. A careful
inspection reveals that a subtheory T of PAr
 +-IND sufﬁces. To be more precise,
T can be taken to be the theory
PAr
 + ∀α ∃λ [α < λ ∧λ is a limit ordinal].
Using cut elimination techniques and asymmetric interpretation, T can be partially
interpreted in RA<ω2. The latter theory is known to have proof-theoretic ordinal ϕ20.
(iv) The above ordinals are less than 0.
Remark 4.2. Constructive set theory with AFA has an interpretation in Martin-Löf
type theory as has been shown by I. Lindström [21]. Martin-Löf type theory is consid-
ered to be the most acceptable foundational framework of ideas that makes precise the
constructive approach to mathematics. The interpretation of CZFA in Martin-Löf type
theory demonstrates that there is a constructive notion of set that lends constructive
meaning to AFA. However, Martin-Löf type theory is not a predicative theory in the
sense of Feferman and Schütte as it possesses a proof-theoretic ordinal bigger than
0. The work in [27] shows that CZFA and its variants can also be reduced to theories
which are predicative in the stricter sense of autonomous progressions.
5. On Using the Anti-Foundation Axiom
In this section I rummage through several applications of AFA made in [3] and [5]. In
order to corroborate my claim that most applications of AFA require only constructive
means, various sections of [3] and [5] are recast on the basis of the theory CZFA rather
than ZFA.
5.1. The Labelled Anti-Foundation Axiom
In applications it is often useful to have a more general form of AFA at one’s disposal.
Deﬁnition 5.1. A labelled graph is a graph together with a labelling function ℓwhich
assigns a set ℓ(a) of labels to each node a.
A labelled decoration of a labelled graph is a function d such that
d(a) = {d(b) : a →b} ∪ℓ(a).
An unlabelled graph (G, ↠) may be identiﬁed with the special labelled graph where
the labelling function ℓ: G →V always assigns the empty set, i.e., ℓ(x) = ∅for all
x ∈G.

Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
203
Theorem 5.2 ((CZFA), cf. [3]: Theorem 1.9). Each labelled graph has a unique la-
belled decoration.
Proof. Let G = (G, ↠, ℓ) be a labelled graph. Let G′ = (G′, →) be the graph
having as nodes all the ordered pairs ⟨i, a⟩such that either i = 1 and a∈G or i = 2
and a ∈TC(G) and having as edges:
• ⟨1, a⟩→⟨1, b⟩whenever a ↠b,
• ⟨1, a⟩→⟨2, b⟩whenever a∈G and b∈ℓ(a),
• ⟨2, a⟩→⟨2, b⟩whenever b∈a ∈TC(G).
By AFA, G′ has a unique decoration π. So for each a∈G
π(⟨1, a⟩) = {π(⟨1, b⟩) : a ↠b} ∪{π(⟨2, b⟩) : b∈ℓ(a)}
and for each a ∈TC(G),
π(⟨2, a⟩) = {π(⟨2, b⟩) : b∈a}.
Note that the set TC(G) is naturally equipped with a graph structure by letting its edges
x ⊸y be deﬁned by y∈x. The unique decoration for (TC(G), ⊸) is obviously the
identity function on TC(G). As x →π(⟨2, x⟩) is also a decoration of (TC(G), ⊸)
we can conclude that π(⟨2, x⟩) = x holds for all x ∈TC(G). Hence if we let
τ(a) = π(⟨1, a⟩) for a∈G then, for a∈G,
τ(a) = {τ(b) : a ↠b} ∪ℓ(a),
so that τ is a labelled decoration of the labelled graph G.
For the uniqueness of τ suppose that τ ′ is a labelled decoration of G. Then π′ is
a decoration of the graph G′, where
π′(⟨1, a⟩) = τ ′(a) for a∈G,
π′(⟨2, a⟩) = a for a ∈TC(G).
It follows from AFA that π′ = π so that for a∈G
τ ′(a) = π′(⟨1, a⟩) = π(⟨1, a⟩) = τ(a),
and hence τ ′ = τ.
Deﬁnition 5.3. A relation R is a bisimulation between two labelled graphs G =
(G, ↠, ℓ0) and H = (H, ↣, ℓ1) if R ⊆G × H and the following conditions are
satisﬁed (where aRb stands for ⟨a, b⟩∈R):
1. For every a ∈G there is a b ∈H such that aRb.
2. For every b ∈H there is a a ∈G such that aRb.

204
M. Rathjen
3. Suppose that aRb. Then for every x ∈G such that a ↠x there is a y ∈H
such that b ↣y and xRy.
4. Suppose that aRb. Then for every y ∈H such that b ↣y there is an x ∈G
such that a ↠x and xRy.
5. If aRb then ℓ0(a) = ℓ1(b).
Two labelled graphs are bisimular if there exists a bisimulation between them.
Theorem 5.4 (CZFA). Let G = (G, ↠, ℓ0) and H = (H, ↣, ℓ1) be labelled graphs
with labelled decorations d0 and d1, respectively.
If G and H are bisimular then d0[G] = d1[H].
Proof. Deﬁne a labelled graph K = (K, →, ℓ) by letting K be the set {⟨a, b⟩: aRb}.
For ⟨a, b⟩, ⟨a′, b′⟩∈K let ⟨a, b⟩→⟨a′, b′⟩iff a ↠a′ or b ↣b′, and put ℓ(⟨a, b⟩) =
ℓ0(a) = ℓ1(b). K has a unique labelled decoration d. Using a bisimulation R,
one easily veriﬁes that d∗
0(⟨a, b⟩) := d0(a) and d∗
1(⟨a, b⟩) := d1(b) are labelled
decorations of K as well. Hence d = d∗
0 = d∗
1, and thus d0[G] = d[K] = d1[H].
Corollary 5.5 (CZFA). Two graphs are bisimular if and only if their decorations have
the same image.
Proof. One direction follows from the previous theorem.
Now suppose we have
graphs G = (G, ↠) and H = (H, ↣) with decorations d0 and d1, respectively, such
that d0[G] = d1[H]. Then deﬁne R ⊆G×H by aRb iff d0(a) = d1(b). One readily
veriﬁes that R is a bisimulation.
Here is another useful fact:
Lemma 5.6 (CZFA). If A is transitive set and d : A →V is a function such that
d(a) = {d(x) : x ∈a} for all a ∈A, then d(a) = a for all a ∈A.
Proof. A can be considered the set of nodes of the graph GA = (A, ↣) where a ↣b
iff b ∈a and a, b ∈A. Since A is transitive, d is a decoration of G. But so is the
function a →a. Thus we get d(a) = a.
5.2. Systems
In applications it is often useful to avail oneself of graphs that are classes rather than
sets. By a map ℘with domain M we mean a deﬁnable class function with domain M,
and we will write ℘: M →V .

Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
205
Deﬁnition 5.7. A labelled system is a class M of nodes together with a labelling map
℘: M →V and a class E of edges consisting of ordered pairs of nodes. Furthermore,
a system is required to satisfy that for each node a ∈M, {b ∈M : a ↣b} is a set,
where a ↣b stands for ⟨a, b⟩∈E.
The labelled system is said to be 0 if the relation between sets x and y deﬁned
by “y = {b ∈M : a ↣b for some a ∈x}” is 0 deﬁnable.
We will abbreviate the labelled system by M = (M, ↣, ℘).
Theorem 5.8 ((CZFA + INDω), cf. [3]: Theorem 1.10). For every labelled system
M = (M, ↣, ℘) there exists a unique map d : M →V such that, for all a ∈M:
d(a) = {d(b) : a →b} ∪ℓ(a).
(2)
Proof. To each a ∈M we may associate a labelled graph Ma = (Ma, a↣, ℘a) with
Ma = 
n∈ω Xn, where X0 = {a} and Xn+1 = {b : a ↣b for some a ∈Xn}. The
existence of the function n →Xn is shown via recursion on ω, utilizing INDω in
combination with Strong Collection. The latter is needed to show that for every set Y,
{b : a ↣b for some a ∈Y}isasetaswell. AndconsequentlytothatMa isaset.
a↣
is the restriction of ↣to nodes from Ma. That Ea = {⟨x, y⟩∈Ma × Ma : x ↣y}
is a set requires Strong Collection, too. Further, let ℘a be the restriction of ℘to Ma.
Hence Ma is a set and we may apply Theorem 5.2 to conclude that Ma has a unique
labelled decoration da. d : M →V is now obtained by patching together the function
da with a ∈M, that is d = 
a∈V da. One easily shows that two function da and db
agree on Ma ∩Mb. For the uniqueness of d, notice that every other deﬁnable map d′
satisfying (2) yields a function when restricted to Ma (Strong Collection) and thereby
yields also a labelled decoration of Ma; thus d′(x) = ℘a(x) = d(x) for all x ∈Ma.
And consequently to that, d′(x) = d(x) for all x ∈M.
Corollary 5.9 (CZFA + -INDω). For every labelled system M = (M, ↣, ℘) that
is 0 there exists a unique map d : M →V such that, for all a ∈M:
d(a) = {d(b) : a →b} ∪ℓ(a).
(3)
Proof. This follows by scrutinizing the proof of Theorem 5.8 and realizing that for a
0 system one only needs -INDω.
Corollary 5.10 (CZFA). Let M = (M, ↣, ℘) be a labelled 0 system such that for
each a ∈M there is a function n →Xn with domain ω such that X0 = {a} and
Xn+1 = {b : a ↣b for some a ∈Xn}. Then there exists a unique map d : M →V
such that, for all a ∈M:
d(a) = {d(b) : a →b} ∪ℓ(a).
(4)
Proof. In the proof of Theorem 5.8 we employed INDω only once to ensure that
Ma = 
n∈ω Xn is a set. This we get now for free from the assumptions.

206
M. Rathjen
Theorem 5.11 ((CZFA + INDω), cf. [3]: Theorem 1.11). Let M = (M, ↠, ℘) be a
labelled system whose sets of labels are subsets of the class Y.
1. If π is a map with domain Y then there is a unique function ˆπ with domain M
such that for each a∈M
ˆπ(a) = { ˆπ(b) : a ↠b} ∪{π(x) : x ∈℘(a)}.
2. Given a map ¯h : Y →M, there is a unique map π with domain Y such that for
all y∈Y,
π(y) = ˆπ(¯h(y)).
Proof. For (1) let Mπ = (M, ↠, ℘π) be obtained from M and π : Y →V by
redeﬁning the sets of labels so that for each node a
℘π(a) = {π(x) : x ∈℘(a)}.
Then the required unique map ˆπ is the unique labelled decoration of Mπ provided by
Theorem 5.8
For (2) let M∗= (M, ↣) be the graph having the same nodes as M, and all edges
of M together with the edges a ↣¯h(y) whenever a∈M and y ∈℘(a). By Theorem
5.8, M∗has a unique decoration map ρ. So for each a∈M
ρ(a) = {ρ(b) : a ↠b} ∪{ρ(¯h(y)) : y ∈℘(a)}.
Letting π(y) := ρ(¯h(y)) for y∈Y, ρ is also a labelled decoration for the labelled
system Mπ so that ρ = ˆπ by (1), and hence π(x) = ˆπ(¯h(x)) for x∈Y. For the
uniqueness of π let µ : M →V satisfy µ(x) = ˆµ(¯h(x)) for x∈Y. Then ˆµ is a
decoration of M∗as well, so that ˆµ = ρ. As a result µ(x) = ˆµ(¯h(x)) = ρ(¯h(x)) =
π(x) for x∈Y. Thus µ(x) = π(x) for all x ∈Y.
Corollary 5.12 (CZFA + -INDω). Let M = (M, ↠, ℘) be a labelled system that
is 0 and whose sets of labels are subsets of the class Y.
1. If π is a map with domain Y then there is a unique function ˆπ with domain M
such that for each a∈M
ˆπ(a) = { ˆπ(b) : a ↠b} ∪{π(x) : x ∈℘(a)}.
2. Given a map ¯h : Y →M there is a unique map π with domain Y such that for
all x∈Y,
π(x) = ˆπ(¯h(x)).
Proof. The proof is the same as forTheorem 5.11, except that one utilizes Corollary 5.9
in place of Theorem 5.8.

Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
207
Corollary 5.13 (CZFA). Let M = (M, ↠, ℘) be a labelled system that is 0 and
whose sets of labels are subsets of the class Y. Moreover suppose that for each a ∈M
there is a function n →Xn with domain ω such that X0 = {a} and Xn+1 = {b : a ↣
b for some a ∈Xn}.
1. If π is a map with domain Y then there is a unique function ˆπ with domain M
such that for each a∈M
ˆπ(a) = { ˆπ(b) : a ↠b} ∪{π(x) : x ∈℘(a)}.
2. Given a map ¯h : Y →M there is a unique map π with domain Y such that for
all x∈Y,
π(x) = ˆπ(¯h(x)).
Proof. The proof is the same as for Theorem 5.11, except that one utilizes Corol-
lary 5.10 in place of Theorem 5.8.
5.3. A Solution Lemma Version of AFA
AFA can be couched in more traditional mathematical terms. The labelled Anti-
Foundation Axiom provides a nice tool for showing that systems of equations of a
certain type have always unique solutions. In the terminology of [5] this is called
the solution lemma. In [5], the Anti-Foundation Axiom is even expressed in terms of
unique solutions to so-called ﬂat systems of equations.
Deﬁnition 5.14. For a set Y let P(Y) be the class of subsets of Y. A triple E =
(X, A, e) is said to be a general ﬂat system of equations if X and A are any two
sets, and e : X →P (X ∪A), where the latter conveys that e is a function with
domain X which maps into the class of all subsets of X ∪A. X will be called the
set of indeterminates of E, and A is called the set of atoms of E. Let ev = e(v).
For each v ∈X, the set bv := ev ∩X is called the set of indeterminates on which v
immediately depends. Similarly, the set cv := ev ∩A is called the set of atoms on
which v immediately depends.
A solution to E is a function s with domain X satisfying
sx = {sy : y∈bx} ∪cx,
for each x∈X, where sx := s(x).
Theorem 5.15 (CZFA). Every generalized ﬂat system E = (X, A, e) has a unique
solution.
Proof. Deﬁne a labelled graph H by letting X be its set of nodes and its edges be of
the form x ↠y, where y∈bx for x, y∈X. Moreover, let ℓ(x) = cx be the pertinent

208
M. Rathjen
labelling function. By Theorem 5.2, H has a unique labelled decoration d. Then
d(x) = {d(y) : y∈bx} ∪ℓ(x) = {d(y) : y∈bx} ∪cx,
and thus d is a solution to E. One easily veriﬁes that every solution s to E gives rise
to a decoration of H. Thus there exists exactly one solution to E.
Because of the ﬂatness condition, i.e., e : X →P (X ∪A), the above form of the
Solution Lemma is often awkward to use. A much more general form of it is proved
in [5]. The framework in [5], however, includes other objects than sets, namely
a proper class of urelements, whose raison d’etre is to serve as an endless supply
of indeterminates on which one can perform the operation of substitution. Given
a set X of urelements one deﬁnes the class of X-sets which are those sets that use
only urelements from X in their build-up. For a function f : X →V on these
indeterminates one can then deﬁne a substitution operation subf on the X-sets. For
an X-set a, subf (a) is obtained from a by substituting f (x) for x everywhere in the
build-up of a.
For want of urelements, the approach of [5] is not directly applicable in our set
theories, though it is possible to model an extended universe of sets with a proper
class of urelements within CZFA. This will require a class deﬁned as the greatest
ﬁxed point of an operator, a topic I shall intersperse now.
5.4. Greatest Fixed Points of Operators
The theory of greatest greatest ﬁxed points was initiated by Aczel in [3].
Deﬁnition 5.16. Let  be a class operator, i.e. (X) is a class for each class X. 
is set continuous if for each class X
(X) =

{(x) : x is a set with x ⊆X}.
(5)
Note that a set continuous operator is monotone, i.e., if X ⊆Y then (X) ⊆(Y).
In what follows, I shall convey that x is a set by x∈V . If  is a set continuous
operator let
J =

{x∈V : x ⊆(x)}.
A set continuous operator  is 0 if the relation “y ∈(x)” between sets x and y is
0 deﬁnable. Notice that J is a 1 class if  is a 0 operator.
Theorem 5.17 ((CZF−+ RDC), cf. [3]: Theorem 6.5). If  is a set continuous op-
erator and J = J then
1. J ⊆(J),
2. If X ⊆(X) then X ⊆J,

Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
209
3. J is the largest ﬁxed point of .
Proof. (1): Let a∈J. Then a∈x for some set x such that x ⊆(x). It follows that
a ∈(J) as x ⊆J and  is monotone.
(2): Let X ⊆(X) and let a∈X. We like to show that a∈J. We ﬁrst show that
for each set x ⊆X there is a set cx ⊆X such that x ⊆(cx). So let x ⊆X. Then
x ⊆(X) yielding
∀y∈x ∃u [y∈(u) ∧u ⊆X].
By Strong Collection there is a set A such that
∀y∈x ∃u∈A [y∈(u) ∧u ⊆X] ∧∀u∈A ∃y∈x [y∈(u) ∧u ⊆X].
Letting cx =  A, we get cx ⊆X ∧x ⊆(cx) as required.
Next we use RDC to ﬁnd an inﬁnite sequence x0, x1, . . . of subsets of X such that
x0 = {a} and xn ⊆(xn+1). Let x∗= 
n xn. Then x∗is a set and if y∈x∗then y∈xn
for some n so that y ∈xn ⊆(xn+1) ⊆(x∗). Hence x∗⊆(x∗). As a∈x0 ⊆x∗
it follows that a∈J.
(3): By (1) and the monotonicity of 
(J) ⊆((J)).
Hence by (2) (J) ⊆J. This and (1) imply that J is a ﬁxed point of . By (2) it
must be the greatest ﬁxed point of .
If it exists and is a set, the largest ﬁxed point of an operator  will be called the
set coinductively deﬁned by .
Theorem 5.18 (CZF−+ 0-RDC). If  is a set continuous 0 operator and J = J
then
1. J ⊆(J),
2. If X is a 1 class and X ⊆(X) then X ⊆J,
3. J is the largest 1 ﬁxed point of .
Proof. This is the same proof as for Theorem 5.17, noticing that 0-RDC sufﬁces
here.
In applications, set continuous operators  often satisfy an additional property.
 will be called fathomable if there is a partial class function q such that whenever
a ∈(x) for some set x then q(a) ⊆x and a ∈(q(a)). For example, deterministic
inductive deﬁnitions are given by fathomable operators.
If the graph of q is also 0 deﬁnable we will say that  is a fathomable set
continuous 0 operator.
For fathomable operators one can dispense with RDC and 0-RDC in Theo-
rems 5.17 and 5.18 in favour of INDω and -INDω, respectively.

210
M. Rathjen
Corollary 5.19 (CZF−+ INDω). If  is a set continuous fathomable operator and
J = J then
1. J ⊆(J),
2. If X ⊆(X) then X ⊆J,
3. J is the largest ﬁxed point of .
Proof. In the proof of Theorem 5.17, RDC was used for (2) to show that for every
class X with X ⊆(X) it holds X ⊆J. Now, if a ∈X, then a ∈(u) for
some set u ⊆X, as  is set continuous, and thus a ∈(q(a)) and q(a) ⊆X.
Using INDω and Strong Collection one deﬁnes a sequence x0, x1, . . . by x0 = {a}
and xn+1 = {q(v) : v∈xn}. We use induction on ω to show xn ⊆X. Obviously
x0 ⊆X. Suppose xn ⊆X. Then xn ⊆(X). Thus for every v∈xn, q(v) ⊆X, and
hence xn+1 ⊆X. Let x∗= 
n xn. Then x∗⊆X. Suppose u ∈x∗. Then u ∈xn
for some n, and hence as u ∈(X), u ∈(q(u)). Thus q(u) ⊆xn+1 ⊆x∗, and so
u ∈(x∗). As a result, a ∈x∗⊆(x∗), and hence a ∈J.
Corollary 5.20 (CZF−+ -INDω). If  is a set continuous fathomable 0 operator
and J = J then
1. J ⊆(J),
2. If X is 1 and X ⊆(X) then X ⊆J,
3. J is the largest 1 ﬁxed point of .
Proof. If the graph of q is 0 deﬁnable, -INDω is sufﬁcient to deﬁne the sequence
x0, x1, . . . .
For special operators it is also possible to forgo -INDω in favour of TRANS.
Corollary 5.21 (CZF−+ TRANS). Let  be a set continuous fathomable 0 oper-
ator such that q is a total map and q(a) ⊆TC({a}) for all sets a. Let J = J.
Then
1. J ⊆(J),
2. If X is 0 and X ⊆(X) then X ⊆J,
3. J is the largest 0 ﬁxed point of .
Proof. (1) is proved as in Theorem 5.17. For (2), suppose that X is a class with
X ⊆(X). Let a ∈X. Deﬁne a sequence of sets x0, x1, . . . by x0 = {a} and
xn+1 = {q(v) : v∈xn} as in Corollary 5.19. But without -INDω, how can we
ensure that the function n →xn exists? This can be seen as follows. Deﬁne
Dn = {f ∈n+1TC({a}) : f (0) = a ∧∀i ∈n [f (i + 1) ∈q(f (i))]},
En = {f (n) : f ∈Dn}.

Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
211
The function n →En exists by Strong Collection. Moreover, E0 = {a} and En+1 =
{q(v) : v ∈En} as can be easily shown by induction on n; thus xn = En. The
remainder of the proof is as in Corollary 5.19.
For (3), note that J = {a : a ∈(q(a))} and thus J is 0.
Remark 5.22. It is an open problem whether the above applications of the dependent
choices axiom are necessary for the general theory of greatest ﬁxed points.
5.5. Generalized Systems of Equations in an Expanded Universe
Before we can state the notion of a general systems of equations we will have to
emulate urelements and the sets built out of them in the set theory CZFA with pure
sets. To this end we employ the machinery of greatest ﬁxed points of the previous
subsection. We will take the sets of the form ⟨1, x⟩to be the urelements and call them
∗-urelements. The class of ∗-urelements will be denoted by U. Certain sets built from
them will be called the ∗-sets. If a = ⟨2, u⟩let a∗= u. The elements of a∗will
be called the ∗-elements of a. Let the ∗-sets be the largest class of sets of the form
a = ⟨2, u⟩such that each ∗-element of a is either a ∗-urelement or else a ∗-set. To
bring this under the heading of the previous subsection, deﬁne
∗(X) = {⟨2, u⟩: ∀x∈u

(x∈X ∧x ∈TWO) ∨x is a ∗-urelement

},
where TWO is the class of all ordered pairs of the form ⟨2, v⟩. Obviously, ∗is a
set-continuous operator. That ∗is fathomable can be seen by letting
q(a) = {v ∈a∗: v ∈TWO}.
Notice also that ∗has a 0 deﬁnition.
The ∗-sets are precisely the elements of J∗. Given a class of Z of ∗-urelements
we will also deﬁne the class of Z-sets to be the largest class of ∗-sets such that every
∗-urelement in a Z-set is in Z. We will use the notation V [Z] for the class of Z-sets.
Deﬁnition 5.23. A general system of equations is a pair E = (X, e) consisting of a
set X ⊆U (of indeterminates) and a function
e : X →V [X].
The point of requiring e to take values in V [X] is that thereby e is barred from taking
∗-urelements as values and that all the values of e are sets which use only ∗-urelements
from X in their build-up. In consequence, one can deﬁne a substitution operation on
the values of e.
Theorem 5.24 ((CZFA), Substitution Lemma). Let Y be a 0 class such that Y ⊆U.
For each map ρ : Y →V there exists a unique operation subρ that assigns to each

212
M. Rathjen
a ∈V [Y] a set subρ(a) such that
subρ(a) = {subρ(x) : x ∈a∗∩V [Y]} ∪{ρ(x) : x ∈a∗∩Y}.
(6)
Proof. The class V [Y] forms the nodes of a labelled 0 system M with edges a ↣b
for a, b ∈V [Y] whenever b ∈a∗, and labelling map ℘(a) = a∗∩Y. By Corol-
lary 5.13 there exists a unique map ˆρ : V [Y] →V such that for each a ∈V [Y],
ˆρ(a) = { ˆρ(x) : x ∈a∗∩V [Y]} ∪{ρ(x) : x ∈a∗∩Y}.
(7)
Put subρ(a) := ˆρ(a).
Then subρ satisﬁes (6).
Since the equation (7) uniquely
determines ˆρ it follows that subρ is uniquely determined as well.
Deﬁnition 5.25. Let E be a general system of equations as in Deﬁnition 5.23. A
solution to E is a function s : X →V satisfying, for all x ∈X,
s(x) = sub s( ex),
(8)
where ex := e(x).
Theorem 5.26 ((CZFA), Solution Lemma). Let E be a general system of equations
as in Deﬁnition 5.23. Then E has a unique solution.
Proof. The class V [X] provides the nodes for a labelled 0 system M with edges
b ↣c for b, c ∈V [X] whenever c ∈b∗, and with a labelling map ℘(b) = b∗∩X.
Since e : X →V [X], we may employ Corollary 5.13 (with Y = X). Thus there is a
unique function π and a unique function ˆπ such that
π(x) = ˆπ( ex)
(9)
for all x ∈X, and
ˆπ(a) = { ˆπ(b) : : b ∈a∗} ∪{π(x) : x ∈a∗∩X}.
(10)
In view of Theorem 5.24, we get ˆπ = subπ from (10). Thus letting s := π, (9) then
yields the desired equation s(x) = sub s( ex) for all x ∈X. Further, s is unique
owing to the uniqueness of π in (9).
Remark 5.27. The framework in which AFA is studied in [5] is a set theory with a
proper class of urelements U that also features an axiom of plenitude which is the
conjunction of the following sentences:
∀a∀b new(a, b) ∈U,
∀a∀a′∀b∀b′ 
new(a, b) = new(a′, b′) →a = a′ ∧b = b′
,
∀a∀b

b ⊆U →new(a, b) /∈b

,
where new is a binary function symbol. It is natural to ask whether a version of CZFA
with urelements and an axiom of plenitude would yield any extra strength. That such
a theory is not stronger than CZFA can be easily seen by modelling the urelements and

Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
213
sets of [5] inside CZFA by the ∗-urelements and the ∗-sets, respectively. To interpret
the function symbol new deﬁne
new∗(a, b) := ⟨1, ⟨a, ⟨b, br⟩⟩⟩,
where br = {r ∈TC(b) : r /∈r}. Obviously, new∗(a, b) is a ∗-urelement and new∗
is injective. Moreover, new∗(a, b) ∈b would imply new∗(a, b) ∈TC(b) and thus
br ∈TC(b). The latter yields the contradiction br /∈br ∧br ∈br. As a result,
new∗(a, b) /∈b. Interpreting new by new∗thus validates the axiom of plenitude, too.
5.6. Streams, Coinduction, and Corecursion
In the following I shall demonstrate the important methods of coinduction and core-
cursion in a setting which is not too complicated but still demonstrates the general
case in a nutshell. The presentation closely follows [5].
Let A be some set. By a stream over A we mean an ordered pair s = ⟨a, s′⟩where
a ∈A and s′ is another stream. We think of a stream as being an element of A followed
by another stream. Two important operations performed on streams s are taking the
ﬁrst element 1st(s) which gives an element of A, and taking its second element 2nd(s),
which yields another stream. If we let A∞be the streams over A, then we would like
to have
A∞= A × A∞.
(11)
In set theory with the foundation axiom, equation (11) has only the solution A = ∅.
With AFA, however, not only can one show that (11) has a solution different from ∅but
also that it has a largest solution, the latter being the largest ﬁxed point of the operator
A(Z) = A × Z. This largest solution to A will be taken to be the set of streams
over A and be denoted by A∞, thus rendering A∞a coinductive set. Moreover, it will
be shown that A∞possesses a “recursive” character despite the fact that there is no
“base case”. For instance, it will turn out that one can deﬁne a function
zip : A∞× A∞→A∞
such that for all s, t ∈A∞
zip(s, t) = ⟨1st(s), ⟨1st(t), zip(2nd(s), 2nd(t))⟩⟩.
(12)
As its name suggests, zip acts like a zipper on two streams. The deﬁnition of zip in
(12) is an example for deﬁnition by corecursion over a coinductive set.
Theorem 5.28 (CZFA). For every set A there is a largest set Z such that Z ⊆A×Z.
Moreover, Z satisﬁes Z = A × Z, and if A is inhabited then so is Z.
Proof. Let F be the set of functions from N := ω to A. For each such f , we deﬁne
another function f + : N →N by
f +(n) = f (n + 1).

214
M. Rathjen
For each f ∈F let xf be an indeterminate. We would like to solve the system of
equations given by
xf = ⟨f (0), xf +⟩.
Solving these equations is equivalent to solving the equations
xf = {yf , zf };
yf = {f (0)}
zf = {f (0), xf +},
(13)
where yf and zf are further indeterminates. Note that f (0) is an element of A. To be
precise, let xf = ⟨0, f ⟩, yf = ⟨1, f ⟩, and zf = ⟨2, f ⟩. Solving (13) amounts to the
same as ﬁnding a labelled decoration for the labelled graph
SA = (S, ↠, ℓ)
whose set of nodes is
S = {xf : f ∈F} ∪{yf : f ∈F} ∪{zf : f ∈F}
and whose edges are given by xf ↠yf , xf ↠zf , zf ↠xf +. Moreover, the labelling
function ℓis deﬁned by ℓ(xf ) = ∅, ℓ(yf ) = {f (0)}, ℓ(zf ) = {f (0)} for all f ∈F.
By the labelled Anti-Foundation Axiom, Theorem 5.2, SA has a labelled decoration d
and we thus get
d(xf ) = ⟨f (0), d(xf +)⟩.
(14)
Let A∞= {d(xf ) : f ∈F}. By (14), we have A∞⊆A × A∞. Thus A∞solves the
equation Z ⊆A × Z.
To check that A × A∞⊆A∞holds also, let a ∈A and t ∈A∞. By the deﬁnition
of A∞, t = d(xf ) for some f ∈F. Let g : N →A be deﬁned by g(0) = a
and g(n + 1) = f (n). Then g+ = f , and thus d(xg) = ⟨a, d(xf )⟩= ⟨a, t⟩, so
⟨a, t⟩∈A∞.
If A contains an element a, then fa ∈F, where fa : N →A is deﬁned by
fa(n) = a. Hence d(xfa) ∈A∞, so A∞is inhabited, too.
Finally it remains to show that A∞is the largest set Z satisfying Z ⊆A × Z. So
suppose that W is a set so that W ⊆A × W. Let v ∈W. Deﬁne fv : N →A by
fv(n) = 1st(secn(v)),
wheresec0(v) = v andsecn+1(v) = 2nd(secn(v)). Thenfv ∈F, andsod(xfv) ∈A∞.
We claim that for all v ∈W, d(xfv) = v. Notice ﬁrst that for w = 2nd(v), we have
secn(w) = secn+1(v) for all n ∈N, and thus fw = (fv)+. It follows that
d(xfv) = ⟨1st(v), d(x(fv)+)⟩
= ⟨1st(v), d(xfw)⟩
= ⟨1st(v), d(xf2nd(v))⟩.
(15)

Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
215
W gives rise to a labelled subgraph T of S whose set of nodes is
T := {xfv : v ∈W} ∪{yfv : v ∈W} ∪{zfv : v ∈W},
and wherein the edges and the labelling function are obtained from S by restriction to
nodes from T . The function d′ with d′(xfv) = v, d′(yfv) = {1st(v)}, and d′(zfv) =
{1st(v), 2nd(v)} is obviously a labelled decoration of T. By (15), d restricted to T is
a labelled decoration of T as well. So by Theorem 5.2, v = d′(xfv) = d(xfv) for all
v ∈W, and thus W ⊆A∞.
Remark 5.29. Rather than applying the labelled Anti-Foundation Axiom one can
utilize the solution lemma for general systems of equations (Theorem 5.26) in the
above proof of Theorem 5.28. To this end let B = TC(A), xf = ⟨1, ⟨0, f ⟩⟩for f ∈F
and xb = ⟨1, ⟨1, b⟩⟩for b ∈B. Set X := {xf : f ∈F} ∪{xb : b ∈B}. Then
X ⊆U and {xf : f ∈F} ∩{xb : b ∈B} = ∅.
Next deﬁne the unordered ∗-pair by {c, d}∗= ⟨2, {c, d}⟩and the ordered ∗-pair by
⟨c, d⟩∗= {{c}∗, {c, d}∗}∗. Note that with c, d ∈V [X] one also has {c, d}∗, ⟨c, d⟩∗∈
V [X].
Let E = (X, e) be the general system of equations with e(xf ) = ⟨xf (0), xf +⟩∗
for f ∈F and e(xb) = ⟨2, {xu u ∈b}⟩for b ∈B. Then e : X →V [X]. By
Theorem 5.26 there is a unique function s : X →V such that
s(xb) = subs(e(xb)) = {s(xu) : u ∈b}
for b ∈B,
(16)
s(xf ) = subs(e(xf )) = ⟨s(xf (0)), s(xf +)⟩
for f ∈F.
(17)
From (16) and Lemma 5.6 it follows s(xb) = b for all b ∈B, and thus from (17) it
ensues that s(xf ) = ⟨f (0), s(xf +)⟩for f ∈F. From here on one can proceed further
just as in the proof of Theorem 5.26.
As a corollary to Theorem 5.28 one gets the following coinduction principle for A∞.
Corollary 5.30 (CZFA). If a set Z satisﬁes Z ⊆A × Z, then Z ⊆A∞.
Proof. This follows from the fact that A∞is the largest such set.
The pivotal property of inductively deﬁned sets is that one can deﬁne functions on
them by structural recursion. For coinductively deﬁned sets one has a dual principle,
corecursion, which allows one to deﬁne functions mapping into the coinductive set.
Theorem 5.31 ((CZFA), Corecursion Principle for Streams). Let C be an arbitrary
set. Given functions g : C →A and h : C →C there is a unique function
f : C →A∞satisfying
f (c) = ⟨g(c), f (h(c))⟩
(18)
for all c ∈C.

216
M. Rathjen
Proof. For each c ∈C let xc, yc, zc be different indeterminates. To be precise, let
xc = ⟨0, c⟩, yc = ⟨1, c⟩, and zc = ⟨2, c⟩for c ∈C. This time we would like to solve
the system of equations given by
xc = ⟨g(c), xh(c)⟩.
Solving these equations is equivalent to solving the equations
xc = {yc, zc};
yc = {g(c)};
zc = {g(c), xh(c)}.
(19)
Solving (19) amounts to the same as ﬁnding a labelled decoration for the labelled
graph
SC = (SC, ↠, ℓC)
whose set of nodes is
SC = {xc : c ∈C} ∪{yc : c ∈C} ∪{zc : c ∈C}
and whose edges are given by xc ↠yc, xc ↠zc, zc ↠xh(c). Moreover, the labelling
function ℓC is deﬁned by ℓC(xb) = ∅, ℓC(yb) = {g(b)}, ℓC(zb) = {g(b)} for all
b ∈C. By the labelled Anti-Foundation Axiom, Theorem 5.2, SC has a labelled
decoration and we thus get
(xc) = ⟨g(c), (xh(c))⟩.
(20)
Letting the function f with domain C be deﬁned by f (c) := (xc), we get from (20)
that
f (c) = ⟨g(c), f (h(c))⟩
(21)
holds for all c ∈C. As ran(f ) ⊆A × ran(f ), Corollary 5.30 yields ran(f ) ⊆A∞,
thus f : C →A∞.
It remains to show that f is uniquely determined by (21). So suppose f ′ : C →
A∞is another function satisfying f ′(c) = ⟨g(c), f ′(h(c))⟩for all c ∈C. Then
the function ′ with ′(xc) = f ′(c), ′(yc) = {g(c)}, and ′(zc) = {g(c), f ′(h(c))}
would give another labelled decoration of SC, hence f (c) = (xc) = ′(xc) = f ′(xc),
yielding f = f ′.
Example 1. Let k : A →A be arbitrary. Then k gives rise to a unique function
mapk : A∞→A∞satisfying
mapk(s) = ⟨k(1st(s)), mapk(2nd(s))⟩.
(22)
For example, if A = N, k(n) = 2n, and s = ⟨3, ⟨6, ⟨9, . . .⟩⟩⟩, then mapk(s) =
⟨6, ⟨12, ⟨18, . . .⟩⟩⟩. To see that mapk exists, let C = A∞in Theorem 5.31, g : A∞→
A be deﬁned by g(s) = k(1st(s)), and h : A∞→A∞be the function h(s) = 2nd(s).
Then mapk is the unique function f provided by Theorem 5.31.

Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
217
Example 2. Let ν : A →A. We want to deﬁne a function
iterν : A →A∞
which “iterates” ν such that iterν(a) = ⟨a, iterν(ν(a))⟩for all a ∈A. If, for example
A = N and ν(n) = 2n, then iterν(7) = ⟨7, ⟨14, ⟨28, . . .⟩⟩⟩. To arrive at iterν we
employ Theorem 5.31 with C = A∞, g : C →A, and h : C →C, where g(s) =
ν(1st(s)) and h = mapν, respectively.
Outlook. It would be desirable to develop the theory of corecursion of [5] (in particular
Theorem 17.5) and the ﬁnal coalgebra theorem of [3] in full generality within CZFA
and extensions. It appears that the ﬁrst challenge here is to formalize parts of category
theory in constructive set theory. Due to page restrictions this cannot not be done in
the present paper.
Acknowledgement. I am grateful to the Mittag-Lefﬂer Institute (Djursholm, Sweden)
for giving me the opportunity in 2001 to be working on the talk on which this paper
is based. The research reported in this paper was also partly supported by United
Kingdom Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council Grant GR/R 15856/01.
References
[1]
Aczel, Peter: 1978. The type theoretic interpretation of constructive set theory. In: A.
MacIntyre et al. (eds.), Logic Colloquium ’77, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 55–66.
[2]
Aczel, Peter: 1982. The type theoretic interpretation of constructive set theory: choice
principles. In: A. S. Troelstra et al. (eds.), The L. E. J. Brouwer Centenary Symposium,
Amsterdam: North–Holland, 1–40.
[3]
Aczel, Peter: 1988. Non-Well-Founded Sets. CSLI Lecture Notes 14. Stanford: CSLI
Publications.
[4]
Barwise, Jon: 1975. Admissible Sets and Structures. An Approach to Deﬁnability Theory.
Berlin: Springer.
[5]
Barwise, Jon and Lawrence Moss: 1996. Vicious Circles. CSLI Lecture Notes 60. Stan-
ford: CSLI Publications.
[6]
Beeson, Michael: 1985. Foundations of Constructive Mathematics. Berlin: Springer.
[7]
Cantini, Andrea: 1986. On the relation between choice and comprehension principles in
second order arithmetic. Journal of Symbolic Logic vol. 51: 360–373.
[8]
Crosilla, Laura: 1998. Realizability Interpretations for Subsystems of CZF and Proof
Theoretic Strength. Technical Report. School of Mathematics, University of Leeds.
[9]
Crosilla, Laura: 2000. Realizability Models for Constructive Set Theories with Restricted
Induction. PhD Thesis. School of Mathematics, University of Leeds.
[10]
Crosilla, Laura and Michael Rathjen: 2002. Inaccessible set axioms may have little
consistency strength. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 115: 33–70.

218
M. Rathjen
[11]
Feferman, Solomon: 1964. Systems of predicative analysis I. Journal of Symbolic Logic
29: 1–30.
[12]
Feferman, Solomon: 1968. Systems of predicative analysis II. Representations of ordi-
nals. Journal of Symbolic Logic 33: 193–220.
[13]
Feferman, Solomon: 1975. A language and axioms for explicit mathematics. In: J. N.
Crossley (ed.), Algebra and Logic, Lecture Notes in Math. 450, Berlin: Springer: 87–139.
[14]
Feferman, Solomon: 1977. Theories of ﬁnite type related to mathematical practice. In: J.
Barwise (ed.): Handbook of Mathematical Logic, Amsterdam: North Holland, 913–971.
[15]
Hallnäs, Lars: 1986. Non Wellfounded Sets: Limits of Wellfounded Approximations.
Uppsala University, Department of Mathematics, Report No. 12, 16 pages.
[16]
Forti, Mauro and Furio Honsell: 1983. Set Theory with Free Construction Principles.
Annali Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa, Classe di Scienze 10, 493–522.
[17]
Jäger, Gerhard: 1993. Fixed points in Peano arithmetic with ordinals. Annals of Pure and
Applied Logic 60: 119–132.
[18]
Kreisel, Georg: 1960. Ordinal logics and the characterization of informal concepts of
proof. In: Proceedings of the 1958 International Congress of Mathematicians, Edinburgh:
289–299.
[19]
Kripke, Saul: 1975. Outline of a theory of truth. The Journal of Philosophy 72: 53–81.
[20]
Lewis, David: 1996. Convention, A Philosophical Study. Cmabridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
[21]
Lindström, Ingrid: 1989.A construction of non-well-founded sets within Martin-Löf type
theory. Journal of Symbolic Logic 54: 57–64.
[22]
Martin-Löf, Per: 1984. Intuitionistic Type Theory. Naples: Bibliopolis.
[23]
Myhill, John: 1975. Constructive set theory. Journal of Symbolic Logic 40: 347–382.
[24]
Rathjen, Michael: 1992. A proof–theoretic characterization of the primitive recursive set
functions. Journal of Symbolic Logic 57: 954–969.
[25]
Rathjen, Michael: 2000. The strength of Martin-Löf type theory with a superuniverse.
Part I. Archive for Mathematical Logic 39: 1–39.
[26]
Rathjen, Michael: 2001. Kripke-Platek set theory and the anti-foundation axiom. Math-
ematical Logic Quarterly 47: 435–440.
[27]
Rathjen, Michael: 2003. The anti-foundation axiom in constructive set theories. In: G.
Mints and R. Muskens (eds.), Games, Logic, and Constructive Sets, Stanford: CSLI
Publications, 87–108.
[28]
Russell, Bertrand: 1903. Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
[29]
Russell, Bertrand: 1908. Mathematical logic as based on the theory of types. American
Journal of Mathematics 30: 222–262.
[30]
Schütte, Kurt: 1964. Eine Grenze für die Beweisbarkeit der transﬁniten Induktion in der
verzweigten Typenlogik. Archiv für Mathematische Logik und Grundlagenforschung 67:
45–60.

Predicativity, Circularity, and Anti-Foundation
219
[31]
Schütte, Kurt: 1965. Predicative well-orderings. In: J. Crossley and M. Dummett (eds.),
Formal Systems and Recursive Functions, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 176–184.
[32]
Schütte, Kurt: 1977. Proof Theory. Berlin: Springer.
[33]
Simpson, Stephen: 1999. Subsystems of Second Order Arithmetic. Berlin: Springer.
[34] Weyl, Hermann: 1949. Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Sciences. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
School of Mathematics
University of Leeds
Leeds LS2 9JT
UK
E-mail: michrathjen@snafu.de


Russell’s Paradox and Diagonalization in a
Constructive Context
John L. Bell
Abstract. OneofthemostfamiliarusesoftheRussellparadox, or, atleast, oftheideaunderlying
it, isinprovingCantor’stheoremthatthecardinalityofanysetisstrictlylessthanthatofitspower
set. The other method of proving Cantor’s theorem—employed by Cantor himself in showing
thatthesetofrealnumbersisuncountable—isthatofdiagonalization. Typically, diagonalization
arguments are used to show that function spaces are “large” in a suitable sense. Classically, these
two methods are equivalent. But constructively they are not: while the argument for Russell’s
paradox is perfectly constructive, (i.e., employs intuitionistically acceptable principles of logic)
the method of diagonalization fails to be so. I describe the ways in which these two methods
diverge in a constructive setting.
One of the most familiar uses of the Russell paradox, or, at least, of the idea underlying
it, is in proving Cantor’s theorem that, for any set E, the cardinality of E is strictly
less than that of its power set P E. This, as we all know, boils down to showing that
there can be no surjection E ↠PE. To establish this it is enough to show that, for
any map f : E →PE, the assertion
(1)
∀X ∈PE ∃x ∈E. X = f (x)
leads to a contradiction. Now from a constructive standpoint the argument of Russell’s
paradox establishes more than just the negation of (1), since it produces an explicit set
R for which it can be proved that
¬∃x ∈E. R = f (x)
namely the familiar “Russell set”
R = {x ∈E : x /∈f (x)}.
This is, of course, because assuming R = f (e) for some e ∈E leads instantly to the
contradiction e ∈f (e) ⇔e /∈f (e). For U ⊆E, a similar argument, replacing R
above by R ∩U, shows that there can be no surjection U ↠P E. If we agree to say
that a set B is surjective with a set A provided that there is a surjection A ↠B, then
this may be put: for no set E is PE surjective with a subset of E.
These arguments are constructively valid in that they employ only constructively,
or intuitionistically, acceptable principles of logic.

222
J. L. Bell
Equally, the (classically equivalent, but not automatically constructively equiva-
lent) form of Cantor’s theorem that, for any set E there is no injection P E ↣E
can also be given a constructive proof using the idea of Russell’s paradox. In fact we
can prove more, to wit, that for any set E there can be no injection of P E into a set
surjective with E. For suppose given a surjection f : E ↠A and an injection m:
P E ↣A. Deﬁne
B = {x ∈E : ∃X ∈P E. m(X) = f (x) ∧x /∈X}.
Since f is surjective there is b ∈E for which f (b) = m(B). Then we have
b ∈B ⇐⇒∃X. m(X) = f (b) ∧b /∈X
⇐⇒∃X. m(X) = m(B) ∧b /∈X
⇐⇒∃X. X = B ∧b /∈X
⇐⇒b /∈B,
and we have our contradiction.
As pointed out by George Boolos in [2], one can, classically, produce explicit
counterexamples to the injectivity of a given map m: P E →E, that is, subsets X and
Y of E for which X ̸= Y and m(X) = m(Y). To do this it sufﬁces to deﬁne a partial
right inverse r of m such that, for M = dom(r), m(M) ∈M and ∀x ∈M. x /∈r(x).
For then, writing m(M) = a, and X = r(a), we have a /∈X, whence X ̸= M,
and m(X) = m(r(a)) = a = m(M). Using an idea that goes back to Zermelo,
Boolos obtains M as the ﬁeld of the largest partial well-ordering < of E such that
m({y : y < x}) = x for all x ∈M, and deﬁnes r by r(x) = {y : y < x}. The
presence of well-orderings in this argument makes it highly nonconstructive; I do not
know whether the existence of such an r and M can be established constructively.
Classically, the power set PE is naturally bijective with 2E, the set of all maps
E →2 = {0, 1}. Constructively, this is no longer the case: here, in general, P E ∼=
E, where  is the object of truth values or propositions, which is only ∼= 2 when the
law of excluded middle is assumed. In fact, constructively, 2E is isomorphic, not to
P E, but to its Boolean sublattice CE consisting of all complemented (or detachable)
subsets of E (a subset U of E is said to be complemented if ∀x ∈E. x ∈U ∨x /∈U).
What happens when we replace PE by CE in the above arguments? Classically, of
course, it makes no difference, but do the “Russell paradox” arguments survive the
transition to constructivity?
Well, if one takes the ﬁrst argument, showing that there can be no surjection f :
E ↠P E, one ﬁnds that, when PE is replaced by CE, the set R /∈range(f ) is itself
complemented and the argument goes through, proving constructively that there can
be no surjection E ↠CE. But the second argument, with P E replaced by CE (and
E replaced by a subset U of E) only goes through constructively when U is itself
complemented. And as for the third argument to go through constructively once P E
is replaced by CE, it is necessary to show that the set B deﬁned there is complemented,
and, as we shall see, this cannot in general be done. The failure of these two latter

Diagonalization in a Constructive Context
223
arguments in a constructive context can be easily demonstrated by considering a model
M of smooth inﬁnitesimal analysis, see, e.g., [1]. In M the real line R has just the two
detachable subsets ∅, R, that is, CR has just two elements. A fortiori CR is injectible
into R, showing that the third argument fails constructively. The fact that there is no
surjection R →CR corresponds simply to the fact that, since R is connected, there are
no continuous nonconstant maps R →2 (all maps in M being smooth, and certainly
continuous). But CR is trivially surjective with the subset {0, 1} of R, refuting the
second argument—of course, in M, {0, 1} is not a complemented subset of R! At the
end of the paper we supply a quite different constructive example of a set E for which
CE is surjective with a subset of E.
Let us return once again to the argument that there is no surjection E ↠P E.
Classically, we may replace P E by the isomorphic object 2E. In that case the use of
Russell’s paradox is transformed into an application of diagonalization, the technique
Cantor used to prove that the set of real numbers has strictly larger cardinality than the
set of natural numbers. Indeed, if φ: E →2E is the map canonically associated with
the given map f : E →P E via characteristic functions (i.e., deﬁned by φ(x)(y) =
1 ⇔y ∈f (x)) then the “Russell” set R ∈P E outside the range of f corresponds
precisely to the map r: E →2 outside the range of φ and deﬁned by “diagonalization”:
r(x) =

0
if φ(x)(x) = 1
1
if φ(x)(x) = 0.
This argument is perfectly constructive and parallels that given above for the nonex-
istence of a surjection E ↠CE.
Diagonalization appears in one of its most familiar guises in the well-known proof
that there can be no surjection of the set N of natural numbers onto the set NN of
all maps N →N, that, in a word, NN is uncountable. Here one is given a map φ:
N →NN; then the map f : N →N deﬁned by the prescription
f (n) =

0
if φ(n)(n) ̸= 0
1
if φ(n)(n) = 0.
is clearly outside the range of ϕ.
This instance of diagonalization, although not
identical with the previous one, also appears very similar to Russell’s paradox.
Looked at constructively, this proof depends crucially on the decidability of N,
i.e., the truth of the assertion
∀m ∈N ∀n ∈N. m = n ∨m ̸= n.
Since N is decidable from a constructive standpoint, the argument is constructively
valid, so that NN is constructively uncountable. (More generally, the same argument
shows that if X is any decidable set with at least two distinct elements, XX cannot be
surjective with X.)
Let us call a set subcountable if it is surjective with a subset of N. Classically, it
follows trivially from the fact that NN is uncountable that it also fails to be subcount-

224
J. L. Bell
able, that is, NN is not surjective with a subset of N. For given φ: U →NN; the map
f : N →N deﬁned by the new prescription (still resembling Russell’s paradox)
f (n) =



0
if n ∈U & φ(n)(n) ̸= 0
1
if n ∈U & φ(n)(n) = 0
1
if n /∈U
is again clearly outside the range of φ. Now this argument only goes through construc-
tively when U is a detachable subset of N, so that the most “diagonalization” shows,
constructively, is that NN is not “detachably” subcountable. But prima facie nothing
prevents NN from being “nondetachably” subcountable; for if, given φ: U →NN we
repeat the original prescription, the map f so obtained is deﬁned just on U, not on
the whole of N, and the argument collapses. So, while it still follows from Russell’s
paradox that PN cannot be constructively subcountable, diagonalization (as well as
Russell’s paradox) fails to establish the corresponding fact for NN.
In fact models of constructive mathematics have been produced in which NN is
actually subcountable. Such is the case, notably, in the effective topos Eff, see, e.g.,
chap. 23 of [3]. In Eff, P N and NN effectively(!) part company, making Russell’s
paradox and diagonalization the more easily distinguished. Russell’s paradox contin-
ues to yield the non-subcountability of P N, which accordingly remains “large”. But
diagonalization, while continuing to yield the uncountability of NN, fails to prevent it
from being subcountable in Eff, and so from being in some sense “small” there. The
reason for this is that, in Eff, NN consists, not of arbitrary maps N →N, but just of
the recursive ones. The subset U ⊆N establishing the subcountability of NN is the
set of codes of total recursive functions; since, in Eff, the complemented subsets of
N are just the recursive subsets, the fact that U cannot be complemented corresponds
to the fact that the set of codes of total recursive functions is not itself recursive. The
subcountability of NN immediately implies that of its subset 2N, and hence also of
the latter’s isomorph CN, showing anew the failure, in a constructive context, of the
argument that there can be no set E for which CE is surjective with a subset of E.
The “divergence” in Eff between diagonalization and Russell’s paradox can be
further pointed up by observing that Eff contains nonsingleton objects C for which the
object CC of self-maps is actually isomorphic to C. Such objects cannot be classical
sets, because clearly the only such sets satisfying this condition are singletons. For a
classical set C, the condition of being a singleton is equivalent to the condition that
there be no injection of 2—the object of truth values in classical set theory—into C.
So, in classical set theory, the condition that CC ∼= C implies that there is no injection
of  into C. In fact Russell’s paradox shows that this implication continues to hold in
the constructive setting. For suppose that i is an isomorphism (even just an injection)
of CC with C and that m is an injection of  into C. Then the map
X 	→i({⟨x, m(x ∈X)⟩: x ∈C})

Diagonalization in a Constructive Context
225
is easily seen an injection of PC into C, which by the Russell’s paradox argument
above, is impossible.
To summarize: in a constructive context, diagonalization does not fail to prevent
the possible presence of an object which is isomorphic to its object of self-maps
and yet is not a singleton. But Russell’s paradox does preclude the existence of an
injection of the object of truth values into any such object C: such a map would yield
an injection into C of its power object P C, which by Russell’s paradox is too large
to be so injectible.
To conclude. We have seen that, in certain constructive contexts, diagonalization
may fail to ensure that function spaces are “relatively large”. By contrast, Russell’s
paradox—at least, as properly applied to power sets—retains its potency even in
constructive environments, ensuring that power sets, or objects, retain their “size”. It
seems ﬁtting, therefore, to claim for Russell’s paradox a universal applicability which
must at the same time be denied diagonalization.
References
[1] Bell, John L.: 1998. A Primer of Inﬁnitesimal Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
[2] Boolos, George: 1997. Constructing cantorian counterexamples. Journal of Philosophical
Logic 26: 237–239.
[3] McLarty, Colin: 1992. Elementary Categories, Elementary Toposes. New York: Oxford
University Press.
Department of Philosophy
Talbot College
University of Western Ontario
London, Ontario
Canada N6A 3K7
E-mail: jbell@uwo.ca


Constructive Solutions of Continuous Equations
Peter Schuster and Helmut Schwichtenberg
Abstract. Inthispaperwemodifysomeseminalnotionsfromconstructiveanalysisbyproviding
witnesses for (strictly) positive quantiﬁers occurring in their deﬁnitions. For instance, by a real
number we understand nothing but a modulated Cauchy sequence of rationals. This approach
allows us to avoid many of the putatively necessary appeals to countable choice. Accordingly,
some basic machinery of constructive analysis is made explicit; this includes choice-free proofs
of the sequential and order completeness of the real numbers, and of the approximate interme-
diate value theorem. Moreover, we unwind the Kneser proof of the fundamental theorem of
algebra by giving a (rather detailed) choice-free proof.
1. Introduction
Since its conception in Bishop’s seminal monograph [3], constructive analysis has
attracted the attention of many researchers.
In particular, it poses a challenge to
design logical systems which allow for a smooth formalization. There are obvious
reasons why one wants to be clear about the possibility of such formalizations, among
them the prospect of using formal proofs of existential theorems as a means to develop
correct programs, in this case, involving exact real numbers.
For such purposes it is important that the system does not include (countable or
dependent) choice axioms. The aim of the present paper is to sketch the development
of elementary constructive analysis on this basis, up to and including the fundamental
theorem of algebra. The key to such a choice-free treatment is to provide witnesses
of (strictly) positive existential quantiﬁers in all deﬁnitions.
2. Elementary Constructive Analysis
We understand real numbers as modulated Cauchy sequences of rationals.1 So a real
number, or simply real, is nothing but a sequence (am)m∈N of rational numbers to-
gether with a modulus M : Q+ →N such that |am −an| ≤ε for m, n ≥M(ε). Let
1Inasmuch as we do not focus on ﬁxed moduli, we deviate from [2, 3, 21]. An approach similar to the
present one was taken in [22, 16].

228
P. Schuster and H. Schwichtenberg
us stress that throughout this paper we strictly identify the notions “real number” and
“modulated Cauchy sequence of rationals” with one another, even though we some-
times say that an instance of the latter represents, gives, or deﬁnes the corresponding
instance of the former. As usual, we denote the set2 of real numbers by R.
Every rational q is tacitly understood as the real represented by the constant se-
quence am = q with the constant modulus M(ε) = 1. For any rational q with |q| < 1,
a less trivial representation of a real (in fact, of the rational
1
1−q ) is that given by the
partial sums an = n
i=0 qi of the geometric series: as |am −an| ≤
2
|1−q||q|n+1
whenever m ≥n, an appropriate modulus is M(ε) = min{ n ∈N | |q|n+1 ≤|1−q|
2
ε }.
A real a is nonnegative (written as a ∈R0+) if −ε ≤aM(ε) for all rationals ε > 0,
and positive (written as a ∈R+) if ε ≤aM( ε
2 ) for some rational ε > 0. We write
a ∈ε R+ whenever the rational ε > 0 is such a witness of a ∈R+. So if a ∈ε R+,
then am ≥ε
2 for all m ≥M( ε
2).
Given real numbers a, b represented by sequences of rationals (am)m∈N, (bm)m∈N
with moduli M, N, we deﬁne each c of the list a+b, −a, |a|, a·b, and 1
a (the latter only
provided that |a| ∈η R+) as represented by the respective sequence (cm) of rationals
with modulus L:
c
cm
L(ε)
a + b
am + bm
max

M
 ε
2

, N
 ε
2

−a
−am
M

ε

|a|
|am|
M(ε)
a · b
am · bm
max

M

ε
2K|b|

, N

ε
2K|a|

1
a for |a| ∈η R+
 1
am
if am ̸= 0
0
if am = 0
max

M
 η
2

, N
 εη2
4

where the rational number Ka = max{ an | n ≤M(1) } + 1 is such that am ≤Ka for
all m ∈N. Needless to say, a −b and a
b (for b ∈R+) stand for a + (−b) and a · 1
b,
respectively.
We write a ≤b for b −a ∈R0+ and a < b for b −a ∈R+. Unwinding the
deﬁnitions yields that a ≤b means that for every rational η > 0 there exists Pη ∈N
such that am ≤bm + η for all m ≥Pη. Furthermore, a < b is a shorthand way of
expressing the presence of a rational η > 0 and a positive integer Q with am +η ≤bm
for all m ≥Q; we then write a <η,Q b (or simply a <η b if Q is not needed) whenever
we want to call these witnesses.
Constructively, equality a = b and inequality a ̸= b between real numbers are to
be deﬁned as a ≥b ∧a ≤b and a < b ∨a > b, respectively. Some routine proofs
show that the arithmetic of real numbers respects equality. Moreover, a ≤b could
equivalentlybedeﬁnedas¬(a > b), anda = b as¬(a ̸= b), whereasa < b anda ̸= b
2As we hesitate to commit ourselves to any set theory whatsoever, we wish to understand each set as
identiﬁed with the deﬁning property of its elements.

Constructive Solutions of Continuous Equations
229
are constructively stronger than ¬(a ≥b) and ¬(a = b), respectively.3 Intervals are
then deﬁned in the familiar way; so [a, b] is deﬁned as the set { c ∈R | a ≤c ≤b }.
Except for the completeness properties, which we shall subsequently discuss, it is
routine to verify that the reals as deﬁned above possess all the features of the reals
that are commonly considered to be constructive [4]. Constructively, in particular, we
cannot compare two reals, but we can compare each real with every nontrivial interval,
as in the following approximate splitting principle.
Lemma 1. For all real numbers a, b, c, if a < b, then either a < c or c < b.
Proof. Let M, N, L denote the moduli of a, b, c, respectively, and assume that
a <7η,P b, i.e.,
am + 3η < am + 4η ≤bm −3η
for every m ≥P . For Q = max{M(η), N(η), L(η), P}, we have either cQ < aQ+4η
or else aQ + 4η ≤cQ, but not both. In the former case, cQ < bQ −3η, and thus
cm + η ≤cQ + 2η < bQ −η ≤bm
for every m ≥Q, which means that c <η,Q b. In the latter case, aQ + 3η < cQ, and
thus
am + η ≤aQ + 2η < cQ −η ≤cm
for every m ≥Q, which is to say that a <η,Q c.
It is noteworthy that although a < c and c < b may well happen simultaneously,
the proof of Lemma 1 contains a routine that automatically pins down one of the
alternatives in every such case. This virtue, which of course stands and falls with the
presence of the moduli for a, b, c and the witness for a < b, is of particular relevance
whenever the approximate splitting principle is applied inﬁnitely often, so in the proof
of Theorem 12 below. By employing that routine, we can avoid the usual invocation
of dependent choice to successively construct a sequence of real numbers.
An immediate consequence of Lemma 1 is that b ≤c means that a < b implies
a < c for all reals c.
For 1 ≤j ≤n let aj be a real number given by the sequence of rationals (ajm)m∈N
with modulus Mj. Then the maximum max{ aj | j ≤n } is the real number represented
by the sequence of rationals

max{ ajm | j ≤n }

m∈N with modulus max{ Mj | j ≤
n }. Constructively, one cannot pick an index i for which ai = max{ aj | j ≤n }, but
for each ε > 0 we can ﬁnd—as follows—an index i such that ai is maximal up to ε
among all the aj.
Lemma 2. For all real numbers a1, . . . , an and each rational ε > 0 we can ﬁnd an
i ≤n so that aj ≤ai + ε for every j ≤n.
3This is clear in view of the existential and universal character of the predicates ∈R+ and ∈R0+,
respectively.

230
P. Schuster and H. Schwichtenberg
Proof. For each j ≤n let aj be represented by the sequence of rationals (ajm)m∈N
with modulus Mj. Given a rational ε > 0, set
M = max

Mj
ε
2
  j ≤n

,
b = max{ ajM | j ≤n },
and
i = min{ k ≤n | akM = b } .
For each j ≤n we then have
ajm ≤ajM + ε
2 ≤aiM + ε
2 ≤aim + ε
for every m ≥M, so that aj ≤ai + ε as was required.
As for Lemma 1 above, we wish to stress that by virtue of the presence of moduli
the algorithm given in the proof of Lemma 2 always picks a deﬁnite index i even when
there are several fulﬁlling its speciﬁcation. This feature again allows us to do proofs
without countable choice.
Let us now have a look at the completeness properties characteristic of the real
numbers. We ﬁrst consider sequential completeness. A sequence (am)m∈N of reals
is a Cauchy sequence with modulus M : Q+ →N whenever |am −an| ≤ε for
m, n ≥M(ε), and converges with modulus M : Q+ →N to a real b, its limit,
whenever |am −b| ≤ε for m ≥M(ε).
Lemma 3. Every modulated Cauchy sequence of rationals converges with the same
modulus to the real number it represents.
Proof. Let (am)m∈N be a Cauchy sequence of rationals with modulus M, and let b
be the real number it represents. For each rational ε > 0 and every m ≥M(ε), we
have to prove that |am −b| ≤ε, which is to say that cm ≥0 for cm = ε −|am −b|.
Now the real cm is represented by the sequence

ε −|am −ak|

k∈N of rationals, which
again has modulus M: for every rational η > 0 and all k, l ≥M(η), we have
|ck −cl| =
|am −ak| −|am −al|
 ≤
(am −ak) −(am −al)
 = |ak −al| ≤η.
Therefore cm ≥0 is equivalent to −η ≤ε −|am −aM(η)| for all rationals η > 0. This
follows from
|am −aM(η)| ≤|am −amax{M(ε),M(η)}| + |amax{M(ε),M(η)} −aM(η)| ≤ε + η ,
which holds by virtue of the inequality m ≥M(ε).
By the triangle inequality, every convergent sequence of reals with modulus M is
a Cauchy sequence with modulus ε →M( ε
2). Writing ⌈ε⌉for the least integer ≥ε
whenever ε > 0 is rational, we now prove the reverse implication.4
4This stems from unpublished lecture notes of the second author.

Constructive Solutions of Continuous Equations
231
Theorem 4 (Sequential Completeness). For every modulated Cauchy sequence of re-
als we can ﬁnd a real number to which it converges with modulus.
Proof. Let (am)m∈N be the Cauchy sequence of reals with modulus M; for every
m ∈N, let am be represented by a Cauchy sequence (amk)k∈N of rationals with
modulus Mm. Note ﬁrst that, for each m ∈N and every rational η > 0, by Lemma 3
we have |am −aml| ≤1
m for all l ≥Mm( 1
m). Next, set
bm = amMm

1
m

for every m ∈N, so that |am −bm| ≤
1
m for all m ∈N by the particular case
l = Mm
 1
m

of the foregoing consideration. Then
|bm −bn| ≤|bm −am| + |am −an| + |an −bn| ≤1
m + ε
2 + 1
n ≤ε
for all m, n ≥N(ε) = max

M( ε
2), ⌈4
ε ⌉

, which is to say that (bm) is a Cauchy
sequence with modulus N, and therefore represents a real number b. Moreover,
|am −b| ≤|am −bm| + |bm −b| ≤1
m + ε
2 ≤ε
for all m ≥N( ε
2) = max

M( ε
4), ⌈8
ε⌉

; in other words: (am) converges with b with
modulus ε →N( ε
2).
This proof happens not to need countable choice but requires a certain conceptual
choice made in advance: that each real number is meant to be nothing but a modulated
Cauchy sequence of rationals. Given this presupposition, we have no reservations
from the choice-free perspective that a single sequence of reals is understood as a
double sequence of rationals.5
On the other hand, countable choice would become indispensable for the proof of
sequential completeness as soon as the concept of reals were relaxed either to Cauchy
sequences of rationals without moduli or else to equivalence classes, modulo =, of
modulated Cauchy sequences of rationals. To start our proof of Theorem 4 in the
former case, one must choose, for every m, the integer l with |am −aml| ≤1
m, which
in the presence of the modulus Mm of am we can simply deﬁne by setting l = Mm( 1
m).
In the latter case, one must choose ﬁrst, again for every m, a representative (amk)k∈N of
the real am, which we understand as already consisting in nothing but such a sequence
of rationals.
5When one wants to read this proof as a completeness proof for the sequential completion of an arbitrary
metric space, one again has to view sequences in this completion—the space of (modulated) Cauchy
sequences in the original space—as double sequences in the latter. Such an interpretation may, however,
look somewhat strange in cases which are more complex than that of the completion of the rationals to the
reals.
For this observation, and for many others on the role of countable choice in constructive mathematics,
the ﬁrst author is indebted to Fred Richman, for whose position we refer to [15].

232
P. Schuster and H. Schwichtenberg
Following [2, 3, 5] in the style of [19], let us now consider order completeness.
To this end, let S be a set of real numbers. A real b is an upper bound of S, or S is
bounded from above by b, whenever s ≤b for all s ∈S, and a least upper bound or
supremum sup S of S if, in addition, for every real a with a < b there is an r ∈S with
r > a.6
If b is a least upper bound and a an upper bound of S, then a < b is impossible,
so that b ≤a; whence up to equality there is at most one supremum of S. If S has
a supremum, then S is inhabited and bounded from above, but even when S has the
two latter properties, the former is not granted constructively. A simple exception is
the maximum of ﬁnitely many reals (see above), which of course is the supremum
thereof.
A more relevant sufﬁcient condition for the constructive existence of the supremum
of a general set S of real numbers (being inhabited and bounded from above) is that S
be order located from above7, which is to say that
	S(a, b):
either s ≤b for all s ∈S or a < r for some r ∈S
holds for all pairs a, b of real numbers with a < b. To get at the sufﬁciency of these
three conditions, it is useful to consider
S(a, b):
both s ≤b for all s ∈S and a < r for some r ∈S
as a property of any pair a, b of real numbers with a < b.
Note that 	S(a, b)
and S(a, b) are the disjunction and conjunction, respectively, of the same pair of
propositions.
Theorem 5 (Order Completeness). Let S ⊂R be inhabited, bounded from above,
and order located from above. Then S has a least upper bound.
Proof. We may assume that we have a, b ∈Q with a < b such that S(a, b). We
construct c, d : N →Q such that for all m
a = c0 ≤c1 ≤· · · ≤cm < dm ≤· · · ≤d1 ≤d0 = b,
(1)
S(cm, dm),
(2)
dm −cm ≤
2
3
m
(b −a).
(3)
Let c0, . . . , cm and d0, . . . , dm be already constructed such that (3) holds. Let x =
cm + 1
3(dm −cm) and y = cm + 2
3(dm −cm). Since S is order located from above,
either s ≤y for all s ∈S or else x < r for some r ∈S. In the ﬁrst case let cm+1 := cm
and dm+1 := y, and in the second case let cm+1 := x and dm+1 := dm. Then clearly
S(cm+1, dm+1), and also (1) and (3) continue to hold for m + 1. We claim that the
6This is a positive way of saying that every real a with a < b, however close it may be to b, is not an
upper bound of S.
7This name was coined in [8]. The same property of S has been called “lower located” by Erik Palmgren
[11] and (if, in addition, S is bounded above) “located above” by Peter Aczel and Michael Rathjen [1].

Constructive Solutions of Continuous Equations
233
real numbers c = d given by the modulated Cauchy sequence of rationals (cm) and
(dm) is the least upper bound of S. Indeed, it is an upper bound because for ε > 0
we have d ≤dm < d + ε for some m and dm is an upper bound of S, and similarly
c −ε < cm ≤c for some m and cm < r for some r ∈S.
One might think that dependent choice has been used in this proof: in the case
distinction “either s ≤y for all s ∈S or else x < r for some r ∈S” the cases may
well overlap. However, reference to the algorithm provided by the assumption that S
is order located from above makes this choice superﬂuous.
Another important condition sufﬁcient for the existence of a supremum is that S
is a totally bounded set of reals. Let us consider this concept next.
To start with, let us call an arbitrary set ﬁnite if there is a mapping from {1, . . . , n}
onto that set with n ≥1; in particular, ﬁnite sets are inhabited.8 A set S of real numbers
is totally bounded whenever for every (rational) ε > 0 there is an ε-approximation of
S: that is, a ﬁnite subset T of S such that each element of S is within ε of an element
of T . Totally bounded sets of real numbers are obviously inhabited and bounded.
Note that the deﬁnition of total boundedness involves two witnessing objects: the
sequence (Tm)m≥1 of ﬁnite subsets of S so that each Tm is a 1
m-approximation of S,
and also for every m a function assigning to each element of S an element of Tm that
lies within 1
m of the former. Notice also that the latter function, having a ﬁnite range,
is necessarily non-continuous.
Clearly every totally bounded set of reals is order located from above; therefore
we immediately obtain from Theorem 5:
Corollary 6. Every totally bounded set of real numbers has a supremum.
As a digression, let us recall the standard application of Corollary 6.
Proposition 7. Let D ⊂R, and let f : D →R be a uniformly continuous function.
If the domain D of f is totally bounded, then so is the range f (D) of f .
Proof. For ε > 0, pick δ > 0 so that, for all x, y ∈D, if |x −y| ≤δ, then
|f (x) −f (y)| ≤ε. Now if T is a ﬁnite δ-approximation to D, then f (T ) is a ﬁnite
ε-approximation to f (D).
Corollary 8. If f : D →R is a uniformly continuous function on a totally bounded
subset D of R, then the supremum of f (D) exists.
In particular, although one cannot expect a constructive method to locate a point
in D at which f attains its supremum, for every ε > 0 there is an x ∈D so that
8In this respect we follow [2, 3] rather than [5, 10], where ﬁnite sets are allowed to be empty. For the
sake of simplicity, we also use “ﬁnite” instead of the constructively more correct term “ﬁnitely enumerable”
(due to Ray Mines) or “subﬁnite” (coined by Errett Bishop). Usually “ﬁnite” is reserved for the sets that
are in a bijective correspondence to sets of the form {1, . . . , n}, and which are necessarily discrete.

234
P. Schuster and H. Schwichtenberg
sup f (D) −ε < f (x). Compare this with Lemma 2, and note that the existence of
the maximum of ﬁnitely many reals is a special case of Corollary 8.
Note that sequential completeness can be deduced from order completeness in a
choice-free way [19]9. However, when one literally transfers that deduction to the
present context, it fails to automatically supply the required moduli. As a digression,
let us thus provide a better suited argument, which still does not make any use of
countable choice.
Reduction of sequential to order completeness. Let (am)m∈N be a Cauchy sequence
of real numbers, and deﬁne L as the set of all the p ∈Q for which there is an N ∈N
so that p < am for all m ≥N. This L is clearly inhabited and bounded above; we ﬁrst
show that L is order located from above. To this end, let r < s be rational numbers.
For ε = s−r
3 , we have
aM(ε) −ε ≤am ≤aM(ε) + ε
for all m ≥M(ε),
and r + ε < s −ε, so that either r + ε < aM(ε) or aM(ε) < s −ε. In the former case,
r < q < aM(ε) −ε for some q ∈Q, for which q ∈L. In the latter case, p < s for
every p ∈L.
By order completeness, L has a supremum b. To conclude the proof, we now verify
that (am) converges to b with modulus ε →M
 ε
2

. Given a rational ε > 0, pick p ∈L
with b −ε
2 < p, and N ∈N with p < am for all m ≥N. For K = max

N, M
 ε
2

,
observe ﬁrst that b −ε
2 < ak and thus b −ε < am for all m ≥M
 ε
2

. Assume next
that ak > b + ε
2. Then ak −ε
2 > b, so that b < p < ak −ε
2 for some rational p, for
which, in particular, p < am for all m ≥M
 ε
2

and thus p ∈L, a contradiction to
p > b. Hence ak ≤b + ε
2 and thus also am ≤b + ε for all m ≥M
 ε
2

.
Needless to say, the approach to greatest lower bounds (alias inﬁma) is completely
analogous to that of least upper bounds (alias suprema).
We next supply the standard constructive versions of the intermediate value theo-
rem. A function f : [a, b] →R is locally nonconstant whenever if a ≤a′ < b′ ≤b
and d is an arbitrary real, then f (c) ̸= d for some real c ∈[a′, b′]. Note that if f
is continuous, then there is also a rational c with that property. Strictly monotonic
functions are clearly locally nonconstant, and so are nonconstant real polynomials.
Proposition 9 (Intermediate Value Theorem for Locally Nonconstant Functions). Let
a < b be real numbers. If f : [a, b] →R is continuous with f (a) < 0 < f (b) and
locally nonconstant, then we can ﬁnd c ∈[a, b] with f (c) = 0.
Proof. We may assume that a, b ∈Q. We construct c, d : N →Q such that for all m
a = c0 ≤c1 ≤· · · ≤cm < dm ≤· · · ≤d1 ≤d0 = b,
(4)
f (cm) < 0 < f (dm),
(5)
9In addition, the deduction given in [4] can easily be reformulated without choice.

Constructive Solutions of Continuous Equations
235
dm −cm ≤
2
3
m
(b −a).
(6)
Let c0, . . . , cm and d0, . . . , dm be already constructed such that (6) holds. Let x =
cm + 1
3(dm −cm) and y = cm + 2
3(dm −cm). By assumption we have a rational
z ∈[cm, dm] with f (z) ̸= 0. In case 0 < f (z) let cm+1 = cm and dm+1 = z, and in
case f (z) < 0 let cm+1 = z and dm+1 = dm. As f is continuous, f (c) = 0 = f (d)
for the real numbers c = d given by the modulated Cauchy sequence of rationals (cm)
and (dm).
One might think that dependent choice has been used in this proof: whether
f (z) > 0 or f (z) < 0 may well depend on the choice of z. However, this is not
so, inasmuch as we can refer to the algorithm contained in the assumption that f is
locally nonconstant.
In Section 3, however, we can do the proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra
with only the following basic tool at hand. Notice that clearly every real polynomial
is uniformly continuous on [a, b].
Theorem 10 (Approximate Intermediate Value Theorem). Let a < b be real num-
bers. For every uniformly continuous function f : [a, b] →R with f (a) ≤0 ≤f (b),
and every ε > 0, we can ﬁnd c ∈[a, b] such that |f (c)| ≤ε.
Proof. In the sequel we repeatedly invoke Lemma 1. Let ε > 0, and compare f (a)
and f (b) with −ε < −ε
2 and ε
2 < ε, respectively. If −ε < f (a) or f (b) < ε, then
|f (c)| < ε for c = a or c = b; whence we may assume that
f (a) < −ε
2
and
ε
2 < f (b).
Now pick δ > 0 so that, for all x, y ∈[a, b], if |x−y| ≤δ, then |f (x)−f (y)| ≤ε, and
divide [a, b] into a = a0 < a1 < · · · < am = b such that |ai−1 −ai| ≤δ. Compare
every f (ai) with −ε
2 < ε
2. On the assumption f (a0) < −ε
2 and ε
2 < f (am), we can
ﬁnd j minimal such that
f (aj) < ε
2
and
−ε
2 < f (aj+1).
Finally, compare f (aj) with −ε < −ε
2 and f (aj+1) with ε
2 < ε. If −ε < f (aj),
we have |f (aj)| < ε. If f (aj+1) < ε, we have |f (aj+1)| < ε. If both f (aj) < −ε
2
and ε
2 < f (aj+1), then we would have |f (aj+1) −f (aj)| > ε, which contradicts
|aj+1 −aj| ≤δ.
Unlike the proofs of this result we know from the literature, the foregoing proof is
entirely choice-free.10 It seems to be characteristic of constructions of (uniquely deter-
mined or) approximate solutions that they do not even require countable choice [19].
10Again, this proof was taken from lecture notes of the second author.

236
P. Schuster and H. Schwichtenberg
3. The Fundamental Theorem of Algebra
In the framework of constructive analysis sketched above we now give a detailed proof
of the fundamental theorem of algebra, essentially following Martin Kneser [9].11
The point is that we present the proof in a choice-free form; this of course includes
all auxiliary lemmata. Our exposition is rather detailed, because—as mentioned in
the introduction—we want to make the algorithmic content of this proof as clear as
possible, keeping in mind that it may later serve as a basis for extracting a program.
A somewhat different presentation of Kneser’s proof has been given in [22]. How-
ever, it is stressed in ([22]: 437) that this proof “essentially rests on the axiom of
choice”.12
As usual, real numbers give rise to complex numbers, which in the present context
are represented by pairs of modulated Cauchy sequences of rationals, and thus are
also sequentially complete (Theorem 4).
Fix the degree n ≥1 of the polynomials to be considered. The bulk of the technical
work is in the proof of the following lemma.
Lemma 11. We can ﬁnd q ∈Q with 0 < q < 1 (depending only on our ﬁxed n ∈N)
such that for every monic polynomial f (ξ) = ξn +an−1ξn−1 +· · ·+a1ξ +a0 ∈C[ξ]
of degree n and with |a0| > 0 we can ﬁnd z ∈C satisfying
|z| ≤
|a0|
q
	 1
n
and
|f (z)| ≤q|a0|.
From the proof it will be clear that the approximate root z ∈C we construct
depends on the representation of the coefﬁcients in C; that is, on the choice of the
pairs of modulated Cauchy sequences of rationals which represent them. This is
to be expected; for instance, there is no continuous function f : C →C such that
f (z)2 = z; to resolve the non-uniqueness of the roots one needs Riemann surfaces.
Theorem 12 (Fundamental Theorem of Algebra). For
every
monic
polynomial
g(ξ) = ξn + bn−1ξn−1 + · · · + b1ξ + b0 ∈C[ξ] of degree n ≥1 we can ﬁnd
w ∈C such that g(w) = 0.
Proof. Choose c > 0 with |b0| ≤c. Let q (depending on n) be supplied by Lemma 11
(for g in place of f ). It clearly sufﬁces to inductively construct a sequence (wm)m∈N
of complex numbers such that
|wm+1 −wm| ≤(qm−1c)
1
n
(7)
11Once more, our version of this proof stems from the lecture notes of the second author. It has even
been a basis of an implementation of the fundamental theorem of algebra in the interactive prover Coq [12],
done by Barendregt, Geuvers, Pollack, Wiedijk and Zwanenburg [7].
12We also use the occasion to mention in print a small oversight in the proof in [22]—the speciﬁcation
of α on page 434 contains a circularity. This was ﬁrst noted by Barendregt and Geuvers, and a correction
can be found on Troelstra’s home page.

Constructive Solutions of Continuous Equations
237
and
|g(wm)| ≤qmc .
(8)
Any such sequence is a modulated Cauchy sequence in C whose limit is a root of g.
To start with, set w0 = 0. For the induction step, assume that wm has already
been found; then fm(ξ) = g(wm + ξ) ∈C[ξ] is a monic polynomial of degree n
with constant coefﬁcient g(wm). By comparing |g(wm)| with 0 < qm+1c, we either
have |g(wm)| < qm+1c or |g(wm)| > 0 (Lemma 1). In the former case, we may take
wm+1 = wm. In the latter case, applying Lemma 11 to fm yields z ∈C such that
|z| ≤
|g(wm)|
q
	 1
n
≤(qm−1c)
1
n
and
|fm(z)| ≤q|g(wm)| ≤qm+1c.
(The second inequality of each pair holds according to (8).) So in this case we may
set wm+1 = wm + z, for which g(wm+1) = fm(z).
In this proof of Theorem 12, the tacit invocation of sequential completeness is
fairly inessential, since—just as the z supplied by Lemma 11—each wm can easily
be constructed so that wm = am + ibm with rational real and imaginary part am and
bm. (This is possible in virtue of the approximate character of each result.) As then
(am) and (bm) both are a modulated Cauchy sequences of rationals, they respectively
represent real numbers a and b, so that w = a + ib is the requested complex number
with g(w) = 0.
In the induction step the cases of the crucial distinction may overlap, and thus a
choice—which may even depend on the foregoing one—seems to be necessary when-
ever both cases happen simultaneously. However, Lemma 1 automatically makes
this choice in every given situation. In other words, countable choice, let alone de-
pendent choice, is not involved in the present proof of the fundamental theorem of
algebra. Also, the proof of the fundamental theorem of algebra given by Ruitenburg
in [16] is without any choice, and designed for complex numbers as represented by
pairs of modulated Cauchy sequences of rationals. It is done by ﬁrst proving the
discrete fundamental theorem of algebra (the one for algebraic rather than complex
numbers) by ﬁeld-theoretic means (splitting ﬁelds, minimal polynomials, etc.), and
then approximating complex numbers by algebraic ones.
Similar in strategy, Richman’s choice-free approach [14] to an approximate version
of the fundamental theorem of algebra appears to be independent of any speciﬁc
presentation of the reals. Part of the price one has to pay for this generality is that
one gets a bit less: a multiset of algebraic numbers as close as one pleases to the
imagined multiset of complex roots. To extend this result to an exact version, by
picking out elements from those multisets, only requires a fairly weak and classically
valid fragment of countable choice [6].13
13Roughly speaking, this is countable choice with the additional presupposition that all choices but at
most one—of which of course one does not know when it occurs—are choices (!) from a singleton set. It

238
P. Schuster and H. Schwichtenberg
Unlike these two proofs, the following one is truly elementary, which might be of
importance to the form of an extracted program.
Proof of Lemma 11. Before going into the details, let us brieﬂy sketch the approach
that will prove successful in the following. First, we pick an appropriate one of the
monomials a1ξ, . . . , anξn = ξn, say akξk, and next determine z such that a0 and
akzk differ by a negative factor. For |z| = r we assume only that this monomial is
sufﬁciently small, i.e., |ak|rk ≤|a0| + ε. Then we obtain (see (15))
|f (z)| ≤|a0 + akzk| +

i̸=0,k
|aizi| ≤|a0| −|ak|rk + 2ε +

i̸=0,k
|ai|ri.
So the point is to choose k and r in such a way that the monomials |ai|ri (i ̸= 0, k)
are small compared to |ak|rk, but on the other hand are not too small compared to |a0|
(see (14)).
Step 0. To start with the construction, set
q = 1 −
1
4 · 32n2−1
and
ε = min

|a0|
2(n + 1) ·
1
4 · 32n2−1 , (q−1 −1)|a0|

.
These choices will be explained in steps 6, 10 und 11 below.
Step 1. Let m(s) := max{ |ai|si | i = 1, . . . , n } for every real s. Pick t ∈Q,
t > 0, such that
|m(t) −|a0|| ≤ε.
(9)
This is possible by the approximate intermediate value theorem (Theorem 10), for
m(0) = 0 < |a0| and, because sn ≤m(s), there is an s0 > 0 such that |a0| < m(s0);
note in this context that m is uniformly continuous over the compact interval [0, s0].
Step 2. For i = 1, . . . , n choose yi ∈Q, yi > 0, such that |yi −|ai|ti| ≤ε. With
yij := yi
3ij (for j ∈Z) we obtain
yij −|ai|
 t
3j
i =
 yi
3ij −|ai|ti
3ij
 ≤ε
3ij .
(10)
Step 3. For every j ∈Z, pick kj ∈{1, . . . , n} minimal such that yij ≤ykj j for
i = 1, . . . , n. So
|ai|
 t
3j
i
≤yij + ε
3ij ≤ykj j + ε
3ij ≤|akj |
 t
3j
kj +
ε
3kj j + ε
3ij .
(11)
Step 4. We have
kj ≥kj+1.
(12)
is further noteworthy that many appeals to countable choice can be reduced to that weaker principle. We
refer to [15] for more details.

Constructive Solutions of Continuous Equations
239
Indeed, for i ≥kj,
ykj (j+1) =
1
3kj (j+1) ykj = 1
3kj ykj j ≥(∗)
1
3i yij =
1
3i(j+1) yi = yi(j+1) ;
whence kj+1 ≤kj according to the choice of kj+1 (“least possible”).
Step 5. Choose j > 0 minimal such that kj−1 = kj = kj+1 =: k. Because of (12)
we have
n ≥k−1 ≥k0 ≥k1 ≥· · · ≥kj−1 = kj = kj+1,
where out of each pair of two consecutive ≥(except for the ﬁrst one) at least one must
be >. Hence for 2i −1 ≤j we have k2i−1 ≤n −i.
Case 1. j is of the form 2i −1. Then
kj ≤n −i = n −j + 1
2
⇒2kj ≤2n −j −1 ⇒j ≤2(n −kj) −1 .
Case 2. j is of the form 2i. Then
kj = kj−1 ≤n −i = n −j
2
⇒2kj ≤2n −j
⇒j ≤2(n −kj) .
Hence generally we have
j ≤2(n −k).
(13)
Step 6. Let r :=
t
3j ∈Q. We estimate |ak|rk against |a0|. For i = 1, . . . , n, by
(11) and k = kj we have |ak|rk = |ak|( t
3j )k ≥|ai|( t
3j )i −2ε ≥
1
3nj |ai|ti −2ε, hence
|ak|rk ≥1
3nj m(t) −2ε
for m(t) = max{ |ai|ti | i = 1, . . . , n } as before
≥1
3nj |a0| −3ε
by the choice of t in (9).
By (13) we have nj ≤2n(n −k) ≤2n2 −k and therefore
|ak|rk ≥
1
32n2−k |a0| −3ε.
(14)
In particular |ak| > 0 because of ε < |a0|
3 ·
1
32n2−1 .
Step 7. We ﬁrst determine z ∈C with |z| = r such that a0 and akzk differ by a
negative factor. Write a0 = |a0|eix0 and ak = |ak|eixk, and let z = |r|eiy with y such
that x0 + π = xk + ky.
We show that |a0 + akzk| ≤|a0| −|akzk| + 2ε. Now akzk = −ca0 with c ∈R,
c > 0, and by the choice of t in (9) also |akzk| ≤|a0| + ε. Therefore
c|a0| = |akzk| ≤|a0| + ε
and
0 < c ≤1 +
ε
|a0|,

240
P. Schuster and H. Schwichtenberg
hence
|a0 + akzk| = |a0| · |1 −c|
= |a0| max(1 −c, c −1)
= |a0| max(1 −c, 1 −c + 2(c −1))
≤|a0| max

1 −c, 1 −c + 2 ε
|a0|

= |a0|(1 −c) + 2ε
= |a0| −|akzk| + 2ε.
We now obtain
|f (z)| ≤|a0 + akzk| +

i̸=0,k
|aizi|
≤|a0| −|akzk| + 2ε +

i̸=0,k
|aizi|
= |a0| −|ak|rk + 2ε +

i̸=0,k
|ai|ri.
(15)
Step 8. Estimate of 
1≤i<k |ai|ri. Let 1 ≤i < k. Then
|ai|ri = 3i|ai|
r
3
i
= 3i|ai|

t
3j+1
i
≤3i
|ak|

t
3j+1
k +
ε
3i(j+1) +
ε
3k(j+1)

by (11), for k = kj+1
≤3i
|ak|
 t
3j
k 1
3k + 2 ε
3i

=
1
3k−i |ak|rk + 2ε,
hence (using
1
3k−1 + · · · + 1
3 = 1
2

1 −
1
3k−1

)

1≤i<k
|ai|ri ≤|ak|rk 1
2

1 −
1
3k−1

+ 2(k −1)ε.
(16)
Step 9. Estimate of 
k<i≤n |ai|ri. Let k < i ≤n. Then
|ai|ri = 1
3i |ai|(3r)i
= 1
3i |ai|

t
3j−1
i
≤1
3i

|ak|

t
3j−1
k +
ε
3i(j−1) +
ε
3k(j−1)

by (11), for k = kj−1

Constructive Solutions of Continuous Equations
241
≤1
3i

|ak|
 t
3j
k
· 3k + 2 · 3kε

≤
1
3i−k |ak|rk + 2ε,
hence (using 1
3 + · · · +
1
3n−k = 1
2

1 −
1
3n−k

)

k<i≤n
|ai|ri ≤|ak|rk 1
2

1 −
1
3n−k

+ 2(n −k)ε.
(17)
Step 10. From (15), (16) and (17) one obtains
|f (z)| ≤|a0| −|ak|rk + 2ε +

i̸=0,k
|ai|ri
≤2nε + |a0| −|ak|rk + |ak|rk 1
2

1 −
1
3k−1

+ |ak|rk 1
2

1 −
1
3n−k

≤2nε + |a0| −1
2 ·
1
3k−1 |ak|rk
≤2nε + |a0| −
1
2 · 3k−1

1
32n2−k |a0| −3ε

by (14)
≤2(n + 1)ε +

1 −
1
2 · 32n2−1

|a0|
≤

1 −
1
4 · 32n2−1




=q
|a0|
for ε ≤
|a0|
2(n+1) ·
1
4·32n2−1
Step 11. Observe |z| = r, hence
|z|n = rn ≤tn ≤m(t) ≤|a0| + ε ≤q−1|a0|
because of ε ≤(q−1 −1)|a0|. Therefore we have |z| ≤(q−1|a0|)
1
n , as was required.
4. Dedekind Reals and Order Completeness
By a Dedekind real we understand a located Dedekind cut in the rationals: that is, a
disjoint pair (L, U) of inhabited open subsets of Q that is cut located inasmuch as
either p ∈L or q ∈U for all p, q ∈Q with p < q. In particular, p < q whenever
p ∈L and q ∈U. The lower cut L and the upper cut U uniquely determine each other,
as one is the open interior of the complement of the other.14 Needless to say, every
rational r is identiﬁed with the Dedekind real ({ p ∈Q | p < r }, { q ∈Q | r < q }).
14Although it may seem redundant, we have chosen to deﬁne a Dedekind real as a pair rather than just as
either a lower or an upper cut. Among our reasons for doing so is that pairs are better suited when it comes
to considering generalized real numbers, i.e., not necessarily located Dedekind cuts, as, e.g., in [13, 17].

242
P. Schuster and H. Schwichtenberg
Every lower cut L (or upper cut U) is bounded from above (or from below) and
downwards monotone (or upwards monotone): that is, for all p, q ∈Q with p < q,
if q ∈L, then p ∈L (or, if p ∈U, then q ∈U). Moreover, every Dedekind real
is approximable: that is, for every rational ε > 0 there are p ∈L and q ∈U with
q −p < ε. For the latter observation, and for the second part of the following, we
may refer to ([22]: Chapter 5, Section 5); the ﬁrst part is routine to verify.
Lemma 13.
(a) If L is an open subset of Q and U denotes the open interior of Q\L, then (L, U)
is cut located if and only if L is downwards monotone and order located from
above.
(b) The following items are equivalent for a pair (L, U) of subsets of Q:
(i) L is inhabited, U is inhabited, and (L, U) is cut located.
(ii) L is downwards monotone, U is upwards monotone, and (L, U) is approx-
imable.
The strict partial order of Dedekind reals is given by (L, U) < (L′, U′) if and
only if L′ ∩U is inhabited. So ≤, ̸=, and = could be introduced—for Dedekind reals
just as for any other type of reals—as the negation of <, the disjunction of < and
>, and the conjunction of ≥and ≤, respectively. For Dedekind reals, however, all
these relations admit of a simpler deﬁnition: namely, (L, U) ≤(L′, U′) as L ⊂L′ or,
equivalently, as U ⊃U′; (L, U) = (L′, U′) as L = L′ or, equivalently, as U = U′;
(L, U) ̸= (L′, U′) as L′ ∩U or L∩U′ being inhabited. Referring to ([22]: Chapter 5,
Section 5) for further details, so for arithmetic, we write D for the set of Dedekind
reals.
Let R be an Archimedean ordered and valued Heyting ﬁeld: that is, a model of
all the axioms—for the moment, except for order completeness—that were listed by
Bridges in [4].15 (In compliance with Theorem 5 above, we say that any such R is
order complete whenever the statement of that theorem is valid for this R in place
of R.) These axioms—together with order completeness, of course—embody all the
properties of real numbers, such as the approximate splitting principle (cf. Lemma 1),
that are commonly accepted in constructive mathematics. In particular, any such R
contains Q as an ordered subﬁeld that is dense in the sense that for all x, y ∈R with
x < y there is q ∈Q such that x < q < y.
BoththeDedekindrealsandtherealnumbersasdeﬁnedearlierinthispaper, byway
of modulated Cauchy sequences of rationals, form a perfect model of those axioms.
As we have seen above and shall remember below, this includes order completeness.
15There and in other places order completeness is called the “(constructive) least-upper-bound principle”.
See also [18] for a case study of real numbers as black boxes that, among other things, serves to justify the
choice of these axioms.

Constructive Solutions of Continuous Equations
243
If S ⊂R is inhabited, bounded from above, and order located from above, then
ξS = (LS, US) is a Dedekind real with LS and US as the open interiors of
{ p ∈Q | p < r for some r ∈S }
and
{ q ∈Q | s ≤q for all s ∈S } ,
respectively. In particular, we can assign a Dedekind real π(x) to each x ∈R by
setting
π(x) = ({ p ∈Q | p < x }, { q ∈Q | x < q } ) .
Then π(q) = q for all rationals q, and π(x) < π(x′) precisely when x < x′; whence
we actually have deﬁned an injective mapping π : R →D.
In other words, R is canonically embedded into D, which rephrases the saying
that there are at least as many Dedekind reals as there are real numbers of an arbitrary
kind like R. The question to which we now turn is under which circumstances there
are exactly as many, or rather—in view of the canonical character of π—when π is a
one-to-one correspondence.
In [19] it is proved,16 without invoking any choice principle, that R is order
complete if and only if a mapping σ : D →R exists that preserves < and operates as
the identity on Q. In fact, if ξ = (L, U) ∈D, then L ⊂Q —considered as a subset
of R—is inhabited, bounded from above, and order located from above; whence the
supremum of L exists provided that R is order complete. Now it is routine to verify
that
σ : D →R, ξ = (L, U) →sup L
is a mapping with σ(ξ) < σ(ξ′) precisely when ξ < ξ′, and with σ(q) = q for all
q ∈Q. Conversely, if we are given such a mapping σ : D →R, and if S ⊂R is
inhabited, bounded from above, and order located from above, then σ(ξS)—with ξS as
deﬁned before—is a supremum of S.
As a consequence, the Dedekind reals are order complete: the identity mapping on
D clearly meets the speciﬁcations of such a σ. Moreover, if R is order complete and
thus σ : D →R can be deﬁned as above, it automatically is the two-sided inverse of
π, so that if (and, of course, only if) R is order complete, then R is order isomorphic
to the Dedekind reals with Q being invariant under the isomorphism.
So D can
legitimately be characterized as the order completion of Q inasmuch as the statement
of Theorem 5 is the right way to phrase order completeness—which it deﬁnitely is
from the constructive perspective.
Troelstra and van Dalen stated in ([22]: Chapter 5, 5.12.iii) that, roughly speaking,
D is—up to order isomorphism—the one and only ordered extension of Q in which
every lower cut in the rationals possesses a least upper bound. This characterization of
D turns out to be equivalent to the one we gave above by way of order completeness. In
fact, the former follows from the latter, because every lower cut satisﬁes the hypotheses
of order completeness: according to the ﬁrst part of Lemma 13, it is inhabited, bounded
16This goes back to an idea of Fred Richman (personal communication to the ﬁrst author).

244
P. Schuster and H. Schwichtenberg
from above, and order located from above. For the reverse implication, it sufﬁces to
notice that if LS is assigned to S ⊂R as before, and if sup LS ∈R exists, then it is
also the supremum of S.
In retrospect, we have achieved the following characterization.
Theorem 14. The following items all are equivalent:
(a) R is order complete.
(b) Every lower cut in Q has a supremum in R.
(c) There is a mapping σ : D →R that preserves < and each rational.
(d) The canonical mapping π : R →D is bijective.
(e) R is order isomorphic to D.
In view of Theorem 5, we have the following
Corollary 15. R is order isomorphic to D.
Note that this does not require countable choice; we have stressed the presence of
witnesses throughout.
References
[1]
Aczel, Peter and Michael Rathjen: 2002. Notes on Constructive Set Theory. Draft of an
extended and revised version of the preprint available at the Mittag-Lefﬂer Institute.
[2]
Bishop, Errett: 1967. Foundations of Constructive Analysis. New York: McGraw-Hill.
[3]
Bishop, Errett and Douglas Bridges: 1985. Constructive Analysis. Grundlehren der math-
ematischen Wissenschaften 279. Berlin: Springer.
[4]
Bridges, Douglas: 1999. Constructive mathematics: a foundation for computable analy-
sis. Theoret. Comput. Sci. 219: 95–109.
[5]
Bridges, Douglas and Fred Richman: 1987. Varieties of Constructive Mathematics. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
[6]
Bridges, Douglas, Fred Richman, and Peter Schuster: 2000. A weak countable choice
principle. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc. 128: 2749–2752.
[7]
Geuvers, Herman, Randy Pollack, Freek Wiedijk, and Jan Zwanenburg: June 2000.
Theory Development Leading to the Fundamental Theorem of Algebra. Manuscript (au-
tomatically generated).
[8]
Ishihara, Hajime and Peter Schuster: 2002. A constructive uniform continuity theorem.
Quart. J. Math. 53: 185–193.

Constructive Solutions of Continuous Equations
245
[9]
Kneser, Martin: 1981. Ergänzung zu einer Arbeit von Hellmuth Kneser über den Funda-
mentalsatz der Algebra. Math. Z. 177: 285–287.
[10]
Mines, Ray, Fred Richman, and Wim Ruitenburg: 1987. A Course in Constructive Alge-
bra. Berlin: Springer.
[11]
Palmgren, Erik: 2003. Constructive Completions of Ordered Sets, Groups and Fields.
Preprint, Uppsala University.
[12]
Paulin-Mohring, Christine and Benjamin Werner: 1993. Synthesis of ML programs in
the system Coq. J. Symbolic Computation 11: 1–34.
[13]
Richman, Fred: 1998. Generalized real numbers in constructive mathematics. Indag.
Mathem. (N.S.) 9: 595–606.
[14]
Richman, Fred: 2000. The fundamental theorem of algebra: a constructive development
without choice. Paciﬁc J. Math. 196: 213–230.
[15]
Richman, Fred: 2001. Constructive mathematics without choice. In [20]: 199–205.
[16]
Ruitenburg, Willem B. G.: 1991. Constructing roots of polynomials over the complex
numbers. In: A. M. Cohen (ed.), Computational Aspects of Lie Group Representations
and Related Topics. Proc. 1990 Computer Algebra Seminar, CWI Tract 84, 107–128,
Amsterdam: Centrum voor Wiskunde en Informatica.
[17]
Schuster, Peter: 2000. A constructive look at generalized Cauchy reals. Math. Logic
Quart. 46: 125–134.
[18]
Schuster, Peter: 2002. Real numbers as black boxes. New Zealand J. Math. 31: 189–202.
[19]
Schuster, Peter: 2003. Unique existence, approximate solutions, and countable choice.
Theoret. Comput. Sci. 305: 433-455.
[20]
Schuster, Peter, Ulrich Berger, and Horst Osswald (eds.): 2001. Reuniting theAntipodes—
Constructive and Nonstandard Views of the Continuum. Synthese Library vol. 306. Dor-
drecht: Kluwer.
[21] Taschner, Rudolf: 1991, 1992, 1993. Lehrgang der konstruktiven Mathematik. Drei
Bände. Wien: Manz and Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky; 2nd ed. of vols. 1,2, ibid., 1995.
[22] Troelstra, Anne S. and Dirk van Dalen: 1988. Constructivism in Mathematics. An Intro-
duction, vols. 121, 123. Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Mathematics. Amster-
dam: North-Holland.
Mathematisches Institut
Universität München
Theresienstraße 39
80333 München
Germany
E-mail: pschust@mathematik.uni-muenchen.de
schwicht@mathematik.uni-muenchen.de


Russell’s Paradox in Consistent Fragments of
Frege’s Grundgesetze der Arithmetik
Kai F. Wehmeier
Abstract. WeprovideanoverviewofconsistentfragmentsofthetheoryofFrege’sGrundgesetze
der Arithmetik that arise by restricting the second-order comprehension schema. We discuss
how such theories avoid inconsistency and show how the reasoning underlying Russell’s paradox
can be put to use in an investigation of these fragments.
1. Introduction.
On June 16th, 1902, Russell communicates ‘his’ paradox to Frege:
Let w be the predicate of being a predicate that cannot be predicated
of itself. Can one predicate w of itself? From any answer follows its
opposite. Therefore one must infer that w is not a predicate. Likewise,
there is no class (as a whole) of those classes that as wholes do not
belong to themselves. From this I infer that under certain circumstances
a deﬁnable set does not form a whole.1
In a postscript to this letter, Russell uses Peano’s notation to give the ﬁrst symbolic
expression of the paradox:
w = cls ∩x ϶ (x ∼ϵ x). ⊃: w ϵ w. = .w ∼ϵ w.2
One would imagine that Frege was not much impressed by the predicability version
of the antinomy that Russell mentions ﬁrst (which is basically the heterologicality
paradox), as it is obviated, within the Begriffsschrift, by the stratiﬁcation of functions
into levels. The class version of the contradiction, however, nowadays known as
1Cf. [14]: 211 (the English translation is mine): ‘Sei w das Prädicat, ein Prädicat zu sein welches von
sich selbst nicht prädicirt werden kann. Kann man w von sich selbst prädiciren? Aus jeder Antwort folgt
das Gegentheil. Deshalb muss man schliessen dass w kein Prädicat ist. Ebenso giebt es keine Klasse (als
Ganzes) derjenigen Klassen die als Ganze sich selber nicht angehören. Daraus schliesse ich dass unter
gewissen Umständen eine deﬁnierbare Menge kein Ganzes bildet.’
2See [14]: 212. In modern notation, Russell’s formula reads as follows:
w = {x : ¬x ∈x} →(w ∈w ↔¬w ∈w).

248
K. F. Wehmeier
Russell’s paradox, Frege immediately recognised as being reconstructible within the
theory of Grundgesetze. He regarded the occurrence of this contradiction as a serious
blow to his life’s work—one can clearly sense his horror between the lines of his
answer to Russell, written on June 22nd, 1902:
Your discovery of the contradiction utterly surprised and, I am almost
inclined to say, dismayed me, as the foundation upon which I believed
arithmetic to be built, thereby begins to rock. It thus seems that the
transformation of the generality of an identity into an identity of value-
ranges (§9 of my Grundgesetze) is not always permitted, that my law
V (§20 p. 36) is false and that my explanations in §31 do not sufﬁce to
secure my combinations of signs a denotation in all cases.3
It is clear from these remarks that Frege himself considered his Grundgesetz V as
the source of the antinomy. This is a very reasonable diagnosis, because basic law V
ﬁgures prominently in the derivation of the contradiction, as we shall see shortly. Most
philosophers have followed Frege in this assessment. Michael Dummett has pointed
out, however, that another contentious principle plays an equally prominent role in
the genesis of the contradiction, viz., Frege’s substitution rule for ‘free’ second-order
variables ([12]: §48, subsection 9, 62–63). Such a rule is equivalent, under certain
conditions, to the full (impredicative) second-order comprehension schema, and it is
this impredicativity that Dummett takes to be responsible for the contradiction.4 The
bulk of this paper will be concerned with the problem of weakening the comprehension
schema in such a way as to obtain a consistent fragment5 of Frege’s original theory.6
To set the stage, let us begin by considering the version of Russell’s paradox that
Frege discusses ﬁrst in the Nachwort to the second volume of Grundgesetze ([13]:
256–257) (as reconstructed in terms of axiomatic second-order logic). Recall that,
according to Frege, there is, associated with any second-order entity (concept) F, a
certain ﬁrst-order entity (object), the concept’s extension (course-of values, value-
3Cf. [14]: 213 (the English translation is mine): ‘Ihre Entdeckung des Widerspruchs hat mich auf’s
Höchste überrascht und, fast möchte ich sagen, bestürzt, weil dadurch der Grund, auf dem ich dieArithmetik
sich aufzubauen dachte, in’s Wanken geräth. Es scheint danach, dass die Umwandlung der Allgemeinheit
einer Gleichheit in eine Werthverlaufsgleichheit (§9 meiner Grundgesetze) nicht immer erlaubt ist, dass
mein Gesetz V (§20 S. 36) falsch ist und dass meine Ausführungen im §31 nicht genügen, in allen Fällen
meinen Zeichenverbindungen eine Bedeutung zu sichern.’
4Cf. [9]: chapter 17 and, for critical discussion, [4].
5We shall, in fact, not work with the term logic of Frege’s original theory, but rather with reconstructions
of this theory in terms of second-order predicate logics. This deviation from Frege’s setting would seem to
be harmless as regards the source of the Russell antinomy.
6John Burgess, in his forthcoming monograph [7], discusses this approach (as well as others) to ﬁxing
Frege’s logic in much greater detail than is here possible. Much interesting and important work has been
done on consistent modiﬁcations of Frege’s systems in Grundlagen and Grundgesetze, e.g., by G. Boolos,
K. Fine, R. Hale, R. Heck, C. Wright, and E. Zalta; but insofar as their systems are not fragments strictu
sensu of the Grundgesetze theory, their discussion falls outside the scope of the present note. The interested
reader should consult, e.g., the collection of papers in [8], [11], and [1].

Consistent Fragments of Frege’s Grundgesetze
249
range) (ˆx)F(x). These extensions are governed by Grundgesetz V:
∀F∀G

(ˆx)F(x) = ( ˆy)G(y) ↔∀z(F(z) ↔G(z))

.
That is, for any concepts F and G, their extensions (ˆx)F(x) and ( ˆy)G(y) coincide
if and only if the same objects fall under F as fall under G. Thus, basic law V is
essentially an extensionality axiom for value-ranges.
Russell’s paradox now arises as follows: Consider the concept R such that an object
a falls under R if and only if a is the value-range of some concept F under which
a does not fall. By (impredicative) second-order comprehension, such a concept R
exists:
∃R ∀a

R(a) ↔∃F(a = (ˆz)F(z) ∧¬F(a))

.
Now let r be the extension of R, r = ( ˆy)R(y). Suppose that r falls under R. By
deﬁnition of R, r is then the extension of some F such that r does not fall under F,
i.e., ∃F(r = (ˆz)F(z) ∧¬F(r)). So (ˆz)F(z) = r = ( ˆy)R(y). Using basic law V,
we ﬁnd that ∀x(F(x) ↔R(x)), that is, F and R are coextensional. Hence, since r
does not fall under F, we also have ¬R(r). Cancelling the assumption that r falls
under R, we have shown that R(r) →¬R(r), hence ¬R(r). By deﬁnition of R,
this means that for any concept F, if r is the extension of F, then r falls under F,
i.e., ∀F(r = (ˆz)F(z) →F(r)). By specialising the universally quantiﬁed second-
order variable F to R (R is in the second-order domain of quantiﬁcation by the above
instance of the comprehension schema), and noting that r is the extension of R, we
obtain R(r). So ¬R(r) and R(r)—voilà the contradiction.
Let us now introduce a symbol for the membership relation by the following
deﬁnition:
x ∈y ↔∀F(y = (ˆz)F(z) →F(x)),
that is, x is a member of y if and only if, whenever y is the extension of some concept
F, x falls under F. We can then immediately obtain the better known class version of
Russell’s paradox from the derivation above: Russell’s condition x ̸∈x transforms,
upon elimination of the deﬁned notion, into ∃F(x = (ˆz)F(z) ∧¬F(x)), that is, into
x’s falling under the concept R introduced above, and the Russell class {y : y ̸∈y} is
just r, the extension of R.7
As is well known, Russell’s paradox is closely related to Cantor’s theorem. In fact,
Russell himself discovered his paradox through an analysis of Cantor’s theorem.8
Cantor’s theorem says that there is no bijection between the ﬁrst- and the second-
order entities (or, in more familiar terms, between the members of a given set A and
7Frege himself discusses (a variant of) this version of the paradox in the Nachwort ([13]: 257), making
use of his analogue of the membership relation introduced in §34 (which is in fact, due to the peculiar
nature of Frege’s system, an application function). We speak of a ‘variant’ here because Frege deﬁnes the
membership relation x ∈y as ∃F(y = (ˆz)F(z)∧F(x)) (this deﬁnition is slightly more natural than the one
used above: if y is not a value-range, then, according to the latter deﬁnition, it has no members, whereas
according to the one we have given, everything will then be a member of y).
8Cf. Russell’s letter to Frege of June 24th, 1902 ([14]: 215-6).

250
K. F. Wehmeier
the subsets of A). The usual proof of this result shows, more speciﬁcally, that there is
no map from the ﬁrst- onto the second-order universe. Alternatively, in order to prove
Cantor’s theorem, one can show that there is no 1-1 map from the second- into the
ﬁrst-order universe. It is this alternative proof that reveals the connection to Russell’s
paradox: Suppose that G 
→G∗is a 1-1 function from the second- into the ﬁrst-order
domain. Now consider the concept C with the following comprehension property:
C(x) ↔∃F(x = F ∗∧¬F(x)).
C∗is a ﬁrst-order entity, so we may ask whether C∗falls under C. Suppose it does.
Then by deﬁnition of C, there is a concept F such that C∗= F ∗and ¬F(C∗). As
G 
→G∗is 1-1, F and C are the same, and so ¬C(C∗). Cancelling the supposition
that C(C∗), we obtain C(C∗) →¬C(C∗), i.e., ¬C(C∗). Again by deﬁnition of C,
this means that ∀F(C∗= F ∗→F(C∗)), from which C(C∗) immediately follows.
As C(C∗) and ¬C(C∗) cannot both be true, we must conclude that G 
→G∗is not 1-1.
It should be clear that, in this version, Cantor’s theorem basically is Russell’s para-
dox: Reading (ˆx)G(x) instead of G∗and noting that basic law V claims this function
to be 1-1, the proofs are literally identical.9 It is the more surprising that Frege failed
to realize at the outset that his value-range function would lead to inconsistency, as he
was clearly aware of Cantor’s theorem: In §164 of the second volume of Grundge-
setze, he mentions that there are more classes of natural numbers than natural numbers,
without crediting this insight to Cantor:
Now an inﬁnite number, which we have called Endless, belongs to the
concept ﬁnite number; but this inﬁnity does not yet sufﬁce. If we call the
extension of a concept that is subordinate to the concept ﬁnite number
a class of ﬁnite numbers, then an inﬁnite number that is greater than
Endless belongs to the concept class of ﬁnite numbers; i.e., the concept
ﬁnite number can be mapped into the concept class of ﬁnite numbers, but
not vice versa the latter into the former.10
It remains puzzling why Frege did not see the consequences of Cantor’s result for his
own logical system. In any case, Russell did, and we shall now discuss how to avoid
the antinomy by weakening the second-order comprehension schema.
9Cf. [5] for an illuminating discussion of these matters.
10Cf. [13]: 161 (the translation is mine): ‘Nun kommt ja dem Begriffe endliche Anzahl eine unendliche
Anzahl zu, die wir Endlos genannt haben; aber diese Unendlichkeit genügt noch nicht. Nennen wir den
Umfang eines Begriffes, der dem Begriffe endliche Anzahl untergeordnet ist, eine Klasse endlicher An-
zahlen, so kommt dem Begriffe Klasse endlicher Anzahlen eine unendliche Anzahl zu, die grösser als
Endlos ist; d.h. es lässt sich der Begriff endliche Anzahl abbilden in den Begriff Klasse endlicher Anzahlen,
aber nicht umgekehrt dieser in jenen.’ It seems worth noting that Frege here deviates from the terminology
he introduced in volume I: We can clearly map the sets of natural numbers into the natural numbers—by
mapping every set to 0, say. But there is no 1-1 map from the sets of numbers into the numbers, so Frege
presumably means ‘map 1-1 into’ when he says ‘map into’. Or perhaps the vice versa clause is intended to
mean that, whenever a relation maps the natural numbers into the sets of natural numbers, the converse of
that relation will not map the sets into the numbers. The point seems marginal, but Frege’s sloppiness is
somewhat surprising.

Consistent Fragments of Frege’s Grundgesetze
251
2. Restricting the Comprehension Schema
We saw in the informal derivation of Russell’s antinomy above that a certain instance
of the comprehension schema plays a pivotal role in the proof, viz.,
∃R ∀x

R(x) ↔∃F(x = (ˆz)F(z) ∧¬F(x))

.
It seems natural to ask what happens when comprehension is not available, or available
only for formulae of a complexity below that of ∃F(x = (ˆz)F(z) ∧¬F(x)). Peter
Schroeder-Heister [18] conjectured that, in the complete absence of comprehension,
that is, in the ﬁrst-order fragment of Frege’s theory, the antinomy would no longer be
derivable. This was later conﬁrmed by Terence Parsons [17]. We shall consider this
system in subsection 2.1. Parsons’ consistency proof was then extended, by Richard
Heck [16], to the predicative fragment of Frege’s theory, where the comprehension for-
mulae must not contain any second-order quantiﬁers. We shall discuss Heck’s theory,
and some observations concerning it made in [19], in subsection 2.2. Subsequently,
we brieﬂy turn to a discussion of the 1
1-CA fragment of Frege’s theory that was re-
cently proven consistent by Fernando Ferreira and the present author [10]. In the ﬁnal
subsection 2.4, we consider a related, though weaker theory proved consistent and
discussed in [19], and contrast its linguistic setup with that of the theories discussed
earlier.
2.1. The First-Order Fragment
We shall follow Heck [16] rather than Parsons [17] in setting out the ﬁrst-order frag-
ment. This is for reasons of convenience, as Parsons conscientiously works with a
Fregean term logic, whereas the systems to be considered later are all based on pred-
icate logic. In a ﬁrst-order theory, we can obviously not formulate basic law V with
the help of second-order universal quantiﬁcation, as we did above. Thus we consider
here schema V instead, that is, all instances of the schema
(ˆx)φ(x) = ( ˆy)ψ(y) ↔∀z(φ(z) ↔ψ(z)),
where φ and ψ are any formulae of the ﬁrst-order fragment’s language L1. The terms
and formulae of L1 are generated by the following inductive deﬁnition:
1. Every individual variable is a term.
2. If s and t are terms, then s = t is a formula.
3. Boolean combinations of formulae are formulae.
4. If x is an individual variable and φ(x) is a formula, then ∀xφ(x) is a formula
and (ˆx)φ(x) is a term (a value-range or VR term, as we shall say).

252
K. F. Wehmeier
Parsons builds a structure for this language satisfying all instances of schema V as
follows. Take ω as the domain of quantiﬁcation. Assign the closed VR terms (where
parameters from ω are allowed) natural numbers as ranks according to the rule: If
φ(x) contains no VR terms, then the rank of (ˆx)φ(x) is 0; if it does contain VR terms,
and the maximal rank of a VR term occurring in it is n, then the rank of (ˆx)φ(x) is
n + 1. Within a given rank, order the closed VR terms arbitrarily into an ω-sequence.
Partition ω (or some inﬁnite subset of it) into inﬁnitely many inﬁnite candidate sets
Ui (i < ω). Now assign values from ∞
i=0 Ui to the closed VR terms by recursion
on ω2. Suppose you are treating the mth VR term of rank n, (ˆx)φ(x), say. All closed
instances of VR terms occurring in φ(x) have rank lower than n and have thus already
been assigned values. It is therefore determined whether for some VR term (ˆx)ψ(x)
treated at some earlier stage we have ∀x(φ(x) ↔ψ(x)). If this is the case, we assign
to (ˆx)φ(x) whatever was assigned to (ˆx)ψ(x) before. Otherwise, we assign it the
ﬁrst element of Un not yet used. In this way, we clearly obtain a model of the full
schema V.11
We note in passing that John Burgess [6] has recently given a more constructive
proof of Parsons’ result. Furthermore, Warren Goldfarb [15] has shown that the ﬁrst-
orderfragmentisrecursivelyundecidable, soitisnotcompletelytrivialmathematically
(although it is unknown whether the theory is essentially undecidable). However, it
does not seem likely that any interesting mathematics can be developed within this
fragment.
2.2. The Predicative Fragment
The language L2 of Heck’s predicative fragment H results from Parsons’L1 by adding
second-order variables and quantiﬁers. That is, the terms and formulae of L2 are
generated by the clauses given above for L1, supplemented by a clause for building
atomic formulae F(t) from second-order variables F and terms t, and closure under
universal second-order quantiﬁcation. Schema V is as before, where of course the
instances are now formed by inserting arbitrary L2-formulae for φ and ψ. In addition
to schema V, H has as axioms all instances of predicative comprehension, that is, all
instances of
∃F∀x(F(x) ↔φ(x)),
where φ contains no second-order quantiﬁer. The deductive apparatus of H may be
taken to be that of two-sorted ﬁrst-order logic, where the objects and concepts represent
the sorts.
11An anonymous referee asked whether the ﬁrst-order fragment has ﬁnite models. This is not the case:
Any model must contain values for (ˆx)(x = x) and (ˆx)(x ̸= x); since no model is empty, by schema
V, these two VR terms must denote distinct objects in any model. But then, ( ˆy)(y = (ˆx)(x = x)),
( ˆy)(y = (ˆx)(x ̸= x)), and (ˆx)(x = x) must all have distinct values by schema V, etc.

Consistent Fragments of Frege’s Grundgesetze
253
We start by building a model for the ﬁrst-order fragment of H by Parsons’ proce-
dure, assigning values to closed VR terms containing no second-order variables (but
possibly parameters from ω), where we take care to choose the Ui in such a way that
∞
i=0 Ui has an inﬁnite complement. We expand the resulting ﬁrst-order structure
to a second-order structure by letting the second-order quantiﬁer range over the ﬁrst-
order deﬁnable subsets of ω. Now we assign values to those closed VR terms of L2
that contain second-order parameters, but no second-order quantiﬁers, simply by ex-
panding the parameters to their ﬁrst-order deﬁnitions and choosing the value that was
assigned to the corresponding ﬁrst-order VR term. At this stage, we have stipulated
enough in order for the predicative comprehension schema to be valid, as is easy to
see. It remains to take care of those VR terms that contain, besides possibly ﬁrst- and
second-order parameters, second-order quantiﬁers. This can be done more or less as
in the original Parsons procedure, using the inﬁnite complement of ∞
i=0 Ui as values
for the properly impredicative VR terms. It is then easy to check that all instances of
schema V hold.
As was observed in [19], the theory H has a curious property: it proves the existence
of objects that are not value-ranges. That is, the sentence ∃x ∀G

x ̸= ( ˆy)G(y)

is a
theorem of H. There is even a term of L2 witnessing this existential sentence, viz.,
the term r for the Russell class introduced above: (ˆz)(∃F(z = (ˆv)F(v) ∧¬F(z))).
In other words, there is a value-range term of L2 of which H proves that it does not
denote a value-range. The proof is simple, and makes no use of the comprehension
schema at all:
Argue in H. As before, let R(x) be the formula ∃F(x = (ˆv)F(v) ∧¬F(x)).
Now assume R(r), that is, ∃F(r = (ˆv)F(v) ∧¬F(r)). Take such an F. Since
(ˆv)F(v) = r = (ˆz)R(z), by the appropriate instance of schemaV, ∀x(F(x) ↔R(x)).
So, since ¬F(r), we also have ¬R(r). As above, we cancel the assumption and
conclude R(r) →¬R(r), i.e., ¬R(r). This means ∀F(r = (ˆv)F(v) →F(r)). Now
suppose that for some second-order G, r = ( ˆy)G(y). It follows that G(r) holds; but by
schema V, it also follows that ∀x(R(x) ↔G(x)), and hence R(r), contradiction. So
the assumption must be false, and we have proven ∀G

r ̸= ( ˆy)G(y)

. By exploiting
other Russellian antinomies, one can indeed provide any ﬁnite number of terms all of
which fail to denote value-ranges; see [19].12
We shall come back to these matters in section 2.4. For now we note that, as Heck
[16] has shown, Robinson’s arithmetic Q can be interpreted in H, and so the theory
is essentially undecidable. But it is unclear, though unlikely, whether much more
arithmetic can be developed within the predicative fragment. We now turn brieﬂy to
an extension of Heck’s predicative fragment whose consistency was doubted in [16],
viz., the 1
1-CA fragment.
12If one identiﬁes the value-ranges with the logical objects, as I suggest in [19], these results may be
reformulated as saying that H proves the existence of any ﬁnite number of non-logical objects. This seems
correct as far as H goes; however, Burgess [7] points out that, if one moves on to the ramiﬁed predicative
fragment, objects that are not value-ranges of any ﬁrst-level concept may well be value-ranges of concepts
of higher level. Similar observations pertain to the theories discussed below.)

254
K. F. Wehmeier
2.3. The 1
1-CA Fragment
Inspection of the proof of the Russell antinomy shows that the instance of com-
prehension used has complexity 1
1, i.e., the comprehension formula has the form
∃Fφ(F), where φ is predicative. Alternatively, one could use a comprehension for-
mula of complexity 1
1 (that is, of the form ∀Fφ(F) with predicative φ), viz., the
variant ∀F(x = (ˆz)F(z) →¬F(x)) of the Russell concept, to generate the contradic-
tion. Hence both 1
1- and 1
1-comprehension are inconsistent with schema V (in fact,
either one of these schemas implies the other). This led Heck [16] to ask whether the
schema of 1
1-comprehension would be inconsistent with basic law V as well, where
this schema can be described as the set of all instances of
∀x(φ(x) ↔ψ(x)) →∃F∀x(F(x) ↔φ(x)),
φ being a 1
1-formula, ψ a 1
1-formula, and F not occurring free in φ. A partial answer
was given in [19], to which we shall come back in the next subsection; however, the
linguistic setting of the theory considered in that paper is rather different from that
of H. In [10] it was ﬁnally shown that 1
1-comprehension can indeed be consistently
added to H. The idea of the proof is as follows: We start by building a model of the
ﬁrst-order fragment in the spirit of Parsons. This model has a recursively saturated
elementary extension, on which we then perform the Heck construction to obtain a
model of H. It can then be shown, by methods introduced in [2], that the recursive
saturation of the ﬁrst-order part forces this model to validate even 1
1-comprehension.
Adding 1
1-comprehension to H obviously results in a stronger theory; it remains
doubtful, however, whether much more arithmetic can be done within this extension
than within the original theory. Clearly, the observations concerning the existence of
objects that are not value-ranges continue to hold for this extension of H.
2.4. The Theory T
To motivate the discussion in this section, let us return to the curious feature of H (and
any consistent extension thereof) noted in subsection 2.2 above, viz., the provable exis-
tence of objects other than value-ranges. As pointed out, H proves ∀F

r ̸= (ˆz)F(z)

for a term r that purports to denote a value range. It cannot denote the value range of
any concept, however, because the formula from which it is derived is properly im-
predicative, so that no second-order entity corresponds to it. Only a VR term derived
from a predicative formula will actually denote the value-range of some second-order
entity. So we have many mock VR terms around—VR terms constructed out of im-
predicative formulae that do not deﬁne an entity in the second-order domain. As Heck
[16] points out, such impredicative VR terms are mock also with regard to the mem-
bership relation: If we let x ∈y stand for ∃F(y = (ˆz)F(z)∧F(x)), we will be able to
prove, within H, that x ∈(ˆz)φ(z) always implies φ(x); however, only for predicative
φ does H prove the converse.13
13On the alternative deﬁnition of membership x ∈y :≡∀F(y = (ˆz)F(z) →F(x)), the converse will
always be provable, but the original direction only for predicative φ.

Consistent Fragments of Frege’s Grundgesetze
255
As shown in [19], the provable existence of non-value-ranges does not, as one
might expect, hinge on the existence of mock VR terms. The theory T proved
consistent there is based on a linguistic setting rather different from those of the other
fragments considered so far. This is because the value range operator is construed as a
third-order function symbol, which accordingly can only be attached to second-order
variables, yielding terms of the form ˆF, but not to arbitrary formulae. Grundgesetz V
is formulated as one single second-order axiom14:
∀F∀G
 ˆF = ˆG ↔∀z(F(z) ↔G(z))

.
In addition, T has all instances of the 1
1 comprehension schema as axioms. While
we may of course introduceVR terms (ˆz)φ(z) into this language by way of deﬁnitional
extension, this will be possible only for formulae φ that are provably 1
1, and so all
VR terms introducible in T do actually denote value-ranges of second-order entities.
Nevertheless, we can still prove that some things are not value-ranges; indeed, the
non-value-ranges do not even form a concept. This can be seen as follows:
Argue in T and suppose ∃H ∀x(H(x) ↔∃F(x =
ˆF)).
Then, essentially,
the 1
1- and the 1
1-version of the Russell formula are equivalent, and hence 1
1:
∃F(x = ˆF ∧¬F(x)) ↔∀G(Hx ∧(x = ˆG →¬G(x))). Thus, a second-order
entity is deﬁned by the Russell formula, and the antinomy follows as before. So there
is no concept under which precisely the value-ranges fall. It follows that there must
be objects other than value-ranges (otherwise the value range concept would simply
be the universal concept, which is predicatively deﬁned by the formula x = x).
3. Closing Remarks
We have surveyed a number of consistent fragments of (a second-order predicate logic
reconstruction of) the theory of Frege’s Grundgesetze der Arithmetik that arise by re-
stricting the second-order comprehension schema. Presumably, none of these theories
are of sufﬁcient mathematical strength to provide a reconstruction of arithmetic, or
even real analysis, in a Fregean spirit. But even if it turned out that a signiﬁcant por-
tion of arithmetic could be so developed, the fact remains that these theories (except
the ﬁrst-order fragment) prove certain claims that would seem to be unacceptable for
a Fregean logicist, in particular, the existence of objects that are not value-ranges.
The point is not that these theories prove the existence of inﬁnitely many objects sim-
pliciter, for, if they were to provide a foundation for arithmetic, they had better do so.
But the existence of urelemente—in fact arbitrarily (ﬁnitely) many of them—should
certainly not follow from a theory that deserves the epithet ‘logical’.15
14Note that, in the context of H and its consistent extensions, this axiom trivially follows from schema
V, but not vice versa.
15See, however, footnote 12 concerning ramiﬁed theories.

256
K. F. Wehmeier
The fragment of section 2.3 is the strongest consistent theory obtainable from
Grundgesetze by restricting the comprehension schema (as both 1
1-CA and 1
1-CA
lead to inconsistency), hence it seems that this strategy does not hold much promise
for a Fregean foundation of mathematics. The situation may be otherwise with al-
ternative directions of restricting or modifying Frege’s system, e.g., modiﬁcations of
Grundgesetz V (retaining full comprehension), as discussed for instance in [3].
Acknowledgement. I wish to thank an anonymous referee for a number of helpful
comments.
References
[1]
Anderson, David J., and Edward N. Zalta: 2004. Frege, Boolos, and Logical Objects.
Journal of Philosophical Logic 33: 1–26.
[2]
Barwise, Jon, and John Schlipf: 1975. On recursively saturated models of arithmetic. In:
D. H. Saracino and V. B. Weispfenning (eds.), Model Theory and Algebra. Lecture Notes
in Mathematics 498, Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 42–55.
[3]
Boolos, George: 1986/87. Saving Frege from contradiction. Proceedings of the Aris-
totelian Society n.s. 87: 137–151.
[4]
Boolos, George: 1993. Whence the contradiction? Aristotelian Society Supplementary
Volume 67: 213–233.
[5]
Boolos, George: 1997. Constructing Cantorian counterexamples. Journal of Philosoph-
ical Logic 26: 237–239.
[6]
Burgess, John: 1998. On a consistent subsystem of Frege’s Grundgesetze. Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic 39: 274–278.
[7]
Burgess, John: forthcoming. Fixing Frege. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
[8]
Demopoulos, William (ed.): 1995. Frege’s Philosophy of Mathematics. Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
[9]
Dummett, Michael: 1991. Frege: Philosophy of Mathematics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
[10]
Ferreira, Fernando, and Kai F. Wehmeier: 2002. On the consistency of the 1
1-CA frag-
ment of Frege’s Grundgesetze. Journal of Philosophical Logic 31: 301–311.
[11]
Fine, Kit: 2002. The Limits of Abstraction. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[12]
Frege, Gottlob: 1893. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, I. Band. Jena: Hermann Pohle.
[13]
Frege, Gottlob: 1903. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, II. Band. Jena: Hermann Pohle.
[14]
Frege, Gottlob: 1976. Wissenschaftlicher Briefwechsel. Edited by G. Gabriel et al., Ham-
burg: Felix Meiner.
[15]
Goldfarb,Warren: 2001.First-orderFregetheoryisundecidable.JournalofPhilosophical
Logic 30: 613–616.

Consistent Fragments of Frege’s Grundgesetze
257
[16]
Heck, Richard: 1996. The consistency of predicative fragments of Frege’s Grundgesetze
der Arithmetik. History and Philosophy of Logic 17: 209–220.
[17]
Parsons, Terence: 1987. On the consistency of the ﬁrst-order portion of Frege’s logical
system. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 28: 161–168.
[18]
Schroeder-Heister, Peter: 1987.A model-theoretic reconstruction of Frege’s permutation
argument, Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 28: 69–79.
[19] Wehmeier, Kai F.: 1999. Consistent fragments of Grundgesetze and the existence of
non-logical objects. Synthese 121: 309–328.
Logic and Philosophy of Science
UC Irvine
Irvine, CA 92697-5100
USA
E-mail: wehmeier@uci.edu


On a Russellian Paradox about Propositions
and Truth
Andrea Cantini
Abstract. We deal with a paradox involving the relations between propositions and sets (Ap-
pendix B of Principles of Mathematics), and the problem of its formalization. We ﬁrst propose
two (mutually incompatible) abstract theories of propositions and truth. The systems are pred-
icatively inspired and are shown consistent by constructing suitable inductive models.
We then consider a reconstruction of a theory of truth in the context of (a consistent fragment
of) Quine’s set theory NF. The theory is motivated by an alternative route to the solution of the
Russellian difﬁculty and yields an impredicative semantical system, where there exists a high
degree of self-reference and yet paradoxes are blocked by restrictions to the diagonalization
mechanism.
1. A Paradox of Russell Concerning the Type of Propositions
The doctrine of types is put forward tentatively in the second appendix of the Principles
(§500). It is assumed that to each propositional function φ a range of signiﬁcance is
associated, i.e., a class of objects to which the given φ applies in order to produce a
proposition; moreover, precisely the ranges of signiﬁcance form types. However there
are objects that are not ranges of signiﬁcance; these are just the individuals and they
form the lowest type. The next type consists of classes or ranges of individuals; then
one has classes of classes of objects of the lowest type, and so on.
Once the hierarchy is accepted, new difﬁculties arise; in particular, if one accepts
that propositions form a type (as they are the only objects of which it can be meaning-
fully asserted that they are true or false). This is a crucial point and leads Russell to a
contradiction, which explicitly involves semantical notions.
First of all, since it is possible to form types of propositions, there are more
types of propositions than propositions, by Cantor’s argument. But then there is an
argument which, if sound, apparently refutes Cantor’s theorem: we can inject types
of propositions into propositions by appealing to the notion of logical product.1
1A ﬁrst discussion of the problem already appears in §349 of [20], where Russell deals with cases
in which the conclusion of Cantor’s theorem is plainly false. In this context, he mentions the crucial
paradoxical embedding of classes into propositions, without solution: “I reluctantly leave the problem to
the ingenuity of the reader”, p. 368.

260
A. Cantini
Indeed, let m be a type of propositions; to m we can associate a proposition m
which expresses that “every proposition of m is true” (to be regarded as a possibly
inﬁnitary conjunction or logical product). Now, if m and n are (extensionally) different
types, the propositions m and n must be regarded as distinct for Russell, i.e., the
map m →m is injective. Of course, if one were to adopt the extensional point of
view, and hence equivalent propositions should be identiﬁed, no contradiction could
be derived. But for Russell nobody will identify two propositions if they are simply
logically equivalent; the proper equality on propositions must be much more ﬁne-
grained than logical equivalence. For instance, the proposition “every proposition
which is either an m or asserts that every element of m is true, is true” is not identical
with the proposition “every element of m is true” and yet the two are certainly logically
equivalent.
Of course, the conﬂict can easily be rephrased into the form of an explicit paradox:
if we accept {p | ∃m(m = p ∧p /∈m)} = R as a well-deﬁned type,2 we have, by
injectivity of ,
R ∈R ⇔R /∈R,
whence a contradiction.
So, if we stick to injectivity of , we have to change some basic tenet, e.g., to
reject the assumption that propositions form one type, and hence that they ought to
have various types, while logical products ought to have propositions of the same type
as factors.
This will be eventually the base of the 1908 solution, but here Russell refutes
the suggestion as harsh and artiﬁcial; as the reader can verify from the text,3 he still
believes that the set of all propositions is a counterexample to Cantor’s theorem.
The Principles of Mathematics, as its coeval Fregean second volume of the
Grundgesetze, conclude with an unsolved antinomy and Russell declares that “what
the complete solution of the difﬁculty may be”, he has not succeeded in discovering;
“but as it affects the very foundations of reasoning”, he earnestly commends “the study
of it to the attention of all students of logic” ([20]: 528).
1.1. A Formal Outlook
In the literature there have been attempts to connect Russell’s contradiction on propo-
sitions to modal paradoxes, see [17]; quite recently, Cocchiarella [5] shows how
to resolve the contradiction in intensional logics that are equiconsistent with NFU,
2Of course, in the deﬁnition of R the quantiﬁer ranges over types of propositions.
3See [20]: 527, footnote: “It might be doubted whether the relation of propositions to their logical
products is one-one or many one. For example, does the logical product of p and q and r differ from that
of pq and r? A reference to the deﬁnition of the logical product (p. 21) will set this doubt at rest; for
the two logical products in question, though equivalent, are by non means identical. Consequently there
is a one-one relation of all ranges of propositions to some propositions, which is directly contradictory to
Cantor’s theorem.”

On a Russellian Paradox about Propositions and Truth
261
Quine’s set theory with atoms. There is also a book of P. Grim [12], which is entirely
devoted to related issues .
In the following we ﬁrst show that Russell’s argument can naturally be formalized
and resolved within the framework of a theory PT of operations, propositions and
truth, which is closely related to Aczel’s (classical) Frege structures [1]. We then
consider a variant of PT, proving that the very notion of propositional function deﬁnes
a propositional function (this is refuted in PT).
PT will comprise the axioms of combinatory logic with extensionality [2] and the
abstract axioms for truth and propositions (T , P respectively). We assume that the
language contains individual constants ˙→, ˙∧, ˙¬, ˙∀, representing the logical operations
→, ∧, ¬, ∀, and individual constants ˙=, ˙T , ˙P , representing the ground predicate
symbols =, T and P . We implicitly assume suitable independence axioms among
the dotted symbols (e.g., ˙¬ ̸= ˙∨, ˙¬x ̸= ˙∨x, etc.), granting provability of a formal
analogue of the unique readability property.
It is then straightforward to deﬁne an operation A →[A], which assigns to each
formula of the language a term [A] with the same free variables of A, which designates
the “propositional object” associated with A.4 As usual, since we can deﬁne lambda
abstraction, we can identify class abstraction {x | A} with λx.[A].
We also deﬁne:
P F(f ) ⇔(∀x)(P (f x));
f := ˙∀(λx( ˙→(f x)x));
a ≡e b ⇔(T a ↔T b);
a =e b ⇔∀x(T (ax) ↔T (bx));
f ⊆P ⇔∀x(T (f x) →P (x));
˙∨ab := ˙¬( ˙∧( ˙¬a)( ˙¬b));
˙∃f := ˙¬(˙∀(λx. ˙¬(f x))).
As to the terminology, if P F(f ) is assumed, we say that f is a propositional function;
sometimes we use x ∈f instead of T (f x).
The point we wish to raise is that at the very beginning of his foundational work,
Russell hits upon arguments which naturally require a framework where semantical
notions as well as the logical notion of set (as extension of propositional function) live
on the same par.
Deﬁnition 1. We list the basic principles for propositions and truth; we essentially
extend the principles implicit in the deﬁnition of Frege structure à la Aczel [1], with
a few extra axioms.
P1 P([x = y]) ∧(T ([x = y]) ↔x = y);
P2 T (a) →P (a);
4This is an idea of D. Scott, see [3].

262
A. Cantini
P3 P(a) →T ([P (a)]);
P4 P([P(a)]) →P (a);
P5 P([T (a)]) ↔P (a);
P6 T ([T (a)]) ↔T (a);
P7 P(a) →(¬T (a) →T ( ˙¬a));
P8 T ( ˙¬a) →¬T (a);
P9 P( ˙¬a) ↔P (a);
P10 P(a) ∧(T (a) →P (b)) →P ( ˙→ab);
P11 P( ˙→ab) →(T (a) →P (b));
P12 P( ˙→ab) →(T (a) →T (b) →T ( ˙→ab));
P13 T ( ˙→ab) →(T (a) →T (b));
P14 P(a) ∧P (b) ↔P ( ˙∧ab);
P15 T ( ˙∧ab) ↔T (a) ∧T (b);
P16 ∀xP (f x) ↔P (˙∀f );
P17 T (˙∀f ) ↔∀x(T (f x)).
Remark 1. (i) The axioms above imply a strict interpretation of (classically deﬁned)
disjunction and existential quantiﬁer. By contrast with Aczel’s original framework, it
is assumed that it makes sense to use the predicates ‘to be a proposition’ and ‘to be
true’ as logical constructors on the same par as the standard logical operators.
(ii) The question “to which kinds of object can truth be rightly attributed” is a
debatable issue among philosophers. For instance, in the Tarskian approach or in
Kripke’s paper [16] truth is attributed to (objects representing) sentences, i.e., to ele-
ments of an inductively deﬁned syntactical category. In contrast, we emphasize that
here propositions form an abstract collection of objects, which are only required to
meet certain broad closure conditions; being members of a combinatory structure, they
can be freely combined for obtaining self-referential side effects for free. In general
no induction on propositions is assumed (even if this might be true in some model,
cf. §2). Also, the system is non-committal about the (delicate) question of deﬁning
a proper intensional equality for propositions. Here propositions inherit a neutral
equality relation, determined by the applicative behaviour in the ground structure.

On a Russellian Paradox about Propositions and Truth
263
Lemma 1 (PT). (i) If P F(f ) and f ⊆P , then f is a proposition such that
T (f ) ↔(∀x(T (f x) →T (x))).
Moreover:
T (a) ↔T ( ˙¬( ˙¬a));
T ([¬T (a)]) ↔T ( ˙¬a);
T ([P (a)]) ↔P (a);
∃x¬T ([¬P (x)]);
P ( ˙∨ab) ↔P (a) ∧P (b);
P (a) ∧P (b) →(T ( ˙∨ab) ↔T (a) ∨T (b));
P (˙∃f ) ↔∀xP (f x);
∀xP(f x) →(T (˙∃f ) ↔∃xT (f x)).
(ii) We also have:
f = g →f = g
P F(a) ∧P F(b) ∧a =e b →(a ≡e b)
(iii)  is not extensionally injective, i.e., there exist propositional functions a, b
such that
a ≡e b ∧¬(a =e b).
Proof. As to (i), we only check the ﬁrst claim (using axioms for ˙→, ˙∀)
P F(f ) ∧f ⊆P ⇒P (f x) ∧(T (f x) →P (x))
⇒P ( ˙→(f x)x)
⇒P F(λx. ˙→(f x)x)
⇒P (f )
⇒T (f ) ↔∀x(T (f x) →T (x))
(ii): apply injectivity of ˙∀, ˙→and extensionality for operations.
(iii): choose a = {[K = K], [S = S]}5 and b = {[K = K]}; then a ≡e b,
but a and b are extensionally distinct propositional functions).
Clearly, we can derive the Tarskian T-schema:
Proposition 1. If A is an arbitrary formula, then PT proves:
P ([A]) →(T ([A]) ↔A)
5Of course {a, b} stands for {x|x = a ∨x = b}.

264
A. Cantini
Proposition 2 (Russell’s Appendix B, [20]). The term
{x | ∃m(P F(m) ∧m ⊆P ∧x /∈m ∧x = m)}
does not deﬁne a propositional function, provably in PT.
Proof. Let
R := {x | ∃m(P F(m) ∧m ⊆P ∧x /∈m ∧x = m)}.
Assume by contradiction that P F(R). Then, by applying the closure conditions of P ,
T and lemma 1:
(∀x ∈R)(P (x)).
Hence:
P (R).
Now we have, for some m:
R ∈R ⇒R = m ∧P F(m) ∧m ⊆P ∧R /∈m.
By the previous lemma ( is 1-1), R = m and hence R /∈R. But R /∈R implies
R ∈R, since R is a propositional function of propositions.
Lemma 2 (PT). If P is a propositional function, then P F itself is a propositional
function.
Proof. If P is a propositional function, we have:
⇒∀x.P([P (x)])
⇒∀x.P([P (f x)])
⇒∀f P ([∀x.P (f x)])
⇒∀f P ([P F(f )])
Theorem 1 (PT). P F and P are not propositional functions.
Proof. By the previous lemma, it is enough to show that P F is not a propositional
function.
Assume P F is a propositional function. The axioms on the relation between P
and ∀imply:
∀x∀u.P ([P (xu)]).
Hence using the axiom P ([P (xu)]) →P (xu), we conclude:
∀x.PF(x),

On a Russellian Paradox about Propositions and Truth
265
against the previous proposition.
Alternative argument: If λx.P F(x) is a propositional function, we can show with the
implication axioms that
W := {x | P F(x) ∧(P F(x) →˙¬(xx))}
is a propositional function. Then the standard Russell paradox arises.
The conclusion is that under relatively mild hypotheses (a notion of truth which
obeys to classical laws, endowed with an abstract notion of proposition) the paradox
disappears. Clearly, no propositional function reasonably deﬁning the power class of
the collection of propositions can exist in the above framework; on the same par, the
collection of propositions cannot give rise to a well-deﬁned propositional function.
The solution is compatible with Russell’s no-class theory: it could be assumed that the
universe of classes exactly includes those collections which are represented by terms
of the form {x | A(x)}, where A(x) deﬁnes a propositional function, cf. the model
construction of §2.
1.2. An Alternative Theory of Truth and Propositions
Deﬁnition 2. We describe a variant AT of the system PT, which is so devised that the
assumption “P F(x) is a proposition” is consistent:
A1 P([x = y]) ∧(T ([x = y]) ↔x = y);
A2 T (a) →P (a);
A3 ∀xT ([¬P (x)]);
A4 P ([T (a)]) ↔P (a);
A5 T ([T (a)]) ↔T (a);
A6 P (a) →(¬T (a) →T ( ˙¬a));
A7 T ( ˙¬a) →¬T (a);
A8 P( ˙¬a) ↔P (a);
A9 P (a) ∧P (b) ↔P ( ˙∧ab);
A10 T ( ˙∧ab) ↔T (a) ∧T (b);
A11 ∀xP (f x) ↔P (˙∀f );
A12 T (˙∀f ) ↔∀x(T (f x)).

266
A. Cantini
The typical principle of the system is A3, according to which no claim about P (a)
can be internally true. A3 implies with A2, A8 the following principle ():
∀x.P([P (x)]).
It follows from () that AT is inconsistent with the axiom:
P ([P (x)]) →P (x).
Indeed, let L be the Liar object L = ˙¬(L). Since P ([P (L)]) holds, we have P (L)
and we can conclude with the negation axioms that T ( ˙¬L) ↔¬T (L), whence a
contradiction.
Moreover, if we apply () and A11, we obtain:
Proposition 3 (AT). λx.P F(x) is a propositional function.
Observe also thatA3 implies that the PT-axiom P (a) →T ([P (a)]) is inconsistent
with AT (choose a := [x = y]).
On the other hand, similarly to PT, we can prove in AT:
T ([¬T (a)]) ↔T ( ˙¬a).
In order to appreciate the difference in strength between AT and PT, it may be of
interest to compare the closure properties of propositional functions in the two systems.
First of all, both systems are closed under elementary comprehension. Indeed, if ⃗a
is a ﬁnite list a0, . . . , an of variables distinct from x, we say that A(x, ⃗a), where
FV (A) ⊆⃗a, x,6 is elementary in ⃗a, if A is inductively generated from atomic formulas
of the form t = s, t ∈ai (with 0 ≤i ≤n and no variable of ⃗a free in t, s) by means
of ¬, ∧and quantiﬁcation on variables not occurring in the list ⃗a.
Let PT∩AT be the theory consisting of those axioms which are common to PT
and AT.
Proposition 4 (PT∩AT). If A(x, ⃗a) is elementary in ⃗a and each ai of the list ⃗a is a
propositional function, then {x | A(x, ⃗a)} is a propositional function such that
∀u(u ∈{x | A(x, ⃗a)} ↔A(u, ⃗a)).
However, while propositional functions are closed under disjoint union (or join)
in PT, the same cannot be proved in AT.
Let us justify this claim. We introduce a kind of sequential conjunction ⊙, due to
Aczel [1]:
a ⊙b := a ˙∧(a →b).
Clearly PT proves:
P (a) ∧(T (a) →P (b)) →P (a ⊙b) ∧T (a ⊙b) ↔T (a) ∧T (b).7
6FV(E) is the set of free variables occurring in the expression E.

On a Russellian Paradox about Propositions and Truth
267
Since we have combinatory logic as underlying theory, we can assume to have an
ordered pairing operation x, y →(x, y) with projections u →u0, u →u1. Therefore
it makes sense to deﬁne
(a, f ) := {u | (u = (u0, u1) ∧u0 ∈a ⊙u1 ∈f (u)0)}.
Proposition 5. (i) PT proves that, if a is a propositional function and f x is a proposi-
tional function whenever x ∈a, then (a, f ) is a propositional function satisfying (J):
u ∈(a, f ) ↔u = (u0, u1) ∧u0 ∈a ∧u1 ∈f (u)0.
(ii) AT proves the weak power class axiom: for every propositional function a,
there exists a propositional function P ow−(a) such that
∀u(u ∈P ow−(a) →P F(u) ∧u ⊆a);
∀u(P F(u) ∧u ⊆a →∃b(P F(b) ∧b ∈P ow−(a) ∧u =e b)).
As to the proof, (i) is an immediate consequence of the deﬁnition of ⊙, while (ii)
essentially depends on the fact that P (x) is a proposition for every x, once we set
P ow−(a) = {u | P F(u) ∧∃b(PF(b) ∧u = b ∩a)}.
Corollary 1. AT+(J) is inconsistent.
This follows by adapting Russell’s paradox along the lines of Feferman, see [7].
1.3. PT and AT Are Non-Cantorian
The claim means that in neither truth theory there is a good analogue of the power set
in terms of propositional functions. The reason is given by the results below, which
are provable in the common subtheory of PT andAT (so they do not involve properties
of strong implication nor the fact that λx.P F(x) is a propositional function).
Deﬁnition 3.
(i) (A formula of our language) ϕ(x) is called extensional iff ∀f ∀g(P F(f ) ∧
PF(g) ∧f =e g ∧ϕ(f ) →ϕ(g));
(ii) a formula ϕ(x) such that ∀x(ϕ(x) →P F(x)) is non-trivial, provided there are
propositional functions x, y such that ϕ(x), ¬ϕ(y).
7We assume that ↔binds more strongly than ∧.

268
A. Cantini
Lemma 3 (“Inseparability”, in PT∩AT). Let ϕ1, ϕ2 be extensional formulas and as-
sume that there exist propositional functions x1, x2 such that ϕ1(x1), ϕ2(x2). Then ϕ1
and ϕ2 are P F-inseparable, i.e., for no propositional function x3 we can have:
∀u(P F(u) ∧ϕ2(u) →u /∈x3) ∧∀u(P F(u) ∧ϕ1(u) →u ∈x3)
Proof. Assume that x3 is a propositional function such that
∀u(P F(u) ∧ϕ2(u) →u /∈x3).
It is enough to produce a propositional function g := g(x1, x2, x3) such that
g /∈x3 ∧ϕ1(g).
By the ﬁxed point lemma, choose an element g such that g = Gg, where
Gh = {u | (u ∈x1 ∧h /∈x3) ∨(u ∈x2 ∧h ∈x3)}.
Then, using the common axioms on ∧, ¬ and the assumption that x3, x2, x1 are
propositional functions, we have that g is a propositional function.
If g ∈x3, then g =e x2. Since ϕ2(x2), also ϕ2(g); thus g /∈x3.
Hence g /∈x3, which yields g =e x1. But ϕ1(x1); so ϕ1(g) by extensionality.
Theorem 2 (PT∩AT). No propositional function f can be both extensional and non-
trivial.
So, for instance, there cannot exist a propositional function playing the role of the
power set of {∅}, i.e., whose “range of signiﬁcance” is exactly the collection of all
propositional functions ⊆{∅}: for this would be non-trivial and extensional.
The results above are extensions to the context of Frege structures of results holding
for theories of explicit mathematics, see [4].
2. About Models
We outline two inductive model constructions for PT and AT, respectively.
2.1. PT-Models
The basic idea is to consider any given combinatory algebra as ground universe and to
produce, by generalized inductive deﬁnition, the collections of propositions and truths.
This cannot be simply rephrased as a standard monotone inductive deﬁnition, because
the clause for introducing a proposition of implicative form makes use (negatively) of
the collection of truths. Nevertheless, we can adapt a trick of Aczel [1].8
8As an alternative, we can deﬁne the model by transﬁnite recursion over the ordinals, in much the same
way as the model for Feferman’s theories with the so-called join axiom.

On a Russellian Paradox about Propositions and Truth
269
Fix an extensional combinatory algebra M; let |M| be the universe of M. If
X = ⟨X0, X1⟩, Y = ⟨Y0, Y1⟩, and X0, X1, Y0, Y1 are subsets of M, deﬁne
X ≤Y ⇔X0 ⊆Y0 ∧(∀a ∈X0)(a ∈X1 ↔a ∈Y1).
Let F be the family of all pairs X = ⟨X0, X1⟩of subsets of |M|, satisfying the
restriction X1 ⊆X0. If X ∈F , we call X suitable.9
Lemma 4. The structure ⟨F , ≤⟩is a complete partial ordering.10
We then deﬁne an operator  on suitable subsets of |M|. (X) can be given by
specifying two operators 0(X), 1(X) such that (X) = ⟨0(X), 1(X)⟩. 0(X) is
deﬁned by the following formula A0(x, X):
∃u∃v [ (x = [u = v]) ∨(x = [P u] ∧u ∈X0) ∨
∨(x = [T u] ∧u ∈X0) ∨
∨(x = ( ˙¬u) ∧u ∈X0) ∨
∨((x = (u ˙∨v) ∨x = (u ˙∧v)) ∧u ∈X0 ∧v ∈X0) ∨
∨(x = (u ˙→v) ∧u ∈X0 ∧(u /∈X1 ∨v ∈X0)) ∨
∨((x = ˙∀u ∨x = ˙∃u) ∧∀y(uy ∈X0))].
1(X) is deﬁned by the following formula A1(x, X):
∃u∃v [ (x = [u = v] ∧u = v) ∨
∨(x = [P u] ∧u ∈X0) ∨(x = [T u] ∧u ∈X1) ∨
∨(x = ( ˙¬u) ∧u ∈X0 ∧u /∈X1) ∨
∨(x = (u ˙∨v) ∧u ∈X0 ∧v ∈X0 ∧(u ∈X1 ∨v ∈X1)) ∨
∨(x = (u ˙∧v) ∧u ∈X0 ∧v ∈X0 ∧u ∈X1 ∧v ∈X1) ∨
∨(x = (u ˙→v) ∧
∧(u ∈X0 ∧(u /∈X1 ∨v ∈X0) ∧(u /∈X1 ∨v ∈X1))) ∨
∨(x = ˙∀u ∧∀y(uy ∈X0) ∧∀y(uy ∈X1)) ∨
∨(x = ˙∃u ∧∀y(uy ∈X0) ∧∃y(uy ∈X1))].
The following properties are immediate:
Lemma 5. (i)  : F →F .
(ii) X ≤Y, then (X) ≤(Y) (where X, Y ∈F ). Hence there are sets X ∈F ,
such that X = (X).
9Intuitively, X0 is a candidate for the set of propositions, while X1 represents the corresponding notion
of truth.
10I.e., a partial ordering in which every ≤-increasing sequence of elements of F has a least upper bound
with respect to ≤.

270
A. Cantini
Theorem 3. If X ∈F and X = (X), then
⟨M, X⟩|= PT.
Hence PT is consistent.
The proof of the theorem is straightforward.
2.2. AT-Models
As to the system AT, we ﬁrst inductively deﬁne the set of propositional objects over
a given combinatory algebra. We then exploit the stages assigned to propositional
objects for generating the truth set.
Formally, we ﬁx an extensional combinatory algebra M with universe |M|. We
also assume that our language includes names for objects of |M| (for which we adopt
the same symbols). If t is a term of the expanded language, tM stands for the value of
t in M. We are now ready to deﬁne, by transﬁnite recursion on ordinals, a sequence
{Pα} of subsets of |M|:
• Initial clause:
P0 = {[a = b] | a, b ∈M} ∪{[P a] | a ∈M};
• Limit clause: if λ is a limit ordinal,
Pλ = ∪{Pα | α < λ};
• ¬- and ∧-rules:
a ∈Pα
( ˙¬a)M ∈Pα+1
a ∈Pα
b ∈Pα
(a ˙∧b)M ∈Pα+1
;
• ∀- and T -rules:
for all c ∈|M|, (f c)M ∈Pα
˙∀f M ∈Pα+1
a ∈Pα
( ˙T a)M ∈Pα+1
.
In a similar way, we recursively produce a sequence {Tα} of subsets of |M|, approxi-
mating the truth set :
• Initial clause:
M |= a = b
[a = b]M ∈T0
;

On a Russellian Paradox about Propositions and Truth
271
• Limit clause: if λ is a limit ordinal,
Tλ = ∪{Tα | α < λ};
• First successor clause: if a ∈Pα,
a ∈Tα+1 ⇔a ∈Tα;
• Second successor clause: assume a ∈Pα+1 −Pα. We distinguish several cases
according to the form of a, i.e., a = ˙∀f , ˙T b , ˙¬b, b ˙∧c (respectively).
1. ∀- and T -clauses:
for all c ∈|M|, (f c)M ∈Tα
˙∀f M ∈Tα+1
b ∈Tα
( ˙T b)M ∈Tα+1
;
2. ∧- and ¬-clauses:
b ∈Tα
c ∈Tα
(b ˙∧c)M ∈Tα+1
b /∈Tα
( ˙¬b)M ∈Tα+1
.
By transﬁnite induction on ordinals, it is not difﬁcult to verify:
Lemma 6. If a ∈M, then
a ∈Tα ⇒a ∈Pα;
α ≤β ⇒Pα ⊆Pβ ∧Tα ⊆Tβ;
a ∈Pα ⇒a ∈Tα ∨( ˙¬a) ∈Tα+1;
( ˙¬a) ∈Tα ⇒a /∈Tβ
(β arbitrary).
We choose P = ∪{Pα | α ordinal}, T = ∪{Tα | α ordinal}; of course, P , T
depend on the underlying combinatory algebra M, but we leave this fact implicit.
Lemma 7. Let O be the open term model of combinatory logic plus extensionality.11
Then it holds over O:
P = Pω and T = Tω.
Proof. Assume that we have proved
P = Pω.
(1)
By lemma 6, if a ∈Tδ, then a ∈Pδ. By assumption, a ∈Pk, for some ﬁnite k.
By the third claim of lemma 6, either a ∈Tk or ( ˙¬a) ∈Tk+1. In the ﬁrst case we
11For details, see [2].

272
A. Cantini
are done; the second case implies a /∈Tδ (again lemma 6, last claim), contradiction.
Hence Tδ ⊆Tω. But the converse inclusion trivially holds and hence T = Tω.
It remains to check (1). It is sufﬁcient to deﬁne a recursively enumerable deriv-
ability relation ⊢over the term model, such that, for every a ∈O,
⊢a ⇔a ∈P .
But this is straightforward: the axioms of ⊢will have the form [t = s], [P (t)], while
the inference rules correspond to the positive inductive clauses generating the sequence
{Pα}. Of course, the clause for ∀can be rephrased as a ﬁnitary inference: from ⊢ax,
infer ⊢˙∀a, provided x is not free in a.
It is then easy to check that the derivability relation is closed under substitution,
that is, for arbitrary terms a, s:
⊢a(x) ⇒⊢a[x := s].
This property together with the fact that O is the open term model readily yields the
initial claim (1) (proofs are carried out by induction on the deﬁnition of ⊢and by
transﬁnite induction on ordinals).
Theorem 4. ⟨M, P , T ⟩|= AT.
Proof-theoretic digression. Of course, we can consider applied versions of PT and
AT. Indeed, let PTN (ATN) be PT (AT) extended with a predicate N for the set of
natural numbers, constants for 0, successor, predecessor and conditional on N, the
induction schema for natural numbers for N. Then:
Theorem 5. (i) PTN is proof-theoretically equivalent to ramiﬁed analysis of arbitrary
level below ε0.
(ii) If N-induction is restricted to propositional functions, the resulting system
PTNc is proof-theoretically equivalent to Peano arithmetic.
The proof follows well-known paths; the lower bound can be obtained by embed-
ding in PTN a system of the required strength, for instance Feferman’s EM0+J [7].
As to the upper bound, it is possible to provide a proof-theoretic analysis of PTN
with predicative methods (partial cut elimination and asymmetric interpretation into
a ramiﬁed system with levels < ε0). A quick proof of the conservation result exploits
recursively saturated models.
Concerning the strength ofATN, we do not have a deﬁnite result yet, but we believe
that the following is true:
Conjecture 6. (i) ATN has the same proof-theoretic strength as ACA, the system of
second order arithmetic based on arithmetical comprehension.
(ii) ATN with number theoretic induction restricted to propositional functions is
proof-theoretically equivalent to Peano arithmetic.

On a Russellian Paradox about Propositions and Truth
273
As to possible routes for proving (i)–(ii), one ought to consider lemma 7 and the
methods of Glass [10].
3. Stratiﬁed Truth?
We now explore an alternative route, which takes into account the possibility of dealing
with the paradox in a fully impredicative, extensional framework, Quine’s set theory
NF. In the new model, the set of all propositions and the set of all truths do exist, and,
to a certain extent, the notion of truth has rather strong closure properties.
We ﬁrst describe the formal details. Ls is the elementary set theoretic language,
which comprises the binary predicate symbol ∈. Ls-terms are simply individual
variables (x, y, z, . . .) and prime formulas (atoms) have the form t ∈s (t, s terms).
Ls-formulas are inductively generated from prime formulas by means of sentential
connectives and quantiﬁers. The elementary set theoretic language L+
s is obtained
by adding to Ls the abstraction operator {−| −}; L+
s -terms and formulas are then
simultaneously generated. The clause for introducing class terms has the form: if ϕ
is a formula, then {x | ϕ} is a term where FV ({x | ϕ}) = FV (ϕ) −{x}.
As usual, two terms (formulas) are called α-congruent if they only differ by re-
naming bound variables; we identify α-congruent terms (formulas).
3.1. Stratiﬁed Comprehension
As usual for Quine’s systems, we need the technical device of stratiﬁcation; we also
deﬁne a restricted notion thereof, which is motivated by the consideration of “loosely
predicative” class existence axioms.
(i) ϕ is stratiﬁed iff it is possible to assign a natural number (type in short) to each
term occurrence12 of ϕ in such a way that
1. if t ∈s is a subformula of ϕ, the type of s is one greater than the type of t;
2. all free occurrences of the same variable in any subformula of ϕ have the
same type;
3. if x is free in ψ and ∀xψ is a subformula of ϕ, then the ‘x’ in ∀x and the
free occurrences of x in ψ receive the same type;
4. if t = {x | β} occurs in ϕ, x is free in β, then t is assigned a type one
greater than the type assigned to x, and all the free occurrences of x in β
receive the same type.
(ii) {x | ϕ} is stratiﬁed if ϕ is stratiﬁed;
12Individual constants included; these can be given any type compatible with the clauses below.

274
A. Cantini
(iii) a stratiﬁed term {x | ϕ(x, ⃗y)} is loosely predicative iff for some type i ∈ω,
{x | ϕ(x, ⃗y)} has type i+1, no (free or bound) variable of ϕ(x, ⃗y) is assigned type
greater than i +1; a stratiﬁed term {x | ϕ(x, ⃗y)} is predicative iff {x | ϕ(x, ⃗y)} is
loosely predicative and in addition no quantiﬁed variable of ϕ(x, ⃗y) is assigned
the same type as {x | ϕ(x, ⃗y)} itself.
(iv) ϕ is n + 1-stratiﬁed iff ϕ is stratiﬁed by means of 0, . . . , n.
For instance,  a = {x | (∃y ∈a)(x ∈y)} is not loosely predicative, since it requires
type 2, but  a itself has type 1; a ∩b = {x | x ∈a ∧x ∈b} is predicative.
Deﬁnition 4. The system NF comprises:
1. predicate logic for the extended language;13
2. class extensionality: ∀x∀y(x =e y →x = y), where
t = s : ⇔∀z(t ∈z →s ∈z);
t =e s : ⇔∀x(x ∈t ↔x ∈s);
3. stratiﬁed explicit comprehension SCA: if ϕ is stratiﬁed, then
∀u(u ∈{x | ϕ(x, ⃗y)} ↔ϕ(u, ⃗y)).
Other systems.
(i) NFP (NFI) is the subsystem of NF, where SCA is restricted to (loosely) pred-
icative abstracts.
(ii) NFk (NFIk, NFPk) is the subsystem of NF (NFI, NFPk), where (at most) k types
are allowed for stratiﬁcation.
Remark 2. If Union is the axiom “ a exists, for all a”, then NFP+Union is equiv-
alent to the full NF; cf. [6].
13To be more accurate, if the abstraction operator is assumed as primitive, it is convenient to include in
the extended logic the schema:
∀u(ϕ(u) ↔ψ(u)) →{x | ϕ(x)} = {x | ψ(x)}.
This would ensure that {x | ¬x = x} = {x | x ∈x ∧¬x ∈x}. An alternative route would be to extend
the logic with a description operator, say in the style of [15], ch.VII. If this choice is adopted, the previous
schema becomes provable. Be this as it may, the resulting theories are conservative over NF as formalized
in the pure set theoretic language Ls, and we won’t bother the reader with further details.

On a Russellian Paradox about Propositions and Truth
275
3.2. Consistent NF-Subtheories
By a theorem of Crabbè [6], NFI is provably consistent in third order arithmetic. The
details of the (different) consistency proofs for NFI can be found in [6] and [14]. The
main idea of [6]: 133–135 is to exploit the reducibility of NFI to its fragment NFI4;
then NFI4 is interpreted into a corresponding type theory up to level 4, TI4, plus Amb
(= the so-called schema of typical ambiguity, see [22]).14 These steps are ﬁnitary and
adapt well-known theorems of Grishin and Specker. TI4+Amb is shown consistent
by means of the Hauptsatz for second order logic (which is equivalent in primitive
recursive arithmetic to the 1-consistency of full second order arithmetic, e.g., see [11]:
280). Hence:
Theorem 7. NFI is consistent (in primitive recursive arithmetic plus the 1-consistency
of second order arithmetic).
In order to carry out a Kripke-like construction in the NF-systems and to represent
the syntax, we shall essentially exploit Quine’s homogeneous pairing operation, which
does require extensionality and the existence of a copy of the natural numbers. But it
is not difﬁcult to check that Quine’s pairing is indeed well-deﬁned already in NFI.
This requires two steps. First of all, the collection of Fregean natural numbers is
a set in NFI. Deﬁne:
∅= {x | x ̸= x};
V = {x | x = x};
0 = {∅};
a + 1 = {x ∪{y} | x ∈a ∧y /∈x};
ClN(y) ⇔0 ∈y ∧∀x(x ∈y →(x + 1) ∈y);
N = {x | ∀y(ClN(y) →x ∈y)}.
Then NFI grants the existence of N ; in fact, by inspection, all the above sets above
are loosely predicative. Furthermore, we have, provably in NFI:
Lemma 8 (NFI).
ClN({x | ϕ(x)}) →N ⊆{x | ϕ(x)};
(2)
(∀x)(x ∈N ↔x = 0 ∨(∃y ∈N )(x = y + 1));
(3)
∅/∈N ∧(∀x ∈N )(V /∈x);
(4)
(∀x ∈N )(x + 1 ̸= 0);
(5)
(∀x ∈N )(∀y ∈N )(x + 1 = y + 1 →x = y).
(6)
(In (2) {x | ϕ(x)} must be loosely predicative.)
14In TI4, {xi | ϕ} exists, provided i = 0, 1, 2 and ϕ contains free or bound variables of type i +1 at most.

276
A. Cantini
Clearly N is inﬁnite by (4) above.15 As to the proof, (4) holds in NFI+Union, as
NFI+Union ≡NF, and NF proves (4) according to a famous result of Specker [21].
On the other hand, NFI + ¬Union implies (4), by [6]. The claims (3), (2) with the
Peano axioms are provable in NFI ((6) requires the second part of (4)).
Deﬁnition 5 (Homogeneous pairing; [19]).
φ(a) = {y | y ∈a ∧y /∈N } ∪{y + 1|y ∈a ∧y ∈N };
θ1(a) = {φ(x) | x ∈a};
θ2(a) = {φ(x) ∪{0} | x ∈a};
(a, b) = θ1(a) ∪θ2(b);
Q1(a) = {z | φ(z) ∈a};
Q2(a) = {z | φ(z) ∪{0} ∈a}.
The deﬁnitions above are (at most) loosely predicative and hence the universe of
sets is closed under the corresponding operations, provably in NFI.
Lemma 9 (NFI).
1. φ(a) = φ(b) →a = b;
2. 0 /∈φ(a);
3. θi(a) = θi(b) →a = b, where i = 1, 2;
4. Qi((x1, x2)) = xi, where i = 1, 2;
5. (x, y) = (u, v) →x = u ∧y = v;
6. the map x, y −→(x, y) is surjective and ⊆-monotone in each variable.
The proof hinges upon the properties of N and the successor operation [19]. In
particular, we below exploit the fact that Quine’s pairing operation is ⊆-monotone in
both arguments. This is seen by inspection: the deﬁnition of (a, b) is positive in a,
b.16
Lemma 10 (Fixed point). Let A(x, a) be a formula which is positive in a. Assume
that
A(a) = {x | A(x, a)}
is loosely predicative, where x, a are given types i, i +1 respectively. Then NFI proves
the existence of a set c of type i + 1, such that:
15Indeed, if ∅/∈N , then no natural number à la Frege-Russell reduces to the empty set, i.e., there exist
arbitrary large ﬁnite sets.
16We recall that a formula A(x, a) is positive in a if every free occurrence of a in the negation normal
form of A is located in atoms of the form t ∈a, which are preﬁxed by an even number of negations and
where a /∈FV (t).

On a Russellian Paradox about Propositions and Truth
277
• A(c) ⊆c ;
• A(a) ⊆a ⇒c ⊆a.
The proof is standard: observe that the set
c := {x | ∀d(A(d) ⊆d →x ∈d)}
is loosely predicative.17
Deﬁnition 6. NFI(pair) (NFP(pair), NF(pair)) is the theory, which extends NFI (NFP,
NF respectively) with a new binary function symbol (−, −) for ordered pairing and
the corresponding new axiom:
∀x∀y∀u∀v((x, y) = (u, v) →x = u ∧y = v)
It is understood that the stratiﬁcation condition is lifted to the new language by stipu-
lating that t, s in (t, s) receive the same type.
The strategic role of homogeneous pairing is clariﬁed by two equivalence results.
Below let S1 ≡S2 denote the relation that holds between two formal theories S1, S2
whenever they are mutually interpretable.
Proposition 6. NF ≡NF3(pair).
The proof of this statement was independently suggested byAntonelli and Holmes.
The basic observation is that NFP3(pair) proves the existence of the set E, where
E := ∃y(y = E) and E = {{{x}, y} | x ∈y}. But by Grishin’s [13], NF ≡NF3 + E.
We can readily extend the proposition to the subsystems NFI, NFP.
Proposition 7. NFP ≡NFP3(pair) and NFI ≡NFI3(pair).
Proof. Let
 ⇔∃y(y = {u | ∩u ̸= ∅}).
By a theorem of Grishin and [6], NFI ≡NFI3 + , (respectively NFP ≡NFP3 + ).
But NFP3(pair) proves that M = {({x}, y) | x ∈y} is a set and
∀s∃a∀x(x ∈a ↔∃q(q ∈s ∧(∀z ∈x)((q, z) ∈M))).
(7)
Choose s = {{x} | x ∈V } in (7); then NFP3(pair) proves that there is a set I such that
(∀x)(x ∈I ↔∩x ̸= ∅).
It follows that we can freely use the homogeneous pairing operation when we work
in NF and NFI.
17A similar argument shows that NFI justiﬁes the existence of the largest ﬁxed point of A.

278
A. Cantini
4. Generating a Truth Set in NFI
We now simulate via homogeneous pairing the logical operations, which are essential
for introducing in the Quinean universe a counterpart of the formula-representing map
of §1.1.
Deﬁnition 7.
˙¬x := (0, x);
x ˙∧y := (1, (x, y));
˙∀f := (2, f );
˙∈xy := (3, (x, y)).
Then we can inductively introduce a map A →[A] such that FV (A) = FV ([A])
and
• [t ∈s] := ˙∈{t}s;
• [¬A] := ˙¬[A];
• [A ∧B] := ˙∧[A][B];
• [∀xA] := ˙∀{x | A}.
We also deﬁne
y · x := [x ∈y].
Under the dot-application, the universe of sets becomes an applicative structure. Note
howeverthaty·x isstratiﬁedonlyify andx aregiventhetypesi+1andi (respectively),
and that the result of applying y to x is one greater than the type of x.
Lemma 11 (Restricted diagonalization, in NFI). There is a term R such that
R = ˙¬R .
Moreover, for every a, there is a term (a) such that
(a) = [¬(a ∈(a))].
Proof. The operation (a) = ( ˙¬, a) is monotone in a. By the ﬁxed point lemma, there
is some R satisfying the claim. As to the second part, a(b) = [a ∈b] = (3, (a, b))
is monotone in b. So the conclusion is implied by lemma 10.
We now model the Kripke–Feferman notion of self-referential truth, as developed
in [3], within the abstract framework of Quine’s set theory. The truth predicate T is
introduced as the ﬁxed point of a stratiﬁed positive (in a) operator T (x, a), which

On a Russellian Paradox about Propositions and Truth
279
encodes the recursive clauses for partial self-referential truth and is given by the
formula
∃u∃v∃w [ (x = [u ∈v] ∧u ∈v) ∨
∨(x = [¬u ∈v] ∧¬u ∈v) ∨
∨(x = [¬¬v] ∧v ∈a) ∨
∨(x = v ˙∧w ∧v ∈a ∧w ∈a) ∨
∨(x = ˙¬(v ˙∧w) ∧( ˙¬v ∈a ∨˙¬w ∈a)) ∨
∨(x = ˙∀v ∧∀z(v · z ∈a)) ∨
∨(x = ˙¬˙∀v ∧∃z( ˙¬v · z ∈a))].
Clearly {x | T (x, a)} is ⊆-monotone in a and is predicative: it receives type 2 once
we assign type 0 to u, z, type 1 to x, v, w, type 2 to a.
Deﬁnition 8.
ClT (a) := ∀x(T (x, a) →x ∈a);
T := {x | ∀a(ClT (a) →x ∈a)};
T x := x ∈T.
Lemma 10 immediately implies:
Proposition 8. NFI proves:
1. ∃y(y = T );
2. ∀x(T (x, T ) →x ∈T );
3. ClT (a) →T ⊆a.
Proposition 9. NFI proves:
T [x ∈y] ↔x ∈y;
T [¬x ∈y] ↔¬x ∈y;
T ˙¬ ˙¬x ↔T x;
T (x ˙∧y) ↔T x ∧T y;
T ˙¬(x ˙∧y) ↔T ( ˙¬x) ∨T ( ˙¬y);
T ˙∀f ↔∀xT (f · x);
T ˙¬˙∀f ↔∃xT ˙¬(f · x).
Proof. Use T x ↔T (x, T ), which is provable with proposition 8, and the indepen-
dence properties of ˙¬, ˙∧, ˙∀, ˙∈, which follow from lemmata 8–9.

280
A. Cantini
Hence, as interesting special cases, we obtain:
(T [T x] ↔T x) ∧(T [¬T x] ↔¬T x).
(8)
Proposition 10 (Consistency). NFI proves:
1. ∀x(T x →¬T ˙¬x);
2. ∃y(¬T y ∧¬T ˙¬y).
Proof. Ad 1: choose ψ(a) := ¬T ( ˙¬a); {x | ψ(x)} exists in NFI. Then check:
∀a(T (a, {x | ψ(x)}) →ψ(a)).
Ad 2: let y = R (lemma 11) and apply consistency.
Remark 3. Consider the map:
x →ϕ(x) := [¬T x].
An alternative “Liar propositional object” would be a set L such that
L = [¬T L] = [¬(L ∈T )].
But the above equation cannot be stratiﬁed; indeed, by (8) NFI proves:
¬∃x(x = [¬T x]).
Lemma 12. If A is stratiﬁed (and {x | A} is loosely predicative), then
T [∀xA] ↔∀xA;
T [¬∀xA] ↔¬∀xA
are provable in NF (NFI).
Proof. Consider the following steps:
T [∀xA] ↔∀uT ({x | A} · u);
↔∀uT [u ∈{x | A}];
↔∀u(u ∈{x | A});
↔∀uA[x := u].
Observe that the second step uses proposition 9, while the last step requires stratiﬁed
comprehension in NF (or in NFI, provided A is loosely predicative).
Theorem 8 (Stratiﬁed T-schema). If A is stratiﬁed, NF proves:
T [A] ↔A.
If A is ∀-free, the schema is already provable in NFI.

On a Russellian Paradox about Propositions and Truth
281
Proof. By induction on A with proposition 9 and the previous lemma.
The stratiﬁed T-schema implies that T strongly deviates from the behaviour of self-
referential truth predicates à la Kripke–Feferman, which do not in general validate the
truthaxiomsthemselvesnorarbitrary logicalaxioms, see[16]and[8]. Onthecontrary,
T provably believes that it is two-valued, consistent and that it satisﬁes the closure
conditions embodied by the operator formula T (x, T ) generating partial truth itself ;
this marks the difference of the present theory versus the Kripke–Feferman system
KF:
Corollary 2. NFI proves:
T [T a ∨¬T a];
(9)
T [¬(T a ∧¬T a)];
(10)
T [T [x ∈y] ↔x ∈y];
(11)
T [T [¬x ∈y] ↔¬x ∈y];
(12)
T [T ˙¬ ˙¬x ↔T x];
(13)
T [T (x ˙∧y) ↔T x ∧T y];
(14)
T [T ˙¬(x ˙∧y) ↔T ( ˙¬x) ∨T ( ˙¬y)].
(15)
In addition, NF proves:
T [∀xT (f · x) ↔T ˙∀f ];
(16)
T [∀x(T x ↔T (x, T ))].
(17)
Proof. All the claimed formulas within the scope of the outermost T are provable in
NF (at most):
• (9)–(10) trivially by logic;
• (11)–(16) by proposition 9;
• (17) by proposition 8.
Also, the same formulas are stratiﬁed. Hence the conclusions of the corollary follow
by the T -stratiﬁed schema (theorem 8).
4.1. Final Remarks
Deﬁnition 9.
P a :⇔T a ∨T ˙¬a .
Pa formally represents the predicate “a is a proposition”.

282
A. Cantini
Proposition 11 (NFI). The collection of all propositions is a proper subset of the
universe:
∃y(y = {x | P x}) ∧{x | P x} ⊂V.
Moreover P has the following closure properties:
P ([x ∈y]) ∧P [T x];
P a ∧(T a →P b) →P (a ˙→b);
P a ∧P b →P (a ˙∧b) ∧P (a ˙∨b);
P a →T [P a];
P (˙∀f ).
The ﬁrst claim is a consequence of proposition 10. As for the remaining properties,
apply proposition 9.
A few closure conditions of the previous proposition are reminiscent of corre-
sponding axioms in PT and AT; but we stress that the axiom T [¬P x] of AT is refuted
in the present context, while the (analogue of the) last statement is clearly unsound,
provably inAT and PT. Note also that P (˙∀f ) implies ∀xP (f ·x), i.e., every set deﬁnes
a propositional function.
We conclude by representing Russell’s contradiction within the theory of propo-
sitions and truth that we have so far developed in NFI.
Deﬁnition 10.
τ(f ) := [P (˙∀f )].
By deﬁnition of the map A →[A], pairing, and proposition 11, we obtain:
Lemma 13. NFI proves:
P (τ(f )) ∧T (τ(f ));
τ(f ) = τ(g) →f = g .
So the operation τ is a well-deﬁned injective map from sets into truths (and propo-
sitions).
Proposition 12. NFI proves:
¬ ∃d∀x(x ∈d ↔(∃f ⊆P )(x /∈f ∧x = τ(f ))).
To sum up: we have considered three formal systems for dealing with Russell’s
contradiction in Appendix B of [20]. In all systems the Russellian argument can be
naturally formalized, but it is essentially sterilized either by denying the existence of
a suitable propositional function or a set. The ﬁrst two systems are provably non-
extensional and predicatively inclined; no analogue of the power set is apparently

On a Russellian Paradox about Propositions and Truth
283
deﬁnable, while the collections of truths and propositions do not deﬁne completed
totalities.
In the third system we do have the set of all propositions and truths, and exten-
sionality is basic. The contradiction is then avoided by the mechanism of stratiﬁcation
and in accordance with an impredicative type theoretic perspective.
Acknowledgement. Research supported by Università degli Studi di Firenze and
MIUR. Part of this paper has been presented under the title Relating KF to NF at the
Symposium Russell 2001, June 2-5 2001, München.
References
[1]
Aczel, Peter: 1980. Frege structures and the notions of proposition, truth and set. In:
J. Barwise et al. (eds.), The Kleene Symposium, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 31–59.
[2]
Barendregt, Henk: 1984. The Lambda Calculus: its Syntax and Semantics.Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
[3]
Cantini, Andrea: 1996. Logical Frameworks for Truth and Abstraction. Amsterdam:
North-Holland.
[4]
Cantini, Andrea and Pierluigi Minari: 1999. Uniform inseparability in explicit mathe-
matics. The Journal of Symbolic Logic 64: 313–326.
[5]
Cocchiarella, Nino: 2000. Russell’s paradox of the totality of propositions. Nordic
Journal of Philosophical Logic 5: 23–37.
[6]
Crabbè, Marcel: 1982. On the consistency of an impredicative subsystem of Quine’s
NF. The Journal of Symbolic Logic 47: 131–136.
[7]
Feferman, Solomon: 1978. Constructive theories of functions and classes. In: M. Boffa
et al. (eds.), Logic Colloquium ’78, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 55–98.
[8]
Feferman, Solomon: 1991. Reﬂecting on incompleteness. Journal of Symbolic Logic
56: 1–49.
[9]
Forster, Thomas: 1995. Set Theory with a Universal Set. Oxford Logic Guides, 31.
Oxford: Clarendon.
[10]
Glass, Thomas: 1996. On power class in explicit mathematics. Journal of Symbolic
Logic 61: 468–489.
[11]
Girard, Jean Y.: 1987. Proof Theory and Logical Complexity. Napoli: Bibliopolis.
[12]
Grim, Peter: 1991. The Incomplete Universe. Totality, Knowledge and Truth. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press.
[13]
Grishin, V. N.: 1969. Consistency of a fragment of Quine’s NF system. Soviet Mathe-
matics Doklady 10: 1387–1390.

284
A. Cantini
[14]
Holmes, Randall M.: 1995. The equivalence of NF-style set theories with “tangled”
type theories: the construction of ω-models of predicative NF (and more). The Journal
of Symbolic Logic 60: 178–190.
[15]
Kalish, Donald and Richard Montague: 1964. Logic. Techniques of Formal Reasoning.
New York: Harcourt, Brace and World.
[16]
Kripke, Saul: 1975. Outline of a theory of truth. Journal of Philosophy 72: 690–716.
[17]
Oksanen, Mika: 1999. The Russell-Kaplan paradox and other modal paradoxes; a new
solution. Nordic Journal of Philosophical Logic 4: 73–93.
[18]
Quine, Willard V.: 1945. On ordered pairs. The Journal of Symbolic Logic 10: 95–96.
[19]
Rosser, John B.: 1953. Logic for Mathematicians. New York: McGraw-Hill.
[20]
Russell, Bertrand: 1903. The Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. Reprinted by Routledge: London, 1997.
[21]
Specker, Ernst: 1953. The axiom of choice in Quine’s New Foundations for Mathemati-
cal Logic. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the U.S.A. 39: 972–975.
[22]
Specker, Ernst: 162. Typical ambiguity. In: E. Nagel et al. (eds.), Logic, Methodology
and Philosophy of Science. Proceedings of the 1960 International Congress, Stanford:
Stanford University Press, 116–123.
Dipartimento di Filosoﬁa
Università degli Studi di Firenze
via Bolognese 52
50139 Firenze
Italy
E-mail: cantini@philos.uniﬁ.it

The Consistency of the Naive Theory of Properties
Hartry Field
Abstract. The Naive Theory of Properties asserts, for any predicate (x), that there is a
property with the feature that an object o has this property if and only if (o). If properties are
to play a useful role in semantics it is hard to avoid assuming the Naive Theory, yet it appears
to lead to various paradoxes. The paper shows that no paradoxes arise from the Naive Theory
as long as the logic is weakened appropriately, e.g., by avoiding excluded middle and using an
appropriate conditional; the main difﬁculty is ﬁnding a semantics that can handle a conditional
obeying reasonable laws without engendering paradox. (The semantics that’s employed is
inﬁnite-valued, with the values only partially ordered.) The paper also discusses whether the
solution can be adapted to Naive Set Theory; the answer is ‘probably not’, but it is argued
that limiting Naive Comprehension in set theory is perfectly satisfactory, whereas doing so in
a property theory used for semantics is not.
1. Introduction
According to the Naive Theory of Properties, for every predicate (x) there is a
corresponding property λx(x). Moreover, this property λx(x) is instantiated by
an object o if and only if (o).
More generally, the Naive Theory involves the
following “Naive Comprehension Schema”:
∀u1. . .∀un∃y[Property(y) ∧∀x(x instantiates y ↔(x, u1, . . . , un))].
(NC)
This Naive Theory of Properties has many virtues, but it seems to have been shattered
by (the property version of) Russell’s Paradox.
“Seems to” have been shattered? There’s no doubt that it was shattered, if we
presuppose full classical logic. Let us use the symbol ‘∈’ to mean “instantiates”. The
Russell Paradox involves the Russell property R corresponding to the predicate ‘does
not instantiate itself’. So according to the Naive Theory, ∀x[x ∈R ↔¬(x ∈x)].
Therefore in particular,
R ∈R ↔¬(R ∈R).
(*)
But (*) is classically inconsistent.

286
H. Field
There are two solution routes (routes for modifying the Naive Theory) within
classical logic. The ﬁrst says that for certain predicates, such as ‘does not instantiate
itself’, there is no corresponding property. The second says that there is one, but it
isn’t instantiated by what you might think: there are either (i) cases where an object o
has the property λx(x) even though ¬(o), or (ii) cases where an object o doesn’t
have the property λx(x) even though (o). In particular, when (x) is ‘does not
instantiate itself’, the Russell property is either of sort (i) or sort (ii). This second
solution route subdivides into three variants. One variant commits itself to a solution
of type (i): the Russell property instantiates itself, but nonetheless has the property of
not instantiating itself. A second variant commits itself to a solution of type (ii): the
Russell property doesn’t instantiate itself, but nonetheless fails to have the property
of not instantiating itself. A third variant hedges: it says that the Russell property is
either of sort (i) or sort (ii), but refuses to say which.
These four classical theories—the three variants that admit the existence of the
Russell property and the one that denies it—all seem to me problematic. (In the prima
facie analogous case of sets, I take the approach that denies the existence of “the
Russell set” to be quite unproblematic. But I take properties to be very different from
sets in this regard, for reasons to be discussed in the ﬁnal section.) In my view we
need a different sort of solution route, and it must inevitably involve a weakening of
classical logic. It is the aim of this paper to provide one.
The idea of weakening logic to avoid the Russell Paradox is not new, but the
proposal presented here is unlike many in that it saves the full Naive Comprehension
Schema in the form stated above: it saves it not only from the Russell Paradox (which is
relatively easy) but from far more virulent forms of paradox (such as the Curry Paradox
and its many extensions). I know of no other ways of saving Naive Comprehension
in as strong or as natural a logic.
2. Background
If we are going to weaken classical logic to get around the Russell paradox (along
with others), it is useful to look at how it is that (*) leads to contradiction in classical
logic; that way, we’ll know which steps in the argument for contradiction might be
denied. (Actually, one well-known approach accepts contradictions, in the sense of
assertions of form A ∧¬A, and while I do not favor it, I want my initial discussion
to recognize it as an alternative. For that reason, let me stipulate that a theory is to be
called inconsistent if it implies, not just a contradiction in the above sense, but anything
at all: the existence of Santa Claus, the omniscience of George Bush about matters of
quantum ﬁeld theory, you name it. So even those who accept “contradictions” won’t
want their theory to be “inconsistent”, in the way I am now using these terms.) With
this terminology in mind, here are the main steps in an obvious argument that (*) is
inconsistent:

Consistency of the Naive Theory of Properties
287
(1) (*) and R ∈R together imply the contradiction
(R ∈R) ∧¬(R ∈R),
(**)
since the ﬁrst conjunct is one of the premises and the second conjunct follows
by modus ponens.
(2) Analogously, (*) and ¬(R ∈R) together imply (**).
(3) So by disjunction elimination, (*) and (R ∈R) ∨¬(R ∈R) together imply the
contradiction (**).
(4) But (R ∈R) ∨¬(R ∈R) is a logical truth (law of excluded middle), so (*) all
by itself implies the contradiction (**).
(5) Anything that implies a contradiction implies anything whatever, and hence is
inconsistent in the most obviously odious sense of the term.
That’s the argument. I’ve been a bit sloppy about use and mention, since I’ve
deﬁned R to be a property, but appear to have spoken of a sentence (*) that contains it.
There are several ways this could be made right. One is to work in a language where
we have a property-abstraction operator, so that we could name R in the language;
then that name would be used in (*). A second is to replace the ‘R’ in (*) with a free
variable y: then the argument in the text goes over to an argument that formulas of form
y ∈y ↔¬(y ∈y) imply contradictions, so their existential generalizations do too,
and (NC) implies such an existential generalization. A third involves the introduction
of a convention of “parameterized formulas”: pairs of formulas and assignments of
objects to their free variables. Then (*) is simply a convenient notation for the pair of
‘y ∈y ↔¬(y ∈y)’ and an assignment of R to ‘y’, and what appears in the text is a
literally correct derivation involving parameterized formulas. Do things however you
like.
Obviously there are several different possible ways to restrict classical logic so as
to evade the above argument for the inconsistency of (*). (I take it that the argument
that (NC) implies (*) involves nothing in the least controversial, so that it is the
argument that (*) leads to inconsistency that must be challenged.) I will simply state
my preferred approach, without arguing that it is best: in my view, the most appealing
way to weaken classical logic so as to evade the argument that (*) leads to inconsistency
is to restrict the law of excluded middle, thereby undermining Step (4). Disjunction
elimination can be retained (even in the strong sense used in Step (3), i.e., allowing
side formulas). So can “the odiousness of contradictions” assumed in Step (5).
Of course, if you can evade the argument in a logic £1 that contains the “odiousness
of contradictions” rule A ∧¬A |= B, you can equally evade it in a logic £2 just like
£1 but which is “paraconsistent” in that the rule A ∧¬A |= B is dropped. But since
classical laws like excluded middle that are absent from £1 will be absent from £2
as well, this has no evident advantages. What might have advantages, if it could be
achieved, would be to save Naive Property Theory in a paraconsistent logic in which
we keep laws absent from £1, such as excluded middle. I know of no interesting way
to achieve this; for a discussion of some obstacles, see [2].

288
H. Field
Unfortunately, restricting excluded middle falls far short of giving an adequate
theory. Restricting the law of excluded middle blocks the above argument for the
inconsistency of R ∈R ↔¬(R ∈R), but it is by no means obvious that there is
a satisfactory logic without unrestricted excluded middle in which that biconditional
can be maintained. It is still less obvious that there is a satisfactory such logic in which
the full Naive Theory of Properties can be maintained. Let me explain.
The most obvious ways to deal with the paradoxes in logics without excluded
middle (e.g., the property-theoretic adaptation of the Kleene version of Kripke’s [4]
“ﬁxed point” approach to the semantic paradoxes)1 do not vindicate (NC), nor do
they even vindicate its weak consequence (*). The reason is that they don’t contain
an appropriate conditional (or biconditional).
Indeed, the main issues involved in showing the consistency of the Naive Theory
center on the problem of ﬁnding an adequate treatment of the →. (And hence the ↔:
I’ll assume that A ↔B means (A →B) ∧(B →A).) Even if our goal were limited
to the consistent assertion of the biconditional (*), that would pretty much rule out
our deﬁning A →B in terms of the other connectives in the manner familiar from
classical logic, viz., ¬A ∨B. For on that “material conditional” reading of ‘→’, (*)
amounts to
[¬(R ∈R) ∨¬(R ∈R)] ∧[¬¬(R ∈R) ∨(R ∈R)].
Assuming distributivity and a few other simple laws, this is equivalent to a disjunction
of the classical inconsistencies (R ∈R) ∧¬(R ∈R) and ¬(R ∈R) ∧¬¬(R ∈R).
If we assume double-negation elimination, that’s in effect just the simple contradic-
tion (R ∈R) ∧¬(R ∈R); and even if double-negation elimination isn’t assumed,
a disjunction of contradictions seems just as inconsistent as a single contradiction.
So if we put aside the paraconsistent approaches mentioned above, it’s clear that we
cannot in general interpret A →B as ¬A ∨B if we want to retain even (*). And
on the paraconsistent approaches the “material conditional” reading of →seems in-
appropriate on different grounds: that reading invalidates modus ponens. (Although
it is important not to interpret →as the material conditional, the theory that I will
advocate does posit a close relation between the two: while (A →B) ↔(¬A ∨B)
is not a logical truth, it is a logical consequence of the premises A ∨¬A and B ∨¬B.
In other words, it is only in the context of a breakdown in the law of excluded middle
that the divergence between the →and the material conditional emerges.)
The ﬁrst problem about getting a decent conditional, then, is licensing the assertion
of (*). But there are plenty of “logics of →” that solve that problem while still being
inadequate to the Naive Theory, for the full Comprehension Schema (NC) is not
consistently assertable in them. Indeed, many of these logics fail to handle a close
analog of Russell’s paradox due to Curry. The problem is this: (NC) implies the
1Such an adaptation of the Kleene variant of Kripke’s approach is in effect given in Maddy [5], as a
theory of proper classes. I will discuss the use of the theory to be given in this paper in connection with
proper classes in the ﬁnal section. In my opinion, the presence of (NC) is not only needed for property
theory generally, it also makes for a more adequate theory of proper classes.

Consistency of the Naive Theory of Properties
289
existence of a Curry property K, for which ∀x[x ∈K ↔(x ∈x →⊥)], where ⊥is
any absurdity you like. So K ∈K ↔(K ∈K →⊥); that is,
(i) K ∈K →(K ∈K →⊥)
and
(ii) (K ∈K →⊥) →K ∈K.
But in many logics of →we have the contraction rule A →(A →B) |= A →B, on
which (i) implies
(i∗) K ∈K →⊥.
But this with (ii) leads to K ∈K by modus ponens; and another application of modus
ponens leads from that and (i*) to ⊥.
Unless we restrict modus ponens (and it turns out a very drastic restriction of it
would be required), we need to restrict the contraction rule. This requires further
restrictions on the logic as well. For instance, given that we’re keeping modus ponens
in the form A, A →B |= B, we certainly have A, A →(A →B) |= B simply
by using modus ponens twice; so to prevent contraction, we certainly can’t have
the generalized →-introduction meta-rule that allows passage from , A |= B to
 |= A →B. Indeed, even the weaker version which allows the inference only when
 is empty should be given up: it is the obvious culprit in an alternative derivation of
the Curry paradox.
It turns out, though, that the difﬁculty in ﬁnding an adequate treatment of the ‘→’is
not insuperable, and that the Naive Comprehension Principle (NC) can be maintained;
indeed, it can be maintained in a logic that, though not containing excluded middle
or the contraction rule, is not altogether unnatural or hopelessly weak.2 The aim of
this paper is to show this.3 Whether the theory should still count as “naive” when the
logic is altered in this way is a question I leave to the reader.
It is worth emphasizing that though the law of excluded middle will need restric-
tion, there is no need to give it up entirely: it can be retained in various restricted
circumstances. For instance, the notion of property is normally employed in connec-
tion with a “base language” L that does not talk of properties; we then expand L to
a language L+ that allows for properties, including but not limited to properties of
things talked about in L. (It is not limited to properties of things talked about in L
because it will also include properties of properties: indeed, it is some of these that
give rise to the apparent paradoxes.) It is within the ground language L that most of
mathematics, physics, and so forth takes place; and the theory advocated here does
2For instance, the conditional obeys contraposition in the strong form |= (¬A →¬B) →(B →A).
Also when |= A ↔B and CB results from CA by substituting B for one or more occurrences of A, then
|= CA ↔CB; so (NC) yields that y ∈λx(x) is everywhere intersubstitutable with (y), even within
the scope of a conditional.
3The approach I’ll be giving is an adaptation of the approach to the semantic paradoxes developed in
[1].

290
H. Field
not require any limitation of excluded middle in these domains, because as long as
we restrict our quantiﬁers to the domain of the ground language we can retain full
classical logic. We can also retain full classical logic in connection with those spe-
cial (“rank 1”) properties that are explicitly limited so as to apply to non-properties;
and to those special (“rank 2”) properties that are explicitly limited so as to apply to
non-properties and rank 1 properties; and so on. Where excluded middle cannot be
assumed is only in connection with certain properties that do not appear anywhere in
such a rank hierarchy, like the Russell Property and the Curry Property (though for
other such properties, e.g., those whose complement appears in the rank hierarchy,
excluded middle is also unproblematic). Even for the “problematic” properties, there
is no need to give up excluded middle for claims about property identity; it is only
when it comes to claims about instantiation of problematic properties that excluded
middle will not be able to be assumed in general.
I don’t know if the theory here can be adapted to a theory of “naive sets”, by
adding an axiom or rule of extensionality; I will have a bit to say about this in the ﬁnal
section, including a discussion of why the matter is much less pressing for sets than
for properties. But if it is possible to develop a theory of naive sets, it seems unlikely
that we would be able to maintain excluded middle for identities between naive sets
(e.g., between the empty set and {x|x = x ∧K ∈K}, where K is the “Curry set”,
deﬁned in analogy with the Curry property). Because of this, a “naive set theory”, if
possible at all, would have an importantly different character from the naive property
theory about to be developed.
3. The Goal
I’ve said I want a consistent naive theory of properties, but actually what I want is a
bit stronger than mere consistency. It’s time to start being a bit more precise.
Let L be any ﬁrst order language with identity. Since I won’t want to identify
A →B with ¬A ∨B, it is necessary to assume that →is a primitive connective,
along with ¬, ∧and/or ∨, and ∀and/or ∃. And to avoid annoying complications
about how to extend function symbols when we add to the ontology, I’ll assume
that L contains no function symbols (except perhaps for 0-place ones, i.e., individual
constants). L can be taken to be a language for mathematics, or physics, or whatever
you like other than properties. (So it shouldn’t contain the terms ‘Property’ or ‘∈’
in the senses to be introduced. If it contains these terms in other senses—e.g., ‘∈’
for membership among the iterative sets of standard set theory—then imagine these
replaced by other terms.)
Let L+ result from L by adding a new 1-place predicate ‘Property’ and a new
2-place predicate ‘∈’ meaning ‘instantiates’. For any formula A of L, let AL be the
formula of L+ obtained from A by restricting all bound occurrences of any variable
z by the condition ‘¬Property(z)’. Let T be any theory in the language L. “Naive

Consistency of the Naive Theory of Properties
291
Property Theory over T ” is the theory T + that consists of the following non-logical
axioms:
(I) AL, for any A that is a closure of a formula that follows from T
(II) ∀x∀y[x ∈y →Property(y)]
(III) ∀u1 . . . ∀un∃y[Property(y) ∧∀x(x ∈y ↔(x, u1, . . . , un))],
where (x, u1, . . . , un) is any formula of L+ in which y is not free.
(III) is just (NC). Then a minimal goal is to show that in a suitable logic, the theory
T + consisting of (I)–(III) is always consistent as long as T itself is consistent. Note
that if T is itself a classical theory, i.e., is closed under classical consequence, then
“Naive Property Theory over T ” effectively keeps classical logic among sentences of
the form AL, even though its ofﬁcial logic is weaker: for if A1,…,An are formulas of
L that classically entail B, then A1∧A2∧. . . An →B is in T , so [(∀u1, . . . , uk)(A1∧
A2 ∧. . . An →B)]L is in T +, and this is the same as (∀u1, . . . , uk)[¬Property(u1)∧
. . . ∧¬Property(uk) →(AL
1 ∧AL
2 ∧. . . AL
n →BL)].
The minimal goal is to show that T + is consistent whenever T is, but I actually
want something slightly stronger: I want to introduce a kind of multi-valued model
for L+ (inﬁnite-valued, in fact), and then prove
(G) For each classical model M of L, there is at least one model M+ of L+ that
validates (II) and (III) and has M as its reduct;
where to say that M is the reduct of M+ means roughly that when you restrict the
domain of M+ to the things that don’t satisfy ‘Property’ (and forget about the assign-
ments to ‘Property’ and to ‘∈’) then what you are left with is just M.4 Since the
connectives of L+ will reduce to their classical counterparts on the reduct, the fact
that M is the reduct of M+ will guarantee the validity of Axiom Schema (I); so if M
satisﬁes T , M+ satisﬁes T +.
There is good reason why (G) says ‘at least one’ rather than ‘exactly one’: we
should expect that most or all models of T + can be extended to models that contain
new properties but leave the property-less reduct unchanged. The proof that I will
give yields the minimal M+ for a given M, but extensions of the model with the same
reduct could easily be given.
I will prove (G) in a classical set-theoretic metalanguage, so anyone who is willing
to accept classical set-theory should be able to accept the coherence of the non-classical
property theory to be introduced.
4The reason for the ‘roughly’in the deﬁnition of ‘reduct’is that M is a classical model, whereas M+ will
be multi-valued; so its reduct will have to assign objects that live in the larger space of values. Nonetheless,
the larger space of values will contain two rather special ones, to be denoted 1 and 0, and we can take ‘A
has value 1 in M+’and ‘A has value 0 in M+’to correspond to ‘A is true in M’and ‘A is false in M’, when
A is in L. The reduct of M+ won’t strictly be M, but it will be the {0, 1}-valued model that corresponds
to M in the obvious way.

292
H. Field
4. The Semantic Framework
The goal just enunciated calls for developing a model-theoretic semantics for L+ in a
classical set-theoretic metalanguage. The semantics will be multi-valued: in addition
to (analogs of) the usual two truth values there will be others, inﬁnitely many in fact.
4.1. The Space of Values
My approach to achieving the goal is an extension of the Kripke-style approach pre-
viously mentioned, but it needs to be substantially more complicated because of the
need for a reasonable conditional.
One complication has to do with method of proof: the new conditional is not
“monotonic” in the sense of Kripke, which means that we cannot make do merely
with the sort of ﬁxed point argument that is central to his approach (though such a
ﬁxed point argument will play an important role in this approach too).
The other complication is that the semantic framework itself should be generalized:
whereas Kripke uses a 3-valued semantics, I will use a model theory in which sentences
take on values in a subspace W  of the set F  of functions from Pred() to {0, 1
2, 1},
where  is an initial ordinal (ordinal with no predecessor of the same cardinality) that
is greater than ω, and where Pred() is the set of its predecessors.5 (I don’t ﬁx on a
particular value of  at this point, because I will later impose further minimum size
requirements on it.)
Which subset of F  do I choose as my W ? If ρ is a non-zero ordinal less than
, call a member f of F  ρ-cyclic if for all β and σ for which ρ · β + σ < ,
f (ρ · β + σ) = f (σ); and call it cyclic if there is a non-zero ρ less than  such that it
is ρ-cyclic. Call it regular if in addition to being cyclic, it satisﬁes the condition that
it is either one of the constant functions 0 and 1 (which map everything into 0 or map
everything into 1) or else maps 0 into 1
2. Then W  consists of the regular functions
from Pred() to {0, 1
2, 1}. (Once we’ve found a suitable method of assigning values
in W  to sentences, then the valid inferences among sentences will be taken to be
those inferences that are guaranteed to preserve the value 1.)
A few properties of W  are worth noting.
• It has a natural partial ordering: f ⪯g iff (∀α < )(f (α) ≤g(α)).
The
ordering has a minimum 0 and maximum 1.
And the ordering is not total:
for instance, the constant function 1
2 is incomparable with the function that has
value 1
2 at limit ordinals, 0 at odd ordinals, and 1 at even successors.
5When I presented an analogous solution to the semantic paradoxes in [1], I did not explicitly introduce
this new space of semantic values (since I hadn’t yet thought of the matter in that way); but the ideas seem
to me clearer with this space of values made explicit.

Consistency of the Naive Theory of Properties
293
• For each f ∈W  deﬁne f ⋆to be the function for which f ⋆(α) = 1 −f (α)
for each α.
Then f ⋆will be in W  too.
Moreover, the operation ⋆is a
symmetry that switches 0 with 1, leaving the constant function 1
2 ﬁxed.
• For any nonempty subset S of W  that has cardinality less than that of , deﬁne
⋏(S) to be the function whose value at each α is the minimum of {f (α)|f ∈S},
and ⋎(S) to be the function that analogously gives the pointwise maximum.
Then ⋏(S) and ⋎(S) are in W ;6 and clearly, they are the meet and join of S
with respect to the partial ordering.
• For any S, ⋎(S) is 1 only if 1 ∈S; that holds because if 1 /∈S, then f (0) < 1
for each f in S. This is important: it will ensure that the logic that results will
obey the meta-rules of ∨-elimination and ∃-elimination.
Observe also that if f (0) is 1
2 and f ∈W , then f assumes the value 1
2 arbitrarily
late, viz., at all right-multiples of ρf . (By ρf , I mean the smallest ρ for which f is
ρ-cyclic.) Also, note that for any f and g in W , there are ρ <  such that both
f and g are ρ-cyclic: any common right-multiple of ρf and ρg will be one. One
consequence of this is that if there are β <  for which f (β) < g(β) (alternatively,
f (β) ≤g(β)), then for any α < , there are β in the open interval from α to  for
which f (β) < g(β) (alternatively, f (β) ≤g(β)). And that implies that
• f ⪯g is equivalent to the prima facie weaker claim that there is an α (less than
) such that for all β greater than α (and less than ), f (β) ≤g(β).
Similarly, if we deﬁne a (quite strong) strict partial ordering ≺≺by f ≺≺g iff either
(f = 0 and g ⪰1
2) or (f ⪯1
2 and g = 1), then
• f ≺≺g is equivalent to the prima facie weaker claim that there is an α (less
than ) such that for all β greater than α (and less than ), f (β) < g(β).
For if the “weaker” claim holds, then pick β to be a common right-multiple of ρf and
ρg greater than α; since f (β) < g(β), at least one of f (β) and g(β) isn’t 1
2, so at
least one of f (0) and g(0) isn’t 1
2, so at least one of f and g is in {0, 1}; and the rest
is obvious.
6For ⋏(S), this is trivial if one of the members of S is 0 or if S is {1}. Otherwise, the value of ⋏(S) at 0
is 1
2 , and we need only verify cyclicity. Let ρS be the smallest ordinal that is a right-multiple of all the ρf
for f ∈S; by the cardinality restriction on S, this is less than  (and at least 2). Moreover, all members of
S ρS-cycle, so ⋏(S) ρS-cycles (and so ρ⋏(S) ≤ρS).

294
H. Field
The results just sketched are the keys to proving a ﬁnal feature of the space W ,
that it is closed under the following operation ⇒:
If α > 0, (f ⇒g)(α) is
1 if for some β < α, and any γ such that β ≤γ < α, f (γ ) ≤g(γ );
0 if for some β < α, and any γ such that β ≤γ < α, f (γ ) > g(γ );
1
2 otherwise,
and (f ⇒g)(0) is
1 if for some β < , and any γ such that β ≤γ < , f (γ ) ≤g(γ );
0 if for some β < , and any γ such that β ≤γ < , f (γ ) > g(γ );
1
2 otherwise.
(The value 1
2 can occur only at 0 and at limits.) Note that the exceptional treatment
of 0 in effect turns the domain of the functions in W  into a “transﬁnite circle”, in
which 0 is identiﬁed with . And we clearly have
• f ⇒g is 1 if and only if f ⪯g; and f ⇒g is 0 if and only if f ≻≻g.
Why is W  closed under ⇒? Since 1 and 0 are in W , we need only show that
when neither f ⪯g nor f ≻≻g then f ⇒g is regular. Let ρ be the smallest non-
zero ordinal for which both f and g ρ-cycle, and let ρ∗be ρ·ω. I claim that f ⇒g
is ρ∗-cyclic, that is, for any σ < ρ∗, the value of (f ⇒g)(ρ∗·δ+σ) is independent
of δ; and that when σ is 0, (f ⇒g)(ρ∗·δ+σ) is 1
2. Case 1: σ > 0. Then (f ⇒
g)(ρ∗·δ +σ) = 1 iff (∃β < ρ∗·δ +σ)(∀γ )(β ≤γ < ρ∗·δ +σ ⊃f (γ ) ≤g(γ )) iff
(∃β)(ρ∗· δ ≤β < ρ∗· δ + σ)(∀γ )(β ≤γ < ρ∗· δ + σ ⊃f (γ ) ≤g(γ )); but that’s
independent of δ since f and g are (ρ-cyclic and hence) ρ∗-cyclic. Similarly for the
δ-independence of the condition for (f
⇒g)(ρ∗· δ + σ) = 0. Case 2: σ = 0.
We need that (f ⇒g)(ρ∗· δ) = 1
2 for all δ. The reason is that for any α < ρ∗· δ
(i.e., α < ρ · (ω · δ)), there is an ζ such that α < ρ · ζ < ρ · (ζ + 1) < ρ · (ω · δ);
and (since neither f ⪯g nor f ≻≻g) there are bound to be β in the interval from
ρ· ζ to ρ · (ζ + 1) (lower bound included) where f (β) > g(β) and others where
f (β) ≤g(β), so (f ⇒g)(ρ∗· δ) = 1
2.
The operation ⇒just speciﬁed has some rather nice properties. I’ve already
noted the conditions under which it takes the values 1 and 0. In addition:
• When f and g are in {0, 1} then f
⇒
g is identical to the value of the
material conditional, ⋎{f ⋆, g}.
Since I will be using ⇒to evaluate the conditional, this will mean that the con-
ditional reduces to the material conditional when excluded middle is assumed for
antecedent and consequent.

Consistency of the Naive Theory of Properties
295
It is beyond the present scope to investigate the laws governing ⇒(though this
is important since it will determine which inferences involving →are valid); for that,
see [1].
It’s worth making explicit that if f ⇐⇒g is deﬁned in the obvious way (as
⋏{f ⇒g, g ⇒f }), then if α > 0, (f ⇐⇒g)(α) is
1 if for some β < α, and any γ such that β ≤γ < α, f (γ ) = g(γ );
0 if for some β < α, and any γ such that β ≤γ < α, f (γ ) ̸= g(γ );
1
2 otherwise.
(And analogously for (f ⇐⇒g)(0): use  in place of α on the right hand side.)
4.2. W -Models
Having noted these features of the space W  of values, we can easily deﬁne models
based on this space: W -models. I will take a W -model for a language to consist of
a domain D of cardinality less than , an assignment to each individual constant c of
a member den(c) of D, and an assignment to each n-place predicate of a function p∗
from Dn to W  (where Dn is the set of n-tuples of members of D). A W -valuation
for a language will consist of a W -model together with a function s assigning objects
in the domain of the model to the variables of the language. Given any valuation with
assignment function s and any term t (individual constant or variable), let dens(t) be
den(t) if t is an individual constant, s(t) if t is a variable.
Given a W -valuation with assignment function s, we assign values in W  to
formulas as follows:
∥p(t1, . . . , tn)∥s is p∗(dens(t1), . . . , dens(tn)), which in the future I’ll also
write as p∗
dens(t1),...,dens(tn);
∥¬A∥s is (∥A∥s)⋆;
∥A ∧B∥s is ⋏{∥A∥s, ∥B∥s};
∥A ∨B∥s is ⋎{∥A∥s, ∥B∥s};
∥∀xA∥s is ⋏{∥A∥s′ | s′ differs from s except perhaps in what is assigned to
the variable x};
∥∃xA∥s is ⋎{∥A∥s′ | s′ differs from s except perhaps in what is assigned to
the variable x};
∥A →B∥s is ⇒(∥A∥s, ∥B∥s).
Note that for the quantiﬁer clause to make sense in general, it is essential that the
domain of quantiﬁcation have lower cardinality than . But this is no real restriction,
it’s simply that if you want to consider models of large cardinality you have to choose a

296
H. Field
large value of . (Recall the goal, (G): we want a strong form of consistency in which
for any classical starting model M for the base language L, there is a non-classical
model M+ in L+ that has M as its reduct. There is no reason why the space of values
used for M+ can’t depend on the cardinality of M.) So I will take my non-classical
model M+ to be a W -model for some initial ordinal  of cardinality greater than
that of M (as well as being greater than ω). M+ will have a cardinality that is the
maximum of the cardinalities of M and of ω, so this restriction will sufﬁce for the
quantiﬁer clause to be well-deﬁned.
I’ve written the valuation rules for ordinary formulas, but in the future I will adopt
the convention of using parameterized formulas in which we combine the effect of
the formula and the assignment function in our notation by plugging a metalinguistic
name for an object assigned to a variable in for free occurrences of the variable in the
displayed formula; that will allow me to drop the subscript s, and simplify the appear-
ance of other clauses.
For instance, the clauses for atomic formulas and universal
quantiﬁcations become
∥p(o1, . . . , on)∥is the function fp,o1,...,on that takes any α into
p∗(o1, . . . , on);
∥∀xA∥is the function ⋏{∥A(o)∥| o ∈D}.
(Sometimes I’ll make the parameters explicit, e.g.,
For all o1, . . . , on, ∥∀xA(o1, . . . , on)∥is the function
⋏{∥A(o, o1, . . . , on)∥| o ∈D},
but the absence of explicit parameters should not be taken to imply that there are no
parameters in the formula.)
5. A Model for Naive Property Theory
5.1. The Basics
The next step is to specify the particular model to be used for naive property theory.
Recall that I’m imagining that we are given a model M for the base language L.
We can assume without real loss of generality that |M| (the domain of M) doesn’t
contain formulas of L+, or n-tuples that include such formulas; for if the domain does
contain such things, we can replace it with an isomorphic copy that doesn’t.
With
this done, let E0 be |M|. For each natural number k, we deﬁne a set Ek+1 of ersatz
properties of level k+1. A member of Ek+1 is a triple consisting of a formula of L+, a
distinguished variable of L+, and a function that assigns a member of {Ej|j ≤k} to
each free variable of L+ other than the distinguished one, meeting the condition that if
k > 0 then at least one element of Ek is assigned.7 If (x, u1, . . . , un) is the formula

Consistency of the Naive Theory of Properties
297
and x the distinguished variable and o1, . . . , on the objects assigned to u1, . . . , un
respectively, I’ll use the notation λx(x, o1, . . . , on) for the ersatz property. Let E
be the union of all the Ek for k ≥1, and let |M+| be |M| ∪E. (The cardinality of
|M+| is thus the same as that of |M|, when |M| is inﬁnite, and is ℵ0 when M is ﬁnite.)
The only terms of L+ besides variables are the individual constants of L; they get the
same values in M+ as in M.
I hope it’s clear that the fact that I’m taking the items in the domain to be con-
structed out of linguistic items does not commit me to viewing properties as linguistic
constructions; the point of the model is simply to give a strong form of consistency
proof (i.e., to satisfy Goal (G)), and this is the most convenient way to do it.
Putting aside the unimportant issue of the nature of the entities in the domain, the
domain does have a very special feature: all the properties in the model are ultimately
generated (in an obvious sense I won’t bother to make precise) from the entities in the
ground model by the vocabulary of the ground model; so that the model contains the
minimal number of properties that are possible, given the ground model. It is useful
to consider such a special model for doing the consistency proof for naive property
theory, but not all models of naive property theory will have this form (as is obvious
simply from the fact that if we were to add new predicates to the ground model before
starting the construction, we would generate new properties).
To complete the speciﬁcation of M+ we must specify an appropriate , and then
assign to each n-place atomic predicate p a “W -extension”: a function p∗that takes
n-tuples of members of |M+| into W . I have already said that I would take  to
be the initial ordinal for a cardinal greater than the cardinality of |M+|; a further
stipulation will become necessary, but let us wait on that. As for the predicates, much
of what we must say is obvious. If p is a predicate in L other than ‘=’, and o1, . . . , on
are in M+, we let p∗
o1,...,on be 1 if ⟨o1, . . . , on⟩is in the M-extension of p, 0 otherwise.
(So it’s 0 if any of the oi are in E.) We let Property∗
o be 1 when o is in E, 0 otherwise.
And we let =o1,o2 be 1 when o1 is the same object as o2, and 0 otherwise.
These
stipulations obviously sufﬁce to make M the reduct of M+. Because of this, and the
fact that the function assigned to each connective including the conditional reduces
to its classical counterpart when conﬁned to the set {0, 1}, we get (by an obvious
induction on complexity) that for any sentence A of L (or any formula A of L and
any assignment function s that assigns only objects in |M|), the value of AL in M+
(relative to s) will be 1 when the value of A (relative to s) in M is 1, and will be 0
when the value of A (relative to s) in M is 0. Each instance of Axiom Schema (I)
therefore gets value 1.
This leaves only ‘∈’. One desideratum should obviously be that when o2 is in the
ground model |M|, then ∈∗
o1,o2 is 0. This will sufﬁce for giving value 1 to Axiom (II).
The difﬁcult matter, of course, is ﬁguring out how to complete the speciﬁcation of
the W -extension of ‘∈’, in such a way as to validate Axiom Schema (III). This will
be the subject of the next four subsections.
7The exception for k = 0 is needed only for formulas that contain no free variables beyond the distin-
guished one.

298
H. Field
5.2. The Difﬁculty: How Do ‘∈’ and ‘→’ Interact?
The main problem in constructing an interpretation for membership statements is due
to the presence in the language of the conditional →. Just to get a feeling for what
might be involved here, consider a very simple case: the ordinary Curry property K.
This is λx(x ∈x →⊥), where ⊥is some sentence with value 0, say ∃y(y ̸= y). What
function fK∈K should serve as ∈∗
K,K, and hence as ∥K ∈K∥, i.e., ∥K ∈λx(x ∈x →
⊥)∥? Since we want (III) to be valid, that had better be the same as ∥K ∈K →⊥∥.
That is, we want the function fK∈K to be identical to the function fK∈K ⇒0.
But how do we get that to be the case? The ﬁrst thing we want to know is, what is
fK∈K(0)? The rules tell us that it is
1 if (∃β < )(∀γ )[β ≤γ <  ⊃fK∈K(γ ) = 0];
0 if (∃β < )(∀γ )[β ≤γ <  ⊃fK∈K(γ ) > 0];
1
2 otherwise.
It appears that we can’t know the value of fK∈K(0) until we know the values of
fK∈K(α) for higher α. But ﬁnding out the values of fK∈K(α) for each higher α
seems to require already having the values for lower α. We seem to be involved in a
vicious circle.
In fact, there is an easy way to ﬁnd out what function fK∈K is. First, fK∈K(0)
can’t be 1; for the only function in W  that has value 1 at 0 is 1, and so fK∈K(1)
would have to be 1; but fK∈K(1) can only be 1 if fK∈K(0) is 0. By a similar argument,
fK∈K(0) can’t be 0. It follows that fK∈K(0) must be 1
2, and from that it is easy to
successively obtain all the other values. (For the record, the value is 1
2 at 0 and all
limit ordinals, 0 at odd ordinals, and 1 at even successors.)
Other cases will not be so simple. For instance, consider a more general class
of Curry-like properties, the properties of the form λx(x ∈x →A(x; o1, . . . , on)).
Letting Q be the property for a speciﬁc choice of A and of o1, . . . , on, we want
|Q ∈Q| to have the same value as Q ∈Q →A(Q; o1, . . . , on). But A can be a
formula of arbitrary complexity, itself containing ∈and →, and the ois can themselves
be “odd” properties of various sorts. It isn’t obvious how the reasoning that works for
the simple Curry sentence will work more generally.
In many speciﬁc cases, actually, it is also easy to come up with a consistent value
for the sentences involved; often a unique one, though in cases like the parameterized
sentence ‘λx(x ∈x) ∈λx(x ∈x)’ it is far from unique unless further constraints
are added. But it’s one thing to ﬁgure out what the value would have to be in a
lot of individual cases, another to come up with a general proof that values always
can be consistently assigned. And it’s still another thing to specify a method that
determines a unique value for any formula relative to any assignment function. How
are we to do these further things? The reasoning about the valuation of K ∈K
suggests that for α > 0 we might be able to ﬁgure out the function Zα that assigns
to each parameterized formula B the value ∥B∥(α), if only we had the functions Zβ

Consistency of the Naive Theory of Properties
299
for β < α; but getting the process going requires that we know Z0, which includes
the assignment to parameterized B for which there are arbitrarily high embeddings of
‘→’in either the formula itself or the formulas involved in generating the parameters;
this will depend on the Zβ for the very high values of β. The main problem, then, is
to somehow break into the “transﬁnite circle”.
I propose that we proceed by successive approximations. The main idea is to start
outside of the space W , so that we can treat ‘→’in a way that mimics the behavior of
the ⇒at ordinal values greater than 0 but abandons its rigid requirement about stage
0. We will start out by assigning the “0th stage” of the evaluation of all conditionals
artiﬁcially, and see what the later stages must be like as a result of this; it will turn out
that by continuing far enough we will inevitably be led to an appropriate assignment
Z0 of values for the initial stage.
This must be combined with another idea, which is basically the one Kripke em-
ployed in his construction: we need to use a ﬁxed point argument to construct the
assignment to ‘∈’ by approximations when the assignment to ‘→’ is given. And we
need to somehow do these two approximation processes together; this is where most
of the difﬁculties arise.
5.3. Constructing the Valuation of ‘∈’: First Steps
OK, let’s get down to business. The construction will assign values in the set {0, 1
2, 1}
to formulas relative to two ordinal parameters α and σ (as well as to an assignment
of values to the variables in the formula). α will initially be unrestricted; σ will
be restricted to being no greater than , the initial ordinal of the cardinality that
immediately succeeds that of |M+|. (Forget about  for now; we will ultimately take
ittobeatleast, butitisnotyetinthepicture.) Weorderpairs⟨α, σ⟩lexicographically,
that is, ⟨α, σ⟩⪯⟨α′, σ ′⟩iff either α < α′ or both α = α′ and σ ≤σ ′; the reason
for demanding that σ is restricted is so that this deﬁnes a genuine sequence. We will
mostly be interested in the subsequence of pairs of form ⟨α,⟩; values of σ smaller
than  serve simply as auxiliaries toward producing the values at . I will call the
value of a sentence at the pair ⟨α,⟩its “value at stage α”, and will often drop the 
from the notation.
I now proceed to assign a value in the set {0, 1
2, 1} to each formula in L+ relative to
any choice of α, σ and s (the latter being a function assigning objects to the variables);
except that as mentioned before I will drop the reference to s by understanding the
formulas to be parameterized. I will use the single-bar notation |A|α,σ instead of the
double-bar notation ∥A∥used before, to emphasize that the value space is different.
Eventually I will use the two-parameter sequence |A|α,σ to recover ∥A∥.
(Just so
you know where we’re headed, the deﬁnition will be that ∥A∥is the function whose
value at α <  is |A|+α,; where  and  are ordinals to be speciﬁed later. These
ordinals will not depend on the particular A; and for all A, |A|+, = |A|,.
Moreover, for all A, |A|, is 1 iff for all α > , |A|α, is 1; and analogously for

300
H. Field
0, though not necessarily for 1
2. These are the main conditions needed to ensure that
∥A∥meets the regularity conditions required for membership in the space W , which
in turn ensures that we get a reasonable logic.)
The single-bar assignment goes as follows:
1. |o1 = o2|α,σ is 1 if o1 = o2; 0 otherwise.
2. If p is an atomic predicate of L other than ‘=’, |p(o1, . . . , on)|α,σ is 1 if
⟨o1, . . . , on⟩is in the extension of p in M; 0 otherwise. (So it’s 0 if any of
the oi are in E.)
3. |Property(o)|α,σ is 1 if o is in E; 0 otherwise.
4. |o1 ∈o2|α,σ is 0 if o2 is in the original domain |M|. Otherwise, o2 is of form
λx(x, b1, . . . , bn) for some speciﬁc formula  and objects b1, . . . , bn. In that
case, |o1 ∈o2|α,σ is
1 if for some ρ < σ, |(o1, b1, . . . , bn)|α,ρ = 1;
0 if for some ρ < σ, |(o1, b1, . . . , bn)|α,ρ = 0;
1
2 otherwise.
5. |¬A|α,σ is 1 −|A|α,σ.
6. |A ∧B|α,σ is min{|A|α,σ, |B|α,σ}.
7. |A ∨B|α,σ is max{|A|α,σ, |B|α,σ}.
8. |∀xA(x)|α,σ is min{|A(o)|α,σ | o ∈|M+|}.
9. |∃xA(x)|α,σ is max{|A(o)|α,σ | o ∈|M+|}.
10. |A →B|α,σ is
1 if for some β < α, and any γ such that β ≤γ < α, |A|α, ≤|B|α,;
0 if for some β < α, and any γ such that β ≤γ < α, |A|α, > |B|α,;
1
2 otherwise.
Note that when α is held ﬁxed, the values of all atomic predications not involving ‘∈’
(including those involving ‘=’ and ‘Property’), and of all conditionals, is completely
independent of σ: in the case of conditionals, that is because of the use of the speciﬁc
ordinal  on the right hand side of 10. That means that for each ﬁxed value of α we
can perform the ﬁxed point construction of [4]. (We perform it “transﬁnitely many
times”, once for each α.) More fully, for each α the construction is monotonic in σ:
as σ increases with ﬁxed α, the only possible switches in value are from 1
2 to 0 and
from 1
2 to 1. So by the standard ﬁxed-point argument, the construction must reach a
ﬁxed point at some ordinal of cardinality no greater than that of the domain; that is,
at some ordinal less than . And that means that we get the following consequence
of 4:
(FP) For all α and all o and all  and all b1, . . . ,bn, |o ∈λx(x, b1, . . . , bn)|α,
= |(o, b1, . . . , bn)|α,.
And the rule for the biconditional that follows from 10 and 6 (together with the fact

Consistency of the Naive Theory of Properties
301
that an increase in σ stops having any effect by the time we’ve reached ) then implies
that for any α≥1 (and any o,  and b1, . . . , bn),
|o ∈λx(x, b1, . . . , bn) ↔(o, b1, . . . , bn)|α, = 1;
so (dropping  from the notation),
(FP-Cor1) For any  and α ≥1, |∀u1 . . . ∀un∃z∀x[x ∈z ↔(x, u1, . . . , un)]|α
= 1.
(FP-Cor1) looks superﬁcially like the (III) that we require, but in fact it falls far short
of it, for it says nothing about the double-bar semantic values that we need to guarantee
a reasonable logic: nothing about regular functions from Pred() to {0, 1
2, 1}. To do
better, we need to explore what happens as we go to higher and higher values of α.
That is the goal of the next subsection.
Before proceeding to that, I note a substitutivity result:
(FP-Cor2) If A is any parameterized formula, and A∗results from it by replacing an
occurrence of y ∈λx(x, o1, . . . , on) by an occurrence of (y, o1, . . . , on), then for
each α, |A|α = |A∗|α.
It’s worth emphasizing that this holds even when the substitution is inside the scope of
an →. The proof (whose details I leave to the reader) is an induction on complexity,
with a subinduction on α to handle the conditionals and the identity claims. (It is es-
sential that the assignment of values to conditionals for α = 0 didn’t give conditionals
different values when they differ by such a substitution; but it clearly didn’t do that,
since it gave all conditionals value 1
2.)
5.4. The Fundamental Theorem
Is there a way to get from our single-bar semantic values relative to levels α to double-
bar semantic values in a space W ? A naive thought might be to deﬁne ∥o1 ∈o2∥
as the function that maps each α into |o1 ∈o2|α. But it should be obvious that this
doesn’t work: it doesn’t meet the regularity condition that we need. (It does work in
a few simple cases, like fK∈K, but not in general.) The fact that all conditionals have
value 1
2 at α = 0 is the most obvious indication of this.
But something like it will work: I will show that there are certain ordinals , which
I will call acceptable ordinals, with some nice properties. It turns out that if  is any
acceptable ordinal and  is any sufﬁciently larger acceptable ordinal that is also initial
(so that it is equal to  + ), then we can use this  for our value space W , and we
can deﬁne ∥o1 ∈o2∥as the function that maps each α <  into |o1 ∈o2|+α. The
conditions on acceptability will guarantee that the functions are regular. It will also

302
H. Field
turn out that even for complex formulas, ∥A∥is the function that maps each α < 
into |A|+α. And this will guarantee all of the laws that we need.8
The deﬁnition of acceptability that is easiest to use will require some preliminary
explanation. To that end, I introduce a transﬁnite sequence of functions Hα. (These
are the “single-bar analogs of ” the Zα that I informally mentioned in Section 5.2.)
Hα is deﬁned as the function that assigns to each parameterized formula A the value
|A|α determined by the single-bar valuation rules. If v = Hα, I say that α represents
v. And if Hα = Hβ I say that α is equivalent to β. I will make use of an intuitively
obvious Lemma that the reader can easily prove by induction on γ :
Lemma. If α is equivalent to β then for any γ , α + γ is equivalent to β + γ .
Now let FINAL be the set of functions v that are represented arbitrarily late, i.e.,
such that (∀α)(∃β ≥α)(v = Hβ).
Proposition 1. FINAL ̸= ∅.
Proof. If it were empty, then for each function v from SENT to {0, 1
2, 1}, there would
be an αv such that (∀β ≥αv)(v ̸= Hβ). Let θ be the supremum of all the αv. Then for
each function v from SENT to {0, 1
2, 1}, v ̸= Hθ. Since Hθ itself is such a function,
this is a contradiction.
Call an ordinal γ ultimate if it represents some v in FINAL; that is, if (∀α)(∃β ≥α)
(Hγ = Hβ).
Proposition 2. If α is ultimate and α ≤β then β is ultimate.
Proof. If α ≤β, then for some δ, β = α + δ. Suppose α is ultimate. Then for any µ,
there is an ηµ ≥µ which is equivalent to α. But then β, i.e., α + δ, is equivalent to
ηµ + δ by the Lemma, and ηµ + δ ≥µ; so β is ultimate.
Call a parameterized formula A ultimately good if for every ultimate α, |A|α = 1;
ultimately bad if for every ultimate α, |A|α = 0; and ultimately indeterminate if it is
neither ultimately good nor ultimately bad. If  is a class of parameterized formulas,
call an ordinal δ correct for  if
(ULT) For any A ∈, |A|δ = 1 iff A is ultimately good, and |A|δ = 0 iff A is
ultimately bad.
(It follows that |A|δ = 1
2 iff A is ultimately indeterminate. Also, if  is closed under
negation then the clause for 0 follows from the clause for 1.) And call an ordinal
acceptable if it is universally correct, that is, correct for the set of all parameterized
formulas. (So if two ordinals are acceptable, they are equivalent, i.e., they assign the
same values to every parameterized formula.)
8In what follows, I use a slightly different deﬁnition of acceptability than in [1], though it is equivalent
to the one there; the difference simpliﬁes the proof somewhat.

Consistency of the Naive Theory of Properties
303
Proposition 3. If δ is ultimate, then the following sufﬁces for it to be correct for :
for all A ∈, if A is ultimately indeterminate then |A|δ = 1
2.
Proof. Since δ is ultimate, anything that is ultimately good or ultimately bad has the
right value at δ, so only the ultimately indeterminate A have a chance of being treated
incorrectly.
I now proceed to show that there are acceptable ordinals; indeed, arbitrarily large
ones. Start with any ultimate ordinal τ, however large. Then every member of FINAL
is represented by some ordinal ≥τ; and since FINAL is a set rather than a proper
class, and τ is ultimate, there must be a ρ such that τ + ρ is equivalent to τ and every
member of FINAL is represented in the interval [τ, τ +ρ). Finally, let  be τ +ρ ·ω.
I will show that  is acceptable.
Proposition 4. For any n, every member of FINAL is represented in the interval
[τ + ρ · n, τ + ρ · (n + 1)).
Proof. From the fact that τ +ρ is equivalent to τ, a trivial induction yields that for any
ﬁnite n, τ + ρ · n is equivalent to τ; so for any ﬁnite n and any α < ρ, τ + ρ · n + α is
equivalent to τ + α. So anything represented in the interval [τ, τ + ρ) is represented
in [τ + ρ · n, τ + ρ · (n + 1)).
Proposition 5.  is correct with respect to all conditionals.
Proof. Since  is ultimate, any ultimately good A has value 1 at , and any ultimately
bad A has value 0 at . It remains to prove the converses, for the case where A is a
conditional.
Suppose |B →C| = 1. Then for some α < τ + ρ · ω, we have that (∀β ∈
[α, τ + ρ · ω))(|B|β ≤|C|β). Since α < τ + ρ · ω, there must be an n such that
α < τ + ρ · n. So (∀β ∈[τ + ρ · n, τ + ρ · ω))(|B|β ≤|C|β). But by Prop. 4,
every member of FINAL is represented in [τ + ρ · n, τ + ρ · ω); so for every ultimate
ordinal β, |B|β ≤|C|β. It follows by the valuation rules that for every ultimate β,
|B →C|β = 1; that is, B →C is ultimately good. Similarly, if |B →C| = 0 then
B →C is ultimately bad.
Fundamental Theorem:  is acceptable.
Proof. By Prop. 3, it sufﬁces to show that if A is ultimately indeterminate then |A| =
1
2. Making the mini-stages explicit (and recalling that for any α, if a sentence has value
1
2 at ⟨α, ⟩then it has that value at all ⟨α, σ⟩), the claim to be proved is that (∀A)(∀σ)(if
||A| | = 1
2 then |A|,σ = 1
2). Or reversing the quantiﬁers, that (∀σ)(∀A)(if ||A| | = 1
2
then |A|,σ = 1
2). Suppose this fails; let σ0 be the smallest ordinal at which it fails.
We get a contradiction by proving by induction on the complexity of A that
(∀A)( if A is ultimately indeterminate then |A|,σ0 =
1
2).
(*)

304
H. Field
If A is atomic with predicate other than ‘∈’, then A is not ultimately indeterminate,
so the claim is vacuous. Similarly if A is o1 ∈o2 where o2 is not in E.
Suppose A is o1 ∈o2 where o2 ∈E. Then o2 is {x|(x, b1, . . . , bn)}, for some
(x, b1, . . . , bn). So if A is ultimately indeterminate, ∃x[x = o1∧(x, b1, . . . , bn)]
must be too, since it has the same value as A at each stage. So by choice of σ0,
|∃x[x = o1 ∧(x, b1, . . . , bn)]|,σ = 1
2 for all σ < σ0. But then by the valuation
rules, |o1 ∈o2|,σ0 = 1
2.
If A is a conditional, then by the valuation rules |A|,σ0 is |A|,, i.e., |A|, which
(when A is ultimately indeterminate) is 1
2 by Prop. 5.
The other cases use the claim that (*) holds for simpler sentences, and are fairly
routine. E.g., if A is ∀xB, then if A is ultimately indeterminate, there is a t0 such
that B(t0/x) is ultimately indeterminate and for no t is B(t/x) ultimately bad. But
for any t for which B(t/x) is ultimately indeterminate, including t0, the induction
hypothesis gives that |B(t0/x)|,σ0 = 1
2; and for any t for which B(t/x) is ultimately
good, |B(t/x)|, is 1 and so |B(t/x)|,σ0 ∈{ 1
2, 1}. So by the valuation rules for ∀,
|∀xB|,σ0 = 1
2.
5.5. The Valuation of ‘∈’ Concluded
We are now ready to choose the value of  for our space W , and to choose a
W -extension for ‘∈’.
Recall that the acceptable ordinal  just constructed was chosen to be bigger than
an arbitrarily big τ; so the fundamental theorem gives that acceptable ordinals occur
arbitrarily late. Let 0 be the ﬁrst acceptable ordinal and 0 + δ be the second; then
an ordinal is acceptable iff it is of form 0 + δ · β.
If I hadn’t already imposed stringent requirements on the space of semantic values
(so as to be able to develop the semantics generally with as little bother as possible), I
could now simply let ∈∗
o1o2 be the function that maps each α < δ into |o1 ∈o2|0+α,
and let the set of semantic values be the set of such functions for the different pairs
⟨o1, o2⟩. But given that I have imposed the stringent requirements, this won’t work:
I need an acceptable 0 +  for which  is an initial ordinal ≥. Also, if I don’t
insist that  is strictly greater than δ I will need to prove that for each parameterized
formula A there is a ρA smaller than δ such that the function |A|0+α is ρA-cyclic; I
imagine that’s so, but to avoid taking the trouble to prove it, I will construct  to be
strictly greater than δ, so that we can use δ as a common cycle for all the A.9
So let  be any initial ordinal that is greater than 0 +δ and no less than . Since
 is initial, and greater than 0 + δ, it is identical to 0 + δ · , so it is acceptable.
9Actually I could avoid a separate stipulation that 0 + δ <  by proving this from the stipulation that
 is an initial ordinal, and that is an obvious consequence of what I assume to be a fact, that δ < 0. But
again, there’s no need to take the trouble to prove this when an alternative stipulation of the value of  will
obviate the need.

Consistency of the Naive Theory of Properties
305
And (since 0 +  is also just ), we can carry out the above idea using  in place
of δ:
(E) For each σ1 and σ2, ∈∗
o1o2 is the function that assigns to each ordinal α <  the
value |o1 ∈o2|0+α.
Then every value ∥o1 ∈o2∥is δ-cyclic.
The last thing that must be shown, to show that (E) does in fact succeed in assigning
a W -extension to ‘∈’for the  recently chosen, is that each ∥o1 ∈o2∥is regular. But
that’s clear: if it maps 0 into either 0 or 1, then |o1 ∈o2|0 is 0 or 1, so by acceptability,
o1 ∈o2 is either ultimately bad or ultimately good, and so |o1 ∈o2|0+α is either 0
for all α or 1 for all α; so ∥o1 ∈o2∥is either 0 or 1.
So we have a W -model. All that now remains of the consistency proof is to verify
that the model validates Axiom Schema (III). This requires the following:
Theorem. For each parameterized formula A, ∥A∥is the function that assigns to
each ordinal α <  the value |A|0+α.
Proof. By induction on the complexity of A. It’s true by stipulation for membership
statements, and trivial for other atomic statements; and the clauses for quantiﬁers
and for connectives other than →are completely transparent because the functions
assignedtheseconnectivesinW -modelsbehavepointwisejustlikethecorresponding
connectives behave in the single-bar assignments. This is true for →too, except for
the behavior at 0. So all we need to verify is the following:
If ∥A∥and ∥B∥are the functions that assign to each ordinal α <  the
values |A|0+α and |B|0+α respectively, then ∥A →B∥(0) assigns the
value |A →B|0.
But ∥A →B∥(0) is by stipulation (∥A∥⇒∥B∥)(0); that is,
1 if for some β < , and any γ such that β ≤γ < , ∥A∥(γ ) ≤∥B∥(γ );
0 if for some β < , and any γ such that β ≤γ < , ∥A∥(γ ) > ∥B∥(γ );
1
2 otherwise.
But ∥A∥(γ ) is by hypothesis |A|0+γ , and likewise for B, so these conditions are
just the same as the corresponding conditions for |A →B|0+. In other words,
we’ve shown that ∥A →B∥(0) is |A →B|0+. And since acceptable ordinals are
equivalent, that is just |A →B|0, as required.
Corollary. Each instance of Axiom Schema (III) gets value 1.
Proof. We need that for any o, o1, . . . , on,
∥o ∈λx(x, o1, . . . , on)∥= ∥(o, o1, . . . , on)∥.

306
H. Field
But by the Theorem, this reduces to the claim that for each α,
|o ∈λx(x, o1, . . . , on)|0+α = |(o, o1, . . . , on)|0+α,
and that is just a special case of the ﬁxed point result (FP) proved in Section 5.3.
6. Satisfaction, Sets, and Proper Classes
Without too much trouble, the above construction could be generalized from properties
to (non-extensional) n-place relations, for each natural number n. (Properties are the
n = 1 case. We can include propositions as the n = 0 case.) There is a weak way
to do this and a strong way. The weak way is to introduce, for each n, the unary
predicate ‘Reln’ (‘is an n-ary relation’) and the (n + 1)-place predicate ‘∈n’ (with
x1, . . . , xn ∈n y meaning “y is an n-place relation and ⟨x1, . . . , xn⟩instantiates it”);
also a single unary predicate ‘REL’ which each of the ‘Reln’ entail (we need this for
restricting the variables to things that aren’t relations). The strong way, which requires
that the ground language L and ground theory T be adequate to arithmetic and the
theory of ﬁnite sequences, is to introduce a single binary predicate ‘Rel(n, z)’meaning
that z is an n-place relation (‘REL’can obviously then be deﬁned), and a single binary
predicate ‘∈’, with ‘∈(s, z)’ meaning “for some n, z is an n-place relation and s is
an n-place sequence that instantiates z”. The details of both the weak and the strong
generalizationare, asfarasIcansee, routine. Wecanalsoeasilybuildintothelanguage
an abstraction symbol that, when applied to any formula (x1, . . . , xn, u1, . . . , uk)
of the language and any k-tuple of entities o1, . . . , ok, denotes the n-place relation
λx1, . . . , xn(x1, . . . , xn, o1, . . . , ok); and we can introduce a predicate that applies
only to such canonical relations. (In the model we used to prove consistency, all the
relations were canonical, but this needn’t be so in general.)
From such a generalized theory in the strong form, we could also obtain a consistent
theory of expressions and of their satisfaction, a theory that validates the naive schema
⟨x1, . . . , xn⟩satisﬁes ⌜(v1, . . . , vn)⌝↔(x1, . . . , xn).
The basic idea is obvious: identify the formulas of a language that contains a satis-
faction predicate with canonical relations, and identify satisfaction with instantiation.
Satisfaction claims thus would get values in the space W , and excluded middle could
not in general be assumed for them.
It would be worth being more explicit about
the details were it not for the fact that such a theory of satisfaction was given more
directly in [1].
A more difﬁcult question is whether we can generalize the above construction to
a naive theory of extensional relations; or, to stick to the n = 1 case, a naive theory of
sets. Here there do seem to be some difﬁculties. The matter is a bit complicated be-
cause there are several different ways one might propose to treat identity, and there are
questions about whether one wants certain laws involving it to hold in full conditional

Consistency of the Naive Theory of Properties
307
form or only in the form of rules. But the main problem seems to be independent of
these issues, for it doesn’t involve identity: the issue is, how can we secure the rule
Set(x) ∧Set(y) ∧∀w(w ∈x ↔w ∈y) |= ∀z(x ∈z ↔y ∈z),
and preferably also the “reverse negated” rule
¬∀z(x ∈z ↔y ∈z) |= ¬∀w(w ∈x ↔w ∈y),
without any weakening of the Naive Comprehension Schema (III)? The natural way
to try to secure these rules is to modify the treatment of ‘∈’so that what the ﬁxed point
construction ensures is not the (FP) of Section 5.3, but rather, (FP) only for the special
case α = 0, supplemented with
(FP-Mod) For all α > 0 and all o and all  and all b1 . . . bn, |o ∈λx(x, b1,
. . . , bn)|α = |∃x[x ≡o ∧(x, b1, . . . , bn)]|α,
where ‘x ≡y’ abbreviates ‘[¬ Set(x) ∧x = y] ∨[Set(x) ∧Set(y) ∧∀z(z ∈x ↔
z ∈y)]’. (Notice that |x ≡y|α depends only on the single-bar values of membership
claims for β < α, given the valuation rules for the biconditional; so there is no threat
of circularity.) If we introduce the double-bar values on the basis of the single-bar
ones as before, this would yield
∥o ∈λx(x, b1, . . . , bn)∥= ∥∃x[x ≡o ∧(x, b1, . . . , bn)]∥.
Since ∥o ≡o∥= 1 for any o (given that ≡was deﬁned via ↔rather than the material
biconditional, and that the single-bar value at α = 0 drops out by the time you get to
the double-bar values), this would in turn yield
∥o ∈λx(x, b1, . . . , bn)∥⪰∥(o, b1, . . . , bn)∥,
which would ensure the validity of
(o, u1, . . . , un) →o ∈λx(x, u1, . . . , un).
(A)
We also get a limited converse, viz., the rule
o ∈λx(x, u1, . . . , un) |= (o, u1, . . . , un).
(B1)
But this is a signiﬁcant lessening of naive comprehension: indeed not only do we not
get the validity of the conditional
o ∈λx(x, u1, . . . , un) →(o, u1, . . . , un),
we don’t even get the “reverse negation” of (B1), viz.,
¬(o, u1, . . . , un) |= o /∈λx(x, u1, . . . , un).10
(B2)
This does not seem to me enough to count as Naive Set Theory. I don’t rule out that
we might be able to do better by a more clever construction, but it doesn’t look easy.
10For a counterexample, let o1 be {w|w ≡w}, o2 be {w|w ≡w ∧K ∈K} (where K is the Curry set),
and o3 be {w|¬(w ≡w)}; and let (x, o3) be ‘x ≡o3’. ∥¬(o1, o3)∥= 1; but ∥o1 /∈λx(x, o3)∥is

308
H. Field
But why do we need a naive theory of sets (or other extensional relations) anyway?
We have a very nice non-naive theory of sets, namely the Zermelo–Fraenkel theory;
and it can be extended to a naive theory of extensional relations either artiﬁcially, by
deﬁning extensional relations within it by the usual trick, or by a notationally messy but
conceptually obvious generalization of ZF that treats multiplace extensional relations
autonomously. (Formulations of ZF in terms of a relation of “having no greater rank
than” greatly facilitate this generalization.)
It is true that the absence of proper classes in ZF is sometimes awkward. It is
also true that adding proper classes in the usual ways (either predicative classes as in
Gödel–Bernays, or impredicative ones as in Morse–Kelley) is conceptually unsettling:
in each case (and especially in the more convenient Morse–Kelley case) they “look too
much like just another level of sets”, and the fact that there is no entity that captures
the extension of predicates true of proper classes suggests the introduction of still
further entities (“super-classes” that can have proper classes as members), and so
on ad inﬁnitum. But once we have properties (and non-extensional relations more
generally), this difﬁculty is overcome: properties can serve the function that proper
classes have traditionally served. The rules they obey are so different from the rules for
iterative sets (for instance, they can apply to themselves) that there is no danger of their
appearing as “just another level of sets”. And since every predicate of properties itself
has a corresponding property, there is no fear that the motivation for the introduction of
properties will also motivate the introduction of further entities (“super-properties”).11
Ofcourse, instandardproperclasstheories, properclassesareextensional; whereas
properties are not. Does this show that the properties won’t serve the purposes that
proper classes have been used for? No. I doubt that extensionality among proper
classes plays much role anyway, but without getting into that, one could always use
the surrogate ≡as a “pseudo-identity” among properties that is bound to be adequate
in all traditional applications of proper classes; and an extensionality law stated in
terms of ≡rather than = is trivially true. Of course, ≡is very bad at imitating identity
among properties generally: if it weren’t, the problem of getting an extensional analog
of naive property theory would be easy. But when we conﬁne our attention to those
properties that correspond to the proper classes of Gödel–Bernays or Morse–Kelley—
in both cases, properties that hold only of things that aren’t themselves properties but
rather are sets—then ≡is a very good surrogate for identity: for instance, over this
restricted domain, excluded middle and all the usual substitutivity principles hold of
≡. Consequently, we have a guarantee that properties will serve all the traditional
purposes of proper classes (even in the impredicative Morse–Kelley theory).
My claim, then, is (i) that if we have a naive theory of properties in the background,
we have all the advantages of proper classes without the need of any “set-like entities”
1 −⋎{∥o ≡o1 ∧(o, o3)∥}, which is ⪯1 −∥o2 ≡o1 ∧(o2, o3)∥, i.e., ⪯1 −∥o2 ≡o1 ∧o2 ≡o3)∥.
But o2 ≡o1 has the value K ∈K →⊤and o2 ≡o3 has the value K ∈K →⊥; and both assume value
1
2 at limit ordinals, so ∥o2 ≡o1 ∧o2 ≡o3)∥is not 0, so ∥o1 /∈λx(x, o3)∥is not 1.
11The general philosophical view here is quite similar to that in [5], though the theory of properties on
offer here is much stronger because of the presence of a serious conditional.

Consistency of the Naive Theory of Properties
309
beyond ordinary sets; (ii) that given this naive theory of properties, ordinary iterative
set theory (ZF) is a highly satisfactory theory; and (iii) there is no obvious need for
any additional theory of “naive sets”.
But if there is no need of a naive theory of sets, why is there a need for a naive
theory of properties, and for a naive theory of satisfaction? Was this paper a wasted
effort?
In fact, the case of properties (on at least one conception of them) and of satisfaction
are totally different from the case of sets. For the way we solve the paradoxes of naive
set theory in ZF is to deny the existence of the alleged set: for instance, there simply is
no set of all sets that don’t have themselves as members. The analogous paradox in the
case of the theory of satisfaction involves the expression ‘is not true of itself’, and if
we were to try to solve the paradox on strictly analogous lines we would have to deny
the existence of the expression! That would be absurd: after all, I just exhibited the
expression. We could of course say “Sure, there’s an expression ‘is not true of itself’,
but it doesn’t have the features one would naively think it has, such as being true of just
those things that are true of themselves”. This would be admitting that the expression
exists, but denying the naive satisfaction theory. That is certainly a possible way to
go, but it isn’t at all like the solution in the ZF case. There are reasons why I don’t
think it is a good way to go: the cost of violating the naive theory of satisfaction is
high; see [3]. But without getting into that here, let me simply say that this approach
is quite unlike that of ZF (where we deny the existence of the set, instead of saying
that it exists but has different members than you might have thought).
The case of properties is slightly more complicated, because there is I believe more
than one notion of property. There is, ﬁrst, the notion of natural property, as discussed
for instance in [6]. Here we do not want anything like Naive Comprehension: it is
central to the idea of natural properties that it is up to science to tell us which natural
properties there are. (It is also doubtful that we want natural properties of natural
properties. Even if we do, it seems likely that we should adopt a picture which is
“ZF-like” in that each natural property has a rank and applies only to non-properties
and to properties of lower rank. But there is no need to decide these issues here.) But
in addition to the notion of natural property, there is also a conception of property that
is useful in semantics. And it is the raison d’être of such “semantically conceived
properties” (sc-properties for short) that every meaningful open sentence (in a given
context) corresponds to one.12 (Open sentences in the language of sc-properties are
themselves meaningful, so they must correspond to sc-properties too.) Again, a ZF-
like solution in which the existence of the properties is denied goes against the whole
point of the notion.
In a theory of semantically conceived properties, then, it is unsatisfactory to say
that for a meaningful formula (x), there is no such thing as λx(x). It also seems
unsatisfactory to say that though λx(x) exists, the things that instantiate it are not
the o for which (o). In classical logic, those are the only two options, but what I’ve
12Or rather, every meaningful open sentence with a distinguished free variable corresponds to a sc-
property relative to any assignment of entities, including possibly sc-properties, to the other free variables.

310
H. Field
shown in this paper is how to develop a third option in which we weaken classical
logic. If we do that, then we can retain the naive theory of (sc-)properties, and that
has an important payoff that has no analogue in the case of sets. At the very least, the
value of a naive set theory is unobvious; but the value of a naive theory of satisfaction
is overwhelmingly clear, and it is almost as clear that we ought to want a naive theory
of sc-properties if we are going to posit sc-properties at all.
You may still want a naive theory of sets, for whatever reason; but what you need
is a naive theory of properties and a naive theory of satisfaction. I suspect that you
can’t get what you want; but you get what you need.
Acknowledgement. This paper ﬁrst appeared in The Philosophical Quarterly, Jan.
2004, ©Basil Blackwell.
References
[1]
Field, Hartry: 2003. A revenge-immune solution to the semantic paradoxes. Journal of
Philosophical Logic 32: 139–177.
[2]
Field, Hartry: 2003. Is the liar sentence both true and false? In: J. C. Beall and B.
Armour-Garb (eds.), Deﬂationism and Paradox, New York: Oxford University Press.
[3]
Field, Hartry: 2003. The semantic paradoxes and the paradoxes of vagueness. In: J. C.
Beall (ed.), Liars and Heaps, New York: Oxford University Press.
[4]
Kripke, Saul: 1975. Outline of a theory of truth. Journal of Philosophy 72: 690–716.
[5]
Maddy, Penelope: 1983. Proper classes. Journal of Symbolic Logic 48: 113–39.
[6]
Putnam, Hilary: 1975. On properties. In: H. Putnam (ed.), Mathematics, Matter and
Method: Philosophical Papers, vol. 1, Cambridge: Cambridge University.
NYU Department of Philosophy
503 Silver Center
100 Washington Square East
New York, NY 10003
USA
E-mail: hf18@nyu.edu

The Signiﬁcance of the Largest and Smallest
Numbers for the Oldest Paradoxes
Ulrich Blau
Abstract. Suppose for a moment that the universe V of pure sets is as real as anything. Do
we know it by axiomatic description? No, pace Russell, by acquaintance! For the platonist,
V is uniquely determined by a formally inexpressible self-referential imperative. Similarly he
is acquainted with numbers: A formally inexpressible well-ordered counting process ∗leads
beyond the ﬁnite and transﬁnite ordinals to transdeﬁnite ordinals without boundary. And con-
versely, a well-ordered halving process of length ∗leads to transdeﬁnite real numbers without
boundary. The formal inexpressibility of ∗‘Cantor’s absolut unendlicher Zahleninbegriff’,
has signiﬁcant consequences:
1. the ﬁnal solution to all semantic paradoxes in a 3-valued logic LR with transdeﬁnite
levels of reﬂexion and an indicator ‘∗’ for the reﬂected level(s),
2. a comprehensive—and maybe complete—theory of formal truth based on the ontology
V and the logic LR,
3. the formal unsolvability of the vagueness and motion paradoxes which originate from
the inconceivable continuum.1
The number system S which I will contemplate and commend is Platonist, arch-
conservative and leads by natural counting and dividing beyond all largest and smallest
numbers. It is characterized by the following.
• S extends the standard models of the ordinal and real numbers, but respects—in
contrast to Conway’s system [7]—natural properties of the ordinal numbers:
There are no magnitudes in S like ω −1, ω/2, or √ω .
• S combines—for the ﬁrst time, as far as I know—the natural arithmetics of the
largest, medium and smallest numbers.
• Thelargestnumbersonecanthinkof, thetransdeﬁniteordinals ofS,represent,
+1, . . . and characterize the well-ordered counting process, which transcends
the class  of all ordinal numbers without boundary.
1An extensive treatment of the subject of the present sketch may be found in an unpublished manuscript
[5].

312
U. Blau
• The smallest numbers one can think of, the transdeﬁnite real numbers of S,
include 1
 (‘1 over ’meaning: ‘1 2-th’, i.e., ‘1 -th’),
1
+1 (‘1 over +1’),
. . . and characterize the well-ordered halving process, which transcends the
length  without boundary.
• The notions of transdeﬁnite ordinal and transdeﬁnite real number are infor-
mally one-place predicates, indeed almost self-evident. Formally, however,
these notions, which are necessarily given relative to an arbitrary, increasingly
extensible well-ordering, cannot be expressed.
This is not without consequences for the oldest paradoxes:
• The notional openness of the transdeﬁnite ordinals allows for a natural non-
classical solution to the semantic paradoxes and an understanding of the whole
formally inexpressible notion of formal truth.
• The notional openness of the transdeﬁnite real numbers prevents any formal
understanding of the continuum and the vagueness and motion paradoxes.
We start with three introductory remarks to ontological, semantic and axiomatic
prerequisites, which will appeal only to the Platonist. The ontological basis of S is
the pure universe of sets V := 
α∈ Vα, where V0 := ∅, Vα+1 := Pot(Vα), and for
limit ordinals λ, Vλ := 
α<λ Vα.
V is extensionally indeterminate as to its height (ordinality) and its width (cardi-
nality). Yet V is—for the Platonist—in an intensional and absolute way uniquely and
completely determined by a formally inexpressible, two-dimensional self-referential
imperative:
V0: Consider the empty set V0!
V1: Consider the power set of the set considered last and repeat V1!
V2: Consider the union of all sets to be considered that way and repeat V1 and V2!

ω
V0
V1
V2
6
-
...
Vωω
Vωω+1 · · · Vωω+m · · ·
...
Vω·n
Vω·n+1 · · · Vω·n+m · · ·
...
V0
V1
· · ·
Vm
· · ·
This imperative leads to every rank set Vα. For, if a smallest Vα stayed out of con-
sideration, then V0, V1 or V2 would be violated, depending on whether α were 0 or a

Largest and Smallest Numbers
313
successor ordinal or a limit ordinal. Therefore, V2 stipulates considering their union
V. Then the process of extension goes no further since  V = V and Pot(V) does
not exist, or Pot(V) = V if we somewhat unusually deﬁne also for proper classes X:
Pot(X) = {x | x ⊆X},
with x being a set variable. The semantic basis of S is the naturally formulable standard
semantics of the impredicative class theory, which is generally not formulated since
it raises a seemingly fatal question: What do the class variables range over?—Very
simple; over absolutely all subclasses of V.—What is the range of these X?—None!
The subclasses of V are an incomprehensible plurality; as soon as we look at them as
a higher unit, V being an element (or hyperelement or whatever) thereof, the universal
class becomes a set, and the Platonist becomes a relativist. In this paper ‘Platonism’
means V-absolutism.
As an axiomatic basis for S, Bernays’impredicative class theory B sufﬁces, see [1].
To the Platonist, B probably looks true in the sense of the standard semantics just
mentioned since he is able to justify its essential part, a class-theoretic reﬂection
scheme, from the nature of the universal class:
There is no speciﬁc statement on V in any extension of the class-theoretic language
by class names: Every truth about V is reﬂected in sets Vα of sufﬁciently high ranks.
Otherwise, the absolute could be ﬁxed in a formal language, which is unthinkable
for the Platonist.
1. The Largest Numbers
Are there numbers that are larger than all large cardinals?2
Of course there are.
Large cardinals are elements of  and have sets of ordinal predecessors. Transdeﬁnite
ordinals, on the other hand, are larger than  by any amount and have proper classes
of ordinal predecessors. Let us deﬁne the following notions:
A well-ordering on a class X is a two-place relation on X which is connected and
well-founded.3 Let W be a well-ordering on X:
A (proper) W-initial segment of X is a (proper) subclass X0 of X that contains
all W-predecessors of its elements. Then W0 := W ∩X2
0 is a well-ordering on X0.
W is called a transdeﬁnite well-ordering on X if a proper initial segment X0 of X is
2‘Cardinal’in the usual sense. For the Platonist, there are two transdeﬁnite cardinalities, encompassing
all transdeﬁnite ordinals: the cardinality K of all pure sets and the formally inexpressible cardinality K∗of
all proper classes. A formally inexpressible argument shows in an informally cogent way that there are no
cardinalities between K and K∗: The class-theoretical continuum hypothesis is true! And another informal
reﬂection leads to the truth of the set-theoretical continuum hypothesis, cf. [4].
3Idonotrequire, asiswidelydone, thateveryproperinitialsegmentofawell-orderingisaset. Otherwise,
according to Mostowski’s theorem, there would be no transdeﬁnite well-ordering and no transdeﬁnite
ordinals.

314
U. Blau
isomorphic to :
(X0, W0) ≃(, ∈).
The elements of X −X0 are called W-transdeﬁnite ordinals. For every well-ordering
W on X there exists a longer well-ordering W + on X+ = {{x} | x ∈X} ∪{∅}: Let
W ′ := {⟨{x}, {y}⟩| ⟨x, y⟩∈W} and W + := W ′ ∪{⟨{x}, ∅⟩| x ∈X}.
W ′ is isomorphic to W, and W + is lengthened by the member ∅. Thus a longest well-
ordering and a largest transdeﬁnite ordinal do not exist any more than the largest natural
number. However, while the natural numbers form the set ω and the ordinals form the
proper class , the ﬁnite, transﬁnite and transdeﬁnite ordinals are an incomprehensible
open plurality. Let us call it—abusively, since any name would be an abuse—∗. Can
we deﬁne ∗? Possibly as the ‘class of ordinals with respect to any well-ordering’?
No, with this ∗= V would hold. But then, which well-ordering would order it? Or
as the ‘class of members of the union of all well-orderings’? No, the heterogeneous
well orderings cannot form a union. Can we introduce ∗as a basic notion and
characterize it axiomatically or semantically? No, we would have to demand:
∗is well-ordered by a relation W ∗.
(A1)
Every well-ordering (X, W) is isomorphicto an initial segment of (∗, W ∗).
(A2)
But then it follows, as above, that
∗+ := {{x} | x ∈∗} ∪{∅} is well ordered by
W ∗+ := {⟨{x}, {y}⟩| ⟨x, y⟩∈W ∗} ∪{⟨{x}, ∅⟩| x ∈∗},
and this well-ordering is not isomorphic to any initial segment of (∗, W ∗). Conse-
quently, the most natural extension ∗of the most natural mathematical notion—the
notion of a natural number—is a formally inexpressible ideal that forces a permanent
extension of its own. Any mathematics will have to be content with arbitrary tiny
initial segments of the ordinals.
How could we know about ∗? By the intimate acquaintance of predetermined
creation.
P0:
Create an arbitrary point!
P1:
Add one successor point to the last added point and repeat P1!
P2:
Add one successor point to the sequence of all points to be created
that way and repeat P1 and P2!
The imperative V0–V2 above must stop at the barrier V. P2 extends the progression
of natural numbers created by P0, P1, and will go on forever.

Largest and Smallest Numbers
315
1.1. A Transdeﬁnite Ordinal Segment
This segment of ∗, deﬁned as
′ := the class of n-tupels of ordinals ⟨α1, . . . , αn⟩,
with αi ∈, α1 > 0 if n > 1,
is a transdeﬁnite generalization of the decimal system. Replacing the small base 10 by
the large base  results in a correspondence between the ‘one-digit’ natural numbers
0, . . . , 9 and the α ∈, and between the ‘multiple digit’ natural numbers and the
transdeﬁnite ordinals of ′:
⟨1, 0⟩, ⟨1, 1⟩, . . . , ⟨1, α⟩, . . . , ⟨2, 0⟩, ⟨2, 1⟩, . . . , ⟨1, 0, 0⟩, . . .
From now on, we shall denote ordinals ∈′ by using α, β, γ, . . . . Ordinals having
lengths 1 are called small ordinals or just ordinal numbers; ordinals having lengths
> 1 are called large or transdeﬁnite ordinals. The well-ordering < of these on ′
corresponds to the well-ordering of the natural numbers in decimal notation, arranged
by the length and, in case of equal lengths of two ordinals, by the ﬁrst occurrence of
a difference: For
α = ⟨α1, . . . , αm⟩and β = ⟨β1, . . . , βn⟩we deﬁne
α < β := m < n ∨m = n ∧

i(αi < βi ∧

j < i(αi = βi)).
We classify the ordinals according to the values at their last value places. There are
successor ordinals with last-place values α +1, limit ordinals or liminals having limit
numbers as last-place values, and 0-ordinals which are either 0 itself or large ordinals
having last-place values of 0. We call these litorals, since they border a cardinally
immenseocean, whereastheliminalsstandoncomparativelyﬁrmgroundtobothsides:
immediate successors in front, close predecessors behind which are only separated by
sets of ordinals. (Replacing the last-place value λ of a liminal by any β < λ results in a
close predecessor.) How do we do calculations with these extensionally indeterminate
magnitudes?
That is very simple. The well-ordering < on ′ already determines addition,
multiplication and exponentiation in ′ if the basic principles of arithmetic of natural
and ordinal numbers are adhered to:
• Addition principle. The sum of α and β is the smallest γ which for all δ < β
exceeds the sum of α and δ (for β > 0).
• Multiplication principle. The product of α and β is the smallest γ which for all
δ < β exceeds the product of α and δ by at least α.
• Exponentiation principle. The power of α and β is the smallest γ which for all
δ < β at least exceeds the α-fold power of α and δ (for β > 0).
These principles, which are independent of notation, are valid for any segment of
∗. They are, along with the initial equations α + 0 = α, α0 = 1, equivalent to the

316
U. Blau
usual deﬁnitions of sum, product and power of natural numbers (restricted to ω) and
of ordinal numbers (restricted to ). For the segment ′, we do not consider raising
to power for now. We deﬁne sum and product as follows. Let Lα be the length n of
α = ⟨α1, . . . , αn⟩∈′ and αi ∈ be the ith member of α.
If Lα < Lβ, then let α + β := β;
otherwise, if Lα = m + n, Lβ = n (m ≥0, n ≥1),
then let α + β := ⟨α1, . . . , αm, αm+1 + β1, β2, . . . , βn⟩
(D+)
If α = 0 ∨β = 0, then let α · β := 0;
otherwise, if Lα = m, Lβ = n(m ≥1, n ≥1),
then let α · β := ⟨β1, . . . , βn−1, α1 · βn, α′
2, . . . , α′
m⟩,
where α′
i :=
	
αi
if βn is a successor number
0
if βn = 0 or βn is a limit number (i = 2, . . . , m)
(D·)
This product is curiously entangled, a knot tied by Cantor by switching the natural
order of the ordinal factors: ‘α · β’ means ‘α, β times’. If we adapt our writing to the
vernacular:
α × β := β · α (‘α times β’)
the knot untied:
If α = 0 or β = 0, then let α × β := 0;
otherwise, if Lα = m, Lβ = n (m ≥1, n ≥1),
then let α × β := ⟨α1, . . . , αm−1, αm × β1, β′
2, . . . , β′
n⟩
where β′
i :=
	
βi
if αm is a successor number
0
if αm = 0 or αm is a limit number
(i = 2, . . . , n)
(D×)
With these deﬁnitions, the addition and multiplication principles are provable; I shall
not delve into this here.4 The main properties of ordinal arithmetic carry over from 
to ′, particularly
(α + β) + γ = α + (β + γ )
(α · β) · γ = α · (β · γ )
α · (β + γ ) = α · β + α · γ.
Of course, addition and multiplication are not commutative on ′; for example, for
ordinal numbers α > 1 we have:
α + ⟨1, 0⟩= ⟨1, 0⟩< ⟨1, α⟩= ⟨1, 0⟩+ α.
α · ⟨1, 0⟩= ⟨1, 0⟩< ⟨α, 0⟩= ⟨1, 0⟩· α.
4The proofs of all statements not proved in the present paper can be found in my unpublished
manuscript [5].

Largest and Smallest Numbers
317
How about exponentiation? Generally, ⟨1, 0⟩n = ⟨1, 0, . . . , 0⟩with n zeros; therefore,
⟨1, 0⟩ω is the smallest ordinal outside ′. Since ⟨1, 0⟩represents the class  in ′,
′ is a notational system for the initial segment ω of ∗.
What does a philosopher need transdeﬁnite ordinals for?
1.2. On the Natural Solution to the Semantic Paradoxes
which I can just hint at.5 It requires a third truth value O (‘open’) for semantically
unfounded sentences and an omniscient veriﬁcater V, who, when confronted with such
sentences runs through transdeﬁnite reﬂexion processes. Let Vα and V≥α denote the
omniscient veriﬁcater at reﬂexion level α and at any reﬂexion level ≥α. While trying
to evaluate the truth value of the Liar,
L:
The sentence L is not true
V is caught in a veriﬁcation circle, and the value of L remains open, as long as Vo
follows the circle without reﬂecting. V≥1 recognizes that sentence L is open at level
0. So it is not true, and this is what it claims: V≥1 recognizes that sentence L is true
at level 1. But this is what it denies: V≥2 recognizes that sentence L is false at level 2.
So it is not true, and this is what it claims: V≥3 recognizes that sentence L is true at
level 3 … . And Vω recognizes the inﬁnite oscillation O0, W1, F 2, W3, F 4 . . . , of
the Liar L. In a similar way, he recognizes that
‘This sentence is true’
is
O0, F 1, F 2, F 3, F 4 . . . ,
‘This sentence is false’
is
O0, F 1, W2, F 3, W4 . . . ,
‘This sentence is open’
is
O0, W1, F 2, F 3, F 4 . . . ,
‘This sentence is not false’
is
O0, W1, W2, W3, W4 . . . ,
‘This sentence is not open’
is
O0, F 1, W2, W3, W4 . . . ,
The principle of this is: Vα recognizes the truth values of all levels < α, as well as
the values W, F of founded sentences of his own level α. He neither recognizes
the value O of unfounded sentences of his own level nor values of any higher level.
This is the basic idea of the reﬂexion logic LR which is able to solve all paradoxes
5It became evident to me some 20 years ago; details are to be found in a meanwhile rather outdated
short version [2]. This solution came about independently of existing literature, but is similar to three
half-successful attempts: By limiting ourselves to reﬂexion level 0, we end up at Kripke’s proposal [11],
the indexical element of truth is implicitly found in Burge [6], and the truth value oscillation appears in
Gupta [8].
Compared to these proposals LR (based on set and class theory) has two advantages:
1. the natural semantics: veriﬁcation trees which model the informal veriﬁcation and reﬂexion process;
2. the metatheoretical completeness: every metatheorem for LR is valid in LR on sufﬁciently high
levels of reﬂection.

318
U. Blau
concerning truth, satisfaction and denotation in a natural way, formally distinguishing
three notions of truth:
W:
unreﬂected truth, having an invisible indicator for my own level
W∗
reﬂected truth, having the indicator ∗for the level(s) I am
reﬂecting now
Wα
truth of the reﬂexion level α, with constant and variable indices α.
Vα understands W as Wα, and W∗as
–
W0 if α = 0;
–
Wβ if α = β + 1;
–
remaining true from a preceding level up to but excluding α, if α is a
liminal or litoral.
LR allows us to formalize sentences like the following, which are then valid from
reﬂexion level ω on:
The Liar L having an unreﬂected truth predicate W is open at all ﬁnite
reﬂexion levels, therefore no paradox arises.
The Liar L having a reﬂected truth predicate W∗is open at level 0, true
at all ﬁnite odd levels, and false at all ﬁnite even levels > 0, therefore
paradox.
What are transﬁnite and transdeﬁnite reﬂexion levels for? They are forced by the
following Liars:
This sentence is open at all ﬁnite reﬂexion levels.
It is, according to the semantics of LR, open at all ﬁnite levels—thus true from level
ω on.
This sentence is open at all transﬁnite reﬂexion levels.
It is, according to the semantics of LR, open at all transﬁnite levels—thus true from
level , i.e., ⟨1, 0⟩on. Now:
This sentence is open at all transdeﬁnite reﬂexion levels.
Were the ideal concept of a transdeﬁnite ordinal formally expressible in any way, the
reﬂexion-logical solution of the semantic paradoxes—the only natural solution as far
as one can see—would be as paradoxical as the Liar ab ovo.

Largest and Smallest Numbers
319
1.3. The Pure Formal Truth
We call this ideal concept U. Its extension is the explanandum of the entire logic &
mathematics; its intension, its rule system, is the central explanandum of logic: the
pure formal logic itself. Since U cannot be formally expressed, we have to make do
with its formal fragments. The three-valued truth predicates Wα of the hierarchy of
reﬂexion levels are immeasurably stronger than the two-valued truth predicates T α
of the classical hierarchy of object language and metalanguages. Every T α (with α in
∗) is deﬁnable using W0. Referring with s to the language of set theory we deﬁne
T α
s x := W0
s x, and x is a (Gödel set of a) sentence of the set-theoretical
language containing at most truth predicates T β<α
s
:
This classical hierarchy—let us call it W0—of set-theoretical truths T α
s
in V is but
the predicative class hierarchy: The truth predicates T α
s with classical levels and the
class variables Xα with predicative levels are mutually deﬁnable, using the standard
interpretation on V.
Class-theoretically we deﬁne in an analogous manner:
T α
c x := W0
c x, and x is a (Gödel set of a) sentence of the impredicative-
class-theoretical language containing at most truth predicates T β<α
c
:
Again, the lowest level T 0
c of impredicative class truths (without truth predicates)
is immeasurably stronger than the hierarchy W0 of predicative class truths or—
equivalently—thehierarchyofobjectlanguageandmetalanguagesofallset-theoretical
truths. This is because the reﬂexion level hierarchy W1 of all set-theoretical truths is
located between W0 and T 0
c . Finally, emerging is a four-storey Truth Hierarchy W
W3:
three-valued hierarchy of reﬂected class truths Wα
c
W2:
classical hierarchy of unreﬂected class truths T α
c
W1:
three-valued hierarchy of reﬂected set truths Wα
s
W0:
classical hierarchy of unreﬂected set truths T α
s
Each storey has a height of ∗. Every truth fragment extends all preceding truth
fragments. If this three-valued class absolutism is the real, pure theory of truth, then
possibly
U = W
holds. In more explicit words: W might be extensionally and intensionally correct
and complete, i.e., it might exactly comprehend all pure formal truths and the logic of
the pure formal notion of truth. To surmise this would have hardly been thinkable so
far, and it remains unthinkable for the notion of truth in every other science. What is
to be said in favour of this conjecture?

320
U. Blau
For the Platonist, it is evident that W is extensionally and intensionally correct.
He supposes—after some hesitation—W to be complete for the following reasons:
1. To extend W ontologically looks impossible to him. If all pure forms are classes
⊆V, there is neither a ﬁfth storey nor a side-building.
2. To make the storeys higher ordinally looks impossible to him since ∗cannot
be formally reached.
3. Could some hidden aspects or dimensions of truth appear which force us to
use further distinctions or indices? This is a priori possible, but a posteriori
improbable, after two and a half millenia of experience with logic. Indeed, the
Liar, excluded by classical, and then analysed by three-valued levels of truth,
was among the earliest logical observations. Other anomalies of the pure formal
truth have not come up to the present day.
4. (A delicate point.) Could it be that means of description for U, V or W which
are not available today will be discovered? This may well be; it may even look
highly probable for everyone else. But the Platonist has empirical reasons to be
sceptical. He demands that every future basic symbol—like those known—be
(a) intensionally unique
(b) irreducible.
No candidate fulﬁlling these requirements has emerged in the last hundred years.
2. The Smallest Numbers
Actually, they have been due since the time of Zeno. For everyone has known since
then that the interval [0, 1] can be divided into a countably inﬁnite number of partial
intervals of decreasing sizes:
0
1
2
3
4
7
8
. . . 1
and ought to have wondered about a strange gap: [0, 1] is neither by rational nor real
numbers x divisible into an inﬁnite number of partial intervals of equal sizes, since
these numbers are Archimedean. For each x > 0 there is a natural number n, so that
x · n > 1. What is missing is a non-Archimedean inﬁnitesimal number 1
ω (‘1 over ω’
meaning: ‘1 2ω-th’, i.e., ‘1 ω-th’) with 1
ω · ω = ω · 1
ω = 1. Similarly, 1
ω should be

Largest and Smallest Numbers
321
divisible by 2, 4, . . . ω, so that
1
ω + 1 · 2 = 2 ·
1
ω + 1 = 1
ω,
1
ω + 2 · 4 = 4 ·
1
ω + 2 = 1
ω,
1
ω + ω · ω = ω ·
1
ω + ω = 1
ω,
and so on. Thus the desired theory should be an ordinal theory. For cardinally,
ω + 1 = ω + ω = ω and
1
ω+1 =
1
ω+ω = 1
ω would hold. Our main result, however,
will be the special case for transﬁnite cardinals κ
1
κ · κ = κ · 1
κ = 1, and ﬁnally 1
 ·  =  · 1
 = 1,
since there are no higher κ’s. This theory does not seem to exist so far. There is
non-standard analysis [12] the models of which contain inﬁnitesimal numbers i and
their multiplicatively inverse counterparts j, so that i ·j = j ·i = 1. However, j is not
a transﬁnite ordinal number, but is subject to the standard axioms for real numbers,
which are ﬁnite.
Somewhat closer to the desired theory are the ingenious numbers of Conway.6
These are a reﬁnement of real numbers which is transﬁnite in the ordinal sense - and
again satisfy the standard axioms for real numbers. Passionate number crunchers will
enjoy them, at the price of having to calculate with numbers like ω −1, ω/2, or √ω ,
which are larger than all natural numbers but smaller than ω. These numbers do not
exist for the Platonist. He takes ω serious as the limit of natural counting: ω has
no immediate predecessor ω −1. To put it shortly, for the Platonist, the contempo-
rary understanding of numbers seems to suffer from semantic blindness (of standard
mathematics) and technical patchworking (of non-standard mathematics), in a similar
way as the understanding of mathematical truth does. This deplorable state is both
caused by and results in an operational way of thinking I just caricature for shortness.
Mathematics, as the art of calculating, is viewed as ontologically neutral (which is not
entirely true, as we shall see), consequently as ontology-free (which is not true at all).
Furthermore, without a structurally unique mathematical ontology there is no unique
mathematical truth (which is correct). The operationalist, a crisis-proof practitioner,
feels in harmony with contemporary spirit. He looks at number and mathematical
truth not as ﬁxed points on the ﬁrmament of ideas, but rather as blurred notions with
technical variations to be used ad libitum. The Platonist is less agile. Though his
notion of number is less deﬁnite than his notion of mathematical truth, the family of
numbers looks to him genetically more closely related than is visible in the number
phenotypes on an algebraic level. For the numbers originate at those archaic sources
6See [7]. The same holds for the transﬁnite real numbers of [10] which also satisfy the standard axioms
for real numbers. Which kind of numbers are to be viewed as the right ones? Certainly those of Conway
and Klaua are more complete algebraically. As to counting and halving, those proposed here are more
natural.

322
U. Blau
of mathematics that are older than calculating and narrower than the broad stream of
algebra:
(a) thinking in units
(b) counting of units
(c) dividing of units
(d) combining of units to higher level units: sets and classes
(e) ordering of units to number-like structures which look natural—and it seems—
are found in nature not merely by coincidence.
(a)–(c) is basically the genome of the family of numbers; (b), supported by (d), nec-
essarily leads to the ordinals and cardinals; (c) in a similar way necessarily leads to
the real numbers. These theories of the inﬁnite large and the ﬁnite small are rightly
considered as ﬁnal standard theories. What is missing for the Platonist is the conser-
vative uniﬁcation yielding a single theory of inﬁnitely large and small numbers which
respects their nature, e.g., the limit character of ω. Ontology, rather than algebra, leads
the way to this theory. We shall extend the standard model of the real numbers, the
binary tree, by extending its branches to any length and thus reach ever more ﬁnely
grained and denser transﬁnite and transdeﬁnite real numbers.
However, we shall not come any closer to the continuum—and this refutes the
ontological neutrality of mathematics. Zeno’s paradox of motion and the paradoxes
of vagueness of the Sorites (accumulation) type, are formally not solvable since conti-
nuity is absolutely without structure and formally incomprehensible: haltless, gliding
change without identity and numbering. Every mathematical continuum is a fake.
2.1. On the Continuum
If continuity is formally impossible, how and where else then? Every example that
comes to mind concerns spatial, temporal or spatiotemporal continuity. So space and
time are absolutely structureless? Possibly at the end of the road, certainly not for
us. The simplest instance of continuity we can think of is timeless and semiformal:
the ideal straight line. It has absolutely no grains. To inquire how many points there
are on it does not make any more sense than to ask how many angels are dancing on
the spire. And now the remarkable, inevitable ontological fall comes about: two ideal
straight lines intersect. Where? At a distinct point. So there are distinct points in the
continuum. But the number of these points will only be found in representing number
spaces. It follows that any mathematization of geometry adulterates the geometric in-
tuition of continuity. This adulteration reaches back farther: Any continuity we think
of projects structures into the structureless and dimensionless continuum. Two inter-
secting straight lines presuppose a common plane—what is the justiﬁcation for this?

Largest and Smallest Numbers
323
Geometric intuition we shall appeal to in the following sections always aims at a par-
tial continuum, e.g., an interval with distinct end points 0, 1. But points, lines, planes
and all other appearances between the extremes of pure forms and pure formlessness
are invariably a half-understood mixture of projected structure and uncomprehended
continuity, substance or materialness which will later dissolve into ﬁne structure—the
perennial drama of physics which never frees itself from its subject matter, whichever
form it has. Is the absolute continuum we stumble on in these material-partial forms
at every corner and that determines geometric intuition in such an essential manner,
ﬁnally the medium between transcendent unity and immanent plurality that Platonists,
gnostics and mystics have such a hard time ﬁxing?
Time induces or seduces us to similar speculation. Its continuous elapsing seems
evident, almost tautological: no time without elapsing, no elapsing without conti-
nuity. The evidence, however, weakens at a closer look. We ﬁnd ourselves forced
to distinguish an internal, mental time from an external, physical time. Does a solid
physical body, sayAchilles or, more precisely, his centre of gravity, move continuously
in the external time? Perhaps. As long as we have no ﬁnal knowledge about what
exactly moves inAchilles—quarks? strings? mathematical probability amplitudes?—
we shall never understand how and if anything is really moving there. Possibly every
physical motion is a mental artefact.
But the stubbornness of these artefacts, the perceived continuity of motion; aren’t
they a clear hint at the mental continuity of perception and the continuity—at least in
short intervals—of consciousness and internal time? Surely—until we give internal
time another look. Intense self-observation at times seems to create discontinuities at
the surface of a steady ﬂow of consciousness, at times it seems to imbue continuity
therein, and sometimes it approaches absolute emptiness. How much of this is ex-
perienced, expected or interpreted is not certain. But one thing is certain: If there
is real motion or change in the internal or external time, or, if elapsing time is not
a fundamental deception of consciousness, as some physicists and countless mystics
believe, then it implies continuity, which eludes formalization.—What about a total
quantization of time to solve all Zenonian problems? This looks like a perfect way
out, were it not for the Zenonian problem how a time quantum manages to elapse,
if absolutely no time passes during its stay. Which cosmic baton will conduct all
spacetime quanta to jump synchronously from one state of rest into the next? Still,
should future physics convince us that external time and—more difﬁcult—internal
time is discontinuous, a last physically inaccessible refuge would remain, geometric
intuition. The ‘continuum’ R of the real numbers owes its discovery to it as well as
its undeserved name, since geometric constructions in the ideal Euclidean space are
representable precisely, in fact over-precisely, as functions in R.
What exactly are real numbers? Geometric intuition does not carry us very far.
For example, the Archimedean property mentioned above is geometrically not at all
evident. But what is perfectly evident and intensionally unique, up to isomorphism,

324
U. Blau
is the binary tree B, which is determined by a formally inexpressible self-referential
imperative:7
B0:
Create an arbitrary point (the ‘root’)!
B1:
Add two successor points to every point that was created in the
step performed last and repeat B1!
2.2. Real Numbers
Their most natural model thereof are the branches of B, sequences F having lengths
ω and values of 0 or 1 at every place. These branches form a (abstract) binary system
of notation for the positive real numbers if we interpret the ﬁrst occurrence of 0 as a
ﬂoating point:
F:
1, . . . , 1
  
m occurrences of 1
, 0, b1, . . . , br, . . .
with bi = 0 or bi = 1
F denotes the real number m + b1/2 + b2/4 + . . . br/2r + . . .
Some real numbers have two designations, e.g.,
(1)
11010111 · · · = 11011000 . . .
since 2 + 1/2 + 1/8 + 1/16 + 1/32 + · · · = 2 + 1/2 + 1/4. We call the sequences
on both sides of (1) and generally two sequences F, G with

n(F(n) = 0 ∧G(n) = 1 ∧

m < n(F(m) = G(m))∧

r > n(F(r) = 1 ∧G(r) = 0))
(1)
left and right twins. For a unique notation, we dispense with the left twin. In general,
we do away with all progressive sequences, i.e., sequences which from a certain place
on contain only ones. Now we are able to identify the notation with the positive real
7Two things are remarkable for the Platonist in this context. The binary tree B is as unique as the
progression P of natural numbers:
P0:
Create an arbitrary point (the ‘zero’)!
P1:
Add one successor point to the last added point and repeat P1!
If P is objectively determined, B is as well, and the number of branches of B, the continuum problem, is
objectively determined, see note 1. The other remarkable thing is that the three most important mathematical
structures, P, B, V, which are the standard models of the natural number theory (-ies), the real number
theory (-ies) and the pure set and class theory (-ies), respectively, can only be determined intensionally, by
formally inexpressible self-referential imperatives. Any formal characterization thereof is incomplete or
incorrect or semantically circular. It is true that P and B are categorically characterizable in second-order
logic, but the categoricity proof presupposes P and B as objectively determined.

Largest and Smallest Numbers
325
numbers.
R0 := set of all non-progressive sequences having lengths
ω and at every place values of 0 or 1.
A more practical variant, which allows for easier transﬁnite generalisation, drops the
ﬂoating point and admits any natural number at the ﬁrst place.
R := set of all non-progressive sequences having lengths ω,
with F(0) < ω and F(r) = 0 or F(r) = 1 for r > 0.
The initial value AF of F is the natural number F(0), the fractional value BF of F is
the inﬁnite sum F(1)/2+F(2)/4+. . . F(r)/2r +. . . < 1 (since F is not progressive).
From now on we use
i, j, k, m, n
for natural numbers in a metatheoretic, i.e., set-theoretic
sense
p, q, r
for natural numbers > 0 in a metatheoretic sense
F, G, R
for real numbers in the sense of R , i.e., sequences in R.
The order on R is given by the ﬁrst difference:
F < G :=

n (F(n) < G(n) ∧

m < n (F(m) = G(m)))
The order is irreﬂexive, transitive, connected and continuous, meaning the following:
Every bounded set M ⊆R has a supremum sup(M), i.e., a smallest upper bound ∈R
(sup(M))(n) :=

{F(n) | F ∈M ∧

m < n (F(m) = (sup(M))(m))}
M is called bounded if there is an upper bound G of M, i.e.,  F ∈M(F ≤G). The
natural number m is represented in R by the sequence
m(n) :=
	
m,
if n = 0
0,
otherwise (‘m at the 0th place, 0 else’)
The rational number 1/2r is represented in R by the sequence
1
r (n) :=
	
1,
if n = r
0,
otherwise (‘1 at the rth place, 0 else’)
Now,
AF := F(0), the initial value of F ( in the sense of R) and
BF (n) :=
	
0,
if n = 0
F(n),
otherwise, the fractional value of F (in the sense of R).

326
U. Blau
F is called short, if
(a)

m

n ≥m(F(n) = 0)
otherwise, F is called long. The length LF of F is, informally spoken, the ﬁrst ﬁnal
0-place of F, and formally: For short F, LF is the smallest m, such that (a), for long
F, LF = ω. We adopt the following notation: f, g, h are short numbers ∈R. f is
either an integer m with length 0 or 1 if m = 0 or m > 0, respectively, or a fractional
number with a length > 1 and certain 1-places that are > 0. The last of these 1-places
is called the ﬁnal place of f . We denote any fractional f with a ﬁnal place r by g⌢1
r ,
where g is the real number that is left when the ﬁnal place is dropped from f . To
economize on the use of parentheses, binding by ‘⌢’, ‘·’, ‘+’ is decreasingly strong.
We now deﬁne addition F + G by induction on LG using the following rules (+0)
through (+3).
(+0)
(F + m)(n) :=
	
F(0) + m,
if n = 0
F(n),
otherwise
Adding m just increases the initial value of F by m. Let us now consider the case
F + 1
r . Since 1
r represents the number 1/2r, we see informally that F + 1
r is generated
from F as follows
(a)
If F(r) = 0, then replace this 0 by 1.
(b)
If F(r) = 1, and F has no 0-place q < r (with q ≥1), then
increase the initial value of F by 1 and replace the 1 found in all
places 1 to r by 0.
(c)
If F(r) = 1 and F has a highest 0-place q < r, then replace this 0
by 1 and replace the 1 found in all places q + 1 to r by 0.
Formally, we state:
If F(r) = 0, let
(F + 1
r )(n) :=
	
1,
if n = r
F(n),
otherwise.
(+1a)
If F(r) = 1 and F has no 0-place q < r, let
(F + 1
r )(n) :=



F(0) + 1,
if n = 0
0,
if 0 < n ≤r
F(n),
otherwise.
(+1b)

Largest and Smallest Numbers
327
If F(r) = 1 ad F has a highest 0-place q < r, let
(F + 1
r )(n) :=



1,
if n = q
0,
if q < n ≤r
F(n),
otherwise.
(+1c)
Using (+0) and (+1), we deﬁne for short G = g⌢1
r by induction on LG:
F + g⌢1
r := (F + g) + 1
r .
(+2)
The case g = 0 of (+2) is just (+1). Finally, for long G we deﬁne:
F + G := sup{F + g | g < G}.
(+3)
In the same way we deﬁne multiplication by induction:
f · 0 := 0
(·0a)
f · m + 1 := m + f.
(·0b)
With this, f · 1
r is deﬁnable by induction on Lf :
m · 1
r := 1
r · m( the right hand side being deﬁned by (·0))
(·1a)
f ⌢1
q · 1
r := f · 1
r +
1
q + r (since 1/2q · 1/2r = 1/2q+r)
(·1b)
f · g⌢1
r := f · g + f · 1
r .
(·2)
The case g = 0 of (·2) is just (·1).
For long G, let f · G := sup{f · g | g < G}.
(·3)
For long F and arbitrary G, let F · G := sup{f · G | f < F}.
(·4)
Subtraction ‘ ˙−’ which is limited on R and does not yield values below 0, as well as
division ‘/’ are now deﬁnable explicitly:
F ˙−G := sup{h | G + h < F}.
( ˙−)
For G > 0, let F/G := sup{h | G · h < F}.
(/)
(If G = 0 and F > 0, the set {h | 0 · h < F} would be an unbounded set ⊆R and
thus would have no supremum.) Now we consider negative real numbers. For the von
Neumann numbers 0 and p (p > 1), which are used in the metatheory, let
0−:= 0 and p−:= {p}.
We extend their linear ordering in a natural way:
q−< p−< 0−= 0 < p < q.

328
U. Blau
and assign an additive inverse number to every positive real number F ∈R:
F −:= {⟨n, i−⟩| ⟨n, i⟩∈F}.
Furthermore, let F −−= F. Then
R−:= {F −| F ∈R} is the set of negative real numbers, and
R′ := R ∪R−is the set of real numbers (R ∩R−being {0}).
Again we extend their linear ordering
G−< F −< 0−= 0 < F < G.
as well as the four fundamental arithmetical operations, including an extension of
restricted substraction ‘ ˙−’ to general substraction ‘−’:
F + G−:= G−+ F :=
	
F ˙−G,
if G ≤F
(G ˙−F)−,
if F < G
F −+ G−:= (F + G)−.
(D+)
R −S := R + S−for R, S ∈R′.
(D−)
F · G−:= G−· F := (F · G)−.
F −· G−:= F · G.
(D·)
F/G−:= F −/G := (F/G)−.
F −/G−:= F/G.
(D/)
Instead of 1/R we shall also write R−1.
Now it can be proved that R′ satisﬁes
the standard axioms of real arithmetic.8 Its formal language contains the classical
connectives and ﬁrst-order quantiﬁers, the individual constants ‘0’, ‘1’, the relational
constant ‘<’, the two-place functional constants ‘+’, ‘·’, and the one-place functional
8This is generally known. However, an exact proof, which I could not ﬁnd written down anywhere, took
almost 20 pages. I would appreciate any communication of a more elegant and complete proof.

Largest and Smallest Numbers
329
constants ‘−’, ‘−1’, which are written as upper indices. The axioms are:
x + y = y + x
(R1)
(x + y) + z = x + (y + z)
(R2)
x · y = y · x
(R3)
(x · y) · z = x · (y · z)
(R4)
(x + y) · z = x · z + y · z
(R5)
x + 0 = x
(R6)
x · 1 = x
(R7)
x + x−= 0
(R8)
x ̸= 0 →x · x−1 = 1
(R9)
x < y →¬y < x
(R10)
x < y ∧y < z →x < z
(R11)
x < y ∨x = y ∨y < x
(R12)
x < y →x + z < y + z
(R13)
x < y ∧0 < z →x · z < y · z
(R14)

x Ax ∧

y

x (Ax →x ≤y) →

y supAx y
(R15)
In (R15), let Ax be a ﬁrst order formula which contains x as a free variable and let
supAx y be the formula  x (Ax →x ≤y) ∧ z ( x (Ax →x ≤z) →y ≤z),
reads as ‘y is the supremum of the x for which Ax’. If we substitute the stronger
second order axiom

x Xx ∧

y

x (Xx →x ≤y) →

y y = sup(X)
for the ﬁrst order axiom scheme (R15), the real arithmetic becomes categorical, with
all its models being isomorphic to R′. We now reﬁne the positive half R to create the
ﬂexible system S of the largest and smallest numbers.
2.3. Transﬁnite Real Numbers
Why they have been neglected can only be guessed. To be sure, they are more difﬁcult
to handle than real numbers, but not much harder than ordinal numbers. There have
probably been two reservations:
•
an unjustiﬁed distrust of inﬁnite divisibility of the ﬁnite:
(A)
1
1 + 1
2 + 1
3 + · · · = 1
•
a justiﬁed distrust of ﬁnite divisibility of the inﬁnite, e.g., of ω · 1
1
(‘half of ω’).

330
U. Blau
On (A). In a metatheoretical sense of R, this equation is correct. The informal sum
on the left-hand side is the progressive sequence 0111 . . . , which we view as the left
twin-brother of 1. Could it, in extended models Re, be inﬁnitesimally smaller than 1?
Quite so. However, (A) is not legitimated and enforced by formal models, but by our
geometric intuition, the platonic source of mathematics.
(B)
0
1
2
3
4
7
8
· · · 1
There is a one-to-one correspondence between the countable inﬁnitely many terms to
the left of (A) and the partial intervals of (B). Consequently, the sum corresponds to
the entire interval. But if the rational terms 1
r (1 < r < ω) already exhaust the entire
interval, what will remain for inﬁnitesimal terms 1
ω,
1
ω+1, . . . ? Nothing remains.
The inﬁnitesimal terms 1
α (α ≥ω) do not appear in addition to the terms 1
r (r < ω).
Each 1
r rather contains arbitrarily large sets and proper classes of inﬁnitesimal terms,
transcending 1
r in a similar way as the transﬁnite and transdeﬁnite numbers transcend
the ﬁnite numbers. Here is a seemingly beautiful argument in favour of (A): If our
starting assumption
(C)
1
ω · ω = 1
is correct, then ω items of the term 1
ω put together yield a value of 1. How could ω terms
1
r , each of them inﬁnitely larger than 1
ω, yield a value of less than 1? Unfortunately,
they can. If we drop from ω terms 1
r just one, e.g., 1
3, ω terms still remain, each of them
being inﬁnitely larger than 1
ω. Yet the sum amounts only to 7/8. Experiences like this
make (A) suspect, and (C) even more suspect. The only argument favouring (A) I have
is geometric intuition: the correspondence between the terms 1
r of (A) and all partial
intervals of (B). As to the fallacious conclusion: Surely we have 1 −1
3 = 7/8, but
1−1
ω, i.e., ιx x+ 1
ω = 1, does not exist any more than ω−1, i.e., ιx x+1 = ω does. For
the transﬁnite real numbers introduced below, n
ω (‘n ωths’) divide the interval [0, 1]
in the same way as the natural numbers n divide the interval [0, ω]. As equation (A)
halves the interval [0, 1] ω times and puts it together again, according to the intuition
of geometric continuity it ought to be possible to halve any arbitrarily small interval
[0, 1
α ] ω times and put it together again. For this reason we stipulate a generalization
of (A):
(D)
1
α + 1 +
1
α + 2 +
1
α + 3 + · · · = 1
α
Much more serious than this is the other subject of reservation, the ﬁnite divisibility of
the inﬁnite. What could ω · 1
1, ‘half of ω’, be? Its natural value, ιx x · 2 = ω, does not
exist: Any x < ω is too small, since this would yield x · 2 < ω, and any x ≥ω is too
large, since this would yield x · 2 > ω (in the sense of ordinal multiplication). What

Largest and Smallest Numbers
331
else could it be? ω itself looks arithmetically most natural. For, if ω · 1
1 < ω held,
then there would be an n, such that ω · 1
1 < n · 1
1, and if, on the other hand, ω · 1
1 > ω,
then ω · 1
1 > ω ·1. In both cases, multiplication would not be even weakly monotonic.
This is not a sufﬁcient argument yet. The underlying problem is more general: For
inﬁnite α and arbitrary β the expression
(∗)
α · 1
β
in most cases has no natural meaning, whereas 1
α · 1
β (‘a 2β−th of a 2α−th’) naturally
means
1
α+β (‘a 2α+β−th’). How do we account for this difference? The fundamental
intuitions counting and dividing, applied to their basic object, the one, lead to different
results. Counting generates units α with structures which determine how to divide
them—if they are divisible at all. Division of one generates structureless, continuous
units 1
α , which are further divisible at will. So what can we do? Note that for all α, β
the expression 1
β · α, i.e., 1
β + 1
β + . . . (α times in an ordinal sense) does not create
any meaning problem. We can count all units we like and sum up them in an ordinal
sense. And since for ﬁnite α, β
α · 1
β = 1
β · α,
there was no problem in R. The best, at least the simplest solution of the meaning
problem (∗) seems to be to take α · 1
β as synonymous in general with 1
β · α. Then we
have, for example
ω · 1
1 = 1
1 · ω = 1
1 · (2 · ω) =
1
1 · 2

· ω = 1 · ω = ω
This solution lacks certain natural divisions of the inﬁnite. For instance, (ω + ω) · 1
1
has a natural value of ω, whereas according to our solution
(ω + ω) · 1
1 = 1
1 · (ω + ω) = 1
1 · ω + 1
1 · ω = ω + ω.
It is possible, albeit complicated, to deﬁne multiplications which ensure some natural
ﬁnite divisions of the inﬁnite, at the price of many artiﬁcial dividing results. With this
in mind, the solution proposed here is incomplete, but correct, if the expressions α · 1
β
are simply understood as deﬁned abbreviations for 1
β · α. Considering perhaps the
most important, since nowadays most-violated maxim of logic and philosophy
No ad hoc solutions!
and another maxim which follows almost inevitably
Better incomplete than incorrect!
I feel our solution is reasonable.

332
U. Blau
Before we deﬁne the transreal numbers of S, we need some postulates.
For positive real numbers x, y, z and their representatives
x, y, z in S:
x + y = z ↔x + y = z , x · y = z ↔x · y = z.
For ordinal numbers α, β, γ and the representatives
α, β, γ in S:
α + β = γ ↔α + β = γ , α · β = γ ↔α · β = γ .
(P0)
This conservation principle will be used unmentioned. Another indispensable princi-
ple is the weak monotony of addition and multiplication for all numbers F, G, H:
F < G →H + F ≤H + G ∧F + H ≤G + H ∧H · F ≤H · G∧
F · H ≤G · H.
(P1)
The generalization (D) of (A) was
1
α + 1 +
1
α + 2 +
1
α + 3 + · · · = 1
α
(P2)
Generalizing
1
m+n = 1
m · 1
n we are lead to
1
α + β = 1
α · 1
β . – Hence
(P3)
For ﬁnite A < 1 and inﬁnitesimal 1
α : A · 1
α = 1
α ,
(P3.1)
since for some n 1
n < A < 1, and as 1
n · 1
α
(P 3)
=
1
n+α = 1
α = 1 · 1
α , (P3.1) follows by
(P1). Generalizing α · 1
β = 1
β · α we are lead to
α · A = A · α, for fractional numbers A, i.e., 0 ≤A < 1.
(P4)
The following associativity is plausible:
1
α ·

β · γ

=
 1
α · β

· γ
(P5)
since 1
α ·

β · γ

has the natural meaning
 1
α + · · · + 1
α + . . .




β
+ · · · +
 1
α + · · · + 1
α + . . .




β
+ . . .
( a γ -sequence of β-sequences). Hence
For ﬁnite F > 0 and inﬁnite α: F · α = α,
(P5.1)

Largest and Smallest Numbers
333
since for some n 1
n < F < n, and as
1
n · α = 1
n ·

2n · α
 (P 5)
=
1
n · 2n

· α = α = n · α,
(P.5.1) follows from (P1). The next associativity, however, does not generally hold.
1
α ·
 1
β · γ

=
 1
α · 1
β

· γ .
(P6∗)
Counterexample:
1
1 = 1
1 · 1
(C)
= 1
1 ·
 1
ω · ω

̸=
1
1 · 1
ω

· ω
(P3)
=
1
1 + ω · ω = 1
ω · ω
(C)
= 1.
Associativity fails because ω absorbs 1 in 1 + ω. Therefore we postulate
1
α ·
 1
β · γ

=
 1
α · 1
β

· γ , if β absorbs nothing from α,
more precisely : if α is the smallest α0 for which
α0 + β = α + β, i.e.: if

α0 < α (αo + β < α + β).
(P6)
Absorption will be a central feature of transreal arithmetics, and Cantor’s normal form,
which is unique for all α > 0, will be helpful:
α = ωα1 + · · · + ωαr−1 + ωαr, (α1 ≥· · · ≥αr−1 ≥αr ≥0).
(N)
ωα1 is the initial term it(α), ωαr is the ﬁnal term f t(α), and ωα1 + · · · + ωαr−1 is the
initial sum is(α) of α. (is(α) = 0, if r = 1.) Formally:
it(α) :=

{ωβ | ωβ ≤α}
f t(α) :=

{γ | γ > 0 ∧

β α = β + γ }
is(α) :=

{β | β + f t(α) = α}.
For α = 0 we deﬁne it(α) = f t(α) = is(α) = 0. From (N) we get
it(α) = ωα1, f t(α) = ωαr, is(α) = ωα1 + · · · + ωαr−1.
and generally α = is(α) + f t(α). All additive terms β of the normal form (N) are
additively indecomposable, i.e.,  α < β (α + α < β), by a well-known theorem of
ordinal arithmetics for β > 0:
β is additively indecomposable ↔

δ β = ωδ
↔

α < β (α + β = β)
i.e.,β absorbs all α < β. Hence
(T1)
β absorbs nothing from α ↔f t(α) ≥it(β).
(T2)

334
U. Blau
So our previous postulate is
1
α ·
 1
β · γ

=
 1
α · 1
β

· γ , if f t(α) ≥it(β).
(P6)
Similarly the next postulate has to be restricted.
1
α · 2α = 1.
(P7∗)
Some positive examples ﬁrst. For ﬁnite α = n, (P7∗) gives the correct result 1
n ·2n = 1.
Similarly we get our initial conjecture
1
ω · ω = 1, as ω = 2ω (in the ordinal sense of 2ω.)
(C)
Furthermore we can infer correctly from (P7∗)
1
ω + ω · 2ω+ω = 1,
since
1
ω + ω · 2ω+ω (P3)
=
 1
ω · 1
ω

·

2ω · 2ω
=
 1
ω · 1
ω

· (ω · ω)
(P5)
=
 1
ω · 1
ω

· ω

· ω
(P6)
=
 1
ω ·
 1
ω · ω

· ω
(C)
= 1
ω · ω
(C)
= 1.
Now a counterexample.
1
ω + 1 · 2ω+1 = 2,
as
1
ω + 1 · 2ω+1 (P3)
=
 1
ω · 1
1

·

2ω · 2

=
 1
ω · 1
1

·

ω · 2

(P5)
=
 1
ω · 1
1

· ω

· 2
(P6)
=
 1
ω ·
1
1 · ω

· 2
(P5.1)
=
 1
ω · ω

· 2
(C)
= 2.
From these examples one might guess:
(P7∗∗)
1
λ · 2λ = 1, for all limit ordinals λ.

Largest and Smallest Numbers
335
But this leads to contradiction. For instance we would get
1
ω2+ω · 2ω2+ω = 1, and on
the other hand we have
1
ω2 + ω · 2ω2+ω (P3)
=
 1
ω2 · 1
ω

· 2ω+ω2+ω =
 1
ω2 · 1
ω

·

2ω · 2ω2+ω

(P5)
=
 1
ω2 · 1
ω

· 2ω

· 2ω2+ω (P6)
=
 1
ω2 ·
 1
ω · 2ω

· 2ω2+ω
(C)
=
1
ω2 ·

2ω2 · 2ω
 (P5)
=
 1
ω2 · 2ω2

· 2ω (P7∗∗)
=
1 · 2ω = ω.
Let us assume that (P7∗) holds for all additively indecomposable α, i.e., by (T1):
(P7)
1
ωδ · 2ωδ = 1.
Now some corollaries will explain our previous examples.
(P7.1)
1
α · 2f t(α) =
1
is(α),
since
1
α · 2f t(α) =
1
is(α) + f t(α) · 2f t(α) (P3)
=

1
is(α) ·
1
f t(α)

· 2f t(α)
(P6)
=
1
is(α) ·

1
f t(α) · 2f t(α)

(P7)
=
1
is(α) · 1 =
1
is(α).
(P7.2)
it(α) = f t(α) ↔1
α · 2α = 1.
‘→’: For α = 0, since 1
0 · 20 = 1 · 1 = 1; for α > 0 let (N) be the normal form of α,
and (P7.2) follows by induction on r. The case r = 1 is (P7).
In case r > 1 we have α = is(α) + f t(α) = f t(α) + is(α), so
1
α · 2α = 1
α · 2f t(α)+is(α) = 1
α ·

2f t(α) · 2is(α)
 (P5)
=
 1
α · 2f t(α)

· 2is(α)
(P7.1)
=
1
is(α) · 2is(α)
i.hyp
=
1. – ‘←’ will follow from
(P7.3)
it(α) > f t(α) ↔1
α · 2α > 1.

336
U. Blau
‘→’: Then α has a normal form (N) for r > 1 and (P7.3) follows by induction r. By
(T1) we have α = f t(α) + α, therefore
1
α · 2α = 1
α · 2f t(α)+α = 1
α ·

2f t(α) · 2α
 (P5)
=
 1
α · 2f t(α)

· 2is(α)+f t(α)
(P7.1)
=
1
is(α) ·

2is(α) · 2f t(α)
 P5=

1
is(α) · 2is(α)

· 2f t(α) ≥

1
is(α) · 2is(α)

· 2
(since f t(α) ≥1)
i.hyp & (P7.2)
≥
1 · 2 > 1.
As for α either it(α) = f t(α) or it(α) > f t(α), ‘←’ follows for (P7.2) and (P7.3);
therefore
(P7.4)
1
α · 2α ≥1.
(P7.5)
α < ωδ ↔1
α · 2ωδ = 2ωδ.
‘→’: As 1
α ≤1, by (P1) 1
α · 2ωδ ≤1 · 2ωδ = 2ωδ. Furthermore we have for α < ωδ
by (T1) α + ωδ = ωδ, so 2ωδ = 1 · 2ωδ (P7.4), (P1)
≤

1
α · 2α

· 2ωδ (P5)
=
1
α ·

2α · 2ωδ
=
1
α ·2α+ωδ (T1)
=
1
α ·2ωδ. ‘←’: ωδ ≤α implies 1
α ≤
1
ωδ , so 1
α ·2ωδ (P1)
≤
1
ωδ ·2ωδ (P7)
= 1 < 2ωδ.
Some further postulates will be required later.
We now extend the positive real standard model R ⊆
ωω by expanding its se-
quences to models Rτ ⊆
ττ, τ being cardinals > ω. In the following we denote
by
α, β, γ, δ
ordinal numbers < τ
κ
an inﬁnite cardinal number < τ
λ
a limit number < τ
σ
a leap number, i.e., 0 or a limit number < τ
The transﬁnite real numbers of lengths τ, in short, the τ-real numbers, will be certain
sequences ∈τ τ, including a and 1
α , which we again deﬁne by
α(β) :=
	
α,
if β = 0
0,
otherwise
1
α (β) :=
	
1,
if β = α
0,
otherwise.
α represents in Rτ the ordinal number α, 1
α represents the value resulting from 1 after
the α-halving. Every τ-real number has as initial value F(0) an ordinal number < τ.
Its fractional value is the sum of all F(α)/2α (0 < α < τ). Successor places α + 1
are, as before, occupied by either 1 or 0, depending on whether or not half of 1
α is a

Largest and Smallest Numbers
337
summation term of the fractional value of F. Values at limit places λ require some
consideration. Which sequence F could, for instance, represent the sum 1
ω + 1
ω? Since
ω has no immediate predecessor, it cannot be
1
ω−1. We shall represent 1
ω + 1
ω in Rτ by
the sequence 2
ω having at the ωth place the value 2 and the value 0 elsewhere. More
generally, let α
β be the sequence ∈ττ for which
α
β (γ ) :=
	
α,
if γ = β
0,
otherwise.
According to this, all sequences α = α
0 , all sequences
1
α+1, and for certain α > 1,
also sequences α
λ all belong to Rτ, the latter meaning
(P8)
α
λ = 1
λ · α.
A sequence like ω
ω will not be admitted, as its value 1 (according to (P8) and (P7)) is
already represented by 1. Which values α are admissible at limit places λ? In other
words, starting from which height α do double representations arise? The answer
follows from (P8) and (P7):
2f t(λ)
λ
(P8)
= 1
λ · 2f t(λ) (P7.1)
=
1
is(λ).
2f t(λ)
λ
reduces to
1
is(λ) and is inadmissible, whereas α
λ is irreducible for all α < 2f t(λ).
So we require
F(λ) < 2f t(λ)
in order to avoid double representation. A second requirement for the same purpose
results from
(P2)
1
α + 1 +
1
α + 2 +
1
α + 3 + · · · = 1
α .
ϕ ∈ττ is called progressive, if  α  n < ω (ϕ(α + n) = 1). The inﬁnite sum on
the left-hand side is the progressive sequence
ϕ(β) :=
	
0,
if β ≤α or α + ω ≤β
1,
if α < β < α + ω.
This is the left twin brother of 1
α . We drop it. Now we are in a position to deﬁne the
set of τ-real numbers:
Rτ :=

ϕ ∈ττ |

α < τ (ϕ(α + 1) < 2 ∧(Lim α →ϕ(α) < 2f t(α)))
∧ϕ is not progressive

.

338
U. Blau
This can be simpliﬁed, since f t(α + 1) = 1 and 2f t(α+1) = 2:
Rτ :=

ϕ ∈ττ |

α > 0 (ϕ(α) < 2f t(α)) ∧ϕ is not progressive

.
So Rω = R, and Rτ is a most natural generalization. In the following, we denote by
F, G, H τ-real numbers and by ϕ, ψ any sequences ∈ττ. As before, let
ϕ < ψ :=

α (ϕ(α) < ψ(α) ∧

β < α (ϕ(β) = ψ(β))).
ϕ is an upper bound of M ⊆ττ, if  ψ ∈M (ψ ≤ϕ). As for the real numbers
discussed above we have
Lemma 1. EveryboundedsetM ⊆ττ hasasmallestupperboundϕ = sup(M) ∈ττ,
i.e., ϕ(α) :=  {ψ(α) | ψ ∈M ∧ β < α (ψ(β) = ϕ(β))}.
However, not every bounded set M ⊆ττ has a smallest upper bound ∈Rτ. To
see this, let
INFτ :=

F ∈Rτ | 0 < F ∧

n < ω (F(n) = 0)

be the set of inﬁnitesimal τ-real numbers. All M ⊆INFτ which at some limit place
λ cannot be restricted to an α < 2f t(λ), i.e., all M ⊆INFτ for which

λ

α < 2f t(λ)  
F ∈M(F(λ) > α)

holds have no smallest upper bound ∈Rτ. An example for this is the set INFτ itself.
It is bound by any number 1
n, but has no smallest upper bound ∈Rτ. 1, however is a
‘natural supremum’ of INFτ, meaning the following: For each F ∈INFτ there is an
n, such that F < n
ω (e.g., n = F(ω) + 1), and for each n there is an F ∈INFτ, such
that n
ω < F (e.g., F = n+1
ω ). By Lemma 1, sup(INF) = ω
ω is the supremum of INFτ
in ττ. Since ω
ω has the value 1
ω · ω = 1 we regard 1 as the natural supremum of INFτ
in Rτ. Let us call it Sup(INFτ).
In the same way, we assign a natural supremum Sup(M) to each bounded set
M ⊆Rτ, i.e., each set M ⊆Rτ having an upper bound ∈Rτ. We do this in three
steps.
Step 1. We take the supremum ϕ = sup(M) ∈ττ, which exists according to Lemma 1.
Step 2. We look for the ‘smallest natural’ψ ≥ϕ that satisﬁes the limit place condition
for τ-real numbers. If ϕ(λ) < 2f t(λ) for all λ, then ψ = ϕ. Otherwise there is a
smallest λ for which ϕ(λ) = 2f t(λ). By (P8) and (P7.1) 2f t(λ)
λ
is reducible to
1
is(λ). So
ψ(α) :=



ϕ(α),
if α < is(λ)
ϕ(α) + 1,
if α = is(λ)
0,
if α > is(λ)
is the ‘smallest natural’ function > ϕ that satisﬁes the limit place condition.

Largest and Smallest Numbers
339
Step 3. We transform ψ into ψ′ which satisﬁes the condition of non-progressivity.
Let for every leap number σ < τ
ψσ := {⟨σ + n, ψ(σ + n)⟩| n < ω}
be the σ-section of ψ. If ψσ is not progressive, let ψ′
σ = ψσ. Otherwise, there exists
a smallest n, such that  r > n (ψ(σ + r) = 1). Then let ψ′
σ be the non-progressive
right twin-brother of ψσ:
ψ′
σ(α) :=



ψσ(α),
if α < σ + n
1,
if α = σ + n
0,
if α > σ + n.
Now, Sup(M) := 
α<T ψ′
σ is an upper bound ψ1 for M in Rτ. We call it the natural
supremum of M.
α is called a ﬁnal place of F, if F(α) = β > 0 and for all γ > α F(γ ) = 0.
Again we write.
F = G⌢β
α
where G is the sequence that results if 0 is substituted for β at the ﬁnal place of F.
F is called closed, if a ﬁnal place of F exists, otherwise F is called open. The terms
‘short’ and ‘long’ previously used for R are not suitable since G could be open in
F = G⌢α
β . An example for this is
F(α) :=



0,
if α < ω and even
1,
if α < ω and odd
1,
if α = ω
0,
if α > ω.
Here, ω is the ﬁnal place of F = G⌢1
ω, and G is open. The length of F is again the
ﬁrst ﬁnal 0-place of F if existent, otherwise, it is τ.
LF := min

τ,

{α |

β ≥α (F(β) = 0)}

In the following we denote closed τ-real numbers by f, g, h . It is now possible to
deﬁne addition F + G by induction on LG, as we did for R, p. 326.

F + β
σ

(α) :=
	
F(σ) + β,
if α = σ
F(α),
otherwise.
(+0)
If F(σ + r) = 0, then let

F +
1
σ + r

(α) :=
	
1,
if α = σ + r
F(α),
otherwise.
(+1a)

340
U. Blau
If F(σ + r) = 1 and F has no 0-place σ + q < σ + r ,then let

F +
1
σ + r

(α) :=



F(σ) + 1,
if α = σ
0,
if σ < α ≤σ + r
F(α),
otherwise.
(+1b)
If F(σ + r) = 1 and F has a highest 0-place σ + q < σ + r ,then let

F +
1
σ + r

(α) :=



1,
if α = σ + q
0,
if σ + q < α ≤σ + r
F(α),
otherwise.
(+1c)
F + G⌢β
α := (F + G) + β
α .
(+2)
For open G let F + G := Sup{(F + g) | g < G ∧Lg < LG}
(+3)
Deﬁning multiplication is harder. We write A, B, C for τ-real fractional numbers, i.e.,
numbers < 1 Each τ-real number F is of the form α⌢A, with α ≥0 and A ≥0. We
further write a, b, c for closed fractional numbers. Our deﬁnition of multiplication
is based on some postulates which might appear more evident than they are, for their
natural generalizations do not hold:
F · G⌢H := (F · G) + F · H – Counterexample:
(1∗)
ω · 1
1
⌢1
2 ̸= ω · 1
1 + ω · 1
2,
for
ω · 1
1
⌢1
2
(P4)
= 1
1
⌢1
2 · ω
(P5.1)
=
ω ̸= ω + ω
(P5.1)
=
1
1 · ω + 1
2 · ω
(P4)
= ω · 1
1 + ω · 1
2.
α⌢A · F = α · F + A · F – Counterexample:
(2∗)
1⌢1
1 · ω ̸= 1 · ω + 1
1 + ω,
for
1⌢1
1 · ω
(P5.1)
=
ω ̸= ω + ω
(P5.1)
=
1 · ω + 1
1 · ω.
F ⌢α
β =

F · 1
β

· α – Counterexample:
(3∗)

Largest and Smallest Numbers
341
ω · 2
ω ̸=

ω · 1
ω

· 2,
for
ω · 2
ω
(P4)
= 2
ω · ω
(P8)
=
 1
ω · 2

· ω
(P5)
= 1
ω

2 · ω

= 1
ω · ω
(P7)
= 1 ̸= 2
(P7)
=
 1
ω · ω

· 2
(P4)
=

ω · 1
ω

· 2.
γ
α · 1
β =
1
α + β · γ – Counterexample:
(4∗)
2
ω · 1
ω2 ̸=
1
ω + ω2 · 2,
for
1
ω · 1
ω2
(P3)
=
1
ω + ω2 = 1
ω2 = 1 · 1
ω2 , and by 1
ω < 2
ω < 1 and (P1) follows
2
ω · 1
ω2 = 1
ω2 ̸= 1
ω2 · 2 =
1
ω + ω2 · 2.
The following postulates are weaker than (1∗) - (4∗)
F · β⌢B = F · β + F · B
cf. (1∗)
(P9)
A · B⌢α
β = A · B + A · α
β
cf. (1∗)
(P10)
α⌢A · B = α · B + A · B
cf. (2∗)
(P11)
A · α
β =

A · 1
β

· α
cf. (3∗)
(P12)
γ
α · 1
β =
1
α + β · γ ,
cf. (4∗)
if β absorbs nothing from α, i.e., if f t(α) ≥it(β).
(P13)
Our ﬁnal postulate needs a similar restriction:
A⌢γ
α · 1
β = A · 1
β + γ
α · 1
β .
(5∗)
Let us consider 5 examples.
A = 1
1
⌢1
2
⌢1
ω and β = 1.
(5a)

342
U. Blau
By (5∗) follows
A · 1
1 = 1
1 · 1
1 + 1
2 · 1
1 + 1
ω · 1
1
(P3)
= 1
2 + 1
3 +
1
ω + 1.
(a)
A natural result: One half of 1/2 + 1/4 + 1/ω is 1/4 + 1/8 +
1
ω + 1.
A as above, but β = ω. By (P3.1) we get a natural result:
(5b)
A · 1
ω = 1
ω. But by (5∗) we get
(b)
A · 1
ω = 1
1 · 1
ω + 1
2 · 1
ω + 1
ω · 1
ω
(P3)
= 1
ω + 1
ω +
1
ω + ω = 2
ω +
1
ω · 2.
(b∗)
An untenable result: A · 1
ω would be greater than 1 · 1
ω, although A is smaller than 1, a
contradiction to (P1). The reason: In case (a) 1
β = 1
1 absorbs none of the three terms
1
1, 1
2, 1
ω of A, whereas in case (b) 1
β = 1
ω absorbs the ﬁrst and greatest term 1
1, and
all the following smaller terms as well.
So we modify the distribution of 1
β over the terms of A: As soon as a ﬁrst term of
A is partly or totally absorbed, all other terms vanish. This gives us the natural result
(b) instead of (b∗). In the next examples (5c)–(5e) let
A = 1
ωω
⌢
1
ωω + ω2
⌢
1
ωω + ω2 + ω.
β = ω or ω + r or ω · r. In these cases distribution of 1
β over A
absorbs none of the three terms of A partly or totally, and
similar to case (a) we have
(5c)
A · 1
β =
1
ωω + β +
1
ωω + ω2 + β +
1
ωω + ω2 + ω + β .
(c)
β = ω2. Now 1
β absorbs none of the two ﬁrst terms of A, but part
of the third, since ω + ω2 = ω2. So again (c) holds.
(5d)
β = ωω. Now 1
β absorbs nothing from the ﬁrst term of A, but part
of the second, since ω2 + ωω = ωω. The third term vanishes, and
(5e)

Largest and Smallest Numbers
343
A · 1
β =
1
ωω + ωω +
1
ωω + ωω .
(e)
We deﬁne:
1
β absorbs A at place α := α is the smallest number for which
A(α) > 0 ∧f t(α) < it(β)
1
β absorbs nothing from A :=

α (A(α) > 0 →f t(α) ≥it(β))
and replace (5°∗) by two postulates:
If A = A0 ⌢γ
α
⌢
A1, γ > 0, and 1
β absorbs A at place α, let
A · 1
β = A0 · 1
β +
1
α + β .
(γ vanishes, as for an α0 < α : α0 + β = α + β, so 1
α0
· 1
β = 1
α · 1
β
and as 1
α ≤γ
α < 1
α0
, by (P1) γ
α · 1
β = 1
α · 1
β =
1
α + β .)
(P14)
If A = A0 ⌢γ
α , γ > 0, and 1
β absorbs nothing from A, let
A · 1
β = A0 · 1
β + γ
α · 1
β .
(P15)
Now multiplication F · G is deﬁnable by induction on LF with secondary induction
on LG. Let a, b, c be closed fractional numbers, i.e., numbers < 1 with a ﬁnal place.
F · 0 := 0
(·0a)
F · β + 1 := F · β + F
(·0b)
F · λ := Sup{F · β | β < λ}
(·0c)
F · β⌢B := F · β + F · B
(·1a)
α⌢A · B := B · α + A · B
(·1b)
A · B⌢α
β := A · B +

A · 1
β

· α
(·1c)

344
U. Blau
If A = A0 ⌢γ
α
⌢
A1, γ > 0, and 1
β absorbs A at place α, let
A · 1
β := A0 · 1
β +
1
α + β .
(·2a)
If A = A0 ⌢γ
α , γ > 0, and 1
β absorbs nothing from A, let
A · 1
β := A0 · 1
β +
1
α + β · γ .
(·2b)
If A is open, and 1
β absorbs nothing from A, let
A · 1
β := Sup{a · 1
β | a < A ∧La < LA}.
(·2c)
If B is open, let
A · B := Sup{A · b | b < B ∧Lb < LB}.
(·3)
Conditions (·0a)–(·0c), (·2c), (·3) will be obvious and the rest is implied by our pos-
tulates: (·1a) is (P9), (·1b) is implied by (P11) and (P4), (·1c) is implied by (P10) and
(P12), (·2a) is (P14), (·2b) is implied by (P15) and (P13).
The next step would show that (P0)–(P15) are implied by the deﬁnitions of + and
· , which means that the postulates are consistent relative to ZF. I leave this out and
prove just one key postulate.
1
ωδ · 2ωδ = 1.
(P7)
(a) If δ = 0, then ωδ = 1, and 1
ωδ · 2ωδ = 1
1 · 2 = 1
(b) If δ > 0, then ωδ is a limit, and is(ωδ) = 0; by (·0) and (+0):
sup
 1
ωδ · β | β < 2ωδ
= 2ωδ
ωδ ;
so for ϕ = 2ωδ
ωδ we have ϕ(0) = 0, and ϕ(0) + 1 = 1. By deﬁnition of the natural
supremum follows
Sup
 1
ωδ · β | β < 2ωδ
= 1
0 = 1,
and by (·0c) follows (P7). This postulate implies our main result for cardinals κ ≥ω:
1
κ · κ = 1,
since for κ = ω : κ = ω1 = 2ω1, and for κ > ω : κ = ωκ = 2ωκ (in the sense
of ordinal exponentiation.) So the ordinal halving process turns out to be a cardinal
dividing process, and loses the arbitrariness of base 2. 1
κ means one κ-th, and justiﬁes

Largest and Smallest Numbers
345
the deﬁnition
1/κ := 1
κ , for cardinals κ ≥ω. So
1/κ · κ = κ · 1/κ = 1,
for the Platonist a mathematical truism, overdue since Zenon (for κ = ω) and Cantor
(for κ > ω).
2.4. Transdeﬁnite Real Numbers
The τ-real numbers are sets: sums of an ordinal < τ and of fragments generated from
the unit one by the well-ordered halving process of length τ ∈. Nothing prevents
us from continuing this process beyond  and from considering transdeﬁnite real
numbers which are proper classes.
Now, similar to ′ of our previous example, let T be any litoral initial segment of
∗, i.e., for each ordinal it contains, T contains a proper class of larger cardinals. For
each α ∈T we have 2α ∈T . Let ϕ, ψ be sequences, each having the length T , with
values ∈T . ϕ < ψ is deﬁned as above on p. 325, this time using the well-ordering of
T . ϕ is again called progressive, if  α  n < ω (ϕ(α + n) = 1). Similar to p. 333,
avoiding the operation ∩which is not applicable in T , we let for α ∈T
f t(α) := the smallest γ > 0 such that

β α = β + γ
is(α) := the smallest β such that β + f t(α) = α
We are now ready to deﬁne the class predicate (having no extension), in analogy
with Rτ:
ϕ is a transdeﬁnite real number of length T , in short a T -real number
RT ϕ := ϕ : T →T ∧

α > 0 (ϕ(α) < 2f t(α)) ∧ϕ is not progressive.
We deﬁne a supremum SupP for predicates P of T -real numbers in three steps, in the
same way we deﬁned the natural supremum Sup(M) for sets M of τ-real numbers. P
is called bounded, if  G  F (P (F) →F ≤G). The ﬁrst step leads us to supP .
Lemma 2. Every bounded predicate P has a smallest upper bound ϕ = supP : T →
T , i.e., ϕ(α) := sup{F(α) | P (F) ∧ β < α (F(β) = ϕ(β))} , being
sup{γ |

F (P (F) ∧F(α) = γ ∧

β < α (F(β) = ϕ(β)))},
with sup{γ | A(γ )} := the smallest δ for which  γ (A(γ ) →γ ≤δ).
Deﬁning ϕ does not require comprehension of classes to hyperclasses, but rather
impredicative class quantiﬁcation over F. ϕ = supP exists according to a transdeﬁnite
induction scheme which is provable in Bernays’ class theory B. However, ϕ is not

346
U. Blau
always a T -real number. As before, two further steps have to be taken to get the
T -real number SupP .
Step 2. If ϕ(λ) < 2f t(λ) for all limit ordinals, i.e., liminals and litorals λ ∈T , then
let ψ = ϕ. Otherwise there exists a smallest λ for which ϕ(λ) = 2f t(λ), and as above
ψ(α) :=



ϕ(α),
if α < is(λ)
ϕ(α) + 1,
if α = is(λ)
0,
if α > is(λ)
is ‘the smallest natural’ sequence > ϕ satisfying the condition on limit places.
Step 3. As before, this step taking
ψ :=

σ∈T
ψσ, generates SupP :=

σ∈T
ψ′
σ,
where ψ′
σ = ψσ, or ψ′
σ is the right twin-brother if ψσ is progressive. SupP is a T -real
number, so the deﬁnitions of addition and multiplication for RT are readily taken from
Rτ. Just two changes have to be kept in mind. λ in (·0c) refers to liminals and litorals.
Secondly, Sup is to be understood predicatively to avoid hyperclasses. For instance,
Sup{F + g | g < G ∧Lg < LG} means
the smallest natural upper bound H of all T -real numbers F + g having the
property g < G ∧Lg < LG
(which is for given F, G an impredicative class theoretic description of H.) These
deﬁnitions of addition and multiplication are valid for all litoral segments T of ∗.
Therefore, transreal arithmetic S is invariant against the boundless extensions RT
of transreal ontology.
So much in short on the largest and smallest numbers. Their guiding ideals, the
whole formal truth and the continuum, are formally inexpressible, but not on a par.
The former is well-founded in V, the latter has neither form nor foundation. Extending
and reﬁning our formal net, we shall catch more and more truth fragments, butAchilles
and the tortoise will slip through all meshes, and the magic trick, the appearance and
disappearance of form and truth in time and consciousness, well remain top secret.
References
[1]
Bernays, Paul: 1976. On the problem of schemata of inﬁnity in axiomatic set theory.
In: G. H. Müller (ed.), Sets and Classes. On the Work of Paul Bernays, Amsterdam:
North-Holland, 121–172.
[2]
Blau, Ulrich: 1985. Die Logik der Unbestimmtheiten und Paradoxien, Short version.
Erkenntnis 22: 369–459.

Largest and Smallest Numbers
347
[3]
Blau, Ulrich: 1992. Cantor und Nâgârjuna. Dialectica 46: 297–311.
[4]
Blau, Ulrich: 1998. Ein platonistisches Argument für Cantors Kontinuumshypothese.
Dialectica 52: 175–202.
[5]
Blau, Ulrich: 2000ff. Die Logik der Unbestimmtheiten und Paradoxien. Unpublished
manuscript, Munich.
[6]
Burge, Tyler: 1979. Semantical paradox. Journal of Philosophy 76: 169–198.
[7]
Conway, John H.: 1976. On Numbers and Games. New York: Academic Press.
[8]
Gupta, Anil: 1982. Truth and paradox. Journal of Philosophical Logic 11: 1–60.
[10]
Klaua, Dietrich: 1989. Transﬁnite Zahlensysteme auf der Grundlage der Cantorschen
Ordinalzahlen. Karlsruhe: Widmann.
[11]
Kripke, Saul A.: 1975. Outline of a theory of truth. Journal of Philosophy 72: 690–712.
[12]
Robinson, Abraham: 1966. Non-Standard Analysis. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Seminar für Philosophie, Logik und Wissenschaftstheorie
Philosophie-Department
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
Ludwigstr. 31/I
80539 München
Germany


The Prehistory of Russell’s Paradox
Nicholas Grifﬁn
Abstract. The paper surveys what is known of the process by which Russell arrived at his para-
dox, bringing together contributions by Ivor Grattan-Guinness, Gregory H. Moore, Alejandro
Garciadiego, and Alberto Coffa. It also addresses the question of why Russell was so disturbed
by the result when previous thinkers (Burali-Forti, Cantor), coming upon similar results, had
not been.
My purpose in this paper is to trace the line of thought which led to Russell’s discovery
of his paradox and to his realization that it was, in fact, an important and difﬁcult
problem, and in the course of doing this to throw light on a minor puzzle in the
historical record. The puzzle is this: Russell was not the ﬁrst person to ﬁnd a paradox
in set theory, but he was the ﬁrst to make a really big fuss about it. I want to consider
why—both why Russell did and why the others didn’t.
So ﬁrst, the simple facts of chronology. Self-referential paradoxes of the kind that
Ramsey classiﬁed as semantic or linguistic have been around for a very long time.
It’s unlikely that St Paul was aware he had created a paradox when he told Titus that
a Cretan prophet had truly said that all Cretans are liars, since he used this, to say
the least, equivocal evidence as grounds for rebuking them sharply. But writers of
greater logical acuity, for example Cervantes, had long used them as jokes and puzzles.
There’s no particular problem with this. After all, there’s no reason to suppose that
language is consistent.
Set theory, logic and mathematics are another matter entirely, and it is there that
our story properly begins. The chronology here is brief but confused. The story that
is told to undergraduates is that the sequence runs
1897:
Burali-Forti’s greatest ordinal paradox;
1899:
Cantor’s greatest cardinal paradox;
1901:
Russell’s class paradox.
This has two advantages: it is easy to remember for exams, and it is brief to expound
as an historical digression in a course on set theory. Unfortunately, history is rarely
what one would wish it to be, and this is no exception. The actual story is a good
deal more complicated and, of the three dates given, only the third is unequivocally
correct. Several people have played a part in unravelling the complex historical record,
but I’d mention in particular Ivor Grattan-Guinness, Alberto Coffa, Gregory Moore

350
N. Grifﬁn
and Alejandro Garciadiego from whose writings I have learnt a great deal, as will be
readily apparent to anyone who knows them.
Consider, ﬁrst, the greatest ordinal paradox. Let  be the ordinal number of the
well-ordered set of all ordinals, No. For any ordinal a, a + 1 > a. Thus  + 1 > .
But, for every a ∈No, a ≤. Thus  + 1 ≤. Now, it is clear that an argument
along these lines ﬁrst appeared in [4],1 but contrary to what van Heijenoort says in
reprinting the paper, it did not “immediately arouse the interest of the mathematical
world” ([32]: 104). It was rather, as Garciadiego ([19]: 25–26) points out, completely
ignored—apart, that is, for a brief note by Burali-Forti himself [5] attempting to correct
a misunderstanding in the original paper of Cantor’s notion of a well-ordered set.
There is a simpler answer to the question of why the interest of the mathematical
world was not immediately aroused by the discovery of Cantor’s analogous paradox
of the greatest cardinal: Cantor didn’t publish it. Nor did he state it—as a paradox. He
did, however, note the existence2 of what he called inconsistent multiplicities of which
the set of everything thinkable was one and the set of all cardinals another. He wrote
to Dedekind about these in letters of July and August 1899,3 which establishes a least
upper bound on the date. Many earlier dates have been suggested, including 1890,
1892, 1895, and 1896.4 Cantor himself said5 he had the idea as early as 1883, but
there seems to be no textual evidence for this beyond his recollection. What is clear is
that the world could not have learnt of Cantor’s inconsistent multiplicities from Cantor
himself until 1932 when his letters to Dedekind were published, though the truth is
that any mathematician might have discovered them for themselves quite easily once
Cantor’s power-set theorem was proven [8] by applying the power-set theorem to the
set of all sets.
Finally, in May6 or (early) June 19017 comes Russell’s paradox. It appeared for the
ﬁrst time in Russell’s 1901 draft of Part I of The Principles of Mathematics ([CPBR3]:
195). It appeared with much greater elaboration and prominence in the ﬁnal, 1902
draft of the same section of the book (published in 1903). Before the publication
of the Principles Russell had communicated it to Frege in his famous letter of 16
1In fact this is not quite correct: Burali-Forti took No to be not merely well-ordered but perfectly ordered.
The matter is discussed in [29].
2The word ‘existence’ is contentious here. See below.
3The documentary record even here has been muddied by shoddy editing on Zermelo’s part. Two letters,
of July and August 1899, were amalgamated into one in his edition of Cantor’s Gesammelte Abhandlungen
[12], see [20]: 126–8. The subsequent edition of the Briefe [13] duly separates them again. The partial
English translation in ([32]: 113–117), unfortunately, follows Zermelo. There is more detail in Cantor’s
correspondence with Hilbert, cf. [13]: 390–400. There Cantor calls the sets which are not inconsistent
‘ready’.
4Evidence for and against all these dates can be assembled—often with difﬁculty and by inference from
brief remarks, see [19]: 33–6.
5In a letter of 9 March 1907 to Grace Young, quoted in [29]: 342.
6According to Russell’s Autobiography ([Auto]: vol. i, 147).
7According to “My Mental Development” (1944), ([CPBR11]: 12); “My Debt to German Learning”,
(1995), ([CPBR11]: 107); and a letter to Philip Jourdain, 15 April 1910, see [21]: 132. My Philosophical
Development ([MPD]: 75) says “spring”, which suggests not late June.

The Prehistory of Russell’s Paradox
351
June 1902 ([32]: 124–5) and to Peano and Whitehead.8 At about the same time,
and quite independently, the group around Hilbert at Göttingen were discovering the
paradoxes. When Hilbert received the second volume of Frege’s Grundgesetze he told
Frege that the problem “was known to us here”. He credited Zermelo with discovering
the Russell paradox “three or four years ago” ([18]: 51). Zermelo had communicated
it to Husserl in April 1902 ([28]: 442). According to Grattan-Guinness ([23]: 216)
Zermelo mentioned it in print only once ([36]: 191–2). Hilbert included both the
Russell-Zermelo and the greatest cardinal paradoxes in his 1905 lecture course on
“Logical Principles of Mathematical Thought”, see [23]: 216.
Burali-Forti, Cantor, and Russell all had very different attitudes towards these
results. As Moore and Garciadiego [29] point out, Burali-Forti was not intending to
demonstrate the existence of a contradiction in Cantorian set theory, and did not think
he had done so. His explicit aim in the paper was to prove that there were inﬁnite
ordinals for which Cantor’s trichotomy law fails.9
Cantor’s case was different again. Burali-Forti at least regarded the contradiction
as something to be avoided—by rejecting the proposition from which it was derived,
namely the trichotomy law. Cantor, by contrast, saw the contradictions as positive
additions to his set theory. In his letters to Dedekind he concludes that both the set of
all ordinals and the set of all transﬁnite cardinals are “absolutely inﬁnite, inconsistent
collection[s]” ([11]: 115, 116). There were technical advantages to be gained from
accepting these as theorems, as Dauben ([16]: 244) points out.10 Moreover, Cantor
in 1899 realized, as Burali-Forti in 1897 did not, that treating them as a mere step in
a reductio proof would imperil his whole system.
He also had more philosophical reasons for accepting inconsistent multiplicities.
Sets for Cantor were collections whose elements could be regarded as combined into
a whole, and which themselves could thus be regarded as a unity. But there were
collections, he told Dedekind, such that “the assumption that all of [their] elements
‘are together’ leads to a contradiction, so that it is impossible to conceive of the
multiplicity as a unity, as ‘one ﬁnished thing’” ([11]: 114). These were his absolutely
inﬁnite, or inconsistent multiplicities, such as the collection of all cardinals, of all
thinkable things, and of all classes. Cantor was forced to this distinction by his proofs
that every genuine set had a cardinal number and that the power-set of a set always
had a greater cardinal number than the original set. If an inconsistent multiplicity,
like that of all cardinals, were a genuine set then it should have the greatest possible
cardinality. Yet, by the power-set theorem, its power-set should have a greater one.
This, for Cantor, was a proof, not that there was something wrong with transﬁnite set
8The letter to Peano is lost. It is not clear whether there ever was a letter to Whitehead—Russell may
have communicated the result in person. Whitehead responded by quoting Browning: “never glad conﬁdent
morning again” ([MPD]: 75).
9Cantor in fact published a proof of the trichotomy law shortly after Burali-Forti’s paper was published
([10]: 216).
10The chief of these was that it enabled him to prove the comparability of all cardinals and (so he
thought—the proof was in fact mistaken) to show that there were no inﬁnite sets whose powers were not
alephs.

352
N. Grifﬁn
theory, but that the collection of all cardinals was not a genuine set, that it had no
cardinality, and that there was no greatest cardinal.
It is not, perhaps, surprising that Dedekind found Cantor’s inconsistent multiplici-
ties obscure ([20]: 129) or that Robert Bunn denied that Cantor intended to claim that
they exist. Bunn writes: “Cantor does not really have ‘two kinds’ of multiplicities …
. Cantor spoke of an inconsistent multiplicity when he might better have spoken of a
property such that the supposition that there is a set of all things having that property
leads to a contradiction” ([3]: 246). Well, maybe, but this was not at all what Cantor
had in mind. For him, inconsistent multiplicities were real, but forever beyond rational
comprehension—for to understand them completely would involve, per impossibile,
treating them as uniﬁed, ﬁnished things. He linked them ultimately to his religious
concerns, see [16]: 245–6.
Cantor’s distinction was vague but ultimately achieved mathematical precision in
von Neumann’s set theory where the distinction between sets and classes is made.
There the distinction is drawn between genuine sets, which are elements of other
sets, and classes which are not. In von Neumann’s set theory the supposition that
a class is an element of a set leads to a contradiction. Von Neumann’s is a precise,
technical distinction but in mathematical intent11 is not so different from Cantor’s.
Russell, however, would have been intuitively in tune with Cantor’s way of making the
distinction, which reﬂects something of the grandeur of Cantor’s original conception
of set theory. Russell, as I shall show, would have been sympathetic to the distinction
(at least, minus its theological trappings) as he was not towards later consistentizing
devices in set theory, to which he always exhibited a profound indifference.
Russell came upon his own paradox while considering Cantor’s proof that there
is no greatest cardinal. “[I]t seemed to me”, he wrote, “that the number of all the
things in the world ought to be the greatest possible”.12 “Accordingly”, he continues,
“I examined his proof with some minuteness, and endeavoured to apply it to the class
of all things there are. This led me to consider those classes which are not members of
themselves, and to ask whether the class of such classes is or is not a member of itself.”
([Auto]: vol. i, 147, see also [POM]: 362n.). It was Russell who saw the resulting
paradox as a serious problem to be solved. But not immediately: at ﬁrst he thought
“there was some trivial error in the reasoning” (ibid.). This, no doubt, accounts for his
relatively long silence on the topic. Though the paradox was discovered in May/June
1901, Russell does not seem to have reported it to anyone (except perhaps Whitehead)
until June 1902, when he wrote to both Frege and Peano about it. It was, as Moore
and Garciadiego comment, only when Russell received Frege’s horriﬁed reply that he
realized how difﬁcult the problem would be to solve. But the point I want to emphasize
here is that, unlike Burali-Forti and Cantor, Russell realized from the ﬁrst that he had
a problem. The question for him was whether it was a big one or a small one; a trivial
11As distinct from Cantor’s theological intent.
12We need to remember that, at this time, Russell was a radical realist who admitted many more things
in the world, including sets, than were countenanced by most people’s philosophies.

The Prehistory of Russell’s Paradox
353
mistake in the reasoning or a matter that needed a fundamental reconstruction of logic.
And the question for me, in the rest of this paper, is: Why was this so?
To seek the answer, we have to go back into Russell’s philosophical past. Russell
ﬁrst discovered Cantor in 1896 and made at that time a detailed, but almost entirely
critical, study of those of his works that Gösta Mittag-Lefﬂer had put together in
French translation in a special issue of his journal, Acta Mathematica, in 1883.13 Rus-
sell returned to Cantor in 1899, 1900 and 1901 and no doubt subsequently, becoming
steadily less critical in the process. But at the time of ﬁrst encounter, Russell was
a Hegelian struggling to give an account of continuous quantity.14 Now Hegelians
love contradictions and one might have expected to ﬁnd Russell relishing the con-
tradictions of continuous quantity.
But Russell, like most of the late-nineteenth-
century British Hegelians, was a consistentizing Hegelian.
That is, he expected
to ﬁnd contradictions, but expected them to be progressively eliminated as one as-
cended through a hierarchy of levels of understanding towards an understanding of the
Absolute. While Cantor associated the Absolute with his inconsistent multiplicities,
Russell expected theAbsolute to be entirely consistent, a realm in which the contradic-
tions which infested lower levels (the realm of appearance rather than reality) would
ﬁnally be resolved.15
Unusually for the British Hegelians, Russell’s ascent to the Absolute was to be
through a study of the special sciences, starting with geometry. Each special science,
he thought, studied some aspect of appearance, but by welding them all together into a
single philosophically well-thought out system he would (he hoped) approach a meta-
physical science of the Absolute; a science of reality rather than of mere appearance.
In accordance with this plan he set about collecting contradictions in the special sci-
ences.16 There was one particularly pervasive type, which he called the contradiction
of relativity, which will not concern us here, although it was of great importance to
Russell. It depended upon the doctrine of internal relations to be found in some of
the British Hegelians, notably Bradley, and in 1898, in what amounted to a logical
gestalt shift, he switched from regarding these contradictions as conclusions to be
derived from a correct theory of relations, to seeing them as errors which invalidated
the theory of relations which yielded them. It was this switch that ended his adherence
to Hegelianism.
In his Hegelian efforts to deal with arithmetic and with continuous quantity one
ﬁnds a predictable assemblage of traditional paradoxes about inﬁnity. These were
the sorts of paradoxes to be derived from Zeno and paradoxes to be found in the
foundations of the calculus as to the impossibility of forming a ﬁnite quantity by
summing inﬁnitesimally small ones. Russell’s consistentizing zeal was so great that,
13See ([23]: 97–8) for an account of the compilation, and ([CPBR2]: 460–81) for Russell’s notes on it.
14See “On Some Difﬁculties of Continuous Quantity” [CPBR2]: 46–58.
15The metaphysical model for this was [2]. Russell’s optimism that a theoretical articulation of the
Absolute would be possible, however, comes from McTaggart.
16I have discussed this work at length in [24]. A much briefer summary can be found in [26].

354
N. Grifﬁn
for a time in 1895–6, he considered resolving these problems by a return to the pre-
calculus tradition of ﬁnite indivisibles.17
There was one antinomy that Russell found in geometry which deserves our atten-
tion, and this is the antinomy of the necessary hypostatization of the point. During his
Hegelian period Russell held a relational view of space and also the view he derived
from Bradley that relations were nothing apart from their terms. Thus, on the one
hand, geometry had nothing other than a system of relations to work with but, on the
other, demanded terms for those relations. Points depended for their reality upon
relations and relations for their reality upon points. In Russell’s view, the geometrical
point was conjured out of nothing to try (unsuccessfully) to resolve this contradic-
tion.18
What I want to draw attention to in this is the criterion of reality that is implicit in
it. For Russell, to be real was to be capable of being a term of a relation19 and this, as
he abandoned his Hegelianism and became a realist, became the principle that to be
real was to be capable of being the subject of a proposition. This view he continued
to hold—in a straight-forward, “what you see is what you get”, kind of way—through
The Principles of Mathematics. The doctrine persisted even beyond the Principles, but
after 1905 his changing views on what was the logical subject of a proposition changed
the import of the doctrine quite radically. It is this doctrine, I believe, that, at least
partially, explains why Russell could not regard Cantor’s inconsistent multiplicities,
when he discovered them, with the same equanimity that Cantor did. Acknowledging
such items at all required making them the logical subject of a proposition, and that, in
turn, entailed that they were real, thus jeopardizing his search for a consistent account
of reality.
Abandoning Hegelianism freed Russell at one stroke from many of the contra-
dictions that had previously bothered him—all the contradictions of relativity were
at once eliminated. Russell’s delight in being free of them is evident in unpublished
work he did in 1899, for example in “Fundamental Ideas and Axioms of Mathemat-
ics”. But although the number of contradictions had been reduced, it had not been
reduced to zero. “Fundamental Ideas” was to contain a chapter on the “Antinomy of
Inﬁnite Number”. The chapter itself has not survived (if it was ever written) among
the miscellaneous fragments of this book in the Russell Archives, but in his table of
contents Russell summarizes the chapter as follows:
Antinomy of Inﬁnite Number. This arises most simply from applying the
ideaoftotalitytonumbers. Thereis, andisnot, anumberofnumbers. This
17He was inﬂuenced here by the French philosopher Arthur Hannequin, whose [27] he reviewed in Mind
([CPBR2]: 36–43).
18As a Hegelian Russell appealed to Boscovichian point atoms to provide something real to anchor
geometrical points. After abandoning Hegelianism he adopted an absolute theory of space, cf. [CPBR3]:
Part II.
19This should not be confused with his criterion for existence, which was that to exist is to have effects.
In the technical terms of his (slightly) later philosophy, the criterion of reality could be stated as a criterion
of being.

The Prehistory of Russell’s Paradox
355
and Causality20 are the only antinomies known to me. This one is more
all-pervading. It does not show ﬁnite numbers to be self-contradictory.
Does it show the relation of part and whole to be so?21 I think it does
not. This relation seems to imply a totality, which is impossible, but
on account of the terms, not the relation itself. No existing metaphysic
avoids this antinomy. ([CPBR2]: 267)
The line of thought is remarkably similar to that which led Cantor to his inconsistent
multiplicities, as is the following remark, also from his detailed table of contents,
where he talks about “all concepts” and “all numbers”:
Totality here seems necessary; but if we make it so, inﬁnite number with
its contradictions becomes inevitable, being the number of concepts or of
numbers. The only way to evade the contradiction is to deny the need of
totality. ([CPBR2]: 266)
But Russell was still a long way from an understanding of Cantor’s transﬁnite
arithmetic. There is no trace, here, of Cantor’s ascending sequence of alephs, nor,
more importantly, of the crucial power-set theorem. Russell’s understanding of the
antinomy of inﬁnite number is still distinctly pre-Cantorean. He explains the antinomy
elsewhere in his table of contents:
There are many numbers, therefore there is a number of numbers. If this
be N, N + 1 is also a number, therefore there is no number of numbers.
([CPBR2]: 265)
But this, of course, is no paradox at all because the principle that N +1 > N on which
it is based fails where N is an inﬁnite cardinal.
It is not known exactly when Russell came to realize this. The 1899-1900 draft
of The Principles of Mathematics, the draft he wrote before discovering Peano at
the Paris Congress in early August 1900, reveals him, in many respects, not much
further ahead.22 He certainly takes Cantor more seriously here than previously. He
considered Cantor’s treatment of the continuum ([CPBR3]: 110–15), and a further
chapter is devoted to transﬁnite numbers ([CPBR3]: 119–25). Cantor is credited
with having created “the mathematical theory of inﬁnity” and established “a branch
of mathematics logically prior to the Calculus and even to irrationals”. Nonetheless,
Russell continues:
20Later in the table of contents, Russell has this to say about the antinomy of causality: “Each element
has an effect, but no effect can be asserted apart from the whole. Illustration from the compounding of
accelerations.” ([CPBR2]: 271). Russell alludes to this problem in the Preface to [POM]: xvi–xvii.
21Russell was attempting at this time (before he discovered Peano) to found mathematics upon a fun-
damental part-whole relation. Husserl at the same time was working, quite independently, along similar
lines.
22Despite having read [7] in July 1899. It was the only work he recorded having read that month
([CPBR1]: 362), which suggests he took especial care with it (or perhaps merely that he was too busy with
other things). He re-read it in August 1900.

356
N. Grifﬁn
I cannot persuade myself that his theory solves any of the philosophical
difﬁculties of inﬁnity, or renders the antinomy of inﬁnite number one
whit less formidable. Like most mathematical ideas on the subject, it
consists of a skillful combination of the two sides of the antinomy in the
proportions most useful for obtaining results. ([CPBR3]: 119)
He then presents a bunch of puzzles about the inﬁnite, such as the traditional one that
there are as many integers as even integers, and the new one that commutativity of
addition fails for inﬁnite ordinals ([CPBR3]: 121).23 He does not, however, regard
these points as in any way decisive against Cantor.
His chief objection remained his earlier antinomy of inﬁnite number, but now recast
in such a way as to avoid the mistaken assumption in the original version. Having read
more Cantor by now, he is much more careful of the distinction between ﬁnite and
inﬁnite numbers. Consider the class of ﬁnite numbers and suppose it has a cardinal
number n. Now either n is ﬁnite or inﬁnite. If n is inﬁnite it cannot be the number of
ﬁnite numbers. But if n is ﬁnite there is a ﬁnite number n + 1 greater than n. So, once
again, n is not the number of ﬁnite numbers ([CPBR3]: 121–2).
Russell recognizes that Cantor’s theory is designed to avoid this dilemma, but he
works through a different version of the dilemma, this time starting, as it were, from
above, with ω, and working down. Suppose the number of ﬁnite numbers is ω which
is inﬁnite, while “the number immediately preceding ω . . . is ﬁnite”. But if N is the
number immediately preceding ω then N, not ω, is the number of ﬁnite numbers. To
be the number of ﬁnite numbers, ω should be the last of the ﬁnite numbers, “not the
number next after these” ([CPBR3]: 122).
He still misses the genuine paradox of the greatest cardinal, mainly because he
remains reluctant to admit that Cantor’s sequence of alephs (or omegas) can get off
the ground.24 “On the whole,” he concludes, “it would seem impossible to maintain
that any number is inﬁnite” ([CPBR3]: 125). But, in coming to this conclusion, oddly
enough, he takes a step towards the genuine paradox. The number of ﬁnite numbers,
he argues, cannot be ﬁnite, because, for any ﬁnite number, adding 1 to it yields a
greater number which is also ﬁnite. Therefore, either there is no number of ﬁnite
numbers or, if there is, it is inﬁnite. If, as Russell concludes, there are no inﬁnite
numbers, it follows that there is no number of ﬁnite numbers. This, in turn, conﬂicts
with what he calls an axiom, namely the claim that “A given collection of many terms
must contain some deﬁnite number of terms” ([CPBR3]: 124). That (ﬁnite) numbers
form a genuine collection is shown, he argues, by the fact that “all ﬁnite numbers” is
a legitimate concept; and he argues for this latter on the grounds that the concept can
occur in a true proposition. The only way out, therefore, is to reject the axiom:
23It is a little puzzling why Russell should have regarded the fact that ω + 1 ̸= 1 + ω as a problem, since
he was already aware of algebras where commutativity of addition fails from [33].
24Though he now knew much more about Cantor’s work and even acknowledged its importance, this
basic position was not very much different from the one he had adopted in 1896, cf. [CPBR2]: 51–2.

The Prehistory of Russell’s Paradox
357
Obvious as this axiom is, there is much to be said for rejecting it. Its
acceptance, as we saw, leads to contradictions; its denial leads only to
oddity. If we deny it, we may say, without actual contradiction, that there
is no number of ﬁnite numbers . . . In this case, a collection is inﬁnite
when portions of it consist of a number of terms, but the whole collection
has no number; and the collection of numbers is inﬁnite in this sense.
([CPBR3]: 125)
We don’t know when this part of the 1899–1900 draft was written, but there is
no doubt that Russell held to these conclusions right up until the Paris Congress. He
comes to exactly the same conclusion in “Is Position in Time Absolute or Relative?”
which he read at Oxford in May 1900 ([CPBR3]: 231). He made the same point in a
footnote in his book on Leibniz:
The general principle that all aggregates are phenomenal must not be
confounded25 with the principle, which Leibniz also held, that inﬁnite
aggregates have no number. This latter principle is perhaps one of the
best ways of escaping from the antinomy of inﬁnite number. ([POL]:
117n)
Interestingly, this footnote does not appear in the manuscript for the book and thus
was added at a late stage in its preparation. The Preface for Russell’s Leibniz is
dated “September, 1900”, i.e., after the Paris Congress, but it is known to be a very
late addition,26 so the best guess is that the footnote was added shortly before the
Congress when Russell read proofs for the book.
Russell’s attitude to the inﬁnite in general and Cantor’s work in particular changed
dramatically immediately after he returned from the Paris Congress. In Russell’s fa-
mous paper, “On the Logic of Relations”, written in early October 1900 and published
by Peano in 1901, transﬁnite numbers are deﬁned and rules for the addition of in-
ﬁnite cardinals presented27 apparently without any philosophical qualms. No doubt
Russell’s understanding of the technicalities of Cantor’s transﬁnite arithmetic, and his
ability to take the ﬁrst steps towards logicising the theory, was helped by a second
reading of [7] in August 1900. Moreover, a technical paper in symbolic logic like
“The Logic of Relations” may not have seemed to Russell the best place to present
his philosophical objections to the inﬁnite. But these considerations can’t explain the
change in “The Logic of Relations”, for the fact is, Russell’s philosophical objections
had vanished.
This is ﬁrst made clear explicitly in his popular paper, “Recent Work on the Princi-
ples of Mathematics”, written in January 1901, where he says that the problems of the
25One suspects from this that Russell himself had been guilty of confounding them.
26See [1]: vol. i, 9.
27Multiplication of inﬁnite cardinals had to wait until [34]. Not all the advances of Russell’s paper were
made in October 1900, as Rodríguez-Consuegra ([30]: 157–62) points out—most notably Russell’s famous
logicist deﬁnition of the cardinal numbers was added later. For the October 1900 draft of the paper, see
[CPBR3]: 590–612.

358
N. Grifﬁn
inﬁnitesimal, the inﬁnite, and continuity have been completely eliminated by Weier-
strass, Dedekind and Cantor, moreover with solutions “so clear as to leave no longer
the slightest doubt or difﬁculty” ([CPBR3]: 370)—a somewhat surprising judgment in
view of the difﬁculty they had given Russell for the preceding four years. Even more
ironical—in view of Russell’s judgment, barely six months’ earlier, that Cantor had
merely combined “the two sides of the antinomy in the proportions most useful for
obtaining results” ([CPBR3]: 119)—Russell now maintained that Cantor had “pro-
ceeded in the only proper way” which was to take “pairs of contradictory propositions,
in which both sides of the contradiction would be usually regarded as demonstrable,
and … strictly examine the supposed proofs” ([CPBR3]: 272–3). This procedure had
revealed that the contradictions all depended upon a single principle namely, “if one
collection is part of another, the one which is a part has fewer terms than the one
of which it is a part and that, when once this maxim was rejected, all went well”
([CPBR3]: 373).
Russell, of course, was alive to the irony and was, indeed, exploiting it. He even
borrowed some of his own language from the 1899-1900 draft of the Principles: “The
Retention of this Axiom”, he wrote in “Recent work” of the principle just stated about
the relative cardinalities of collections where one is a proper part of the other, “leads to
absolute contradictions, while its rejection leads only to oddities” ([CPBR3]: 375)—
almost exactly quoting his earlier conclusion about the thesis that there is a number of
numbers. “It was obvious”, he now writes, “that there were inﬁnities—for example,
the number of numbers” ([CPBR3]: 372)—the negation of which he had carefully
attempted to prove the previous year. And when he decried the efforts of previous
philosophers as “unintelligible rigmarole” ([CPBR3]: 372), he certainly intended to
include his own earlier work. This entire passage in “Recent Work” is to be seen as a
private joke at the expense of Russell’s work on inﬁnity in the previous year.
What had happened to effect such a complete reversal? The answer is not just a
more careful study of Cantor. That undoubtedly helped, but Russell had been studying
Cantor off and on with some care since 1896, without thinking that the contradictions
of inﬁnity had been made one whit more tractable. The completeness of the reversal
suggests another gestalt shift but, in this case, a more complicated one than that of
converting modus ponens into modus tollens. The crucial difference, it seems to me,
was that Russell, after the Paris Congress, had changed his logic. Prior to the Paris
Congress Russell’s logic had been built on an primitive part-whole relation. While this
relation was at the heart of his logic, it seemed inescapable to sacriﬁce the ‘obvious’
truth that the number of numbers was inﬁnite for the sake of preserving the principle
that a proper part of a collection has fewer terms than the whole. Once he had embraced
Peano’s logic, the latter principle was no longer sacrosanct.
There is no doubt that Russell, in “Recent Work”, thought that the problems of
inﬁnity had been completely and decisively solved. But pride comes before a fall,
and Russell was to pay dearly for his hubris in “Recent Work”. There is, indeed, one
sign of trouble to come in the essay itself. Russell takes issue with Cantor’s proof that
there is no greatest number, in which he thinks that there is “some very subtle fallacy”.

The Prehistory of Russell’s Paradox
359
“[I]f this proof is valid”, Russell says, “the contradictions of inﬁnity would reappear
in a sublimated form” ([CPBR3]: 375).
That this was the source of Russell’s paradox is conﬁrmed by what Russell said in
My Philosophical Development almost sixty years later:
I was led to this contradiction by considering Cantor’s proof that there is
no greatest cardinal number. I thought, in my innocence, that the number
ofallthethingsthereareintheworldmustbethegreatestpossiblenumber,
and I applied his proof to this number to see what would happen . . . The
application of Cantor’s argument led me to consider the classes that are
not members of themselves; and these, it seemed, must form a class. I
asked myself whether this class is a member of itself or not. If it is a
member of itself, it must possess the deﬁning property of the class, which
is to be not a member of itself. If it is not a member of itself, it must
not possess the deﬁning property of the class, and therefore must be a
member of itself. ([MPD]: 75–6)
But the road to the paradox was far from straight-forward.
Russell had noticed the problem he refers to in “Recent Work” two months earlier
and put it down to a mistake in Cantor’s proof of the power-set theorem. He had
written to Couturat about it on 8 December 1900:
I have discovered a mistake in Cantor, who maintains that there is no
largest cardinal number. But the number of classes is the largest number.
The best of Cantor’s proofs to the contrary can be found in [8]. In effect
it amounts to showing that, if u is a class whose number is α, the number
of classes included in u (which is 2α) is larger than α. The proof presup-
poses that there are classes included in u which are not individuals [i.e.
members] of u; but if u = Class, that is false: every class of classes is a
class. ([31]: vol. i, 210–11).28
That this is the “very subtle fallacy” that Russell referred to in “Recent Work” the
following month is made clear by his remarks on the topic in The Principles of Math-
ematics ([POM]: 362), to which I shall turn shortly.
Couturat replied that he didn’t think it would be possible to admit the class of all
classes without involving oneself in some kind of contradiction.29 Russell, however,
stuck to his guns:
Concerning the class of classes, if you admit a contradiction in this con-
cept, inﬁnity will remain forever contradictory, and your works as well
as Cantor’s will not have resolved the philosophical problem. For there
is a concept class and there are classes. Therefore, class is a class. Now
it is proven (and this is essential to Cantor’s theory) that all classes have
28The original letter is in French. The translation followed here is that provided at [CPBR3]: xxxii.
29Couturat to Russell, 3 January 1901 ([31]: vol. i, 218).

360
N. Grifﬁn
a cardinal number. Thus, there is a number of classes, that is, a number
of the class class. But it does not result in any contradiction, since the
proof that Cantor gives that
α ∈Nc. ⊃2α > α
presupposes that there is at least one class contained in a given class u
(whose number is α) which is not itself a member of u, that is, one has:
∃Cls ∩v ∋(v ⊃. v ∼∈u).
(1)
If we put u = Cls, this becomes false. Thus the proof doesn’t hold.30
Russell, in fact, was mistaken in thinking that (1) was presupposed by Cantor’s proof.
It is not, however, clear when he realized this.
Interestingly, Couturat’s letter of 3 January mentioned Burali-Forti’s argument
that the trichotomy law for inﬁnite ordinals was false. “His reasoning”, Couturat said,
“was more specious than convincing” ([31]: vol. i, 218). Russell did not know of
Burali-Forti’s paper at time and asked Couturat for a copy of it. Nonetheless, he was
inclined to agree with Burali-Forti’s conclusion, and even to think the same thing
held for cardinals—“Cantor’s arguments on the subject are not conclusive” ([SLBR1]:
211; [31]: vol. i, 225). Here, too, Russell reversed himself the following year in
“The General Theory of Well-Ordered Series” where he presented Cantor’s proof of
the trichotomy law for ordinals in Peanoesque guise ([CPBR3]: 389-421, *5.47). He
dealt with Burali-Forti’s paper in a note added in proof to the paper ([CPBR3]: 385)—
which is, in fact, his ﬁrst published response to any of the paradoxes—he accepted
the trichotomy law, but still denied that there was a paradox because he now rejected
the claim that the class of all ordinals can be well-ordered. There is nothing in this
response which links Burali-Forti’s result with his own paradox, which he had by then
discovered. Indeed, Russell treats Burali-Forti’s argument, as Burali-Forti himself
had done, as a reductio argument.31
The precise route which led Russell from thinking that there was a subtle ﬂaw in
Cantor’s argument that there was no greatest cardinal to the discovery of his paradox
was ﬁrst identiﬁed by Alberto Coffa, who found a passage in the manuscript for The
Principles of Mathematics which was replaced in the published work and which makes
Russell’s thinking clearer.32 The manuscript in question is that of Chapter XLIII, Part
V of the Principles (Russell Archives ﬁle 230.030350-F14). It is part of what is
usually known as “The Printers’Manuscript”, but for reasons which will soon become
30Letter of 17 January, 1901, see ([SLBR1]: 211–12) and ([31]: vol. i, 225–6). We do not know whether
“Recent Work” was written before or after this letter.
31Contrary to what is often suggested, he takes the same line in a slightly longer discussion in [POM]:
323. Garciadiego ([19]: 26–7) mistakenly cites this passage as the ﬁrst statement of Burali-Forti’s result
as an “inconsistency in the theory of transﬁnite numbers”—as does Ferreirós; ([17]: 307).
32Coffa [14]. Prior to Coffa, Bunn ([3]: 239), Crossley [15], and Grattan-Guinness [22] had identiﬁed
Russell’s likely line of reasoning, and Grattan-Guinness was able to conﬁrm it by reference to Russell’s
correspondence with G.H. Hardy and Philip Jourdain. Russell’s letter to Hardy is reproduced in facsimile
in ([19]: 196–201); the relevant parts of Russell’s much less explicit letter to Jourdain are in ([21]: 52).

The Prehistory of Russell’s Paradox
361
apparent, I shall refer to it more neutrally as “The F-14 Manuscript”. The printed
text begins to diverge from the manuscript at §344, which forms a little preamble to
Russell’s main argument.33 The central concern, as is suggested by both Russell’s
later reminiscences and the contemporary correspondence with Couturat, is with the
class of all classes or the class of all terms. In the manuscript (fol. 189), but not in the
printed text, Russell gives an argument to show that the class of all classes can be put
into one-one correspondence with the class of all terms,34 since every class-concept
is a term and every term a deﬁnes a class (viz., ˆx(x = a)). Moreover, since there
is “a general proof, from the reﬂexiveness of similarity, that every class must have a
number” (fol. 189), it follows that the class of terms and the class of classes have the
same number, and, moreover, “since every other class is a proper part” of the class
of all terms, it follows that this number must be the greatest possible. Thus, in the
manuscript, the stage is set for a confrontation with Cantor’s claim that there is no
greatest number. The setting is much less elaborate in the published text: there he
merely notes that there are certain classes—he mentions the class of all terms, the
class of all classes and the class of all propositions—of which “it is easy to give an
apparently valid proof that they have as many terms as possible”. Thus, he concludes,
“it would seem as though Cantor’s proof [that there is no greatest cardinal] must
contain some assumption which is not veriﬁed in the case of such classes” ([POM]:
362)—an appearance which in the published book, but not in the manuscript, he will
go on to refute.
ThereweretwoargumentsofCantor’sthathesetouttorebutintheF-14manuscript.
The ﬁrst ([7]: 44) was easily dealt with and Russell’s treatment of it in the manuscript
does not differ importantly from what was published in Principles (§345). The argu-
ment depended upon the assumption that the transﬁnite cardinals could be placed in
one-one correspondence with the transﬁnite ordinals, and Russell simply rejected the
assumption ([POM]: 363–4). He had earlier noted the lack of proof of the trichotomy
law for cardinals and had expressed doubts whether any proof would be forthcom-
ing ([POM]: 306).35 Without the comparability of all cardinals, there was reason to
doubt whether every set could be well-ordered. The set of all terms was a case in point.
Russell saw no reason for thinking it could be well-ordered, but, if it could, then “the
ordinals will have a perfectly deﬁnite maximum, namely that ordinal which represents
the type of series formed by all terms without exception” ([POM]: 364). On the other
hand, if the set of all terms cannot be well-ordered, “it is impossible to prove that there
must be a maximum ordinal.36 But in this case we may legitimately doubt whether
there are as many ordinals as there are cardinals”, and here he adverts once more to
the failure of Cantor’s proof [9] of the well-ordering of the cardinals. So far so good,
33A full list of variants between the F-14 manuscript and Part V of [POM] as published is given in [6].
34In the manuscript Russell uses ‘individual’ for what he elsewhere in the Principles calls ‘terms’.
35He had assumed it as an axiom in a draft of “The Logic of Relations”, cf. [CPBR3]: 596, ∗2·2) but did
not assume it in the published version of the paper.
36In the published text, but not of course in the manuscript, Russell was able to cite Burali-Forti’s
argument [4], to which Couturat had drawn his attention, as further grounds for this conclusion.

362
N. Grifﬁn
and the F-14 manuscript for this section of the Principles (§345) corresponds closely
to what was printed.
Cantor’s second argument—his famous diagonal argument [8]—was a different
matter entirely. Russell’s published exposition of the proof ([POM]: §346) follows
the F-14 manuscript (fols. 193–6) quite closely, as does the ﬁrst paragraph of §347
outlining a simpliﬁed version of the proof. But the remainder of §347 and the next two
sections of the published text do not appear in the manuscript. Instead, after stating
Cantor’s conclusion “that the number of classes contained in any class exceeds the
number of terms belonging to [i.e., which are members of] the class” ([POM]: 366;
fol. 196), Russell continues in the manuscript:
Now if u be the class of classes, this is plainly self-contradictory, for
classes contained in u will be only classes of classes, whereas terms
belonging to u will be all classes without exception, so that the classes
contained in u are a proper part of the class u itself. Hence there must
be somewhere in Cantor’s argument a concealed assumption not veriﬁed
when u is the class of classes. (fol. 196)
Thus Russell’s remark to Couturat, that Cantor tacitly assumes in his proof that there
is at least one class contained in u which is not a member of u, was not based on
Russell’s having identiﬁed the point at which Cantor thus begs the question, but on
Russell’s assumption that he must have done so somewhere since the conclusion of
his argument was plainly untenable.
But Russell goes beyond this in the manuscript. By applying Cantor’s diagonal
construction to class, the class of classes itself, he seeks to show that it does not produce
a new class, a member of the power-set of class which is not in class. Cantor’s proof
of the power-set theorem proceeded by showing that for any function f from a class
u to its power-set P (u), the class w = {x : x ∈u & x /∈f (x)} is a member of P (u)
but for all y ∈u, w ̸= f (y). For suppose to the contrary that y ∈u & w = f (y),
y ∈w ↔y /∈w. Russell considers what would happen if we set u = class and take
f to be the function k from u to P (u) such that
k(x) =

{x},
if x is a class but not a class of classes
x,
if x is a class of classes
In what follows Russell writes ‘kx’ for the now-standard functional notation ‘k(x)’:
We have u = class, so that ‘x is a u’ means ‘x is a class’. When x is
not a class of classes, let kx be the class of classes whose only member
is x. When x is a class of classes, let kx be x itself. Then we deﬁne
a class u′, in accordance with the above procedure, as containing every
x which is not a member of its kx, and no x which is a member of its
kx. Thus when x is not a class of classes, x is not a u′; when x is class,
or class of classes or class of classes of classes, or etc., x is not a u′;
but when x is any other class of classes, x is a u′. Then Cantor infers

The Prehistory of Russell’s Paradox
363
that u′ is not identical with kx for any value of x. But u′ is a class of
classes, and is therefore identical with ku′. Hence Cantor’s method has
not given a new term, and has therefore failed to give the requisite proof
that there are numbers greater than that of classes. In fact, the procedure
is, in this case, impossible; for if we apply it to u′ itself, we ﬁnd that u′
is a ku′, and therefore not a u′; but from the deﬁnition, u′ should be a
u′. In fact, when our original class consists of all possible combinations
of all possible terms, the method, which assumes new combinations to
be possible, necessarily fails, since, in this case, u′ itself is a u. Thus
what Cantor has proved is, that any power other than that of all classes
can be exceeded, but there is no contradiction in the fact that this power
cannot be exceeded. The exact assumption, in Cantor, which class fails
to satisfy, is, that if u be the class whose power is to be exceeded, not all
classes of u are themselves terms of u. (fols. 197–8)
It is evident now that Russell has come to the very brink of his paradox without
realizing it, for his diagonal class u′, is, a close companion of the class of all classes
that are not members of themselves. It is deﬁned by the condition
x ∈u′ ↔x /∈kx
so
u′ ∈u′ ↔u′ /∈ku′.
(2)
But u′ is a class of classes, so by the deﬁnition of k,
u′ = ku′.
Substituting the identity in (2) gives
u′ ∈u′ ↔u′ /∈u′.
Russell goes half-way to recognizing this in the passage just quoted, when he says
that “the procedure . . . is impossible; for if we apply it to u′ itself, we ﬁnd that u′ is
a ku′, and therefore not a u′; but from the deﬁnition [of k], u′ should be a u′”. But,
as Byrd ([6]: 66) points out, this line of argument is muddled up with another one,
incompatible with it, which treats the construction of u′ as legitimate, but then argues
that, since u′ is a class of classes, it is identical with ku′ and so is not a “new term”.
On this approach, the diagonal construction produces a term, u′, but not a new one;
on the other approach, the construction is impossible because u′ itself is inconsistent.
Once the illegitimacy of u′ is recognized, Russell’s objection to Cantor collapses.
We know exactly when Russell wrote this remarkable passage, for the next folio
of the manuscript is dated “Nov. 24, 1900”. In retrospect, it seems odd that it took
him another six months to discover the ﬂaw in his reasoning. Between January and
May 1901 we have little evidence of Russell’s thinking on the paradoxes. The great
exuberance of the period immediately following the discovery of Peano’s work is over.
During this period Russell found himself beset by personal problems (cf. [SLBR1]:

364
N. Grifﬁn
215–19), which no doubt took up much of his time. And no doubt he felt like a rest
after his labours to complete the draft of the Principles of Mathematics by the end of
1900. In May, he started work on the book again, and it was in the course of this work
that Russell discovered his paradox. The ﬁrst extant statement of the paradox—though
not, in fact, in its usual class form—occurs in Chapter III of the draft of Part I of The
Principles of Mathematics that he wrote in May 1901.37 What is striking about this
ﬁrst statement of the paradox is that it gives no hint of its Cantorean origins.
In the relevant chapter of the manuscript, Chapter III “Classes and Relations”,
Russell is thinking about homelier matters than these, about the need to be able to
predicate concepts of themselves, as in “concept is conceptual”, “term is a term”, “1
is one” ([CPBR3]: 193–4). This is followed by a brief discussion of relations and
their converses. Then Russell turns to “axioms relating classes and relations” and to
the relation between predicates and classes, i.e., comprehension principles for classes
though he doesn’t call them that. He claims that “to have a given relation to a given
term is a predicate” and that the terms having that relation to that term form a class.
Moreover, “to have a given relation at all is a predicate, so that all references with
respect to a given relation form a class” ([CPBR3]: 194). But then he notes that this
last principle requires “some limitation . . . for the following reason”:
We saw that some predicates can be predicated of themselves. Consider
now those . . . of which this is not the case. These are the referents (and
also the relata) in a certain complex relation, namely the combination of
non-predicability with identity. But there is no predicate which attaches
to all of them and to no other terms. For this predicate will either be
predicable or not predicable of itself. If it is predicable of itself, it is one
of those references by relation to which it was deﬁned, and therefore,
in virtue of their deﬁnition, it is not predicable of itself. Conversely, if
it is not predicable of itself, then again it is one of the said referents,
of all of which (by hypotheses) it is predicable, and therefore again it
is predicable of itself. This is a contradiction, which shows that all the
referents considered have no common predicate, and therefore do not
form a class. ([CPBR3]: 195)
This, of course, is not Russell’s class paradox, but the predicational variant of it.
It is perhaps not surprising, in view of Russell’s logicist concerns, that he should
have presented the paradox in this way—after all, predicates and relations were, from
Russell’s logicist point of view, more fundamental than classes. More surprisingly,
in view of his later accounts of the discovery, he arrives at it not by any apparent
considerations involving the class of all numbers, or the greatest cardinal, or the
trichotomy law for ordinals, but by admitting that predicates may be predicated of
themselves and then considering the relationship between predicates and classes. One
could certainly come up with the paradox as Russell states it in the 1901 draft without
knowing anything about Cantor.
37The manuscript is dated “May 1901” and thus rules out June as the month of the paradox’s discovery.

The Prehistory of Russell’s Paradox
365
It seems rather as if the paradox emerged from a consideration of the consequences
ofapplyingapredicatetoitself. Theproblemsderivingfromthedistinctnessoridentity
of the predicate as predicated and the predicate as logical subject had plagued Russell’s
philosophy since he ﬁrst embraced realism.38 It seemed on the one hand that the two
must be distinct—since one was a predicate and the other was a term—and yet they
must be identical—since it was necessary on occasion to speak of the predicate and
that required making it, and not another thing, the subject of a proposition. These
problems remain in the Principles and even linger after the theory of ramiﬁed types
in Russell’s distinction between a relation as term and a relating-relation.
Indeed, in his ﬁrst published presentation of the paradox in the Principles ([POM]:
88), it is linked to this very issue. The paradox of predication is said to emerge from
treating “ϕ” as a separable part of “ϕx”. It is rather, he asserts, that “ϕ” “lives in the
propositions of the form ϕx, and cannot survive analysis”.39 But although he thinks
such a view is necessary to avoid the paradox, he is not certain that it does not lead to
contradictions of its own. He takes a similar sort of line when he comes to state the
class form of the paradox in Chapter X of Principles. There he distinguishes between
the class as one and the class as many, and links this to his embryonic type theory—the
class as one is of the same logical type as its terms, and the class as many is not. It is,
of course, signiﬁcant that even in the ﬁrst statement of the paradox he links the trouble
(in effect) to unrestricted comprehension axioms for classes. For the predicational
paradox itself this would hardly be necessary, but the motive behind his interest in
predication was to provide a logical account of the notion of class. In the Preface to
the Principles he admits that in this he has failed on account of the paradox ([POM]:
xv–xvi).
What the predicational paradox shows, he claims in 1901, is “that not every deﬁn-
ablecollectionoftermsformsaclassdeﬁnedbyacommonpredicate”or“Aproposition
containing one variable may not be equivalent to any proposition asserting that the
variable in question belongs to a certain class” ([CPBR3]: 195). Even so, it is possi-
ble to make too much of this. In two major papers, “General Theory of Well-ordered
Series” ([CPBR3]: 389–421) and the joint paper with Whitehead, “On Finite and Inﬁ-
nite Cardinal Numbers” ([CPBR3]: 425–30), written immediately after the May 1901
draft of the Principles Part I, he puts no restriction on the comprehension principle.40
In the 1901 draft of Part I, there is just one remark which suggests, albeit vaguely, a
link between the predicational paradox and difﬁculties he had already been considering
in connection with Cantor. In deﬁning the class of predicates that are not predicable
of themselves, he says,
38They are a special case of what I have elsewhere called “double aspect problems” [26]. They are
endemic in Russell’s philosophy.
39Interestingly, a view similar to this one was later taken up by the young Wittgenstein in 1912, who
retailed it back to Russell as an alternative to his position then ([35]: 25).
40As late as 1905 in correspondence with Jourdain, Russell left the comprehension principle unrestricted,
see [21]: 51–2.

366
N. Grifﬁn
all those that are not predicable of themselves have been used up. The
common predicate of all these predicates cannot be one of them, since for
each of them there is at least one predicate (namely itself) of which it is
not predicable. But again, the supposed common predicate cannot be any
other predicate, for if it were, it would be predicable of itself. ([CPBR3]:
195)
The effect of this diagonalization argument is to bring the new paradox into the same
form in which he had originally discussed the paradox of the number of numbers in
the 1899–1900 draft of the Principles.
More surprising yet is the fact that in the 1901 draft of Part I there is little to suggest
that Russell found the predicational paradox seriously disturbing. He does say that the
need to restrict the comprehension principle “is of great importance in connection with
the theory of the variable” ([CPBR3]: 195), but then he moves on. In view of all this
it is tempting to suppose that when he included the predicational paradox in the May
1901 draft of Part I of the Principles, Russell still did not realize its connection to his
earlier attempted refutation of Cantor’s power-set theorem. This is not impossible, as
noted already there is nothing in the predicational paradox that depends upon Cantor,
and not even a thinker as quick as Russell can draw all the consequences of a problem
at once—and for a writer as proliﬁc as Russell a good deal of text can be produced in
the interim. It may well have been that Russell’s thinking about the relation between
classes and predicates in the May 1901 draft led him to the predicational paradox
independently of his criticism of Cantor’s diagonalization argument, but this must
then have led him very quickly to reconsider the legitimacy of the class u′ with which
he had challenged the power-set theorem the previous November. This could account
for his uncertainty about the month in which the paradox was discovered. It may be,
though this has to be sheer speculation, that he discovered the predicational paradox
in May 1901, but it was not until the following month that he realized the ﬂaw in his
‘refutation’ of Cantor and discovered the class form of the paradox.
The familiar class form of the paradox does not appear among Russell’s surviv-
ing papers until some inconclusive working notes on the paradoxes written between
March and April 1902 (now published as [CPBR3]: Appdx. II). Apart from these
notes, we have a virtually complete silence from Russell on the paradox between its
original discovery in May/June 1901 and the time he came to write the ﬁnal version
of Part I of Principles, almost exactly a year later. His correspondence with Couturat,
for example, does not mention it. (Between May 1901 and May 1902 they corre-
sponded mainly about Leibniz.) In almost the only reference to set-theoretic matters,
Russell told Couturat that he now regarded Cantor’s proof of the power-set theorem
as “irrefutable”.41
Even more surprising, is the fact that, when he completed the manuscript of the
Principles in May 1902, he seems to have left his November 1900 critique of the
power-set theorem unchanged. We know that Russell ﬁnished the book in a hurry and
41Letter of 2 October 1901 ([31]: vol. i, 259).

The Prehistory of Russell’s Paradox
367
sent it off to the publisher as soon as it was done, writing to Cambridge University
Press about it on the very day he ﬁnished work (cf. [SLBR1]: 236). Moreover, the
published book shows signs of this haste and of the fact that the printers’ manuscript
was partly compiled from a variety of earlier drafts. Even so, it is difﬁcult to believe
that, a year after discovering the paradox and eight months after telling Couturat that he
now thought Cantor’s proof was irrefutable, Russell actually sent the F-14 manuscript
to the printer. The grounds for doubt are not conﬁned to the short section on Cantor.
Byrd’s collation of the F-14 manuscript with the published book reveals that none
of the logicist deﬁnitions of Part V of ([POM]: §§253, 284, 295, 299) are in the
manuscript. This conﬁrms Rodríguez-Consuegra’s ([30]: ch. 4) view that Russell did
not embrace logicism immediately after the Paris Congress—indeed, the ﬁrst draft
of “The Logic of Relations” (Oct. 1900) and the F-14 manuscript (Nov. 1900) are
non-logicist works. But this only makes our difﬁculty worse. Russell had been a
logicist since at least January 1901; his May 1901 draft of Part I of the Principles
defends logicism as does its May 1902 replacement. It seems barely credible that
Russell should have packaged the latter along with the F-14 manuscript and send the
result to his publisher when the two parts are in contradiction to each other on such
important matters. It is one thing to suggest that he had forgotten what was in the F-14
manuscript—evidently he had, if he included it in the printer’s manuscript—but it is
another to suggest that he included it without even glancing at it, for even the most
cursory inspection would have shown him how it varied from the position taken in
those parts of the book that were written after January 1901.
Yet the alternative—that the F-14 manuscript, though early discarded, had some-
how crept back into what is now known as “The Printer’s Manuscript”, replacing
material written later—is not easy to support either. Outside the two areas of major
variance between the F-14 manuscript and the published text of Part V, Byrd’s colla-
tion reveals only relatively minor alterations. Russell rarely produced fair copy of a
manuscript when isolated sheets from old ones could be cannibalized. So he would
have been unlikely to produce a later document which was, for the most part, a fair
copy of the F-14 manuscript. If he felt the need to revise a whole manuscript, he
would typically rewrite the entire thing with only passing reference to the original, a
process which resulted in many linguistic variants between the two. If he needed only
to change certain parts of a paper, he would change only those parts, adding sheets
and deleting passages as necessary, but leaving the other parts of the document in tact.
Byrd’s collation very much suggests the latter type of revision. Yet the F-14 manuscript
contains no replacement sheets, no short folios, no longish cancelled passages, and,
above all, no missing folios: there is, in short, no evidence that Russell ever made a
major revision on this manuscript. The F-14 manuscript is plainly not what was left
over after a subsequent (now lost) manuscript was prepared through a major round
of revisions. The F-14 manuscript is in tact. If it was replaced before Russell sent
Principles to the publisher, it was replaced in its entirety. But Russell rarely did this
unless all parts of the manuscript required change. Byrd’s collation strongly suggests
that this was not the case with Part V of the Principles of Mathematics.

368
N. Grifﬁn
But if Russell did not change the F-14 manuscript before sending it to the printer,
when did he change it? In proof? After he received Frege’s response to the paradox?
As early as October 1901, well before the printer’s manuscript was prepared, he had
admitted to Couturat that Cantor was right and he was wrong. He did not need to hear
from Frege to know that the passage needed replacement.
The working notes of March/April 1902 are really the only evidence we have
that Russell was looking for a solution in the right place. There the unrestricted
comprehension principle for sets is clearly identiﬁed as the source of the class form
of the paradox, cf. [CPBR3]: 563. Nonetheless, in the year following the discovery
of the paradox, it is the predicational form of the paradox that seems to have been
uppermost in Russell’s mind. Not only does he introduce it separately from the other
paradoxes in the Principles, but he gives it pride of place in Chapter X which is devoted
to the paradoxes.42 He presents it ﬁrst and quite elaborately and then follows it with a
brief restatement in terms of class-concepts and, ﬁnally, in terms of classes ([POM]:
102). It also gets pride of place in his famous letter to Frege of 16 June 1902, where
the set-theoretic form is stated in Peano notation in a brief postscript ([32]: 124–5).
It seems clear that, up to this point, Russell did not expect the problem to be hard to
solve—certainly no harder than many of the other difﬁculties he had faced in the past
four years. It seems clear, as he himself said long afterward, that he thought there was
some mistake in his reasoning and one which, once identiﬁed, would not be difﬁcult
to correct. It also seems that, at the time he wrote to Frege, after a year of having tried
and failed to ﬁnd the mistake himself, he hoped that Frege would quickly point it out
to him. No doubt he was almost as distressed at Frege’s response as Frege had been
to receive Russell’s letter.
It is with the letter to Frege that the paradox begins its public history. So it is at
this point that the real story begins. Nonetheless, since I promised only the prehistory
of the paradox, it is at this point that I’ll stop.
Acknowledgement. Research supported by the Social Sciences and Humanities Re-
search Council of Canada. I am grateful to participants in the Russell 01-Conference,
to Gregory H. Moore, and to an anonymous referee for comments on this paper.
Works by Russell
[Auto]
1969–1969. The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, 3 vols. London: Allen and
Unwin.
[CPBR1]
1983. The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell. Volume 1: Cambridge Essays,
1888–99. Edited by K. Blackwell et al. London and Boston: Allen and Unwin.
42He gave it a chapter on its own in the plan for Part I of the Principles he drew up in April 1902—the
month before he wrote the version that was actually published, cf. [CPBR3]: 211.

The Prehistory of Russell’s Paradox
369
[CPBR2]
1990. The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell. Volume 2: Philosophical Papers,
1896–99. Edited by N. Grifﬁn and A. C. Lewis. London and Boston: Unwin and
Hyman.
[CPBR3]
1993. The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell. Volume 3: Toward the Princi-
ples of Mathematics, 1900–02. Edited by G. H. Moore. London and New York:
Routledge.
[CPBR11]
1997. The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell. Volume 11: Last Philosophical
Testament, 1943–68. Edited by John G. Slater. London: Routledge.
[MPD]
1959. My Philosophical Development. London: Allen and Unwin.
[POL]
1900. A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press. New ed., London: Allen and Unwin, 1937.
[POM]
1903. The Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[SLBR1]
1992. The Selected Letters of Bertrand Russell. Volume 1: The Private Years,
1888–1914. Edited by N. Grifﬁn. London: Penguin.
Works by Other Authors
[1]
Blackwell, Kenneth and Harry Ruja: 1994. A Bibliography of Bertrand Russell. London:
Routledge.
[2]
Bradley, Francis H.: 1893. Appearance and Reality. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[3]
Bunn, Robert: 1980. Developments in the foundations of mathematics, 1870–1910. In:
I. Grattan-Guinness (ed.), From the Calculus to Set Theory 1630–1910, An Introductory
History, London: Duckworth, 220–255.
[4]
Burali-Forti, Cesare: 1897. A question on transﬁnite numbers. Translated by J. van Hei-
jenoort. In [32]: 105–111.
[5]
Burali-Forti, Cesare: 1897. On well-ordered classes. Translated by J. van Heijenoort. In
[32]: 111–112.
[6]
Byrd, Michael: 1994. Part V of The Principles of Mathematics. Russell n.s. 14: 47–86.
[7]
Cantor, Georg: 1883. Grundlagen einer allgemeinen Mannigfaltigkeitslehre. Leipzig:
Teubner.
[8]
Cantor, Georg: 1891. Über eine elementare Frage der Mannigfaltigkeitslehre. Jahres-
bericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 1: 75–78.
[9]
Cantor, Georg: 1895. Beiträge zur Begründung der transﬁniten Mengenlehre (I). Math-
ematische Annalen 46: 481–512.
[10]
Cantor, Georg: 1897. Beiträge zur Begründung der transﬁniten Mengenlehre (II). Math-
ematische Annalen 49: 207–246.
[11]
Cantor, Georg: 1899. Letter to Dedekind. Translated by S. Bauer-Mengelberg. In [32]:
113–117.
[12]
Cantor, Georg: 1932. Gesammelte Abhandlungen mathematischen und philosophischen
Inhalts. Edited by E. Zermelo. Berlin: Springer.

370
N. Grifﬁn
[13]
Cantor, Georg: 1991. Briefe. Edited by H. Meschkowski and W. Nilson. Berlin: Springer.
[14]
Coffa, J. Alberto: 1979. The humble origins of Russell’s paradox. Russell 33–4: 31–37.
[15]
Crossley, John N.: 1973.A note on Cantor’s theorem and Russell’s paradox. Australasian
Journal of Philosophy 51: 70–71.
[16]
Dauben, Joseph: 1979. Georg Cantor: His Mathematics and Philosophy of the Inﬁnite.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
[17]
Ferreirós, José: 1999. Labyrinth of Thought. A History of Set Theory and its Role in
Modern Mathematics. Basel: Birkhäuser.
[18]
Frege, Gottlob: 1980. Philosophical and Mathematical Correspondence. Edited by G.
Gabriel et al., abridged by Brian McGuinness, translated by Hans Kaal. Chicago: Chicago
University Press.
[19]
Garciadiego, Alejandro R.: 1992. Bertrand Russell and the Origins of the Set-Theoretic
“Paradoxes”. Basel: Birkhäuser.
[20]
Grattan-Guinness, Ivor: 1974. The rediscovery of the Cantor-Dedekind correspondence.
Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 76: 104–139.
[21]
Grattan-Guinness, Ivor: 1977. Dear Russell—Dear Jourdain.A Commentary on Russell’s
Logic Based on his Correspondence with Philip Jourdain. London: Duckworth.
[22]
Grattan-Guinness, Ivor: 1978. How Bertrand Russell discovered his paradox. Historia
Mathematica 5: 127–137.
[23]
Grattan-Guinness, Ivor: 2000. The Search for Mathematical Roots. Logics, Set Theories
and the Foundations of Mathematics from Cantor through Russell to Gödel. Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
[24]
Grifﬁn, Nicholas: 1990. Russell’s Idealist Apprenticeship. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
[25]
Grifﬁn, Nicholas: 1991. Terms, relations, complexes. In: A. Irvine and G. Wedeking
(eds.), Russell and Analytic Philosophy, Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
[26]
Grifﬁn, Nicholas: 2003. Russell’s philosophical background. In: N. Grifﬁn (ed.), The
Cambridge Companion to Russell, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[27]
Hannequin, Arthur: 1895. Essai critique sur l’hypothèse des atomes dans la science
contemporaine. Paris: Masson.
[28]
Husserl, Edmund: 1994. Early Writings on the Philosophy of Logic and Mathematics.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
[29]
Moore, Gregory H. and Alejandro Garciadiego: 1981. Burali-Forti’s paradox: A reap-
praisal of its origins. Historia Mathematica 8: 319–350.
[30]
Rodríguez-Consuegra, Francisco: 1991. The Mathematical Philosophy of Bertrand Rus-
sell: Origins and Development. Basel: Birkhäuser.
[31]
Schmid, Anne-Françoise: 2001. Bertrand Russell Correspondance sur la philosophie, la
logique et la politique avec Louis Couturat (1897–1913), 2 vols. Paris: Editions Kimé.
[32]
van Heijenoort, Jean (ed.): 1967. From Frege to Gödel. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.

The Prehistory of Russell’s Paradox
371
[33] Whitehead, Alfred N.: 1898. Treatise on Universal Algebra. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
[34] Whitehead, Alfred N.: 1902. On cardinal numbers. American Journal of Mathematics
24: 367–394.
[35] Wittgenstein, Ludwig: 1995. Cambridge Letters. Correspondence with Russell, Keynes,
Moore, Ramsey and Sraffa. Edited by B. McGuinness and G. H. von Wright. Oxford:
Blackwell.
[36]
Zermelo, Ernst: 1908. A new proof of the possibility of a well-ordering. Translated by S.
Bauer-Mengelberg in [32]: 183–198.
The Bertrand Russell Research Centre
McMaster University
1280 Main St. W.
Hamilton, Ontario
Canada L8S 4L6
E-mail: ngrifﬁn@mcmaster.ca


Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’ and Their Solution by
Russell’s Substitutional Theory
Gregory Landini
Abstract. It is well known that Russell’s 1903 Principles of Mathematics construed logic as a
synthetic and a priori science of structure. Russell reiﬁed structures by adopting an ontology
of propositions—mind and language independent ‘states of affairs’. The thesis of Logicism
advanced in the work held that the intuitions grounding all non-applied mathematics are logical
intuitions of propositional structure. It has been widely reported that Logicism is dead and
indeed that it died at Russell’s own hands. Valiant as it was, the ramiﬁed type-theory of the
1910 Principia Mathematica did not save logicism from Russell’s paradoxes (of classes and
predication). The system offers no genuine ‘solution’ of the paradoxes, and requires an inﬁnity
axiom and an axiom of reducibility—neither of which can be counted among the truths of
pure logic. Logicism is dead. Or is it? What has not been widely reported is that prior to
composing the system of Principia Mathematica, Russell did solve the paradoxes. Applying
his 1905 theory of incomplete symbols to form deﬁnite descriptions of propositions, he invented
a type-free intensional calculus which emulates a simple type-theory of attributes (and thereby a
simple type-theory of classes and relations in extension). This “no-classes” or “substitutional”
theory, as it came to be called, has only recently begun to be investigated. This paper shows
that Russell acted to hastily when he abandoned substitution in 1908. The substitutional theory
may well resurrect logicism just as Russell had originally hoped.
1. Introduction
It is not well-known that prior to Principia Mathematica (1910) Russell formulated
a theory that solved the paradoxes of classes and attributes plaguing logicism [10].
The theory was largely axiomatized by December of 1905 on the heels of Russell’s
theory of deﬁnite descriptions. But it was lost in unpublished manuscripts for almost
seventy years. It is brieﬂy discussed in Russell’s 1905 paper “On Some Difﬁculties in
the Theory of Transﬁnite Numbers and Order Types,” and hinted at in the 1907 paper
“Mathematical Logic as Based on the Theory of Types.” But only one of Russell’s
detailed papers on the theory was published. Written ﬁrst in English with the bold title
“On ‘Insolubilia’and Their Solution by Symbolic Logic,” Russell translated the paper
into French and published it in 1906 under the title “Les paradoxes de la logique.”
The paper was Russell’s reply to Poincaré’s paper “Les mathématiques et la logique”

374
G. Landini
which criticized logicism and offered the Vicious Circle Principle (VCP) as a solution
of the paradoxes. Interest in the paper was conﬁned to Russell’s defense of logicism
and his apparent agreement with Poincaré that violation of the VCP is the common
source of both logical and semantic paradoxes. The hidden gems in Russell’s paper,
however, are his solution to the paradoxes and his distinction between syntactic and
semantic paradoxes!
To solve the paradoxes, Russell formulated a substitutional theory of propositional
structure. Russell’s notion of substitution is unrelated to modern “substitutional quan-
tiﬁcation.” Quantiﬁcation in the theory is entirely objectual. There is only one style
of variables in the calculus (entity/individual variables). Substitution is not a theory of
types of entities, but rather a dissolution of the paradoxes by means of an eliminativis-
tic ontological analysis and reconstruction of a type-stratiﬁed theory of attributes in
intension (and thereby a type-stratiﬁed theory of classes and relations-in-extension).
Unfortunately, Russell’s eliminativistic methods have largely been unrecognized. In
Principia, his thesis that classes are “logical constructions” has been interpreted to
be ontologically reductive—classes are to be identiﬁed with certain entities called
“propositional functions” (ramiﬁed and type-stratiﬁed attributes in intension), cardi-
nal numbers are reduced to classes, ordinal numbers are reduced to (identiﬁed with)
classes of well-ordering relations-in-extension, and so on. In his 1924 paper “Logical
Atomism,” Russell wrote
One very important heuristic maxim which Dr.Whitehead and I found, by
experience, to be applicable in mathematical logic, and have since applied
in various other ﬁelds, is a form of Ockham’s razor. When some set of
supposed entities has neat logical properties, it turns out, in a great many
instances, that the supposed entities can be replaced by purely logical
structures without altering any of the detail of the body of propositions
in question. This is an economy, because the entities with neat logical
properties are always inferred, and if the propositions in which they oc-
cur can be interpreted without making this inference, the ground for the
inference fails, and our body of propositions is secured against the need
for a doubtful step. The principle may be stated in the form: ‘Wherever
possible, substitute constructions out of known entities for inferences to
unknown entities.’ ([26]: 326)
This statement of method is commonly interpreted as holding that inference to (the
postulation of) new entities is to be replaced by logical constructions from entities
with which we are acquainted such as sense-data and propositional functions. This
is mistaken, however. The emergence of Russell’s largely unpublished substitutional
theory has revealed a completely different picture of Russell’s conception of “logical
construction.” Russell’s program is one of ontological eliminativism, reconceptu-
alization, and structural realism. The ontology of an old theory is abandoned (or
obviated), but structures of the old theory are re-conceptualized and recovered (where
possible). The new theory retains the structures given by the laws of the old ontologi-

Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’
375
cal framework, just as Maxwell’s equations for electromagnetic waves in an aether are
retained in Einstein’s no-aether theory of relativity. Russell’s eliminativism is promi-
nent in his thinking in the 20’s and appears unequivocally in his neutral monism—a
theory that attempts to reconstruct both the physics of continuants and the psychology
of conscious states from an ontology of physical space-time events.1 That Russell
intended an eliminativistic approach is clear in his substitutional theory.2 The major
successes obtained by appeal to the existence of classes, the positive constructions
of Cantor, Dedekind, Weierstrass, and Frege, are to be retained within substitution.
But the results obtained by appeal to the existence of classes are conceptualized in an
entirely new way. There is some loss, for instance, Cantor’s transﬁnite ordinal number
ωω cannot be recovered. But this loss is to be measured against the successes of the
new theory. Indeed, had the theory yielded the conceptual successes that Russell had
anticipated, one might venture to say that present mathematics would regard the notion
of a class as present physics regards phlogiston, caloric ﬂuid, and the aether.
It has been widely reported that logicism is dead, and indeed that it died at Russell’s
own hands. The doctrine of logicism espoused in Russell’s Principles provided no
solution of the paradoxes of classes and attributes. Valiant as it was, the ramiﬁed
type-theory of Principia did not provide a solution either. The system relies upon
an axiom (schema) of reducibility and an axiom of inﬁnity, neither of which can be
regarded as truths of pure logic. Logicism is dead. Or is it? Not all the options have
been explored. Russell’s substitutional theory has only recently been uncovered from
his unpublished manuscripts. Collaborating with Whitehead, the substitutional theory
was to have been set out in a companion volume to Principles. By 1905, Whitehead
and Russell had decided to write a separate book Principia Mathematica, but Russell
was convinced that Principia would have the substitutional theory at its foundation. In
his paper “On the Substitutional Theory of Classes and Relations.” Russell wrote that
the theory “… affords what at least seems to be a complete solution of all the hoary
difﬁculties about the one and the many; for while allowing that there are many entities,
it adheres with drastic pedantry to the old maxim that ‘whatever is, is one’” ([29]: 189).
The paper was accepted for publication in October of 1906, but Russell withdrew it. In
a letter to Jourdain he explained that “… there was much in it that wanted correction,
and I preferred to wait till I got things into more ﬁnals shape. I am engaged at present
in purging it of metaphysical elements as far as possible, with a view to getting the bare
residuum on which its success depends.”3 Russell thought he had succeeded in this in
his 1906 paper “On ‘Insolubilia’andTheir Solution by Symbolic Logic.” As it heraldic
title suggests, the paper promises a ﬁnal solution of the paradoxes plaguing logicism.
Alas, Russell abandoned substitution in 1907. Instead there was Principia, with legacy
of interpreters working with an ontological reduction of classes to a ramiﬁed and
1In Russell’s book Philosophy [27], we ﬁnd an outright naturalization of epistemology and philosophy
of mind.
2It is no less clear in Principia—if one knows were to look. Principia offers a no-propositions, no-
classes, and no-propositional functions theory. But this is tangential to our present concerns, see [10].
3Quoted from [6]: 93.

376
G. Landini
type-stratiﬁed hierarchy of propositional functions. Russell’s eliminativism, and the
insights of the substitutional theory were lost. But we cannot rest with this as a proper
end for the substitutional theory. I hope to show that the ideas Russell set forth for
solving the ‘insolubilia’ can be employed to resurrect logicism.
2. Russell’s Distinction between Logical and Semantic
Paradoxes
By May of 1906 Poincaré’s paper “Les mathématiques et la logique” appeared. Russell
was eager to reply. Writing to Couturat on 15 May 1906, he remarked that “I still
believe that my solution to the contradictions is good, but it seems to me that it needs
to be extended to propositions. … I will follow your advice in replying to M. Poincaré.
For this reason, I will not reply quickly, because I would like to get into order what I
have to say about the solution of the contradictions.”4 Retreating to Covelly House
for two months, Russell worked out a plan. By 14 June he wrote to Jourdain:
The no-classes theory … shows that we can employ the symbol ˆy ϕy
without ever assuming that this symbol in isolation means anything. I
feel more and more certain that this theory is right. In order, however, to
solve the Epimenides, it is necessary to extend it to general propositions,
i.e., to such as (x).ϕx and (∃x).ϕx. This I shall explain in my answer to
Poincaré’s article. ([6]: 89)
At ﬁrst blush, Russell’s comments suggest that he was seeking a common solution
to both the logical paradoxes and the semantic paradoxes. What actually transpired
is quite different. The formal calculus of propositions underlying the substitutional
theory has not been well understood. Studying Russell’s brief comments in the 1907
paper “Mathematical Logic as Based on the Theory of Types,” Quine once wrote
that the central idea of substitution was that “instead of speaking of the class of all
the objects that fulﬁll some given sentence, one might speak of the sentence itself
and of substitutions within it.
Now discourse about speciﬁed classes lends itself
well enough to paraphrase in terms thus of sentences and substitution, but when we
talk rather of classes in general, as values of quantiﬁable variables, it is not evident
how to continue such paraphrase” [16]. Quine’s difﬁculty in understanding how to
continue the paraphrase stems from his eschewing the substitutional theory’s ontology
of propositions. The notion that a given entity is in (a constituent of) a proposition
(state of affairs) is quite different than the notion of a singular term occurring in a
sentence. During the era of substitution, Russell viewed propositions as mind and
language independent states of affairs. Some propositions obtain, some do not. As
such, propositions are intensional entities, not intentional entities. The existence of
4Letter to Couturat in [31]: 604.

Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’
377
propositions does not ipso facto introduce semantic notions into the object-language of
the substitutional theory. Propositional versions of paradoxes such as the Epimenides
are not germane to substitution. They can only appear in an applied form of a theory
of propositions which introduces semantic concepts such as ‘belief’ and ‘assertion’
and regards these are direct relations between a mind and a proposition. This has not
been appreciated. Indeed, Ramsey is often credited with having admonished Russell
for thinking that both semantic paradoxes and the logical paradoxes of classes and
attributes must have a common solution. In truth, Russell’s substitutional theory did
distinguish them and proposed quite distinct solutions.
Russell’s manuscripts reveal that sometime after May of 1906 he had discovered
a new paradox of propositions unique to substitution. I have called the new paradox
Russell’s “po/ao paradox.” This paradox is not semantic, but logical, for its formula-
tion does not depend upon introducing semantic notions such as “assertion,” “belief,”
“designation,” or “truth.” Russell withdrew his May paper on the substitutional the-
ory from publication because of the po/ao paradox of propositions, not because of the
liar or any semantic paradox. He had decided not to respond too quickly to Poincaré
because he needed to solve the po/ao paradox. The reason the po/ao paradox is not
mentioned in Russell’s reply to Poincaré is likely that Russell felt that its formulation
is too technical and readers would not be familiar with details of the substitutional
theory. The unfortunate consequence is that the fact that Russell’s intention in 1906
to distinguish the logical and semantic paradoxes has been entirely lost.
A careful reading of Russell’s reply to Poincaré reveals that he did not take the
VCP to be the solution of the paradoxes. We ﬁnd in ([29]: 206):
It is important to observe that the vicious-circle principle is not itself the
solution of vicious circle paradoxes, but merely the result which a theory
must yield if it is to afford a solution of them. It is necessary, that is
to say, to construct a theory of expressions containing apparent [bound]
variables which will yield the vicious-circle principle as an outcome. It is
for this reason that we need a reconstruction of logical ﬁrst principles, and
cannot rest content with the mere fact that paradoxes are due to vicious
circles.
Russell maintains that the VCP is a regulative principle that any solution, grounded
in logical re-constructions of ﬁrst principles, must meet. The logical re-constructions
RussellhasinmindareimportantfortheyshowthatRusselldistinguishedfour separate
approaches to the paradoxes:
(1) A substitutional theory supplanting a type-theory of attributes in intension.
(2) A reconstruction of quantiﬁcation theory without an ontology of general propo-
sitions.
(3) A recursive correspondence theory of “truth” for general statements.
(4) An hierarchy of languages.

378
G. Landini
In “On ‘Insolubilia’”5 and in “On the Substitutional Theory of Classes and Relations,”
the solution Russell offers for the Richard paradox, the König/Dixon paradox, and the
Berry paradox is to adopt approach (4). On Russell’s view, notions like “designation”,
“naming” are not univocal. One must ﬁrst set out a formal language L, whose set of
primitives and formation rules are determinate, and as a consequence “designation-
in-L” and “namable-in-L” necessarily cannot be a primitives of L. Concerning the
König/Dixon, Russell writes:
Now the cardinal number of ordinals of the second class exceeds ℵ0;
hence some of these must be indeﬁnable, and among those that are in-
deﬁnable there must be a least. But this ordinal seems to be deﬁned as
‘the immediate successor of the ordinals that are deﬁnable.’ At ﬁrst this
looks like a contradiction, but in fact it is not. For although every indi-
vidual number less that this one is deﬁnable, the whole class of them is
not deﬁnable. It seems to be deﬁned as ‘the class of deﬁnable ordinals’;
but deﬁnable is relative to some given set of fundamental notions, and if
we call this set of fundamental notions I, ‘deﬁnable in terms of I’is never
itself deﬁnable in terms of I. … It is easy to deﬁne ‘deﬁnable in terms of
I’ by means of a larger apparatus I*; but then ‘deﬁnable in terms of I*’
will require a still larger apparatus I** for its deﬁnition, and so on. Or we
may take ‘deﬁnable in terms of I’ as itself part of our apparatus, so that
we shall now have an apparatus J consisting of I together with ‘deﬁnable
in terms of I.’ In terms of this apparatus J, ‘the least ordinal not deﬁnable
in terms of I’ is deﬁnable, but ‘the least ordinal not deﬁnable in terms of
J’ is not deﬁnable. Thus the paradox of the least deﬁnable ordinal is only
apparent. ([8]: 185)
This anticipates Tarski’s hierarchy-of-language approach to semantic paradoxes. In
contrast, Russelloffershisapproach(1)asasolutionofthelogicalparadoxesofclasses,
attributes (propositional functions), Burali-Forti’s contradiction of the greatest ordinal,
and Cantor’s contradiction of the greatest cardinal. These logical paradoxes are solved
by the reconstruction of a type-theory of attributes in intension within the type-free
substitutional “no-classes,” “no-relations-in-extension,” and “no-propositional func-
tions” theory. The little-known po/ao paradox is solved by approach (2). In the early
versions of the substitutional theory, it was assumed that any formula A could be
nominalized to generate a singular term {A}. For example, a closed formula (x)Bx
involving bound variables could be nominalized to form {(x)Bx} which is a singular
term. In the intended interpretation {(x)Bx} would be assigned a general proposi-
tion as its designation. Russell’s later version of the substitutional theory, however,
abandons the ontology of general propositions. Consequently, Russell had to refor-
mulate quantiﬁcation theory. In the new theory, a quantiﬁed formula (x)Bx cannot be
nominalized. Nonetheless, such a formula can ﬂank the horseshoe sign because such
5See [29]: 209.

Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’
379
an occurrence is deﬁned in terms of a prenex equivalent. For instance, where Bx is
quantifer-free and x is not free in α Russell has:
(x)Bx ⊃α def
= (∃x)({Bx} ⊃α)
Quantiﬁcation theory is reconstructed by a “no-general propositions” theory of logic
in this manner. This is one of the “re-constructions of logical ﬁrst principles” that
Russell alludes to. Lastly, Russell offers approach (3) to generate a new account of
truth and falsehood for general formulas. In the context of an ontology of propositions
(states of affairs), ‘truth’ (‘obtaining’) and ‘falsehood’ (‘non-obtaining’) are taken to
be primitive and unanalyzable properties. But when Russell abandoned his ontology
of general propositions, a recursive correspondence theory of the truth-conditions of
general statements is needed. The recursive theory generates a hierarchy of senses of
“truth” and “falsehood” generated by the number of bound variables in the formulas
they ﬂank. This hierarchy is employed to solve the Liar paradox that arises with the
statement “I am now asserting a false statement.”
3. Logic as the Science of Propositional Structure
It is quite clear then, that Russell’s awakening to the distinction between logical and
semantic paradoxes did not arise with Ramsey’s criticisms of Principia.6 Peano had
hinted that they should be distinguished in 1906 [13], and Russell explicitly offered
different solutions for them in print. In 1905 Russell had considered belief as a dyadic
relation to a proposition and investigated whether a solution of the Epimenides Liar (as
a paradox of proposition rather than statements) would yield invaluable philosophical
insights concerning the paradoxes of propositions. But he abandoned this view of
belief when he abandoned general propositions. Semantic paradoxes are as tangential
to the substitutional theory as they are to Zermelo set theory. Missing this important
fact clouds one’s understanding of the substitutional theory irremediably.
It is no less important to understand that the logical particles in the substitutional
theory are not the logical particles of modern predicate calculi. In a modern predicate
calculus, the logical particle “→” is a statement connective; it is ﬂanked by well-
formed formulas (wffs) A and B of the language of the calculus to form a formula
A →B. Similarly, the modern logical particle “¬” is a statement connective; it is
ﬂanked by a wff A to form a wff ¬A. In the language of substitution, the only variables
are individual variables. Russell’s logical particle “⊃” is a dyadic predicate expression
for the relation of ‘implication.’ It is ﬂanked by terms to form a formula. Accordingly,
where α and β are any terms, α ⊃β is a wff. (I use lower-case Greek for any singular
term of the language of substitution.) The position of x and y in the formula x ⊃y
are subject positions, and the individual (entity) variables x and y here are bindable,
6Unfortunately, Russell misleadingly attributes the distinction to Ramsey. See [28]: 126.

380
G. Landini
so that, (x)(y)(x ⊃y) is a formula of the language. (It says that for all x and y, x
implies y.) Moreover, in the substitutional theory, a wff of the formal language can
be nominalized to generate a genuine singular term. It is useful to use nominalizing
braces “{” and “}” for nominalization. Thus, where x and y are individual variables,
{x ⊃y} is a term. The distinction between terms and formulas is respected by Russell.
The expression, x ⊃{x ⊃y} is a formula. But since subject position is sufﬁcient by
itself to indicate a nominalizing transformation has taken place, we can often drop the
brackets and use dots for punctuation. Thus instead of writing x ⊃{x ⊃y} we can
write, x. ⊃.x ⊃y as our formula.7
To be sure, it may appear odd for entities such as people, rocks, and trees, to be said
to stand in, or even fail to stand in, a relation of implication. Perhaps a relation x|y
of x’s being non-copresent with y (adapted from the Peirce/Sheffer stroke)8 is better
suited for the role. But it is essential to a proper understanding of the substitutional
theory not to identify its sign “⊃” with the modern statement connective “→.”
In an unpublished manuscript of 22 December 1905 entitled “On Substitution,”
Russell set out a formalization of the basic calculus for substitution [19]. From this
we can reconstruct the formal calculus for the substitutional theory that Russell had
in mind. In the original 1905 version, written prior to Russell’s discovery of the po/ao
paradox, the substitutional theory allowed any wff of its language to be nominalized
to form a singular term. The substitutional language takes the following as primitive
signs: ( , ), { , }, /, !, and ⊃. The individual variables of the substitutional language
are x, followed by one or more occurrences of “′”. Informally we shall use any lower-
case letter of the English alphabet. The terms are given inductively as follows. (1) All
individual variables are terms; (2) If A is a wff, then {A} is a term; (3) There are no
other terms. The atomic wffs are of the form:
(x ⊃y),
(x/y; z!u)
where x, y, z, u, are variables. The wffs are those of the smallest set K containing all
atomic wff and such that (α ⊃β), (α/β; µ!δ), and (x)C, and in K just when α, β, δ,
µ, are any terms, C is any wff in K in which the individual variable x occurs free. The
expression α/β; µ!δ says that δ results from substituting µ for every occurrence of β
in α. The notion of substitution is primitive. Structurally the entity δ is exactly like α
except that µ occurs in δ at exactly those positions (if any) at which β occurs in α.
The axiom schemata for the calculus for the original 1905 substitutional logic of
propositions may be stated as follows:
α. ⊃.β ⊃α
S1
α. ⊃.β ⊃δ :⊃: β. ⊃.α ⊃δ
S2
7Russell himself took subject position to be sufﬁcient to mark the nominalizing transformation and so
did not employ brackets as we have above. In what follows I shall used dots symmetrically for punctuation.
8Of course, the Peirce/Sheffer stroke A|B for alternative denial and A ↓B for joint denial are statement
connectives.

Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’
381
α ⊃β :⊃: β ⊃δ. ⊃.α ⊃δ
S3
α ⊃β. ⊃.α :⊃: α
S4
(u)Au ⊃A[α|u], where α is free for u in A.
S5
(u)(α ⊃Au). ⊃.α ⊃(u)Au, where u is not free in α.
S6
α in {Aα}
S7
α in {Aβ1, . . . , βn} :⊃: α = {Aβ1, . . . , βn}.∨. α in β1.∨., . . . , .∨. α in
S8
βn, where A is any wff all of whose distinct free terms are β1,…, βn.
(x, y)(x in y .&. y in x :⊃: x = y)
S9
(x, y, z)(x in y .&. y in z :⊃: x in z)
S10
(p, a)(q)(x, y)(p/a; x!q .&. p/a; y!q .&. a in p :⊃: x = y)
S11
(p, a)(z)(q)(p/a; z!q .&. a in p .&. a ̸= p :⊃: z in q .&. z ̸= q)
S12
(x, y)(x/x; y!y)
S13
(x, y)(x/y; y!x)
S14
(p, a)(x)(∃q)(p/a; x!r. ≡r .q = r)
S15
(p)(∃q)(q ex p)
S16
(∃u)(α out {Au|v}). ⊃.(u)({Aα|v}/α; u!{Au|v}),
S17
where α and u are free for v in A.
(∃u1, . . . , un)(α out {Au1|v1, . . . , un|vn}) : & : α ̸=
S18
{Au1|v1, . . . , un|vn}. & .α ̸= β1 . & ., . . . , . & . α ̸= βn. :⊃: .
(x)(∃u1, . . . , un)({Aσ1|v1, . . . , σn|vn}/α; x!{Au1|v1, . . . , un|vn}
: & : σ1|α; x!u1 . & ., . . . , . & . σn|α; x!un),
where each ui and σi, 1 ≤i ≤N, are free for their respective vi
in A, and β1, . . . , βn are all the terms occurring free in A.
{(u)Au} = {(v)Av|u}, where v is free for u in A.
S19
{(u)Au} = {(u)Bu}. ⊃.(u)({Au} = {Bu})
S20
{(u)Au} ̸= {α ⊃β}
S21
α in {(u)Au} . & . α ̸= {(u)Au} :⊃: (u)(α in {Au}),
S22
where α is not the individual variable u and u is not free in A.
{α ⊃β} ̸=⊃. & . {(u)A} ̸=⊃
S23

382
G. Landini
The inference rules of the system are as follows:
Modus Ponens:
From A and {A} ⊃{B}, infer B.
Universal Generalization:
From A infer (u)A,
where u is an individual variable free in A.
Replacement of Deﬁned Signs:
Deﬁniens and deﬁniendum may replace one another in any context.
The following deﬁnitions are then introduced:
∼α def
= (x)(α ⊃x)
df(∼)
(∃x)A def
= ∼(x) ∼A
df(∃)
α ∨β def
= ∼α ⊃β
df(∨)
α & β def
= ∼(α ⊃∼β)
df(&)
α = β def
= (p)(a)(q)(r)(p/a; α!q .&. p/a; β!r :⊃: q ⊃r)
df(=)
(∃x1, . . . , xn)A def
= (∃x1), . . . , (∃xn)A
df(E)
(x1, . . . , xn)A def
= (x1), . . . , (xn)A
df(A)
A ⊃x1,x2,...,xn B def
= (x1)(A ⊃x2,...,xn B)
df(I)
α out β def
= (u)(β/α; u!β)
df(out)
α in β def
= ∼(α out β)
df(in)
α ind β def
= α out β .&. β out α
df(ind)
α ex β def
= ∼(∃u)(u in α .&. u in β).
df(ex)
These last deﬁnitions are worth discussing brieﬂy. With the notion of substitution as
a primitive, Russell deﬁnes what it is for one entity to be out (not a constituent) of
another. Surely a is out of b if and only if every substitution of an entity u for a in b
does not alter b. Russell then deﬁnes the notion of an entity being in (a constituent)
of another as just the contradictory of out. On Russell’s deﬁnition, there is a trivial
sense in which every entity is in itself. But given Russell axioms (S9) and (S10),
it follows that no entity is in itself in non-trivial sense. That is, no entity a is in an

Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’
383
another entity which is, in turn, in a. Russell also introduces the notion of an entity
being independent of another: An entity a is independent of b if and only if neither is a
constituent of the other. More important is Russell’s deﬁnition of an entity’s excluding
another. An entity a excludes b if and only if no entity is a constituent of both a and
b. This deﬁnition is important to axiom (S16) which is needed so that the antecedent
clause of (S17) can be detached when needed. For if a excludes b, then since a in a,
it follows that a is out of b. This reconstructs (with a bit of updating)9 the system for
the substitutional calculus of logic that Russell set out late in 1905.
4. Type-Theory as Formal Grammar
To understand how the substitutional language proxies a type-stratiﬁed second-order
calculus with nominalized predicates, let us begin with a formal characterization of
such a calculus. The primitive symbols of the language are (, ), o, ′, ∀, ¬, and →.
A type symbol is any expression that satisﬁes the following recursive deﬁnition:
1. “o” is a type symbol.
2. If t1, . . .,tn are all type symbols, then the expression (t1, . . ., tn) is also a type
symbol.
3. These are the only type symbols.
The variables are small italic letters x with any type symbol superscript and followed
by any number of occurrences of the sign “′”. Informally, we shall use xt, yt, zt, where
t is a type symbol. When the type symbol t is not “o” we shall use Greek letters ϕt, θt,
ψt, and also followed by one or more occurrences of “′” for convenience. The terms
of the language are just the variables; the individual variables are those variables with
type index “o”, and the predicate variables are just the variables whose type index is
not “o”. The atomic formulae (wffs) of the language have the following form:
x(t1,...,tn)(yt1
1 , . . . , ytn
n ).
(1)
The wffs of the language are those of the smallest set containing all atomic wffs and
such that (A →B), (∼A), and (∀xt)C are in K wherever A, B, and C are wffs in K
and xt is a variable. The axiom schemata for the type theory of attributes are then as
9The axiom schemata (S19), (S20), and (S21) are adapted from [1].

384
G. Landini
follows.
A. →.B →A
A1
A. →.B →C :→: A →B. →.A →C
A2
∼B →∼A. →.A →B
A3
(∀xt)(A →B). →.A →(∀xt)B,
where xt is not free in A.
A4
(∀xt)A →A[yt|xt],
where yt is free for xt in A.
A5
(∃ϕ(t1,...,tn)(∀xt1, . . . , xtn)(ϕ(t1,...,tn)(xt1, . . . , xtn). ↔.A),
where ϕ(t1,...,tn) does not occur free in A.
A6
Modus Ponens:
From A and A →B, infer B.
Universal Generalization:
From A infer (∀ut)A, where ut is in A.
Replacement of Deﬁned Signs:
Deﬁniens and deﬁniendum may replace one another.
Deﬁnitions then include:
(∃xt)A def
= ¬(∀xt)¬A
xt = yt def
= (∀ϕ(t))(ϕ(t)(xt). ↔. ϕ(t)(yt))
A ∧B def
= ¬(A →¬B)
A ∨B def
= ¬A →B.
This completes the system.
Now to understand how the substitutional theory supplants a type-stratiﬁed theory
of attributes, let us simply focus on the matter of comprehension principles. From
(S17) and (S16) the following theorem schema is readily forthcoming:
(∃p, a)(z)(a in p. & .p/a; z!{A}),
where p and a are not free in the wff A.
(CPsub)1
From this, we get the following:
(∃p, a)(z)(p/a; z. ≡.{A}),
where p and a are not free in the wff A.
(CP)1

Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’
385
The expression “p/a; z” is but a notational convenience. It is a deﬁnite description
of an entity q just like p except for containing z wherever p contains a. Russell puts
([19]: 4):
p/a; z def
= (ιq)(p/a; z!q).
Russell calls α/β of a deﬁnite description α/β;δ its “matrix,” and he speaks of the
term α (and the proposition it names) as the “prototype” of the matrix. These notions,
however, are apt to mislead. Russell speaks of the matrix as an “incomplete sym-
bol” which has no meaning in isolation. But the incomplete symbol to focus upon is
(ιq)(p/a; z!q), and this is simply a deﬁnite description. The theory of deﬁnite descrip-
tions is straightforwardly applied to these new deﬁnite descriptions of propositions.
Where B(v) is a formula with v free, we have:
[(ιq)(p/a; z!q)][B((ιq)(p/a; z!q)|v)] def
= (∃q)(p/a; z!r. ≡r .r = q : & : B(q|v)).
All the same scope distinctions of deﬁnite descriptions, including the conventions
on omission of scope marker when narrowest possible scope are intended, apply. It
should be recalled that deﬁnite descriptions are not genuine terms of Russell’s formal
language. Accordingly, one cannot apply deﬁnitions which are framed in terms of
genuine singular terms to deﬁnite descriptions. For example, in deﬁning “&” Russell
has:
α & β def
= ∼(α ⊃∼β)
This cannot be applied to:
p/a; b & s,
because α and β are expressions for genuine singular terms of the language. One must
ﬁrst eliminate the deﬁnite description, to yield:
(∃q)(p/a; z!r. ≡r .r = q : & : q & s).
Then since q and s are variables one may apply df(&) to q & s.
Russell goes on to deﬁne what he calls “simultaneous dual substitutions,” “simul-
taneous triple substitutions,” and so on. These are just carefully crafted successions
of single substitutions. The expression “s/t, w; r, c!q,” for instance, is for a dual sub-
stitution and says that q is exactly like s except containing r wherever s contains t and
containing c wherever s contains w. One must take care in the deﬁnition so that q is the
entity intended—since, for example, the substitution of r for t may remove w from s.
Russell’s deﬁnitions are complicated and we shall avoid discussion of them here, for
there is a simpler approach. There is no need to deﬁne “simultaneous substitutions.”
We can simply put:
p/a, b; x, y!q def
= (∃e, h, t)(p/a; e!h : & : h/b; y!t. & .t/e; x!q).
df(dual)

386
G. Landini
For any formula A(u, v), we can employ (S16) to ﬁnd appropriate entities p, a, and
b, so that
(x, y)(p/a, b; x, y!{A(x|u, y|v)}).
Accordingly, we arrive at the following theorem schema for dual substitutions:
(∃p, a, b)(x, y)(p/a, b; x, y. ≡.{A}),
(CP)2
where p and a and b are not free in the wff A. Here the expression p/a, b; x, y is a
convenient way of writing the deﬁnite description, (ιq)(p/a, b; x, y!q). In a similar
way, we can go on to triple substitutions and the theorem schema:
(∃j, k, u, v)(q, p, a)(j/k, u, v; q, p, a. ≡.{A}),
(CP)3
where j and k and u and v, are not free in the wff A. The process continues for any
ﬁnite number of substitutions.
The comprehension theorem schemata of substitution recover instances of the
comprehension axiom schema (A6) of simple second-order type theory. Consider the
following pairs:
(∃ϕ(o))(∀xo)(ϕ(o)(xo). ↔.xo = xo)
#1
(∃p, a)(x)(p/a; x. ≡.x = x)
#1s
(∃ϕ((o)))(∀ψ(o))(ϕ((o))(ψ(o)). ↔.(∀xo)¬ψ(o)(xo))
#2
(∃q, p, a)(r, c)(q/p, a; r, c. ≡.(x) ∼(p/a; x))
#2s
(∃ϕ(o,o))(∀xo)(∀yo)(ϕ(o,o)(xo, yo). ↔.xo = yo)
#3
(∃q, p, a)(r, c)(q/p, a; r, c. ≡.r = c)
#3s
The ﬁrst of the pairs are instances of the comprehension axiom schema (A6); the
second are their translations into the language of the substitutional theory. The notion
of type has been built into the logical grammar of substitution. It will be noted that
#2s and #3s both employ dual substitutions, yet #2s proxies a type ((o)) attribute (an
attribute of attributes of individuals) and #3s proxies a type (o,o) relation between
individuals. This shows that the notion of type does not correspond simply to the
number of substitutions employed in the substitutional theory. The structure is central
as well. Nonetheless, it is clear that monadic predications are captured in the substitu-
tional theory by using expressions such as “p/a; x!t” and “q/p, a; r, c!t” and so on.
Accordingly, the expression “ϕ(ϕ)” cannot be proxied. It would require a sequence
such as “p/a; p/a!t” and this, as well as its negation, is ungrammatical.
The substitutional theory is entirely type-free. It countenances no types of entities,
and there is only one style of variables—individual variables. (Recall that every lower-
case letter of the English alphabet is used as an individual variable for convenience.
There are no special “propositional” variables in the theory.) The type regimented
grammar of simple type theory is built into the substitutional language’s replacement
of the use of predicate variables. At the same time, it should be clear enough from the

Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’
387
above that any instance of the comprehension schema A6 in the primitive notation of
second-order type theory is translatable into the language of substitution. Indeed, any
formula in primitive notation of simple type theory can be translated into the language
of substitution. Types become part of logical grammar.
5. Classes in Substitution
Class symbols are incomplete symbols in the substitutional theory and their use is
much as we ﬁnd in Principia Mathematica. The class symbol ˆyo(Ayo) is supplanted
by use of
ι(p/a)[p/a; y ≡y Ay].
For example, to reconstruct the theorem,
(∀xo)(xo ∈ˆyo(yo = xo)).
Russell puts:
(x)(x ∈ι(p/a)[p/a . ≡y . y = x]).
The use of such class symbols in substitution is supported by deﬁnitions governing
each context of their use. For instance, there are the following:
z ∈ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x Ax] def
= (∃p, a)(p/a; x ≡x Ax. & .z ∈p/a)
x ∈p/a def
= (∃q)(p/a; x!q. & .q).
ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x Ax] = ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x Bx]def
=
(∃p, a)(p/a; x ≡x Ax. & .(∃l, m)(l/m; x ≡x Bx. & .p/a = l/m))
p/a = l/m def
= p = l. & .a = m
Similarly, in the next type, a class ˆy(o)(By(o)) of type ((o)) is supplanted by use of :
ι(s/t, w)[s/t, w. ≈r,c .B(r, c)].
To take a simple illustration, deﬁne as follows:
x def
= x ̸= x.
0(r, c) def
= (z) ∼(z ∈ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x r/c; x]).
The substitutional reconstruction of (o)ε0((o)), becomes:
ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x x] ∈ι(s/t, w)[s/t, w ≈r,c 0(r, c)].

388
G. Landini
This is supported by the following deﬁnitions:
ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x Ax] ∈ι(s/t, w)[s/t, w ≈r,c B(r, c)]def
=
(∃s, t, w)(s/t, w ≈r,c B(r, c). & .(∃p, a)(p/a; x ≡x Ax. & .p/a ∈s/t, w))
s/t, w ≈r,c B(r, c) def
= (∃l, m)(l/m; x ≡x r/c; x. & .l/m ∈s/t, w) ≡r,c
(∃l, m)(l/m; x ≡x r/c; x. & .B(l, m)).
ι(s/t, w)[s/t, w ≈r,c A(r, c)] = ι(s/t, w)[s/t, w ≈r,c B(r, c)] def
= (∃s, t, w)
(s/t, w ≈r,c A(r, c). & .(∃h, d, e)(h/d, e ≈r,c B(r, c). & .s/t, w = h/d, e))
s/t, w = h/d, e def
= s = h. & .t = d. & .w = e.
Type-stratiﬁed class abstraction
zo ∈ˆyo(Ayo) ↔Azo
is now supplanted by:
z ∈ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x Ax]. ≡.Az.
In the next type, class abstraction,
ˆyo(Ayo) ∈ˆy(o)(By(o)) ↔B( ˆyo(Ayo))
is supplanted by:
ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x Ax] ∈ι(s/t, w)[s/t, w ≈r,c B(r, c)]. ≡.
(∃p, a)(p/a; x ≡x Ax. & .B(p, a)).
Working through the deﬁnitions, it is clear that class abstraction schemata for each
type are forthcoming as theorem schemata from the existence theorems afforded by
(CP)1 and (CP)2. Similar constructions and deﬁnitions permit the generation of a
substitutional proxy for the type-stratiﬁed theory of relations-in-extension.
6. The po/ao Paradox and Russell’s ‘Insolubilia’
The 1905 substitutional theory is inconsistent. By April of 1906, Russell discovered
his po/ao paradox.10 Its existence as a new paradox and its unique signiﬁcance for the
historical development of Russell’s ramiﬁed type-theory were largely unknown until I
unearthed it from the archival manuscripts.11 The problematic axiom schema is (S17).
10The paradox is the central theme of a number of Russell’s worknotes for 1906. See ([22]: 7, 57, 71)
and [24].

Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’
389
Coupled with (S16) one arrives at the theorem schema (CPsub)1. The paradox12 is
derived from the following instance:
(∃t, w)(x)(t/w; x!{x = {p ⊃a}. & .p/a; x!r :⊃p,a,r: ∼r}).
By existential instantiation we arrive at:
(x)(t/w; x!{x = {p ⊃a}. & .p/a; x!r :⊃p,a,r: ∼r}).
Then by universal instantiation we have:
t/w; {t ⊃w}!{{t ⊃w} = {p ⊃q}. & .p/a; {t ⊃w}!r :⊃p,a,r: ∼r}.
It is provable in substitution that:
(p, a)(r, c)({p ⊃a} = {r ⊃c} :⊃: p = r. & .a = c).
We arrive at the following contradiction:
{t ⊃w} ={p ⊃a}. & .p/a; {t ⊃w}!r :⊃p,a,r: ∼r
. :≡: . ∼({t ⊃w} = {p ⊃a}. & .p/a; {t ⊃w}!r :⊃p,a,r: ∼r).
The ﬂaw in the substitutional system lies with schema (S17).
But what precisely is wrong with (S17)? Russell’s assessment in May of 1906 was
that the source of the contradiction lies in his assumption of general propositions. In his
article “On ‘Insolubilia’ and Their Solution by Symbolic Logic,” Russell abandoned
his ontological commitment to general propositions. Of course, the abandonment
of general propositions should not be confused with the abandonment of quantiﬁed
formulas.13 The employment of quantiﬁed wffs does not make any commitment to
general propositions (states of affairs). But the affect of abandoning general proposi-
tions is that it is no longer possible to nominalize a wff (x)Ax, to form a term of the
form {(x)Ax}. Only quantiﬁer-free formulas can be nominalized. This is signiﬁcant
because Russell’s sign “⊃” is a dyadic predicate constant that must be ﬂanked by
terms. In the new theory,
{(x)(x = x)}. ⊃. q ⊃{(x)(x = x)},
is not a proper instance of axiom schema (S1). Quantiﬁcation theory has to be mod-
iﬁed to accommodate the abandonment of general propositions. Russell therefore
reformulates quantiﬁcation theory by deﬁning subordinate occurrences of quantiﬁed
11Cocchiarella showed the way. He observed that Russell had blundered in thinking that substitution
would be able to capture the Cantorian fact that there must be more classes of propositions than propositions.
See [2].
12Russell’s original formulation proceeded as follows. Abbreviate putting:
po
def
= {ao = {p/a; b!q}. & .p/a; ao!r :⊃p,a,r: ∼r}.
Then observe that:
po/ao; {po/ao; b!q}!{{po/ao; b!q} = {p/a; b!q}. & .p/a; {po/ao; b!q}!r :⊃p,a,r: ∼r}
A contradiction follows since the following is a theorem,
(p, a)(r, c)(b, q)({p/a; b!q} = {r/c; b!q} :⊃: p = r. & .a = c).
13Surprisingly, some commentators are guilty of just this confusion. See [15].

390
G. Landini
formulas in terms of an equivalent formula in prenex normal form.14 The full revision
of quantiﬁcation theory is not set out in “On ‘Insolubilia’,” but it does not impose
insurmountable problems. Indeed, a system very like it appeared in ∗9 of the 1910
Principia—though it plays a quite different role in that work.
The basic system Russell had in mind for “On ‘Insolubilia’” is then the following.
The primitive signs for the substitutional language takes as primitive signs: (, ), {, }, /,
!, ⊃, f, and ∃. The individual variables of the substitutional language are x, followed
by one or more occurrences of “′”. Informally we shall use any lower-case letter of
the English alphabet. The terms are given inductively as follows. (1) All individual
variables are terms; (2) If A is a quantiﬁer-free wff, then {A} is a term; (4) There are
no other terms. The atomic wffs are: f, (x ⊃y), and (x/y; z!u), where x, y, z, u are
variables. The wffs are those of the smallest set K containing all atomic wff and such
that (α ⊃β), (α/β; µ!δ), and (x)C and (∃x)C are in K just when α, β, δ, µ, are any
terms, and C is any wff in prenex-normal form in K in which the individual variable
x occurs free. The axiom schemata for the calculus are as follows:
α. ⊃.β ⊃α
S1
α. ⊃.β ⊃δ :⊃: β. ⊃.α ⊃δ
S2
∼∼α ⊃α
S3
α = β. ⊃.A[α|v, α] ⊃A[β|v, α], where α, β are free for v in A.
S4
A[α|u] ⊃(∃u)Au, where α is free for u in A.
S5
A[α|u] ∨A[β|u] ⊃(∃u)Au, where α, β are free for u in A.
S6
α in {Aα}
S7
α in {Aβ1, . . . , βn} :⊃: α = {Aβ1, . . . , βn}.∨. α in β1.∨., . . . , .∨. α in
S8
βn, where A is any wff all of whose distinct free terms are β1,…, βn.
(x, y)(x in y .&. y in x :⊃: x = y)
S9
(x, y, z)(x in y .&. y in z :⊃: x in z)
S10
(p, a)(q)(x, y)(p/a; x!q .&. p/a; y!q .&. a in p :⊃: x = y)
S11
(p, a)(z)(q)(p/a; z!q .&. a in p .&. a ̸= p :⊃: z in q .&. z ̸= q)
S12
(x, y)(x/x; y!y)
S13
(x, y)(x/y; y!x)
S14
(p, a)(x)(∃q)(p/a; x!r. ≡r .q = r)
S15
(p)(∃q)(q ex p)
S16
14In Principia Mathematica’s *9, we get a glimpse of how the calculus would be formulated. Principia,
however, regards its logical particles statement connectives because it explicitly abandons the ontology of
propositions.

Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’
391
(∃u)(α out {Au|v}). ⊃.(u)({Aα|v}/α; u!{Au|v}),
S17
where α and u are free for v in A.
(∃u1, . . . , un)(α out {Au1|v1, . . . , un|vn}) : & : α ̸=
S18
{Au1|v1, . . . , un|vn}. & .α ̸= β1 . & ., . . . , . & . α ̸= βn. :⊃: .
(x)(∃u1, . . . , un)({Aσ1|v1, . . . , σn|vn}/α; x!{Au1|v1, . . . , un|vn}
: & : σ1|α; x!u1 . & ., . . . , . & . σn|α; x!un),
where each ui and σi, 1 ≤i ≤N, are free for their respective vi
in A, and β1, . . . , βn are all the terms occurring free in A.
The inference rules of the system are as follows:
Modus Ponens1:
From A and {A} ⊃{B}, infer B.
Modus Ponens2:
From A and A ⊃B, infer B.
Universal Generalization:
From A infer (u)A,
where u is an individual variable free in A.
Switch
From B[(u)(∃v)A], infer B[(∃v)(u)A],
where all free occurrences of the variable u in A are on one side of
a logical particle and all free occurrences of the variable v
in A are on the other.
Replacement of Deﬁned Signs:
Deﬁniens and deﬁniendum may replace one another in any context.
Where α and β are any quantiﬁer-free terms of the language, and A and B are any
formulas of the language, the following are deﬁnitions:
x = y def
= x/x; y!x
df(=)
∼α def
= α ⊃f
df(∼)1
∼(u)A def
= (∃u) ∼A
dfs(∼)2
∼(∃u)A def
= (u) ∼A
dfs(∼)3
α ∨β def
= ∼α ⊃β
df(∨)1

392
G. Landini
A ∨B def
= ∼A ⊃B
df(∨)2
α & β def
= ∼(α ⊃∼β)
df(&)1
A & B def
= ∼(A ⊃∼B)
df(&)2
α ≡β def
= (α ⊃β) &(β ⊃α)
df(≡)1
A ≡B def
= (A ⊃B) &(B ⊃A)
df(≡)2
Assuming that u and v are distinct and that u has no free occurrence in α or B and
v has no free occurrence in A, the system has:
(∃u)Au ⊃α def
= (u)(Au ⊃α)
dfs(P)1
α ⊃(u)Au def
= (u)(α ⊃Au)
dfs(P)2
(u)Au ⊃α def
= (∃u)(Au ⊃α)
dfs(P)3
α ⊃(∃u)Au def
= (∃u)(α ⊃Au)
dfs(P)4
(∃u)Au ⊃(∃v)Bu def
= (u)(∃v)(Au ⊃Bv)
dfs(X)1
(u)Au ⊃(v)Bv def
= (v)(∃u)(Au ⊃Bv)
dfs(X)2
(∃u)Au ⊃(v)Av def
= (u)(v)(Au ⊃Bv)
dfs(X)3
(u)Au ⊃(∃v)Bv def
= (∃u)(∃v)(Au ⊃Bv)
(dfs(X)4)
This system is complete with respect to quantiﬁcation theory, see [12].
There was a major hurdle, however. Without general propositions, Russell cannot
generate the existence theorems in substitution that are needed to generate arithmetic.
Axiom schema (S17) is now such that its formulas A must be quantiﬁer-free. Consider
the following comprehension theorem schemas derived from (S17):
(∃p, a)(x)(p/a; x. ≡.{A}),
(CP)1
where p and a are not free in A.
(∃p, a, b)(x, y)(p/a, b; x, y. ≡.{A}),
(CP)2
where p, a and b are not free in A. These will be well-formed only if the formula A
in them is quantiﬁer-free. In the system of “On ‘Insolubilia’” there is no term {A}
unless the formula A is quantiﬁer-free. This is a severe limitation. For example, it
will no longer be possible to generate the existence theorems needed for the theorem
(o) ∈0((o)). One would need,
(∃s, t, w)(s/t, w ≈r,c {0 (r, c)})

Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’
393
and this is no longer follows from (CP)2. Recall that,
0 (r, c) def
= (z) ∼(z ∈ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x r/c; x]).
In the substitutional theory of “On ‘Insolubilia’” there is no term {0(r, c)} because it
is not possible in the revised theory to nominalize a general formula.
To mitigate the affect of the abandonment of general propositions, Russell offered
what amounts to auxiliary axioms for comprehension. For example, he has:
(∃p, a)(x)(∃q)(p/a; x!q. & .q ≡A),
1906(Aux)1
where A is any wff (quantiﬁer-free or otherwise) in which p, a are not free.
(∃s, t, w)(r, c)(∃q)(/t,w;r,c!q. & .q ≡A),
1906(Aux)2
where A is any wff (quantiﬁer-free or otherwise) in which s, t, w are not free. (It
is in virtue of Russell’s contextual deﬁnitions of quantiﬁed-formulas ﬂanking logical
particles that the formula A in these comprehension axiom schemata can contain
quantiﬁers.) By means of these new auxiliary comprehension principles, arithmetic
can be recovered in the 1906 substitutional theory. It must be understood that Russell’s
“mitigating” comprehension principles are not “reducibility” principles of a system
espousing a hierarchy of orders of propositions. In “On ‘Insolubilia’” there are no
orders of propositions at all.15 So the revised theory preserves Russell’s doctrine that
any proper calculus for the science of logic must have only one style of variables—
viz., individual variables. Unfortunately, however, Russell overlooked the fact that
the “mitigating” comprehension principles will resurrect the po/ao paradox! The
following is an instance of 1906 (Aux)1:
(∃t, w)(x)(∃s)(t/w; x!s. & . (s. :≡: . x = {p ⊃a}. & .p/a; x!r :⊃p,a,r: ∼r)).
The paradox goes through. Russell had to admit that his new mitigating axioms
were too strong. Without them, however, the system of “On ‘Insolubilia’” with its
abandonment of general propositions fails to be strong enough to recover arithmetic.
7. A New Approach to ‘Insolubilia’
The abandonment of general propositions in “On ‘Insolubilia’” had not yielded a
solution of the po/ao paradox which could recover arithmetic. In 1907 Russell en-
tertained the possibility of ramifying the substitutional theory by introducing order
indexed variables in an effort to avoid the po/ao paradox (and its variants). Russell
began to investigate what formal system would result if the substitutional theory were
ﬁtted with order indexed variables. General propositions would be assumed again,
15Cocchiarella in [2] makes this point. Hylton attributes orders of propositions to the system Russell set
out in “On ‘Insolubilia’.” See [7].

394
G. Landini
and propositions would be split into orders on the basis of the kind of generality they
“involve” or “presuppose”. Aspects of this idea surfaced in Russell’s paper “Math-
ematical Logic as Based on the Theory of Types.” With substitution retroﬁtted with
order indexed variables, axioms of propositional reducibility can be added without
fear of reviving the po/ao paradox.
We saw that the pristine substitutional theory begun in 1905, proxies a simple type
theory of attributes. When the substitutional theory is ﬁtted with order indices, it
will reconstruct a ramiﬁed type-theory of attributes. Russell acknowledges that the
language of predicate variables ﬁtted with order/type indices is convenient because it
supports the introduction of ordinary class symbols. But the underlying foundation of
ramiﬁed types in “Mathematical Logic” is the substitutional theory. “Mathematical
Logic” took a long time at the press, and when it ﬁnally appeared in 1908, Russell
thoughts had changed. In a letter to Hawtrey of 1907, we ﬁnd Russell explaining that
the po/ao paradox had “pilled” the substitutional theory and that he was never satisﬁed
with the patches he devised.16 By 1908, the era of substitution was over. Its successor
was the ramiﬁed type-theory of Principia with it reliance on reducibility and inﬁnity
axioms.
I believe that the approach in “On ‘Insolubilia’” was on the right track. Russell
needs to drop his mitigating axioms and ﬁnd new auxiliary axiom schemata.17 The
way to ﬁnd them is to observe that propositions, unlike the formulas of the language of
substitution, can have inﬁnitely many constituents. Some propositions contain ﬁnitely
many constituents. As we shall see, it is provable that there are inﬁnitely many of them.
Indeed, it seems natural to imagine that there are exactly ℵ0 many such propositions.
Since propositions are ﬁnely individuated there will be 2ℵ0 many propositions con-
taining exactly ℵ0 constituents (each of which has ﬁnitely many constituents).18 The
number of propositions that have exactly 2ℵ0 constituents is 2 to the 2ℵ0 and so on.
Let us introduce into the language of substitution primitive predicate expressions of
the form Cn(x). In the intended interpretation, C0(x) says that x has ﬁnitely many
consituents, C1(x) says that the entity x contains exactly ℵ0 many constituents, C2(x)
says the entity x contains exactly 2ℵ0 constituents, and so on. Deﬁne as follows:
(xn)Axn
def
= (x)(Cn(x) ⊃Ax)
(∃xn)Axn
def
= (∃x)(Cn(x) & Ax).
We’ll need to add the following axiom schema:
Cn1(β1), &, . . . , & .Cnj (βj) :⊃: Cm({A}),
16Letter to Hawtrey, dated 22 January 1907.
17I made some preliminary suggestions in [11].
18It may be, however, that since propositional structure is well-ordered the number is ℵ1. My thanks to
David McCarty for a helpful discussion of this matter.

Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’
395
where β1, …, βj are all the terms free in A and m = max(n1, . . . , nj). The needed
mitigating axioms then include the following:
(∃p1, a1)(x0)(∃q)(p1/a1; x0!q. & .q ≡A),
2001(Aux)1
where A is any wff (quantiﬁer-free or otherwise) in which p, a are not free.
(∃s2, t2, w2)(r1, c1)(∃q)(2/t2, w2; r1, c1!q. & .q ≡A),
2001(Aux)2
where A is any wff (quantiﬁer-free or otherwise) in which s, t, w are not free.
It is easy to see that these axiom schemata should be viewed as truths of the logic
of propositions. Suppose there are only ℵ0 many individuals that have ﬁnitely many
constituents. No matter what formula A(ξ) is, there is a proposition p containing
exactly ℵ0 many constituents, viz.,
{a = x. ∨. a = x′. ∨. a = x′′. ∨. a = x′′′. ∨. a = x′′′′ . . .},
where the entity a contains exactly ℵ0 many constituents, and where x′, x′′, x′′′,
and so on, are all and only the entities with ﬁnitely many constituents that satisfy the
formula.19 But then we have C1(p) and C1(a) and (xo)(∃q)(p/a; x0!q. & .q ≡A(xo)).
Hence we have:
(∃p1, a1)(x0)(∃q)(p1/a1; x0!q. & .q ≡A)
and this is just 2001(Aux)1. The same point holds as we ascend types. Instances of
the axiom schemata 2001(Aux)1, 2001(Aux)2, etc., will all count as truths of the pure
logic of propositions. In this way, substitution can avoid the axiom (schemata) of
reducibility that undermines logicism in Principia Mathematica.
It might be objected that the Cn predicates which are adopted as part of the sys-
tem’s primitive constants take the notion of cardinal number as primitive. But observe
that the Cn predicates do not themselves generate the notion of the cardinal number
of a class. That notion is given its usual Frege/Russell construction. It is our semantic
interpretation of the Cn predicates that takes them refer to the cardinality of a proposi-
tion. There is no axiom of the system that assures that some propositions have greater
than ﬁnite cardinality. That result is a theorem of the system, derived from the po/ao
paradox itself. That is,
(x)(Cnx ⊃∼Cmx),
where m ̸= n is a theorem schema of the system. The proof is as follows. Suppose,
ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x C1x] SIM ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x C0x].
That is, suppose there were a function from the class of all entities x that are C1x onto
the class of all entities x that are C0x. The classes are then similar. In substitutional
19The language of the substitutional theory, of course, is ﬁnitary. But there are curious ontological
questions about inﬁnite propositions composed of inﬁnite iterations of a binary relation. Many thanks to
David Kaplan for helpful discussions at the conference about whether an inﬁnitary relation would be needed
as the universal which occurs predicatively in such a proposition.

396
G. Landini
notation this is:
(∃h, d, e)(1-1funct(ι(s/t, w)[s/t, w ≈(0,0) h/d, e]) &
ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x Dom(0,0)(hde)(x)] = ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x C1x] &
ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x Rng(0,0)(hde)(x)] = ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x C0x]).
(The substitutional deﬁnitions of domain, range, and functionality are as expected.)
After an existential instantiation, let us abbreviate as follows:
Gxo
def
= (∃m, n)(⟨p, m⟩∈ι(s/t, w)[s/t, w ≈(0,0) h/d, e] &
⟨a, n⟩∈ι(s/t, w)[s/t, w ≈(0,0) h/d, e] & x0 = {m ⊃n}).
Then we can formulate a version of the po/ao paradox as follows:
(∃t1, w1)(x0)(∃q)(t1/w1; x0!q. & .(q. :≡: . Gx0. & .p/a; x0!r ::⊃p,a,r: ∼r)).
Contradiction results. Accordingly, there can be no function from the class of all
entities x that are C1x to the class of all entities x that are Cox. We can go on to prove
the following:
ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x Cox] < ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x C1x].
(x)(C1x ⊃∼C0x).
By similar considerations, we know
ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x Cnx] < ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x Cn+mx].
(x)(Cnx ⊃∼Cn+mx).
For this reason it is natural for the Cn predicates to be semantically interpreted as
cardinality predicates. But the differences in cardinality are theorems, not axioms of
the system.
Our reformulation of Russell’s substitutional theory avoids the difﬁculties that
undermine Principia’s logicism. The system avoids Principia’s inﬁnity axiom. In the
system, we can capture a universal class of all entities whatsoever,
ι(p/a)[p/a; x ≡x Vx].
(I put: Vξ def
= ξ = ξ.). It is easy to prove that this class is Dedekind inﬁnite (i.e., it is
similar to one of its proper subsets). There is also the class of all entities with ﬁnitely
many constituents:
ι(p1/a1)[p1/a1; x0 ≡x0 Vx0].
This is also Dedekind inﬁnite. We can prove that any class that is Dedekind inﬁnite
is inﬁnite in Frege’s sense of not being a member of any natural number. Thus we
know that the class ι(p1/a1)[p1/a1; x0 ≡x0 Vx0] is inﬁnite in Frege’s sense. To be
sure, this leaves it open whether there are exactly ℵ0 many propositions with ﬁnitely

Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’
397
many constituents. There could be more! This won’t jeopardize our argument for
the auxiliary axiom schemata of the revised system of substitution. The auxiliary
axiom schemata will be valid in the domain of propositions no matter what inﬁnite
cardinality the set of entities with ﬁnitely many constituents is. Thus we have avoided
both the inﬁnity axiom and reducibility axiom (schemata) of Principia. These were
the two main hurdles. It would seem then, that in the modiﬁed substitutional system
just outlined, the ‘Insolubilia’ plaguing logicism—Russell’s paradoxes of classes, at-
tributes, and his po/ao paradox—are ﬁnally solved. Russell gave up on substitution
too quickly. The “hoary difﬁculties of the one and the many,” as Russell called them,
are indeed solved by the substitutional theory, just as Russell had hoped.
References
[1]
Church, Alonzo: 1984. Russell’s theory of the identity of propositions. Philosophia Nat-
uralis 21: 513–22.
[2]
Cocchiarella, Nino: 1980. The development of the theory of logical types and the notion
of a logical subject in Russell’s early philosophy. Synthese 45: 71–115.
[3]
de Rouilhan, Philippe: 1996. Russell et le cercle des paradoxes. Paris: Presses Universi-
taires de France.
[4]
Grattan-Guinness,Ivor:1974.TheRussellarchives:SomenewlightonRussell’slogicism.
Annals of Science 31: 387–406.
[5]
Grattan-Guinness, Ivor: 1977. Bertrand Russell’s manuscripts: An apprehensive brief.
History and Philosophy of Logic 6: 53–74.
[6]
Grattan-Guinness, Ivor: 1977. Dear Russell—Dear Jourdain. London: Duckworth.
[7]
Hylton, Peter: 1980. Russell’s substitutional theory. Synthese 45: 1–31.
[8]
Lackey, Douglas: 1973. Essays in Analysis by Bertrand Russell. New York: George
Braziller.
[9]
Landini, Gregory: 1989. New evidence concerning Russell’s substitutional theory of
classes. Russell 9: 26–42.
[10]
Landini, Gregory: 1998. Russell’s Hidden Substitutional Theory. NewYork: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
[11]
Landini, Gregory: 1998. Russell’s intensional logic of propositions: A resurrection of
logicism? In: F. Orilia and W. J. Rappaport (eds.), Thought, Language, and Ontology:
Essays in Honor of Hector Neri Castañeda, Amsterdam: Kluwer, 61–93.
[12]
Landini, Gregory: 2000. Quantiﬁcation theory in *9 of Principia Mathematica. History
and Philosophy of Logic 21: 57–78.
[13]
Peano, Guisseppe: 1906. Addition. Revista de Mathematica 8: 143–57.

398
G. Landini
[14]
Pelham, Judy and Urquhart Alasdair: 1994. Russellian propositions. In: D. Prawitz et al.
(eds.), Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science IX, Proceedings of the Uppsala
conference, 307–26.
[15]
Potter, Michael: 2000. Reason’s Nearest Kin. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[16]
Quine, Willard V.: 1967. Introduction to Russell’s Mathematical Logic as Based on the
Theory of Types. In: J. van Heijenoort (ed.), From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in
Mathematical Logic 1879–1931, Harvard: University Press, 150–152.
[17]
Russell, Bertrand: 1903. The Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge. References are to
the second edition London: W. W. Norton, 1967.
[18]
Russell, Bertrand: 1905. On denoting. Mind 14: 479–93.
[19]
Russell, Bertrand: 1905. On substitution. Unpublished manuscript dated 22 December
1905. Russell Archives, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada. In [30].
[20]
Russell, Bertrand: 1905. On some difﬁculties in the theory of transﬁnite numbers and
order types. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society 4: 29–53. The paper was
read to the Society on 14 December 1905. Pagination is to the paper as reprinted in [29]:
135–164.
[21]
Russell, Bertrand: 1905. On the substitutional theory of classes and relations. Received
by the London Mathematical Society on 24 April 1906, and read before the Society on
10 May 1906. In [29]: 165–89.
[22]
Russell, Bertrand: 1906. On substitution. Unpublished manuscript of April–May 1906
(Russell Archives). In [30].
[23]
Russell, Bertrand: 1906. Les paradoxes de la logique. Review de Métaphysique et de
Morale 14: 627–59. Pagination is to the English manuscript ‘Insolubilia’ and Their So-
lution by Symbolic Logic in [29]: 190–214.
[24]
Russell, Bertrand: 1906. The paradox of the liar. Unpublished manuscript of September
1906 (Russell Archives, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada). In [30].
[25]
Russell, Bertrand: 1908. Mathematical logic as based on the theory of types. American
Journal of Mathematics 30: 222–62.
[26]
Russell, Bertrand: 1924. Logical atomism. In: R. Marsh (ed.), Logic and Knowledge
Essays 1901–1950, London: Allen & Unwin, 1977. 321–343.
[27]
Russell, Bertrand. 1927. Philosophy. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
[28]
Russell, Bertrand: 1959. My Philosophical Development. NewYork: Simon and Schuster.
[29]
Russell, Bertrand: 1973. Essays in Analysis by Bertrand Russell. Edited by D. Lackey.
New York: Braziller.
[30]
Russell, Bertrand: forthcoming.The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, vol. 5. London:
Routledge.
[31]
Russell, Bertrand and Couturat, Louis: 2001. Bertrand Russell correspondence sur la
philosophie, la logique et la politique avec Louis Couturat (1997–1913). Edited byAnne-
Françoise Schmidt. Paris: Edition Kimé.

Logicism’s ‘Insolubilia’
399
[32] Whitehead,AlfredNorthandBertrandRussell:1910.PrincipiaMathematica.Cambridge,
1910.
Department of Philosophy
University of Iowa
Iowa City, IA 52242-1408
USA
E-mail: gregory-landini@uiowa.edu


Substitution and Types:
Russell’s Intermediate Theory
Philippe de Rouilhan
Abstract. Russell went through three “substitutional" theories on his way to the so-called
ramiﬁed theory of types. The ﬁrst was so strong as to be inconsistent; the second was consistent,
but too weak. The third is mentioned in passing in “Mathematical Logic as Based on the Theory
of Types", and abandoned in favor of the ramiﬁed theory of types for the sake of “practical
convenience". However, it is doubtless the most fascinating theory Russell ever came up with.
1. Introduction
We now know what went wrong in the article “On the Substitutional Theory of Classes
and Relations” that Russell read on May 10, 1906 before the London Mathematical
Society and why he decided not to publish it some time later. The theory presented in
it was contradictory ([2], [1], [5]: chap. V, [3]: chap. VIII), and Russell had ﬁnally
realized that ([3], ibid.). The elimination of functions and of classes and relations1
as entities and their contextual redeﬁnition as logical ﬁctions had indeed sheltered
the theory from the paradoxes to which Russell had long known these entities to give
rise, but the propositions were now producing a new paradox. Not a semantical or
epistemological paradox, but a purely logical paradox. As early as the summer of 1902,
Russell had himself discovered such a paradox involving the notion of proposition that
afﬂicted the “doctrine of types” that he had just developed to escape from the other
logical paradoxes. Curiously, however, he did not immediately realize some four years
later that the substitutional theory was to meet exactly the same fate ([7]: appendix B,
in particular §500; [8]: in ﬁne).
Once he knew what was going on, Russell had to solve the paradox of propo-
sitions. The ﬁrst idea that could have come to mind was to eliminate propositions
1In those days, Russell applied the classical intension/extension distinction to “classes” as well as to
“relations”. It is, therefore, both classes and relations in extension or in intension that are involved here.
But from 1908 on, it would no longer be a question of classes and relations in intension since Russell very
likely considered them to be doing double duty with the functions themselves. To avoid long, awkward
sentences, I shall speak of “classes and relations” without being any more explicit, since taking the dates
into consideration sufﬁces to remove the ambiguity.

402
Ph. de Rouilhan
altogether. But the vicious circle principle which Poincaré had just set forth didn’t
require such a drastic move. It only required that one give up postulating propositions
containing apparent variables2, viz. general propositions. Russell therefore took pains
to reconstruct logic in the form of a new substitutional theory: one without classes,
relations, functions, and now, without general propositions. This logic had to be weak
enough to be consistent, but strong enough for one to be able to reconstruct classical
mathematics within it. And he did not manage to construct it.3
This second substitutional theory had to be a logic that was both predicative (in
keeping with the vicious circle principle) and universal (only logically recognizing a
single kind of being and therefore only mobilizing a single sort of variable). Through
the iterative character of their logical reconstruction, the functions, and likewise the
classes and relations, of the ﬁrst substitutional theory formed a hierarchy. According
to the second theory, it was to be the same for general propositions, which had to form a
certain hierarchy of logical ﬁctions constructed on the basis of a real world exclusively
composed of individuals (particulars or universals) and of elementary propositions.
So Russell failed to achieve his goals.
He would soon give up. He would give up, at least temporarily, on universality.
Unable to construct the hierarchy of general propositions, he would give it to himself.
More speciﬁcally, he would grant himself a certain hierarchy of individuals and propo-
sitions, elementary or general, satisfying the vicious circle principle. The primitive
logical notion of substitution would be retained, enabling one, in principle, to construct
the ﬁctional hierarchy of functions, then that of classes and relations, on the basis of
that real hierarchy. Russell would mention this third theory, both substitutional and
typed, in the 1908 article, “Mathematical Logic as Based on the Theory of Types”,
but would abandon it in turn, ﬁnding it “technically inconvenient”([11], [18]: 77), in
favor of his famous “theory of types” known today as the “ramiﬁed theory of types”.
The primitive notion of substitution would disappear, and the hierarchy of functions
would be henceforth treated as a given; the only thing left would be to construct that
of classes and relations.
So in between the second substitutional theory and the ramiﬁed theory of types
came the “intermediate theory”, as I call it. Russell himself passed over so quickly that
it has scarcely held the attention of scholars. Yet, it is doubtless the most fascinating
theory Russell ever came up with.4
2The notion of variable is to be understood here in a Russellian, extra-linguistic, sense.
3[5] and [3] (the latter taking into account unpublished manuscripts of the time) give divergent expla-
nations of this point. This is not the place to enter into a debate about this.
4The following sections overlap quite a bit with my [5]: chap. VI, section A.

Russell’s Intermediate Theory
403
2. Predicativity without Universality: Types of Entities
The vicious circle principle and its technical version, which appeared in 1906 [9],
reappeared without signiﬁcant change in 1908. Admittedly one can detect a few
variations in the heuristic versions,5 but the technical version is practically the same
(‘involves’ was replaced by ‘contains’):
(VCP1) Whatever contains an apparent variable must not be a possible
value of that variable. ([11]: 237, [18]: 75)
Signiﬁcant change deﬁnitely took place between 1906 and 1908. It lies in the
abandonment of universalism, temporary, to be sure, but abandonment all the same.
It is ﬁtting to take into account this abandonment when evaluating the consequences
of VCP for the construction of logic. Like Russell, let us call “type” the range of
signiﬁcance of some propositional function of one argument, in other words, the
domain of possible values of a variable.6 In view of the requirement of universality,
the VCP had done away with the objects containing apparent variables; now that this
requirement was lifted, it merely relegated them to another type. Henceforth there
could well be entities containing apparent variables, but they would simply be of a
different type than the entities that these variables could take as values, which Russell
claims as an immediate consequence of VCP1:
(VCP2) [W]hatever contains an apparent variable must be of a different
type from the possible values of that variable. ([11]: 237, [18]: 75)
The universe, therefore (if one may still speak of universe), would in some way be
divided into types, and the variables themselves would be divided up according to the
types of their values. But this division would not be just any division, it would respect
a certain number of constraints. I shall indicate two of them. The ﬁrst hangs on the
very idea of the vicious circle principle. This principle says that an entity b which
contains an apparent variable must be of a different type from any possible value a
of that variable, but the idea is that the same must hold for any entity c containing an
apparent variable able to take b as a value, i.e., c must be of a different type from a,
5“[A]ll our contradictions have in common the assumption of a totality such that, if it were legitimate, it
would at once be enlarged by new members deﬁned in terms of itself. This leads us to the rule: ‘Whatever
involves all of a collection must not be one of the collection’; or, conversely: ‘If, provided a certain
collection had a total, it would have members only deﬁnable in terms of that total, then the said collection
has no total’ ” ([11]: 225, [18]: 63); and a footnote then states in reference to this last word: “When I say
that a collection has no total, I mean that statements about all its members are nonsense”. A few pages
later: “These fallacies, as we saw, are to be avoided by what may be called the ‘vicious circle principle’;
i.e., ‘no totality can contain members deﬁned in terms of itself’. This principle, in our technical language,
becomes: ‘Whatever contains an apparent variable must not be a possible value of that variable’ ” ([11]:
237, [18]: 75).
6“A type is deﬁned as the range of signiﬁcance of a propositional function, i.e., as the collection of
arguments for which the said functions has values. Whenever an apparent variable occurs in a proposition,
the range of values of the apparent variable is a type, the type being ﬁxed by the function of which ‘all
values’ are concerned” ([11]: 237, [18]: 75).

404
Ph. de Rouilhan
and the same must also go for any entity d that contains an apparent variable able to
take c as a value, i.e., d must be of a different type than a, and so on ad inﬁnitum. The
differences of types would be hierarchical differences. When he stated VCP2, Russell
immediately added: “we will say that it is of a higher type”. This is not merely a
matter of terminology. The second constraint is different in origin, perhaps a concern
for simplicity (Russell did not give any explanation), and the VCP2 formulation of
the vicious circle principle is connected with it. The vicious circle principle did not in
itself require that the types be pairwise disjoint. In fact, they would be. They would
form a partition (in the mathematical sense of the term) of the universe. Any entity
would belong to one, and only one, type. I shall refer to this constraint as the “principle
of disjunction (of types)”.7
3. On the Intended Interpretation of the Intermediate
Theory
In the intermediate theory an ontology of individuals and propositions (elementary or
general) arranged in accordance with a hierarchy of types, as stipulated by the vicious
circle principle and the principle of disjunction, is taken for granted and one has to
construct functions on this basis, then classes and relations.
Several hierarchies of individuals and propositions can a priori satisfy the vicious
circle principle and the principle of disjunction. One expects to see Russell adopt
the one in accordance with which he thinks the general propositions in question here
would have been arranged if he had succeeded in reconstructing them within the second
substitutionaltheory. Atthetime, in1906, Russellonlyexpresslyenvisionedasgeneral
propositions those for which the apparent variables were variables of entities. But,
one must see that if he had succeeded in logically reconstructing these propositions,
he would have been led to consider new general propositions in which variables taking
the preceding ones as values would have ﬁgured. And this process would have had to
go on indeﬁnitely. It is the hierarchy in accordance with which all these propositions
would have been arranged of their own accord that is at stake here.
However, this hierarchy, at least as Russell could have imagined constructing it,
and the one that he provided himself with in 1908 differ in at least two ways. In 1906,
there was an element of typological complexity that fell out in 1908. In 1906, Russell
thought that the general propositions that he expressly took into account would be of
different types depending on the number of their apparent variables, see ([9]: 643,
647) and ([19]: 207, 211). In 1908, it seems he fortunately no longer thought that,
but he didn’t comment on the change.8 Given this simpliﬁcation, one would expect
7[12]: 95, formulated a principle that amounts to the same thing and which corresponds to Tarski’s “ﬁrst
principle of the theory of semantical categories” ([20], [22]: 216).
8Curiously, this thought comes up again in Principia as a theoretical requirement with which it is
practically useless to comply ([12]: 133, 162).

Russell’s Intermediate Theory
405
Russell to reason in the following fashion: The entities that had been countenanced
in the second substitutional theory, namely individuals and elementary propositions,
would be of the ﬁrst type, let us say of type 1; the propositions containing variables of
type 1, but of no higher type, would be of type 2; the propositions containing variables
of type 2, but of no higher type, would be of type 3; etc.
However, that is not exactly what Russell did. The hierarchy that he assumed
differed from the preceding one (with all that that implies) on one point: the type
of elementary propositions. Above, the elementary propositions would be of the
same type as the individuals; they would be of type 1. For Russell, only individuals
were of type 1. As for elementary propositions, they were of the same type as the
general propositions containing variables of type 1, but of no higher type; they were of
type 2. This time it was an element of ontological complexity affecting the structure
of the elementary propositions that fell out. The description of higher types could
literally remain the same. Let us add that Russell drew in a notion that would acquire
full signiﬁcance only within the ramiﬁed theory of types, but which here did double
duty with the notion of type, viz. the notion of order. In the Russellian hierarchy,
propositions are attributed a type and an order: propositions of type 2 are of order 1,
those of type 3 of order 2, etc.9 It is natural to extend the notion of order to individuals
by attributing them order 0.
Russell did not advance an argument of ontological simplicity in defense of his
decision concerning the type of elementary propositions, but did give an argument to
the effect that if one wants to avoid a vicious circle, no proposition must be of the
same type as an individual.10 However, he went too far; as he had in fact already
recognized in 1906, it was enough that no general proposition was. But being a
matter of elementary propositions, in any case, something happened in 1907, even
before Russell became involved in the theory of types, which deserves to be mentioned.
Grosso modo, in that year the possibility occurred to Russell of accommodating certain
arguments militating against the notion of proposition in general, and of reducing
elementary propositions themselves to logical ﬁctions. It is therefore not surprising
that in the intermediate theory they were no longer of the same type as individuals.
But let us be more speciﬁc, because that is not, as I see it, the whole story.
9“[I]ndividuals (…) form the ﬁrst or lowest type. (…) Elementary propositions together with ones
containing only [variables of] individuals as apparent variables will be called ﬁrst-order propositions.
These form the second logical type. (…) We can (…) form new propositions in which [variables of] ﬁrst-
order propositions occur as apparent variables. These we will call second-order propositions; these form
the third logical type. (…) The n+1th logical type will consist of propositions of order n, which will be
such as contain [variables of] propositions of order n−1, but of no higher order, as apparent variables. The
types so obtained are mutually exclusive” ([11]: 237–238, [18]: 76–77 additions in square brackets are
mine).
10“By applying the process of generalization to individuals occurring in elementary propositions, we
obtain new propositions. The legitimacy of this process requires only that no individuals should be propo-
sitions. (…) Hence in applying the process of generalization to individuals we run no risk of incurring
reﬂexive fallacies”. ([11]: 237–238, [18]: 76)

406
Ph. de Rouilhan
4. Looking back: The Theory of Judgment of 1907 and the
Elimination of Elementary Propositions
Up until 1907, Russell had countenanced propositions in his ontology albeit reluc-
tantly. They provided a way of: 1) accounting for the meaningfulness of sentences
independently of their truth value; 2) assigning a bearer for these truth values; and
3) assigning an object11 to propositional attitudes12, to belief, for example, inde-
pendently of their rightness or wrongness. But there was something shocking about
granting false propositions the same ontological status as true propositions, as facts.
In his 1907 article, “On the Nature of Truth” [10], Russell reexamined the notion of
proposition from the point of view of the theory of belief. Elementary propositions
were called into question just as much as general propositions.
Two theories were envisioned. According to the ﬁrst, when belief is correct, or true,
it is so because there is a fact corresponding to it as its object; when it is mistaken, or
false, it is because there is nothing of the kind. According to the second theory, belief
always has an object, and this object is a proposition: a true proposition, or fact, if the
belief is correct; a false proposition, or ﬁction (in the ordinary sense, not in the logical
sense), if the belief is mistaken. The ﬁrst theory has simplicity and common sense
on its side, and it displays a sort of ontological parsimony which speaks in its favor.
But going against it is the fact that it provides no answer to the following question:
“What do we believe when our belief is mistaken?” ([10]: 45). If our belief is about
nothing, it is in no way a belief. That is the objection that leads from the ﬁrst theory
to the second.
Russell sought to amend the ﬁrst theory in order to escape the second. He did it
by exposing one of its presuppositions. This presupposition is that belief is a “single
state of mind”, meaning a “single complex idea”, and therefore a “single thing”. If
this were the case, then this mental state, this complex idea, should always have a
single object, a certain entity (speciﬁcally a proposition), and one would be led, as
the second theory in fact does, to grant the same ontological status to “non-facts” (the
expression is Russell’s) as to facts, to objective falsehoods as to objective truths, to
false propositions as to true propositions.
Russell denied that this was the case. He maintained that the belief that aRb, for
example, is not one (complex) idea, but (a complex of) several ideas: the idea of a,
the idea of b, the idea of R. Each of these ideas has its own object: a, b, R; but there
is no need to postulate, or hypostasize, in all cases something like the object aRb of
the corresponding belief. Whether this object exists (whether aRb is a fact—case of
correct belief) or not (case of mistaken belief); whether the belief, in this sense, is
“objective” or not, does not matter: the principle “no idea without object” still holds,
and belief without object (mistaken belief) remains in a full-ﬂedged belief.
Apart from the common sense argument that has it that in the world there are no
“non-facts”, objective falsehoods, or false propositions, Russell set forth an argument
11In this section, “object” will be taken in the narrow sense, according to which an object is an entity.
12As Russell would say in 1918, cf. [18]: 227.

Russell’s Intermediate Theory
407
in defense of his theory of belief that is worth discussing. In his eyes, in 1906, not only
the propositional paradox, but also epistemological versions of the Liar’s paradox, had
shown that not all propositions were entities. Similarly a paradox analogous to the
latter now showed that not all beliefs (mental states, i.e., complexes of ideas in which
they consist) were entities. It was a matter of a man who, only having mistaken beliefs
otherwise, believes that all his beliefs are mistaken, including this one. If this belief is
also mistaken, then indeed all his beliefs are mistaken, and he is right to believe that:
so the belief in question is correct after all. Conversely, if that belief is correct, then
not all his beliefs are mistaken, and so he is wrong to believe the contrary: hence the
belief in question is mistaken. In 1906, only general propositions had been dismissed,
in keeping precisely with what the vicious circle principle required. In the same way,
now, only general beliefs, as it were, qua entities had to be so. But the new theory
of belief was primarily designed to satisfy the requirement of ontological parsimony:
all false propositions had to disappear, therefore also all mistaken beliefs qua entities,
and hence, by parity, all beliefs qua entities.
In 1910, in the last chapter of the Philosophical Essays entitled “On the Nature
of Truth and Falsehood” [13], Russell would return to the theory of belief outlined in
1907 and make it more rigorous. He would no longer be interested in the ontological
status of beliefs, but rather in the existence of their objects. And he would not merely
state that there are no more false propositions, but no more propositions at all. For
if propositions as such are deﬁned as objects of belief, if mistaken belief is void of
object, and if correct belief must be analyzed in itself like mistaken belief, then beliefs
in themselves are void of object and there are not, properly speaking, any propositions.
That does not mean that there are no correct beliefs and thus no facts; the latter are
simply no longer the objects of the former: they are not propositions. The theory of
belief, then, that Russell ultimately espoused can be summed up as follows: All belief
is void of object, and there are no propositions; propositions are only logical ﬁctions;
a belief is not a relation of a subject to one object, but to several; the latter constitute
a unit, a fact, if the belief is correct, and they do not constitute anything at all if it
is mistaken. (Naturally, what Russell says about belief is presumed to apply to all
propositional attitudes, and go with a theory of the sentence meaning and of bearers
of truth values that also dispenses with propositions.)
Let us establish, as Russell did not do, the connection with the plan for a logic
in the state in which he had left it in 1906. The ontology had been reduced to ele-
mentary propositions and their ultimate constituents, individuals. In 1907, elementary
propositions themselves disappeared to leave room for elementary facts.13 From the
1906 perspective, the job of logical reconstruction had already seemed impossible.
A fortiori, it appeared so in 1907. There is deﬁnitely nothing surprising about the
1908 retreat back to a predicative, but non-universal logic. What might surprise us is
that elementary facts and their ultimate constituents, individuals, are not exactly the
entities of the lowest type in the intermediate theory. It is clear that they are not, since
13The new elementary facts must not be identiﬁed with the old ones, with the ex-propositions true
elementary.

408
Ph. de Rouilhan
only “individuals” are found in the lowest type, and “[w]e may deﬁne an individual
as something destitute of complexity” ([11]: 238, [18]: 76). That elementary propo-
sitions disappeared in 1907 is in accordance with their being found in the second type
of the intermediate theory; their replacement in 1907 by elementary facts could have
led Russell to put the latter in the ﬁrst type of that theory. The argument of ontological
simplicity may have operated. Perhaps Russell shrank from the idea of having an
entity (an elementary fact) ﬁgure in the ﬁrst type that in some way would have been
found again in the second (as a true elementary proposition). Be that as it may, that
would not have left any more of a trace in the intermediate theory than it would do in
the ramiﬁed theory of types if he had developed the ﬁrst as he would do the second.
5. Towards the Formalization of the Intermediate Theory:
The Language L(IT)
Below, I propose a formal language, L(IT), to which one is naturally led from the
language of the ﬁrst substitutional theory when, like Russell: 1) one seeks to satisfy the
vicious circle principle, no longer by giving up general propositions, but by arranging
them in accordance with a certain typology; 2) one chooses a typology satisfying the
principle of disjunction; 3) instead of putting elementary propositions in the same type
as individuals, one includes them in the same type as ﬁrst-order propositions. It is to
this very language L(IT) that one is led if to these considerations one adds those of the
preceding section. In my exposition of this language, I shall often employ the notion
of type when it is a question of indeterminate entities, individuals or propositions, and
the notion of order when it is more precisely a question of propositions.
First, some introductory remarks about L(IT) and its interpretation. L(IT) will
be a language with inﬁnitely many sorts of variables: variables of individuals, ‘x0
1’,
‘x0
2’, ‘x0
3’, …; variables of ﬁrst-order propositions, ‘x1
1’, ‘x1
2’, ‘x1
3’, …; variables of
second-order propositions, ‘x2
1’, ‘x2
2’, ‘x2
3’, …; etc. Alongside the variables there may
be an array of constants of individuals, ‘a0
1’, ‘a0
2’, ‘a0
3’, …; constants of ﬁrst-order
propositions, ‘a1
1’, ‘a1
2’, ‘a1
3’, …; constants of second-order propositions, ‘a2
1’, ‘a2
2’,
‘a2
3’, …; etc.
The well-formed symbols, or well-formed expressions, will be deﬁned recursively
at the same time as an order is assigned to them and the notion of real (apparent re-
spectively) occurrence of a variable in such a symbol is deﬁned. For any values (of
appropriate type) assigned to the variables for the real occurrences that they possess
there, these symbols will correspond to entities (of a certain type depending on the
symbol considered in each case) and for this reason will be called “entity symbols”,
or “complete symbols”. If these entities are propositions, they will be called “propo-
sition symbols”, or “formulas”. The formulas without real occurrence of variables,
corresponding to deﬁnite propositions, will be “sentences”.

Russell’s Intermediate Theory
409
Among the primitive symbols, we further have the logical symbols ‘¬’, ‘⇒’, and
‘∀’, corresponding—modulo the typed nature of the system—to usual negation, (ma-
terial) implication, and universal quantiﬁcation, respectively. As L(IT) is a language
that is both substitutional and typological, one will ﬁnd the symbolism characteristic
of substitutional theories enabling one to express, for entities p, q, a, b, the proposition
that q results from the replacement of a by b in p, in the form: p(b/a)!q. Beyond
their particular use in formulas of that form, parentheses will serve in a general way
for punctuation.
And now, here is L(IT).
1. Alphabet
1.1 The variables ‘xn
m’, when n ≥0 and m ≥1.
1.2 Possibly, constants ‘an
m’, when n ≥0 and m ≥1.
1.3 ‘¬’, ‘⇒’, ‘∀’, ‘/’, ‘!’, ‘(’, ‘)’.
2. Complete symbols, formulas, sentences
2.1 The variables and the constants having n as a superscript are complete
symbols of order n. The occurrence of a variable is real in the complete
symbol that it constitutes.
2.2 If c1 and c2 are complete symbols of orders n1 ≥1, n2 ≥1 respec-
tively, then ⌜(¬c1)⌝and ⌜(c1 ⇒c2)⌝are complete symbols of orders
n1, max(n1, n2) respectively. The occurrences of variables that were real
(apparent respectively) in c1 or c2 remain so within the new complete
symbols.
2.3 If c is a complete symbol of order n ≥1, and x a variable of order m ≥0
having a real occurrence in c, then ⌜∀xc⌝is a complete symbol of order
max(n, 1 + m). The occurrences of variables that were real (apparent
respectively) in c remain so in the new complete symbol, except for the
occurrences of x which were real, which are now apparent.
2.4 If c1, c2, c3, c4 are complete symbols of orders n1, n2, n3, n4, re-
spectively, then ⌜(c1(c2/c3)!c4)⌝is a complete symbol of order max(1,
max1≤i≤4ni).14 The occurrences of variables which were real (apparent
respectively) in one of the symbols ci remain so within the new complete
symbol.
2.5 The formulas are complete symbols of order ≥1.
2.6 The sentences are the formulas without real occurrences of variables.
The system IT would be obtained from language L(IT) by adding axioms and
rules of inference corresponding to its intended interpretation.
14If all the symbols ci are of order 0, the order is thus equal to that which elementary propositions must
have according to Russell, namely 1; if not, it is equal to max1≤i≤4ni.

410
Ph. de Rouilhan
6. The Intended Interpretation again
Russell kept almost completely silent about the language and, a fortiori, about the
system of the intermediate theory. He was content to describe the hierarchy of indi-
viduals and propositions corresponding to its intended interpretation, after which he
said a few words about the substitutional method in accordance with which the logical
reconstruction of a hierarchy of functions would be possible on this basis. Finally, he
abandoned the intermediate theory, pleading reasons of convenience, and moved on
to the ramiﬁed theory of types—all this in barely three pages ([11]: 236–239, [18]:
75–77). The description of the hierarchy of individuals and propositions takes up a
little bit more than a page.
1. I shall ﬁrst quote Russell’s text at length, furnishing it with some initial comments
in square brackets. Let us remember that, despite appearances, the notions at issue in
this text, in particular the notion of variable, are extra-linguistic notions.
Propositions which contain apparent variables [more precisely: univer-
sally quantiﬁed variables: vide infra] are generated from such as do not
contain these apparent variables by processes of which one is always the
process of generalization, i.e. the substitution of a variable for one of
the terms of a proposition [i.e. for one of its constituents in the subject
position: vide infra], and the assertion of the resulting function for all
possible values of the variable [the notion of function here serves to de-
scribe the hierarchy, but there will not be any function in this hierarchy].
Hence a proposition is called a generalized proposition when it contains
an apparent variable. A proposition containing no apparent variable we
will call an elementary proposition. (…) In an elementary proposition we
can distinguish one or more terms from one or more concepts; the terms
are whatever can be regarded as the subject of the proposition, while the
concepts are the predicates or relations asserted of these terms. The terms
of elementary propositions we will call individuals; these form the ﬁrst
or lowest type. [Although Russell does not say anything about it here, the
concepts just in question may in turn be considered subjects in other ele-
mentary propositions, as terms of these propositions: they are themselves
individuals.]
By applying the process of generalization to individuals occurring [in
subject position] in elementary propositions, we obtain new propositions.
(…) We may deﬁne an individual as something destitute of complexity;
(…) propositions are essentially complex. (…)
Elementary propositions together with such as contain only [variables
of] individuals as apparent variables we will call ﬁrst-order propositions.
These form the second logical type.
We have a new totality [after that of individuals], that of ﬁrst-order propo-
sitions. We can thus form new propositions in which [variables of] ﬁrst-

Russell’s Intermediate Theory
411
order propositions occur as apparent variables. These we will call second-
order propositions; these form the third logical type. (…)
The above process can be continued indeﬁnitely. The n+1th logical type
will consist of propositions of order n, which will be such as contain [vari-
ables of] propositions of order n−1, but of no higher order, as apparent
variables. The types so obtained are mutually exclusive. ([11]: 237–238,
[18]: 75–77)
2. Certain complete symbols of the language L(IT) do not seem to have any inter-
pretation within the Russellian hierarchy, viz. the complete symbols introduced by
rule 2.4. How is one to interpret them within this hierarchy? Indeed, the question
could just as well be asked for the symbols introduced by rule 2.2, and the response
would again be the same. Although Russell was not explicit on this point, we have
to understand that propositions do not reduce to those generated by the iterated ap-
plication of operations of predication and of generalization. (Here I conveniently
call “predication” the operation that consists of joining a concept, predicate or re-
lation, and an appropriate number of individuals given in a certain order to form a
proposition.) To these operations one must add the usual operations of negation and
(material) implication. But one also has to take into account a new operation, crucial
to the intermediate theory, viz. substitution. Here I mean precisely the possibility of
forming new propositions corresponding to the complete symbols introduced by rule
2.4. Russell was not as explicit as he should have been, and as I shall be in a moment,
about the roles of negation, implication, and substitution in describing his hierarchy,
but then is no hidden difﬁculty here.
Conversely, there is something in the Russellian hierarchy which seems not to be
reﬂected in the syntax of the language L(IT). It is the structure of the propositions
that result from the operation of predication alone: the so-called atomic propositions.
However, there is nothing new here to be worried about. That was already the case with
the ﬁrst two substitutional theories: in the same sense—if not to the same degree—as
they were, the intermediate theory is a theory of unanalyzed propositions.15
3.
One will note the “constructive” nature, in a certain sense, of the Russellian hi-
erarchy. Once the individuals are “given”, divided up into particulars and universals
(concepts), and the latter into predicates (qualities), two-place relations, three-place
relations, etc., the totality of the hierarchy is “constructed” step by step in a unique way.
The elementary propositions are propositions that one can “construct” out of individ-
uals by iterated application of the operations of predication, negation, implication and
substitution, and nothing else. The ﬁrst-order propositions are obtained by adding the
operation of generalization with the individual variables to the preceding operations,
and nothing more. The idea of a ﬁrst-order proposition that would be “given”, so to
speak, without being “constructed” out of individuals in the way indicated is ruled out.
Likewise, the second-order propositions are obtained from ﬁrst-order propositions by
15For a detailed analysis of this point with respect to the ﬁrst substitutional theory, see [5]: chap. V, §8.

412
Ph. de Rouilhan
employing a certain procedure optionally involving negation, implication and gener-
alization with variables of individuals, and necessarily involving generalization with
variables of ﬁrst-order propositions, and nothing more. And so on.
The kind of constructivism in question here must not be mistaken for other possible
readings of this notion. I shall therefore distinguish:
1˚ the logical constructivism, or constructivism1, that induced Russell, beginning
in 1905 and 1906, to replace dubious entities (paradigmatically classes) with
logical constructions (that is the idea of the no-classes theory), and which would
ﬁnd its radical expression, beginning in 1914, in the “supreme maxim of sci-
entiﬁc philosophizing”: “Wherever possible, logical constructions are to be
substituted for inferred entities” ([14]: 388, [16]: 115);
2˚ the “constructivism” at issue here, or constructivism2;
3˚ constructivism as a well-known doctrine of the ontological status of abstract
objects, or constructivism3; according to it these objects do not exist indepen-
dently of ourselves, but are only mental constructions. This brand is classically
contrasted with realism (“Platonism”), and always remained completely foreign
to Russell.
In a nutshell, then, we can say that the hierarchy of types was constructive1 in
1906, it became constructive2 in 1908, but it would never be constructive3.
There is no need to wonder why Russell limited himself to a constructive2 hierar-
chy. He did not have to “limit” himself; rather, the very idea of proposition implied
“limitation” right from the start. The idea of propositions that might not have their
place within the hierarchy in question did not occur to Russell any more than the
idea of natural numbers not ﬁnding their place in the intended (“standard”) model of
arithmetic had done to Frege, Dedekind, Peano or Russell himself.
4. I shall describe the Russellian hierarchy as I see it in more precise terms. Let us
consider, independently of any requirement of effectiveness, the following language,
L*(IT). Its deﬁnition broadly overlaps that of language L(IT) given in section 5. To
deﬁne L*(IT), one provides oneself with a multiplicity of constants ‘a0
i ’ (i ranging
over a certain multiplicity) in one-to-one correspondence with the individuals assumed
to be “given” at the base of the hierarchy in the Russellian description, and for each
of them a “degree”: 0 if it corresponds to an individual that is not a concept; 1 if it
corresponds to a predicate; n ≥2 if it corresponds to a n-ary relation. At that point,
the inductive deﬁnition of L*(IT) can begin. It will be enough to say that it literally
coincides with the deﬁnition of L(IT) except for the following two amendments:
1˚ replace 1.2 with 1.2*:
1.2∗The constants ‘a0
i ’ with their respective degrees n ≥0;
2˚ complete 2.1 in 2.1*:
2.1∗a) [repeat 2.1];
b) if a is a constant of degree n, and b1, …, bn, variables of order 0 or

Russell’s Intermediate Theory
413
constants (of any degree), then ⌜(ab1 …bn)⌝is a complete symbol of
order 1; the occurrences of variables there are real.
One can then obtain a relatively precise idea of the Russellian hierarchy by describ-
ing it as the ontological transfer of the hierarchy of constants and sentences of L*(IT),
except that one has to identify the propositions corresponding to the alphabetical vari-
ants of a single sentence of L*(IT) with one another. The absence of constants of order
≥1 in L*(IT) corresponds to the absence of any “given” entity that is not an individual
in the hierarchy described by Russell—in other words, to the constructive2 nature of
that hierarchy. It will be understood that the sentences introduced by clause b) of
rule 2.1* correspond to the propositions obtained from individuals by the operation of
predication alone in the Russellian hierarchy. Language L(IT) does not itself contain
any symbolism of this kind: the intermediate theory does not take the analysis that
far, it does not penetrate the mystery of the ultimate structure of propositions.
7. Programmatic Note for the Development of IT
Russell abandoned the intermediate theory for the ramiﬁed theory of types for reasons
of convenience. By way of conclusion, I shall say a word about the manner in which
IT could be developed.
Let us ﬁrst note that IT is, in its own way, a theory of types, but that—contrary
to what generally happens in type theory—the differences of types do not correspond
to any particular morphological taboo. These differences involve the interpretation of
the symbols and would only leave a trace in the axioms and rules of inference.
From the morphological point of view, one could easily verify that the deﬁnitions
given in the ﬁrst substitutional theory for the logical construction (construction1) of
functions could be taken up again in L(IT) with appropriately adapted commentary.16
By their successive deﬁnitions, functions of one, two, three, etc., (real) arguments
would be arranged beyond individuals and propositions in accordance with a hierar-
chy of types. This hierarchy would be much more complex than the corresponding
hierarchy of the ﬁrst substitutional theory because the functions should be typolog-
ically distinguished according to the types of their arguments and the order of their
values. One should, however, note that from the perspective of the substitutivity salva
congruitate for the corresponding incomplete symbols, the hierarchy would actually
be as simple as it was in the ﬁrst substitutional theory, because this substitutivity would
only depend on the number of arguments. This simplicity would be a consequence of
the purely semantical nature of the determination of types for complete symbols. The
classes of entities and the relations among entities would be deﬁned in terms of these
16Like Russell from 1908 onward, one would no longer distinguish classes and relations in intension
from the corresponding functions. By way of logical ﬁctions, there would only be functions, on the one
hand, and classes and relations in extension on the other.

414
Ph. de Rouilhan
functions, as Russell would do in the ramiﬁed theory of types. By their successive
deﬁnitions, these classes and relations would be arranged in accordance with a hierar-
chy of types as simple as the corresponding hierarchy of the ﬁrst substitutional theory.
The other functions would be deﬁned, as in the ﬁrst substitutional theory, as particular
cases of preceding ones, and the other classes and relations, in turn, in terms of these
other functions.
As for the axioms and rules of inference, one would undoubtedly be led to a system
comparable in strength to that of the system of the ramiﬁed theory of types, with the
same problems,ﬁnally, and the same aporias.17
References
[1]
Cocchiarella, Nino: 1980. The development of the theory of logical types and the notion
of a logical subject in Russell’s early philosophy. Synthese 45: 71–115.
[2]
Hylton, Peter: 1980. Russell’s substitutional theory. Synthese 45: 1–31.
[3]
Landini, Gregory: 1998. Russell’s Hidden Substitutional Theory. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
[4]
Rouilhan, Philippe de: 1992. Russell and the vicious circle principle. Philosophical
Studies 65: 169–182.
[5]
Rouilhan, Philippe de: 1996. Russell et le cercle des paradoxes. Paris: Presses Universi-
taires de France.
[6]
Rouilhan, Philippe de: 1996. Towards ﬁnishing off the axiom of reducibility. Philosophia
Scientiae 1: 17–35.
[7]
Russell, Bertrand: 1903. The Principles of Mathematics. London: Cambridge University
Press. 2nd ed. G. Allen & Unwin, 1937.
[8]
Russell, Bertrand: 1906. On the substitutional theory of classes and relations. Published
in [19]. Paper read before the London Mathematical Society in 1906.
[9]
Russell, Bertrand: 1906. Les paradoxes de la logique. Revue de Metaphysique et de
Morale 14: 627–650. Original English version, On ‘Insolubilia’ and their Solution by
Symbolic logic, published in [19].
[10]
Russell, Bertrand: 1906–07.Onthenatureoftruth.ProceedingsoftheAristotelianSociety
7: 28–49.
[11]
Russell, Bertrand: 1908. Mathematical logic as based on the theory of types. American
Journal of Mathematics 30: 222–262. Reprinted in [18].
[12]
Russell, Bertrand: 1910 Cf. Whitehead et Russell 1910–27 , vol. I, 1st ed.
[13]
Russell, Bertrand: 1910. On the nature of truth and falsehood. In: Philosophical Essays,
London: Longmans Green. 2nd ed. London: Allen & Unwin, 1966, 147–159.
17Thanks to Claire O. Hill for translating the penultimate version of this paper.

Russell’s Intermediate Theory
415
[14]
Russell, Bertrand: 1914. The Relation of sense-data to physics. Scientia 4. Reprinted in
[16]: 108–131.
[15]
Russell, Bertrand: 1914. Our Knowledge of the External World. Chicago: Open Court.
Rev. ed. London: G. Allen & Unwin, 1926.
[16]
Russell, Bertrand: 1917. Mysticism and Logic. London: Allen & Unwin.
[17]
Russell, Bertrand: 1918–1919. The philosophy of logical atomism. The Monist 28:
495–527; 29: 33–63, 190–222, 344–380. Lectures delivered in 1918; reprinted in [18]:
177–281.
[18]
Russell, Bertrand: 1956. Logic and Knowledge. Essays 1901–1950. Ed. by R. C. Marsh.
London: G. Allen & Unwin.
[19]
Russell, Bertrand: 1973. Essays in Analysis. Ed. by D. Lackey. London: Allen & Unwin.
[20] Tarski, Alfred: Proj¸ecie prawdy w j¸ezykach nauk dedukcyjnych. Warsaw, 1933.
[21] Tarski, Alfred: 1936. Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen. Studia Philo-
sophica 1: 261–405. Reprint dated 1935; English translation in [22]: 152–278.
[22] Tarski, Alfred: 1956. Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics. Papers from 1923 to 1938.
Trans. by J. H. Woodger. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
IHPST (CNRS and Université Paris I Panthéon-Sorbonne)
France
E-mail: rouilhan@ext.jussieu.fr


Propositional Ontology and Logical Atomism
Francisco Rodríguez-Consuegra
Abstract. In the following I will brieﬂy indicate the role of propositional functions in Principia,
then point out the way in which they continue to be introduced through propositions, in spite
of the doubtful status of these pseudo-entities. I will then try to see if the notion of judgment,
which is used by Russell to explain propositions, can meet the requirements which are needed
in a serious, coherent ontology. After a survey of the different attempts to build up a convincing
notion of proposition and judgment carried out by Russell between 1910 and 1918, I will
conclude that the ontology of logical atomism was ﬁnally a failure, and so that the mathematical
ontology usually associated with Russell’s logicism was also a failure. In doing so, I will often
show that almost all the problems in which Russell was involved in that period are somehow
dependent upon what I will call Bradley’s paradox of relations, according to which we cannot
consider relations (or other similar “incomplete” notions) as genuine terms, or logical subjects.
If we do that, then we should give an account of the way in which these relational terms are in
turn related to other terms. But this leads to an unavoidable inﬁnite regress.
‘Logical atomism’ is perhaps an appropriate expression for referring to the most im-
portant philosophy developed by Bertrand Russell, which is associated with his most
important contributions to logic, foundations and philosophy of mathematics. These
contributions were mainly presented in Principia Mathematica [23]. I will regard
logical atomism as extending, broadly, from 1910 to 1918.
The ontology held by Russell in former periods of his philosophy (mainly in The
Principles of Mathematics [7]) consists of terms (logical subjects), concepts (including
properties and relations) and propositions, these last being genuine entities, possibly
to be regarded as a special sort of terms. Here, classes are terms, and are used to deﬁne
numbers and the rest of mathematical entities. The status of propositional functions
should, on this scheme, be equivalent to that of concepts, and they, despite their being
genuine primitive notions, could easily be introduced in terms of (albeit not reduced
to) propositions, given that a propositional function, when a value is assigned to its
variable, is transformed into a proposition (as its ﬁnal value).1 The problem in logical
atomism, beginning in Principia or even earlier, is that propositions (in the sense that
they are expressed by sentences) are no longer regarded as genuine entities, but merely
as sets of entities, so the symbols used to denote them are no longer true symbols,
but incomplete symbols. So, propositional functions can hardly be explained through
propositions, unless we ﬁrst clarify the ontological status of propositions.
1For the details of the whole construction in Principles, see my [5].

418
F. Rodríguez-Consuegra
In Principia propositional functions, together with the usual quantiﬁers, are used
to deﬁne-eliminate: descriptions; classes, through the axiom of reducibility (which
is also named “axiom of classes”); relations, through the corresponding axiom of
reducibility (or “axiom of relations”), and also the fundamental notions of identity
and membership. From the viewpoint of mathematical ontology, that means that
although numbers, the basic notion on which mathematics is founded, are deﬁned as
classes of classes. And, since classes are nothing but their members and everything
that you may want to say about classes can be said through propositional functions,
numbers, as well as the rest of the mathematical entities, can legitimately be reduced
to propositional functions. Yet, propositional functions are nothing but properties, so
numbers are ultimately properties.
Let us ﬁrst examine how Russell describes the relationship between propositional
functions and propositions: “By a ‘propositional function’we mean something which
contains a variable x, and expresses a proposition as soon as a value is assigned to
x” ([23]: vol. I, 38). So, propositional functions cannot even be understood without
appealing to the notion of proposition. When you assign a value to the variable in a
propositional function (φ ˆx) you obtain, as the value of the function, a proposition (φx).
Since propositional functions are genuine entities, and since the values you assign to
their variables are entities too (values which belong to the class ˆx(φx)), you accord-
ingly have to obtain entities as ﬁnal values. That is, you can have sentences as values
of propositional functions if these are just expressions; you can have propositions as
values if propositional functions are treated as entities, but you cannot have proposi-
tional functions as entities and sentences as values. Therefore, propositions should be
true entities, and according to Russell, they are denoted by propositional functions.
Although denotation was interpreted merely as a relation between words and enti-
ties (not as a logical relation between concepts, as it was in Principles), propositions
should be seen as “objects”, as Russell writes:
The function itself, φ ˆx, is the single thing which ambiguously denotes its
many values; while φx, where x is not speciﬁed, is one of the denoted
objects, with the ambiguity belonging to the manner of denoting. ([23]:
vol. I, 40)
Yet the problem starts when Russell writes in Principia that propositions are not
“single” entities, but sets of them which are in need of judgment to reach the necessary
unity, judgment being a “multiple” relation. This theory of judgment, which was held
by Russell in unpublished manuscripts as early as 1906 or 1907, see my [4]. However,
itwasnotadmittedinpublicuntiltheofﬁcialproclamationin1910([23]: vol. I,41–44)
([10]: 155–82), where judgment is openly explained as a multiple relation between the
mind and several terms which, taken together, constitute a complex as a consequence
of the judgment itself:
2Curiously enough, these pages are part of the new essay that Russell wrote to replace the third section
of [8] (which was here eliminated with no explanation), where he still presented the multiple relation theory
only as one more possibility.

Propositional Ontology and Logical Atomism
419
Owing to the plurality of the objects of a single judgment, it follows that
what we call a “proposition” (in the sense in which is distinguished from
the phrase expressing it) is not a single entity at all. That is to say, the
phrase which expresses a proposition is what we call an “incomplete”
symbol; it does not have meaning in itself, but requires some supple-
mentation in order to acquire a complete meaning. This fact is somewhat
concealed by the circumstance that judgment in itself supplies a sufﬁcient
supplement, and that judgment in itself makes no verbal addition to the
proposition. Thus “the proposition “Socrates is human”” uses “Socrates
is human” in a way which requires a supplement of some kind before it
acquires a complete meaning; but when I judge “Socrates is human,” the
meaning is completed by the act of judging, and we no longer have an
incomplete symbol. ([23]: vol. I, 44)
Thus, propositions are not single entities, but rather complexes of entities, which are
joined through a special relation. However, propositions (sentences) are now regarded
as incomplete symbols, for they need the complement of the judgment itself to reach
full meaning, and it is unclear whether this suggests that propositions as complexes
are, in fact, nothing at all. In principle, the complex, being a mere creation of the
mind, would be something subjective, and this would be a sign that Russell was also
trying to avoid one of the forms of Bradley’s paradox concerning the statement of any
form of correspondence.3
The problem lies in explaining how it is possible that the (judging) mind is not a
part of the complex which is supposed to be the object of the judgment, while it is,
at the same time, to be taken as a part of the multiple relation of judging itself. For
in this way the mind can impose a certain order among the terms with which it is
acquainted, an order which does not exist on its own. Thus, the status of relations as
terms, i.e., as genuine realities, is doubtful, given that, although we accede (through
acquaintance) objectively to the constituents of the complex, yet the relation joining
them is a mental product (the judging relation). And this, again, turns into the problem
about the pre-eminence of relations over terms or vice versa.
On the other hand, it is truly surprising that, for Russell, an incomplete symbol
(the proposition before being judged by the mind) can be transformed into a complete
one (the proposition once judged by the mind); for an incomplete symbol designates
nothing, while a complete one designates something extra-linguistical. So the mind
seems to have the incredible capacity to transform nothing into something.
Russell’s continued his defense in 1907 of the objective status of external relations
as the only correct alternative to monism, while he was really espousing, in other
manuscripts, the infeasibility of treating propositions as complexes, as well as the
subjectivity of the judging relation, is, in my view, incoherent. As usual, he had to ﬁnd
a compromise between two strong forces pulling in opposite directions. On the one
3I.e., the relation of correspondence between two things is in need of another relation which in turn
relates it to the two things, and so on.

420
F. Rodríguez-Consuegra
hand, heneededtopointoutrelationsasterms4 toescapefromtheimageheconstructed
about monism. On the other, he also needed to deny the reality of these relations as
terms in one of the most important instances (that of propositions and judgments) in
order to avoid Bradley’s paradox (now under the form of the impossibility of regarding
complexes as terms), while, at the same time, he should avoid any correspondence
theory of truth as falling down into another form of the same paradox. Yet some form
of such a correspondence was necessary to avoid idealism. But the inconsistencies
caused by these two forces appear even more clearly when we consider the details of
the multiple relation theory as stated by Russell in Philosophical Essays [10] (as in
Principia he avoids any treatment of such problems).
Let us see how Russell poses the problem of false judgments. In general, the
“natural” view concerning judgment says that there is a relation (judging) between
our mind and a certain object, the judgment being true or false according to the truth
and falsehood of the object of judgment. But Russell had two objections against
false objects ([10]: 175ff). First, they seem to depend on the full signiﬁcance that
the corresponding sentence acquires through the addition of the expression “I believe
that . . .”. This is the line leading to judgments as “incomplete symbols”. Second, if
we admit false objects, we are admitting entities whose existence does not depend
upon the existence of judgments, which seems to Russell something incredible, as “it
leaves the difference between truth and falsehood quite inexplicable”.
Thus, on the one hand, Russell wants to accept some sort of a corresponding entity
whose presence or absence can determine the truth or falsehood of the judgment,
while, on the other hand, he wants to deny that the absence of this corresponding
entity may mean the “existence” of a false object. However, we cannot say that true
judgments have objectives while false ones do not, “so long as we hold the view that
judgment is actually a relation of the mind to an objective. For . . . a relation cannot
be a relation to nothing” ([10]: 176–7). The only solution seems dividing the object
of judgment into several parts:
The way out of the difﬁculty consists in maintaining that, whether we
judge truly or whether we judge falsely, there is no one thing that we
are judging. When we judge that Charles I died on the scaffold, we
have before us, not one object, but several objects, namely, Charles I
and dying and the scaffold . . . . We therefore escape the necessity of
admitting objective falsehoods, or of admitting that in judging falsely we
have nothing before the mind. ([10]: 177)
Therefore, the “unity of the judgment” cannot be provided by a relation joining the dif-
ferent elements present in it to form a complex, with which the mind is then uniformly
related. Rather, that unity is provided by the relation between the mind and each of
those elements (the terms and the original relation), “i.e., we must have, not several
instances of a relation between two terms, but one instance of a relation between more
4Recall that Russell uses the word term for entity in its most general sense, cf. [7]: 43.

Propositional Ontology and Logical Atomism
421
than two terms”. This was the solution Russell discovered to the Bradleyan problem
of reconstructing complexes.
The later ofﬁcial formulation is this:
Every judgment is a relation of a mind to several objects, one of which is a
relation; the judgment is true when the relation which is one of the objects
relates the other objects, otherwise it is false . . . . Let us take the judgment
‘A loves B’. This consists of a relation of the person judging toA and love
and B, i.e., to the two terms A and B and the relation ‘love’. . . . The
‘corresponding complex’ object which is required to make our judgment
true consists of A related to B by the relation which was before us in our
judgment. ([10]: 181, 183)
In this way, we can certainly avoid false objects, while some form of correspondence
is maintained, although obviously at a rather high price. For, on the one hand, the
unity of the judgment seems to depend upon some sort of mental operation which is
in charge of ultimately joining the terms and the relation in the judgment; but, on the
other, the new theory ignores the ontological advantages of not distinguishing between
judgment and perception in the way of Moore,5 which is involved in Moore’s rejection
of the correspondence theory of truth. Last, but not least, there is also the problem of
the “sense” of the relation between the different terms in the judgment, which has to
be related, in some way, to the mind. One could get the impression that Russell, in
discussing these problems, was somehow uncertain of his new theory.
Russell’s doubts concern precisely the most difﬁcult point: the relation between
the two complexes involved, i.e., the relation between the two relations which give
these complexes their unity.6 Russell writes: “judgment is a relation of the mind to
several other terms: when these other terms have inter se a ‘corresponding’ relation
the judgment is true; when not, it is false” ([10]: 153). A ﬁrst sign of Russell’s doubts
is the fact that the relevant correspondence appears with inverted commas. A second
sign is the fact that the problem of the “sense” of the involved relations is avoided,
while Russell says only that this sense has to be the “appropriate” one:
We may distinguish two ‘senses’ of a relation according as it goes from
A to B or from B to A. Then the relation as it enters into the judgment
5Concerning this last point, Russell says:
One of the merits of the above theory is that it explains the difference between judgment
and perception, and the reason why perception is not liable to error as judgment is ….
Thus in perception I perceive a single complex object, while in a judgment based upon the
perception I have the parts of the complex object separately though simultaneously before
me. ([10]: 181–2)
However, the old Moorean realism made it impossible to make a distinction between fact, or complex object,
i.e., perception, and judgment. Thus, any perception involved a judgment (in the sense of a proposition),
which made it impossible to maintain any theory of correspondence.
6That is, r1(mind, A, r2, B) being the main complex, and where r2(A, B) is the secondary one, how are
r1 and r2 related to one another?

422
F. Rodríguez-Consuegra
must have a ‘sense’, and in the corresponding complex it must have the
same ‘sense’. Thus the judgment that two terms have a certain relation
R is a relation of the mind to the two terms and the relation R with the
appropriate sense: the ‘corresponding’complex consists of the two terms
related by the relation R with the same sense. The judgment is true when
there is such a complex, and false when there is not. ([10]: 183–4)
This point is very important, for it involves precisely the connection between the two
relations, and as one of these relations is mental and the other objective, the danger of
idealism seems undeniable. Perhaps such an unsolved problem was the reason why
Russell said that his theory preserved the necessary “mixture of dependence upon
mind and independence of mind” ([10]: 158).
Later in the same work, Russell stresses the same point by saying that the new
theory succeeds in preserving truth and falsehood as properties of judgments. Thus,
they are properties which, in a certain sense, depend upon the existence of minds,
while, on the other hand, “the truth or falsehood of a given judgment does not depend
upon the person making it or the time when it is made, since the ‘corresponding’
complex, upon which its truth or falsehood depends, does not contain the person
judging as a constituent” ([10]: 184). Yet I cannot help feeling that in this way Russell
comes very close to some sort of contradiction: truth and falsehood of judgments
depend upon the mind and then again do not depend upon it. This might be one of
the consequences of having forgotten Moore’s radical way of avoiding the problem,
which consisted in rejecting any correspondence theory by identifying judgment with
perception.
In Problems of Philosophy [15] Russell already explicitly considered the problem
of the sense of the relations involved, but provided no solution to it. The starting point
is already misleading, for in pointing out several examples of multiple relations, he
refers only to multiple relations among people, while the example which is actually
analyzed later is one in which one of the terms is a relation: “Othello believes that
Desdemona loves Cassio”. Russell then admits two different senses, according to the
two relations involved, but he continues to maintain that the judging relation provides
its sense to the secondary relation: “the relation ‘loving’, as it occurs in the act of
believing, is one of the objects—it is a brick in the structure, not the cement. The
cement is the relation ‘believing’" ([15]: 128). However, this can only mean that the
terms are put in a certain order precisely “by the ‘sense’of the believing” "(ibid.), with
which, if they have no order by themselves, it is difﬁcult to see how it is possible to
speak of the ‘correspondence’ between the two complexes.7
7There is another indication of the extreme importance of the problem of sense in Russell’s correspon-
dence with Broad. See for instance this letter to Russell of June 25, 1912:
Suppose we have an n-adic relation. Then the number of possible [?] complexes of the
same terms will be |n. In a judgement about such a complex we shall have n + 2 terms,
i.e. [?] the n terms of the original relation, the relation itself, and the judging mind. So
that believe will involve a n+2-adic relation and therefore |n + 2 psychical states differing
only in the sense of their relating relation will be possible. If for a true belief each complex

Propositional Ontology and Logical Atomism
423
Moreover, the problem concerning idealism remains unaltered, as does the problem
concerning Bradley’s paradox, in both forms of the endless regress: clarifying the
relation between relation and terms, and the complex indicating the correspondence
between the two previous complexes. If the judging relation imposes a sense on the
secondary complex, then this sense is a product of the mind, given that the mind is
one of the constituents of the judging relation. On the other hand, if the mind has
acquaintance with each member of the complex,8 then it has to be acquainted with
the relation as well, and it seems that this should include the involved sense. If not,
not only does the judging relation impose its own sense on the secondary complex
(with which we might produce “nonsense”, as Wittgenstein later objected), but also
we must explain how it is possible to connect this second relation to the related terms,
with the subsequent danger of arriving at Bradley’s regress in the ﬁrst form.9
of the object terms must be correlated with one and only one of the psychical complexes
then ought to be for any given complex of objects |n + 2 −1 possible false beliefs as to the
sense. But actually there are only |n −1.
Would you say that |n + 2 −|n of the possible psychical complexes are not beliefs, or that
as a matter of fact they never exist? If so on what principle do you decide what are beliefs or
which exist? And, apart from this, can we tell [?] at all which sense of the object complex is
correlated with which one of the belief complex? Finally the relation of belief in different
beliefs has different polyadicity according to that of the relation of the object complex. Is
there [?] any other example of the same relation having different polyadicity? I think you
hold that relations do not have instances; what then is there in common between all the
differently polyadic relations that relate the complexes which are all called beliefs?
And Russell’s response of Jan 31, 1912:
It is not the case that |n + 2 psychical states differing only in the sense of the relation of
judging are possible. A mind must occupy one ﬁxed position in the complex. E.g., “B.
judges that the sun is shining” is possible, but not “the sun judges that B. is shining”. If
several of the other constituents of the judgments are minds, of course the case is altered [?].
But this is only possible when God is the Judge, since we have no acquaintance with other
minds. And then polytheism is required really. Generally, your principle that |n complexes
can be made of n terms is wrong; many senses will not yield a complex if the terms are of
different sorts.
The question whether we can tell which sense of the object-complex is correlated with
which of the belief-complex is more difﬁcult. It is plain to me that we can, but I hardly
know how. I think it must come by way of acquaintance with a perceived complex. You
perceive “A-to-right-of-B” and you judge that A is to right of B; this gives a correlation of
the two senses. Thence it could be extended to cases when the complex is not perceived.
But I am not sure that this is satisfactory.
The question of the different polyadicity of different relations of belief is difﬁcult too. I
have been always inclined to suppose these [?] were different relations of belief, 3-term,
4-term, etc. But then, as you say, one wants to know what they all have in common, and
to that I don’t know what to answer. Perhaps only an associated feeling. The question is
serious and I should be glad to know the answer.
Both letters are extant in the Russell Archives, McMaster University, Hamilton, Canada.
8In [15] Russell openly admits this point: “when we are judging, we have a relation to each of the
constituents of our judgment separately” ([15]: 153), but he avoids the term “acquaintance” and replaces it
by “being conscious of”, perhaps to make the problem seem less important.
9Anyway, it is also unclear how we are to understand Russell when he says that the sense is ultimately
provided by the judging relation, for the real problem in jealousy does not, I am afraid, lie in whether

424
F. Rodríguez-Consuegra
The second form is unavoidably implied by the supposed ‘correspondence’ be-
tween the two complexes. We must not forget, ﬁrst, that for Russell, at this stage,
there are no propositions per se, for they (the corresponding sentences) are mere in-
complete symbols which exist only in judgment (or beliefs, which are synonymous
for Russell in this context). Thus there is no complex ArB on its own—there is only
“I belief that ArB.” At this point the possibility of the correspondence is quite ob-
scure, for as it is the judging relation that imposes its sense, thus actually producing a
complex (which does not exist independently), it is hard to accept that there must be a
correspondence between the judging relation, which is a product of the mind, and the
resulting secondary complex, which is also a product of the mind, if the theory of in-
complete symbols is to be accepted. The endless regress is present here, just as it is in
any other form of correspondence: to explain the relation of correspondence between
the ﬁrst complex, which is a belief (the judging relation), and the second complex (the
secondary relation), we need another belief stating the fact of the correspondence, as
Russell wrote many times when he was attacking the correspondence theory at former
stages of his philosophy.
However, here the second kind of endless regress can be presented even under
another more subtle form, which was already suggested by Stout in a further criti-
cism [22], in spite of the fact that Stout did not see any problem of the form of a
Bradleyan endless regress. The fact is, just as there must be a correspondence be-
tween the two complexes, we also have to know whether or not the judgment-complex
is itself apprehended, for we must compare it with the secondary complex. But “this
would imply that whenever we believe we must at the same time be aware of the
state or process of believing, and of the mind as a constituent of it” ([22]: 343). In
other words, if we have “I believe that Ar1B”, and we need to compare the two com-
plexes “r2(Mind, A, r1, B)” and “Ar1B” to know about the possible correspondence
and then about the truth of the judging relation, then we also need “I believe that
{r2(Mind, A, r1, B)} r3 {Ar1B}”, and so on.
The climax of all these problems can be found in the articles in which Russell
considered the status of relations and predicates, in an attempt to set up a whole
ontology in which a full classiﬁcation of universals and particulars was provided,
once the multiple relation theory had been publicly admitted. In those articles we can
see how the inconsistencies between the two forces we have described above come
close to being full-ﬂedged contradictions. In the following, I shall point out some of
these inconsistencies in the four main papers published between 1911 and 1912.
In [11] we ﬁrst ﬁnd the argument that we have “awareness” of universals, and
especially of relations, although the “proof” is not very convincing: “yellow differs
from blue”. But treating relations as things that are immediately known to us supposes
that their recognition has an objective ontological status which, although derived ul-
Desdemona loves Cassio or Cassio loves Desdemona, but rather in whether or not Desdemona loves Cassio.
And this indicates that the mind can not only provide a sense, but also produce a relation which does not
exist as relating Desdemona and Cassio. (Although perhaps this is not quite the same as saying that the
mind creates the relation at all, for Russell believed that we have acquaintance with universals.)

Propositional Ontology and Logical Atomism
425
timately from Russell’s need for regarding them as genuine terms (then as ultimate
realities), is hardly compatible with Principia where relations, like classes, are re-
garded as mere ﬁctions, and their names rendered as incomplete symbols accordingly.
It can be said that the relations which were considered there were only relations in
extension, but to say that is not to say much, for classes had the same extensional
status, and Russell never tried to admit them as objective realities “in intension” in
his ontology, while they had to be rejected in logic, which is extensional (except,
of course, through propositional functions, which, being ultimately properties, are
intensional entities).
This would be a constant ambiguity in the rest of Russell’s development, and I think
it ultimately proceeds from the tension between the two forces we have been consid-
ering since the beginning of this paper. The only argument we are given is that we not
only directly know complexes that contain relations as constituents, but also relations
as logical subjects, which is a consequence of the principle of acquaintance, according
to which any proposition we can understand must be composed of constituents with
which we are acquainted ([11]: 117). However, the principle presupposes that there
is already a solution to the problem of relations as terms, which, as we have seen, can
hardly be maintained.
Another sign of Russell’s problems with relations regarded as “forms” involves
the difﬁcult status of propositional functions themselves. In Principia, as we have
seen, they were to be regarded as primitive ideas to which all the rest of our “formal”
concepts (i.e., classes, relations, descriptions, etc.) could be reduced. Here he adds
that propositional functions are “complexes” which play the role of “true subjects” or
“ultimate subjects” ([11]: 126, 128), despite the fact that this would suppose (i) that
we would have acquaintance with them, and (ii) that they would be true constituents
of complexes, as they appear in judging multiple relations. Of course Russell needed
to regard propositional functions as logical subjects in Principia, but he provided no
theory to explain these two consequences. This, together with the problems pointed
out above, might have contributed to the changes in the multiple relation theory of
judgment in Theory of Knowledge,10 where “forms” are openly admitted as being
parts of the multiple relation, as we shall see below.
The essay [12] tries to build up a whole philosophical view, epistemological and
ontological at the same time, but the problems of relations as terms remain unsolved.
Russell starts by writing:
It [my philosophy] is analytic for it maintains that the existence of what
is complex depends upon the existence of what is simple, and not vice
versa, and that a constituent of one complex is absolutely identical, as
constituent, to what it is in itself when its relations are not considered.
([12]: 53)
However, Russell seems to forget that relations are also constituents of complexes, so
that some explanation of their status as simples must be provided, especially because
10Written in 1913, but not published until 1984. See below.

426
F. Rodríguez-Consuegra
it is unclear how it is possible that relations are exactly the same as the rest of the
constituents of a complex, i.e., how it is possible to regard relations both as relating
relations and as mere constituents that are not related at all. The problem again has to
do with the twofold nature of relations: the paradoxical consequences we have been
seeing force us to recognize them simultaneously as terms and concepts.
That is why when Russell classiﬁes the different kinds of “beings” in the world,
he is silent about the place where relations are to be found: “I say then that there are
simple beings in the universe, and that these beings have relations through which they
compose complex beings” ([12]: 56). He admits that every complex has two kinds of
constituents: terms and relations (or predicates). So he seems to have forgotten that,
according to his own view, every complex must also contain relations as terms, so the
distinction is difﬁcult to accept. Finally, since Russell admits predication as a true
universal, he should provide some explanation of the ontological status of predication,
and even of the consequences concerning the old theory of judgment, according to
which there is no ontological difference at all between subject and predicate. But
nothing of the kind is to be found in this paper.
The paper [13] tries to provide some responses to these problems. We have to
remember that Russell needed, at the same time, to consider predicates as relations
(or as involving relations, which give their true essence) and also as predicates in
themselves. He needed the former, because in this way some form of the old Moorean
theory of judgment could still be maintained (and so the danger of the predicative
general form avoided); but he needed the latter too, because propositional functions,
the most important entities in Principia, are nothing but the general form of properties
(and therefore they seem to be able to reduce all propositions to the predicative form).
In this paper Russell introduces the difference between monadic and dyadic con-
cepts, doubtless in an attempt to face the difﬁculty, but is then forced to speak of
predicates as having the two different natures: “It is of course the case that, whenever
a subject has a predicate, there is a dyadic relation of subject and predicate, but it
does not follow that there is not also a proposition in which the predicate is merely
predicated” ([13]: 159). That implies further that the analogy with relations is com-
plete: we have predicates as relations (“predicating” predicates) and predicates as
terms (predicates “in themselves”), which leads exactly to the same unsolved prob-
lems as with relations (for we also have “relating” relations along with relations “in
themselves”). The ﬁrst form avoids Bradley’s paradox but cannot provide terms, and
the second form provides true terms but cannot explain complexes unless we introduce
further relating constituents and accept Bradley’s paradox. The following passage is
a further effort to make sense of the distinction:
Whenever a has the relation R to b, there is a triadic relation of a and
R and b, but in this relation R occurs as a term of the relation, not as
the relating relation of the proposition. Similarly, if there are monadic
concepts, the proposition in which they are said to have the relation of
predication to their subjects will not be identical with the propositions in
which they are actually predicated. ([13]: 159)

Propositional Ontology and Logical Atomism
427
ButthenewmanoeuvreisonlytheoldstrategyalreadyusedtoavoidBradley’sparadox,
for here we have two additional relations which do not appear in the notation: one is
the triadic relation which actually relates the rest of the constituents; the other is the
relation R no longer as a relation, but as a term. Thus, to explain a dyadic relation we
need a triadic one where the former relation acquires a different status; so presumably
to explain the triadic relation we are going to need a quadruple one, and so on. Since
the same goes for predicates, we get the same problem Russell encountered in former
stages: there is no point in asking whether or not predicates can be transformed into
relations, for predicates are already relations.
The paper [14] can be regarded as the ﬁnal stage of the series. Its main goal was to
defend the ultimate dualism between universals and particulars, which Russell needed
in order to separate concepts (predicates and relations) from terms. But he also needed
concepts to be terms as well, which made any consistent solution impossible.11 Thus,
the classiﬁcation itself is vitiated by the old problem of the twofold role. That is
why when Russell says that particulars enter into complexes only “as the subjects of
predicates or the terms of relations”, and universals “as predicates or relations” ([14]:
124), he seems to be oblivious of the fact that, according to his own position in other
contexts, predicates can be subjects and relations can be terms.
Here Russell openly admits that predication is a relation “involving a fundamental
logical difference between its two terms” ([14]: 123), but this is not much, for at
the same time he needs to admit the twofold role of predicates, which makes the
supposed logical difference impossible. As Russell himself confesses, he needs to
maintain a speciﬁc relation of predication to be able to make an ultimate distinction
between particulars (those which cannot be predicates or relations) and universals
(those which are only predicates or relations). But as we have seen the distinction
cannot be ultimately maintained, for it amounts to nearly the same thing as saying, in a
language close to Bradley’s, that universals are already impregnated with particularity.
At this stage Russell was no longer able to accept such contradictory metaphors.
I do not know how far these efforts can be located in relation to Bradley’s theory
that universals are also particulars and vice versa, but, at any rate, it seems that the
corresponding idealism is somehow involved in Russell’s view. We will also discover
that the monism (and the holism) implicit in this idealism will appear more and more
openly in later stages.
Anyway, the polemic which Russell maintained with Bradley directly, both in the
publications and in the unpublished correspondence, can be usefully considered in
this context. Bradley started the (published) polemic in [1], by accusing Russell of
maintaining an inconsistent pluralism, for he admitted “unities which are complex and
whichcannotbeanalysedintotermsandrelations”([1]: 176). Russell’sresponsein[9]
tried to avoid the ultimate inconsistency by saying that he did not maintain that unities
are incapable of analysis, but only that the mere enumeration of the constituents cannot
11In Principles Russell juggled with the problem by introducing a further division of terms, into things and
concepts. But then the problem remains when we have to give an account of the fact that relations—concepts
in principle—can also be regarded as things.

428
F. Rodríguez-Consuegra
reconstruct the unity: “A complex differs from the mere aggregate of its constituents,
since it is one, not many, and the relation which is one of its constituents enters into it
as an actually relating relation, and not merely as one member of an aggregate” ([9]:
344). But in saying this he provides no true reply to the objection, as Bradley lucidly
pointed out in [2]:
Is there anything, I ask, in a unity beside its “constituents”, i.e., the terms
and the relation, and, if there is anything more, in what does this “more”
consist? Mr. Russell tells us that we have got merely an enumeration or
merely an aggregate. Even with merely so much I should still have to
ask how even so much is possible. But, since we seem to have something
beyond either, the puzzle grows worse.
The personal correspondence12 shows Russell to be much more appreciative of
Bradley’s philosophy. In a letter from 1907, Bradley had already pointed out that
wholes can by no means be reconstructed, for they are non-relational in the last anal-
ysis: “But if you break this entity up, and set down any part as independent—then,
starting with this part, there is no getting beyond it except arbitrarily …. You will say
that you replace this by external relations. But it is denied that these serve” (Oct. 21,
1907). Russell admitted the difﬁculties, but only by claiming that relatedness does
not imply complexity, with no further explanation of how we can give an account of
relations as related to their terms (Oct. 29, 1907).
The ﬁnal stage of the correspondence is captured very nicely in this passage by
Russell, which contains the failed attempt to escape the old paradox: “I do not consider
pluralism incompatible with the existence of complex entities. I consider that in every
case where two simples have a relation, there is a complex entity consisting of the
two simples so related” (April 9, 1910). But this, again, misses the point, for the
expression “complex entity” involves different unexplained senses. We only have to
replace “simples” with “terms” to realize that Russell is forgetting that the relation is
also a term on his own view. This in turn requires him to explain the difference between
the complex as formed by the three terms, and the complex as being the “complex
entity”, supposedly formed by the terms as “simples” and the “relating relation”. This
is why Russell ﬁnally added a third entity, the “form”, and faced the same paradox at
a higher level.
Russell’s ﬁnal attitude implied the recognition that even considering the recent
publications from 1910–11, the problem of unities remained unsolved: “I have nothing
short to say, the subject is difﬁcult (…), and I do not pretend to have solved all
its problems” (March 2, 1911). Fortunately, there is still another passage showing
the strong link between Bradley’s criticisms, Russell’s unsolved difﬁculties, the new
theory of judgment, and Wittgenstein’s objections (Jan. 30, 1914):
I fully recognise the vital importance of the questions you raise, particu-
larly as regards “unities”; I recognise that it is my duty to answer if I can,
12In the Russell Archives, MacMaster University, Hamilton, Canada. A more detailed study of this
correspondence will appear in my Relational Ontology and Analytic Philosophy, now near completion.

Propositional Ontology and Logical Atomism
429
and, if I cannot, to look for an answer as long as I live . . . Chieﬂy through
the work of an Austrian pupil of mine, I seem now to see answers about
unities; but the subject is so difﬁcult and fundamental that I still hesitate.
To my knowledge, this is the only place where Russell admitted these important
links, as well as the fact that he regarded his former views as a failure, precisely from
the viewpoint of Bradley’s objections, and not only as regards Wittgenstein’s.
The next stage, which might perhaps be entitled: “Enter Wittgenstein: the multiple
relation theory staggers on”, can, I think, be regarded, to some extent, as the time at
which Russell’s philosophy had to pay the price for his continuous delay in facing
the “fundamental principles” (as Bradley used to say). This price turned out to be
quite high, for it involved the abandonment of a major project in the philosophy of
logic and epistemology, and his subsequent devotion to particular problems, without
any hope of ﬁnding an acceptable global philosophy. However, the difﬁculties which
made the project impossible were already present in former stages, as already pointed
out by Bradley, despite the fact that Wittgenstein’s criticisms were given the credit for
Russell’s disappointment with his own philosophy.13
The manuscript [16] is already an attempt to characterize the notion of form. But
the starting point returns to former views: “The form of a complex is what it has in
common with a complex obtained by replacing each constituent of the complex by
something different”.14 Thus, we have to avoid Bradley’s paradox, for if we make the
form a constituent, “it would have to be somehow related to the other constituents,
and the way in which it was related would really be the form; hence an endless
regress” ([16]: 2). Therefore, though no ﬁnal deﬁnition of the notion is provided,
Bradley’s paradox is respected, and for the same reason any possible violation of the
theory of types was apparently avoided, for any attempt to consider forms on the
same ontological level as constituents would be such a violation, for it would regard
“formal” concepts as individuals or substances.
That is why it is so strange that in the unﬁnished book of 1913, Theory of Knowl-
edge [17], Russell’s main recourse was the admission of forms as constituents of
complexes with no explanation of the type-theoretical problems involved. Of course,
this was also an attempt to avoid the criticisms of Bradley and Wittgenstein, which
forced him to introduce some changes to avoid the rather idealist consequences of re-
garding complexes, and then propositions, as a mere creation of our minds. But these
criticisms forced Russell to face a very unpleasant dilemma: he could either maintain
the old theory of types by abandoning the multiple relation theory of judgment and by
renouncing the attempt to characterize complexes, and then logic, or abandon some
philosophical consequences of the theory of types by complementing the multiple the-
ory with an explicit device making the admission of forms as some sort of constituent
possible. Russell’s solution in 1913 was clearly a compromise between the two horns
13Grifﬁn’s [3] also contains a good survey of those criticisms.
14The examples which Russell mentions are propositional functions, dyadic and multiple relations, and
the two standard forms of quantiﬁcation.

430
F. Rodríguez-Consuegra
of the dilemma, although the ﬁnal solution seems to involve the second alternative,
despite Bradley’s prohibition.
Russell now rejected the view that the form can be a “mere” constituent of com-
plexes with the usual Bradleyan argument. Hence, in “Socrates is human,” “is” repre-
sents the form, and thus cannot be a constituent: “for if it were, there would have to be
a new way in which it and the two other constituents are put together, and if we take this
way as again a constituent, we ﬁnd ourselves embarked on an endless regress” ([17]:
16). But when he tries to explain the nature of form, he rejects regarding it not only
as an equivalence relation (i.e., “to be the same form”), but also as a mere primitive
idea; for it would lead us to the usual paradox, when trying to relate this idea with the
others in the system. The solution, already found in Wittgenstein’s framework, was
to regard it as an indeﬁnable object corresponding to certain general expressions.
Thus, the form of subject-predicate complexes will be “something has some pred-
icate,” and the form of dyadic complexes will be “something has some relation to
something.” Russell tries to avoid the obvious attack of circularity by writing: “in
spite of the difﬁculties of language, it seems not paradoxical to say that, in order to un-
derstand a proposition which states that x has the relation R to y, we must understand
what is meant by ‘something having some relation to something’" ([17]: 114). How-
ever, the compromise supposes only one change in the general scheme of the already
published multiple relation theory of judgment, viz., incorporating a symbol of the
form (γ ) into the general complex constituting the judgment: “U(S, x, R, y, γ )”.
Thus, it is difﬁcult to deny that forms are regarded as constituents. However, this is
not only an attempt to leap over Bradley’s paradox, but also to give an objective status
to the form as something with which we are acquainted, in the same way as a relation
was both a relating relation and a term. The only change is now to regard γ as the
general form of dual complexes, and to show it to absorb the “relating” part of R,
though, of course, we still need to explain the status of γ in the complex.
I cannot enter here into Wittgenstein’s criticisms in any detail15 which forced
Russell to leave the book unpublished, but forWittgenstein the main defect of Russell’s
revised theory was that all the difﬁculties involved had their common root in the attempt
to regard the form as a new constituent. Wittgenstein expressed this in a language
shrouded in mystical connotations, but this cannot cover the fact that he clearly saw
the impossibility of Russell’s attempt to ﬁx the nature of a form without simultaneously
using another form. Thus, Bradley’s paradox is also present: we cannot meaningfully
speak about the relation between the judging complex and the secondary complex.
If we look at his publications at this stage, Russell, rather surprisingly, did not
abandon the multiple relation theory of judgment, nor renounce the need to regard
forms as constituents. In [18] Russell starts by declaring forms to be the object of
“philosophical logic” ([18]: 52), although in resorting to the “replacement” device,
he says only that “form is not another constituent, but is the way the constituents
are put together”. Thus, without mentioning his failure to construct an acceptable
15I did it in [6].

Propositional Ontology and Logical Atomism
431
epistemology of logic, he even adds the explicit claim that we have knowledge of
forms, allowing us to understand sentences: “Thus some kind of knowledge of logical
forms, though with most people it is not explicit, is involved in all understanding of
discourse” ([18]: 53). We have thus the two traditional arguments, but nothing about
the status of the form in the judging complex, while the multiple theory is apparently
maintained, for Russell denies objective negative facts except as false beliefs: “It is
therefore necessary, in analysing a belief, to look for some other logical form than a
two-term relation” ([18]: 66). In the face of that statement, I am unable to see any
weight in the usual claim that Russell “abandoned” the multiple relation theory in
1913 because of Wittgenstein’s criticisms.16 On the whole, then, I must conclude that
Russell made no progress in trying to solve the real problems underlying all of his
rather edifying talk of relations.
Thelastpaper[19]wasRussell’sﬁnalattempttomaintainaconsistenttheorybefore
ofﬁcially abandoning the multiple relation theory of judgment. Yet, we again ﬁnd
exactly the same unsolved problems. As regards forms, the same idea of constituting
an inventory is introduced by merely changing “forms of propositions” to “forms
of facts” ([19]: 216), which surfaces again as a “realistic bias” despite the need for
providing an account of false “facts” in terms of some kind of multiple relation theory.
This multiple theory seems to still be maintained here, for it is said that belief is
not a dual relation: “Therefore the belief does not really contain a proposition as a
constituent but only contains the constituents of the proposition as constituents” ([19]:
224).17 Bradley’s paradox is presented a few pages later, when Russell admits that
we cannot put the verb on the same level as its terms because it is an instance of
form, which can by no means be a further constituent: “the form of the dual relation
… is not a constituent of the proposition. If it were you would have to have that
16Russell seems to have maintained some sort of multiple relation theory in his lectures in America. The
following are some notes fromV. Lenzen’s “Notes on Russell lectures” (now extant in the RussellArchives),
which were taken in March 1914, that is to say, after Russell had left Theory of Knowledge unﬁnished and,
supposedly, abandoned the theory of judgment it contained. In Lenzen’s notes we can read, for example,
about propositional attitudes as involving not a dual but a multiple relation:
Judgment: all objects must be things with which you are acquainted … . Acquaintance
with universal—logical form of occurrence—not same as acq. with particulars. Possibility
of error in any cognitive occurrence shows that occurrence is not dual relation … . I be-
lieve Jones hates Smith—single fact—contains 2 verbs. Constitutes oddity of propositional
thought … . Logical form of occurrence is different from that of presentation.
Lenzen’s term paper dealt precisely with Russell’s theory of judgment, and it contained two main criticisms:
judgment cannot be a relation, for (i) truth is a relation; that is why we say there are true judgments; (ii)
relations are universals, while judgment is a process in time. Russell’s reply, in the form of notes added to
the paper, reads: “Judgment is a relation, a judgment is not a relation. Thus man is a universal, but a man
is not. Your argument (. . .) on this point sins against philosophical grammar”. Also: “‘A judgment’ will
be a positive fact in which the principal relation is judging; but a judgment is not itself a relation. What
is related to an objective is judgment, not a judgment”. Thus, Russell does not confess his strong doubts
concerning the multiple relation theory after Wittgenstein’s Bradleyan criticisms, but he seems to continue
to maintain the theory rather explicitly.
17For, as stated before, “Every fact that occurs in the world must be composed entirely of constituents
that there are, and not of constituents that there are not” ([19]: 220).

432
F. Rodríguez-Consuegra
constituent related to the other constituents” ([19]: 239). The problem is, then, the
same: Bradley’s paradox makes the form as a constituent impossible, but precisely
this is required by the multiple relation theory.
The persistence of these ideas can even be seen once again in [20], written in 1918
([20]: 198 ff). Here Russell needed some deﬁnition of logic,18 for the book was
explicitly devoted to the logicist foundations of mathematics. He resorts to the usual
“solution”: “we may accept, as a ﬁrst approximation, the view that forms are what
enter into logical propositions as their constituents,” with which “logic is concerned
only with forms, and is concerned with them only in the way of stating that they are
always or sometimes true.” Thus, he says not only that forms are constituents, but also
that we can have second-order propositions in which we refer to these forms and the
rest of the constituents. He is obviously forgetting the two forms of Bradley’s paradox.
However, a few lines earlier he wrote: “the form is not itself a new constituent; if it
were, we should need a new form to embrace both it and the other constituents.”
IfIhavetoproposesomeconclusionhere, Icanonlyaddthatthechaoticphilosophy
usually called “logical atomism”, can hardly be regarded as “logical” or as “atomism”.
It is not logical, for it was mainly the compromise between two incompatible, purely
philosophical (ontological) traditions: that of Moore, and that of Bradley. Neither is it
atomistic, for it was mainly devoted to including forms in the ultimate inventory of the
world, which was impossible as it was attempted by making forms to have a twofold
nature, that of terms, and that of non-terms. Furthermore, this philosophy was hardly
realistic, for the unavoidable idealistic implications of the multiple relation theory
of judgment, together with the monism implicit in the logical constructions, made
it impossible to continue to maintain that complexes are genuine objective realities.
They are, at best, the result of our application of forms to the terms we perceive in the
world. But since these terms, even when they are the simplest possible, can be further
constructed out of relational structures, which are ultimately nothing but “incomplete
symbols”, the old realistic and atomistic world is replaced by an inescapably idealistic
and holistic one, where terms can no longer be opposed to relations, where relations
can no longer be regarded as true terms, and where the seed of the later abandonment
of the distinction between subject and object was already present.
Acknowledgement. I am grateful to an anonymous referee for useful suggestions.
18In a letter of 1918—to Frank Russell—Russell says that the most important things still to be reached at
that stage were: (i) a theory of judgment; (ii) a deﬁnition of logic. The new orientation, as to the solutions,
is now openly psychological, but the problem is still the same: the unity of complexes. I think it is worth
quoting the letter:
“Facts, Judgments, and Propositions” opens out—it was for its sake that I wanted to study
behaviourism, because the ﬁrst problem is to have a tenable theory of judgment. I see my
way to a really big piece of work, and incidentally to a deﬁnition of “logic”, hitherto lacking.
All the psychology that I have been reading and meaning to read was for the sake of logic;
but I have reached a point in logic where I need theories of (a) judgment (b) symbolism,
both of which are psychological problems. ([21]: 249)

Propositional Ontology and Logical Atomism
433
References
[1]
Bradley, Francis H.: 1910. On appearance, error and contradiction. Mind 19: 154–185.
[2]
Bradley, Francis H.: 1911. Reply to Mr. Russell’s explanations. Mind, 20, 74–76.
[3]
Grifﬁn, Nicholas: 1986.Wittgenstein’s criticisms of Russell’s theory of judgment. Russell
5: 132–145.
[4]
Rodríguez-Consuegra, Francisco: 1989. Russell’s theory of types, 1901-1910: its com-
plex origins in the unpublished manuscripts. History and Philosophy of Logic 10: 131–
164.
[5]
Rodríguez-Consuegra, Francisco: 1991. The Mathematical Philosophy of Bertrand Rus-
sell. Basel: Birkhäuser. Reprinted in 1993.
[6]
Rodríguez-Consuegra, Francisco: 2002.Wittgenstein y la teoría russelliana de la proposi-
ción. In my Estudios de ﬁlosoﬁa del lenguaje, Granada: Comares, 179–214. Partial en-
glish translation of this paper, with some changes and new material, as “Wittgenstein and
Russell on propositions and forms”. In J. Padilla Gálvez (ed.), Wittgenstein from a New
Point of View. Wittgenstein-Studien, vol. 6, Frankfurt a. M.: Peter Lang, 2003, 79–110.
[7]
Russell, Bertrand: 1903. The Principles of Mathematics, Cambridge: The University
Press. London: Allen & Unwin. Second edition in 1937. Paperback edition London:
Routledge, 1992.
[8]
Russell, Bertrand: 1907. On the nature of truth. Proc. Arist. Soc. 7: 28–49.
[9]
Russell, Bertrand: 1910. Some explanations in reply to Mr. Bradley. Mind 19: 373–378.
[10]
Russell, Bertrand: 1910. Philosophical Essays. London: Longmans Green.
[11]
Russell, Bertrand: 1911. Knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description.
Proc. Arist. Soc. 7: 108–128.
[12]
Russell, Bertrand: 1911. Le réalisme analytique. Bull. Soc. Franç. Phil. 11: 53–82.
[13]
Russell, Bertrand: 1911. The basis of realism. Jrn. Phil. 8: 158–161.
[14]
Russell, Bertrand: 1912. On the relation of universals and particulars. Proc. Arist. Soc.
12: 1–24.
[15]
Russell, Bertrand: 1912. Problems of Philosophy. London: Williams and Norgate.
[16]
Russell, Bertrand: 1912. What is logic? In: The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell,
vol. 6, London: Routledge, 1992.
[17]
Russell, Bertrand: 1913. Theory of Knowledge: the 1913 manuscript. In: The Collected
Papers of Bertrand Russell, vol. 7, London: Allen & Unwin, 1984.
[18]
Russell, Bertrand: 1914. Our Knowledge of the ExternalWorld. London: Allen & Unwin.
[19]
Russell, Bertrand: 1918–1919. The philosophy of logical atomism. The Monist 28–29.
Repr. in Logic and Knowledge. Edited by R. Ch. Marsh, London: Allen & Unwin, 1956.
[20]
Russell, Bertrand: 1919. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. London: Allen &
Unwin, 198ff.
[21]
Russell, Bertrand: 1919–1926. The Collected Papers of Bertrand Russell, vol. 9. London:
Unwin Hyman, 1988.

434
F. Rodríguez-Consuegra
[22]
Stout, Georg F.: 1915. Mr. Russell’s theory of judgement. Proc. Arist. Soc. 15: 332–352.
[23] Whitehead, Alfred N., and Bertrand Russell: 1910, 1912, and 1913. Principia Mathe-
matica, 3 vol’s. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Departament de Lògica i Filosoﬁa de la Ciència
Facultat de Filosoﬁa i CC de l’Educació
Avinguda Blasco Ibáñez, 30 - 7a
46010 València
Spain
E-mail: Francisco.Rodriguez@uv.es

Classes of Classes and Classes of Functions in
Principia Mathematica
Bernard Linsky
Abstract. The No-Classes theory of classes in Principia Mathematica must be supplemented
with a deﬁnition of propositional functions of classes in order to avoid a recently discovered
puzzle. Such a deﬁnition is suggested but rejected by Whitehead and Russell in the Introduction
to PM and does not make it into the technical presentation of ∗20. PM thus contains a distinction
between classes of classes and classes of functions although only the former appear in the body
of the work. The problem that justiﬁes this distinction is distinct from a problem about scope
identiﬁed by Carnap in 1947 in Meaning and Necessity, although Carnap’s problem also involves
the contextual deﬁnitions of the no-classes theory and the intensional nature of propositional
functions.
The “No-Classes Theory of Classes” in ∗20 of Principia Mathematica provides what
Russell had ultimately come to accept as the solution to his paradox of the class of all
classes that are not members of themselves. It provides deﬁnitions of the extensional
notions of the theory of classes within a logic of intensional propositional functions.
While the theory of classes is conducted in what amounts to a simple theory of types,
the underlying logic of propositional functions is the “ramiﬁed” theory of types. The
ramiﬁcation, justiﬁed as it is by its connection with the vicious circle principle which
bans impredicative deﬁnitions, seems to be associated with a constructivist attitude
towards functions, and hence, presumably, towards classes as well. The excursion
into ramiﬁcation of the types of propositional functions is apparently then undone
by adopting the axiom of reducibility. Or at least this has been one standard view
of the role of ramiﬁcation and reducibility in PM.1 In recent years some students
of PM have followed Alonzo Church in promoting an “intensional interpretation”
of that work, reasserting the signiﬁcant role of intensional notions including that of
propositional functions in its logical foundations.2 If the fundamental nature of the
logic of PM is to be a ramiﬁed type theory of intensional propositional functions,
then whatever its independent justiﬁability, the axiom of reducibility becomes at least
1See [9]: 35. Surprisingly, from Church himself, ([2]: 355), we ﬁnd a criticism of the Axiom of
Reducibility: “Indeed, as many have urged, the true choice would seem to be between the simple functional
calculi and the ramiﬁed functional calculi without axioms of reducibility. It is hard to think of a point of
view from which the intermediate position represented by the ramiﬁed functional calculi with axioms of
reducibility would appear to be signiﬁcant.”
2Including L. Linsky [7] and Church [2].

436
B. Linsky
understandable for its necessary role in reconstructing the extensional theory of classes
within that larger intensional logic. Whatever element of constructivism there might
be in the theory of propositional functions does not extend to the theory of classes that
is reproduced within the larger logic.
This paper proposes to extend the intensional interpretation of PM by showing
how Whitehead and Russell distinguish between classes of classes and classes of
propositional functions. Failing to observe that distinction leads to what will look
like a serious problem for the no-classes theory. Part of the worry about the axiom
of reducibility, and indeed the role of functions in the work is that once classes are
introduced propositional functions seem to disappear from PM.3 The vast bulk of the
project of reducing mathematical notions to logic in fact consists of reducing math-
ematical objects to classes of classes with appropriate features. Not all higher order
classes in the system of PM are classes of classes, however. Admittedly the notion of
classes of functions plays no signiﬁcant role in the body of the work. Indeed White-
head and Russell remark “We shall never have occasion explicitly to consider classes
of functions, but classes of classes will occur constantly …”([PM]: 190). Neverthe-
less, the apparatus to make the distinction is discoverable in the details of ∗20 and
particularly in an obscure passage near the end of the Introduction where a deﬁnition
is proposed but then seemingly rejected. This paper will present the case for this
distinction, motivating the need for it, and attempt to clarify that obscure passage.
Along the way, the details of the system which are able to control the interaction of
intensional phenomena with extensional classes will be presented. The result will
be to show the extent to which the logic of PM, even when it concerns classes, is
thoroughly intensional.
Theheartofthesocalled“no-classes”theoryof∗20isalistofcontextualdeﬁnitions
of all occurrences of class expressions and variables ranging over classes which is
inspired by the famous contextual deﬁnition of deﬁnite descriptions in ∗14. That
theory allows deﬁnite descriptions to occur in all syntactic contexts in sentences where
a singular term could occur, and then provides an analysis of those contexts yielding
the correct truth conditions for those sentences. It is important to notice that contextual
deﬁnitions of so called “incomplete symbols”, if correctly carried out, allow for the
elimination of those symbols from all contexts in which they might appear. There
is no role for ill formed expressions using incomplete symbols beyond those that
derive from the type restrictions on propositional functions in the underlying logic.
Consequently the theory of classes will have to account for expressions asserting that
a function is in a class, namely a class of functions, but also for classes being in those
classes of functions. As well there will be classes as members of what are clearly
classes of classes, but an analysis is provided for assertions that functions belong to
such classes.
The deﬁnitions of ∗20 have the effect of reducing talk about classes that are ex-
tensional, in that two with the same members are identical, to expressions about
3This observation is made by Quine ([9]: 251).

Classes of Classes and Classes of Functions
437
propositional functions which are “intensional”, in that two distinct functions can be
true of the same arguments. The principal deﬁnition achieves this by saying that a
function will be true of a class, just in case it is true of some function coextensive with
the deﬁning function of that class. In the notation of PM this is:
∗20·01
f {ˆz(ψz)}. = : (∃φ) : φ!x . ≡x .ψx : f {φ!ˆz}
Df
To be more precise, the function f is true of the class of ψs just in case some
predicative function φ (as indicated by the !) which is coextensive with ψ has f . The
role of the notion of predicative function and the accompanying axiom of reducibil-
ity complicates the interpretation of the no-classes theory, but is independent of the
problem discussed here. That problem would arise for any attempt to deﬁne classes
in this sort of way within a theory of intensional properties.
One of the primary contexts in which class expressions will occur, and which
needs to be deﬁned, is in conjunction with the membership sign ϵ. In ﬁrst order
axiomatizations of set theory, this is taken as the one non-logical primitive. Once talk
of classes is interpreted as talk about propositional functions, the deﬁnition of this
notion is straightforward; an object is in a function just in case the function is true of
it:
∗20·02
x ϵ (φ!ˆz). = .φ!x
Df
∗20 ·02 should be read as “typically ambiguous”, that is, while the individual
variable x is used in the number, and so presumably φ! will be a function of a type
that applies to individuals, the whole should be seen as schematic, allowing for an
interpretation which says what it is for a function of individuals f to be “in” a function
of such functions ([PM]: 189). If φ! is such a higher order function of functions of a
given type, then ˆzφ!z will be a class of functions of that type. (Classes of functions
will be written ˆf !f below, with f a function of a given type and  a function of a
type that can apply to f )
To complete the elimination of class expressions from all contexts, deﬁnitions must
be provided to allow for the interpretation of occurrences of bound variables that range
over classes. PM uses the lower case Greek letter α for such variables. Roughly, what
is true of some class will be what is true of some function which has that class as
extension. More precisely:
∗20·07
(α).f α. = .(φ).f {ˆz(φ!z)}
Df
∗20·071
(∃α).f α. = .(∃φ).f {ˆz(φ!z)}
Df
Class variables may also appear in class abstracts, that is, in expressions for classes
of classes. Those occurrences are deﬁned this way:
∗20·08
f {ˆα(ψα)}. =: (∃φ) : ψα. ≡α .φ!α : f {φ!ˆα}
Df

438
B. Linsky
With these deﬁnitions the properties of classes that Whitehead and Russell need
for the rest of PM can be derived, with only the (notorious) addition of axioms of
reducibility, inﬁnity and choice (called the “multiplicative” axiom). The effect is to
capture the power of set theory done in the simple theory of types.4
One of the most fundamental results of the no-classes theory is to allow the proof
as a theorem what otherwise is adopted as the “axiom” of extensionality:
∗20·31 ⊢:. ˆz(ψz) = ˆz(χz) . ≡: x ϵ ˆz(ψz) . ≡x . x ϵ ˆz(χz)
Again, observing the “typical ambiguity” of the theory, this theorem will apply to
higher order classes of functions as well. No corresponding theorem is proved saying
that classes of classes are identical if they have the same classes as members. I will
argue below that such a theorem for classes of classes is not already asserted by this
schema, but could be stated and proved.
This list of contextual deﬁnitions given in ∗20 would seem to be incomplete,
however. While uses of Greek letters as variables bound by universal and existential
quantiﬁers can be eliminated, as well as those bound by class abstracts, as in ˆα(ψα),
no deﬁnition is given for free occurrences of Greek letters, and none of occurrences
of Greek letters in expressions for functions of classes, as in φ!ˆα in ∗20·08, with the
exception of:
∗20·081
α ϵ ψ!ˆα. = ψ!α
Df
InfacttherearedeﬁnitionsfortheseotheroccurrencessuggestedintheIntroduction
to PM at page 80, which are curiously not included in the text of ∗20. The main
argument of this paper will result in an explanation of these tentative deﬁnitions,
providing motivation for their inclusion and an account of their oddity: an oddity
which seems to have prevented Whitehead and Russell from including them in the
body of the text.
As a comment on ∗20·42 which uses a free occurrence of α that should read as
having universal force, we have “A Greek letter, such as α, is merely an abbreviation
for an expression of the form ˆz(φz) …” ([PM]: 194). Although there is no formal
deﬁnition of propositional functions with Greek variables in the body of ∗20, we do
ﬁnd this obscure “deﬁnition” tucked in almost at the very end of the Introduction
([PM]: 80-81):
Accordingly
f α = .(∃ψ).φ!x ≡x ψ!x.f {ψ!ˆz}
Df.
It is a peculiarity of a deﬁnition of the use of a single letter [viz., α] for
a variable incomplete symbol that it, though in a sense a real variable,
occurs only in the deﬁniendum, while “φ,” though a real variable, occurs
only in the deﬁniens.
4See ([5]: Chp. 4, §4.3) for the system TT of simple type theory, and the following discussion.

Classes of Classes and Classes of Functions
439
Thus “f ˆα” stands for
“(∃ψ). ˆφ!x ≡x ψ!x.f {ψ!ˆz)"
and “(α).f α” stands for
“(φ) : (∃ψ).φ!x ≡x ψ!x.f {ψ!ˆz)"
This is indeed a peculiar deﬁnition, but at least certain cases of it can be clearly
stated, using the language of PM, and the need for such a deﬁnition will be clear in
what follows.
We can approach an understanding of this passage by considering how, according
to the deﬁnitions presented in ∗20, one would analyse a sentence asserting that a class
of individuals is in a second level class of classes, say, ˆxf x ϵ ˆαα. The following
apparent derivation using the deﬁnitions above leads to a proper analysis at 5) but is
missing two crucial additional steps.
1) ˆxf x ϵ ˆαα
2) (∃g)( g!x ≡x f x & g ϵ ˆαα)
using ∗20·01
3) (∃g)( g!x ≡x f x & (∃)( !α ≡α α & g ϵ !ˆα))
by ∗20·08
4) (∃g)( g!x ≡x f x & (∃)( !ˆxh!x ≡h ˆxh!x & g ϵ !ˆα))
by ∗20·07
5) (∃g)( g!x ≡x f x & (∃)( !ˆxh!x ≡h ˆxh!x & !g))
applying ∗20·02?
Expressions of the sort g ϵ !ˆα require careful attention. g ϵ !ˆα does not
mean simply !g. More than a simple substitution of one for the other is required to
move from 4) to 5). What follows is a digression through the problems of Martin and
Carnap which show the need for the alternative account of expressions like !ˆα and
the accompanying need for a distinction between classes of functions and classes of
classes such as ˆαα.
One might think, following Gregory Landini ([6]: 169), that one could analyze
1) by ﬁrst eliminating the class term on the right, namely ˆαα, taking the context
ˆxf x ϵ … in which it occurs taken as the f in ∗20·08. Then using ∗20·081, the right
result is obtained and every step is provided for in the deﬁnitions of ∗20. Landini in
fact argues that the other order of elimination requires the very sort of analysis that I
will propose below, but rejects the needed deﬁnition as unacceptable, relying simply
on Russell’s reservations about its “peculiarity”. One reason, however, for pressing on
with the left to right order of elimination of the class terms is Whitehead and Russell’s
statement that “With regard to the scope of ˆz(ψz), and to the order of elimination of two
such expressions, we shall adopt the same conventions as were explained in ∗14 for
(ιx)(φx)” ([PM]: 188). The discussion of conventions on scope in ∗14 includes this:
“Hence we shall in general adopt the convention that the description occurring ﬁrst
typographically is to have the larger scope, unless the contrary is explicitly indicated”

440
B. Linsky
([PM]: 174). That this particular part of the policy on scope is also intended for classes
is conﬁrmed by a remark in ∗20: “The meaning of ‘ˆz(ψz) = ˆz(χz)’ is obtained by a
double application of ∗20·01 to ∗13·01 [the deﬁnition of identity], remembering the
conventionthat ˆz(ψz)istohavealargerscopethan ˆz(χz)becauseitoccursﬁrst”([PM]:
191). So it appears that following the conventions of PM one will confront contexts
of the form g ϵ  ˆα in the analysis of any simple formula which asserts that one class
is in another. We must look elsewhere for an account of membership in classes of
classes.
A key to the understanding of expressions such as !ˆα is supplied by ﬁnding
the solution to an apparent problem for the no-classes theory recently identiﬁed by
D. A. Martin. He suggests that the no-classes theory of ∗20 produces “too many”
classes.5 An example of these seemingly excess classes if provided by considering
two non-identical, but empty functions, i.e., functions true of nothing. It seems that
there would then be at least two distinct second order classes whose only member
class is the empty class. As Russell and Whitehead identify the class containing only
the empty class with zero, this particular example may also be seen as showing that
there are “too many zeros” in PM.
Here are details of this example of Martin’s problem. Assume that there are two
(predicative) functions of the type that apply to individuals, say f1 and f2, that are
distinct, yet are both true of nothing, so:
6) ∼(f1 = f2)
and
7) ∼∃xf1x & ∼∃xf2x
Suppose further that there are two second level functions, 1 and 2 which are
uniquely true of f1 and f2 respectively:
8) (f )(1f ≡f = f1) &(f )(2f ≡f = f2)
By assumption 7), the class of f1’s is just the empty set () and so is the class of f2’s:
9) ˆxf1x = ˆxf2x = 
According to the 6) and 8) above, and by the deﬁnition of ϵ at ∗20·02, f1 will be in the
class of functions which are 1 but not in the class of functions which are 2 (letting
f be a variable ranging over functions):
10) f1 ϵ ˆf 1f & ∼(f1 ϵ ˆf 2f )
We now derive the surprising result that two classes of functions can have all the
same classes as members, since both classes contain only the empty class , yet still
be distinct, since one has a function in it that the other does not. Since any function g
coextensive with some function in ˆf 1f and hence with f1, will also be coextensive
some function in ˆf 2f , namely f2, we will have:
5As a comment from the audience during a presentation on the no-classes theory that I was making to
the Philosophy of Mathematics Workshop, Department of Philosophy, UCLA, Nov. 29, 2000.

Classes of Classes and Classes of Functions
441
11) [(∃h)(h!x ≡x gx) & h ϵ ˆf 1f ] ≡g [(∃k)(k!x ≡x gx) & k ϵ ˆf 2f ] &
∼( ˆf 1f =
ˆf 2f )
and so, using ∗20·01 twice,
12) (ˆxgx ϵ ˆf 1f ≡g ˆxgx ϵ ˆf 2f ) & ∼( ˆf 1f =
ˆf 2f )
a sentence that surely shows that classes may be meaningfully said to be members
of classes of functions. ∗20·01 gives a precise meaning to such expressions. Then,
applying ∗20·07 to introduce the bound Greek variable β which ranges over classes,
we have:
13) (β ϵ ˆf 1f ≡β β ϵ ˆf 2f ) & ∼( ˆf 1f =
ˆf 2f )
Finally, using ∗20 · 071 we seem to have a counter example to the “axiom” of
extensionality (taking 	 and 
 to be Greek letters for higher order classes):
14) (∃	)(∃
)(β ϵ 	 ≡β β ϵ 
 & ∼(	 = 
))
The class which contains only the empty set is, in fact, deﬁned to be the number 0
using the function ι‘x which yields the singleton class containing x:
∗54·01
0 = ι‘
Df
Several results are proved about 0, including:
∗54·102
⊢: α ϵ 0 . ≡. α = 
If this deﬁnition is to be proper, and the results about 0 legitimately provable, it must
be the case that there is only one class containing . Our example above suggests that
there are “too many 0’s” in PM.
The consequence 14) of our suppositions, however, does not in fact contradict the
theorem of extensionality ∗20·31. If one distinguishes classes of classes and classes
of functions, these distinct classes ˆf 1f and ˆf 2f will be seen to only agree on
all classes which belong to them, not all functions. Hence they are not genuinely
coextensive. One has a function as member that the other does not. If one did not
distinguish classes of classes and classes of functions, one would have to identify all
second order classes which agree on their member classes. The examples above would
indeed show that there were too many classes in Principia Mathematica. Similarly, if
one makes the distinction, while there will be many classes of functions that contain
only the empty class, there will only be one class of classes to which it belongs, only
one 0.
While this issue of too many classes arises from a combination of intensional
functions with the extensional theory of classes, it is important to see that this is
not simply a matter to be resolved with careful attention to the scope of incomplete
symbols for classes, as is a problem that Rudolf Carnap raised for the no-classes theory.
In his [1] Carnap pointed out that the combination of intensional predicates with the
no-classes theory gives what are at the very least “awkward” results:

442
B. Linsky
… let us consider two non-extensional properties 1 and 2 such that 2
is the contradictory of 1; hence 2 holds in all cases, and only in those,
in which 1 does not hold. Since 1 is nonextensional there are different,
but equivalent, properties, say f1 and f2, such that 1 holds for f1, but
not f2, and hence 2 holds for f2. Then according to deﬁnition 33.2
[Carnap’s version of ∗20·01] both 1 and 2 hold for the class ˆz(f1z),
although 1 and 2 are contradictions and hence logically incompatible.
This would be an awkward result, although it does not constitute a formal
contradiction, since 1 and 2 are logically exclusive only with respect
to properties …
([1]: 148)
My instances for 1, 2, f1 and f2 above do ﬁt the speciﬁcations of this problem.
The difﬁculty that Carnap sees, however, is that 1 and 2, while incompatible with
respect to all properties, are both true of a common class, ˆz(f1z). He does not say that
ˆf 1f and ˆf 2f are then distinct classes of classes.
Although Carnap’s own example for this problem described above might look
very like the new problem Martin has identiﬁed, it is nevertheless different. Carnap
considers the distinct but supposedly coextensive properties f1 = H ˆz, ˆz is a human,
and f2 = F ˆz • Bˆz, ˆz is featherless and a biped. For 1f he uses f = H ˆz, the
property of being identical with the property of being human, and for 2, f ̸= H ˆz,
not being identical to the property of being human. The “awkward” result we get is
that ˆz(Hz) = H ˆz and ˆz(Hz) ̸= H ˆz.6 This is not the problem Martin has identiﬁed.
In our example what seems to be proved is that something is a member of one class
and not the other, so they are distinct classes. The classes do not differ simply by there
being some function co-extensive with the deﬁning of one class that is not identical
with something co-extensive with the deﬁning function of the other class. Martin’s
problem cannot be dismissed as simply the result of forgetting that class abstracts need
to be eliminated with care from any intensional context, including identity statements.7
If one follows Russell in taking class expressions to have narrow scope with respect
to negation signs, then ˆz(Hz) ̸= H ˆz will not be true. What it says, according to this
convention, is that no function coextensive with H ˆz is identical with H ˆz, and that of
course, is false. This response to Carnap’s problem, combined with my response to
Martin’s problem, suggests that careful attention to scope conventions and the details
of the contextual deﬁnitions of ∗20 resolves any awkwardness resulting from the
combination of intensional functions and extensional classes.8
6Both this last example, of an identity between a class and a function, and the analysis of this in terms
of scope seems to be originally due to Leon Chwistek ([3]: 14–16). Chwistek presents the example as part
of an argument against the blanket use of the convention which Whitehead and Russell propose of always
reading the scope of an incomplete symbol such as a description or class term to be as narrow as possible.
7See the Appendix to [7] for a discussion of this problem of Carnap’s and a proposal for a solution by
means of conventions about the elimination of class expressions.
8Gregory Landini ([6] §6.6 and 6.7), however, claims that Carnap has identiﬁed a pseudo-problem on
the grounds that there is no possibility of scope ambiguity for class terms in these contexts. Deﬁnitions

Classes of Classes and Classes of Functions
443
Martin has also proposed a solution to his own problem.9 The idea is to redeﬁne
ϵ, so that the members of a function, and hence of a class, will be just those proper-
ties which ultimately depend only on coextensive functions. The motivation for this
approach is to see the no-classes theory as taking functions as proxies for classes, and
then redeﬁning the membership relation to eliminate the effects of the intensionality of
functions. Martin’s solution requires the simultaneous inductive deﬁnitions 15)–17)
of a new equivalence relation ≈and a redeﬁnition of ϵ as ∈:
15)
f ∈φ ≡∃g (g ≈f & φg),
where f is one type lower than φ, and may be an individual variable.
16) x0 ≈y0 ≡x = y
For individuals x and y, of type 0, ≈is just identity. Finally,
17) gn+1 ≈f n+1 ≡(xn)(x ∈g ≡x ∈f )
where x is of any type one below f and g, as indicated by the superscripts.
Russell and Whitehead do not make use of any such deﬁnitions by induction on
type, but using the device of typical ambiguity, they could easily be stated in PM
notation. This deﬁnition blocks the derivation of the undesirable conclusion above,
for the classes ˆf 1f and ˆf 2f will now have the same members, as determined by
the new notion ∈. In this approach all higher order classes are classes of classes. One
need not distinguish classes of functions from classes of classes.
One more change must be made if the other theorems of set theory are still to
be derivable using the new notion of ∈as representing membership. The “axiom” of
extensionality as expressed in terms of ∈is not forthcoming on the deﬁnitions we have
so far:
18) x ∈ˆz(ψz). ≡x x ∈ˆz(χz). ≡: ˆz(ψz) = ˆz(χz)
In the example above, ˆf 1f and ˆf 2f are coextensive in this sense, though not
identical.
The necessary alteration is to change the original clause of the no-classes theory,
∗20·01 as follows:
19)
f ˆz(ψz) =df ∃φ( φ ≈ψ & f φ!ˆz)
which are stated for singular terms and functions can only be applied after class terms are eliminated, and
that can only be done after Greek letters, which he reads as schematic, are replaced by speciﬁc class terms.
Whether or not a strict and unique order of elimination can be recovered from the various deﬁnitions in
PM, Landini is only criticizing the particular case of ̸= as giving rise to issues of the order of elimination of
derived terms. The more general description of the problem that Carnap gives at the beginning of the quoted
passage presents problems about scope in intensional contexts without involving deﬁned expressions other
than those for classes.
9In an email to D. Kaplan, Nov. 30, 2000 [personal communication].

444
B. Linsky
Using 19) as an additional clause of the revised deﬁnition of classes, 18) becomes
provable. This completes Martin’s suggested remedy and would allow for a recon-
struction of the no-classes theory with theorems about classes and membership that
coincides with the simple theory of types for classes.
This solution is not in accordance with the rest of PM ∗20, however. It comes
at the cost of making all higher level classes be classes of classes. Thus note that it
will no longer be the case that f1 is not in the class of things that are 1, for some
function coextensive with it, namely f2, surely is. The alternative solution proposed
below keeps f1 out of the class of functions that are 2, but lets it into the class of
classes that are 2, not the only intuitive result, but one which at least allows for a
distinction between the two sorts of higher level classes.
The solution I propose follows from paying closer attention to Russell and White-
head’s use of special Greek variables (such as α) to range over classes and makes sense
of the “peculiar” deﬁnition in the Introduction. It also relies on following the model
of the theory of descriptions very closely in observing that the no-classes theory does
not take classes to be particular functions, but simply presents contextual deﬁnitions
that are intended to allow proof as theorems of all the theory of classes that one needs.
This includes expressions that talk about classes of classes, some using quantiﬁers,
others with free occurrences of class variables. Describing the contents of ∗20 Russell
and Whitehead say that “Lastly, we have a set of propositions designed to prove that
classes of classes have all the same formal properties as classes of individuals” ([PM]:
189). They then go on to make the remark above about the lack of classes of functions
in what follows. They could have added that their deﬁnitions also show how classes
of functions have all the same formal properties as classes of individuals. Classes of
functions are in the system, just never used in the body of PM and so not discussed.
The key is to see that f ˆα is deﬁned in that peculiar passage in the Introduction as
a function of functions, different from f ˆφ. We should take the suggested deﬁnition
in the Introduction as proposing that ˆα be deﬁned as ˆx ˆf x, which in more modern
notation would be written (λf )({x : f x}).10 In other words, ‘f ’ is a free variable
ranging over predicative functions. Indeed one might suggest one of the missing
deﬁnitions of occurrences of Greek letters as follows (complementing ∗20·02) :
20) f ϵ (φ!ˆα) . = .φ!ˆxf x
Df
What now of the apparent violation of extensionality at 18)? To begin with we
should observe that if one distinguishes classes of classes from classes of functions,
and also allows all manner of statements about classes and functions being in classes of
either sort, making both f ϵ ˆαα and αϵ ˆf f well formed, no untoward consequences
follow. Thus, for example, we need not say that classes of classes, such as ˆα1α and
ˆα2α, have the same classes as members, in this case just the one class , but are
10This analysis, and the translation into contemporary terms is also given in Rouilhan’s ([10]: 260), but
he suggests that it is not supplied in PM itself. He does point out the discussion at [PM]: 80–81 but then
proposes simply ignoring the distinction between functions of classes and functions of functions in the
deﬁnition ∗20·08 at [10]: 265.

Classes of Classes and Classes of Functions
445
distinct by having “non class” members, namely functions, on which they differ.
Classes of classes with the same classes as members cannot simply be “identiﬁed”,
unless one guarantees that anything true of the one class must be true of the other. But
having a given function as member is one of those properties “true of” a class, and
in that respect the classes will differ. One would indeed have too many classes. We
need not accept this unpalatable consequence however, for in fact those two classes
of classes will in have the very same functions as members. That is to say, f1 and f2
each belong to both of ˆα1α and ˆα2α. For consider
21) f1 ϵ ˆα2α
By ∗20·08 this means:
22) ∃ [(!α ≡α 2α) & f1 ϵ !ˆα]
By 20) we have that f1 ϵ !ˆα implies ˆxf1x, i.e., ∃f (f x ≡x f1x & f ). 22)
thus becomes:
23) ∃ [(!α ≡α 2α) & ∃f (f !x ≡x f1x & !f )]
which is true, taking  be 2 and f be f2. On this account we still have a way of
reading sentences that have functions being members of (ϵ) classes of classes ˆαφα,
but no awkward results yielding too many classes of classes.
Indeedingeneraltwoclassesofclasseswhichshareallthesameclassesasmembers
will also have the same functions as members, and so be indiscernible, so the missing
theorem of extensionality for classes of classes will obtain:
24) (β ϵ ˆαα ≡β β ϵ ˆαα) ≡(ˆαα = ˆαα)
To return to our starting point, the proper analysis of an expression ˆxf x ϵ ˆαα
will arrive at the analysis originally proposed, but making an extra inference in two
more steps along the way:
1) ˆxf x ϵ ˆαα
2) (∃g)( g!x ≡x f x & g ϵ ˆαα)
using ∗20·01
3) (∃g)( g!x ≡x f x & (∃)( !α ≡α α & g ϵ !ˆα))
by ∗20·08
4) (∃g)( g!x ≡x f x & (∃)( !ˆxh!x ≡h ˆxh!x & g ϵ !ˆα))
by ∗20·07
4.1) (∃g)( g!x ≡x f x & (∃)( !ˆxh!x ≡h ˆxh!x &!ˆxg!x))
4.2) (∃g)( g!x ≡x f x & (∃)( !ˆxh!x ≡h ˆxh!x &(∃k)( kx ≡x gx & !k)))
5) (∃g)( g!x ≡x f x & (∃)( !ˆxh!x ≡h ˆxh!x & !g))

446
B. Linsky
Sentence 4.1) follows from 4) by the proposed deﬁnition based on the remark at
page 80 of PM. 4.2) then is an application of ∗20·01 to 4.1). Sentence 4.2), which
is the proper and full analysis of 1), is logically equivalent to the simpler sentence
5). Now 5) might mistakenly be directly derived from 4) not paying attention to
the precise meaning of an expression like g ϵ  ˆα, and thinking that one need only
apply ∗20·02 to it yielding g. It is certainly true that the class of f s is in the
class of classes which are  just in case some function  which is coextensive with
the function of functions  is true of some function g which is coextensive with the
function of individuals f , but that derivation goes through the extra step illustrated at
line 4.1). Perhaps the fact that the original incorrect derivation still leads to the correct
analysis is part of the explanation for why this corner of the system, and the rejected
deﬁnitions of the Introduction have so far been noticed so rarely.11 Furthermore, that
a theorem of extensionality for classes of classes is derivable, just as one for classes of
functions, may be another reason why this whole issue has simply been passed over
without notice. Whitehead and Russell do remark that “… classes of classes have all
the same formal properties as classes of individuals” ([PM]: 189). They did indeed
succeed in providing a theory that would allow theorems about classes of individuals,
and hence by typical ambiguity, classes of functions, to extend to classes of classes.
They succeeded so thoroughly that the complications involved in the distinctions, and
in particular, the need for talk of functions being in classes of classes, has just barely
been observed, or at least remarked on in print.
In his famous discussion of “Russell’s Mathematical Logic”, Gödel [4] chastised
PM for the inadequate introduction of deﬁned expressions, but with just a little charity
we may be able to read a great deal of care into the deﬁnition of Greek letters α.12
Those careful deﬁnitions require a distinction between classes of functions and classes
of classes even though those classes of functions are not needed for the reduction of
mathematics that follows. The work of Principia is primarily that of constructing an
extensional theory of mathematical entities as classes of classes within a background
logic of intensional propositional functions.
Acknowledgement. Many people have provided very helpful suggestions and criti-
cisms of this project as it developed from an problem with the number of classes to a
counterexample to the theorem of extensionality for classes of classes to its ﬁnal form
as an explication of the obscure deﬁnition on page 80 of the Introduction to PM. Tony
Martin found the puzzle and David Kaplan and Alasdair Urquhart helped me through
this progression of responses. Gregory Landini pointed out that he had discussed
that passage in the Introduction, and explained his views on this matter to me at the
conference from which this volume derives.
11Chwistek [3] and Rouilhan [10] are the only two sources in print that I can ﬁnd that identify this
meaning for functions of classes  ˆα.
12Indeed Gödel ([4]: 126) uses the example ‘φ!ˆu = ˆu[φ!u]’as a formula where the order of elimination
of the two deﬁned expressions makes a difference to the truth of a sentence. This is almost exactly Carnap’s
example, but a few years before the publication of [1]. Both were anticipated by Leon Chistwick [4]. See
my [8].

Classes of Classes and Classes of Functions
447
References
[1]
Carnap, Rudolf: 1947. Meaning and Necessity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
References to second edition, 1956.
[2]
Church, Alonzo: 1956. Introduction to Mathematical Logic. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
[3]
Chwistek, Leon: 1924. The theory of constructive types. (Principles of logic and math-
ematics.) Annales de la Société Polonaise de Mathématique. (Rocznik Polskiego To-
warazystwa Matematycznego) II: 9–48.
[4]
Gödel, Kurt: 1944. Russell’s mathematical logic. In: P. A. Schilpp (ed.), The Philosophy
of Bertrand Russell, LaSalle: Open Court, 125–153.
[5]
Hatcher, William S.: 1968. Foundations of Mathematics. Philadelphia: W. B. Saunders.
[6]
Landini, Gregory: 1998. Russell’s Hidden Substitutional Theory. NewYork and Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
[7]
Linsky, Leonard: 1983. Oblique Contexts. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
[8]
Linsky, Bernard: 2004. Leon Chwistek on the no-classes theory. In Principia Mathemat-
ica. History and Philosophy of Logic 25: 53–71.
[9]
Quine, Willard V.: 1963. Set Theory and Its Logic. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
[10]
de Rouilhan, Philippe: 1996. Russell et le cercle des paradoxes. Paris: Presses Universi-
taires de France.
[11] Whitehead, Alfred N. and Bertrand Russell: 1925–1927. [PM] Principia Mathematica,
second edition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Department of Philosophy
4-115 Humanities Centre
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta
Canada T6G 2E5
E-mail: bernard.linsky@ualberta.ca


A “Constructive” Proper Extension of Ramiﬁed
Type Theory (The Logic of Principia Mathematica,
Second Edition, Appendix B)
Allen P. Hazen
Abstract. Russell, in the Introduction andAppendices added to the 1925 second edition of Prin-
cipia Mathematica, suggests a system of Higher-Order Logic which seems to be intermediate
in strength between Ramiﬁed and Simple Type Theory. It shares a plausible philosophical mo-
tivation with rtt, as we show by proving that it has a natural semantic interpretation in which
higher-order quantiﬁers are interpreted “substitutionally,” but its criteria of well-formedness are
more liberal. Contrary to what has been claimed by Landini, however, it does not validate an
unrestricted principle of mathematical induction (as claimed by Russell in Appendix B).
1. History
Russell’s metaphysical stance in [46] was an extreme Platonism: you name it and he
believed in it, and at least one contemporary reviewer spoke of the book’s “scholastic
realism.” By the time Principia Mathematica was written the Platonism was, at the
very least, less exuberant. One can speculate as to how much this was a result of
the shock of the paradoxes and how much a result of Russell’s growing adherence to
the traditional British empiricism, but by 1910 Russell was clearly trying to limit his
ontological commitments to abstracta, taking as his guiding maxim that one should
“[w]henever possible, substitute constructions out of known entities for inferences to
unknown entities” [49], leading Gödel [16] to dub Russell’s new philosophical stance
as “constructivism.”
(In itself, that is quite a good name for it, but the logical community now under-
stands the word as referring to programs—very different from Russell’s—like those
of Brouwer and Bishop. In the two versions of an introductory footnote added when
[16] was reprinted in [3] and [39], Gödel noted the difference and characterized Rus-
sell’s program as “a strictly anti-realistic” or “a strictly nominalistic kind of construc-
tivism.” Perhaps—given its inﬂuence on and similarity to the programs of Carnap [6]
and Goodman [18]—“constructionalism” would be a good term.)
The underlying logic—for purposes of the present discussion we may consider the
infamous “Axioms of Reducibility” as non-logical axioms added to it—of the ﬁrst

450
A. P. Hazen
edition of Principia is the Ramiﬁed Theory of Types, described in more detail in sec-
tion 2. Although set theory is interpreted in it, the abstract entities quantiﬁed over by
this logic are not sets but rather items of types to which a mind can stand in cogni-
tive relations: propositions and concepts, or, in Russell’s terminology, propositional
functions. (This characterization of the ontology of Principia is the most service-
able for our purposes, but is probably an oversimpliﬁcation: cf. the—skippable—last
paragraph of this section.) The logic postulates these items only insofar as they can
be constructed from a basis of individuals and universals which doesn’t have to be
speciﬁed for mathematical purposes, but which can be assumed, in applications, to be
given empirically. As a basis, that is, we assume some number of particulars (items,
that is, which could be designated by proper names in an idealized language) and
universals—properties and relations—(items which could interpret predicates of ap-
propriate adicities): Russell would claim that, in order for the applied system to be
understood, these items should be ones with which we are, in his technical sense,
acquainted, cf. [47]. Propositions and propositional functions, then, are thought of
as structured entities, built up out of the basic particulars and universals in a way
which parallels the construction of sentences and open formulas from the names and
primitive predicates of a language. The technical mark of the implementation of this
conception of propositions and propositional functions in the type structure of the
logic is that the formal system of Ramiﬁed Type Theory can be given an interpretation
under which quantiﬁcation over other than individuals is interpreted substitutionally:
details in the next section. It is natural to take the possibility of such a substitutional
interpretation of higher-type quantiﬁers as a criterion of whether a proposed extension
of Ramiﬁed Type Theory is compatible with Russell’s philosophical stance. It seems
plausible to interpret Gödel’s remark ([16]: 134) that the type-theoretic liberalization
of the second edition is “quite unobjectionable even from the constructive standpoint”
as signifying that he saw that the liberalized system could be interpreted in this way.
Two comments. First, it does not follow from these considerations that the substi-
tutional interpretation, based as it is on the stock of primitive predicates in a particular
formal language, should be thought of as Russell’s intended interpretation. The sub-
stitutional interpretation will validate all theorems of the logic, but it is possible to
formulate logically consistent existentially quantiﬁed sentences which will be false on
this interpretation. (Given appropriate choices of vocabulary and individual domain,
Axioms of Reducibility will be among the examples.) Such sentences shouldn’t be
dismissed as logical falsehoods, but should rather be interpreted as contingent asser-
tions implying the existence of universals not expressed by any primitive predicate
of our language. (Cf. [20], where it is suggested that this provides a framework for
discussing one kind of philosophical question about the completeness of science.)
Second comment: The Axioms of Reducibility are a blatant example of the postu-
lation of unknown entities. Russell could plausibly claim that this was allowed by the
escape clause of his maxim. In this instance the substitution of constructions out of
knownentitiesisnot possible, astheAxiomsareneededinordertocarryoutthelogicist
interpretation of classical mathematics. It is possible to pursue the logicist program

A “Constructive” Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
451
without Reducibility, attempting to derive mathematics within Ramiﬁed Type Theory
from a simple Axiom of Inﬁnity, and in fact an interesting fragment of arithmetic
can be so derived. The fragment, however, though including everyday, gradeschool,
arithmetic and weak forms of mathematical induction, is far weaker than (First-Order)
Peano Arithmetic, cf. [5] for a summary. Moreover, as remarked by Linsky [30], the
entities postulated by Axioms of Reducibility are at least of the same general category
as ones we are acquainted with, and, as pointed out by Church [9] and Myhill [33],
Ramiﬁed Type Theory with Axioms of Reducibility combines mathematical strength
with an interesting analysis of the semantic paradoxes.
By the time Russell wrote the Introduction and Appendices to the 1925 second
edition of Principia Mathematica, his philosophical views had changed again. Unlike
Brouwer and Weyl, he had no wish to revise accepted mathematics, and he was happy
to republish unchanged the (in modern terms) set theoretic development of it from the
ﬁrst edition: we can see him as ambivalent, still suspicious of but also in part attracted
by Ramsey’s recommendation in [42] that the complexities of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
be abandoned in favor of an extensional version of Simple Type Theory. (Extensional
Simple Type Theory is a simple and natural version of axiomatic set theory, elegantly
compared to Zermelo’s system in Quine [41]. The Axioms of Reducibility amount, in
effect, to the postulation that the universe of Ramiﬁed Type Theory contains a model
for Simple Type Theory, and the set-theoretical work of Principia is carried out within
this model.) He was not, however, completely prepared to abandon the constructivistic
program of RamiﬁedTypeTheory. In the Introduction andAppendices he wrote for the
new edition he sketched a new logic combining some of the constructivistic features
of Ramiﬁed Type Theory—in particular the fundamental idea that the propositions or
propositional functions in the range of a given higher-order quantiﬁed variable must
be of limited conceptual complexity—with (his interpretation of) the “extensional”
interpretation of propositional functions of Wittgenstein and Ramsey.
Russell’sconclusionwasthatthisnewlogichadinterestingmathematicalstrength—
he (erroneously) believed that he had derived an unrestricted principle of mathemat-
ical induction in it, with an Axiom of Inﬁnity as the only non-logical assumption
necessary—but that it was not as strong as simple type theory, and would not sufﬁce
for a logicist development of the theory of real numbers. It is tempting to think that
the general neglect of the new logic stemmed from this evaluation of its mathematical
strength. Russell was not interested in a “revisionary” program, rejecting signiﬁcant
parts of classical mathematics for philosophical reasons: “It might be possible to sac-
riﬁce inﬁnite well-ordered series to logical rigour, but the theory of real numbers is
an integral part of ordinary mathematics, and can hardly be the object of reasonable
doubt” ([50]: xlv). On the other hand, those who were interested in such revision-
ary projects (like Hermann Weyl, whose [56] advocated founding analysis on a basis
with some similarities to Ramiﬁed Type Theory) were by 1925 committed to other
programs, and would not have been interested in something that would have seemed
like a minor variant of set theory to them.

452
A. P. Hazen
In any event, the new logic was ignored. None of the contemporary reviews of the
second edition that I have been able to examine make any mention of the change to type
theory. Indeed, I know of no published evidence that anyone actually read Appendix
B until Gödel started work on his [16]. (There is evidence that Skolem looked at
it … and threw up his hands in horror! Discussing Ramiﬁed Type Theory in [53],
Skolem discusses general issues in a way that closely follows Russell’s introduction,
even using one of the same examples, and then attempts to develop a fragment of
arithmetic on a predicative basis in a way that owes nothing to Appendix B. It is hard
to avoid the thought that Skolem had read the introduction with mounting enthusiasm,
had turned to Appendix B, and decided that it would be easier to work things out
himself than wrestle with its notational horrors.) Gödel noted the new logic and made
brief but clear comments on it, but (perhaps because the comments were lost amidst
the wealth of other insights in [16]) no one seems to have noticed his noticing: none
of the early comments on Gödel’s essay mention it. Myhill [32], though referring to
Gödel [16], assumes that Appendix B is based on orthodox Ramiﬁed Type Theory.
In 1989 Davoren noticed Gödel’s comments and pointed them out to Hazen; they
presented a report on their reconstruction of the 1925 logic to a conference in July of
1990, cf. [11]. They claimed that the 1925 logic had a substitutional interpretation,
but on the basis of an inadequate proof. (The error was Hazen’s; Davoren expressed
misgivings before the conference but deferred to her co-author’s conﬁdence.) The
main contribution of the present paper is to present a correct proof of this claim.
InAppendix B, Russell presented a proof of mathematical induction, using his new
logic and an axiom of inﬁnity as the bases for a logicist reconstruction of arithmetic.
His proof, however, as Gödel [16] pointed out, is irremediably ﬂawed. (It is also, given
the notation, very hard to follow. Gödel gave one possible correction of one error,
but the important ﬂaw is separate from this, and hopeless.) Landini [25], however,
makes the startling claim that mathematical induction can be obtained on this basis;
his proof—correct, given his axioms—is a new proof, and not a revision of Russell’s
attempted proof. Landini’s paper is the ﬁrst rigorous and detailed presentation in print
of the 1925 logic. He claims that it has a substitutional interpretation (he has conﬁrmed
in correspondence that this is what he means when he refers to the system’s “nomi-
nalistic semantics”), but without proof. With one major difference, his formalization
of the logic is equivalent to that given by Davoren and Hazen (and restated in section
3 below): Landini adds an axiom scheme of extensionality. The second main point
of the present paper is to argue (section 4) that this axiom scheme, which is required
for his proof of mathematical induction, is incorrect on the substitutional semantics,
and so unacceptable from Russell’s “constructivistic” point of view. (There is also the
minor difference that Landini does not include abstracts in his formal language.)
Skippable last paragraph: The conception of propositions and propositional
functions as structured entities suggested above (and discussed in greater detail in [22]
is reasonable from a modern standpoint, and sufﬁces for the motivation of the Ramiﬁed
Type Theoretic logics of (ﬁrst and second edition) Principia. It would have seemed
less reasonable to Russell. We modern logicians are happy with structured entities

A “Constructive” Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
453
(in, e.g., syntax) in part because we know that the nuts and bolts for putting them
together—pairing, formation of ﬁnite sequences—is available at the safest and most
elementary levels of set theory. Russell, who was trying to reconstruct set theory on
the basis of a theory of propositional functions, was not in a position to presuppose this
material. (And, more generally, even such simple constructs as ordered pairs would
have presented foundational issues to a set theorist at the beginning of the 20th Century:
Peirce’s “dyad … a mental diagram consisting of two images of two objects …” had
not yet been reduced by Wiener and Kuratowski! Cf. [40]: section 53.) Russell (at
least in part, one assumes, because of this problem) tried, in the period in which the ﬁrst
edition of Principia was completed, to avoid ontological commitment to propositions
as structured entities altogether. This was the (a?) point of his “multiple relation”
theory of judgment: instead of construing judgment (belief), etc., as a binary relation
between a judging mind and a structured proposition, he construed it as a many-place
(“multiple”) relation between the mind and the various simple constituents of the
proposition. (Strictly speaking: between the mind and the various entities, particular
and universal, which would have been constituents of the proposition if there had been
propositions!) He advocates the multiple relation theory in the introductory chapter
on the theory of types in (the ﬁrst edition of) Principia, writing
Owing to the plurality of the objects of a single judgment, it follows that
what we call a “proposition” (in the sense in which this is distinguished
from the phrase expressing it) is not a single entity at all. That is to
say, the phrase which expresses a proposition is what we call an “incom-
plete” symbol; it does not have a meaning in itself, but requires some
supplementation in order to acquire a complete meaning. (p. 44)
Now, “incomplete symbol” is Whitehead and Russell’s term for things like deﬁnite
descriptions and class abstracts: pieces of notation to be explained by contextual
deﬁnitions (and, indeed, the passage just quoted has a footnote referring the reader
to the chapter on such notations).
The obvious implication is that quantiﬁcation
over propositions (and so, also, propositional functions) is to be explained away as a
façon de parler, much as one might explain quantiﬁcation over rationals (and atomic
formulas containing variables for rationals) as shorthand for pairs of quantiﬁers over
integers (and expressions containing double the number of variables). But, as Church
[9] complains,
… the contextual deﬁnition or deﬁnitions that are implicitly promised by
the “incomplete symbol” characterization are never fully supplied, and it
is in particular not clear how they would explain away the use of bound
propositional and function variables. If some of the things that are said
by Russell in IV andV of Introduction to the second edition may be taken
as an indication of what it intended, it is probable that the contextual
deﬁnitions would not stand scrutiny. (footnote 4; when the paper was
reprinted Church replaced this footnote with a more cautiously worded
one.)

454
A. P. Hazen
In fact there is a serious technical problem in giving appropriate contextual deﬁnitions.
If all the propositions referred to or quantiﬁed over were of the same form—e.g., sub-
ject/predicate, composed of one monadic universal and one particular—the contextual
deﬁnitions would be easy to state. Atomic formulas of the form J[ap] (“a judges that
p”) with a binary judgment relation could be replaced by atoms of the form J[abF]
(“a bears the ternary judgment relation to the subject, b, and predicate, F, of p”),
and quantiﬁers over propositions, ∀p or ∃p, could be replaced by pairs of quantiﬁers,
∀x∀F or ∃x∃F. The underlying logic would be ordinary First-Order Logic (perhaps
double-sorted). For the theory of propositions (and, more importantly, propositional
functions) to serve as a foundation for mathematics, however, quantiﬁcations could
not be restricted to propositions of a single form, or even of a limited number of con-
stituents. The “multiple relation” of judgment would have to be, not merely multiple,
but multigrade, and, what is technically far harder to handle, the quantiﬁers of the un-
derlying logic would have to be able to bind “vectors,” of varying length, of variables.
Such a logic is described (and its application to the multiple relation theory of judg-
ment brieﬂy discussed), in [54], where it is proven to be unaxiomatizable (that is, that
its set of valid formulas is not recursively enumerable). I would suggest, therefore, that
Russell was serious about the nonexistence of propositions (and propositional func-
tions), and thought that in principle (well-known philosophical weasel words, those!)
it should be possible to think of them as “incomplete symbols” (this is also argued in
[26]), but for good technical reasons was unable to carry out their reduction in detail.
That said, however, the conception of propositions (etc.) as structured entities seems
like a clearer way of motivating the system he actually published.
2. Ramiﬁed Type Theory and Its Semantics
In order to facilitate comparison with the 1925 logic, this section presents a version
of Ramiﬁed Type Theory (“irt”—Edition I, Ramiﬁed Types), generally following
Church [9] but formulated with abstracts (and rules of β-conversion) instead of com-
prehension axioms. The second subsection discusses the status of extensionality prin-
ciples and the motivation for using abstracts, and the third presents the “substitutional”
interpretation. A fourth takes an excursion into proof theory.
The logic irt: Since Ramiﬁed Type Theory adds formal complications to Simple
Type Theory, it is expositorily convenient to start with the latter. We assume entities
to be organized into a system of types of the following sort. There is a type, i, of
urelements or individuals, and for every ﬁnite sequence of types t1, . . . , tn a type
(t1, . . . , tn) of propositional functions taking a sequence of arguments of the given
types t1, . . . , tn: n-adic relations (properties in the case n = 1) or, if we assume
extensionality, n-adic relations-in-extension (classes in the case n = 1). We include
also the case of zero-length sequences, yielding a type () of propositions or, assuming
extensionality, truth-values.

A “Constructive” Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
455
A conventional formal language embodying such a conception would be based
on a many-sorted quantiﬁcational language, with all variables and constants having
assigned types. There would be alphabets of free and bound variables for each type,
interpreted as ranging over entities of that type, and, optionally and depending on
application, constants of some types, interpreted as denoting speciﬁc entities of those
types. Free variables (and constants) of type () standing alone count as formulas;
all other atomic formulas are of the form a[b1, . . . , bn], where b1, . . . , bn are free
variables (or constants) of the respective types t1, . . . , tn, and a is a free variable (or
constant) of type (t1, . . . , tn). Non-atomic formulas are formed in the usual ways, by
combining formulas with connectives or by going through a formula, replacing every
occurrence in it of some one free variable with occurrences of a bound variable (not
already occurring in the formula) of the same type, and preﬁxing a quantiﬁer with this
bound variable as operator variable. (In other words: I adopt Hilbert and Gentzen’s
convention, under which bound and free variables are notationally distinct, bound
variables do not occur free in well-formed formulas, and quantiﬁers with the same
operatorvariableneverhaveoverlappingscopes.) Sentences, asusual, areformulasnot
containing free variables, quasi-formulas things like formulas except for containing
unbound occurrences of bound variables in places where they ought to have free
variables.
There is an optional added feature for this language which is convenient for some
purposes and trivial on some (but not all) assumptions. A formula containing free
variables is naturally thought of as expressing a propositional function. In order to
ensure that the language contains a term for each propositional function expressed by
one of its formulas, we may add abstracts. Where A is a quasi-formula containing
free occurrences of no bound variables other than x1, . . . , xn, of types t1, . . . , tn re-
spectively, {x1, . . . , xn : A} is an abstract of type (t1, . . . , tn), and may occur in any
environment in which a free variable or constant of that type may occur (and occur-
rences of x1, . . . , xn in an occurrence of {x1, . . . , xn : A} in a formula are counted as
bound in the formula). We can make our machinery uniform by saying that, where A
is a formula, {A} is an abstract of type (). As is well-known (cf. [41] for discussion),
abstracts are eliminable by contextual deﬁnition if extensionality is assumed. They
are not in general eliminable without this assumption, and in some applications give
a useful increase in expressive power. Note that every occurrence of a bound variable
in an abstract is either bound in the formula following the colon or is an occurrence of
one of the variables preceding the colon. Repeated formation of abstracts, or quantiﬁ-
cation of formulas containing abstracts, can produce occurrences of quasi-abstracts,
expressions like abstracts but containing free variables which are neither operator
variables of the abstract nor bound by operators within the abstract.
The formal language is rich enough that, on its familiar set-theoretic interpreta-
tion with inﬁnitely many entities of type i, completeness is not to be hoped for. A
basic axiomatization should, however, include at least standard quantiﬁcational logic
for each type, and some embodiment of the motivating idea that formulas express
propositional functions and sentences propositions. So: start by postulating the usual

456
A. P. Hazen
natural deduction or sequent-calculus rules for the connectives and quantiﬁers (the
quantiﬁer rules for variables and constants of each type), as in [14]. These rules by
themselves, however, do not allow us to prove that there is a propositional function
expressed by any given formula. As stated so far, the quantiﬁer rules allow free vari-
ables and constants (if any) to be substituted for the bound variables of higher types:
what is needed is some way of letting formulas be substituted.
There are two general approaches possible here. One is to postulate axioms of
comprehension. This is satisfactory if extensionality is assumed, but seems inade-
quate without this assumption: a propositional function holding of all and only those
(sequences of) items which satisfy a formula, which is what an axiom of comprehen-
sion gives, may not be the propositional function expressed by that formula. In the
non-extensional case it is possible to get around this difﬁculty by enriching the lan-
guage with a non-truth functional connective of propositional identity and formulating
the comprehension axioms with this connective, rather than material equivalence, as
in [8] and [10] and (following Church) [1] and [2]. A simpler alternative, which will
be followed here, is to supplement the statement of the quantiﬁer rules, for types other
than i, with a deﬁnition of what it means to substitute a formula for a variable, as in
(the ﬁrst part of) [8]. Given the complexity of this notion, it is more convenient to
introduce abstracts as auxiliary notation.
Postulate, then, rules of β-conversion to handle abstracts: formulas obtained from
one another by β-conversion (sequents obtained from one another by replacing a
formula by one obtained from it by β-conversion) are equivalent, and may be inferred
from one another. (This is an effective rule: since we are working in a typed system,
and indeed with one having only a small fraction of the hierarchy of types available
in systems of typed λ-calculus, β-convertibility is decidable. At considerable cost—
derivations get much longer—we could get the same effect by postulating simple
rules of abstraction and concretion.) Then, in stating the quantiﬁer rules, allow bound
variables to be substituted for abstracts (though not, of course, quasi-abstracts), as
well as free variables and constants, of their type.
[Aside: Even if the hypotheses and conclusion of a derivation (to put it in natural
deduction terms: in sequent-calculus terms, even if the formulas in the endsequent
of a proof) are free of abstracts, a derivation using these rules can contain formulas
essentially containing abstracts: that is, formulas which contain abstracts even when
reduced to β-normal form. The irreducible abstracts in these formulas will occur
as terms of atomic quasi-subformulas with variables as predicates. Consider, for
example, the following derivation of ∃X∃([X] & X[a]) (with variables of types
 : ((i)), X : (i), and a : i) from F[a]:
1.
F[a]
Hypothesis
2.
(F[a] & F[a])
1, & introduction
3.
({x : F[x]}[a] & F[a])
2, β-abstraction

A “Constructive” Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
457
4.
({X : X[a]}[{x : F[x]}] & F[a])
3, β-abstraction
5.
∃([{x : F[x]}] & F[a])
4, ∃introduction
6.
∃([{x : F[x]}] & {x : F[x]}[a])
5, β-abstraction
7.
∃X∃([X] & X[a])
6, ∃introduction.
The abstracts introduced in 3, 4 and 6 are part of the machinery: those introduced in 3
and 6 would not occur if the ∃introduction rule had been formulated in terms of a rule
of substitution of formulas for variables instead of taking a detour through abstracts.
Formula 5, however, is in β-normal form and contains an irreducible abstract. 7 can,
of course, be derived from 1 in other ways, but this seems the least clumsy. The
moral seems to be that one can treat abstracts as mere auxiliary notation to simplify
the statement of the rules of deduction, but that it is more convenient to grant them
full citizenship, extending the expressive resources of the language to allow sentences
like 5. End of aside.]
Extensional Simple Type Theory is a reasonable formulation of set theory: not as
strong as Zermelo’s, but working mathematicians’systematic use of capital and lower
case letters, and distinguishing locutions like “family of sets,” suggest much mathe-
matical thinking is in practice type-theoretic. The non-extensional variant, however,
is inadequate as a theory of propositions and propositional functions: it succumbs
to the semantic and epistemic paradoxes. Russell moved to a theory making ﬁner
discriminations of type. Church [9] refers to the types of Ramiﬁed Type Theory as
r-types.
Following the account in [9], we once again start with a type i for individuals. As
in the Simple Type Theory, entities of other types may be distinguished according to
the types of arguments they take, but now further distinctions must be made, reﬂecting
the differing structural complexities of the propositional functions (or propositions)
falling within a single (Simple) type. Start with those entities taking only individuals
as objects (including those abstract entities taking no arguments, the propositions).
Each type subdivides into a hierarchy of ramiﬁed types (r-types, for short) according
to the complexity of their structure or constituency. Thus, instead of simply having
types of properties, dyadic relations, triadic relations, and so on, (i), (i, i), (i, i, i), and
of propositions, (), we have, corresponding to each such simple type a series of types,
(i)/1, (i)/2, (i)/3, …, (i, i)/1, (i, i)/2, (i, i)/3, … and so on. It is convenient, though
not faithful to the letter of Russell’s exposition, to interpret each of these hierarchies
cumulatively, so that, for example, an entity of type (i, i)/3 is counted as also being
of types (i, i)/4, (i, i)/5, and so on. With the types so far listed, we have Ramiﬁed
Second-Order Logic, as described in sections 58 and 59 of Church [7]. The numeral
after the slash in a type designation is said to give the level of the type, or of the entities
of that type.
To get ramiﬁed Third-Order Logic, we add types for entities taking arguments of
at least one of the non-individual types recognized in ramiﬁed Second-Order Logic,
where, once again, the entities taking (a sequence of) arguments of a given (sequence
of) types are subdivided into levels according to their structure or constituency. Thus
we will have types ((i)/1)/1, ((i)/1)/2,…, of properties taking as arguments level-

458
A. P. Hazen
one properties of individuals, types (i, (i)/3)/1, (i, (i)/3)/2,…, of relations between
individuals and level-three properties of individuals, and so on. By the cumulativity
of levels for Second-Order types, an (i, (i)/3)/1 can relate an individual to an (i)/1
or an (i)/2; levels of Third-Order types are also cumulative, so an (i, (i)/3)/1 will
be counted to be an (i, (i)/3)/2 as well. In Third-Order Logic (and at higher types)
it is useful to deﬁne a further notion, the badness (Church [9] uses Russell’s term
order, but this conﬂicts with the modern terminology of “n-th-Order Logic”) of a
type. Individuals are deﬁned to have badness 0; for other types the badness is the sum
of the “worst” allowable argument for an entity of the type with the level of the type.
Thus the type (i, (i)/3)/1 has badness 4 (= 3, the badness of those (i)/3 entities which
are not (i)/2’s, +1, the level of the relational type), and (i, (i)/3)/2 has badness 5.
Ramiﬁed Fourth-Order Logic adds in addition types of entities taking as arguments
entities of at least one Third-Order type, and the types of a full system Ramiﬁed Type
Theory, such as our irt, are all those belonging to ramiﬁed n-th-Order Logic for some
natural number n.
The vocabulary of irt will contain (free and bound) variables of all these types,
and perhaps constants of some; constants and variables will be said to have the badness
of their type. (Principia Mathematica, which was concerned with purely logical and
mathematical issues, includes no non-logical constants in its formal language. Its
authors regarded this language as a sort of skeletal language, one which would be able
to express the contents of arbitrary thoughts once it was supplemented with appropriate
non-logical constants standing for items of direct acquaintance.) Atomic formulas are
of the form a[b1, . . . , bn], where the bi are terms (constants, variables, or abstracts)
of types suitable as arguments for items of a’s type: note that the badness of the
predicate of an atomic formula will always be greater than the badness of any of its
arguments. The set of well-formed formulas is speciﬁed by the usual sort of recursion.
Its deductive apparatus will include, as before, the usual rules of quantiﬁcational logic
for all types, and rules of β-conversion. The level-aspect of r-types is supposed to
reﬂect the constructional complexity of propositions and propositional functions, and
this is what motivates the logic’s speciﬁcation of what abstracts may be substituted for
the variables of a given (non-individual) type. One preliminary technical deﬁnition
will be useful before stating this speciﬁcation. We may state the:
Fundamental specification: In the application of the Quantiﬁca-
tion and β-conversion rules, an abstract {x1, . . . , xn : A} is substitutable
for a variable of type (t1, . . . , tn)/j and badness k (where k > j) if and
only if
1. the abstraction variables x1, . . . , xn are, in order, of types t1, . . . , tn,
2. no free variable or constant occurring in A is of badness > k, and
3. every bound variable occurring in A is of badness strictly < k.
Abstracts and extensionality: Many applications of irt (including Russell’s
intended application for Ramiﬁed Type Theory) are incompatible with assuming ex-

A “Constructive” Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
459
tensionality, but an extensional variant might be more convenient for mathematical
applications. Imposing extensionality axiomatically is slightly more complicated than
it is in Simple Type Theory and other standard set theories. In Simple Type Theory
one can postulate, for each type t, a single axiom of extensionality (with variables of
types  : ((t)), X : (t), Y : (t) and x : t):
∀X∀Y(∀x(X[x] ↔Y[x]) →∀([X] ↔[Y]))
Inirtthisisnotpossible, theproblemlyingwiththequantiﬁersofthetwohighertypes.
There are inﬁnitely many types, (t)/1, (t)/2, etc., of propositional functions taking
items of type t as arguments, so inﬁnitely many axioms with the ∀X∀Y quantiﬁers
rewritten in these different types will be needed. Worse, each of these axioms will have
to be reduplicated inﬁnitely many times, with the ∀ rewritten in the different types
capable of taking arguments of the type of the ∀X∀Y quantiﬁers. (In other words, the
axiom of extensionality, already schematic in a type-theoretic context, becomes triply
so!)
So much for extensional identity at higher types. In Simple Type Theory one can
also deﬁne identity of individuals by the formula
∀X(X[a] ↔X[b])
As Russell pointed out, however, this will not sufﬁce in a Ramiﬁed logic: whatever
level is chosen for the ∀X quantiﬁer, the corresponding formula with a higher-level X
will not be derivable from it (this non-derivability is rigorously established in Myhill
[32]). So yet another inﬁnite set of extensionality axioms will have to be added:
∀X(X[a] ↔X[b]) →∀Y(Y[a] ↔Y[b])
(with variables of types X : (i)/1, Y : (i)/n for n > 1, and x : i). The resulting
extensional system is perhaps the best version of Ramiﬁed Type Theory to use in
investigating the mathematical power of Ramiﬁed Types without the Axiom of Re-
ducibility. It is interpretable in our basic irt by making appropriate restrictions on all
higher-order quantiﬁers.
Without extensionality, the use of comprehension axioms will not give as ﬂexi-
ble a system as the use of abstracts. Church’s [9] is something of a tour de force,
demonstrating that it is possible to use Ramiﬁed Type Theory to give an interesting
analysis of (at least some) semantic paradoxes while using a variant of the logic with
only comprehension axioms, but for other purposes the expressive power of abstracts
is desirable. For example, the use of abstracts allows, what comprehension axioms do
not, a natural identiﬁcation of the propositional function expressed by a given formula
of the formal system.
Semantics with substitutional quantifiers: Given that the motivating idea
of propositions and propositional functions has them structured in a way that parallels
the construction of the formulas of the formal language, the idea of interpreting the
higher-order quantiﬁcations of Ramiﬁed Type Theory substitutionally was a natural
one. An interpretation of this kind was given by Fitch [13], and substitutional inter-

460
A. P. Hazen
pretations have been discussed by a number of writers since. The clearest discussions
are in Parsons’ [34, 35, 36, 37].
There are both conceptual and technical difﬁculties with such a semantics, which
we can either ignore or ﬁnesse. One conceptual problem, leading to doubts that a
purely substitutional semantics should be thought of as the correct or intended in-
terpretation, has been mentioned in the ﬁrst section of this paper: there can be no
guarantee that (empirical) discoveries will not lead us to supplement our language
with new predicates expressing universals that are at present unknown. It is also not
clear how we should formulate the semantics of higher-order predicate constants, such
as those expressing intensional notions like meaning or belief. This problem can be
ignored in the context of a comparison with Russell’s 1925 logic, for such constants
were explicitly excluded from the later logic. Finally, there is the problem of referen-
tially interpreted quantiﬁcation over individuals: if there are nameless individuals in
the domain interpreting variables of type i, it will in general not be possible to inter-
pret quantiﬁcations of other types in terms of closed substitution instances. This last
technicality was pointed out by Parsons; for simplicity we may limit consideration to
interpretations of irt over models with domains of named individuals.
A substitutional model for irt (with no predicate constants of types other than
(i, . . . , i)/1), then, is simply a structure in the sense of the model theory of First-Order
Logic, interpreting the predicate constants, in which all individuals are named. As one
would expect, an atomic sentence (the semantics deals only with closed formulas!) is
true if and only if the tuple of objects named by its terms are in the extension of its
predicate. It will slightly simplify the exposition (and, since the existence of β-normal
forms is decidable, etc., it is harmless) to assume that all sentences are in β-normal
form: abstracts occur only as arguments to bound predicate variables.
Then truth of sentences in general can be deﬁned by the usual sort of recursion:
• a negation is true iff the negated sentence is not true;
• a conjunction (disjunction) is true iff both of its conjuncts (one or more of its
disjuncts) is true;
• similarly for any other connectives you want to include;
• a universal quantiﬁcation is true iff all of its instances are true; and
• an existential quantiﬁcation is true iff at least one of its instances is true, where
• an instance of a quantiﬁcation with quantiﬁed variable of type i is any sentence
formed from it by deleting the initial quantiﬁer and replacing all occurrences of
the variable bound to it with occurrences of some one name, and
• an instance of any other quantiﬁcation is any sentence formed from it by deleting
the initial quantiﬁer and replacing all occurrences of the variable bound to it
with occurrences of some one closed abstract and (if necessary) normalizing.

A “Constructive” Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
461
Intuitively it is clear that this semantics explains the truth value of every complex
sentence by reducing it to a question of the truth values of simpler ones. This notion of
reduction is often dramatized with the metaphor of a semantic game. To determine the
truth value of a sentence, we give it to two omniscient players, a Proponent, who will
win if the game ends with a true atomic sentence, and an Opponent, who will win if
the game ends with a false atomic sentence. At each stage of the game, if the sentence
in play is a conjunction or universal quantiﬁcation, the Opponent gets to choose a
conjunct or instance, trying for a false one. If the sentence in play is a disjunction or
existential quantiﬁcation, the Proponent gets to choose, trying to choose a true disjunct
or instance. If it is a negation, they switch sides and play with the negated sentence;
rules for other connectives are readily speciﬁed. The starting sentence is true if the
Proponent can win, false if the Opponent can.
In technical terms, the well-deﬁnedness of the semantics depends on the fact that
the relevant reducibility relation is well-founded. In terms of the game-metaphor, the
requirement is that the game will always terminate, whatever sentence the players start
with: no sequence of moves, each move reducing the sentence in play to one of those
its truth value is deﬁned to be dependent on, can go on forever. This is perhaps obvious
enough without proof, but the proof is, in any event, quick and easy. We deﬁne an
ordinal measure of complexity, or grade, on sentences and their quasi-sub-formulas
as follows:
• the grade of an atomic sentence or quasi-formula with a predicate constant as
its predicate is 0
• the grade of an atomic quasi-formula with a predicate variable as its predicate
is ω · k, where k is the badness of the variable
• the grade of a negation is the grade of the negated sentence or quasi-formula
+ 1
• the grade of a conjunction (etc.) is 1 more than the grade of whichever conjunct
(. . .) has the higher grade
• the grade of a quantiﬁcation is the grade of the matrix + 1.
It is easy to see that the sentences to which the semantics “reduces” the truth value of
a given non-atomic sentence will always be of lower grade. The only difﬁcult case
is that of a quantiﬁcation with a quantiﬁed variable of non-individual type. Since the
arguments to a predicate variable must have lower badness than the variable itself,
we may ignore occurrences (of the quantiﬁed variable to be replaced) as arguments
in atomic quasi-subformulas: their replacement with abstracts will not immediately
affect the grade of the sentence, and when they do come into play (at a later stage
of the reduction, after the predicate has been substituted for) they will not cause any
damage. There remains the case of a predicate variable occurring as a predicate.
Since, however, it is to be replaced with a closed abstract, every variable occurring in

462
A. P. Hazen
the abstract, as well as variables standing as (or occurring within abstracts standing
as) arguments to it must be of strictly lower badness. The (quasi-) formula formed
when the abstract is β-reduced will, therefore, have a lower grade than the original
atomic quasi-formula, and so (by induction on the construction of the sentence) the
whole sentence will have its grade reduced.
Note that the “substitutional” semantics deﬁned for irt is an “honest” one, unlike
that claimed for Simple Type Theory in [28]. As stressed earlier, when we start with a
particular set of primitive predicates, there will in general be existentially quantiﬁed
sentences that are consistent (with the deductive system for irt) but false on the
substitutional interpretation as deﬁned: such sentences may be thought of as assertions
that the set of predicates of the language is inadequate. On the other hand, every
theorem of irt will be true on the semantics: the soundness of the deductive apparatus
can be established by the usual sorts of argument. (Completeness, of course, is another
matter: as is well-known—cf. [12]—completeness on a substitutional semantics is not
to be hoped for without inﬁnitary inference rules!) It is, in other words, consistent with
the acceptance of the deductive apparatus of irt to believe that one’s language has
enough predicates to express all the ways in which individuals resemble and differ from
one another. Leblanc’s substitutional interpretations, in contrast, are related to non-
standard models (in the sense of Henkin [24]) of Simple Type Theory, and may require
the addition of inﬁnitely many new primitive predicates to a given language in order
to verify the theorems of the system. Leblanc, in other words, obtains substitutional
semantics only by postulating an unknown language extending the one he starts with:
surely a case of theft rather than honest toil! On the other hand, the semantics of
Leblanc & Weaver [29] (and also that presented in Grover [19] in the same volume)
is close to that presented here.
A note on cut-elimination: Thecomplexitymeasureusedhereiscloselyrelated
to Gentzen’s notion of grade in [14] , which was employed in proving his Hauptsatz
for First- Order Logic, and it is almost true that, after extending our deﬁnition to cover
formulas containing free variables, we can use it to prove a cut-elimination theorem
for irt. There is a slight complication, however: since the abstracts substitutable
for a bound predicate variable in applications of the quantiﬁer rules are allowed to
contain free variables of the same badness, the simple deﬁnition of grade used above
for semantic purposes allows open instances to exceed a quantiﬁcation in grade. For
example (where P and Q are purely atomic sentences of grade 0, a is an individual
constant or variable, and the predicate variables X and R are of types (i)/1 and (i, i)/1
respectively),
(P & (Q & ∀xRxa))
is of grade ω + 3, but, after abstracting to
{y : (P & (Q & ∃R ∀xRxa))}[a],

A “Constructive” Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
463
we may infer
∃X(X[a]),
which is only of grade ω +1, from it. For proof-theoretic purposes, we need a slightly
more reﬁned notion of grade. We may once again allow atomic sentences (and open
formulas as well, this time) with constants as predicates to have grade 0, and truth
functional connectives and quantiﬁers over individual variables may increase grade
by 1 as before. The remaining two clauses of the deﬁnition are changed to
• the grade of an atomic (quasi-)formula with a variable as predicate is ω·(2k−1),
where k is the badness of the predicate variable, and
• thegradeofaquantiﬁcationwithanon-individualvariableintheinitialquantiﬁer
is ω · 2k, where k is the badness of the variable, if the grade of the matrix is less
than ω · 2k, and otherwise is 1 greater than the grade of the matrix.
With this altered deﬁnition, the limit of the grades of well-formed formulas of irt
remains ω2, but now open as well as closed instances of quantiﬁcations will be of
lower grade than the quantiﬁcations themselves. (Proof: Case 0: the quantiﬁer
removed has a variable of other than the highest badness in the formula. Then the
quantiﬁcations of the variables of higher badness will determine the grade of the
matrix, and removal of the initial quantiﬁer will reduce the grade of the whole by 1.
Case 1: the quantiﬁer removed has a variable of higher badness than any bound
variable in the matrix, so the quantiﬁcation has a grade of the form ω · 2n. Since
bound variables in the abstract replacing the variable will also be of lower badness,
the maximum grade for the instance will be ω · (2n −1) + some natural number.
Case 2: there are additional bound variables of the same badness in the matrix. Note
that, on the assumption that the formula is in β-normal form, no occurrence of the
abstraction operator can bind a variable of the highest badness in the formula. If all the
occurrences of the variable to be replaced are inside the scope of quantiﬁers binding
some of these additional variables, then the grade of the matrix will not be affected
by the replacement, and the grade of the whole will be reduced by 1 when the initial
quantiﬁer is removed. If, on the other hand, there are occurrences of the variable to
be replaced that are not in the scope of such quantiﬁers, the largest subformulas of the
original matrix containing such occurrences but not containing any quantiﬁers with
variables of the same badness will, after the replacement, come to have a grade no
higher than ω · (2n −1) + some natural number, and so, from the point of view of
calculating the grade of the whole instance, will be dominated by the subformulas,
truth functionally connected to them, that do contain quantiﬁed variables of highest
badness. Thus in this case, as in case 0, the grade of the instance will be 1 less than
that of the quantiﬁcation. End of proof.)
With this revised deﬁnition of grade, then, a Hauptsatz for irt can be proven
by reconstruing Gentzen’s induction on grade as transﬁnite induction, and otherwise
taking over his proof unchanged. (The resulting Hauptsatz is for a slightly abstract

464
A. P. Hazen
formulation of the logic, identifying β-equivalent formulas and ignoring steps of β-
abstraction and reduction.)
The provability of cut-elimination for Ramiﬁed Type
Theory has been known at least since Lorenzen [31], but I know of no readily accessible
treatment in English. Discussion of Ramiﬁed Type Theory (and ofAckermann’s type-
free system) in Schütte [52] was dropped from the English translation, but there is a
pseudo-translation (replacing Schütte’s idiosyncratic variant of sequent-calculi with
Beth–Smullyan tableaux) in Toledo [55].
3. The 1925 Logic
In this section we describe the 1925 logic (bmt for “Appendix B, Modiﬁed Type
Theory). The ﬁrst subsection describes the motivating ideas and the divergences from
irt. The second (written to be independently readable) gives a formal description
of bmt. bmt as presented in the second subsection, though motivated by an ex-
tensional conception of propositional function, contains no extensionality principles:
the third subsection discusses the degree to which extensionality can be expressed by
added axioms or rules. The fourth subsection proves the existence of a substitutional
semantics.
The Influence of Ramsey and Wittgenstein: Russell’s earlier logical
work had been directed toward the construction of a general intensional logic, one in
which such notions as the cognitive relations between a mind and the propositions it
understands and believes could be expressed. The type structure of irt, according to
which a given higher-order propositional function could apply only to arguments of
limited badness (and the badness of a predicate is always greater than that of the argu-
ments to which it is applied) is natural and well-motivated: it allows the type theory by
itself, without additional apparatus, to defuse the semantic and intentional (epistemic)
paradoxes as well as the set-theoretic ones. Consider, for example Buridan’s scenario,
in which Socrates (by hypothesis an infallible and instantaneous logician) reads with
understanding the following grafﬁto:
(*) Socrates does not believe this proposition
(andletusinterpret“proposition”inaRussellianratherthanBuridanianway). Socrates,
ever questioning, considers the proposition, and sees that if he were to decide it was
true and start to believe it, this would render it false: which, since he recognizes it,
means he cannot rationally believe it. On the other had, unless and until he comes to
believe it, it is true, and this too he recognizes. Assuming, as we have, that his beliefs
are formed with perfect rationality, he must both believe it and not believe it.
Most modern treatments of this take the “this proposition” to be a deﬁnite de-
scription, short for something like “the proposition expressed (in English) by this
inscription.” This allows at least two distinct resolutions:

A “Constructive” Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
465
(a) we may (following Russell’s discussion of, e.g., the Epimenides) point out that
when the deﬁnite description is given its Russellian contextual deﬁnition, a propo-
sitional quantiﬁcation occurs, and Ramiﬁed Type Theory yields the result that the
proposition is non-paradoxically false—whatever level (badness) we assign to the
quantiﬁcation in it, the proposition itself will be of the next level up, so, in the sense
of the quantiﬁer, there will be no proposition expressed by the inscription, or
(b) we may instead choose to “ramsify, not ramify,” and focus attention on the
systematic ambiguity of “expressed,” appealing to the doctrine of “levels of language”
to conclude that no proposition at all is expressed by the inscription, for the relation
of expression holding between sentences of any language and propositions can only
be expressed by a predicate of a higher language.
Neither of these approaches require that propositional functions be limited in the
levels (as opposed to the simple types) of the arguments they take. It is, however,
far from obvious that “this proposition” should be analyzed as a deﬁnite description
or as involving a reference to the inscription. “This,” after all, is Russell’s favorite
example of a logically perfect name, and if Socrates, having understood the inscription
(and being acquainted with each of the constituents of the proposition expressed), is
actively considering the proposition, then this is as good a candidate as one could hope
for an example of direct acquiantance with a proposition. Suppose, therefore, that we
interpret the “this proposition” as directly referential. There is then no mention of
the expression relation, and no quantiﬁcation over propositions. The only (obvious)
remaining way to defuse the paradox is to postulate a type-ambiguity in believe. Since
there are many types of propositions, the type structure of irt forces us to suppose
that there is a corresponding hierarchy of belief relations, and the paradox is dispelled
by noting that no belief relation can apply to a proposition of which it is a constituent.
In a certain sense (Russell, in the Introduction to the second edition of Principia,
uses these very words), however, low-level propositional functions can apply to high-
level arguments. Suppose we want to say of a (i, i)/1 relation, R, expressed by a
predicate constant, that it is, say, symmetric. We may do so by asserting a purely
First-Order sentence:
∀x∀y(Rxy →Ryx).
Replacethepredicatebyapredicatevariableandwegetaformuladeﬁninga((i, i)/1)/1
property of relations. But now suppose we wanted to say of some high level binary
relation of individuals—perhaps an (i, i)/79—that it was symmetric. Whatever hor-
rendous formula we would have to write to express the relation, the additional material
needed to say it was symmetric would be precisely the same as the material used in
saying that R was symmetric: the conditional operator and a couple of quantiﬁers
with variables ranging over individuals. Ofﬁcially, we have a hierarchy of symmetry
properties: the ((i, i)/1)/1 ﬁrst deﬁned, the ((i, i)/79)/1 we (in effect) deﬁned when
we said the (i, i)/79 was symmetric, and so on. (And, though the cumulative inter-
pretation of levels allows us to drop some of these properties in favor of others, the
fact that there is no highest level of binary relations of individuals means that no one

466
A. P. Hazen
symmetry property can be ascribed meaningfully to all such relations.) Still, although
the theory of types implicit in irt insists that these are different, there is a clear sense
in which they have much in common, in which they are deﬁned in the same way. If we
didn’t have some other reason for distinguishing between properties of relations taking
different levels of relation as arguments, it would be tempting to identify them . . .
By about 1920 Russell, under the combined inﬂuence of Wittgenstein and of such
psychological behaviorists as Watson, had largely abandoned the notion of belief,
etc., as relations between minds and propositions. Appendix C, added to the second
edition of Principia, sketches a defense of the new view, on which there are no in-
tensional primitives, and the only higher-order properties (relations) recognized are
those deﬁnable by logical means from (ultimately) the First-Order primitives. (Read-
ers who recall the jacket blurb, “This is the book that has meant the most to me,” from
W. V. Quine on the back cover of Whitehead & Russell [58] will see in Russell’s on-
tological development a precedent for Quine’s later “ﬂight from intension.”) The net
effect of the psychological speculation is to suggest a reduction of intentional notions
to semantic ones, somewhat in the manner of more recent speculations in cognitive
science about “the language of thought.” As for the semantic paradoxes, they can
be defused by means of the doctrine of “levels of language” (as Gödel [16] hints via
references to Ramsey and Tarski). It seems fair to attribute this line of thought to
Russell, as he had already given a very clear statement of the levels of language idea
at the end of his preface to Wittgenstein’s Tractatus.
One initially obscure-sounding statement of the new view that Russell gives in
the Introduction to the second edition, “Propositional functions occur only through
their values,” can be interpreted as an endorsement of the substitutional interpreta-
tion of higher-order quantiﬁers as an “intended interpretation.” Terms (in particular,
variables) for propositional functions occur in argument position to higher-order pred-
icates in the new logic as in the old, so, from a superﬁcial, notational, point of view
it seems that propositional functions are thought of as “occurring” as functions, and
not merely through the occurrence of the particular propositions which are their vari-
ables. If the slogan means anything, therefore, it must mean that the truth conditions
of sentences containing occurrences of function-terms as arguments must, ultimately,
be explicated in terms of sentences in which the function terms occur as predicates:
sentences, in other words, in which subformulas expressing propositional values of
the functions occur. Ultimately, on the new view, the only genuine basic facts are
such as could be expressed in a First-Order language with appropriate predicates: as
Russell more or less says, the role of the machinery of higher-order predication and
quantiﬁcation is simply to abbreviate various inﬁnitary conjunctions and disjunctions
of such First-Order statements.
bmt: Formalism. We specify the type structure, the vocabulary and formation
rules of the formal language, and the deductive apparatus.
Types. There is a bmt-type i of individuals. For every non-individual simple type
(thus: for the types of propositions and of propositional functions taking arguments

A “Constructive” Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
467
of various simple types) t and every positive integer n, there is a bmt-type t/n of
propositional functions (or propositions) of level n and simple type t. Note that the
bmt-type of a non-individual in the ontology of the logic is only partially speciﬁed
by giving its simple type, but that the single notion of level does the duty of both
level and badness in irt; individuals will again be assumed to be of level 0. Where
confusion seems unlikely, “bmt-type” will be abbreviated to “type.” The simple type
corresponding to the bmt-type i is i, and the simple type corresponding to a bmt-type
(. . .)/n is (. . .).
Non-logical vocabulary. We may have constants denoting individuals, and certain
predicate constants. In giving the substitutional interpretation of irt we assumed that
the only primitive predicates were level 1 predicates of individuals, but irt allows—
and in application as an intensional logic demands—predicates of higher type. The
intended interpretation of bmt, however, seems to rule such things out. All predicate
constants, therefore, are of type (i, . . . , i)/1 (with 0 or more occurrences of i). For
applications it is convenient to assume that one of the predicates expresses identity of
individuals, but we shall not include principles of identity in our deductive system.
Logical vocabulary. We have the usual propositional connectives, quantiﬁer symbols,
parentheses, brackets, and braces, and many, many variables: for each bmt-type we
have alphabets of free and bound variables, and, in addition, for each simple type we
have an alphabet of abstract variables (which will only occur bound).
Well-formed expressions. We deﬁne the notions of term and formula by simultaneous
recursion:
1. Free variables (i.e., variables from the ﬁrst class of alphabets) and constants of
a given type are terms of that type;
2. If F is a term of some type (t1, . . . , tn)/k and a1, . . . , an are terms with corre-
sponding simple types t1, . . . , tn, F[a1, . . . , an] is a formula;
3. Negation and the other truth functional connectives form new formulas out of
old as usual;
4. IfAisaformula, notcontaininganyoccurrenceoftheboundbmt-typedvariable
x, a is a free variable of the same bmt-type as x, and Ax
a is the result of replacing
every occurrence of a in A with an occurrence of x, then ∃x(Ax
a) and ∀x(Ax
a)
are both formulas; and
5. If A is a formula, a1, . . . , an are free variables of bmt-types t1, . . . , tn re-
spectively, x1, . . . , xn abstract variables of the corresponding simple types t −
1, . . . , t −n which do not occur within A, and Aa...
x... is the result of simultane-
ously substituting occurrences of x1, . . . , xn for all occurrences of a1, . . . , an
in A, then {x1, . . . , xn : Aa...
x...} is a term of the bmt-type (t −1, . . . , t −n)/k,
where k is the maximum of the levels of the free bmt-typed variables occurring
in Aa...
x... or 1 + (the maximum of the levels of the quantiﬁed variables occurring

468
A. P. Hazen
in A), whichever is higher. (Note that this includes the case of propositional
abstracts: where A is a formula, {A} is a term of some type ()/k.)
Deductive apparatus. The usual machinery of rules for the connectives and for quanti-
ﬁers of each type (for deﬁniteness we might specify, say, the rules of LK from Gentzen
[14]), where the terms substitutable for the bound variables of any given bmt-type
are stipulated to be precisely the free variables, constants, and abstracts of that type.
For the purposes of this paper, this completes the description of the logic bmt;
axioms of extensionality, of inﬁnity, and for identity will be considered non-logical.
Extensionality. The 1925 logic is based on an extensional construal of the notion
of a propositional function in (at least) one clear sense. Higher-order properties and
relations—properties and relations, that is, holding of propositions and propositional
functions—are countenanced only insofar as they can, in principle, be deﬁned by ex-
pressions of an extensional language in which the variables for their arguments occur
as (the predicates of) atomic subformulas. No property deﬁned in such a way can
distinguish between co-extensive propositional functions. Analogues of set theory’s
Axioms of Extensionality, therefore, will be valid on Russell’s intended interpreta-
tion of bmt (though not, of course, derivable from the logical system deﬁned in the
previous section). The formulation of appropriate extensionality principles, however,
is a somewhat delicate matter, and their attribution to Russell somewhat contentious.
The problem is that, since the propositional functions of a given simple type come
in a topless inﬁnite hierarchy of levels, no quantiﬁed variable can range over all the
potential arguments of a higher-order predicate, making a straightforward statement
of extensionality impossible.
In the Introduction to the second edition, Russell (pp. xxxix, xl) somewhat ob-
scurely suggests that certain inferences related to extensionality are legitimate if their
premisses are “logical truths,” but not if they are only “hypotheses.” The idea seems
to be something like this. Suppose
∀x(F[x] ↔G[x]),
where x is a variable for propositional functions of some type, is a theorem of the
logic. In typical cases it will have been proven by proving
(F[a] ↔G[a]),
with a free variable, a. Now, provided nothing in the proof depended on the level
of the variable a, the same proof can be imitated with a higher level variable, and
the equivalence thus established for propositional functions of (the same simple type
but) arbitrary level. Thus, even though the variable x is of some deﬁnite level, the
provability of
∀x(F[x] ↔G[x])
often indicates that the equivalence holds at higher levels, whereas its mere truth, or
the fact that it follows from assumptions, does not.

A “Constructive” Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
469
Although an extensionality rule of this sort seems to be valid on Russell’s intended
interpretation of bmt, the sort of extensionality axiom familiar from set theory,
∀F∀G(∀x(F[x] ↔G[x]) →∀([F] ↔[G])),
is deeply problematic. Russell states it (p. xxxix), but it is not quite certain that he
meant to endorse it at all types: the variable x was restricted, in an earlier section of
the introduction, to ranging over individuals. Now, if, in the displayed formula, the
variable x is of type i (and F, G, and  consequently of types (i)/i, (i)/j, and ((i))/k
for some levels i, j and k), it is valid: since there are no distinctions of level among
individuals, the antecedent says in full generality that F and G are coextensive, imply-
ing that they cannot be distinguished by any  deﬁnable in an extensional language.
If x is of any propositional function type, however, it is not valid. Its implausibility
for function types can be seen by considering its corollary,
∀F∀G(∀x(F[x] ↔G[x]) →∀y(F[y] ↔G[y])),
where y is of the same simple type as x but of higher level. This says, essentially,
that if F and G agree on all functions of some low level, they will also agree on all
functions of a higher level, but this would only follow if for every higher level function
a coextensive function already existed at the lower level. And this is simply Russell’s
Axiom of Reducibility, which he was not assuming in the introduction and Appendix
B, and which is not valid on the intended interpretation of bmt. A counterexample to
a simple instance of this form in a speciﬁc substitutional model will be presented in
section 4D.
Substitutional semantics. Let a substitutional model be as in the previous
section: a structure of the standard sort for the First-Order fragment of the language,
with every individual in the domain having a name (so as to avoid complications
about satisfaction and assignments). Atomic sentences are true in this model under
the usual conditions. We wish to specify what it is for an arbitrary sentence to be
true in this model. Truth-functionally compounded sentences depend on their truth-
functional constituents in the standard way, and universal (existential) quantiﬁcations
are true if and only if all (at least one) of their instances are true. If the quantiﬁed
variable is an individual variable, the instances are the results of deleting the initial
quantiﬁer and substituting a name of an individual for all remaining instances of the
bound variable. If the quantiﬁed variable is of any other bmt-type, the instances are
the results of deleting the initial quantiﬁer and substituting some (closed) abstract for
all the remaining occurrences of the bound variable (and then, if necessary, reducing
to β-normal form). As in the case of irt, it is intuitively obvious that such a truth
deﬁnition reduces the truth value of a complex sentence to the truth values of its
instances (or truth-functional compounds), and, also as with irt, it must be shown
that the reducibility relation is well-founded: that, in terms of the game metaphor, the
game won’t go on forever. As usual, we show this by deﬁning an ordinal measure of
complexity or grade to the formulas of the language, and showing that every reduction

470
A. P. Hazen
of a formula (to an instance, if it is a quantiﬁcation, or to a truth-functional constituent)
leads to a reduction in grade.
The ordinal assignment for formulas of bmt will have to be a bit subtler than that
for irt. We may, as before, assign 0 to atomic formulas having predicates of the
language as predicates. With irt, the grade of an atomic formula with a variable as
its predicate was determined by the badness of the predicate, but this will not do for
bmt: since, in bmt, arguments may have the same level as, or a higher level than,
the predicate of an atomic formula, the levels of the arguments have to be taken into
consideration as well: consider the atomic formula
[{A}]
where  is a variable of type (())/1, and A is a formula containing variables of high
level. Admissible substituents of  will include
{p : p}
and
{p : (p & p)},
so the atomic formula will have substitution instances which (after β-reduction) in-
clude A itself and the conjunction (A & A).
The grade of the atomic formula,
therefore, will have to reﬂect the complexity of the argument. It turns out that the ap-
propriate strategy is to make the grade of an atomic formula depend on the maximum
of the levels of its terms, regardless of whether the maximum is achieved by the predi-
cate or an argument (or both). Where one or more of the arguments are abstracts, they
will be deemed to have the same level as the lowest-level bmt-typed variables substi-
tutable for them: the level of an abstract is therefore that of the highest-level variables
occurring free anywhere within it, including occurrences in smaller abstracts occur-
ring in it, or one more than the highest-level quantiﬁed variable occurring anywhere
within it, including occurrences in smaller abstracts, whichever is higher.
In deﬁning the grades of more complex formulas for irt, we were able to use a
particularly simple scheme for the purposes of the substitutional semantics, where only
closed formulas (sentences) were at issue. Because the open formulas substitutable for
a variable could contain free variables of the same badness as the ﬁrst variable itself,
however, a more complicated scheme was needed for proof-theoretic purposes. Since
the term of an atomic formula with highest level in bmt may not be the predicate, the
sort of problem that forced us to use the more complex scheme with open formulas in
irt arises in bmt arises even in the semantics of bmt: A, in the previous example,
can be chosen to be a sentence. Again, in irt we were able to keep the ordinals low
(the limit of the grades of formulas of irt is ω2) by the trick of raising the grade
by only 1 for an outer quantiﬁer with a variable of a certain badness, once an inner
quantiﬁer with a variable of the same or worse badness had been recorded. This,
however, was possible only because the arguments of an atomic formula are not as
bad as the predicate, so that when a predicate variable is eliminated, the formula that

A “Constructive” Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
471
replaces an atomic formula with the given variable as predicate must be built up from
atomic formulas of strictly lower grade. In bmt the level of a quantiﬁed variable must
be recorded in the grade of a formula regardless of how high the grade of the matrix of
the quantiﬁcation is. Thus, for example, let  in our previous example of a formula
be of type (())/2, with A containing bound variables of higher level. Then, if we tried
to use the trick that kept the grades low in irt, our grade for
∃([{A}])
would be (level of {A}) + 1. One admissible substituent for a variable of type (())/2,
however, is
{p : ∃([p])},
where  is a variable of type (())/1, so that
∃([{A}])
turns out (after β-reduction) to be an instance of
∃([{A}]).
Clearly, the grade of a formula of this form must record the level of the variable
quantiﬁed by the initial quantiﬁer.
A deﬁnition of grade satisfying these desiderata may be deﬁned as follows:
• the grade of an atomic sentence or quasi-formula with a predicate constant as
its predicate is 0
• the grade of an atomic quasi-formula with a predicate variable as its predicate is
ω(2k−1), where k is the level of that variable, or of the highest-level quasi-term
occurring as an argument to it, whichever is higher
• the grade of a negation is the grade of the negated formula (or quasi-formula)
+ 1
• the grade of a conjunction (etc) is the grade of whichever conjunct (. . .) has the
higher grade + 1
• the grade of a quantiﬁcation with an individual variable is the grade of the matrix
+ 1
• the grade of a quantiﬁcation with a higher-order variable of level k is the grade
of the matrix + ω2k.
(Note that the desire to record the level of variables of quantiﬁcation independently
of the grade of the matrix forces us to make our “jumps” by exponentiation rather than,
as with the grade deﬁnition for irt, multiplication. As a result the limit of the grades
of bmt formulas is ωω instead of ω2.)
It remains to verify that a reduction of a formula always reduces grade. The
cases of truth-functional compounds and quantiﬁcations with individual variables are

472
A. P. Hazen
standard, leaving the case of a higher-order quantiﬁcation with a variable of level k.
The initial effect of deleting the quantiﬁer is to subtract ω2k from the grade: in terms
of the standard notation for ordinals, to delete a ﬁnal addend of the form ω2k (or to
reduce by one the parameter in a ﬁnal addend of the form (ω2k) · n). The grade of the
matrix may increase, but not by enough to undo the effect of this subtraction. Note
ﬁrst that the substitution of an abstract for a variable as an argument in an atomic
(quasi-)formula cannot increase the grade of that atom, so we only need to worry
about substitutions of abstracts for predicates in atomic quasi-formulas. An abstract
substitutable for a bound variable of level k may contain bound variables of level no
higher than k −1, and may also (in the proof-theoretic environment: this does not
arise in the substitutional semantics, in which only the substituents considered are
closed abstracts) contain free variables of level no higher than k. Concretizing to
get rid of the abstract, we get a (quasi-)formula built up from atoms having, as their
predicates and arguments, free and bound variables of the abstract and/or argument
terms from the original atom. (If some of the arguments of the original atom were
themselves abstracts, further concretion may be needed to obtain a β-normal form,
yielding additional possibilities for the atoms of the new (quasi-)formula. Since,
however, the grade of the original atom already reﬂected levels of the highest-level
variables occurring in it, including occurrences within abstracts, it can be seen that
this further complication does not affect the argument.) Thus the highest possible
grade for an atomic (quasi-)subformula of the new (quasi-)formula is the same as the
grade of the atom we started with. The new (quasi-)formula is built up from these
atoms by means of truth-functional connectives and quantiﬁers with variables of level
no higher than k −1. Its grade, therefore, will be less than the grade of the original
atom + ω(2k−1). Substitution of formulas of this grade for occurrences of the original
atom, in turn, can raise the grade of the matrix of the original quantiﬁcation by no
more than ω(2k−1), so the reduction has yielded a formula of lower grade.
Note that this notion of grade can be used to both to establish the termination of the
semantic “game” (and so, as argued, the philosophical correctness of the formal logic
bmt given Russell’s “constructivistic” intentions) and also to prove the Hauptsatz for
bmt.
4. Mathematical Induction and Landini
Inthissectionwediscuss(ﬁrstsubsection)thegeneralquestionoftheutilityoframiﬁed
systems for the foundations of mathematics, (second) Russell’s Appendix B, (third)
Landini’s claim, and (fourth) make good on our claim from the previous section that
Landini’s extensionality axiom scheme is invalid on the substitutional semantics.
Arithmetic in Ramified Logics. The ﬁrst edition of Principia postulated re-
ducibility. Given inﬁnitely many individuals this allows the deﬁnition of cardinal
numbers as ((i))s (the equivalence classes of (i)s under the equipollence relation) and

A “Constructive” Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
473
the deﬁnition of the ﬁnite or natural numbers as those belonging to every (((i))) con-
taining 0 and closed under successor. First- and Higher-Order Peano Arithmetics are
interpretable in the system, with the rule of mathematical induction (ind) derived by
simple universal quantiﬁer elimination from the deﬁnition of natural number. The
Axiom of Reducibility, however, is introduced somewhat apologetically, as justiﬁed
mainly in terms of its consequences. What could Russell have done if he had com-
bined his philosophy of logic, including a certain scepticism about Reducibility, with
Brouwer’s (or Weyl’s) personality and willingness to advocate trimming mathematics
to eliminate the philosophically suspect bits? More precisely, how much of this devel-
opment is possible in a Ramiﬁed system: say, irt plus a weak Axiom of Inﬁnity? For
simplicity, assume that identity of individuals is given as a primitive predicate constant
of type (i, i)/1. (This assumption can be avoided—recall that the system with identity
can be interpreted in that without—at the expense of using variables a level of badness
higher in our deﬁnitions.)
It turns out that the deﬁnitions of cardinal number and the most familiar arithmetic
functions (addition, multiplication and—with a bit more work—exponentiation) can
be taken over with minimal changes, and, when ﬁnite numbers have been appropri-
ately deﬁned, can be proven to be total and to satisfy their usual recursion equations
over the ﬁnite numbers. Additional functions can be deﬁned by composition and by
bounded primitive recursion. The situation with ind, however, is delicate. The quan-
tiﬁcation over (((i)))s has to be restricted to some level or other (as well as having the
arguments speciﬁed as to level!)—for example, to (((i)/1)/1)/3s. The derivation of
ind then applies only to conditions which deﬁne propositional functions of this type:
in particular, to conditions which, when written out in primitive notation, contain no
quantiﬁed variables of this type. Most of the induction axioms of (First-Order) Peano
Arithmetic are therefore, not derivable in irt + Inﬁnity: quantiﬁcation over natural
numbers is represented by quantiﬁcation over cardinals restricted to ﬁnite ones, so any
number-theoretic condition containing (unbounded) quantiﬁcation over natural num-
bers translates into one containing forbidden bound variables! It is, however, possible
to prove that numbers less than a given natural number are themselves natural, so that
ind for number-theoretic conditions containing only bounded numerical quantiﬁers
is available. (Ramiﬁed Fourth-Order Logic is more complicated than most mathemat-
ical logicians want their underlying systems to be. A small fragment of arithmetic
is derived from an inﬁnity axiom in Ramiﬁed Second-Order Logic, using “logicist”
deﬁnitions in the spirit of Frege and Russell, in [21]. [5] makes further simpliﬁcations
and—in sections due solely to Burgess—establishes upper and lower bounds on how
much arithmetic is obtainable on this basis.)
Appendix B. bmt is a proper supersystem of irt, so it is not immediately apparent
that a foundational system employing it will have the same mathematical weakness
as irt + Inﬁnity. In the second of the three appendices added to the (ﬁrst volume
of the) second edition of Principia, Russell claimed to have derived unrestricted ind
in bmt + Inﬁnity. Had the claim been correct, this system would have served as a
natural foundation for predicative analysis, as advocated by Weyl and his followers.

474
A. P. Hazen
(Since bmt is a weaker Higher-Order Logic than Simple Type Theory, this would
have meant that the whole of First-Order Peano Arithmetic was derivable, but not
Higher-Order Arithmetics: in the Introduction to the second edition Russell notes that
bmt does not yield classical analysis.) The claim is, however, wrong: the proof given
is irremediably ﬂawed, as Gödel [16] appears to have been the ﬁrst to note.
Still, there is one point in the supposed proof suggesting that bmt might have
interesting mathematical advantages over irt. Lemma *89.12 states that every propo-
sitional function true of only ﬁnitely many objects is coextensive with a minimal level
propositional function. This lemma is correct, and of considerable use in deriving
mathematics within ramiﬁed systems like irt and bmt. (For examples of its use, see
[21].) It is provable in a stronger form in bmt, however, than in irt. For simplicity
let us consider propositional functions true of individuals and assume that identity
of individuals is expressed by a primitive of type (i, i)/1. For convenience we adopt
set-theoretic vocabulary (“subset,” “member,” …) for talking about propositional func-
tions and the items of which they are true. Recall also that levels are cumulative, so
that (i)/1 “sets” are included among the (i)/2s.
In irt we may deﬁne, for example, an (i)/2 set, X, to be ﬁnite if and only if it
belongs to every ((i)/2)/1 class which (a) includes all unit subsets of X, and (b) for
each proper (i)/2 subset, Y, of X included and each individual, x, in X −Y includes
also the union of Y with the unit set of x. (A fairly standard set-theoretic deﬁnition
of ﬁnite set.) The class of (i)/2 subsets of X which are coextensive with (i)/1 sets is
a ((i)/2)/1 class, denoted by the abstract
{Y : ∀x(Y[x] →X[x]) & ∃A∀x(Y[x] ↔A[x])},
where X and Y are of type (i)/2, A of type (i)/1, and x of type i. We now prove that
it fulﬁlls conditions (a) and (b).
(a) Let Y be a unit (i)/2 subset of X and x be its member. Then
{y : y = x}
is a (i)/1 set coextensive with Y.
(b) Let Y be an (i)/2 subset of X, let x be a member of X not in Y, and let A be
an (i)/1 set coextensive with Y. Then
{y : A[y] ∨y = x}
is an (i)/1 set coextensive with the (i)/2 set
{y : Y[y] ∨y = x}.
This proves a strictly limited version of *89.12: all ﬁnite (i)/2 sets are coextensive
with (i)/1 sets, but nothing is said about, say, ﬁnite (i)/3 sets: since they cannot belong
to ((i)/2)/1 classes, the deﬁnition of ﬁniteness does not apply to (i)/3 sets.
In bmt, by contrast, *89.12 can be proven in greater generality. The quantiﬁed
class variable in the deﬁnition of ﬁniteness may be taken to be of bmt-type ((i))/2 (or

A “Constructive” Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
475
of higher level with the same simple type), capable of taking as arguments variables
of simple type (i) and any level, and the bound set variables in conditions (a) and (b)
as of bmt-type (i)/2. The deﬁnition is applicable to sets of type (i)/n for any n, and
any ﬁnite set of any such bmt-type can be shown, by the same argument as before, to
be coextensive with an (i)/1.
Unfortunately for Russell, the result that he really needed, that every subset of
a ﬁnite set is ﬁnite (his *89.17) is still, apparently, not forthcoming. Leaving the
question of just what the mathematical strength of bmt + Inﬁnity is. Gödel leaves the
question open:
So the question whether (or to what extent) the theory of integers can
be obtained on the basis of the ramiﬁed hierarchy must be considered as
unsolved at the present time. ([16]: 146)
Burgess’s negative result in [5] for a system based on Ramiﬁed Second-Order Logic
is established by reference to Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorem: the system cannot
yield the mathematics needed for a proof of its own consistency, where a key step
in the obvious consistency proof is the establishment of Gentzen’s Hauptsatz for the
logic. In this connection, the fact that the complexity ordering of sentences used in
establishing the substitutional semantics and Hauptsatz for bmt is appreciably longer
than that needed for irt suggests that it may require stronger assumptions for its proof
than does that for irt, but it would certainly seem to provable in, say, (First-Order)
Peano Arithmetic. Given the Hauptsatz for the logic of bmt, a consistency proof for
bmt + Inﬁnity (with identity for individuals primitive and axioms of substitution of
identicals for all propositional functions taking individuals as arguments) is straight-
forward. By the Hauptsatz, any First-Order conclusion derivable from First-Order
premisses in bmt is derivable from them in First-Order Logic: any bmt-provable
sequent containing only First-Order formulas in the antecedent and succedent is a
valid sequent of First-Order Logic. To prove the consistency of bmt + Inﬁnity, then,
it sufﬁces to give an evidently consistent First-Order theory from which the axiom of
Inﬁnity is derivable in bmt. Consider the (decidable) theory of dense linear order
(with, for deﬁniteness, no top or bottom), formulated with identity and the order rela-
tions as primitives. (To turn this example into a concrete example of a substitutional
model, take the rational numbers as the domain of individuals, with names given by
appending fractions as subscripts to some constant symbol.) General substitution of
identicals is not derivable from the First-Order axioms for identity: substitution ax-
ioms allowing the substitution of terms for identicals as arguments to the predicate
constants of the First-Order language will not yield substitution as arguments to (i)/1
predicate variables. The system with general substitution of (individual) identicals is,
however, interpretable in the system without: simply restrict all higher-order quanti-
ﬁers of appropriate types to propositional functions for which substitution holds. A
good axiom of Inﬁnity asserts the existence of a ((i))/1 class of non-empty (i) sets
containing a proper superset of each of its members. But the class of sets of the form
{x : a < x & x < b}

476
A. P. Hazen
for a < b (these are all, for what it’s worth, (i)/1 sets) will work, and can be proven
to work. Given the elementary nature of the consistency proof just sketched, it seems
very unlikely that full ind (even for conditions in the language of First-Order Peano
Arithmetic) is derivable in bmt + Inﬁnity, but determining exactly what subsystem of
pa is obtainable would require a more reﬁned analysis. It seems that essentially the
argument given for *89.12 allows the “Pigeon-Hole” principle to be proven in a much
more general form in bmt + Inﬁnity than in irt + Inﬁnity, so the 1925 logic may be
of greater mathematical interest than has been believed!
Landini. In [25] Landini attempts to vindicate Russell by showing that the derivation
ofAppendix B could have been carried out successfully after all. (Landini is concerned
with provability and not with deﬁnability; the potentially misleading title of his article
is a reference to [32].) What he presents is a derivation of the key claim ofAppendix B,
*89.17, from bmt + Inﬁnity … plus Extensionality. Landini takes the extensionality
axiom discussed in section 3C above to hold for propositional functions in general,
and not just for functions taking only individuals as arguments. Landini’s derivation
is correct, and—Russell’s exposition not being as explicit as one could desire—it
may be that Russell, in 1925, believed that the extensionality axiom held on the
“constructive” interpretation motivating bmt. If he did believe this, he was wrong, as
we demonstrate in the next subsection. The logic bmt is primarily of interest in virtue
of having this constructivistic philosophical motivation, and since the extensionality
principle Landini needs is not valid on this interpretation, his derivation does not really
vindicate Russell.
Invalidity of Landini’s Axiom. In his replacement for Russell’s Appendix B
in [25], Landini appeals to a general extensionality principal which we have already
suggested is incompatible with the philosophical motivation for bmt. Subject to
reservations already mentioned, we may take the interpretation on which the higher-
order quantiﬁcations are interpreted substitutionally as a reasonable approximation to
the intended interpretation. If we can display a reasonable substitutional model on
which instances of the extensionality principal come out false, therefore, we will have
shown that Landini’s axiom is unacceptable.
Consider, therefore, the substitutional model built up over standardArithmetic: let
the individuals be just the natural numbers, and take as primitive vocabulary just the
usual vocabulary of First-Order Peano Arithmetic (reformulated, given our “ofﬁcial”
syntax, with predicates replacing the usual function symbols). The range of the type
(i)/1 variables on a substitutional interpretation being precisely those subsets of the
individual domain as are (parametrically) deﬁnable by First-Order formulas of the
language, the (i)/1 propositional functions on this interpretation correspond to the
arithmetic sets of natural numbers, and so on.
(Note that we are not now trying to “construct” arithmetic on a logicist basis,
but are rather assuming arithmetic in a metamathematical investigation of a logicist
logic, bmt: even though our goal is to evaluate Landini’s claims of success at logicist
construction, there is no circularity in our assuming arithmetic.)

A “Constructive” Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
477
The relevant extensionality principle is the schema
∀X(A(X) ↔B(X)) →∀F(A(F) ↔B(F)),
where X and F may be taken to be of types (i)/1 and (i)/2 respectively, and A and
B are arbitrary appropriate contexts. (This schema is stated, in full generality, at the
beginning of section 4 of [25]; it is essential to Landini’s proof.) In the particular sub-
stitutional model speciﬁed, then, X ranges over arithmetic sets of numbers. ByTarski’s
Theorem, the set of (Gödel numbers of) true sentences of First-Order Arithmetic is
not in the range of X. On the other hand, it is fairly easy to specify, in First-Order
Arithmetic supplemented with set variables, the conditions a set must satisfy in order
to be the set of truths of First-OrderArithmetic (for details, see Chapter 19 of [4]—the
claim is that the unit class of the set of truths of (First-Order) Arithmetic is deﬁnable
inArithmetic). We may, therefore, choose A(·) to express (on the speciﬁed interpreta-
tion) (·) is the set of Arithmetic truths and (there being no difﬁculty at all in expressing
being-the-negation-of via Gödel numbering) choose B(·) to express (·) is the set of
Arithmetic falsehoods. The antecedent, ∀X(A(X) ↔B(X)), of this instance of the
schema is, then, vacuously true: no item in the range of X satisﬁes either A(·) or B(·).
Now, it is also possible, for any given natural number n, to deﬁne in
First-Order Arithmetic the set of (Gödel numbers of) truths of First-Order Arithmetic
containing n or fewer quantiﬁers (details, again, in [4]): all these sets are, on the spec-
iﬁed substitutional model, (i)/1s. It is, moreover, possible to write out a condition
(with no quantiﬁed set variables) specifying exactly these “partial truth sets.” In the
speciﬁed substitutional model of bmt, to put it in other words, the class of partial
truth sets is deﬁned by a propositional function of type ((i))/1. But a sentence is a
truth of Arithmetic if and only if it is a member of some partial truth set! Quantify-
ing a variable of type (i)/1, then, we can write a formula expressing (·) is a truth of
First-Order Arithmetic. The set of truths of First-Order Arithmetic, then, amounts to
a (i)/2, as is, of course, the set of falsehoods. The set of truths is not identical to the
set of falsehoods, so the consequent, ∀F(A(F) ↔B(F)), is false. q.e.d.
Acknowledgement. An earlier, and drastically condensed, version of this paper has
been published as [23]. While accepting full responsibility for the present paper, I
would like to thank Dr. Davoren for her essential contribution to earlier phases of the
research.
References
[1]
Anderson, C. Anthony: 1986. Some difﬁculties concerning Russellian intensional logic.
Noˆus 20: 35–43.
[2]
Anderson, C. Anthony: 1989. Russellian intensional logic. In: J. Almog et al. (eds.),
Themes from Kaplan, New York: Oxford University Press.

478
A. P. Hazen
[3]
Benacerraf, Paul, and Hilary Putnam: 1964. Philosophy of Mathematics: Selected Read-
ings. Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall.
[4]
Boolos, George, and Richard Jeffrey: 1974. Computability and Logic. Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press. Later editions 1980 and 1989.
[5]
Burgess, John P., and Allen P. Hazen: 1999. Predicative logic and formal arithmetic.
Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 39 (1998 cover date): 1–17.
[6]
Carnap, Rudolf: 1928. Der Logische Aufbau der Welt. Berlin: Weltkreis. Eng. tr. The
Logical Structure of the World, Berkeley & Los Angeles: University of California Press,
1967.
[7]
Church, Alonzo: 1956. Introduction to Mathematical Logic. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press.
[8]
Church, Alonzo: 1974. Russellian simple type theory. Proceedings and Addresses of the
American Philosophical Association 47: 21–33.
[9]
Church, Alonzo: 1976. Comparison of Russell’s resolution of the semantical antinomies
with that of Tarski. Journal of Symbolic Logic 41: 747–760. Repr. with correction in R. L.
Martin (ed.), New Essays on Truth and the Liar Paradox, New York: Oxford University
Press.
[10]
Church,Alonzo: 1984. Russell’s theory of identity of propositions. Philosophia Naturalis
21: 513–522.
[11]
Davoren, Jen M. and Allen P. Hazen: 1991. Russell, Gödel and Skolem: how much of
arithmetic is predicative? Journal of Symbolic Logic 56: 1108–1109.
[12]
Dunn, John M. and Nuel D. Belnap: 1968. The substitution interpretation of the quanti-
ﬁers. Noˆus 2: 177–185.
[13]
Fitch, Frederick B.: 1938. The consistency of the ramiﬁed Principia. Journal of Symbolic
Logic 3: 140–149.
[14]
Gentzen, Gerhard: 1934. Untersuchungen über das logische Schliessen. Mathematische
Zeitschrift 39: 176–210 and 405–431. Eng. tr.: Investigations into logical deduction,
American Philosophical Quarterly 1 (1964): 288–306 and 2 (1965): 204–218. Eng. tr.
repr. in [15].
[15]
Gentzen, Gerhard: 1969. Collected Papers of Gerhart Gentzen. Edited by M. Szabo,
Amsterdam: North-Holland.
[16]
Gödel, Kurt: 1944. Russell’s mathematical logic. In P. A. Schilpp (ed.), The Philosophy
of Bertrand Russell, Evanston: Northwestern University. Repr. in [17] and other places.
[17]
Gödel, Kurt: 1990. Collected Works, vol. II. Edited by S. Feferman et al., New York:
Oxford University Press.
[18]
Goodman, Nelson: 1951. The Structure of Appearance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Press.
[19]
Grover, Dorothy: 1973. Propositional quantiﬁcation and quotation contexts. In [27].
[20]
Hazen, Allen P.: 1985. Nominalism and abstract entities. Analysis 45: 65–68.

A “Constructive” Extension of Ramiﬁed Type Theory
479
[21]
Hazen, Allen P.: 1992. Interpretability of Robinson’s arithmetic in the Ramiﬁed Second-
Order theory of dense linear order. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 33: 101–111.
[22]
Hazen, Allen P.: 1995. On quantifying out. Journal of Philosophical Logic 24: 291–319.
[23]
Hazen, Allen P. and Jen M. Davoren: 2000. Russell’s 1925 Logic. Australasian Journal
of Philosophy 78: 534–556.
[24]
Henkin, Leon: 1950. Completeness in the theory of types. Journal of Symbolic Logic 15:
81–91. Repr. in J. Hintikka (ed.), Philosophy of Mathematics, London: Oxford University
Press, 1969.
[25]
Landini, Gregory: 1996. The deﬁnability of the set of natural numbers in the 1925
Principia Mathematica. Journal of Philosophical Logic 25: 597–615.
[26]
Landini, Gregory: 1998: Russell’s Hidden Substitutional Theory. New York: Oxford
University Press.
[27]
Leblanc, Hugues (ed.): 1973. Truth, Syntax and Modality. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
[28]
Leblanc, Hugues: 1975. That Principia Mathematica, ﬁrst edition, is predicative after
all. Journal of Philosophical Logic 4: 67–70.
[29]
Leblanc, Hugues, and George Weaver: 1973. Truth-functionality and the ramiﬁed theory
of types. In [27].
[30]
Linsky, Bernard: 1999. Russell’s Metaphysical Logic. Stanford: csli.
[31]
Lorenzen, Paul: 1951.Algebraische und logistische Untersuchungen über freieVerbände.
Journal of Symbolic Logic 16: 81–106.
[32]
Myhill, John: 1974. The undeﬁnability of the set of natural numbers in the ramiﬁed
Principia. In: G. Nakhnikian (ed.), Bertrand Russell’s Philosophy, New York: Harper
and Row.
[33]
Myhill, John: 1979. A refutation of an unjustiﬁed attack on the axiom of reducibility.
In: G. W. Roberts (ed.), Bertrand Russell Memorial Volume, London: George Allen &
Unwin.
[34]
Parsons, Charles: 1971. Mathematics and ontology. Philosophical Review 80: 151–176.
Repr. in [38].
[35]
Parsons, Charles: 1971. A plea for substitutional quantiﬁcation. Journal of Philosophy
68: 231–237. Repr. with added note in [38].
[36]
Parsons, Charles: 1974. Sets and classes. Noˆus 8: 1–12. Repr. in [38].
[37]
Parsons, Charles: 1982. Substituional quantiﬁcation and mathematics (review of Gottlieb,
Ontological Economy). British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 33: 409–421.
[38]
Parsons, Charles: 1983. Mathematics in Philosophy. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
[39]
Pears, David: 1972. Bertrand Russell: a Collection of Critical Essays. New York: Dou-
bleday.
[40]
Quine, Willard V.: 1960. Word and Object. Cambridge: MIT Press.
[41]
Quine, WillardV.: 1963. Set Theory and its Logic. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

480
A. P. Hazen
[42]
Ramsey, Frank P.: 1925. The foundations of mathematics. Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society 25: 338–384. Repr. in [43, 44, 45].
[43]
Ramsey, Frank P.: 1931. Foundations of Mathematics and Other Logical Essays. Edited
by R. B. Braithwaite, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
[44]
Ramsey, Frank P.: 1978. Foundations: Essays in Philosophy, Logic, Mathematics and
Economics. Edited by D. H. Mellor, London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
[45]
Ramsey, Frank P.: 1990. Philosophical Papers. Edited by D. H. Mellor, Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press.
[46]
Russell, Bertrand: 1903. The Principles of Mathematics. London: Cambridge University
Press. Second edition with new introduction London: Allen & Unwin, 1925.
[47]
Russell, Bertrand: 1910–1911. On knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by de-
scription. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 11: 108–128. Repr. in [48].
[48]
Russell, Bertrand: 1918. Mysticism and Logic. London: Longmans, Green.
[49]
Russell, Bertrand: 1924. Logical atomism. In: J. H. Muirhead (ed.), Contemporary
British Philosophy (First Series), London: George Allen & Unwin. Repr. in [51].
[50]
Russell, Bertrand: 1925. Introduction (pp. xiii–xlvi) and three Appendices (pp. 635–
666) added to the second edition of [57]. The Introduction and Appendices A and C (pp.
401–408) (but not B) are included in [58].
[51]
Russell, Bertrand: 1956. Logic and Knowledge. Edited by R. C. Marsh, London: George
Allen & Unwin.
[52]
Schütte, Kurt: 1960. Beweistheorie. Berlin: Springer-Verlag.
[53]
Skolem, Thoralf: 1962. Abstract Set Theory. Notre Dame Mathematical Lectures 8. Notre
Dame: Notre Dame University.
[54] Taylor, Barry M. and Allen P. Hazen: 1995. Flexibly structured predication. Logique et
Analyse 139–140 (1992 cover date): 375–393.
[55] Toledo, Sue: 1975. Tableau Systems. Lecture Notes in Mathematics, vol. 447. Berlin:
Springer.
[56] Weyl, Hermann: 1918. Das Kontinuum. Leipzig: De Guyter. Eng. tr. The Continuum,
Kirksville, Missouri: Thomas Jefferson University Press, 1987.
[57] Whitehead, Alfred N. and Bertrand Russell: 1910. Principia Mathematica, vol. I. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. Second edition with additional matter by Rus-
sell, 1925.
[58] Whitehead, Alfred N. and Bertrand Russell: 1962. Principia Mathematica to *56.
Abridged reprint of second edition of [1910]. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University
Press.
Philosophy Department
University of Melbourne
Victoria 3010
Australia
E-mail: a.hazen@philosophy.unimelb.edu.au

Russell on Method
Andrew D. Irvine
Abstract. This paper explores a tension between Russell’s views on epistemology and his views
on philosophical method. According to Russell-the-foundationalist, epistemic certainty is a
common feature of both logical and empirical knowledge. According to Russell-the-fallibilist,
the analytic method implies a universal lack of certainty, not just in philosophy, but everywhere.
It is argued that it was this tension between epistemology and method that eventually resulted
in Russell abandoning his foundationalism in favour of an alternative theory of knowledge.
Bertrand Russell’s quest for certainty is both famous and well documented. “I wanted
certainty in the kind of way in which people want religious faith,” he says in his
autobiography. (See [39]: vol. 3, 220) Understood in this way, his foundationalism
in epistemology, while in some respects groundbreaking, is fully in keeping with
traditional epistemic goals.
For Russell-the-foundationalist, the aim of epistemic
justiﬁcation is epistemic certainty.
In contrast, Russell’s views about method stress the uncertainty of all logical, philo-
sophical and scientiﬁc claims. In his many writings about what he calls the “liberal”
or “scientiﬁc” outlook, Russell-the-fallibilist continually stresses the uncertainty of all
branches of justiﬁed belief. In these writings, Russell-the-foundationalist is nowhere
to be seen.
This apparent tension between Russell’s views on epistemology and his views on
method is signiﬁcant. According to Russell-the-foundationalist, epistemic certainty
is a common feature of both logical and empirical knowledge. In contrast, according
to Russell-the-fallibilist, both the analytic method and the liberal or scientiﬁc outlook
essentially imply a universal lack of certainty, not just in philosophy, but everywhere.
In what follows, it is argued that it was this tension between epistemology and method
that eventually resulted in Russell abandoning his foundationalism in favour of an
alternative theory of knowledge.
This paper is divided into four main parts. The ﬁrst reviews Russell’s founda-
tionalism with regard to both logical and empirical knowledge. The second reviews
Russell’s theory of analysis and his views about method more generally. The third in-
vestigates the tension between Russell’s theory of knowledge and his theory of method,
and concludes that this tension needs to be resolved. The fourth describes Russell’s
resolution. The paper ﬁnishes with some remarks about the signiﬁcance of this issue,
not only for Russell, but for analytic philosophy more generally.

482
A. D. Irvine
1. Russell’s Theory of Knowledge
Here is Russell at age 87 reviewing his life’s work:
There is only one constant preoccupation: I have throughout been anxious
to discover how much we can be said to know and with what degree of
certainty or doubtfulness. ([37]: 9)
Here he is making much the same point thirty-ﬁve years earlier:
From early youth, I had an ardent desire to believe that there can be such
a thing as knowledge, combined with a great difﬁculty in accepting much
that passes as knowledge. It seemed clear that the best chance of ﬁnding
indubitable truth would be in pure mathematics … . ([31]: 323)1
In other words, throughout his life, Russell’s desire for certainty permeated his philos-
ophy. As A. J.Ayer puts it, Russell “was a consistent sceptic, in the sense of holding
that all our accepted beliefs are open to question; he conceived it to be the business of
philosophy to try to set these doubts at rest.” ([1]: 66)
The main reason Russell believes that most propositions are open to doubt is that
they refer to entities whose existence is questionable. Because of this, the best way
to resolve such doubts is to identify or reduce each class of questionable entities to a
separate class of entities whose existence is more certain.
Russell observes that most of our beliefs involve inferences of one kind or another.
For example, unlike his idealist opponent, the early Russell accepts independently
existing physical objects as the underlying cause of perceptual experience.2
His
common-sense justiﬁcation of these objects uses what we would today call “infer-
ence to the best explanation.” By postulating independently existing physical objects,
we are better able to explain recurring patterns of experience. In short, we infer the
existence of such objects from their explanatory power.
This type of inference originally played a fundamental role in Russell’s philosophy,
especially in light of worries about naïve realism. According to Russell, not only the
argument from illusion, but science itself makes it difﬁcult to accept the claim that we
directly or naïvely perceive physical objects. As he puts it in An Inquiry into Meaning
and Truth, “Naïve realism leads to physics, and physics, if true, shows that naïve
realism is false. Therefore, naïve realism, if true, is false: therefore it is false.” ([33]:
15)3
Despite this, Russell also points out that
1Or as he puts it in [37]: 154–155, “My philosophical development, since the early years of the present
century, may be broadly described as a gradual retreat from Pythagoras. … I hoped, at that time, that all sci-
ence could become mathematical, including psychology. … My interest in the applications of mathematics
was gradually replaced by an interest in the principles upon which mathematics is based. This change came
about through a wish to refute mathematical scepticism.”
2See [22]: ch. 2. Russell later changes his mind on this issue. For example, in his [24] he attempts to
reduce physical objects to collections of sense-data. However, by the time he is writing both his [32] and
his [36] he has returned to the view that physical objects are best understood as inferred entities.
3It was this encapsulation of Russell’s argument against naïve realism that impressed Einstein.

Russell on Method
483
our world is not wholly a matter of inference. There are things that we
know without asking the opinion of men of science. If you are too hot
or too cold, you can be perfectly aware of this fact without asking the
physicist what heat and cold consist of. … We may give the name ‘data’
to all the things of which we are aware without inference. ([37]: 17)
We are thus led to Russell’s distinction between two kinds of knowledge of truths:
that which is direct, intuitive, certain and infallible, and that which is indirect, deriva-
tive, uncertain and open to error.4 To be justiﬁed, every indirect knowledge claim must
be validated by showing how it is derived from more fundamental, direct or intuitive
knowledge. The kinds of truths that are capable of being known directly include both
truths about immediate facts of sensation and truths of logic.5
Eventually, Russell supplemented this distinction between direct and indirect
knowledge with his famous distinction between knowledge by acquaintance and
knowledge by description.
As Russell puts it, “I say that I am acquainted with an object when I have a
direct cognitive relation to that object, i.e., when I am directly aware of the object
itself. When I speak of a cognitive relation here, I do not mean the sort of relation
which constitutes judgment, but the sort which constitutes presentation.” ([21]: 209)
Later, he clariﬁes this point by adding that acquaintance involves, not knowledge of
truths, but knowledge of things, cf. [22]: 44. Thus, while intuitive knowledge and
derivative knowledge both involve knowledge of propositions (or truths), knowledge
by acquaintance and knowledge by description both involve knowledge of objects (or
things).6 Since it is those objects with which we have direct acquaintance that are the
least questionable members of our ontology, it is these objects upon which Russell
ultimately bases his epistemology.
A paradigmatic example of the reduction of one questionable class of entities to
another, less questionable one, involves the reduction of material objects to sense-data.
For example, in Our Knowledge of the External World, Russell explains that
A thing may be deﬁned as a certain series of appearances, connected with
each other by continuity and by certain causal laws. … More generally, a
‘thing’ will be deﬁned as a certain series of aspects, namely those which
would commonly be said to be of the thing. To say that a certain aspect
is an aspect of a certain thing will merely mean that it is one of those
which, taken serially, are the thing. ([24]: 106–107)
Another example involves the reduction of numbers to classes. As Russell puts it
4For example, see [19]: 41f, as well as [21], [22], and [25].
5For example, see [22]: 109 where he states that propositions with the highest degree of self-evidence
(what he here calls “intuitive knowledge”) include “those which merely state what is given in sense, and
also certain abstract logical and arithmetical principles, and (though with less certainty) some ethical
propositions.”
6This distinction is slightly complicated by the fact that, even though knowledge by description is in part
based upon knowledge of truths, it is still knowledge of things, and not of truths. I am grateful to Russell
Wahl for reminding me of this point.

484
A. D. Irvine
Two equally numerous collections appear to have something in common:
this something is supposed to be their cardinal number. But so long as
the cardinal number is inferred from the collections, not constructed in
terms of them, its existence must remain in doubt. … By deﬁning the
cardinal number of a given collection as the class of all equally numerous
collections, we … thereby remove a needless doubt from the philosophy
of arithmetic. ([26]: 156)
In much the same way, points and instants are reduced to ordered classes of volumes
and events, and classes themselves are reduced to propositional functions.
Toobtainthesekindsofreductions, Russellrequiresthatweadoptwhathecalls“the
supreme maxim in scientiﬁc philosophizing,” namely the principle that “Whenever
possible, logical constructions,” or as he also sometimes puts it, logical ﬁctions, “are
to be substituted for inferred entities.”7 Ontological atoms turn out to be anything
that is not a construction in this sense. They are the objects that resist reduction to
other objects. Such objects are atomic, both in the sense that they fail to be composed
of individual, substantial parts, and in the sense that they exist independently of one
another. Their corresponding propositions are also atomic, both in the sense that they
contain no other propositions as parts, and in the sense that the members of any pair of
true atomic propositions will be logically independent of one another. It turns out that
formal logic, if carefully developed, will provide a mechanism for mirroring precisely,
not only the various relations between all such propositions, but their various internal
structures as well.
In one sense this goal of having logic mimic reality originates with Plato, for it
was Plato who ﬁrst enjoined us to carve nature at its joints.8 However, in a more
precise sense, it originates with Leibniz, for it was Leibniz who ﬁrst championed the
use of a logically ideal language, together with an instrument of universal deductive
reasoning. Together, Leibniz’s characteristica universalis and calculus ratiocinator
were intended to help us represent the world as it actually is and to reason about it
without fear of error. As Russell himself tells us, Leibniz believed that, with these
tools, “we should be able to reason in metaphysics and morals in much the same way
as in geometry and analysis … If controversies were to arise, there would be no more
need of disputation between two philosophers than between two accountants. For it
would sufﬁce to take their pencils in their hands, to sit down to their slates, and to
say to each other (with a friend as witness, if they liked): Let us calculate.” ([17]:
169–170) Thus, like Leibniz, Russell held that advances in metaphysics would occur
only when accompanied by advances in logic.
Even so, at this point we are entitled to inquire further about the nature of Russell’s
ontological atoms. How is it that they are to be identiﬁed?
7See [26]: 155. Cf., too, [24]: 107, and [31]: 326.
8For example, see Plato’s Statesman in [11]: 287c, where it is suggested that conceptual divisions should
be made “according to their natural divisions as we would carve a sacriﬁcial victim.”

Russell on Method
485
Russell’s answer is clearly inﬂuenced by his foundationalism. For Russell, genuine
ontological atoms are exactly those items with which we associate the highest degree
of epistemic certainty. In other words, they are exactly the items with which we have
direct experience. It is these items which are also capable of being denoted by logically
proper names.9
Originally, Russell referred to these items as “sense-data” and characterized them
as being “immediately known in sensation.” ([22]: 12) Later he referred to them as
“percepts,” but for current purposes this change in terminology is not signiﬁcant.
Like sense-data, percepts remain both epistemologically privileged and ontologically
fundamental.10
Underlying Russell’s logical atomism there thus appears the clear epistemic goal of
constructing less certain items out of more certain ones. From the “primitive data” of
experience we are able to construct or infer the existence of physical, mathematical and
other objects, and in so doing, our initial uncertainty about these objects is eliminated,
or at least greatly reduced.11
As a result, we have the following general picture of Russell’s theory of knowl-
edge. All propositional knowledge falls into (at least) two general categories, logical
knowledge and empirical knowledge. In both cases there exists a foundational class of
propositions that serves as a source of premisses for all derived beliefs. These propo-
sitions are known directly or intuitively, and include both truths about immediate facts
of sensation and truths of logic. In both cases our knowledge of these propositions
is, or comes close to being, certain, not only in the sense that these propositions are
indubitable, but also in the sense that there exist no other propositions from which we
could legitimately infer their falsehood.
These epistemologically privileged propositions are also atomic, both in the sense
that they contain no other propositions as parts, and in the sense that the members of any
pair of true atomic propositions will be logically independent of one another. Ideally,
our logic will perfectly mirror the structure of these (and all other) propositions.
Sentences used to express atomic propositions will include both proper names and
9It is in this context that Russell’s theory of descriptions, which solves the problem of how a non-existent
entity can serve as the subject of a proposition, becomes fundamental. His solution is justly famous, not
simply because he denies that many denoting phrases function as logically proper names, but because he
shows how propositions involving such phrases may be reconstructed to permit thisthis. (See [19])
10Initially, Russell distinguished sense-data from sensations, in the sense that sensations were to be
mental acts which took sense-data as their objects. However, by the time he wrote The Analysis of Mind in
1921 he had given up his belief in the existence of mental acts, largely because he no longer believed such
acts to be empirically detectable. As a result, he also abandoned the idea of sense-data, substituting in its
place the notion of “percepts.”
11Of course the project is not without its difﬁculties. For example, Ayer criticizes the construction of
physical objects out of sense-data as follows: “This theory is highly ingenious, but seems to me to fail on the
count of circularity. The difﬁculty is that if the physical object is to be constructed out of its appearances,
it cannot itself be used to collect them. The different appearances of the penny, in Russell’s example, have
ﬁrst to be associated purely on the basis of their qualities. But since different pennies may look very much
alike, and since they may also be perceived against very similar backgrounds, the only way in which we can
make sure of associating just those sensibilia that belong to the same penny is by situating them in wider
concepts.” See [1]: 78.

486
A. D. Irvine
predicates. Names will have as their meanings the objects they denote. Names may
also be distinguished from predicates since, unlike predicates, they are not tied to any
particular propositional form or structure. In other words, unlike, say, a two-place
predicate which must be accompanied (in any atomic sentence) by exactly two names,
names need not be associated with any speciﬁc form of predicate. Although human
beings may be acquainted with a variety of entities, including universals,12 the only
entities that we may name (as individuals) are the individual sense-data (or percepts)
with which we are acquainted. Any individual not known to us by acquaintance may
be known only through description.
Knowledge by description also turns out to rely crucially upon knowledge by
acquaintance. As Russell summarizes, “I think that all knowledge as to what there is
in the world, if it does not directly report facts known through perception or memory,
must be inferred from premisses of which, one, at least is known by perception or
memory.” ([37]: 97–98) In other words, accepting the existence of unperceived objects
still requires us to keep sense-data as the ultimate building blocks of the world.13 The
danger is that, in doing so, we may forget that unperceived objects really do exist. As
Russell explains,
Ifeelthattheconceptof‘experience’hasbeenverymuchover-emphasised,
especially in the Idealist philosophy, but also in many forms of empiri-
cism. … [Idealists] tend to think that only what is experienced can be
known to exist and that it is meaningless to assert that some things exist
although we do not know them to exist. … Everybody, in fact, accepts
innumerable propositions about things not experienced, but when people
begin to philosophise they seem to think it necessary to make themselves
artiﬁcially stupid. I will admit at once that there are difﬁculties in explain-
ing how we acquire knowledge that transcends experience, but I think the
view that we have no such knowledge is utterly untenable. ([37]: 97)
Russell goes on to observe that each claim involving knowledge by description will
have associated with it a degree of risk. This risk arises since each such claim relies
upon an inference to the effect that there exists an entity of the type described. This
in turn leads us back to Russell’s “supreme maxim” that “Whenever possible, logical
constructions are to be substituted for inferred entities.” ([26]: 155) However, since we
dramatically reduce our chance of error whenever we reduce a postulated object to one
constructed from objects known by acquaintance, the epistemic pay-off of Russell’s
12For example, see [22]: 109. Famously, Russell eventually abandoned the idea that the bare self was an
object of acquaintance, eliminating it in favour of classes of experiences. For example, compare [22]: 50,
109, with [24]: 73f, and [30]: chs. 5 and 6.
13In other words, according to Russell it was a mistake for the Idealists to accept both (1) the claim that
sense-data have all the qualities they appear to have, and (2) the claim that all the qualities of sense-data are
inevitably manifest. From an epistemological point of view, it is not just certainty concerning the existence
of things that is open to question, but also the certainty of claims about all such things. (I am grateful to
Russell Wahl for this helpful way of putting things.)

Russell on Method
487
program is immediate and clear. It is only by adopting Russell’s theory of logical
atomism together with his “supreme maxim” that we are able to answer the sceptic.14
2. Russell’s Method of Analysis
Recalling C. D. Broad’s quip that “As we all know, Mr. Russell produces a different
system of philosophy every few years,” ([3]: 79) many commentators have suggested
that Russell ﬂirted with a large variety of unrelated doctrines. For example, such
doctrines are regularly cited to include absolute idealism, platonism, logical atomism,
phenomenalism, and neutral monism, to name only a few. As a result, the charge
is often made that, rather than being a systematic philosopher, Russell was at best a
philosophical opportunist, adopting new views and abandoning old ones whenever the
need arose.
In contrast to this view, Russell himself saw all of his post-idealist philosophy as
having a unity not noticed by many authors.15 This unity arises as a result of his
methodology: philosophical analysis. In fact, Russell often claimed that he had more
conﬁdence in his methodology than in any speciﬁc philosophical theory or conclusion.
As he himself puts it,
My method invariably is to start from something vague but puzzling,
something which seems indubitable but which I cannot express with any
precision. I go through a process which is like that of ﬁrst seeing some-
thing with the naked eye and then examining it through a microscope.
I ﬁnd that by ﬁxity of attention divisions and distinctions appear where
none at ﬁrst was visible, just as through a microscope you can see the
bacilli in impure water which without the microscope are not discernible.
There are many who decry analysis, but it has seemed to be evident, as
in the case of the impure water, that analysis gives new knowledge with-
out destroying any of the previously existing knowledge. This applies
not only to the structure of physical things, but quite as much to con-
cepts. ‘Knowledge,’ for example, as commonly used is a very imprecise
term covering a number of different things and a number of stages from
certainty to slight probability.
It seems to me that philosophical investigation, as far as I have experi-
ence of it, starts from that curious and unsatisfactory state of mind in
14It is worth noting that this epistemic pay-off effects our knowledge of truths just as it effects our
knowledge of things. Once we reduce our knowledge of postulated objects to knowledge of objects known
by acquaintance, all that remains is a series of epistemologically secure inferences. As Russell puts it in his
[22]: 109 , “[o]ur derivative knowledge of truths consists of everything that we can deduce from self-evident
truths by the use of self-evident principles of deduction.”
15This interpretation has also been developed in accounts such as [44], [48], [14], [8], and [10].

488
A. D. Irvine
which one feels complete certainty without being able to say what one is
certain of. The process that results from prolonged attention is just like
that of watching an object approaching through a thick fog: at ﬁrst it is
only a vague darkness, but as it approaches articulations appear and one
discovers that it is a man or a woman, or a horse or a cow or what not. It
seems to me that those who object to analysis would wish us to be con-
tent with the initial dark blur. Belief in the above process is my strongest
and most unshakable prejudice as regards the methods of philosophical
investigation. ([37]: 98–99)
As Russell sees it, philosophical analysis mirrors the methodology of the natural
sciences. It consists of identifying some phenomenon which is not well understood,
analyzing this phenomenon in order to develop a theory that explains it, and then
testing, altering and reﬁning the theory until it accounts for all relevant data.
In this sense, philosophical analysis is closely related to what Russell calls the
“liberal” or “scientiﬁc” outlook. As he puts it, “The essence of the liberal outlook
lies not in what opinions are held, but in how they are held: instead of being held
dogmatically, they are held tentatively, and with a consciousness that new evidence
may at any moment lead to their abandonment. This is the way in which opinions are
held in science, as opposed to the way in which they are held in theology.” ([35]: 15)
Hence the title for the ﬁrst of Russell’s 1914 Lowell lectures, “The Scientiﬁc Method
in Philosophy.”16
This allegiance to method mattered a great deal to Russell. For example, here he
is in a letter to Lady Ottoline Morrell commenting on a conversation he had with one
of his students in 1912:
I began to talk about how philosophy should be studied—how people
ought to have more of the scientiﬁc impulse for collecting queer facts,
less fear of spending their time on matters not digniﬁed in themselves but
important for their consequences, as the man of science does with his test-
tubes; how the love of system, since new facts are the enemies of systems,
has to be kept rigidly in check, in spite of being a thing every philosopher
ought to have; how vital it is to avoid unction and ediﬁcation and the
wish to be literary. Some day I must write on how to study philosophy;
I have a lot to say about it. There is so much to be found out by patience
and a scientiﬁc spirit … [These ideas then] led me on to say how I didn’t
want to teach a doctrine, but a spirit, an attitude to philosophy. I do care
enormously about that.17
And here he is two years later, continuing to extol the virtues of analysis:
16Revised versions of these lectures appeared as chapters in [24]. Russell also used a similar title, “On
Scientiﬁc Method in Philosophy,” several months later when he gave the Herbert Spencer lecture in London.
An abridged version of the lecture appears as [27] in [28].
17Russell writing to Lady Ottoline Morrell in March of 1912, quoted in [40]: 6.

Russell on Method
489
Of the prospect of progress in philosophy, it would be rash to speak with
conﬁdence. Many of the traditional problems of philosophy, perhaps
most of those which have interested a wider circle than that of techni-
cal students, do not appear to be soluble by scientiﬁc methods. Just as
astronomy lost much of its human interest when it ceased to be astrol-
ogy, so philosophy must lose in attractiveness as it grows less prodigal
of promises. But to the large and still growing body of men engaged in
the pursuit of science—men who hitherto, not without justiﬁcation, have
turned aside from philosophy with a certain contempt—the new method,
successful already in such time-honoured problems as number, inﬁnity,
continuity, space and time, should make an appeal which the older meth-
ods have wholly failed to make. Physics, with its principle of relativity
and its revolutionary investigations into the nature of matter, is feeling the
need for that kind of novelty in fundamental hypotheses which scientiﬁc
philosophy aims at facilitating. The one and only condition, I believe,
which is necessary in order to secure for philosophy in the near future
an achievement surpassing all that has hitherto been accomplished by
philosophers, is the creation of a school of men with scientiﬁc training
and philosophical interests, unhampered by the traditions of the past, and
not misled by the literary methods of those who copy the ancients in all
except their merits. ([24]: 242)
Clearly, the very fact that analytic philosophy was as dominant as it was during the
20th century tells us something about Russell’s success.
Even so, in the current
context, there is one speciﬁc feature of Russell’s method worth emphasizing. This is
its hypothetical or inductive character.
Because of the work of scholars such as Peter Hylton18 and Nicholas Grifﬁn,19 we
now know just how much Russell’s philosophy was inﬂuenced by his early brush with
British idealism. However, like his Cambridge contemporary, G. E. Moore, the young
Russell soon broke with his idealist origins. Russell saw that the idealist doctrine of
internal relations led to a series of contradictions regarding asymmetrical (and other)
relations necessary for mathematics.20 This led to his defense of realism and to his
claim that relations exist independently of the individual natures of their relata. This
led, in turn, to his theory of logical atomism, in which all atomic facts exist in isolation
from one another. As a result, knowledge is largely to be gathered piecemeal, or by
induction, and it is for this reason that all (scientiﬁc) knowledge remains uncertain. It
is also for this reason that analysis is so useful. Since we obtain knowledge of things
independently of the totalities of which they are a part, it is only possible to obtain
new knowledge of the whole by ﬁrst learning something about its constituent parts.
18For example, see [12].
19For example, see [8].
20For example, in his [37]: 42 he comments as follows: “Leibniz gives an extreme example. He says that,
if a man living in Europe has a wife in India and the wife dies without his knowing it, the man undergoes
an intrinsic change at the moment of her death. This is the kind of doctrine that I was combating.”

490
A. D. Irvine
Knowledge claims obtained through philosophical analysis, like theoretical scientiﬁc
knowledge in general, are built up “tentatively, and with a consciousness that new
evidence may at any moment lead to their abandonment.” ([35]: 15)
As Hylton21 has also pointed out, prior to 1905 Russell writes as if it is the analysis
of ideas or concepts that is of primary interest to him.22 However, with the publication
of “On Denoting” Russell shifts from the analysis of concepts to the analysis of
propositions23 and it is from this point that Russell begins to emphasize his claim that
the form of a sentence will not, in general, be a helpful guide to the underlying logical
form of the proposition expressed by the sentence. Discovering the logical form of
a proposition or, as we are more likely to say today, a fact24 is thus not as straight
forward as one originally might have hoped. The discovery of the correct underlying
form will be largely a matter of hypothesis and conﬁrmation. In other words, it too
will be largely a matter of induction.
Unlike many philosophers who followed him, Russell’s theory of analysis is thus
intimately related to his realism. On Russell’s view, it is real-world facts (or proposi-
tions) that are to be studied and analyzed, not mind-independent concepts, or portions
of either scientiﬁc or natural language.25 At the same time, philosophical analysis
is equally concerned with the discovery of logical form,26 and it is in this sense that
“Philosophy becomes indistinguishable from logic as that word has now come to
be used.”27 In other words, it is the connection between real world facts and their
underlying logical form that analysis is intended to exhibit.
As we have already seen, analysis, in this sense, is also intimately connected to
Russell’s epistemology, and to his notion of acquaintance. Analysis is complete only
when we discover the elementary, epistemologically privileged atoms known to us
through acquaintance. However, as Bill Lycan has pointed out, for the contemporary
scientiﬁc realist, this connection between ontological and logical atoms is less than
straight-forward:
To a (purely hypothetical) contemporary metaphysician who had never
been inﬂuenced by Russell, the alleged identity of logical atoms with on-
tological atoms (and accordingly, that of logical ﬁction with ontological
complexes of some sort) would come as quite a surprise. A philosopher
who inclines toward scientiﬁc realism thinks of scientiﬁc posits such as
quarks and gluons as being the basic building blocks of the physical uni-
verse at least, but this same philosopher, turning to semantics, would never
suppose that the true sentences of English were semantically analyzable
21See [13]: 41.
22For example, see [17]: 18 and [18]: 111.
23See not only [19], but also [33]: ch. 12.
24Russell himself equivocates between these two terms.
25For example, see both [9] and [13] for helpful surveys of how the term “analysis” was understood by
other philosophers, including G. E. Moore, Rudolf Carnap, Ludwig Wittgenstein and W.V. Quine.
26For example, see [24]: 42, or [27]: 112.
27Cf. [27]: 111–112. See also [31]: 323.

Russell on Method
491
into logical formulas whose (genuine) referring terms named quarks or
gluons … Why, then, did Russell maintain to the contrary that all and
only logical atoms are ontological atoms …?
Thereisaquickandobviousﬁrstanswertothisquestion: Russellwasnota
‘scientiﬁc realist’in the sense I have gestured toward, but a phenomenalist.
His ontology featured sense-data, not scientiﬁc posits such as quarks and
gluons. And it is the epistemological properties of Russell’s sense-data
that form the bridge between logical and ontological ﬁctionhood. ([16]:
237–238)
But just how strong is this bridge? Given the large amount of non-deductive detective
work required to distinguish between grammatical and logical form, what guarantee do
we have that Russell’s original goal of achieving epistemic certainty will be satisﬁed?
And given Russell’s heavy reliance on induction in justifying both logical and scientiﬁc
knowledge, how certain can we be about any individual knowledge claim, whether in
logic, science, or philosophy?
In his early writings, Russell uses the term “regressive method” to refer to any
type of inference that involves the conﬁrmation of hypotheses by their consequences.
In the sciences, this type of conﬁrmation is regularly considered to serve as a norm.
However, given Russell’s overall scientiﬁc outlook, this same method is found even
in mathematics and philosophy.28 In the case of mathematics, for example, Rus-
sell observes that “Some of the premisses are much less obvious than some of their
consequences, and are believed chieﬂy because of their consequences,”29 and since
“the inferring of premisses from consequences is the essence of induction,” it follows
that “the method in investigating the principles of mathematics is really an inductive
method, and is substantially the same as the method of discovering general laws in any
other science.” ([20]: 274)Yet if so, a high degree of uncertainty is bound to effect even
logic and mathematics, and once the regressive method is adopted, Russell’s original
goal of achieving universal epistemic certainty fades quickly into the background.
Whether he is defending his adoption of the axiom of reducibility in Principia
Mathematica30 or his postulates of scientiﬁc inference in Human Knowledge: Its
Scope and Limits31 over forty years later, Russell’s reliance on induction is central to
his overall program of work. The result is a unity, not just within Russell’s mathemat-
ical philosophy, but within his epistemology as well. As Alan Wood memorably puts
it, Russell’s “work on epistemology was not a kind of subsidiary supplement to his
work on mathematical philosophy. It came from the same workshop and was made
with the same tools.” ([48]: 196)32 Ultimately, however, this unity would bring with
it the downfall of Russell’s epistemic foundationalism.
28See [14] for a summary of the basic argument.
29See [31]: 325. Compare [33]: 16.
30See [45]: xiv, 59–60. Compare [37]: 90f.
31For a summary, see [36]: ch. 9.
32Also see [37]: 12 where we read that it is Russell’s goal to “reverse the process which has been common
in philosophy since Kant … [namely] to begin with how we know and proceed afterwards to what we know.”

492
A. D. Irvine
3. The Tension between Knowledge and Method
It is well known that, according to Russell, philosophy has two main purposes. The
ﬁrst is to encourage a degree of intellectual modesty; to show that there are things
that we thought we knew but do not. As Russell explains, philosophy allows us to see
that even our most everyday observations have associated with them questions that
are difﬁcult to resolve. As he puts it in Problems of Philosophy, philosophy “removes
the somewhat arrogant dogmatism of those who have never traveled into the region of
liberating doubt, and it keeps alive our sense of wonder by showing familiar things in
an unfamiliar aspect.” ([22]: 157)
Philosophy’s second purpose is to encourage speculation about things that are
not yet amenable to scientiﬁc investigation. In other words, it is “to keep alive that
speculative interest in the universe which is apt to be killed by conﬁning ourselves
to deﬁnitely ascertainable knowledge.” ([22]: 156) Says Russell, “There are a great
many things of immense interest about which science, at present at any rate, knows
little and I don’t want people’s imaginations to be limited and enclosed within what
can be now known.” ([38]: 9f.) As a result, philosophical questions “enlarge our
conception of what is possible, enrich our intellectual imagination, and diminish the
dogmatic assurance which closes the mind against speculation … .” ([22]: 161)
On this view, despite its shared method (in the broad sense) with science, phi-
losophy should be understood as a kind of pre-science, something that occupies us
prior to our being able to address matters scientiﬁcally or within what, to borrow a
term from Kuhn, we might call “normal science.” As Russell puts it, “philosophy
consists of speculations about matters where exact knowledge is not yet possible. …
science is what we know and philosophy is what we don’t know.” ([38]: 9) It is for
this reason that “questions are perpetually passing over from philosophy into science
as knowledge advances.” ([38]: 9) It is for this same reason that philosophy contains
so little that is uncontroversial. As Russell explains, as soon as deﬁnite knowledge
concerning any subject becomes possible,
this subject ceases to be called philosophy, and becomes a separate sci-
ence. The whole study of the heavens, which now belongs to astronomy,
was once included in philosophy; Newton’s great work was called ‘the
mathematical principles of natural philosophy.’ Similarly, the study of
the human mind, which was a part of philosophy, has now been separated
from philosophy and has become the science of psychology. Thus, to
a great extent, the uncertainty of philosophy is more apparent than real:
those questions which are already capable of deﬁnite answers are placed
in the sciences, while those only to which, at present, no deﬁnite answer
can be given, remain to form the residue which is called philosophy. ([22]:
155)
According to Russell, “this is a mistake, because knowing how we know is [only] one small department of
knowing what we know.”

Russell on Method
493
In one sense, then, philosophy and science are on a par: both share a similar method
and both have as their goal our understanding of the world. At the same time, phi-
losophy remains pre-scientiﬁc in the sense that the questions and issues it addresses
are often not yet well-deﬁned, not yet sharp enough to be regularized into normal
science. Seen in this light, Gödel’s famous comment that “while philosophy analyzes
the fundamental concepts, science only uses them”33 and Einstein’s related suggestion
that “Science without epistemology is—insofar as it is thinkable at all—primitive and
muddled,” ([6]: 684) can both be understood as Russellian in temperament.
As Russell tells us, his philosophical methodology therefore emphasizes our ability
to move from the vague to the precise, from pre-science to science: “It is a rather
curious fact in philosophy that the data which are undeniable to start with are always
rather vague and ambiguous. … The process of sound philosophizing, to my mind,
consists mainly in passing from those obvious, vague, ambiguous things, that we
feel quite sure of, to something precise, clear, [and] deﬁnite, which by reﬂection and
analysis we ﬁnd is involved in the vague thing that we start from, and is, so to speak,
the real truth of which that vague thing is a sort of shadow.” ([29]: 179–180)
As an example, Russell considers the claim that there are a number of people in
this room at this moment. Although in some sense the claim may be undeniable, it
turns out that when we try to deﬁne what a room is, or what it is for a person to be in
a room, or what it is to be a person, we ﬁnd such tasks remarkably difﬁcult. Moving
from the vague to the precise is never easy or straightforward. Says Russell, “If I start
with the statement that there are so and so many people in this room, and then set
to work to make that statement precise, I shall run a great many risks and it will be
extremely likely that any precise statement I make will be something not true at all.
So you cannot very easily or simply get from these vague undeniable things to precise
things which are going to retain the undeniability of the starting-point.” ([29]: 180)
Hence we have Russell’s famous comment to the effect that “the point of philosophy
is to start with something so simple as to not seem worth stating, and to end with
something so paradoxical that no one will believe it.” ([29]: 193)
For Russell, being a logical atomist is thus really just having a certain kind of
method: “It means, in my mind,” says Russell, “that the way to get at the nature of any
subject matter you’re looking at is analysis—and that you can analyze until you get to
things that can’t be analyzed any further and those would be logical atoms. I call them
logical atoms because they’re not little bits of matter. They’re the ideas, so to speak,
out of which a thing is built.” ([38]: 12)As we have seen, it is in this sense that Russell
claims philosophy to be “indistinguishable from logic.” ([27]: 111) It is also in this
sense that Russell concludes that methodology, or logic, is fundamental, “and that
schools should be characterized rather by their logic than by their metaphysic.” ([31]:
323)
As we have seen, Russell is also famous for emphasizing both the fundamental
epistemic role that analysis plays, and the similarities between philosophical analysis
33Kurt Gödel, paraphrased in [43]: 151.

494
A. D. Irvine
and scientiﬁc method, going so far as to call his method “the scientiﬁc method in
philosophy.”34 But how are these two aspects of Russell’s program to be reconciled?
On the one hand, his method of analysis has been designed especially to help answer
the sceptic, to reduce epistemologically questionable entities to more certain ones
using his “supreme maxim in scientiﬁc philosophizing.” On the other hand, he also
tells us that the very “essence” of his methodology requires that beliefs be held only
“tentatively” or provisionally, and that new evidence may at any moment lead to
their abandonment. Scientiﬁc theories, he reminds us, are accepted only as “useful
hypotheses” and that “no sensible person regards them as immutably perfect.” ([35]:
18) The result is that, on the one hand, philosophical analysis is designed to secure
epistemic certainty; but on the other, it has as its consequence universal uncertainty.
Of course, one way out of this dilemma might be to conclude that we have mis-
understood Russell on either one or both of these points. For example, Russell often
states that philosophy is to be distinguished from science, not by its method or its
goals, but by its subject matter. Unlike the more subject-speciﬁc scientiﬁc disciplines,
philosophy investigates only the most general aspects of the world, and it is because
of this generality that philosophy is able to proceed, as it apparently does, a priori.
In other words, it may be that our dilemma need not be resolved since, ultimately, it
never really arises: theories of epistemic justiﬁcation, on the one hand, and theories of
philosophical method, on the other, would be properly understood as completely dis-
tinct theories about completely distinct phenomena. Epistemic justiﬁcation increases
certainty, just as it has been designed to do. Theories about epistemic justiﬁcation, on
the other hand, bring with them no such guarantee.
ButisthiswayoutofRussell’sdilemmasuccessful? IfRussellisright, thescientiﬁc
outlook will permeate all branches of rational inquiry, including both science and phi-
losophy. In addition, as Russell is regularly at pains to remind us, “Philosophy, like all
other studies, aims primarily at knowledge.” ([22]: 154) Unlike Wittgenstein, who in
the Tractatus tells us that philosophy is distinct from science (cf. [46]: 4.111), Russell
sees philosophy as being on a continuum with science. Unlike Wittgenstein’s char-
acterization of philosophy as a non-cognitive activity that may be used and practiced,
but which ultimately must be “passed over in silence,” ([46]: 7) Russell’s philosophy,
including his theory of method, remains a branch of knowledge proper. Yet if so,
it will be sensitive to exactly the same doubts, errors and uncertainties as any other
branch of knowledge. It follows that distinguishing between epistemic justiﬁcation,
on the one hand, and theories about epistemic justiﬁcation, on the other, cannot serve
as a way out of our dilemma.
How, then, is this tension between certainty and uncertainty to be resolved?
34See note 16 above.

Russell on Method
495
4. Russell’s Way out
With
the
publication,
in
1984,
of
Russell’s
1913 Theory
of
Knowledge
manuscript, we now know much more about the impact that Wittgenstein’s criticisms
had on Russell’s work in epistemology.35 These criticisms, it turns out, were just as
devastating in epistemology as they had been in logic and mathematics. “I thought
of mathematics with reverence,” Russell tells us, “and suffered when Wittgenstein led
me to regard it as nothing but tautologies.”36 It now appears that the setback was
just as great when Russell was faced with Wittgenstein’s claim that Russell’s theory
of judgment was not up to the task of explaining even elementary logical inferences.
(See [5]: xxvii) Given Russell’s foundationalism, how was logical knowledge to be
explained? By June of 1913, Russell would write that Wittgenstein’s criticism made
him feel “ready for suicide.” ([5]: xxvii) Intellectually, it meant that he would be
unable to work seriously on his theory of knowledge “for years to come.”37
In helping us understand why this is so, Ken Blackwell’s analysis is particularly
telling: “I believe he hoped,” Blackwell tells us, that Russell’s originally planned
book on this topic “would do for epistemology what Principia had done for logic and
mathematics. Inshort, whileeschewingaxiomsandsymbolicdemonstration, hehoped
to erect an unimpeachable system, which would function deductively, demonstrating
our knowledge of the external world. It was a far grander effort than the book of
this title written partly in despair and with drastically pruned ambitions a few months
later.”38
In contrast to this grand hope, Wittgenstein led Russell to the view that his newly
formed multiple-relation theory of judgment was an utter failure. (See [7]) Originally
introduced by Russell to avoid the problem of false beliefs (i.e., the problem of what
it is that our beliefs are about when we believe falsely), the multiple-relation theory
ultimately proved to be inconsistent with Russell’s theory of types and of logical form.
(See [7] and [41]) It seemed that either Russell would have to give up his explanation
of how we accept many of even the most elementary judgments, or he would have to
give up his resolution of the paradoxes. Since neither option appeared plausible, the
result was paralysis.
Yet even more challenging issues were still to come. The main one was that,
like logic, philosophy itself was soon to be viewed by Wittgenstein as an activity
empty in content. Like logic, epistemology would have to become either an empirical
science akin to descriptive psychology or else mere tautology. Thus, just as analytic
philosophy itself was about to divide into Quine’s naturalized epistemology on the one
hand, and Wittgenstein’s natural language philosophy on the other, Russell himself
35Prior to the release of this material in [23], Russell’s only published reference to these criticisms
occurred in [39]: vol. 2, 57.
36Cf. [34]: 19. See also [37]: 119.
37See [2]: 111 and [5]: xxviii.
38See [2]: 109. Compare [5]: xxii.

496
A. D. Irvine
felt forced to choose between these two horns of the dilemma. Initially, at least, the
result was intellectually debilitating.
OnWittgenstein’sdevelopingview, allmeaningfulthoughtsweretruth-functionally
analyzable into elementary, atomic propositions. These, in turn, were analyzable into
names, predicates and logical forms, all of the appropriate Russellian kind. But how
could sentences in philosophy meet these strict requirements? What empirical content
does epistemology (or metaphysics, or ethics) have? As Hylton puts it, “if the doc-
trines of the Tractatus are true then they cannot be expressed, so the sentences which
(apparently) attempt to express them are nonsensical.” ([13]: 45) As Hacker puts it,
“The Tractatus itself is the swan song of metaphysics, for its propositions are non-
sense. There are no philosophical propositions, hence no philosophical knowledge.
Philosophy is not a cognitive discipline. Its contribution is not to human knowledge,
but to human understanding. The task of philosophy is the activity of logical clari-
ﬁcation.”39 And as Urmson so starkly puts it, if Wittgenstein is right, “There are no
philosophical propositions.” ([42]: 105)
All this was still in the future. In 1913 Russell only knew that his then current
theory of knowledge was not up to the task of explaining logical certainty. As he puts it,
“My impulse was shattered, like a wave dashed to pieces against a breakwater.” ([39]:
vol. 2, 57)
Despite this sad conclusion to the 1913 manuscript, our story need not end so
unhappily. By the time Russell was able to complete An Inquiry into Meaning and
Truth in 1940, there was not only change, but resolution. By 1940, Russell had given
up the claim that sensations yield direct, error-free knowledge. In other words, he had
given up knowledge by acquaintance in the traditional sense and, with it, epistemic
foundationalism. In contrast to the robust defense of immediate knowledge given in
both Problems of Philosophy and Our Knowledge of the ExternalWorld, Russell’s new
theory of neutral monism opened the door to anti-foundationalism. In effect, this new
theory admits that there is no direct perception, and hence that there is no perception
free of interpretation, no perception free of potential misinterpretation and potential
error. While rejecting coherence in the sense of Neurath and Hempel (cf. [33]: 139–
140), Russell comes to accept the view that epistemic justiﬁcation is based upon “a
combination of self-evidence with coherence: sometimes one factor is very much
more important than the other, but in theory coherence always plays some part.” ([33]:
161) Even at the level of percepts, there is the possibility of error: “When two percepts
A and B occur together, the occurrence of a percept closely similar to A on a future
occasion may cause an image closely similar to B.” ([33]: 161) Thus, as Elizabeth
Eames summarizes, by 1940, Russell had
acknowledged that perceptual experience comes with built-in interpreta-
tions due to memory, organic habits, the inﬂuence of attention, and the
interest of the organism. It seems that it was Russell’s reading of be-
havioristic psychology and a careful attention to experience that brought
39Cf. [9]: 19. See, too [46]: 4.112.

Russell on Method
497
about this change. With this new position the possibility of anchoring de-
scriptive knowledge to its validation in knowledge by acquaintance was
excluded. Sensory knowledge became ‘the sensory core’of the perceptual
experience. ([4]: 123)40
Should we be surprised? Perhaps not. Even as early as 1912 Russell was telling
us that it is the job of philosophy to
show us the hierarchy of our instinctive beliefs … It should take care to
show that, in the form in which they are ﬁnally set forth, our instinctive
beliefs do not clash, but form a harmonious system. There can never be
any reason for rejecting one instinctive belief except that it clashes with
others; thus, if they are found to harmonize, the whole system becomes
worthy of acceptance. … by organizing our instinctive beliefs and their
consequences, by considering which among them is most possible, if
necessary, to modify or abandon, we can arrive, on the basis of accepting
as our sole data what we instinctively believe at an orderly systematic
organization of our knowledge, in which, though the possibility of error
remains, its likelihood is diminished by the interrelation of the parts and
by the critical scrutiny which has preceded acquiescence. ([22]: 25–26)
Seen in the context of Russell’s original foundationalism, such comments are clearly
anomalous. At least some instinctive beliefs, after all, were originally intended to be
both direct and error-free.41 But if so, how could such beliefs ever come into conﬂict
with one another? Also, on a foundationalist account, why should some instinctive
beliefs be thought more probable than others? And, why would epistemic justiﬁcation
increase once these beliefs are made “to harmonize”?
In contrast, any theory of knowledge that abandons certainty ([33]: 133) and
that emphasizes both the importance of coherence and the necessity of integrating
scientiﬁc and philosophical knowledge ([33]: 131) will have avoided the tension
between foundationalism and method. Thus, it is by abandoning his foundationalism
that Russell not only resolves the tension between certainty and uncertainty; it is with
this single change that he side-steps Wittgenstein’s challenge and clears the way for
Quine.
Acknowledgement. An abbreviated version of this paper was read at the confer-
ence “One Hundred Years of Russell’s Paradox” held at the University of Munich in
40Even so, in parts of his [33]: 137 ff, Russell remains ambiguous about several of these points. For
example, although they are deﬁned as “a subclass of epistemological premisses … which are caused, as
immediately as possible, by perceptive experiences” (italics added), Russell clearly continues to advocate
the acceptance of what he calls “basic propositions” (see especially ch. 10). Later in the book Russell also
comments as follows: “There is a tendency—not conﬁned to Neurath and Hempel, but prevalent in much
modern philosophy—to forget the arguments of Descartes and Berkeley. It may be that these arguments
can be refuted, though, as regards our present question, I do not believe that they can be.” ([33]: 143f.)
41This is so even though Russell distinguished between instinctive and intuitive knowledge. For example,
see [22]: ch. 11. Again, I am grateful to Russell Wahl for reminding me of this point.

498
A. D. Irvine
June, 2001. I would like to extend my thanks to Godehard Link and the other members
of the conference’s organizing committee for their support. I would also like to thank
Melinda Hogan, Peter Hylton, Alan Richardson and Russell Wahl for their helpful
comments and suggestions.
References
[1]
Ayer, Alfred J.: 1972. Bertrand Russell as a philosopher. Proceedings of the British
Academy 58: 127–151. Repr. in [15], vol. 1, 65–85.
[2]
Blackwell, Kenneth: 1981. The early Wittgenstein and the middle Russell. In: Irving
Block (ed.), Perspectives on the Philosophy of Wittgenstein, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1–30. Repr. in [15] vol. 1, 96–123.
[3]
Broad, Charles D.: 1924. Critical and speculative philosophy. In: John H. Muirhead (ed.),
Contemporary British Philosophy, London: George Allen & Unwin, 75–100.
[4]
Eames, Elizabeth R.: 1972. Russell on ‘What there is’. Revue Internationale de Philoso-
phie 26: 483–498. Repr. in [15] vol. 3, 115–127.
[5]
Eames, Elizabeth R.: 1984. Introduction. In: [23], xv-xlv.
[6]
Einstein, Albert: 1949. Reply to criticisms. In: Paul A. Schilpp (ed.), Albert Einstein:
Philosopher-Scientist, London: Cambridge University Press, 663–688.
[7]
Grifﬁn, Nicholas: 1986.Wittgenstein’s criticism of Russell’s theory of judgement. Russell
4: 132–145.
[8]
Grifﬁn, Nicholas: 1991. Russell’s Idealist Apprenticeship. Oxford: Clarendon.
[9]
Hacker, Peter M. S.: 1998. Analytic philosophy: What, whence, and whither? In: Anat
Biletzki and Anat Matar (eds.), The Story of Analytic Philosophy. London: Routledge,
3–34.
[10]
Hager, Paul J.: 1994. Continuity and Change in the Development of Russell’s Philosophy.
Dordrecht: Kluwer.
[11]
Hamilton, Edith, and Huntington Cairns (eds.): 1961. The Collected Dialogues of Plato.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
[12]
Hylton, Peter: 1990. Russell, Idealism, and the Emergence of Analytic Philosophy. Ox-
ford: Clarendon.
[13]
Hylton, Peter: 1998. Analysis in analytic philosophy. In: Anat Biletzki and Anat Matar
(eds.), The Story of Analytic Philosophy, London: Routledge, 38–55.
[14]
Irvine, Andrew D.: 1989. Epistemic logicism and Russell’s regressive method. Philo-
sophical Studies 55: 303–327. Repr. in [15], vol. 2, 172–195.
[15]
Irvine, Andrew D.: 1999. Bertrand Russell: Critical Assessments, 4 vols. London: Rout-
ledge.
[16]
Lycan, William: 1981. Logical atomism and ontological atoms. Synthese 46: 207–229.
Repr. in [15] vol. 3, 237–238.

Russell on Method
499
[17]
Russell, Bertrand: 1900. A Critical Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz, 2nd edn.
London: George Allen & Unwin, 1937.
[18]
Russell, Bertrand: 1903. Principles of Mathematics, 2nd edn. London: George Allen &
Unwin, 1937.
[19]
Russell, Bertrand: 1905. On denoting. In: Logic and Knowledge, London: George Allen
& Unwin, 1956, 41–56.
[20]
Russell, Bertrand: 1907. The regressive method of discovering the premises of mathe-
matics. In: Essays in Analysis, London: George Allen & Unwin, 1973, 272–283.
[21]
Russell, Bertrand: 1911. Knowledge by acquaintance and knowledge by description. In:
[28], 209–232.
[22]
Russell, Bertrand: 1912. Problems of Philosophy. New York and Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1997.
[23]
Russell, Bertrand: 1913. Theory of Knowledge: The 1913 Manuscript. Collected Papers
of Bertrand Russell, vol. 7. London: George Allen & Unwin, 1984.
[24]
Russell, Bertrand: 1914. Our Knowledge of the External World. Chicago and London:
Open Court.
[25]
Russell, Bertrand: 1914. On the nature of acquaintance. In: Logic and Knowledge,
London: George Allen & Unwin, 1956, 127–174.
[26]
Russell, Bertrand: 1914. The relation of sense-data to physics. In [28]: 145–179.
[27]
Russell, Bertrand: 1914. On scientiﬁc method in philosophy. In [28]: 97–124.
[28]
Russell, Bertrand: 1918. Mysticism and Logic and Other Essays. London: George Allen
& Unwin.
[29]
Russell, Bertrand: 1918. The philosophy of logical atomism. In: Logic and Knowledge,
London: George Allen & Unwin, 1956, 177–281.
[30]
Russell, Bertrand: 1921. The Analysis of Mind. London: George Allen & Unwin.
[31]
Russell, Bertrand: 1924. Logical atomism. In: Logic and Knowledge. London: George
Allen & Unwin, 1956, 323–343.
[32]
Russell, Bertrand: 1927. The Analysis of Matter. London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner.
[33]
Russell, Bertrand: 1940. An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth. London: George Allen &
Unwin.
[34]
Russell, Bertrand: 1944. My mental development. In: Paul A. Schilpp (ed.), The Philos-
ophy of Bertrand Russell, 3rd edn, New York: Tudor, 1951, 1–20.
[35]
Russell, Bertrand: 1947. Philosophy and politics. In: Unpopular Essays, New York:
Simon and Schuster, 1950, 1–20.
[36]
Russell, Bertrand: 1948. Human Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits. London: George
Allen & Unwin.
[37]
Russell, Bertrand: 1959. My Philosophical Development. London: Routledge, 1993.
[38]
Russell, Bertrand: 1960. Bertrand Russell Speaks His Mind. New York: Bard Books.

500
A. D. Irvine
[39]
Russell, Bertrand: 1967, 1968, 1969. The Autobiography of Bertrand Russell, 3 vols.
London: George Allen & Unwin.
[40]
Slater, John: 1988. Russell’s conception of philosophy. Russell n.s. 8: 163–178. Repr. in
[15]: vol. 3, 1–20.
[41]
Sommerville, Stephen: 1980. Wittgenstein to Russell (July, 1913): ‘I am very sorry
to hear … my objection paralyses you’. In: Rudolf Haller and Wolfgang Grassl (eds.),
Language, Logic and Philosophy: Proceedings of the Fourth International Wittgenstein
Symposium, Vienna: Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, 182–188.
[42]
Urmson, James O.: 1956. Philosophical Analysis. London: Oxford University Press.
[43] Wang, Hao: 1987. Reﬂections on Kurt Gödel. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[44] Weitz, Morris: 1944. Analysis and the unity of Russell’s philosophy. In: Paul A. Schilpp
(ed.), The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell, 3rd edn, New York: Tudor, 1951, 55–121.
[45] Whitehead, Alfred North, and Bertrand Russell: 1910. Principia Mathematica to *56.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1962.
[46] Wittgenstein, Ludwig: 1921. Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus. London: Routledge and
Kegan Paul, 1961.
[47] Wittgenstein, Ludwig: 1995. Cambridge Letters. Oxford: Blackwell.
[48] Wood, Allan: 1959. Russell’s philosophy: A study of its development. In [37]: 189–205.
Department of Philosophy
University of British Columbia
1866 Main Mall E370
Vancouver BC
Canada V6T 1Z1
E-mail: a.irvine@ubc.ca

Paradoxes in Göttingen
Volker Peckhaus
Abstract. There are two periods in the early discussion of the paradoxes in Göttingen. The ﬁrst
period up to 1903 saw the struggle with Georg Cantor’s unintended sets (Cantor’s Paradox) in
the course of which David Hilbert formulated a paradox of his own. The logical signiﬁcance
of this paradox, but also of Ernst Zermelo’s Paradox, similar to, but independent of Bertrand
Russell’s Paradox, was not recognized. So they remained unpublished. When Russell’s Paradox
was published by Russell himself and by Gottlob Frege, Hilbert had to change his axiomatic
programme signiﬁcantly. Now the paradoxes were also discussed in the circle around the
Göttingen philosopher Leonard Nelson. A fruit of these discussions was the semantical paradox
found by Kurt Grelling.
1. Introduction
In 1903 the mathematical world was struck by Russell’s Paradox twice over. Bertrand
Russell himself published it under the heading “The Contradiction” in chapter 10 of
his Principles of Mathematics [40]. Almost at the same time Gottlob Frege (1848–
1925) referred to Russell’s Paradox in the postscript of the second and ﬁnal volume
of his Grundgesetze der Arithmetik [7], admitting that the foundational system of the
Grundgesetze had turned out to be inconsistent.
Frege sent a copy of this volume to his Göttingen colleague David Hilbert (1862–
1943), and received an astonishing reply. Hilbert told Frege that “this example,” as
he called the paradox, had already been known before in Göttingen. In a footnote
he added, “I believe Dr. Zermelo discovered it three or four years ago after I had
communicated my examples to him,” and continued
I found other even more convincing contradictions as long as four or
ﬁve years ago; they led me to the conviction that traditional logic is
inadequate and that the theory of concept formation needs to be sharpened
and reﬁned.1
1See [9]: 51. German original in [8]: 79–80.

502
V. Peckhaus
In view of this remarkable claim of Hilbert’s a number of questions can be raised:
• WhatexactlyweretheseparadoxessaidtohavebeenknowninGöttingenalready
before the publication of Russell’s Paradox?
• What was Ernst Zermelo’s (1871–1953) role in this story?
• Why did Hilbert and Zermelo refrain from publishing the paradoxes they had
found?
• What was the impact of Russell’s Paradox, if any, in Göttingen?
• In particular, who discussed the paradox in Göttingen? Did such discussions
go beyond the bounds of mathematical discourse?
Most of these questions have already been given quite satisfactory answers. They show
that there is just as little ground for the “standard” story in the history of set theory—
according to which Russell’s paradox led to the axiomatization of set theory—as for
assuming that in Göttingen at least there was no impact at all, a conclusion which could
well be drawn from Hilbert’s self-conﬁdent statement in his letter to Frege. However,
the impact was not like a sudden blow that immediately divided the mathematical
history into pre and post paradox mathematics; rather, the paradoxes had their effect
only gradually, after some time of thinking them over, but then sparked new and
important insights into the nature of mathematics.
This paper will not present new historical material on the impact of Russell’s
Paradox in Göttingen. It aims at surveying and combining the results of previous
research on the matter, thereby illustrating the complexity of the story of the paradoxes.
The paper will be divided into two parts. In the ﬁrst part the period up to 1903 will
be considered, especially Hilbert’s exchange with Cantor on unintended sets, and the
paradoxes of Hilbert and Zermelo. The second part is devoted to the effects caused
by the publication of Russell’s Paradox. It will cover the period between 1903 and
1908. In this part the discussion of Russell’s Paradox among Göttingen philosophers
standing close to the Hilbert circle will also be presented.
2. The Paradoxes up to 1903
2.1. Cantor’s Paradox
Hilbert’s ﬁrst contact with the so-called “paradoxes of set theory” can be traced back
to his correspondence with Georg Cantor (1845–1918) between 1897 and 1900.2
Already in the ﬁrst of his letters, dated 26 September 1897 ([6]: no. 156, 388–389),
2For a comprehensive discussion of this correspondence [36]: 147–166. Extracts are published in [6].

Paradoxes in Göttingen
503
Cantor proved that the totality of alephs does not exist, i. e., that this totality is not
a well-deﬁned, ﬁnished set [fertige Menge]. If it were taken to be a ﬁnished set, a
certain larger aleph would follow on this totality. So this new aleph would at the same
time belong to the totality of all alephs, and not belong to it, because of being larger
than all alephs (ibid.: 388).
Hilbert and Cantor were thus concerned with what later became known under the
name “Cantor’s Paradox”. But in fact, Cantor was not really dealing with paradoxes
and their resolution, but with non-existence proofs using reductio-ad-absurdum argu-
ments.3 He disproved the existence of the totality of all cardinals by showing that the
assumption of its existence contradicts his deﬁnition of a set as the comprehension of
certain well-distinguished objects of our intuition or our thinking into a whole ([4],
cf. [5]: 282). The totality of all cardinals (and of all ordinals) cannot be thought of as
one such thing, in contrast to actual inﬁnite objects like transﬁnite sets.
Hilbert’s letters to Cantor have not been preserved, but we can derive Hilbert’s
opinion from published talks. These talks show that Hilbert took the doubts about the
existence of the set of all cardinals seriously, obviously not convinced by Cantor’s non-
existence proof. Hilbert saw an alternative to this proof in a suitable axiomatization of
set theory. In his 1900 paper “On the Concept of Number” [15], Hilbert’s ﬁrst paper
on the foundations of arithmetic, he gave a set of axioms for arithmetic, and claimed
that only a suitable modiﬁcation of known methods of inference would be needed for
proving the consistency of the axioms. If this proof were successful, the existence
of the totality of real numbers would be shown at the same time. In this context he
referred to Cantor’s problem of whether the system of real numbers is a consistent, or
ﬁnished, set. He stressed:
Undertheconceptionabove, thedoubtswhichhavebeenraisedagainstthe
existence of the totality of all real numbers (and against the existence of
inﬁnite sets in general) lose all justiﬁcation; for by the set of real numbers
we do not have to imagine the totality of all possible laws according to
which the elements of a fundamental sequence can proceed, but rather—
as just described—a system of things whose internal relations are given
by a ﬁnite and closed set of axioms [ …], and about which new statements
are valid only if one can derive them from the axioms by means of a ﬁnite
number of logical inferences.4
He also claimed that the existence of the totality of all powers or of all Cantorian
alephs could be disproved, i. e., in Cantor’s terminology, that the system of all powers
is an inconsistent (not ﬁnished) set (ibid.).
Hilbert took up this topic again in his famous 1900 Paris lecture on “Mathematical
Problems.”5 In the context of his commentary on the second problem concerning the
consistency of the axioms for arithmetic he used the same examples from Cantorian set
3We follow in this evaluation [25] and [10].
4See [21]: 1095. German original [15]: 184.
5See [14], English translations in [16] and [20].

504
V. Peckhaus
theory and the continuum problem as in the earlier lecture. “If contradictory attributes
be assigned to a concept,” he wrote, “I say, that mathematically the concept does not
exist” ([20]: 1105).
According to Hilbert a suitable axiomatization would avoid the contradictions
resulting from the attempt to comprehend absolute inﬁnite multiplicities as units,
because only those concepts had to be accepted which could be deduced from an
axiomatic basis.
2.2. Hilbert’s Paradox
Hilbert’s remarks at these prominent places show that he was worried by the problems
causing Cantor to distinguish between ﬁnished or consistent sets and multiplicities
that are no sets. Unrestricted comprehension, a natural way of forming sets, had
been removed by a stipulation made necessary by the fact that a contradiction would
arise if that were not done. A suitable axiomatization, however, would exclude these
problematic multiplicities from the outset. Hilbert was worried not simply by the
fact that these contradictions occurred in set theory, but by the pragmatic aspect that
methodsusedbymathematiciansasamatterofcoursehadproventoleadtounintended,
contradictory results. And this pragmatic aspect furthermore shows that not only
Cantorian set theory could be implicated, but also other domains of mathematics.
Hilbert gave evidence to this by formulating a paradox of his own which was “purely
mathematical” in the sense that it did not make use of notions from Cantor’s theory of
cardinals and ordinals. This paradox was known in Göttingen as “Hilbert’s Paradox,”
the one he obviously referred to in his letter to Frege, and which Otto Blumenthal
mentioned in his biographical note in the third volume of Hilbert’s Collected Works
[1].6
Hilbert never published the paradox. He discussed it, however, in a lecture course
on the “Logical Principles of Mathematical Thinking” he gave in Göttingen in the
summer semester of 1905. It is preserved in two sets of notes [18], [19]. Part B of
these notes, on “The Logical Foundations”, starts with a comprehensive discussion of
the paradoxes of set theory. It begins with metaphorical considerations of the general
development of science:
It was, indeed, usual practice in the historical development of science
that we began cultivating a discipline without many scruples, pressing
onwards as far as possible, that we thereby, however, then ran into dif-
ﬁculties (often only after a long time) that forced us to turn back and
reﬂect on the foundations of the discipline. The house of knowledge
is not erected like a dwelling where the foundation is ﬁrst well laid-out
before the erection of the living quarters begins. Science prefers to ob-
tain comfortable rooms as quickly as possible in which it can rule, and
6For the history of Hilbert’s Paradox and its reconstruction, cf. [29] and [35] (with an edition and English
translation of Hilbert’s presentation of the paradox).

Paradoxes in Göttingen
505
only subsequently, when it becomes clear that, here and there, the loosely
joined foundations are unable to support the completion of the rooms, sci-
ence proceeds in propping up and securing them. This is no shortcoming
but rather a correct and healthy development.7
Although contradictions are quite common in science, Hilbert continued, in the case
of set theory they seem to be different, because there they have a tendency to bend
towards theoretical philosophy. In set theory the common Aristotelian logic and its
standard methods of concept formation had been used without hesitation. And these
standard tools of purely logical operations, especially the subsumption of concepts
under a general concept, now proved to be responsible for the new contradictions.
Hilbertelucidatedtheseconsiderationsbypresentingthreeexamples, theLiarPara-
dox, “Zermelo’s Paradox,” as the Russell–Zermelo Paradox was called in Göttingen
at that time which will be discussed below, and the paradox of his own, which was,
according to Hilbert, of purely mathematical nature ([18]: 210). Hilbert expressed his
opinion that this paradox
appears to be especially important; when I found it, I thought in the
beginning that it causes invincible problems for set theory that would
ﬁnally lead to the latter’s eventual failure; now I ﬁrmly believe, however,
that everything essential can be kept after a revision of the foundations,
as always in science up to now. I have not published this contradiction,
but it is known to set theorists, especially to G. Cantor.8
The paradox is based on a special notion of set which Hilbert introduces by means of
two set formation principles starting from the natural numbers. The ﬁrst principle is the
addition principle (Additionsprinzip). In analogy to the ﬁnite case, Hilbert argued that
the principle can be used for uniting two sets together “into a new conceptual unit”, a
new set that contains the elements from both sets. This operation can be extended: “In
the same way, we are able to unite several sets and even inﬁnitely many into a union.”
The second principle is called the mapping principle (Belegungsprinzip). Given a set
M, he introduces the set MM of self-mappings (Selbstbelegungen) of M to itself. A
self-mapping is just a total function (“transformation”) which maps the elements of
M to elements of M.9
Now, he considers all sets which result from the natural numbers “by applying
the operations of addition and self-mapping an arbitrary number of times.” By the
addition principle, which allows us to build the union of arbitrary sets, one can “unite
them all into a sum set U, which is well-deﬁned.” In the next step the mapping
principle is applied to U, and we get F = UU as the set of all self-mappings of U.
Since F was built from the natural numbers by using the two principles alone, Hilbert
concludes that it has to be contained in U. From this fact he derives a contradiction.
7See [19]: 122, published in [29]: 51.
8See [18]: 204 and [35]: 164.
9In standard set theory, MM is isomorphic to 2M, the set of all functions from M to {0, 1}, which, in
turn, is isomorphic to P (M), the power set of M.

506
V. Peckhaus
Since “there are ‘not more’elements” in F than in U there is an assignment of the
elements ui of U to elements fi of F such that all elements of fi are used. Now one
can deﬁne a self-mapping g of U which differs from all fi. Thus, g is not contained
in F . Since F was assumed to contain all self-mappings, we have a contradiction.
In order to deﬁne g, Hilbert used Cantor’s diagonalization method. If fi is a mapping
ui to fi(ui) = uf (i)
i
he chooses an element ug(i) different from uf (i)
i
as the image of
ui under g. Thus, we have g(ui) = ug(i) ̸= uf (i)
i
and g “is distinct from any mapping
fk of F in at least one assignment.”10
Hilbert ﬁnishes his argument with the following observation:
We could also formulate this contradiction so that, according to the last
consideration, the set UU is always bigger [of greater cardinality]11 than
U but, according to the former, is an element of U.
Hilbert’s Paradox is closely related to Cantor’s Paradox. Both Cantor and Hilbert
construct “sets” which lead to contradictions. This is shown with the help of Can-
tor’s diagonalization argument. However, the ways in which these “sets” are con-
structed differ essentially. According to Cantor ([3]: § 11; cf. [5]: 195–197), there
are three principles for the generation of cardinals. The ﬁrst principle (“erstes Erzeu-
gungsprinzip”) concerns the generation of real whole numbers [reale ganze Zahlen,
i. e., ordinal numbers] by adding a unit to a given, already generated number. The
second principle allows the formation of a new number, if a certain succession of
whole numbers with no greatest number is given. This new number is imagined as
the limit of this succession. Cantor adds a third principle, the inhibition or restric-
tion principle (“Hemmungs- oder Beschränkungsprinzip”) which guarantees that the
second number class has not only a higher cardinality than the ﬁrst number class, but
exactly the next higher cardinality. Considering Cantor’s general deﬁnition of a set,
cited above, one can justly ask whether the set of all cardinals, the set of all ordinals
and the universal set of all sets, are sets according to this deﬁnition, i. e., whether an
unrestricted comprehension is possible. Cantor denies this, justifying his opinion with
the help of a reductio ad absurdum argument, but he doesn’t exclude the possibility
of forming the paradoxes by provisions in his formalism.
Hilbert, on the other hand, introduces two alternative set formation principles, the
addition principle and the mapping principle, but they lead to paradoxes as well. In
avoiding concepts from transﬁnite arithmetic Hilbert believes that the purely mathe-
matical nature of his paradox is guaranteed. For him, this paradox appears to be much
more serious for mathematics than Cantor’s, because it concerns an operation that is
part of everyday practice of working mathematicians.
10Hilbert’s notation ug(i) is somewhat clumsy. In fact, it is enough to say that g(ui) = vi for an element
vi of U with vi ̸= fi(ui).
11Remark later added in Hilbert’s hand in Hellinger’s lecture notes.

Paradoxes in Göttingen
507
2.3. Zermelo’s Paradox
Ernst Zermelo came to Göttingen in 1897 in order to work on his Habilitation. His
special ﬁelds of competence were the calculus of variations and mathematical physics,
such as thermodynamics and hydrodynamics.12 Under the inﬂuence of Hilbert he
changed the focus of his interests to set theory and foundations. He became Hilbert’s
collaborator in the foundations of mathematics. His ﬁrst set-theoretical publication
on the addition of transﬁnite cardinals dates from 1901 [44], but as early as the winter
semester 1900/1901 he gave a lecture course on set theory in Göttingen. It is possible
that he may have found the paradox while preparing this course. He referred to it
in the famous polemical paper “A New Proof of the Possibility of a Well-Ordering”
of 1908 [45]. There Zermelo noted that he had found the paradox independently
of Russell, and that he had mentioned it to Hilbert and other people already before
1903. And indeed, among the papers of Edmund Husserl (1859–1938), professor
of philosophy in Göttingen until 1916, a note in Husserl’s hand was found, partially
written in Gabelsberger shorthand, saying that Zermelo had informed him on 16 April
1902 that the assumption of a set M that contains all of its subsets m, m′, . . . as
elements, is an inconsistent set, i. e., a set which, if treated as a set at all, leads to
contradictions.13 Zermelo’s message was a comment on a review that Husserl had
written on the ﬁrst volume of Ernst Schröder’s (1841–1902) Vorlesungen über die
Algebra der Logik [41]. Schröder had criticized George Boole’s interpretation of the
symbol 1 as the class of everything that can be a subject of discourse (the universe
of discourse, universal class).14
Husserl had dismissed Schröder’s argumentation
as sophistic ([23]: 272), and was now advised by Zermelo that Schröder was right
concerning the matter, but not in his proof.
In his own recollections, communicated to Heinrich Scholz in 1936, Zermelo saw
the origins of his paradox in discussions in the Hilbert circle. At that time Heinrich
Scholz was working on the papers of Gottlob Frege which he had acquired for his
department at the University of Münster. He had found Hilbert’s letter to Frege,
mentioned above, and now asked Zermelo what paradoxes Hilbert referred to in this
letter.15 Zermelo answered that the set-theoretic paradoxes were often discussed in the
Hilbert circle around 1900, and he himself had at that time given a precise formulation
of the paradox which was later named after Russell.16
As mentioned above, Hilbert discussed it in his 1905 lecture course, presenting it
as a “purely logical” example—probably more convincing for non-mathematicians—
12On Zermelo’s activities in Göttingen cf. esp. [26], [28], [29]: 76–122.
13Critical edition in ([24]: 399). English translation in [38].
14See [41]: 245. Schröder referred to Boole’s deﬁnition of the universe of discourse and his interpretation
of the symbol 1, cf. [2]: 42–43.
15Heinrich Scholz to Zermelo, dated Münster, 5 April 1936, University Archive Freiburg i. Br., Zermelo
papers, C 129/106.
16Zermelo to Scholz, dated Freiburg i. Br., 10 April 1936, Institut für mathematische Logik und Grund-
lagenforschung, Münster, Scholz papers.

508
V. Peckhaus
whereas his own (purely mathematical) example seamed to be more decisive for the
mathematician ([18]: 210).
3. Reﬂecting on the Paradoxes, 1903–1908
3.1. The Mathematicians’ Reaction to Russell’s Paradox
Given the naïve attitude towards the contradictions of set theory, the publication of
Russell’s Paradox could not easily be ignored because the paradox unveiled the con-
sequences of this special kind of contradictions for general logic. Before 1903 Hilbert
suggested avoiding or circumventing the contradictions with the help of an axiomatic
reformulation of set theory. This suggestion was kept after 1903, but he had to extend
it considerably. His axiomatic programme was deeply involved since its centrepiece,
the consistency proof for the arithmetical axioms by means of standard mathematical
and logical methods, required logic itself to be free of contradictions.
In his seminal “Grundlagen der Geometrie” [13] Hilbert had proved the consis-
tency of Euclidean geometry under the provision of the consistency of arithmetic.
The consistency of arithmetic, however, had still to be shown. In his talk “Über den
Zahlbegriff” [15] Hilbert claimed that the consistency proof for arithmetic only re-
quired a suitable modiﬁcation of known methods of inference ([15]: 184), an opinion
which soon proved to be overoptimistic. In the Paris problems talk, he included the
consistency proof for arithmetic as the second among the problems discussed [14].
Frege’s disappointed admission now made it obvious that this consistency proof could
not be done using means just proved to be inconsistent.
The talks on foundations of mathematics and logic at meetings of the Göttingen
Mathematical Society give evidence for the new activities released by the publication
of the paradoxes.17 In 1901 and 1902 the main speaker was Hilbert himself, giving
papers on special problems in the axiomatic foundation of geometry. Furthermore, Ed-
mund Husserl gave his “double lecture” on completeness and deﬁniteness of axiomatic
systems (26 November and 10 December 1901). In 1903 Ernst Zermelo discussed
Frege’s concept of number as presented in the second volume of the Grundgesetze
der Arithmetik (12 May 1903). Obviously the Göttingen mathematicians felt a need
to go deeper into Frege’s failed theory. Hilbert spoke about the axiomatic standpoint
in the foundations of arithmetic emphasizing the principle of contradiction as the
“pièce de résistance” (27 December 1903). Early in 1904 H. Fleischer familiarized
the Göttingen mathematicians with Italian positions in foundations, reporting, e. g.,
on Giuseppe Peano’s (1858–1932) Arithmetices principia, nova methododo exposita
17According to the reports in the Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 11 (1901)–
14 (1905).

Paradoxes in Göttingen
509
(Peano 1889) (19 January and 23 February 1904). Several lectures on the axioma-
tization of set theory were given, especially by E. Zermelo in 1904, 1906 and 1908.
And on 7 February 1905 William Henry Young (1863–1942) reported on Russell’s
Principles of Mathematics and Russell’s Paradox.
These activities are indications for a deep revision of Hilbert’s axiomatic pro-
gramme. The programme before 1903 consisted in axiomatizing certain ﬁelds of
mathematics in which foundations had been questioned, reducing their consistency to
the consistency of arithmetic. Set theory was not an integral methodological part of this
programme, but was among the ﬁelds of mathematics waiting to be axiomatized. After
1903 it became clear that the axiomatization of arithmetic required an axiomatization
of logic and set theory. One precondition was to gain competence in modern logic,
i. e., both, the Fregean mathematical logic and G. Boole’s and E. Schröder’s algebra of
logic. Therefore logic, formerly regarded as a basic philosophical subdiscipline, came
into the focus of the Göttingen mathematicians. On Hilbert’s initiative, Zermelo was
awarded with a stipendiary lectureship on “Mathematical Logic and Related Fields”
in 1907. Zermelo delivered the ﬁrst German lecture course on mathematical logic
which was based on a ministerial commission, in the summer semester of 1908, cf.
[28, 29, 30, 32].
Now logic and set theory were integrated into the axiomatic programme, i. e.,
securing the logical and set-theoretical grounds was seen as a necessary precondition
for proving the consistency of arithmetic. Arithmetic was treated in a rather logicist
manner, i. e., as soon as the consistency of logic and set theory (the last dealing with
the inﬁnite in mathematics) were shown, there would only be one step more to prove
the consistency of arithmetic. This was expressed by Hilbert in his rather obscure
demand of “a partially simultaneous development of the laws of logic and arithmetic”
called for in his Heidelberg talk on the foundations of logic and arithmetic, Hilbert’s
ﬁrst published reaction to the paradoxes ([17]: 170). These ideas were considerably
deepened in the lecture course on the logical principles of mathematical thinking
mentioned above.
Hilbert’s original approach to reducing the consistency of any set of mathematical
axioms to the consistency of arithmetic was thus replaced by a three step programme
to create consistent sets of axioms for logic, set theory, and then arithmetic. One
of the ﬁrst fruits of this revised programme was Ernst Zermelo’s formulation of the
set-theoretic axioms published in 1908. Zermelo, however, had to confess that he
was not yet able to prove “the ‘consistency,’ no doubt very essential, of my axioms”
([46]: 262).
3.2. The Philosophical Discussion in the Nelson Circle
One of the participants in Hilbert’s summer lecture course of 1905 was the 23 year-
old philosopher Leonard Nelson (1882–1927), who had received his doctorate in

510
V. Peckhaus
philosophyinGöttingeninJuly1904.18 Hewasalreadyheadofaphilosophicalschool,
the Neue Fries’sche Schule that was devoted to critical philosophy in the spirit of Jacob
Friedrich Fries (1773–1843). Nelson was still a student when he founded the new
series of the Abhandlungen der Fries’schen Schule as a forum for his circle, assisted
by his older friend Gerhard Hessenberg (1873–1925), then lecturer for mathematics
at the Academy for Military Technology in Charlottenburg near Berlin, and by the
physiologist Karl Kaiser (1861– c. 1933). Hessenberg was a known geometer, but he
also gained recognition as a set theorist after having published the ﬁrst textbook on
set theory [12].
In June 1905 Nelson sent a letter to Hessenberg commenting on Hilbert’s lecture
“ÜberdieGrundlagenderArithmetik”[17], andheexpressedhisdisappointmentabout
Hilbert’s ideas. Rather perplexed he wrote: “In order to remove the contradictions in
set theory, he [i.e., Hilbert] intends to reform (not set theory but) logic. Well, we shall
see, how he will do it.”19 Hessenberg answered quite to the point:20
I do not at all consider it as paradoxical that one has to reform logic
in order to make set theory free of contradictions. First of all it is not
yet possible to separate logic sharply from arithmetical considerations.
Secondly, however: If there are paradoxes in set theory, then either the
inferences are not correct or the concepts generated are contradictory.
In both cases, Hessenberg continued, it is a logical task to uncover the mistakes.
According to the laws of logic, a thing a either does or does not fall under the concept
b. No other principle is needed for the concept of a set. Hessenberg stressed that
Hilbert very much strengthened the requirements for building concepts in order to
avoid the resulting paradoxes.
In Hilbert’s lecture course Nelson learned more about the paradoxes, not about
Russell’s, but about its Göttingen variant, Zermelo’s Paradox, and about Hilbert’s
Paradox. It is instructive to observe the growing signiﬁcance of Russell’s name in the
correspondence between Hessenberg and Nelson. In June 1905 Hessenberg, who was
at that time going to write his textbook on set theory, recalled that Nelson had spoken
about “Hilbert’s Paradox of the set of sets that belong to themselves,” obviously
misconceiving what Nelson had told him.21
In the same month Nelson directed
Hessenberg’sinteresttowardsRussell’sPrinciplesofMathematics, abookinwhichthe
foundations of all mathematical disciplines and especially of set theory were discussed,
18For more details on Nelson and his circle, cf. [29]: 123–154, with further hints on literature. On the
philosophical discussion of the paradoxes in Göttingen, especially the emergence of Grelling’s Paradox,
see [34].
19Nelson to Hessenberg, dated Göttingen, 16 June 1905, Bundesarchiv, Abt. Potsdam, Nelson Papers,
90 Ne 1, fol. 50–53.
20Hessenberg to Nelson, dated Grunewald, 26 June 1905,Archiv der sozialen Demokratie, Nelson Papers,
1/LN AA 000270.
21Hessenberg to Nelson, dated Grunewald, 26 June 1905,Archiv der sozialen Demokratie, Nelson Papers,
ibid.

Paradoxes in Göttingen
511
as Nelson wrote.22
In February 1906 Nelson sent Russell’s book to Hessenberg
whose judgement on its set-theoretical parts was, however, scathing. He had found
almost nothing that made any impression on him. He regarded Russell’s logicistic
standpoint (contrary to that of Dedekind) as utterly ridiculous, and criticized that
Russell expatiated “the completely vague contradiction of the set of all sets that do
not contain themselves in a whole chapter, but found only a few unimportant words
on the considerable contradiction of the set of all ordinals.”23
It is astonishing to see that, although the paradoxes became a widely discussed
topic, in the beginning no one made efforts to study the relevant books of Russell or
Frege in greater detail, in Nelson’s circle at least not before late 1905 or early 1906.
In contrast to Hessenberg, Russell’s Paradox did electrify the more philosophically
minded members of Nelson’s circle. In June 1906 Heinrich Goesch (1880–1930, cf.
[29]: 137–140), wrote the following letter to his friend Leonard Nelson (mentioning
other members of Nelson’s circle):24
Grelling informed me of Russel[l]’s Paradox in logic concerning the con-
cept impredicable. I succeeded in solving the same, and then I learned
from Berkowski of another paradox also from Russel[l] in set theory,
concerning the concept of a set not belonging to itself. For this paradox
my resolution holds as well. Therefore Berkowski, who told me that the
mathematicians working in set theory have no resolution for the paradox
up to now, thought that the matter might be not unimportant. I therefore
would like to write a short paper, and I would like to ask you to tell me
in which book of Russel[l]’s these paradoxes can be found and to which
German presentations [Ausformungen] one should refer. I think that the
matter will be ﬁnished in a few days.
Of course, Goesch’s paper was not written in a few days. A ﬁrst version of the
announced manuscript was not completed before spring 1907.25 Nelson was sceptical
and commissioned his closest collaborator, the mathematics student Kurt Grelling
(1886–1943)26 to check Goesch’s ideas.
In this period of discussion, several other members of the circle were involved in
attempts to solve the paradoxes. One of them was Otto Meyerhof (1884–1951),27
the 1923 Nobel laureate for medicine and physiology; another was Alexander Rüstow
(1885–1963),28 after World War II one of the fathers of the German social economy.
22Nelson to Hessenberg, dated Grunewald, 7 February 1906, Archiv der sozialen Demokratie, Nelson
Papers, 1/LN AA 000271.
23Hessenberg to Nelson, dated Grunewald, 7 February 1906, Bundesarchiv, Abt. Potsdam, 90 Ne 1, no.
389, fol. 54f .
24Goesch to Nelson, undated (Munich, 14 June 1906), Archiv der sozialen Demokratie, Nelson Papers,
1/LN AA 000255.
25In the correspondence with Nelson (Archiv der sozialen Demokratie, Nelson Papers, LN AA000255)
a postal receipt of delivery for a manuscript can be found, dated 23 April 1907.
26On Grelling’s tragical biography, cf. [31, 33].
27Cf. [29]: 135–137.
28Cf. [29]: 140–142.

512
V. Peckhaus
Rüstow asked Nelson whether he could publish his doctoral thesis in the Abhand-
lungen der Fries’schen Schule.29 It had the characteristic title Der Lügner. Theorie,
Geschichte und Auﬂösung des Russellschen Paradoxons (The Liar. Theory, History,
and Resolution of Russell’s Paradox). Nelson refused, because he rejected Rüstow’s
resolution.30 Rüstow’s thesis was published not before 1910, and it is also character-
istic that in the title of the published version the reference to Russell’s Paradox was
omitted [39].
It was during Grelling’s and Nelson’s struggle with Goesch’s “resolution” that
Grelling and Nelson compiled material for a joint paper which was ﬁnally published
in 1908 [11]. They looked for the basic logical conditions for the occurrences of the
paradoxes, and distinguished between
the task of a proper “resolution” of the paradox, i.e., the task of unveiling
the underlying appearance, and the task of a “correction,” i.e., the task
of avoiding the paradox by introducing new, consistent concepts. Such a
correction cannot be considered to be a resolution, because the paradox-
ical objects, if they exist at all, are not eliminated by stopping work on
them. ([11]: 314)
Most importantly, Grelling discovered new paradoxes, among them the semantic
“heterological” paradox, today known under Grelling’s name. It runs in its original
version as follows:
Let ϕ(M) be the word that denotes the concept deﬁning M. This word is
either an element of M or not. In the ﬁrst case we will call it “autological”
in the other “heterological.”31 Now the word “heterological” is itself
either autological or heterological. Suppose it to be autological; then it is
an element of the set deﬁned by the concept that is denoted by itself, hence
it is heterological, contrary to the supposition. Suppose, however, that it
is heterological; then it is not element of the set deﬁned by the concept
that is denoted by itself, hence it is not heterological, again against the
supposition. ([11]: 307)
It is this paradox of Grelling’s that Frank Plumpton Ramsey (1903–1930) in [37]
wrongly attributed to Hermann Weyl (1885–1955), who had mentioned it in Das
Kontinuum as “a well-known paradox, essentially coming from Russell” and had
discussed it as “scholasticism of the worst kind” ([43]: 2). History has shown that
Weyl’s judgement did not do justice to the importance of Grelling’s Paradox.
Acknowledgement. I would like to thank Marcello Ghin (Paderborn) and Godehard
Link (Munich) for helpful comments on a previous version, and Daniel Mook (Mu-
nich), for his suggestions concerning my English. This paper very much proﬁted from
29Cf. Nelson to Hessenberg, dated Westend, 23 January 1908, Bundesarchiv, Abt. Potsdam, 90 Ne 1, no.
389, fol. 155–157.
30Nelson to Rüstow, dated Göttingen, 9 February 1908, Bundesarchiv Koblenz, NL 169, Rüstow.
31“Short”, e.g., is autological; “long”, heterological; “English” is autological; “German”, heterological.

Paradoxes in Göttingen
513
an earlier collaboration with Reinhard Kahle on “Hilbert’s Paradox”, the result of
which has been published as [35]. All translations from the German are mine, unless
otherwise stated.
References
[1]
Blumenthal, Otto: 1935. Lebensgeschichte. In: D. Hilbert, Gesammelte Abhandlungen,
vol. III. Berlin: Springer, 388–429. Second edition, Berlin: Springer, 1970.
[2]
Boole, George: 1854. An Investigation of the Laws of Thought on which are Founded the
MathematicalTheoriesofLogicandProbabilities.London: Walton&Maberly.Reprinted
Dover, New York: c. 1958.
[3]
Cantor, Georg: 1883. Ueber unendliche, lineare Punktmannichfaltigkeiten [5th pt.].
Mathematische Annalen 21: 545–591. Reprinted in [5]: 165–209.
[4]
Cantor, Georg: 1895 & 1897. Beiträge zur Begründung der transﬁniten Mengenlehre.
Mathematische Annalen 46/49: 207–246. Reprinted in [5]: 282–351.
[5]
Cantor, Georg: 1932. Gesammelte Abhandlungen mathematischen und philosophischen
Inhalts. Edited by E. Zermelo. Berlin: Springer. Reprinted Hildesheim: Olms, 1962 and
Berlin: Springer, 1980.
[6]
Cantor, Georg: 1991. Briefe. Edited by H. Meschkowski/W. Nilson. Berlin: Springer.
[7]
Frege, Gottlob: 1903. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik, begriffsschriftlich abgeleitet. vol. 2.
Jena: Hermann Pohle. Reprinted together with vol. 1, Hildesheim: Olms, 1966.
[8]
Frege, Gottlob: 1976. Wissenschaftlicher Briefwechsel. Edited by G. Gabriel et al. Ham-
burg: Felix Meiner.
[9]
Frege, Gottlob: 1980. Philosophical and Mathematical Correspondence. Edited by G.
Gabriel et al. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
[10]
Garciadiego Dantan, Alejandro R.: 1992. Bertrand Russell and the Origins of the Set-
theoretic “Paradoxes”. Basel: Birkhäuser.
[11]
Grelling, Kurt and Leonard Nelson: 1908. Bemerkungen zu den Paradoxieen von Russell
und Burali-Forti. Abhandlungen der Fries’schen Schule n. s. 2, no. 3: 301–334.
[12]
Hessenberg, Gerhard: 1906. Grundbegriffe der Mengenlehre. Zweiter Bericht über das
Unendliche in der Mathematik. Abhandlungen der Fries’schen Schule n. s. 1, no. 4: 479–
706.
[13]
Hilbert, David: 1899. Grundlagen der Geometrie. In: Festschrift zur Feier der Enthül-
lung des Gauss-Weber-Denkmals in Göttingen, Leipzig: Teubner, 1–92. Recent edition
[22].
[14]
Hilbert, David: 1900. Mathematische Probleme. Vortrag, gehalten auf dem interna-
tionalen Mathematiker-Kongreß zu Paris 1900. Nachrichten von der königl. Gesellschaft
der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen. Mathematisch-physikalische Klasse aus dem Jahre
1900, 253–297. English translation [16]. Extract in [20].
[15]
Hilbert, David: 1900. Über den Zahlbegriff. Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-
Vereinigung 8: 180–184. English translation in [21].

514
V. Peckhaus
[16]
Hilbert, David: 1902. Mathematical Problems. Lecture Delivered before the International
Congress of Mathematicians at Paris in 1900. Translated by M. W. Newson. Bulletin of
the American Mathematical Society 8: 437–479.
[17]
Hilbert, David: 1905. Über die Grundlagen der Logik und der Arithmetik. In: A. Krazer
(ed.), Verhandlungen des Dritten Internationalen Mathematiker-Kongresses in Heidel-
berg vom 8. bis 13. August 1904, Leipzig: Teubner, 174–185.
[18]
Hilbert, David: 1905. Logische Principien des mathematischen Denkens. Lecture course
in the summer semester 1905, lecture notes by Ernst Hellinger. Library of the Mathematics
Seminar of the University of Göttingen.
[19]
Hilbert, David: 1905. Logische Principien des mathematischen Denkens. Lecture course
in the summer semester 1905, lecture notes by Max Born. Niedersächsische Staats- und
Universitätsbibliothek Göttingen, Cod. Ms. D. Hilbert 558a.
[20]
Hilbert, David: 1996. Mathematical Problems. In: W. Ewald (ed.), From Kant to Hilbert:
A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics, vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1096–1105.
[21]
Hilbert, David: 1996. On the Concept of Number. In: W. Ewald (ed.), From Kant to
Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics, vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1089–1095.
[22]
Hilbert, David: 1999. Grundlagen der Geometrie. Mit Supplementen von Paul Bernays.
14th ed. by M. Toepell. Stuttgart & Leipzig: Teubner.
[23]
Husserl, Edmund: 1891. Review of [41]. Göttingische gelehrte Anzeigen, 243–278. Crit-
ical edition in [24]: 3–43.
[24]
Husserl, Edmund: 1979.AufsätzeundRezensionen(1890–1910), mitergänzendenTexten.
Edited by B. Rang. Husserliana vol. XXII, The Hague: Nijhoff.
[25]
Moore, Gregory H. and Alejandro Garciadiego: 1981. Burali-Forti’s Paradox: A Reap-
praisal of its Origins. Historia Mathematica 8: 319–350.
[26]
Moore, Gregory H.: 1982. Zermelo’s Axiom of Choice. Its Origins, Development and In-
ﬂuence. Studies in the History of Mathematics and Physical Sciences 8. Berlin: Springer.
[27]
Peano, Giuseppe: 1889. Arithmetices principia, nova methododo exposita. Augustae
Taurinorum: Bocca.
[28]
Peckhaus, Volker: 1990. ‘Ich habe mich wohl gehütet, alle Patronen auf einmal zu ver-
schießen.’ Ernst Zermelo in Göttingen. History and Philosophy of Logic 11: 19–58.
[29]
Peckhaus, Volker: 1990. Hilbertprogramm und Kritische Philosophie. Das Göttinger
Modell interdisziplinärer Zusammenarbeit zwischen Mathematik und Philosophie. Stu-
dien zur Wissenschafts-, Sozial- und Bildungsgeschichte der Mathematik 7. Göttingen:
Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
[30]
Peckhaus, Volker: 1992. Hilbert, Zermelo und die Institutionalisierung der mathematis-
chen Logik in Deutschland. Berichte zur Wissenschaftsgeschichte 15: 27–38.
[31]
Peckhaus, Volker: 1993. Kurt Grelling und der Logische Empirismus. In: R. Haller and
F. Stadler (eds.), Wien – Berlin – Prag. Der Aufstieg der wissenschaftlichen Philosophie.
Zentenarien Rudolf Carnap – Hans Reichenbach – Edgar Zilsel. Veröffentlichungen des
Instituts Wiener Kreis 2, Wien: Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky, 362–385.

Paradoxes in Göttingen
515
[32]
Peckhaus, Volker: 1994. Logic in Transition: The Logical Calculi of Hilbert (1905)
and Zermelo (1908). In: D. Prawitz and D. Westerståhl (eds.), Logic and Philosophy of
Science in Uppsala. Papers from the 9th International Congress of Logic, Methodology
and Philosophy of Science. Synthese Library 236. Dordrecht: Kluwer, 311–323.
[33]
Peckhaus, Volker: 1994. Von Nelson zu Reichenbach. Kurt Grelling in Göttingen und
Berlin. In: L. Danneberg et al. (eds.), Hans Reichenbach und die Berliner Gruppe,
Braunschweig & Wiesbaden: Vieweg & Sohn, 53–73.
[34]
Peckhaus, Volker: 1995. The Genesis of Grelling’s Paradox. In: I. Max and W. Stelzner
(eds.), Logik und Mathematik. Frege-Kolloquium Jena 1993. Perspectives in Analytical
Philosophy 5, Berlin: de Gruyter, 269–280.
[35]
Peckhaus, Volker and Reinhard Kahle: 2002. Hilbert’s Paradox. Historia Mathematica
29: 157–175.
[36]
Purkert, Walter and Hans J. Ilgauds: 1985. Georg Cantor. Biographien hervorragender
Naturwissenschaftler, Techniker und Mediziner 79. Leipzig: Teubner.
[37]
Ramsey, Frank P.: 1926. The Foundations of Mathematics. Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society (2) 25: 338–384.
[38]
Rang, Bernhard and W. Thomas: 1981. Zermelo’s Discovery of the ‘Russell Paradox’.
Historia Mathematica 8: 15–22.
[39]
Rüstow, Alexander: 1910. Der Lügner. Theorie, Geschichte und Auﬂösung. Ph. D. thesis
Erlangen 1908. Leipzig: Teubner.
[40]
Russell, Bertrand: 1903. The Principles of Mathematics, Cambridge: The University
Press. London: Allen & Unwin, 21937. Paperback edition London: Routledge, 1992.
[41]
Schröder, Ernst: 1890. Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik (exakte Logik). vol. 1.
Leipzig: Teubner. Reprinted as vol. 1 of the second edition Bronx, NY: Chelsea, 1966.
[42]
van Heijenoort, Jean: 1967. From Frege to Gödel. A Source Book in Mathematical Logic,
1879–1931. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
[43] Weyl, Hermann: 1918. Das Kontinuum. Kritische Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen
der Analysis. Leipzig: Veit & Comp.
[44]
Zermelo, Ernst: 1901 Ueber die Addition transﬁniter Cardinalzahlen. Nachrichten von
der Königl. Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen. Mathematisch-physikalische
Klasse aus dem Jahre 1901, 34–38.
[45]
Zermelo, Ernst: 1908. Neuer Beweis für die Möglichkeit einer Wohlordnung. Mathema-
tische Annalen 65: 107–128. Translated in [42]: 183–198.
[46]
Zermelo, Ernst: 1908. Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre I. Mathe-
matische Annalen 65: 261–281. Translated in [42]: 199–215.
Universität Paderborn
Fakultät für Kulturwissenschaften - Philosophie
Warburger Str. 100
33098 Paderborn
Germany
E-mail: peckhaus@hrz.upb.de


David Hilbert and Paul du Bois-Reymond: Limits
and Ideals
David Charles McCarty
Abstract. Paul du Bois-Reymond (1831–1889), younger brother of physiologist Emil du Bois-
Reymond, was among the most accomplished and inﬂuential mathematicians in the second
half of the 19th Century. He made substantial contributions to the areas (we would today call)
differential equations, calculus of variations, functional analysis, topology and nonstandard
analysis, not to mention the foundations of mathematics. Paul du Bois-Reymond may have
been the ﬁrst to employ an explicitly diagonal argument and is credited with introducing into
analysis the notions of dense set and choice sequence. In his “General Function Theory” (1882),
du Bois-Reymond presented and defended a skeptical philosophy of mathematics and argued
informally, on the basis of that philosophy, that mathematics contains absolutely undecidable
statements. In the ﬁrst decades of the 20th Century, mathematician David Hilbert explicitly
attacked Emil du Bois-Reymond’s famous “Ignorabimus” in several articles and lectures. It
is here argued that Paul du Bois-Reymond’s ideas, although not so famous, afforded a natural
target for the positions Hilbert took up in his proof-theoretic Program, perhaps a more natural
target than Brouwer’s intuitionism.
1. Hilbert’s Program and Brouwer’s Intuitionism
Doubtless, David Hilbert and his fellow proof theorists devised the mature Hilbert
Program of the 1920s and 30s to form, in large part, a defensive bulwark against
Brouwer’s intuitionism. Even so, the Program was neither born nor is it well under-
stood exclusively as a countermeasure to intuitionism. It was born of and nurtured by
what one could reasonably call “Hilbert’s Project,” his decades-long engagement with
and advocacy for the true epistemology, proper pedagogy and cultural signiﬁcance
of the mathematical sciences. The means and ends of that Project informed Hilbert’s
lectures and writings, as is plain from his 1919–20 lectures, Nature and Mathemati-
cal Knowledge [Natur und mathematisches Erkennen] wherein we ﬁnd the following
announcement.
[I]t is among the noblest tasks of philosophy to investigate the questions
how knowledge comes to be, what it is and what it takes as its goal. I will
handle my material in the light of these questions. My lecture should,

518
D. C. McCarty
therefore, form a kind of preparation for an epistemology [Erkenntnis-
theorie]. ([16]: 3)
Early and late, intellectual ingredients to the Program were garnered from the Project.
One such ingredient was Hilbert’sAxiom of Solvability: every well-posed mathemati-
cal problem admits a resolution: either a deﬁnite ‘Yes,’a deﬁnite ‘No,’or a convincing
proof that no solution will be forthcoming. Hilbert believed that his proof theory would
vindicate the axiom, but his statement of it antedated the proof theory of the mature
Program. It featured prominently in the Problems Address of 1900, delivered seven
years before Brouwer completed his PhD dissertation and eight years before Brouwer
was to launch his ﬁrst assault on the validity of logical laws. At that time, prior to
the First World War, the Program was still in short trousers; and neither Program nor
Project could have been a reply to Brouwer, Weyl and company, for the intuitionists
then counted as no large threat to mathematical peace in Göttingen.
Hilbert’s stated intentions for his postwar Program notwithstanding, one cannot
always make good sense of his ideas as reasonable anti-intuitionistic countermeasures,
as contributory to prima facie effective arguments against Brouwer’s views. For one
thing, Brouwer could not have accepted Hilbert’s leading premises. Metatheorems
that various formal systems representing higher mathematics are consistent and com-
plete, demonstrations of which were objects of Hilbert’s so strenuous labors, were to
be obtained via strictly ﬁnitistic reasoning. This required inter alia that those metathe-
orems and their proofs be couched in a language carrying a particular interpretation
that Hilbert took some pains to elucidate in his writings. On that interpretation, cer-
tain sentences formalized with unbounded quantiﬁers were to count as incomplete
communications: either a manner of mathematical shorthand for other ﬁnitistically
complete communications or procedures for listing ﬁnitistically complete communi-
cations. According to Hilbert, such general statements, as read by the ﬁnitist, cannot
be negated signiﬁcantly.
For example, the statement that if a is a numerical symbol, then a + 1 =
1 + a is universally true, is from our ﬁnitary perspective incapable of
negation. ([19]: 144)
Hilbert also insisted that, in a language so interpreted,“We cannot write down number-
signs or introduce abbreviations for inﬁnitely many numbers” ([17]: 1123). Fur-
ther, ﬁnitistically admissible denoting terms were to refer exclusively to the perceived
shapes of intuited ﬁnite sequences: “The objects of [ﬁnitistic] number theory are for
me—in direct contrast to Dedekind and Frege—the signs themselves, whose shapes
can be generally and certainly recognized by us” ([17]: 1121). Brouwer could not in
consistency have embraced these ﬁnitistic restrictions. This had less to do with the
logic at work in the conjectured proofs than with the meanings of the statements that
would comprise them. Unbounded universal quantiﬁcations in intuitionistic arith-
metic were perfectly complete communications; in general, Brouwer thought them
to assert the existence of abstract mathematical operations with inﬁnite domains and

Hilbert and Paul Du Bois-Reymond
519
ranges. Although they would not, in general, provide conﬁrmatory instances of the
tertium non datur, they would admit of meaningful negation. Moreover, there was
no prohibition in intuitionism against writing down “number-signs or abbreviations
for inﬁnitely many numbers” so long as the inﬁnities in question were subject to intu-
itionistic treatment. Third, according to Brouwer, “The ﬁrst act of intuitionism [is] the
complete separation of mathematics from mathematical language and, accordingly,
from the linguistic phenomena of theoretical logic. Intuitionistic mathematics is a
languageless construction carried out by the human mind” ([4]: 21). Brouwer dubbed
the mathematics licensed by the ﬁrst act “separable mathematics,” that is, mathematics
pursued in total separation from language. Therefore, his intuitionistic mathematics,
at least in its separable aspect, could not rely for its meaning on forms or shapes of
physically realizable sign sequences. Lastly, in Brouwer’s mathematical universe,
there was no place for the concrete signs whose forms afforded ultimate objects to
Hilbert’s metamathematics, because the intuitionistic universe of pure mathematics
was a universe entirely of mental constructions, and hence abstract to that extent.
Hilbert was well aware that the majority of statements made by everyday mathe-
maticians working in, say, analysis lie beyond the pale of ﬁnitistic rephrasing, requir-
ing for their formalizations unbounded universal and existential quantiﬁers thought
to range over uncountable domains. On the foundational design set out in such pa-
pers and addresses as On the Inﬁnite [19], these statements were to count neither as
contentfully ﬁnitistic nor as denotationally meaningful. Such meaning as they would
bear was to be all inference and no reference or, more accurately, no reference not ex-
hausted by inference. Drawing an analogy between inﬁnitary statements that extend
contentful mathematics and ideal points and lines that projective geometers add to
extend the Euclidean plane, Hilbert applied the epithet ‘ideal’to inﬁnitary statements,
and incorporated them into his map of the mathematical world as formulae adjoined
to strictly ﬁnitistic theories so as to improve their deductive efﬁcacy.
By contrast, a crucial pressure point for the intuitionistic critique of conventional
mathematics via a critique of inference would vanish on the assumption that inﬁni-
tary statements such as the classical Bolzano–Weierstrass Theorem (that every inﬁ-
nite, bounded set of real numbers has an accumulation point) which Hilbert would
have treated as ideal, carry no referential contents beyond their inferential roles. For
Brouwer, one major difﬁculty haunting statements of that sort was that the claims they
make about real numbers cannot be backed up by reliable forms of inference, forms
of inference the cogency of which are responsible to the referential meanings of those
claims. Terms in signiﬁcant mathematical claims, both elementary and higher-order,
are to refer to mental constructions existing prior to inferences and to which inferences
are wholly responsible. The failure of traditional inference, with its dependence on
the tertium non datur and other nonconstructive logical rules, lies in its inability to
track the course of mental construction. An application of tertium non datur to a
statement giving a suitable construction may well convert it into a statement to which
no construction can correspond. This critique of inference opens the door wide to
intuitionism’s most characteristic and most daring feature: in its higher-order reaches,

520
D. C. McCarty
intuitionistic mathematics contradicts, not just formally but also contentually, hal-
lowed results of classical mathematics. Intuitionists of Brouwerian stripe understood
and still understand the proposition “every total function from the real numbers into
the real numbers is continuous” to be a theorem of intuitionistic real analysis contra-
dicting, and striking at the root of, classical analysis. It denies, e.g., the existence of
step functions deﬁned over all real numbers. These functions, too, fail to exist because
they cannot correspond to appropriate features of the underlying constructive reality.
Third, on the conception of Hilbertian proof theory most familiar to contemporary
scholars, Hilbert assumed that proofs would be ﬁnitary objects of the same general
sort as intuited strings or sequences. A fortiori, every proof would have to terminate
in a ﬁnite number of steps. To quote him, “In our present investigation, proof itself
is something concrete and displayable” ([17]: 1127). Hilbert’s hope was to prove
consistency for formal theories by reducing to evident absurdity the assumption that
the theories in question contained ﬁnite proofs of contradictions, proofs that could be
fully laid out for examination. Brouwer would have had little of this. In his efforts
[1] to prove the correctness of Bar Induction (induction on certain well-founded trees)
Brouwer proposed an analysis of proofs on which intuitionistically acceptable proofs
are in general inﬁnitistic and, hence, impossible to display and survey exhaustively. In
consequence, any metatheorem Hilbert proved showing that no ﬁnite proof of a con-
tradiction exists would have been insufﬁcient, assuming Brouwer able to countenance
the meaning Hilbert assigned to it, to convince Brouwer that an informal mathemati-
cal theory contains no hidden contradiction. For the latter would have allowed that a
contradiction in a mathematical discipline might only come to light as the conclusion
of an inﬁnite proof.
Next, Hilbertian proof-theoretic efforts were to be applied, not to theories in a
mathematical Umgangssprache, but to their formalized counterparts in artiﬁcial lan-
guages. Even an intuitionistically allowable proof that a formal theory representing
results of traditional mathematics is minimally coherent might neither encourage nor
discomﬁt a proper Brouwerian. Early intuitionists held that mathematical language,
artiﬁcial or otherwise, was no appropriate guide to mathematical thought. Such an
intuitionist might have offered (but did not, so far as I know) the following analogy.
We can allow that a particular painting of an event is, as a painting, visually coherent.
We can see it, take it in and understand it. From this it does not follow that what
the painting depicts ever took place, or, if it did take place, did so in the manner por-
trayed. In these respects, relations between an historical event, say Wolfe’s death at
Quebec, and a painting of it parallel those between mathematical thought and mathe-
matical language. Just as Wolfe’s demise occurred before West’s canvas ever stood on
his easel, intuitionistic mathematical thought comes ﬁrst and mathematical language
later, if at all. Like the historical painter, the speaker of a mathematical language can
only tag along afterwards to put things on the lexical canvas, perhaps inaccurately,
for posterity. Worse, all painting requires a measure of distortion, the truncation of a
limitless, multidimensional reality for the sake of the limited, two-dimensional picture
plane. Brouwerians believed mathematical language to harbor analogous distortions.

Hilbert and Paul Du Bois-Reymond
521
Expressions of such logical laws as the tertium non datur are at best distorted images
of their mental originals; they record little or nothing real in constructive thought.
Hence, a consistency proof for a formal theory that includes the formalized tertium
non datur would not underwrite the intuitionistic cogency of the thoughts, if any, the
theory captures. In general, language is to play the role neither of conductor nor of
guide in what really matters: the unfolding of mathematical thought, an unfolding
that is a direct grasping of mathematical objects themselves rather than a vain effort
to knit their shadows, painted in words and projected on a narrow screen of language.
Worth special mention is an issue on which Hilbertians and Brouwerians would
have agreed, an issue that much exercised Hilbert: the autonomy of mathematics.
With the Program and the circumambient Project, Hilbert and his followers hoped to
insure that mathematics would solve (and be acknowledged to have solved) by strictly
mathematical means all serious foundational problems pertaining to it. The truth of its
basic claims as well as the cogency and efﬁcacy of its methods of proof were to be so
guaranteed that pressing metaphysical and epistemological worries about mathematics
were properly banished by an application of mathematics itself. No other discipline,
whether metaphysics or psychology, was to get a last foundational word in, as far
as the validity of pure mathematics was concerned. On this issue of mathematical
autonomy, the intuitionists stood in seeming agreement with Hilbert, as is apparent
from [3]. From the intuitionistic viewpoint, answers to all basic foundational questions
regarding mathematics looked to be attainable via mathematical insight, by an exercise
of which we were to learn that all mathematical objects are mental constructions and
all mathematical proofs result from constructive acts.
Certainly, Hilbert devised the mature Program, in part, to thwart a feared Brouwe-
rian Putsch. That Hilbert’s dialectical countermeasures failed to meet the intuitionistic
assault head-on puts Hilbert, in this respect, in no very bad company; some of his
brightest contemporaries struggled to grasp Brouwer’s revolutionary ideas and did not
always succeed. That said, it is no vain exercise in counterfactual history to adumbrate
a position on the foundations of mathematics to which Hilbert’s Program stood in more
perfect opposition, a position welcoming to Hilbertian premises but unfriendly to their
much-sought-after conclusions.
That position would ask (1) that mathematical thought be a manipulation of repre-
sentations at least partially rule-governed and not, as the intuitionists held, an engage-
ment with mathematical objects or constructions themselves; (2) that proofs be ﬁnite
in length; (3) that the ﬁeld of mathematical intellection be divisible into inﬁnitary
and ﬁnitary zones, the latter maintaining an epistemic priority over the former; (4)
that mathematical claims refusing ﬁnitistic reconstrual not denote in ways unreﬂected
in their inferential powers, but be treated as limits or ideals adjoined to the ﬁnitistic
realm; (5) that the Axiom of Solvability for well-posed mathematical problems fail;
(6) that mathematics not be autonomous but survive only under the foundational aegis
of some nonmathematical science; and (7) that modern higher mathematics, taken as
a whole, be inconsistent.

522
D. C. McCarty
2. Paul du Bois-Reymond: Mathematician and Philosopher
At the close of the 19th Century, Paul du Bois-Reymond was counted among the most
successful and inﬂuential of European mathematicians. In the index of Ernest William
Hobson’s classic textbook, The Theory of Functions of a Real Variable and the Theory
of Fourier’s Series [20], no mathematician received more page references than du Bois-
Reymond. The index listed Cantor, Dedekind, Dini, Hardy, Lebesque andWeierstrass;
only Cantor approached du Bois-Reymond in number of citations. Histories credit
du Bois-Reymond with introducing the terms ‘extremum’ and ‘integral equation’ into
mathematics. He used the word ‘metamathematics’ in his 1890 monograph On the
Foundations of Knowledge in the Exact Sciences [Über die Grundlagen der Erkenntnis
in den exakten Wissenschaften] [12] in roughly its contemporary meaning. He devised
a notation for rates of growth of real-valued functions that is a direct ancestor to
the “big O” notation of contemporary computer science. Under the title ‘limits of
indeﬁniteness,’ he deﬁned the lim inf and lim sup of inﬁnite series and proved basic
results governing them. (Cauchy had introduced these notions but du Bois-Reymond
may have been the ﬁrst to recognize their full import.) A major theorem bearing his
name states that, if a trigonometric series is convergent and the function deﬁned is
Riemann integrable, then the coefﬁcients of the series are precisely those of Fourier.
In 1868, he formulated and proved the Second Mean Value Theorem for deﬁnite
integrals, a result to which his name is now attached but which Dini once ascribed
to Weierstrass. In 1873, he constructed a continuous function with divergent Fourier
series at every point of a dense set, thus refuting conjectures of Dirichlet and Riemann.
In 1875, he described dense sets under the title ‘pantachisch,’ from the Greek for
‘everywhere.’ He later claimed, against Georg Cantor, priority in their discovery. (In
his textbook, Hobson awarded the laurels to du Bois-Reymond.) Cantor presented his
ﬁrst diagonal proof to the public in 1891 in On an elementary question of set theory
[Über eine elementare Frage der Mannigfaltigkeitslehre] [6]; Paul du Bois-Reymond
had been there well before him, having published a plainly diagonal argument in
an 1875 article on approximation by inﬁnitesimals [9]. His greatest invention was
probably the Inﬁnitärcalcül or inﬁnitary calculus, an original, non-Cantorean account
of inﬁnite and inﬁnitesimal sizes as ﬁrst-class entities representing the rates of growth
of real-valued functions rather than the magnitudes of collections.
David Paul Gustav du Bois-Reymond was born in Berlin on 2 December 1831.
He began his academic career in medicine and physiology at Zürich; his elder brother
Emil was a famous physiologist. While in Zürich, Paul collaborated on an important
study of the blindspot of the eye. Later, he turned to mathematical physics and pure
mathematics, tackling problems of partial differential equations. Du Bois-Reymond
came to hold professorial appointments at Heidelberg, Freiburg, Berlin and Tübingen,
where he was successor to Hermann Hankel. Hilbert was certainly familiar with du
Bois-Reymond’s mathematical research; we know that the young Hilbert visited him
at least once in Berlin. Hilbert was also in touch with du Bois-Reymond’s unique
philosophy of mathematics, for du Bois-Reymond was widely recognized as a leading

Hilbert and Paul Du Bois-Reymond
523
critic of efforts to arithmetize analysis, as Alfred Pringsheim’s article in the Encyclo-
pedia of Mathematical Sciences [Encyklopädie der mathematischen Wissenschaften]
[22] conﬁrms. Du Bois-Reymond died in Freiburg on 7April 1889, having succumbed
to kidney disease while on a train trip.
Emil and Paul du Bois-Reymond played major roles in the Ignorabimusstreit, a
spirited public debate over skepticism in the natural sciences. Emil’s 1872 address to
the Organization of German Scientists and Physicians, On the limits of our knowledge
of nature [Über die Grenzen des Naturerkennens] [8], both sparked the debate and
baptized it. The address closed with the dramatic pronouncement, “In the face of the
puzzle over the nature of matter and force and how they should be conceived, the
scientist must, once and for all, resign himself to the far more difﬁcult, renunciatory
doctrine, ‘Ignorabimus’ [we shall never know]” ([8]: 130). Emil argued that natu-
ral science is inherently incomplete in that there are pressing foundational questions
concerning important phenomena to which science will never ﬁnd adequate answers.
The address unleashed a whirlwind of argument and counterargument in the press and
learned journals that lasted well into the 20th Century. Rudolf Carnap, Ernst Mach,
Moritz Schlick and LudwigWittgenstein joined the ranks of du Bois-Reymond’s critics
([14]: 99–102). As late as 1930, Richard von Mises attacked Emil du Bois-Reymond’s
lecture on behalf of logical positivism, denouncing Emil’s skeptical tropes as Schein-
probleme ([27]: 119). Edith Stein employed the word ‘Ignorabimus’ in her summer
lectures of 1932 as a general term for psychological questions that empirical science
would be unable to answer ([25]: 167). Emil du Bois-Reymond’s agnosticism was
the original Ignorabimus against which Hilbert so often railed. Hilbert’s denuncia-
tion of it loomed large in the Problems Address ([5]: 7) as well as in his ﬁnal public
statement, the Königsberg talk of 1930 ([18]: 378–387). The latter concluded with a
direct reference to Emil’s 1872 lecture: “In general, unsolvable problems don’t exist.
Instead of the ridiculous Ignorabimus, our motto is, by contrast, ‘We must know. We
will know”’ ([18]: 387). Those optimistic lines, “We must know. We will know,” are
inscribed on Hilbert’s burial monument in Göttingen.
Paul du Bois-Reymond’s 1882 monograph General Function Theory [Die allge-
meine Functionentheorie] [11] and the posthumously published On the Foundations
of Knowledge in the Exact Sciences [12] were in part devoted to sowing skepticism
in the garden of pure mathematics. In those works, he expounded a philosophy of
mathematics both highly original and remarkably prescient, no mere transliteration
into mathematical terms of his brother’s agnosticism about physical science. Paul du
Bois-Reymond showed himself a forceful critic of arithmetization and logicism and,
in that respect as well as others, a direct ancestor of Brouwer. Indeed, the extent to
which his ideas anticipated those of Brouwer is one, but hardly the sole, index of the
value of du Bois-Reymond’s philosophy. In General Function Theory, Paul drew a
clear distinction between actually and potentially inﬁnite sets and, recognizing that
the existence of potential but nonactual inﬁnities makes demands on logic, called into
question the general validity of the tertium non datur. Also, he may have been the
ﬁrst to describe in print lawless sequences, Cauchy sequences the successive terms of

524
D. C. McCarty
which cannot be generated by any predetermined rule or procedure, and to attempt
to demonstrate their existence. To elucidate the idea of lawlessness, he imagined se-
quences whose terms are given by throws of a die: “One can also think of the following
means of generation for an inﬁnite and lawless number. Every place [in the sequence]
is determined by a throw of the die. Since the assumption can surely be made that
throws of the die occur throughout eternity, a conception of lawless number is thereby
produced” ([11]: 91). Doctrines of lawless sequences still comprise a chapter in the
intuitionistic theory of the continuum; contemporary intuitionists have recourse to the
very same die-casting analogy to explain their approach to the subject ([26]: 645).
Du Bois-Reymond devised arguments that are close kin to Brouwer’s ‘weak’coun-
terexamples. He believed that information about the physical world could be so en-
coded in sequences that, if such an encoding sequence were governed by a law, a
knowledge of that law would yield up predictions about the universe that would oth-
erwise be impossible to make. Were we aware of laws for the development of those
sequences, he reasoned, we would be able to answer correctly questions about the
precise disposition of matter at any point in space and at any time in the past. He
wrote, “If we think of matter as inﬁnite, then a constant like the temperature of space
is dependent on effects that cannot be cut off at any decimal place. Were its sequence
of terms to proceed by a law of formation, then this law would contain the history
and picture of all eternity and the inﬁnity of space” ([11]: 91–92). He concluded
that, since we shall never possess comprehensive physical knowledge, we will never
have laws for the sequence giving the precise temperature of space. The similarity
to Brouwer’s ‘weak’ counterexamples should be plain: the intuitionist argues that we
will never have a law for sorting real numbers into two categories, “equal to zero” and
“unequal to zero,” on pain of harvesting, from that law, fruit from the intuitionistic
tree of good and evil, that is, knowledge sufﬁcient to prove the tertium non datur. By
Brouwer’s lights, this is knowledge we cannot possess.
A good part of General Function Theory was written in the form of a dialogue
between two imaginary mathematicians, Idealist and Empiricist. The Idealist cham-
pioned a conception of the geometrical continuum on which its basic constituents
can be transcendent and will include both inﬁnite and inﬁnitesimal magnitudes. The
Empiricist restricted consideration to those points, line segments and relations among
them that are immanent and available to intuition. Du Bois-Reymond believed that
our current and future best efforts at the philosophies of mathematics and of mind will
discern only these two distinct, mutually inconsistent, fundamental outlooks on the
foundations of mathematics, and no ﬁnal decision between them will ever be reached.
A knockdown mathematical argument will not be devised for favoring one over the
other. Now or later, the choice between them is largely a matter of scientiﬁc temper-
ament. According to du Bois-Reymond, mathematics, which is the scientiﬁc study
of magnitude, can pass its ultimate foundational test only by being carried back to
the touchstone of the continuum and these two conceptions of it. Consequently, he
thought the literary device of debate between Idealist and Empiricist to reﬂect a natural
divide and an eternal dispute within human mathematical cognition.

Hilbert and Paul Du Bois-Reymond
525
Du Bois-Reymond reasoned that this permanent intellectual dualism engenders
absolute undecidability results, that there are meaningful questions of mathematics
answers to which depend essentially upon the outlook adopted. The Idealist answers
the questions one way, the Empiricist another. Since no conclusive mathematical con-
sideration will ever decide between the two, such questions constitute undecidable
problems whose solutions will remain forever outside the range of our mathematical
abilities. A main point of General Function Theory was that one, if not the pre-
miere, such question is the existence of limits for bounded, monotonically increasing
sequences. Du Bois-Reymond wrote,
The solution of the riddle [e.g., that of limits] is, if I am correct, that it
is and will always remain a riddle. The simplest expression of the riddle
appears to be a psychological one. The most extensive observation of our
thought processes and their relation to perception leads us ineluctably to
the conclusion that there are two distinct means of conception sharing the
same right to count as foundational in the exact sciences, since neither of
the two produces results that are disconﬁrmable, at least when we restrict
ourselves to pure mathematics. … These two methods of representa-
tion I name, in keeping with the standard nomenclature, … Idealism and
Empiricism. ([11]: 2–3)
For Paul du Bois-Reymond, who advanced his own account of the inﬁnitely small,
the question “Does the continuum contain inﬁnitesimals?” was equally pressing. His
Idealist argued, along vaguely realist lines, that inﬁnitesimal real quantities do exist
and are required for the completeness of the real numbers. His Empiricist stood in
opposition, insisting that we have every reason to believe that real inﬁnitesimals are
ﬁgments of the imagination, in no way required for a satisfactory higher mathematics.
Du Bois-Reymond maintained that we will never ﬁnd grounds sufﬁciently solid for
preferring one position over the other on this issue. In this, as in the matter of limits,
our mathematics is and will always remain incomplete.
3. Du Bois-Reymond’s Philosophy and Hilbert’s Program
Paul du Bois-Reymond’s outlook on mathematics included views one would naturally
expect in a position to which the Hilbert Program was to be a reply. He and Hilbert
would have agreed that, on a proper metaphysics of proof, proofs are seen to be
arrays of representations. Du Bois-Reymond held that mathematical thought is a rule-
governed manipulation of representations and not, as the intuitionists maintained, a
direct intellectual engagement with mathematical objects. He believed the mind to be
populated by representations or Vorstellungen that are abstract to various degrees. At a
level close to perception, representations are extracted from perceptions or intuitions
and stand for perceived or intuited objects much as a Xerox copy can stand for its

526
D. C. McCarty
original. One might call these ‘object-representations.’ Du Bois-Reymond allowed
that there are also representations derived from no real perception but supplied by the
mind itself. He called these Wort-Vorstellungen, word-representations. In this case,
there is no pictorial image but only a word to tag a concept. Our representations
for the limits of sequences of rational numbers would often be of this sort. For du
Bois-Reymond, proofs were to be combinations of representations satisfying certain
mathematical requirements. In the introduction to General Function Theory we ﬁnd,
“So much is certainly clear: a proof has to connect either a representation that is
already available at the start or the common content of a class of representations,
known as a concept, with a new, to be grasped or proven, ﬁnal representation via a
connected chain of representations” ([11]: 11).
Second, for du Bois-Reymond as for Hilbert, a successful proof had to be ﬁnite
in length and completely surveyable: “For a proof, as with an explanation, is, at
bottom and generally speaking, the production of a logically satisfying sequence of
representations linking one representation, which engages our concern, to such rep-
resentations that do not disturb our peace” ([11]: 111). Du Bois-Reymond’s analyses
of various arguments for the existence of limits, set out by the Idealist in General
Function Theory ([11]: 61ff), presuppose the ﬁniteness of proofs. For example, the
Idealist criticized the standard proof, proceeding by repeated interval division, for the
least upper bound property of the real numbers, namely, that every bounded, strictly
increasing sequence of real numbers approaches a limit, its least upper bound. As an
attempted proof, as a connected representational chain transforming representations
for premises into those for conclusions in a ﬁnite number of intermediate steps, the pro-
cedure of interval division fails, or so reasoned the Idealist. Du Bois-Reymond had the
Idealist complain that, in the end, the division procedure cannot produce, from starting
object-representations for an interval and a sequence, an object-representation for a
single dimensionless limiting point. There can be only ﬁnitely many steps in the chain
of representations that comprise the proof, he argued. However, after ﬁnitely many
steps, at most a ﬁnite number of divisions of the original interval, enclosing the tail of
the sequence, can be made. At a ﬁnite stage in the division process, a stage at which
the purported proof has to terminate, one is left with, at best, an object-representation
of a rational interval of nonzero length (perhaps a visualized line segment) and not the
visualized point or dot representing the unique real number that the proof’s conclu-
sion requires. “On the basis of our assumptions, we can certainly keep reducing the
length of the interval without limit. This is, however, a process which alters nothing
in the nature of our representations. Large or small, the interval . . . remains always
an interval between two rational points” ([11]: 61). Whether defensible or not, this
line of thought would make no sense unless the author of General Function Theory,
in the guise of the Idealist, required proofs to consist of representations and be ﬁnite
in length.
Third, it would not be wholly anachronistic to ask if, with his Inﬁnitärcalcül, Paul
du Bois-Reymond thought himself to have constructed a nonstandard continuum. Of
course, the contemporary ideas of nonstandard model and of abstract languages sepa-

Hilbert and Paul Du Bois-Reymond
527
rate from their varied interpretations were not then available. Du Bois-Reymond held
that the properties of his domain of inﬁnities or inﬁnite orders (not to be confused with
Cantor’s arithmetic of inﬁnite cardinals, a development wholly distinct) agreed to an
extent with those generally supposed to hold among the standard real numbers. Sev-
eral features of the standard domain capturable by geometrical object-representations,
e.g., density, are manifested in the nonstandard number continuum as well. However,
the two continua may not have all analytically discernible features in common. Us-
ing diagonalization, du Bois-Reymond proved that the inﬁnite orders deﬁnitely do not
possess the least upper bound property. The domain of orders contained inﬁnitesimals,
as du Bois-Reymond was also able to show.
To a ﬁrst approximation, the face-off between du Bois-Reymond’s two characters,
Idealist and Empiricist, was a register of divergent attitudes toward the existence of
inﬁnitesimals. The Idealist championed a vision on which a nonstandard number
continuum forms the true structure underlying the continuum of geometry, a structure
open to the analytical intellect but revealed only partially, in glimpses often ﬂeeting
and misleading, to geometrical intuition. The Idealist’s nonstandard continuum is an
ideal, or series of ideals, posited by the mind and inserted to ﬁll gaps in the geometric
continuum where limits ought to lie. By contrast, the Empiricist was the champion of
a real number system exhausted by intuition; his mathematical empiricism was to be a
system “of complete renunciation” ([11]: 3). The Empiricist renounced inﬁnitesimals,
restricting himself to intuited real magnitudes. He denied outright that the Idealist’s
analytical machinery is at work behind the scenes erected by object-representations
as a ﬁtting backdrop to mathematical analysis.
Du Bois-Reymond’s division of mathematical thought into empiricism and ideal-
ism coincided to a large degree with a division into its ﬁnitary and inﬁnitary aspects,
the ﬁrst of which maintaining a priority over the second. The Idealist believed the
concept of magnitudes inﬁnitely large and that of magnitudes inﬁnitely small to make
sense and to be exempliﬁed in reality; the empiricist denied sense and exempliﬁca-
tion to both. Du Bois-Reymond had his Empiricist exclaim, “For the construction
of mathematics, the ﬁnite sufﬁces” ([11]: 146). The continuum of the idealist was
to be uncountable in magnitude but that of the empiricist only potentially inﬁnite.
It is essential to remember that, in the writings of du Bois-Reymond, Idealist and
Empiricist were not so much representatives of different foundational schools, e.g.,
logicism or constructivism, as discriminable voices in one and the same mathematical
consciousness. Every mathematician, du Bois-Reymond thought, sometimes reasons
as the Idealist and sometimes as the Empiricist, much as, in Hilbert’s scheme, ﬁnitism
would reign in metamathematical heaven at the same time that inﬁnitary, classical
analysis held sway over mathematical earth.
Further, since du Bois-Reymond believed that the continuum of the Empiricist
agreed with that of the Idealist in all suitably elementary geometrical and analytical
respects, no object-representation and no mathematical datum would ever distinguish
between the opposing visions by conﬁrming one and disconﬁrming the other. The
Idealist will never, unless he commits a mathematical error, claim anything to be a

528
D. C. McCarty
mathematical fact of an elementary character that the Empiricist will not be able to ac-
cept. Despite the threat of anachronism, one might suggest that idealistic mathematics
was to be conservative over the empiricistic when it came to mathematics acceptable
to the latter, much as Hilbert’s inﬁnitary higher arithmetic was to be conservative over
its ﬁnitistic fragment. In consequence, empiricism was to hold, in its strict adherence
to geometrical intuition, a manner of priority over idealism. The knowledge it delivers
is assured of greater certainty, since, according to du Bois-Reymond, the appeal to
geometrical object-representation is either innate for humans or acquired very early in
life, while the unfettered analytical thought and word-representations of the Idealist
are not. Paul du Bois-Reymond took the results of idealistic real analysis to be a
belated adjustment to some original geometrical data: “Accordingly, we can glimpse,
in the intercalation of irrational numbers among the rationals, only a retrospective
adaptation of the intellective number concept to the concept of geometrical magni-
tude, which is either innate or acquired in infancy” ([10]: 150). Because Idealist
and Empiricist were to agree on all the relevant data, the Idealist could look to the
future mathematical progress of the Empiricist as offering further support for his own
inﬁnitary investigations ([11]: 148).
Fourth, in the posthumous monograph [12], du Bois-Reymond argued that in-
ﬁnitary mathematical claims are generally ideal in that their terms need not denote
anything given by an object-representation drawn from a perceived or intuited realm.
Instead, the items represented by those terms should be viewed as symbolic limits
added to the ﬁnitistic or empiricistic sector in order to round it out. Apart from
those magnitudes like
√
2 associated with the visible result of a geometrical con-
struction, irrational numbers are not allied with object-representations but only with
word-representations that correspond to nothing in intuited mathematical reality: “The
sequence of contentual representations of exactness has as its end result [its limit] a
word for something unrepresentable” ([12]: 80). A few pages later in the same work,
we ﬁnd him asserting, “The concept of the inﬁnite that turns up here is the most sig-
niﬁcant of the unrepresentable word-representations, the foremost idealistic concept,
because it is best attached to the question of our conception of the existence of the
ideal” ([12]: 85–86). In General Function Theory [11], any magnitude that is purely
idealistic is nothing but a symbol:
All the mathematical magnitudes we have introduced so far can be located
in the realm of the perceptual world, either mental or non-mental. We
wish to call such magnitudes real. There are also magnitudes created by
the human thought process and which stand outside any direct relation
to the perceptual world. Logical processes for achieving combinations
of symbols, one of the favorite activities of the human spirit, lead to
certain symbols which are, in mathematics, also called magnitudes, and
which serve to assemble into a single sign a mathematical conclusion that
frequently recurs. ([11]: 38)

Hilbert and Paul Du Bois-Reymond
529
Incidentally, this quotation helps underscore the extent to which du Bois-Reymond
considered empiricism to hold priority over idealism. The Empiricist limited his
mathematical considerations to those magnitudes which are, as here explained, real.
The Idealist did not.
Fifth, as earlier noted, Paul du Bois-Reymond explicitly refused any principle of
solvability for mathematical problems. This refusal followed as an immediate corol-
lary to his characterization of the Idealist/Empiricist dualism. The former believed in
a continuum that contains, in addition to ordinary magnitudes, inﬁnite and inﬁnites-
imal numbers. The latter staunchly maintained that none of these purely analytical
adjustments really exists. According to du Bois-Reymond, no completely convincing
mathematical demonstration, no mathematical datum, no scientiﬁcally respectable ar-
gument will be sufﬁcient to prove either the truth or the falsity of the Idealist’s claims
to the satisfaction of all. The truth of the statement “inﬁnitesimal magnitudes actually
exist,” crucial to the Idealist’s worldview, cannot be decided. It will never be proved; it
will never be disproved. There can be no ﬁnal scientiﬁc determination of the structure
of the continuum. An examination of the text of Hilbert’s Problems Address suggests
that his Axiom of Solvability, there enunciated, might well have been intended to
exorcize this particular spectre of incompleteness [21].
Finally, Hilbert and Brouwer endorsed, in the strongest terms, the autonomy of
mathematics. Du Bois-Reymond rejected it in terms no less vigorous; he insisted
that mathematics is not an independent science, but can live only in symbiosis, its
foundation shored up by a nonmathematical discipline. He wrote, “As was to be
suspected and as we soon recognize, the [foundational] difﬁculty of the concept of
limit is not of a mathematical nature. If it were, it would have been dealt with long
ago. The difﬁculty is really rooted in the simplest constituents of our thinking, the
representations” ([11]: 2). The discipline underlying mathematics was to be the proper
study of representations. For du Bois-Reymond, that study was the physiological
psychology that so prospered in Germany during the 19th Century, among whose
foremost representatives had been Johannes Müller, Hermann von Helmholtz and his
older brother Emil. In the ﬁrst section of General Function Theory, that devoted to the
analysis of magnitude, the authorities most often cited seem to be such physiologists
as Müller and Gustav Fechner. Paul du Bois-Reymond believed that physiology will
reveal to us by experiment the nature and extent of represented magnitude and, on
that experimental basis, the foundations of mathematics could be erected. Only in
this way, by a scientiﬁc determination of what humans can actually perceive, can
the crucial foundational distinction between the Empiricist, who restricts himself to
magnitudes fully captured by geometrical object-representation, and the Idealist, who
iswillingtocountenanceunperceivableandunintuitablemagnitudes, bemadewithfull
assurance. The largest feature on du Bois-Reymond’s map of mathematical thought,
the ﬁnal treaty-line between empiricism and idealism, was to be drawn by the hand of
physiology, not by that of mathematics.

530
D. C. McCarty
4. Conclusion
Both Hilbert’s Program and the Project in which it played a part took aim at a number
of dialectical targets; they were not zeroed-in exclusively on the large target offered
by the intuitionists. Equally in his sights was Emil du Bois-Reymond’s Ignorabimus,
a grand agnostic scheme and, so, a foil well suited to the broad optimism and wide
epistemological sweep intended for the Project. And there were the skeptical philoso-
phy and nonstandard mathematics of Emil’s brother, Paul, a combination better placed
philosophically to afford a natural opponent to Hilbertism than any intuitionism from
Amsterdam. To put the naturalness of that opposition on clear display was the main
goal of this writing. No one would doubt that we can gain true and lasting insight
into the views of Hilbert and his allies only by knowing, and knowing thoroughly, the
ideas of Hilbert’s intellectual enemies. Hence, without a due appreciation of the ideas
of the du Bois-Reymond brothers and an accurate measure of the powerful inﬂuence
those ideas exerted on thinkers of their day, there can be no full, rich understanding
of the Hilbert Program, not merely in its ﬁrst beginnings but also in its argumentative
ends, forthcoming in our day.
Acknowledgement. I am grateful to Christian Thiel and Peter Bernhard of the Uni-
versity of Erlangen, as well as to Volker Peckhaus of the University of Paderborn, for
allowing me to present preliminary versions of this essay to the Colloquium Logico-
Philosophicum at Erlangen. I wish to thank Bernd Buldt, Volker Halbach and their
colleagues in the Logik Forschergruppe at the University of Konstanz, especially Ulf
Friedrichsdorf and Max Urchs, for comments and suggestions on a forerunner of this
paper presented there. Bernd Buldt was also more than generous in providing detailed
comments on subsequent versions. Essential help was given me by Gerhard Betsch,
Mic Detlefsen, James Hardy, Reinhard Kahle, Stuart Mackenzie, Jeremy McCrary and
Marianne Moberg-Blauert. Last but not least, I thank Steve Forrest, Robert Noel and
Paula Patton of the Indiana University Library in Swain Hall for their patience and de-
termination in tracking down works by 19th Century mathematicians and philosophers
now sadly forgotten.
References
[1]
Brouwer, Luitzen E. J.: 1927. Über Deﬁnitionsbereiche von Funktionen. [On domains of
deﬁnition for functions.]1 Mathematische Annalen 97: 60–75.
[2]
Brouwer, Luitzen E. J.: 1928. Intuitionistische Betrachtungen über den Formalismus.
[Intuitionistic reﬂections on formalism.] Koninklijke Akademie van wetenschappen te
Amsterdam. Proceedings of the Section of Sciences. [The Royal Academy of Sciences in
Amsterdam.] 31: 374–379.
1Unless otherwise noted, translations from the German are my own.

Hilbert and Paul Du Bois-Reymond
531
[3]
Brouwer, Luitzen E. J.: 1952. Historical background, principles and methods of intuition-
ism. In: W. Ewald (tr. and ed.), From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations
of Mathematics. vol. II, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1197–1207.
[4]
Brouwer, Luitzen E. J.: 1992. Intuitionismus. [Intuitionism.] Edited by D. van Dalen,
Mannheim: Bibliographisches Institut und F. A. Brockhaus AG., 161pp. (Contains an
edited text of Brouwer’s 1927 Berlin lectures together with Brouwer’s Theory of Real
Functions, both previously unpublished.)
[5]
Browder, Felix E. (ed.): 1976. Mathematical Developments arising from the Hilbert
Problems. Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics. vol. XXVIII. Providence, RI:
American Mathematical Society, xii+628. I have amended the translation of Hilbert’s
1900 lecture in the light of [18].
[6]
Cantor, Georg: 1891. Über eine elementare Frage der Mannigfaltigkeitslehre. [On an ele-
mentary question of set theory.] Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung.
[Annual Report of the German Mathematical Association.] Erster Band: 75–78.
[7]
Detlefsen, Michael: 1986. Hilbert’s Program. An Essay on Mathematical Instrumental-
ism. Dordrecht: Reidel, xiv+186.
[8]
Du Bois-Reymond, Emil: 1886. Über die Grenzen des Naturerkennens. Reden von Emil
du Bois-Reymond. Erste Folge. [On the limits of our knowledge of nature. Addresses of
Emil du Bois-Reymond.] Leipzig: Verlag von Veit and Comp., viii+550.
[9]
Du Bois-Reymond, Paul: 1875. Über asymptotische Werte, inﬁnitäre Approximationen
und inﬁnitäre Auﬂösungen von Gleichungen. [On asymptotic values, inﬁnitary approxi-
mations and inﬁnitary solutions of equations.] Mathematische Annalen 8: 363–414.
[10]
Du Bois-Reymond, Paul: 1877. Über die Paradoxa des Inﬁnitärcalcüls. [On the paradoxes
of the inﬁnitary calculus.] Mathematische Annalen 10: 149–167.
[11]
Du Bois-Reymond, Paul: 1882. Die allgemeine Functionentheorie. [General Function
Theory.] Tübingen: H. Laupp, xiv+292.
[12]
Du Bois-Reymond, Paul: 1966. Über die Grundlagen der Erkenntnis in den exakten Wis-
senschaften. [On the Foundations of Knowledge in the Exact Sciences.] Sonderausgabe.
Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, vi + 130.
[13]
Felscher, Walter: 1978. Naive Mengen und abstrakte Zahlen II. Algebraische und reelle
Zahlen. [Naive Sets and Abstract Numbers II. Algebraic and Real Numbers.] Mannheim:
Bibliographisches Institut Wissenschaftsverlag, 195.
[14]
Geier, Manfred: 1992. Der Wiener Kreis. [The Vienna Circle.] Reinbek bei Hamburg:
Rowohlt, 157.
[15]
Hardy, Godfrey H.: 1954. Orders of Inﬁnity: The ‘Inﬁnitärcalcül’ of Paul du Bois-
Reymond. Cambridge Tracts in Mathematics and Mathematical Physics 12. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, 77.
[16]
Hilbert, David: 1919–1920. Natur und mathematisches Erkennen. [Nature and Mathe-
matical Knowledge.] Berlin: BirkhäuserVerlag, 1992, xiv + 101.
[17]
Hilbert, David: 1922. The new grounding of mathematics. In: W. Ewald (tr. and ed.),
From Kant to Hilbert: A Source Book in the Foundations of Mathematics. vol. II. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1996, 1115–1134.

532
D. C. McCarty
[18]
Hilbert, David: 1935. David Hilbert. Gesammelte Abhandlungen. Dritter Band. [Col-
lected Works. vol. 3] Berlin: Springer, vii+435.
[19]
Hilbert, David: 1964. On the inﬁnite. In: P. Benacerraf and H. Putnam (eds.), Philosophy
of Mathematics: Selected Readings. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc., 134–151.
(A translation of Hilbert’s 1925 address to the Westphalian Mathematical Society as
printed in Mathematische Annalen.)
[20]
Hobson, Ernest W.: 1907. The Theory of Functions of a Real Variable and the Theory of
Fourier’s Series. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, xv+772.
[21]
McCarty, David C.: 2004. Problems and Riddles: Hilbert and the du Bois-Reymonds.
Synthese. Special Issue for GAP 2000. To appear.
[22]
Pringsheim, Alfred: 1898–1904. Irrationalzahlen und Konvergenz unendlicher Prozesse.
[Irrational numbers and the convergence of inﬁnite processes.] In: W. F. Meyer (ed.),
Encyklopädie der mathematischenWissenschaften. Erster Band in zwei Teilen. Arithmetik
und Algebra. [Encyclopedia of the Mathematical Sciences. First Volume in Two Parts.
Arithmetic and Analysis.] Leipzig: Teubner, 47–146.
[23]
Reid, Constance: 1970. Hilbert. Berlin: Springer, xi+290.
[24]
Sieg, Wilfried: 1999. Hilbert’s Programs: 1917–1922. The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 5:
1–44.
[25]
Stein, Edith: 1987. Essays on Woman. The Collected Works of Edith Stein. vol. 2. Trans-
lated by Freda Mary Oben. Washington: ICS Publications, ix+290.
[26] Troelstra, Anne S. and Dirk van Dalen: 1988. Constructivism in Mathematics: An Intro-
duction. vol. II. Amsterdam: North-Holland, xvii+879+LII.
[27] Webb, Judson C.: 1980. Mechanism, Mentalism, and Metamathematics. An Essay on
Finitism. Dordrecht: Reidel, xiii+277.
Indiana University
Bloomington, IN 47405-1006
USA
E-mail: dmccarty@indiana.edu

Russell’s Paradox and Hilbert’s (much Forgotten)
View of Set Theory
Jan Mycielski
Abstract. We try to explain the convictions of mathematicians that the axioms of Russell’s
theory of types and of ZFC are consistent. We claim that this is an inductive inference (a
generalization) based on mental experience, the experience of a certain physical constructive
process occurring in the brains of those who read with understanding the axioms of ZFC. Thus
Con(ZFC) is a fairly well established scientiﬁc claim or prediction about a physical process.
We describe this process by means of concepts introduced by Hilbert, Poincaré and Skolem,
and we add a number of remarks which we believe to be in the spirit of Russell’s rationalism.
1. We all know the message of Russell’s famous letter to Frege: The class of all sets
which are not members of themselves is not a set.
But why should it be a set? And, since it is not, can we develop a clear view of
sets (in our imaginations) which shows in a palpable way that this class is not a set?
These questions have been answered almost one hundred years ago, and the answer
is: sets are like imagined boxes intended to contain other boxes. Of course we cannot
enclose a box into itself. And hence the class of all boxes cannot be put into one box.
Thus the class of Russell is a superbox, a container designed to contain all boxes but
no superbox.
Henri Poincaré said it differently. He said, for example, that a line is not a set
of points, although we can construct many points on it. And the Aristotelian concept
of potentially inﬁnite sets also suggests the view that sets are some kind of imagined
boxes waiting to be ﬁlled up.
David Hilbert in 1904 [3] used still different words. He wrote that sets are thought-
objects which can be imagined prior to their elements. [At the request of the referee
who asked what is a thought-object let me add: I understand it to be a thought about
an object which may exist or not. Thus it is an electrochemical event in the brain
or/and its record in the memory. In particular it is a physical thing in space-time. Of
course it is difﬁcult to characterise any physical phenomena. But we have the ability
to recognize thoughts as identical or different, just as we have the ability to recognize a
silent lightning from a thunderous one. Hence I understand Hilbert’s words as follows:
mathematicians imagine many sets which do not exist, but their thoughts about sets do
exist and they can arise prior to the thoughts of most elements in those sets. Moreover,
in 1923 [4], he described to some extent the algorithm creating those thoughts, see
below section 3.]

534
J. Mycielski
Georg Cantor used the term deﬁnite sets, to stress the difference between sets and
proper classes. I believe that he must have thought about sets and classes in a similar
way, that is as boxes and containers (in spite of his insistence upon actual inﬁnity),
because this is the only way I can actualize them in my imagination.
Still, even today, the word set is a bit confusing to some philosophers who are not
used to set theory. In fact some are perplexed by Russell’s paradox and think that
Frege’s inconsistent set existence schema is intuitive. It would be better if set theory
teachers (and books on set theory) told at the beginning that it is essential to view the
universe of sets as a container intended to contain boxes intended for other boxes and
one of them intended to remain empty. Of course the set-brackets {...} suggest this
view of sets, but this notation should be explained to those students who meet it for
the ﬁrst time.
[However, let me defend Frege. When we construct axiomatic theories it is natural
to start with axioms as strong and as simple as possible (even if one does not see through
very well). Then, if inconsistencies are discovered, of course one has to prune down
the axioms. Thus it was natural that Frege started with the simplest and strongest
set existence axiom which occurred to him. Something similar happened when H.
Steinhaus proposed the axiom of determinacy. His original form was too strong and
I trimmed it down (then we published it together). But I had also another stronger
version and D. Scott showed that it is inconsistent; see [6], p. 219. And again when
William Reinhardt proposed his axioms of large cardinals K. Kunen showed that some
of them were too strong and inconsistent. And recently, some axioms which imply
GCH occurred to me and H. Woodin showed that some of them were inconsistent with
each other (the weaker versions which still appear to be consistent also imply GCH
and seem interesting; see [9]). In this kind of work one has to take some risks.]
The view of sets and classes as boxes and containers points out to the construc-
tive process in human imaginations creating set theory. It suggests the thesis that the
Skolem Paradox of existence of countable models of ZFC is not at all a paradox but
a preliminary mathematical description of this process. Hilbert’s ontology of mathe-
matics has been understood as follows: Pure mathematics is a tale about nothing (i.e.,
about something completely imaginary). This is called formalism. It is unsatisfying,
since it does not explain why mathematics (the set theory ZFC) appears to be con-
sistent, and why it appears to be a discovery and not a pure invention. I think that
his view (at least in 1904) was deeper, namely that pure mathematics is a description
(however indirect or metaphorical) of a growing ﬁnite structure of thought-objects
actually constructed in human imaginations, and that set theory is a straightforward
extension of human natural logic, of the ability to classify things into sets, and of the
logic and the potential for creating language given to us by natural evolution. Perhaps
an essential part of this view goes back to Aristotle (I am not familiar enough with
ancient mathematics to make any ﬁrm attributions). This view will be called here
rationalism. Notice that it is free of Platonist ontological assumptions. It explains the
belief in the consistency of ZFC as an inductive inference based on a mental experi-
ment. It explains also such works of ﬁction other than mathematics where something

Hilbert’s (much Forgotten) View of Set Theory
535
sufﬁciently concrete has been imagined such that it can be described in many ways
and in any common language. Later (in 1923) Hilbert proposed a formalism (his
ε-symbols) for a direct (non-metaphorical) description of such growing ﬁnite struc-
tures. Those structures were also described in 1920 and 1922 in mathematical terms
(informally) by Thoralf Skolem; see Sections 3 and 4 for more details.
Thus rationalism offers a biological explanation (and description) of the nature of
pure mathematics and of all sufﬁciently concrete imaginary structures, taking them
to be physical processes and their records in human brains. In the remainder of this
lecture I will try to explain rationalism more fully and I will add some remarks (or
impressions) about its history. Of course this account is only a sketch which is far
from completeness.
2. Let me begin with some events from my early education.
I asked my high-school teacher if mathematics is consistent. He said that he is
not sure since there are things called paradoxes in set theory. But he said that some
have worried about that question and this stimulated the writing of some books. He
lent me one, a semiformal exposition of what was then called theoretical arithmetic.
It was full of close-knit proofs of obvious facts, the whole thing pedantic and boring,
and absolutely inconclusive relative to my question.
Of course I learned later that Hilbert asked the same question, and that Gödel has
shown that in a sense we do not and cannot know the answer.
But, in spite of this, I had an experience which I can repeat at will: When reading the
formulas expressing the axioms of set theory, I form in my imagination an approximate
picture of the universe of sets which is so concrete that it convinces me that this system
of axioms is consistent.
How to analyse this experience? What is happening in my imagination? I believe
that I construct mentally a little ﬁnite segment of the Skolem hull of sets generated by
the empty set by means of the operations suggested by the axioms. This construction
appears so regular, in a sense periodic, that I believe that it can be continued forever.
The injection of the inﬁnite set is beautiful, no obstacle whatsoever. (See also below,
Section 3.) The physical prediction that ZFC will never be found inconsistent is equiv-
alent to the prediction that these ﬁnite segments of Skolem hulls can be extended for as
long as we can and wish to do it (even with the help of computers). [A more detailed
mathematical deﬁnition of these ﬁnite structures arising in human imaginations and
supporting the feeling of consistency and concreteness of mathematical theories is
given in [8].]
I do not want to be disrespectful to those who are believing Platonists, but it seems
to me that this experience in mental construction has nothing to do with seeing a
Platonist universe of sets. It derives from a certain regularity of ZFC. If I had been
exposed e.g., to Quine’s NF I believe I would not have had such an experience since
the Quinean membership relation has a loop V ∈V and so the ﬁnite segments of
Skolem hulls for NF are not that simple. I was relating a personal experience; perhaps
all of you had this experience (if not with ZFC, then with PA)?

536
J. Mycielski
[A more general observation may be of interest: The fact that we believe the
consistency of ZFC is caused by a mental mechanism M which turns into convictions
this (and many many other) inductive generalizations, based on mental or external
experiences. M acts in such a way that it turns into convictions any description or
theory which appears to be true (that is to agree with facts in some intended measure)
and is the simplest (or a disjunction of the simplest) among those descriptions which
we know and which seem to have this agreement. [To accept the simplest among the
fullest descriptions is often called inference from the best explanation.] Of course
there are two ways of checking such an agreement: we learned that description from
a source which we can trust, or we made ourselves an observation or an experiment
which conﬁrms it strongly enough. Moreover, M acts independently of our will. In
particular it is difﬁcult or impossible to loose our belief unless we forget it or we learn
a better description (i.e., one which is simpler and/or appears to satisfy that agreement
in a larger degree). Notice that M is an attribute of good intelligence, and that it
counters any general form of scepticism. Let me add that as soon as evolution gave
us the power to form freely complex mental models of reality and the language to
communicate them, it had to give us also an instinctive preference for the simplest
such models, i.e., those which are the easiest to remember and to communicate from
scratch. And M is a perfected form of this instinct. I believe that there exists also
another reason for that preference: the simplest theories which appear to be true have
a better chance to be true (in their intended measures). In the practice of daily life and
in science this preference is always obeyed.]
Thus the questions, why mathematics appears to be consistent, why it is so concrete
or reconstructible in our minds, are all answered. It is all grounded in the simplicity of
the axioms of ZFC and the human ability to carry a mental construction of appropriate
ﬁnite structures when exposed to those axioms. (Although it is possible that some like
Zermelo himself may ﬁrst imagine the structures and then express the axioms.)
Still, I do not think that ZFC has any absolute position. Most extensions of ZFC
with axioms of existence of large cardinals even some very strong ones (likeVopenka’s
axiom or Reinhard’s n-extendible cardinal existence axioms), are easily incorporated
in the above mental construction which yields in the same way the conviction that
they are consistent. But, of course, as the axioms become stronger the conviction
becomes weaker. I believe that our minds have some subjective estimates of the
probabilities of consistency of those theories; however those values are not easy to
measure, they are present only in our subconscious knowledge and they vary with time
and experience. It is somewhat like evaluation of positions in chess. (Concerning
our evaluating knowledge see below Section 5(e).) More generally, all our beliefs
may have such probabilities in our minds. (Thus the concept of a conviction used
above is a simpliﬁcation. Rather than creating convictions M attaches probabilities
of consistency (and of truth when this concept applies) to theories. But we are able
to observe clearly the presence of these probabilities in our minds only when they are
close to 1 or close to 0.)

Hilbert’s (much Forgotten) View of Set Theory
537
Of course one should remember that the mental constructions supporting the con-
sistency of ZFC and its natural extensions are not full proofs. For example it seems
to me that if somebody is not familiar with set theory, and he is exposed to ZFC +
AD (where AD is the Axiom of Determinacy), he may have the same positive expe-
rience. AD may appear to him as a natural generalization of a fact on ﬁnite games
of perfect information. Indeed the clash between AD and the Axiom of Choice is not
immediately visible since it requires a longer proof. At least I can tell that if I omit the
axiom of choice, that is I consider the theory ZF + AD, then that mental experience
supporting consistency happens in my mind. And I believe that whenever we consider
a new theory, at the beginning we have only that mental constructive method and no
Platonic telescope to see anything.
3. In 1951 the logician J. Słupecki told me: I understand free variables. They are places
for the substitution of more concrete terms. But I do not understand quantiﬁers since
often they refer directly to some actually inﬁnite universes which I do not believe
to exist. (Like a number of Polish logicians of that time Slupecki called himself a
nominalist; so did Kotarbi´nski and Tarski. They were inﬂuenced by K. Twardowski.
See also [8].)
But there was an excellent answer to his question which Hilbert gave in 1923 [4]
which I did not know in 1951 (it is possible that Slupecki knew it and wanted only
to stimulate his student): Hilbert’s ε-symbols eliminate quantiﬁers from the basic
formalism of logic. Quantiﬁers become abbreviations or deﬁned symbols. Namely,
∃yϕ(x, y) ↔ϕ(x, εyϕ(x)),
and
∀yϕ(x, y) ↔ϕ(x, εy(¬ϕ)(x)).
In fact, if we add to ﬁrst-order logic without quantiﬁers the ε-operator, and Hilbert’s
axiom schema (H):
ϕ(x, y) →ϕ(x, εyϕ(x)),
and the above deﬁnitions, then one can prove the usual axiom schemata on quantiﬁers.
Even variables can be eliminated, since the above formulas can be interpreted
as axiom schemata of logic, where the free occurrences of the variables x and y
are understood to be arbitrary constants (i.e., terms without variables). (By axiom
schemata we mean certain rules which yield theorems.)
ThusbothquantiﬁersandfreevariablesinanystatementsareexplainedviaHilbert’s
ε-symbols as schemata for formulas without any variables free or bound. In this way,
formulas with free variables can be understood as rules for forming quantiﬁer-free
sentences (i.e., formulas without any variables) and those sentences do not refer to
any objects except those whose names appear in them, in particular they do not refer
to universes. Of course if y is the only free variable in ϕ, then the term εyϕ is a
constant. This constant can be called a general object, since its only intended prop-
erty is expressed by the schema (H), i.e., it is maximizing the truth value of ϕ. (It is
useful to generalize all this in such a way that we understand x and y to be any ﬁnite
sequences of variables, and εyϕ(x) as a sequence of |y| function symbols each having

538
J. Mycielski
|x| variable places, where |s| denotes the length of the sequence s.) [Concerning the
mental role of variables see also below Section 5(a).]
Now notice the following ambivalence of sentences of ﬁrst-order logic. The Pla-
tonist understands them as assertions about an ideal (most often actually inﬁnite)
structure. The formalist takes them to be meaningless strings of symbols. The ratio-
nalist (me) understands them as assertions about ﬁnite structures of constants which
are named in those sentences. Also, depending on the context, the rationalist under-
stands formulas with free variables as names of relations or as rules for producing
sentences. And he understands terms with variables as rules for producing constants
(without claiming that he knows or can always decide the truth values of equality
or other relations of his language when they are applied to those constants). Thus
all three use the same mathematical language, but the rationalist is interested in the
physical structures of thoughts underlying them (in human brains), and for him the
view of Platonists appears false and the view of formalists trivial. It is clear that ra-
tionalism generalizes such that it explains not only pure mathematics but all works of
ﬁction expressed in common languages, and it explains it all in biological terms such
as thought-objects of various kinds, and the calculus of terms, relations and Boolean
connectives of the natural human logic.
4. I do not know if Hilbert ever juxtaposed his view of 1904 (that sets are mentally ac-
tually constructed thought-objects whose members need not be actually constructed),
with his ε-symbols of 1923 (which provide notations for all thought-objects). He
does not mention either that the ε-operator can be viewed as a tool for naming Skolem
functions (1920–1923, see [16]) nor, as we have explained above, that they provide
a language for describing directly that constructive process in our brains which is
stimulated by reading the axioms of ZFC (see [8] for a fuller mathematical deﬁnition
of those imagined structures).
In his later writings Hilbert introduced a confusing distinction between concrete
and abstract concepts which does not match his 1904 idea (and is not related to the
ε-symbols). Of course we have a distinction between those concepts which are used
in applications of mathematics to represent physical objects and processes, and those
objects of pure mathematics which have no such uses, see [10]. But this does not seem
to be the distinction which he had in mind or at least this is not how his commentators
understood it (for example it is understood that individual real numbers are not among
his concrete objects, however they have of course direct physical interpretations). It
seems that he intended his concrete objects to be those which can be denoted by ﬁnite
strings of symbols (e.g., integers). But then, according to the rational point of view,
he made an ontological error since either this implies that there are mathematical
objects which cannot be actually denoted or imagined (Platonism) or that all objects
are concrete (and the distinction is useless).
[Perhaps we can rescue Hilbert’s distinction saying that a structure consists of
concrete objects if we have a system of names for all its individual objects and a
decision procedure for equality and the other basic relations when applied to those

Hilbert’s (much Forgotten) View of Set Theory
539
names (such a structure is called a computable structure). For example the individual
objects of number theory (integers), of logic (terms and formulas), and of ﬁnite combi-
natorics (hereditarily ﬁnite sets) are concrete, while those of second-order arithmetic
(real numbers) are not. But, since I do not know any ontological signiﬁcance of this
concept, I doubt if this was the intention of his distinction.]
5. Finally let me add miscellaneous thoughts about the philosophy of mathematics
and even philosophy in general (as mentioned above, the ontology of mathematics
presented here has a more general signiﬁcance). Those remarks will complement some
points made earlier, but they are somewhat incomplete. I am emboldened to make them
because the previous text seems already diametrically opposite to the vast majority
of ontological opinions expressed by philosophers, also to the current opinions of
phenomenologists and of postmodernists. Indeed I believe that rationalism (as deﬁned
above) puts in doubt the cognitive value of a large part of the philosophical literature.
It suggests also that as a rule the literature about the history of philosophy is defective
since it is uncritical and hence confusing. Many writers stress dead ends and present
them as viable alternatives, rather than trying to disentangle solid contributions to
knowledge or to distinguish that which is known from open problems and to illuminate
the political or/and religious pressures which may have caused errors. (Perhaps there
exists a dubious belief that error is a necessary precursor of knowledge. In fact error
often obscures the truth and makes it more difﬁcult to construct knowledge. Ignorance,
when explicitly acknowledged, is much more useful.) Then some philosophers try to
justify it all claiming that philosophy is incapable of producing any deﬁnitive answers
to its core problems. This in turn appears to me to be an exaggeration. Moreover, I
believe that philosophy is not like pure mathematics. We can know mathematics, as
we can know other man-made structures, so metamathematics is a knowledge since it
is a mathematical theory of a reality, but pure mathematics is not a knowledge since
it talks about imaginary structures. On the other hand the aim of philosophy is to
be a part of knowledge. In fact solid philosophical knowledge exists and I hope that
rationalism belongs to knowledge. Also, philosophical criticism in science is dearly
needed (especially in physics). But philosophers left it to the scientists who are not
very good at it. Too often their appreciation of basic unsolved problems is insufﬁcient
and they overemphasise algorithmic and technical know-how.
(a) Mathematicians often leave interpretations and applications of their concepts
to others, and Hilbert may have omitted anything that appeared too obvious to him. In
philosophical matters he would rather write about things with which he had difﬁculties,
than those which were clear to him. Then his commentators could have missed some
meanings which he had in mind. Perhaps the idea that all thoughts and memories (and
hence all mathematical objects) are physical things in human brains would have been
obvious to many scientists at the turn of the nineteenth century.
I believe that this view implies that there are no objective degrees of concreteness
of thought-objects (I will return to this point in a moment). However thoughts can
be fragile in the sense that they are ﬂeeting and not reproducible, or solid in the

540
J. Mycielski
sense that they are remembered and can be explained to others in many ways. More
important is the objective distinction between those imagined thought-objects which
name and are intended to model other physical objects or processes (such as many
geometric ﬁgures), and those thought-objects for which there is little or no chance
of ﬁnding physical signiﬁcance (such as a well ordering of the real line). This is
also discussed in [10]. Thus in my vocabulary concrete means physical, but it does
not mean meaningful or representing something real. Thus in pure mathematics we
write symbols like 2 or ≺(a well ordering of the real line), and both are symbols for
concrete thoughts, in spite of the fact that 2 is deﬁnable and it plays an important role
in numerous applications (e.g., as a property of objects which we view as consisting
of two sub-objects) while ≺is not deﬁnable in the language of ZFC (prior to the
ε-extension) and it has no intended direct physical interpretations. That is, when a
mathematician uses ≺in a proof, ≺is as concrete in his imagination as any other
thought-object.
Returning to our discussion of variables, let me amplify once again that they are not
only places for substitution (as told by Slupecki). When we use them in calculations
and in proofs, they get in our minds the status of thought-objects, objects which can be
called general and denoted by constant ε-terms. For example consider two expressions
x = x,
εy¬(y = y) = εy¬(y = y).
The ﬁrst can be explained as an abbreviation of the second (which is a more explicit).
We do not care about (we abstract) all properties of the object εy¬(y = y) (except that
it maximises ¬(y = y), i.e., we can use (H)), so we call it a general object. [But free
variables are also used in different ways such as in the expression ¬(x = y). Indeed,
this expression cannot be understood as a statement but either as a notation for (the
thought of) the relation of non-equality, or as a schema for some statements without
variables.]
(b) H. Poincaré made the following error: With his rational interpretation of inﬁnite
sets and classes as potentially inﬁnite sets and classes (we said boxes and containers)
he jumped too hastily to the prediction that Cantor’s theory of inﬁnite cardinal numbers
will never be an interesting or genuine part of mathematics. Thus he thought that one
kind of (presumably too abstract) objects can be a priori banned from mathematics. It
appears that he believed also that every good mathematical theory must contribute to
natural sciences. But such a requirement is inconsistent with his own statement that
in mathematics to exist is to be imagined and to be free from any known contradiction.
Indeed, according to most of us set theory is a good and even admirable theory.
(c) Let us reﬂect upon the question what information or what concrete structure
of mathematical objects is so valued by the constructivists or the intuitionists and
according to them is lost in classical mathematics? See e.g., [1]. According to our
rational interpretation if an existential statement is postulated or proved, then the
corresponding object must be a concrete thought. (Concrete does not mean fully
deﬁned in the usual ﬁrst-order language, for example we can think of an integer

Hilbert’s (much Forgotten) View of Set Theory
541
εy(y = y), and we do not wish to decide its parity, thus it remains a general object; or
we can think of a pencil, but we do not think about its color or length). This suggests
that nothing valuable is lost in classical mathematics.
The only proposal of intuitionists whose motivation is clear to me (although they
do not express it in this way) is that mathematics should deal only with computable
structures.
But I think that this restriction would badly impoverish mathematics.
The motivation of their second restriction, namely rejecting proofs using the law of
excluded middle, is much less clear to me and it would damage mathematics even
more. It is true that this restriction automatically forces the mathematician to prove
more, however if the effect of that additional work is not expressed in the theorems it
is lost. I believe that it is better to prove stronger theorems in a classical way, than to
hide their meaning in their intuitionistic proofs.
[Intuitionistic logic does not agree with the way we organize theories and descrip-
tions of reality. We observe that in the world at large theories and arguments are built
such that p or not-p is accepted as true without necessarily knowing that p is true or
knowing that not-p is true, and classical mathematical thinking is not any different
from common thinking. (Of course in our imagination p is neither true nor false, it
is a sentential variable, a general object of a certain kind.) Thus human knowledge is
organized on the basis of classical logic and not intuitionistic logic; see also [5], [8],
[10].]
(d) All the discussions of truth and existence in mathematics in the collection
[2] propose or assume theories which are unconvincing since those theories are more
complicated than rationalism. Thus a few words on the concepts of truth and existence
are in order. As we know, truth (in its primary meaning) is an agreement between
sentences and the reality, and an adequate mathematical theory of this relation was
given by Tarski. [This theory inspired model theory, but the latter went far beyond
the original epistemological motivation of Tarski.] According to this primary sense,
since pure mathematics talks about imaginary objects, there is no truth in it, and the
word true (when we talk about mathematical statements or theories) has a different
meaning than in normal parlance. It seems so easy to explain this meaning that I do not
understand why philosophers wrote papers devoted to this issue. Namely, when talking
about the truth of mathematical statements we are in the realm of metamathematics,
see also [7]. Thus A is true means A has been assumed or proved from axioms and
deﬁnitions which are clear from the context. If we challenge the statement A is true we
question the existence of such a proof of A. Spoken and written mathematics does not
describe directly the structure of mathematical thoughts. We can say that it is a true but
metaphorical description of our ﬁnite thought-structures. A direct description, i.e., a
translation of mathematics into the variable-free language deﬁned in Section 3, would
be too long for human uses. [But I think that it will become useful for computers since
for them such translations of the usual expressions are not be too long while the rules
of proof of the variable-free language are more uniform.]
Also in pure model theory truth or satisfaction do not have any physical meanings.
Such meanings appear only when model theory is applied to explain the property true

542
J. Mycielski
of real thoughts or texts describing reality. So once again, truth can appear only in
applications.
In a similar way the term exists means something else in everyday language, in
philosophy, and in science, than in mathematics. First consider the trivial sentence:
Everything exists. Of course the concept of existence used here does not distinguish
anything from anything and hence it is useless. So the primary (and useful) meaning
of the term exists must be different. In fact its role is to distinguish those thought-
objects which are intended to name or correspond to something from those which
are purely imaginary (that is without such an intention). But in pure mathematics
the meaning of existence is different. It distinguishes thought-objects which appear
to be consistent from the inconsistent ones or, in other contexts, A exists means that
we were able to prove (in a sense clear from the context) the theorem that an A with
such and such properties exists. (Inconsistent objects do appear in mathematics on a
temporary basis in proofs by reductio ad absurdum and in some preliminary attempts
to construct consistent objects.)
Mutatis mutandis all of the above applies to all works of ﬁction. (Concerning
physical interpretations of mathematical objects, see also [10].)
(e) It is more difﬁcult to explain or to build an interesting theory of intuition, see
[11] and references therein. There are striking examples of the importance of intuition:
A good chess player uses not only computation but also his intuitive knowledge in order
to choose a good move, a mathematician uses intuition to form interesting axioms,
deﬁnitions, conjectures, and to build proofs. In each case there are too many possible
choices and their consequences are too remote to be explored, and one applies one’s
evaluating knowledge (EK), see [8]. The EK which is useful in chess and mathematics
is fully learned since there was no evolutionary pressure to give us such facilities. In
[8] I divided knowledge into EK and descriptive knowledge (DK), and proposed some
mathematical deﬁnitions and theories of the learning process of EK and DK. Here
I will only add that intuition, the mechanism M (see Section 2) and EK are closely
related to each other. Indeed the evaluation of the degree of truth of a statement, of the
strength of an analogy, or of the simplicity of a theory or a description, are all made
on the basis of EK, and they are essential for the action of M. Vice versa M plays an
important role in the construction of EK.
Assuming that our mathematical theories of EK and DK (see [8] and references
therein) are adequate, the main unsolved problem is to explain how EK and DK
inﬂuence each other’s development and how they collaborate in our minds.
(f)The philosophical signiﬁcance of proof theory is unclear, since there seems to be
no ontological or psychological signiﬁcance of the proofs of consistency of arithmetic.
To me, and perhaps to most of us, like all pure mathematics, those proofs are motivated
only by the formal value or beauty of their logical and conceptual structures (unlike,
say, Mathematical Physics which has also another goal: to describe physical reality).
(g) Likewise any special ontological signiﬁcance of primitive recursive arithmetic
(PRA) is unclear except for those areas which touch upon computer science or brain
science. For example, the idea that PRA constitutes the appropriate theory of concrete

Hilbert’s (much Forgotten) View of Set Theory
543
objects fails, if we agree (see (a)) that all thought-objects of pure mathematics are
equally concrete in human imaginations.
(h) We do not share Hermann Weyl’s concern about the lack of scientiﬁc content of
mathematics, see e.g., [12]. Weyl did not regard as sufﬁcient the artistic or aesthetical
motivation of mathematics. As a pure mathematician he did not feel secure and wanted
to do applicable mathematics. Unlike him Hilbert felt secure and I think that most of
us share Hilbert’s feeling. And we are sure of the importance of mathematics since
we know that it is a mental art with an extraordinary esthetical quality, that throughout
human history art accompanied and often preceded knowledge, and that mathematics
is a prerequisite to science. For these reasons the concern of Weyl seems unnatural.
(i) Historians and philosophers divide the philosophy of mathematics into three
schools: logicism (Frege, Russell and others), formalism (Hilbert and his school) and
intuitionism (Brouwer and his school). As we wrote in [5], and in view of the ontology
described in the present paper, this classiﬁcation seems artiﬁcial and confusing. Also
philosophers use a number of terms which are derived from the theological disputes
in the Middle Ages, and are in conﬂict with modern natural language (but pleasing to
some of them). Let me discuss those points.
First, what is logic? A natural sense of this word is: the ensemble of those
methods of correct argument with which nature endowed human beings. (I am aware
that postmodernists do not believe in such a thing. They claim that those methods
were made by people and not by nature, that they are cultural and not natural. But
I do not believe the postmodernists. The agreement between mathematicians and
scientists of all races and cultures and the degree to which knowledge is a cumulative
construction disproves the postmodernist ideas; see also [13]). If you agree with the
above deﬁnition of logic, it is reasonable to regard set theory as a part of logic. Indeed
all mathematicians know intuitively enough set theoretical constructions and axioms to
build the objects and to prove the theorems in their ﬁelds of interest. However, many of
them do not know those methods and axioms in a conscious way. They have the know-
how but not the know-why (Plato pointed out this distinction in a different context).
Thus type theory or even set theory and some special tools for using them, appear
to be ready in our nature. [Some must think that it is only in the nature of gifted
people, since they write books and offer courses for the ungifted ones; books with
titles like “Learning to Reason”, which are hundreds of pages long and have almost
no mathematical content. I doubt if they can ever be useful; in fact I believe that they
are harmful since they can kill the interest of their readers. The compactness and the
expressive power of mathematics are essential qualities which are important in our
culture, and these qualities are completely missed in those books. Even their authors
seemtoknowthatthosetextsaretrainingprograms, buttheyseemunawarethattheyare
extremely inefﬁcient as sources of information and are dangerously counterproductive
as initiations to science or mathematics.] Thus I believe that the primitive sense of
the word logic encompasses set theory (say ZFC, or some system with urelements).
Nevertheless, since Gödel’s discovery of the Completeness Theorem for ﬁrst-order
logic (FOL), in mathematics, the term logic is often restricted to mean FOL. And of

544
J. Mycielski
course, after restricting it in this way, one can claim that the program of logicism (of
Frege, Russell and Whitehead) of deriving mathematics from logic, is not doable. But,
if we return to the old more inclusive sense of the term then this program is doable
and it has been fully completed.
And then, formalism (understood as a program) is really the same as logicism,
whence the distinction between them rests on the above terminological convention;
it vanishes if we adopt the wider sense of the concept of logic. (I am not aware of
any signiﬁcant disagreements between logicists and formalists, unless one takes the
Platonism of Frege to be a part of logicism—Russell would have rejected such an inclu-
sion). Thus I think that this distinction is not interesting. Both groups of people tried
and (on the basis of the work of Dedekind, Cantor, Zermelo and Skolem) succeeded
in constructing a simple and formal (i.e., mathematical) account of mathematics.
Now, the name ‘formalism’ for the philosophy of Hilbert (apparently invented by
Brouwer) should not be used. First, this term carries a pejorative overtone, second,
it is misleading. Indeed the mental experience supporting the consistency of ZFC
which was discussed in Section 2 is real and, for example, the distinction between
ZFC and NF mentioned there is also real. Thus NF could be called formalistic while
ZFC intuitively true, and we see a real difference between formalistic and intuitive
theories. Moreover, in that mental experience, there exists a signiﬁcant difference
between sentences and objects or structures, and there are many categories of mental
objects (the division into the category of truth valued expressions and object valued
expressions is only the ﬁrst step in this analysis, see [8]). And there exists a rich
structure in our imaginations and memories which is based on these categories. Hence
the structure of mathematical knowledge is far from arbitrary. Hilbert stressed the role
of imagination and intuition in mathematics and one cannot attribute to him the view
that mathematics is an arbitrary game of symbols. Unfortunately as much as I know
he did not respond himself to the curious accusation that his philosophy assumes or
implies such arbitrariness.
The phenomenon of relatively wide acceptance of biased misnomers like the name
‘formalism’ for mathematics based on classical logic or for the philosophy of Hilbert,
is not isolated. Time and again we see people who twist language in order to win the
popular debate. For example the positive overtones of the word realist must delight
Platonists who call themselves realists. (They do not seem to be bothered that this
contradicts the common meaning of words according to which only an idealist can
think that mathematical objects are real, i.e., exist independently of mankind, while a
realist knows that they are ideal, i.e., imagined.)
The common meaning of the word rationalism is also rejected by many philoso-
phers and replaced by a contrary meaning, namely they oppose rationalism to empiri-
cism (but in common parlance it is irrational to ignore experiments). I do not think
that such uses are motivated only by an outdated medieval tradition. They sound to me
(at least sometimes) as furtive attempts to diminish the value of science and reason.
Still on terminology: Poincaré was called a conventionalist. Again I do not know
any good justiﬁcation of this label. It is true that he stressed that the choice of primitive

Hilbert’s (much Forgotten) View of Set Theory
545
concepts in a mathematical theory is a matter of convenience, a convention. But this
is a well recognized fact and not a philosophical position. He may have erred by
not realizing that his version of special relativity is not only a convention but a real
improvement of the Galilean theory (since the concept of ether becomes redundant).
This was an oversight, but not a philosophical position.
(j) I know only one interesting distinction in the philosophy (ontology) of mathe-
matics namely the distinction between Platonists and rationalists, and this motivates
the following remarks.
Some Platonists base their conviction on a feeling that PA is true and that every
sentence in the language of PA is true or false. What matters is what do they mean by
true? After all rationalists have just the same belief: for every sentence in the language
of PA either it or its negation expresses a physical law, i.e., a correct prediction about
an appropriate physical process.
Platonists say also that they are sure that if set
theory is done in other planetary systems it is compatible and perhaps very similar to
ours. Again rationalists agree since they think that set theory is founded upon some
ﬁnite mental experiments and there are universal physical laws which determine the
outcomes of those experiments.
Thus the only real difference between rationalists and Platonists are the beliefs of
the latter that there is a non-physical Platonic world of mathematical objects, and a
human ability to learn certain facts of that world. Rationalism explains mathematics
without these assumptions (by accepting the physical nature of mental life, which in
the present state of knowledge about the brain is obvious). This Ockhamian economy
of rationalism makes it more convincing than Platonism.
As mentioned in Section 2 we have a psychological mechanism M which acts
independently of our will and makes us believe the simplest explanations of things
which agree with facts. Thus we know why rationalism is convincing and Platonism
is not. (Notice that although our minds do not tolerate inconsistency, they are more
liberal about truth. Indeed M induces beliefs in some theories which only approximate
the reality in some intended degree, a degree which, very often, is not known to the
believer. E.g., I believe that each of the three theories of planetary orbits of Copernicus,
Kepler and Einstein is true in an intended measure in which it is used today, but I do
not know how accurate they are.
(k) In this state of affairs the existence of Platonists in this day and age is puzzling
to me as it was puzzling to Tarski (see [8]) and presumably to Russell. But let me try
to answer this question. Of course there were very outstanding Platonists, and among
them Frege, Zermelo and Gödel. But notice that Frege and Zermelo did their main
works before the invention of Skolem functions or Hilbert’s ε-symbols, and hence we
can assume that they did not see any way to justify the rationalistic theory. It remains
to explain the position of Gödel who knew very well those concepts of Skolem and
Hilbert (the philosophy of Gödel was taken very seriously by several authors; see e.g.,
[2], [11], [14]). My explanation is that Gödel never thought seriously about the idea
that mathematics is a physical construction going on in human brains. It is possible
that he had a mystic non-physical concept of mind, since we know that he believed

546
J. Mycielski
that the mind discovers or sees (rather than constructs) the universe of sets. Of course
many people, and many mathematicians, think that way. But I propose that this is a
consequence of a gap in their philosophical knowledge and a propensity to create a
quick ﬁx for that gap, somewhat justiﬁed by the fact that this ﬁx has almost no impact
on mathematics. [However it does have inﬂuence upon the attitude toward the axioms
of set theory, and perhaps on the way they are invented, see e.g., [6], [7], [9]. I cannot
believe that the illusion that they tell a truth about some real inﬁnite universe could
be better than the knowledge that the only reality inspiring and supporting them is a
ﬁnite constructive process in human brains.]
(l) The defense of rationalism offered by philosophers is weak and their inﬂuence
on sciences almost nonexistent. In fact, as the biologist E. O. Wilson [15] and the
physicists J. Bricmont and A. Sokal [13] explained, the lack of consilience between
philosophy and sciences is striking (and sometimes it reaches comic proportions).
Let me mention one example of this lack of contact or awareness. The philosophers
D. Armstrong, A. Flew, B. Russell, G. Ryle, L. Wittgenstein and many others do not
quote nor use in their theories and historical accounts the work of physiologists such as
Charles Sherrington or Santiago Ramon y Cajal, or the mathematicianA. Turing. This
is perplexing since the discovery of the complexity of the brain and the construction
of relatively simple universal Turing machines provided a much higher platform for
a rational philosophy of the human being (the identity thesis) than the platform of
earlier centuries upon which those philosophers appear to be standing.
I think that philosophy of mathematics (and philosophy in general) becomes rele-
vant and true to its original aims only when it constitutes a contribution to knowledge.
And, to propose a sufﬁciently sharp (perhaps even useful) criterion let me repeat that
knowledge consists only of the simplest among the fullest descriptions of reality.
(m) Finally, concerning the future, I believe that the rational philosophy of mathe-
matics points us toward a better understanding of the structure of mathematical knowl-
edge in human brains, and eventually it will explain how mathematicians invent proofs
of conjectures. (I have tried to formulate some preliminary mathematical deﬁnitions
for such a theory in the lecture [8].)
References
[1]
Bishop, Erret and Douglas Bridges: 1985. Constructive Analysis Berlin: Springer.
[2]
Hart, Wilbur D. (ed.): 1996. The Philosophy of Mathematics. Oxford Readings in Phi-
losophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[3]
Hilbert, David: 1904. On the foundations of logic and arithmetic. In [16]: 129–138.
[4]
Hilbert, David: 1923. Die Logischen Grundlagen der Mathematik. Math. Annalen 88:
151–165.
[5]
Marek, Viktor W. and Jan Mycielski: 2001. Foundations of mathematics in the twentieth
century. Amer. Math. Monthly 108: 449–468.

Hilbert’s (much Forgotten) View of Set Theory
547
[6]
Mycielski, Jan: 1964. On the axiom of determinateness. Fund. Math. 53: 205–224.
[7]
Mycielski, Jan: 1995. New set-theoretic axioms derived from a lean metamathematics.
J. of Symbolic Logic: 191–198.
[8]
Mycielski, Jan: 2001. On the tension between Tarski’s nominalism and his model theory
(Deﬁnitions for a mathematical model of knowledge). Warsaw: Proceedings of the Tarski
Conference, to appear.
[9]
Mycielski, Jan: 2003. Axioms which imply GCH. Fund. Math. 176: 193–207.
[10]
Mycielski, Jan: to appear. Pure mathematics and physical reality (continuity and com-
putability).
[11]
Parsons, Charles: 1995. Platonism and mathematical intuition in Kurt Gödel’s thought.
The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 1: 44–74.
[12]
Sieg, Wielfried: 1999. Hilbert’s programs: 1917–1922. The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic
5: 1–44.
[13]
Sokal,Alan and Jean Bricmont: 1998. Fashionable Nonsense, Postmodern Intellectural’s
Abuse of Science. New York: Picador.
[14] Tieszen, Richard: 1998. Gödel’s path from the incompleteness theorems (1931) to phe-
nomenology (1961). The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 4: 181–203.
[15] Wilson, Edward O.: 1998. Consilience among the great branches of learning. Daedalus
127: 131–149.
[16]
van Heijenoort, Jean: 1967. From Frege to Gödel, A Source Book in Mathematical Logic,
1979–1931, third printing. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Department of Mathematics
Campus Box 395
University of Colorado, Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309-0395
USA
E-mail: jmyciel@euclid.colorado.edu


Objectivity: The Justiﬁcation for Extrapolation
Shaughan Lavine
Abstract. Set theory can be obtained by extrapolating, in a mathematically precise sense, from
the mathematics of indeﬁnitely large ﬁnite sets. That extrapolation is, I have argued elsewhere,
the origin of and motivation for inﬁnitary set theory. But on what grounds can it be argued
that the extrapolation is not merely a technical trick but a justiﬁed move from knowledge of the
indeﬁnitely large to knowledge of the set-theoretic inﬁnite? The application of mathematics to
physics provides those grounds.
The ﬁnite mathematics of the indeﬁnitely large, with its context-dependent bounds of avail-
ability, provides a natural setting for a theory of measurements. Insofar as a successful theory of
the correlations and behavior of some types of physical measurements is construed as a theory
of the correlations and behavior of measurements of objective physical quantities, the theory
of the objective quantities themselves must be obtained by replacing the context-dependent
bounds of measurement by the bounds of “measurement” of the physical quantities imposed
by objective external physical reality. Those bounds are ﬁxed once and for all, equal to what
exists in the hypothesized objective world. But that change yields the extrapolated, inﬁnitary,
version of the measurement theory.
Physics makes use, not only of measurements of values of individual physical quantities
at points, but of measurements of values of ﬁeld quantities throughout a region, that is, of
the measurement of functions. Insofar as measurements may take on arbitrary values, the
extrapolated mathematical theory will be one that allows arbitrary functions. The need to
integrate differential equations then inevitably leads to modern set theory, and the success of
extrapolation in that part of mathematics that is applicable to physics provides evidence of its
legitimacy as a general method within mathematics.
I have argued [10, 11] that inﬁnitary set theory originated through extrapolation (in a
technically precise sense) from a theory in a system without commitments to the actual
inﬁnite. That system is what I have called ﬁnite mathematics of the indeﬁnitely large,
which is centered around mathematical work of Mycielski [16] and Pawlikowski [19].1
1Mycielski and Pawlikowski associated a theory Fin(T ) with any ordinary theory T . The theory Fin(T )
has a vocabulary obtained by augmenting the vocabulary of T with new unary predicate symbols p, for all
rational subscripts p. The axioms of Fin(T ) include those of T regularly relativized to the s: (∀x)(∃y)φ
becomes, for example, (∀x)(0(x) →(∃y)(1(y) ∧φ)) or, in a more perspicuous abbreviated form,
(∀x ∈0)(∃y ∈1)φ, with quantiﬁers of greater depth bounded by s with greater subscripts. The
axioms of Fin(T ) are all regular relativizations of axioms of T , axioms that state that p ⊆q when
p < q, and axioms stating that the s are order indiscernibles, that is, that if φ′ and φ′′ are both regular
relativizations of φ, then every formula of the form (∀x0 ∈p) . . . (∀xn ∈q)(φ′ ↔φ′′) that is the
regular relativization of some formula is an axiom. Mycielski and Pawlikowski showed that every model

550
S. Lavine
The indeﬁnitely large is an epistemic, context-relative notion that itself involves no
commitment to anything inﬁnite. But that raises a question: on what grounds could we
legitimately extrapolate, taking our experience of the indeﬁnitely large to be genuinely
relevant to what the set-theoretic inﬁnite is like?
Any adequate justiﬁcation whatsoever for our belief in the truth of present-day set
theory and our consequent commitment to the existence of a proper class of entities
must meet (at least) two desiderata: it must show why ordinary inﬁnitary set theory—
with its strong ontological commitments—is to be preferred to ﬁnite set theory, and it
must show how knowledge of the inﬁnitistic concepts of set theory could have arisen.
Extrapolation can easily be seen to meet both desiderata, and it will therefore serve as
a justiﬁcation for set theory once it has been shown to be a motivated procedure and
not just a technical trick.
Note that when I say justiﬁcation of a theory, I mean justiﬁcation in a very strong
sense—justiﬁcation, or in other words, adequate reason to believe, that the theory is
true and the entities it mentions exist. That must be clearly distinguished from weak
justiﬁcations that attempt merely to show that a theory is the simplest, or interesting
and worthy of study, or admirable as a work of art. When I write about justiﬁcation
in the rest of this article I always mean strong justiﬁcation. I shall occasionally write
“strong justiﬁcation” instead of just “justiﬁcation,” but that is only for emphasis—I
mean the same thing in either case.
Here is how extrapolation can be motivated: When we apply mathematical theories
to physics, if our intent is to model not our measurements but an objective world of
physical quantities instead, then what we take to be in the available domains of ﬁnite
mathematics must be what is in the physical world. Precisely because the physical
world does not change with our epistemic situation, all the domains are set equal, and
a ﬁnite theory is extrapolated into an inﬁnitary one. The extrapolation is justiﬁed by
the intended application, and its result is preferable to the underlying theory in ﬁnite
mathematics to just the extent to which we value theories of the physical world over
theories of our measurements.
The theory Fin(T ) will always have better empirical support than T : the two
explain and predict the same phenomena, but T has a much larger ontology with no
explanatory gain. Adding the consideration of objectivity motivates the increased
ontology, and T is the only theory with that ontology that preserves the explanatory
success of Fin(T ). On the account proposed here, our intuitions underlying a ﬁnite
of T has a substructure with ﬁnite domain that can be expanded to a model of Tf for every ﬁnite subset
Tf of Fin(T ). Thus, a theory Fin(T ) has no commitment to the inﬁnite, even when T does. Moreover,
they showed that proofs in T of φ and in Fin(T ) of a regular relativization of φ are closely related and of
essentially the same complexity ([16], [10]: 273n). Thus, the reduction in ontological commitment comes
for free, with no loss of expressive or proof-theoretic capacity. The s are to be thought of, on my account,
as bounds of current knowledge: the extension of 0 is what is most immediately available to us (numbers
actually written down, marbles in the room), while the extension to higher s represents items that are more
remote (sums of numbers actually written down, marbles in the next room). A theory Fin(T ) collapses
to (a notational variant of) T when axioms are added stating that all the s are equal, which follows, for
example, from 1 ⊆0, in virtue of the order indiscernibility. That is what I call extrapolation.

Objectivity: The Justiﬁcation for Extrapolation
551
theory are extended to its extrapolated counterpart in a manner precisely analogous to
that in which our observations yield a picture of the objective physical world, and the
resulting extension of ﬁnite set theory is what gives rise to our concepts concerning
the inﬁnite.
What would constitute an argument that the proposed justiﬁcation of set theory
via extrapolation is the best argument for the legitimacy of set theory, that is, the best
argument that set theory is true and that the entities to which it is committed are real?2
To support the justiﬁcation of set theory via extrapolation is in part to show that that
method of strongly justifying our set-theoretic practices is superior to its rivals. That
will be clear, provided the justiﬁcation via extrapolation meets some minimal adequacy
conditions, because no other strong justiﬁcation for set theory that has been proposed
both establishes the superiority of inﬁnitary mathematics to ﬁnite mathematics and
shows how the concepts behind inﬁnitary mathematics could have arisen: Quine–
Putnam indispensability [21, 22, 20], for example, or positions that require no more
than the consistency of a theory to justify its use (for example, Balaguer’s full-blooded
Platonism [1] or Hilbert’s program [8]) do not make it possible to distinguish between
any inﬁnitary theory and its counterpart within ﬁnite mathematics, since the two always
yield parallel theorems, have equal consistency strength, and are notationally equally
simple ([16] [10]: 273n).3 Moreover, such positions make no attempt to explain how
we could have come up with a theory of the inﬁnite in the ﬁrst place, and there are,
as I have argued elsewhere ([10]: 2, 8, 140, 162, 164–165, 179, 246 247, 316–317),
special problems in seeing how we could have come up with such a theory: we have
no experience of any actually inﬁnite systems or at least no experience that cannot be
reasonably interpreted as experience of ﬁnite systems, as is shown, for example, by
the fact that some physicists think that nature is ﬁnite, cf. [8].
Positions that attempt to introduce the inﬁnite directly like the iterative conception
[4, 5, 2, 17] or various attempts to employ the idealized capacities of an eternal math-
ematician (for example, by Cantor, see ([7]: 15, 35–36, 44), also [17, 28], ([9]: Chap-
ter 6, 44)) presuppose the inﬁnitary concepts it should be their job to explain. For that
reason, they are inadequate justiﬁcations of inﬁnitary mathematics.
Why do we need a justiﬁcation for inﬁnitary mathematics at all? We don’t. As
Shapiro has argued (for example, in the Preface and Chapter 2 of [25]), there is
no good reason to expect or require any justiﬁcation of any mathematical theory to
whose truth we are committed. But that does not mean that it would not be desirable
to have a justiﬁcation, supposing that one can be obtained. In a philosophical spirit
comparable to the mathematical spirit of reverse mathematics (see, for example, [26]),
such justiﬁcations are desirable because they show what depends on what. Moreover,
without a nontrivial justiﬁcation for inﬁnitary mathematics, it is hard to see what
motivation there could be for adopting it in preference to ﬁnite mathematics.
2As I discuss below, nothing I say here should be construed as an argument that accepting set theory
requires a prior argument for its legitimacy.
3One can, in doing ﬁnite mathematics, leave the bounds to indeﬁnitely large sets implicit, in which case
the notation and proof system become identical in surface form to those of ordinary mathematics.

552
S. Lavine
I discuss the Quine–Putnam indispensability argument even though, as I have
already noted, it cannot justify belief in inﬁnitary set theory since it cannot distinguish
inﬁnitary set theory from its counterpart in ﬁnite mathematics. I do so because I take
extrapolation to rely on a modiﬁed version of Quine–Putnam indispensability, and
Quine–Putnam indispensability has come under attack on a couple of different fronts
of late [12, 27, 13].
The Quine–Putnam indispensability argument is fundamentally a form of inference
to the best explanation: it is the idea that if a mathematical theory is an indispensable
part of our best theory of the physical world, that is, an indispensable part of the
physical theory that best accounts for our observations and measurements, a theory
that we take to be true with good reason, then that indispensability constitutes evidence
for the truth of the mathematical theory. I rely on that idea to justify the use of theories
of ﬁnite mathematics in accounting for observations and measurements, and so I must
defend it from its other critics. My criticism of Quine–Putnam indispensability as it
is ordinarily applied is that not enough mathematics is indispensable, and so Quine–
Putnam indispensability doesn’t do the work for which it has been employed. It can
best be used to yield a commitment to theories of ﬁnite mathematics, which theories
provide, by construction, the ability to explain all measurements and correlations
between them explained by corresponding ordinary theories and to do so with far
fewer ontological commitments.
TheﬁrstattackonQuine–Putnamindispensability: Settheoryisusedinallphysical
theories, and so the success of any one physical theory is no evidence for or against
set theory [13, 27].
That argument is wrong: Aristotelian physics, for example,
presumably did not use set theory, and there may well be physical theories that make
use of intuitionistic or category-theoretic mathematics.4 If theories including a certain
subtheory (like those including set theory) are so clearly superior in explanatory power
to theories not including that subtheory that any theories not including it have dropped
out of serious consideration, then that is the best possible evidence that the subtheory
is a part of the best explanation of scientiﬁc phenomena.5
The second attack: Set theory is only used in idealized physical theories, and
since we do not think the idealized theories true, they cannot license any commitment
to the truth of the mathematics they employ [12]. But (a) idealized theories are in
fact the best we have (and so a form of inference to the best explanation legitimately
applies), and (b) there is every reason to believe that less-idealized theories—to the
extent to which they become available—will be just as mathematical. That removes
any clear distinction between those mathematical parts of an idealized theory that we
take seriously and those that we don’t and hence removes any possibility of making
4Mycielski was kind enough to point out to me that theories using intuitionistic mathematics or category
theory are relevant here.
5The somewhat abstract phrasing in the text about subtheories is necessary because there are, in fact,
perfectly good physical theories that do not use set theory—those based on ﬁnite mathematics—which
provide explanations that are at least as good as those given by the theories that employ set theory. I
therefore abstract from the occurrence of set theory in the attack. Set theory is now understood only as
appearing in a particular instance of a more general argument.

Objectivity: The Justiﬁcation for Extrapolation
553
use of such a distinction to dismiss the Quine–Putnam indispensability argument. For
example, we don’t take all aspects of continuous models of ﬂuids seriously. But more
realistic models start from the same equations, and so the same mathematics remains
just as indispensable.
Now, let us return to the justiﬁcation of extrapolation proper. I shall not concentrate
on the justiﬁcation via extrapolation of a theory of sets, but only the justiﬁcation via
extrapolation of elementary analysis. The justiﬁcation I shall present of extrapolation
from a theory within ﬁnite mathematics to analysis is intimately connected with the
intended application of the real numbers to the measurement of physical quantities.
I believe that the strong justiﬁcation via extrapolation of analysis to be discussed
should be taken to extend to an analogous justiﬁcation of set theory. Functions from
ordered systems of real numbers to ordered systems of real numbers play a role in
the measurement of physical quantities analogous to that of the real numbers—such
functions are used in the measurement of physical ﬁelds—and it is such functions
and the need to integrate partial differential equations that led to set theory ([10]: 39–
41, 47, 49–51). I therefore see the situation with respect to the justiﬁcation of set
theory via extrapolation as being highly analogous to and intimately connected with
that of the justiﬁcation of analysis via extrapolation. Moreover, modern analysis,
originating as it did with Weierstrass, Dedekind, and Cantor, is itself set-theoretic, and
so the justiﬁcation of elementary analysis via extrapolation is already a justiﬁcation
of a part of set theory via extrapolation. In addition, whether or not I am right that
the justiﬁcation of analysis via extrapolation directly extends to a justiﬁcation of set
theory via extrapolation, the success of applying extrapolation to analysis is itself
evidence for the general validity of the procedure of extrapolation, to whatever theory
(including set theory) it is applied.
The description of the real numbers as being used to give the values of the physical
quantities in our physical theories, while accurate by our lights today, is not true
to the history of the relationship between real numbers and physical quantities. Up
until the “arithmetization of analysis” in the mid-19th Century, the real numbers and
the physical quantities we now take them to represent were not distinct and separate
things. The real numbers were taken to be geometric quantities, and the geometry
was the interpreted geometry of actual physical space, and so, until comparatively
recently in the development of our conceptualization of the real numbers, the real
numbers were themselves actually taken to be physical quantities—ratios of lengths
of lines in physical space and the like. See [10]: Chapter 2 for a synoptic history and
references. Thus, our present-day conception of real numbers as being appropriate to
reﬂect certain properties of physical quantities is not some desideratum of physicists
or philosophers of science artiﬁcially imposed on the real numbers from the outside. It
was and is a central part of the development and conceptualization of the real numbers
that they must be like physical quantities in certain central respects. My argument
relies on that necessary resemblance.
To say that the length of a rod is between 4.5 and 5 meters is just to say that nine
meter sticks lined up is shorter than two aligned copies of the rod and that ten meter

554
S. Lavine
sticks lined up is longer than two aligned copies of the rod. Moreover, given two
(systems of aligned copies of) rods, there is a fact of the matter about whether they
are the same length and, if they are not, there is a fact of the matter about which is
longer. Analogous facts apply to all physical quantities, not just length—often for
the simple reason that the measurement of many physical quantities is performed by
ﬁrst associating those quantities with suitable lengths, temperature in simple cases to
lengths of columns of mercury, times to distances traveled by beams of light, and so
forth.
Every physical theory takes as basic some system of physical quantities (which
may not be lengths in all cases but other physical quantities—for example, relative
statistical frequencies or propensities) for which such comparisons are possible. That
is to say, according to every physical theory, it is possible, once a choice of unit6
has been made, to compare any physical quantity with any rational multiple of the
unit. Note that I am here discussing the presuppositions of physical theories, not
the experimental or epistemological problems that are frequently involved in actually
making the comparisons.
It is a presumption of contemporary physics that every physical quantity is already
less than, greater than or equal to every rational multiple of a given unit of that
quantity, whether or not a comparison has actually been performed. Note that that is a
consequence of the assumption that our physical theories concern an objective world
in which the outcomes of suitable physical operations—in particular, comparisons of
physical quantities with rational multiples of a unit—are univocally determined quite
independently of any human intervention or any human knowledge of the outcome.7
The assumption of the objective nature of the physical world has been disputed by
idealists, phenomenologists, empiricists, instrumentalists, and so forth, and, arguably,
by lattice gauge ﬁeld theorists, but I shall just put such doubts aside here—they are
part of a different and much larger topic. I believe that doubts about the objective
nature of the physical world inevitably lead to derivative doubts about the status of
inﬁnitary mathematics. Inﬁnitary mathematics cannot be strongly justiﬁed except on
the basis of some assumption like that of the objective nature of the physical world.
I just argued that it is a fundamental assumption of contemporary physics that every
physical quantity is less than, greater than, or equal to—comparable to—every rational
multiple of a given unit of that quantity. That follows from the presupposition that a
comparison can always be made between any physical quantity and a rational multiple
of a suitable unit and the presumption that the results of such comparisons are ﬁxed
in advance of any actual act of comparison. That means that a physical quantity takes
on a real number value, since the real numbers are, one might even say by deﬁnition,
6Anyone who is uncomfortable with the need for a choice of unit should feel free to replace all of my
examples with ones concerning dimensionless constants.
7It is just as true of quantum mechanics as it is of more familiar theories that each quantity is comparable
to every rational multiple of a suitable unit, when one restricts attention to suitable quantities—what
is surprising about quantum mechanics is not that there are no such quantities but that certain familiar
quantities are not of that type.

Objectivity: The Justiﬁcation for Extrapolation
555
precisely the objects that realize every consistent system of comparisons with rational
numbers. We can see that, for example, by noting that a quantity determines the set
of all rational multiples of the unit less than it and the set greater than it: that is, it
determines a Dedekind cut. Though I have argued here that every physical quantity
takes on a real number value, that by no means entails that every real number is the
value of some physical quantity.
The preceding considerations concerning the possibility of comparisons of lengths
show that, insofar as real numbers are used to give the values of physical quantities in
an objective world, the real numbers obey trichotomy (that is, each is less than, greater
than, or equal to any other). Thus, our considerations have ruled out the intuitionistic
reals, which do not obey trichotomy. The intuitionistic reals certainly form a coherent
and mathematically interesting system. That system, however, is not the one of interest
here, not the one that coheres with the desideratum that the real numbers be suitable
for serving within mathematical physics as the values of objective physical quantities.
I have argued for the necessity of the assumption of trichotomy for systems of real
numbers suited for a particularly important and historically central application of the
real numbers. I have not shown, nor do I think it could be shown, that there could not
be reasons for adopting other systems for other purposes.
Let us explore how we represent (the values of) measurements as opposed to the
physical quantities of which they are measurements. In arriving at the conclusion that
physical quantities are represented by real numbers that obey trichotomy, we have
made use of every rational multiple of a unit, an inﬁnitary notion. In contrast, we
conceive of measurements as having known results. Since all measurements available
to us in a given experimental context are of some bounded accuracy, one natural
and familiar model is that of numerical analysis: a ﬁnite grid or lattice of points all,
for example, with coordinates of some ﬁxed number of digits, with a corresponding
theory given in terms of ﬁnite differences. That picture is overly simple in several
respects. Measurements of different quantities may be of different accuracies, and
measurements even of the same quantity may be of different accuracies in different
ranges. Methods of measurement will in general only cover ﬁnite ranges.
There is no reason to suppose that the potential values of measurements form a
nice, regular array. Instead, in general, the domain of potentially available values must
be taken to be nothing more than a ﬁnite set of values of the appropriate sort, usually n-
tuples of rational numbers. Moreover, in many contexts it is important to take account
of the possibility of values of increased accuracy, that is, of the possibility of more
reﬁned measurements or of computed values of greater accuracy than the measured
ones. After all, it is an all-too-familiar fact that the outcome of measurement plus
modelling is often nothing more than an indication that more accurate measurements
will be required—a fact that, among many other things, leads to a host of techniques in
numerical analysis, including those involving adaptive approximation, which involve
interactively moving from grids to other, ﬁner ones. The moral is that not one but a
sequence of sets of available values, representing improved possibilities of precision,
each set including the previous one, is needed to model the process of measurement.

556
S. Lavine
A theory of how measurements on a system behave should be independent of the
details of current measurement technology, and so the theory should be such that it
works for any suitable sequence of sets of available values—so that, for example,
a present sequence can be extended as measurement technology improves, and so
that the theory is not sensitive to the actual way in which technology improves—a
changed history that skipped a step, leaping forward faster, or, similarly, a slowed
down history that interpolated more steps will lead to different sequences of sets of
available values, but that should not, of itself, necessitate any changes in the theory.
For the reasons just given, a general theory of measurements on a physical system
must be a theory on a ﬁnite increasing sequence of ﬁnite sets of available values
such that the members of the sequence are order indiscernibles with respect to what
is expressible in the theory—indiscernibles so that adding to or removing members
from the sequence does not require changes in the theory. Thus, ﬁnite mathematics
([14, 15, 19], see also [10]: 268–285), with its hierarchy of ﬁnite domains each of which
can serve as a ﬁnite system of discrete possible values for measurements, each member
of the hierarchy encompassing more values and hence permitting greater resolution,
that are order indiscernible, seems tailored to a theory of measurements that have
the character of being available with ﬁnite, but, through change of the experimental
situation, increasable accuracy.
Our theory of physical quantities, how they evolve and constrain each other, what-
ever it may be, is empirically answerable to a parallel theory of measurements, how
their results evolve and constrain each other. That is just to say that we do not test hy-
pothesized relationships between physical quantities directly, but only through tests
of hypothesized relationships between measurements of physical quantities, which
may be compared with the results, of ﬁnite accuracy, of measurements that have ac-
tually been made. Physical quantities themselves, far from having known values, are
conceived of as having deﬁnite, context-independent values quite independent of any
knowledge we may have acquired of them through measurement.
Consider, for example, some ordinary mathematical theory of a physical system,
say, concerning position along a line. A counterpart theory to it in ﬁnite mathemat-
ics will be a theory concerning, not positions on a line, but ﬁnite approximations—
measurements—of positions along the line. The intended model of the theory con-
cerning positions on a line may naturally be taken to include a copy of the real numbers.
The counterpart of the theory in ﬁnite mathematics will be such that every ﬁnite set of
its axioms has a model that is a ﬁnite substructure of, a ﬁnite approximation to, the full
intended model. As more axioms are added, they put more constraints on the models.
Larger sets of axioms embody commitments to ﬁner and ﬁner approximations.
Every theorem of the ordinary theory has a ﬁnite analog that can be proved using
some ﬁnite set of axioms of the ﬁnite counterpart theory. Thus, a ﬁnite analog of
every theorem holds in every sufﬁciently ﬁne sequence of approximations, and ﬁnite
approximations are always available. In the ﬁnite theory every quantiﬁer is bounded
by a predicate representing an indeﬁnitely large set, where indeﬁnitely large means in

Objectivity: The Justiﬁcation for Extrapolation
557
part that nothing is excluded from it8 and that as additional constraints are imposed
the indeﬁnitely large sets are only constrained to increase, nothing is ever excluded.9
Any measurements, and any observed correlations between them, that can be ac-
counted for by the ordinary theory can be accounted for in an exactly parallel way by
a sufﬁciently large (though ﬁnite) subtheory of the counterpart theory in ﬁnite math-
ematics. Every ﬁnite set of facts expressible in the language of the ordinary theory,
every ﬁnite set of inequalities representing measurements plus any ﬁnite system of
equations correlating the values has a direct analog expressed in the vocabulary of the
ﬁnite theory, and any part derivable from the ordinary theory will have its counterpart
derivable in the ﬁnite theory. If the ﬁnite set of facts is consistent with the ordinary
theory, then the counterpart in the vocabulary of the ﬁnite theory will have a ﬁnite
model that is a substructure10 of the intended model of the ordinary theory11 that is
a model of the formulation in ﬁnite mathematics of all the facts. Successive mea-
surements and correlations can always be added on, imposing further constraints and
thereby reducing the class of models.
The ﬁnite models of the ﬁnite theory reﬂect the measured and computed experi-
mental evidence and theoretical correlates in a way that exactly parallels that of the
ordinary theory, but the ﬁnite models only codify a commitment to a system of ﬁnitely
many objects and correlations, tracking what our measurements and computations
actually show.
As I have just described, the theories of ﬁnite mathematics account for our obser-
vations just as well as the more familiar theories that use ordinary mathematics, and
they don’t carry any commitment to anything inﬁnitary, which is an advantage insofar
as that means that they avoid a commitment for which we have no observational evi-
dence. Moreover, the theories of ﬁnite mathematics are no harder to prove theorems
in than the classical theories, as I have discussed above. So, what possible reason
could we have for preferring ordinary theories to the theories of ﬁnite mathematics
for applications in science?
What is in the world is just what there is, quite independent of our measurements
of it, and it is context independent. After all, it is a fundamental part of objectivity that
there are no varying degrees of being in the world analogous to the increasing degrees
8Speaking more precisely, “nothing is excluded from the set” means that for every ﬁnite subset Tf of
Fin(T ), every predicate  representing an indeﬁnitely large set that is used in any of the axioms of Tf , for
every model M of the ordinary theory T , every ﬁnite model F of Tf that is an expansion of a substructure
of M, and every member m of the domain of M, there is a model of Tf that has F as a substructure, that is
an expansion of a substructure of M, and that has m in its domain and in the extension of .
9Speaking more precisely, “they are only constrained to increase . . . ” means that in any theory of ﬁnite
mathematics and for any predicate  representing an indeﬁnitely large set in that theory, there is no theorem
of the form (∀x)(φ(x) →¬(x)). That is a consequence of the fact that nothing is excluded from any
indeﬁnitely large set.
10There is a slight simpliﬁcation in the text: The vocabulary of the ﬁnite theory includes, in addition to
the vocabulary of the ordinary theory, predicates for indeﬁnitely large sets, and so the ﬁnite model is not
literally a substructure as claimed: it is an expansion of such a structure to the enlarged vocabulary, an
expansion with unchanged domain.
11“Intended” isn’t playing any mathematical role here: the result stated in the text applies to any model.

558
S. Lavine
of accuracy of measurements. Thus, the appropriate theory concerning positions
along a line is one in which there is a single unvarying domain, not the hierarchy of
increasing domains characteristic of measurements of increasing accuracy as modelled
by the ﬁnite structures of ﬁnite mathematics. A theory of a ﬁxed domain is a theory
in which all the bounds on the quantiﬁers are ﬁxed and equal to each other, and in
our case it must be a theory that is parallel to our theory within ﬁnite mathematics
concerning measurement along the line in order to provide parallel explanations of
our observations and measurements. The theory concerning positions therefore must
be the theory extrapolated from the one concerning the measurements, that is, the
one obtained from that theory by moving from many domains to a single one by
requiring that all the domains be equal. But that is extrapolation in the sense that I
have proposed ([10]: 257–258)—it amounts to dropping the bounds to the sequence
of sets, which are now superﬂuous. A theory extrapolated from any reasonable theory
concerning measurements of position on a line will yield—without presuming any
inﬁnitary notions in advance—the result discussed above, that positions along the line
are characterized by real number multiples of a unit ([10]: 273). Hence, extrapolation
grounded in objectivity will justify the theory of the real numbers as the appropriate
mathematical theory in which to formulate a theory concerning positions.
In like manner, a theory concerning measurements of values of a ﬁeld in a three-
dimensional space will, extrapolated, justify a theory of functions from the real num-
bers to the real numbers. Note that since a theory of measurements will allow arbitrary
measured values for the initial conditions, with no functional dependence among them
(that is almost a part of the deﬁnition of initial values), the extrapolated theory will have
to include a theory of arbitrary functions, not a theory of some restricted class of ana-
lytic expressions, as its mathematical basis. But the theory of arbitrary functions and
of the integration of partial differential equations just is set theory, which has therefore
been justiﬁed on the basis of the metaphysical presupposition of the physical sciences
that measurements are measurements of values of objective physical quantities in a
world external to, and independent of, the measurements.
References
[1]
Balaguer, Mark: 1998. Platonism andAnti-Platonism in Mathematics. NewYork: Oxford
University Press.
[2]
Boolos, Georg: 1971.The iterative conception of set. Journal of Philosophy 68: 215–231.
Reprinted in [3], 486–502.
[3]
Benacerraf, Paul and Hilary Putnam (eds.): 1983. Philosophy of Mathematics. Second
edition. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
[4]
Gödel, Kurt: 1944. Russell’s mathematical logic. In: P. A. Schilpp (eds), The Philos-
ophy of Bertrand Russell, number 5 in Library of Living Philosophers, Evanston, Ill:
Northwestern University Press, 123–153. Reprinted in [3], 447–469.

Objectivity: The Justiﬁcation for Extrapolation
559
[5]
Gödel, Kurt: 1947. What is Cantor’s continuum problem?
American Mathematical
Monthly 54: 515–525. Errata, vol. 55, 151. Revised and expanded for the ﬁrst (1964)
edition [3], 470–485.
[6]
Gödel, Kurt: 1986, 1990. Collected Works. Edited by S. Feferman et al., New York:
Oxford University Press.
[7]
Hallett, Michael: 1984. Cantorian Set Theory and Limitation of Size. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
[8]
Hilbert, David: 1926. Über das Unendliche. MathematischeAnnalen 95: 161–190.Trans-
lation by S. Bauer-Mengelberg, pp. 369–392 [29]. Partial translation by Erna Putnam and
Gerald J. Massey, 1964. Second edition of the Putnam and Massey translation, 183–201
[3].
[9]
Kitcher, Philip: 1983. The Nature of Mathematical Knowledge. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
[10]
Lavine, Shaughan: 1994. Understanding the Inﬁnite. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press.
[11]
Lavine, Shaughan: 1995. Finite mathematics. Synthese 103: 389–420.
[12]
Maddy, Penelope: 1992. Indispensability and practice. Journal of Philosophy 89: 275–
289.
[13]
Musgrave, Alan: 1996. Arithmetical Platonism: Is Wright wrong or must Field yield?
In: M. Fricke (ed.) Essays in Honor of Bob Durrant, Dunedin, New Zealand: Otago
University Press, 90–110.
[14]
Mycielski, Jan: 1980–1981. Finitistic real analysis. Real Analysis Exchange 6: 127–130.
[15]
Mycielski, Jan: 1981. Analysis without actual inﬁnity. Journal of Symbolic Logic 46:
625–633.
[16]
Mycielski, Jan: 1986. Locally ﬁnite theories. Journal of Symbolic Logic 51: 59–62.
[17]
Parsons, Charles: 1977. What is the iterative conception of set? In: R. E. Butts and
J. Hintikka (eds.), Logic, Foundations of Mathematics, and Computability Theory. Pro-
ceedings of the Fifth International Congress of Logic, Methodology, and the Philosophy
of Science (London, Ontario, 1975), Dordrecht: Reidel. Reprinted [18], 503–529.
[18]
Parsons, Charles: 1983.MathematicsinPhilosophy: SelectedEssays.Ithaca, NY:Cornell
University Press.
[19]
Pawlikowski, Janusz: 1989. Remark on locally ﬁnite theories. Abstracts of Papers Pre-
sented to the American Mathematical Society 10: 172. Abstract.
[20]
Putnam, Hilary: 1979. Mathematics, Matter and Method, second edition. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press.
[21]
Quine, Willard V.: 1948. On what there is. Review of Metaphysics, 2: 21–38. Reprinted
with minor changes as pp. 1–19 of [23].
[22]
Quine, Willard V.: 1960. Carnap and logical truth. Synthese: 12. Reprinted in [24].
[23]
Quine, Willard V.: 1961. From a Logical Point of View: Logico-Philosophical Essays,
second, revised edition. New York: Harper Torchbooks, Harper & Row.

560
S. Lavine
[24]
Quine, Willard V.: 1976. Ways of Paradox and Other Essays, revised and enlarged.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
[25]
Shapiro, Stewart: 1991. Foundations without Foundationalism. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
[26]
Simpson, Stephen G.: 1987. Subsystems of Z2 and reverse mathematics. In: G. Takeuti
(ed.), Proof Theory, Appendix. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 432–446.
[27]
Sober, Elliot: 1993. Mathematics and indispensability. Philosophical Review 102: 35–57.
[28] Van Bendegem, Jean Paul: 1989. Foundations of mathematics or mathematical practice:
Is one forced to choose? Philosophica 43: 197–213.
[29]
van Heijenoort, Jean (ed.): 1967. From Frege to Gödel: A Source Book in Mathematical
Logic, 1879–1931. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Department of Philosophy
University of Arizona
Tucson, AZ 85721-0027
USA
E-mail: shaughan@ns.arizona.edu

Russell’s Absolutism vs. (?) Structuralism
Geoffrey Hellman
Abstract. Along with Frege, Russell maintained an absolutist stance regarding the subject mat-
ter of mathematics, revealed rather than imposed, or proposed, by logical analysis. The Fregean
deﬁnition of cardinal number, for example, is viewed as (essentially) correct, not merely ad-
equate for mathematics. And Dedekind’s “structuralist” views come in for criticism in the
Principles. But, on reﬂection, Russell also ﬂirted with views very close to a (different) version
of structuralism. Main varieties of modern structuralism and their challenges are reviewed,
taking account of Russell’s insights. Problems of absolutism plague some versions, and, inter-
estingly, Russell’s critique of Dedekind can be extended to one of them, ante rem structuralism.
This leaves modal-structuralism and a category theoretic approach as remaining non-absolutist
options. It is suggested that these should be combined.
1. Twists and Turns: Absolutism and Hints of Structuralism
in Russell
Russell’s book, Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (1919), is almost as rich in
philosophical views as it is in information for the general reader about foundations of
mathematics. Early on, Russell writes,
The question, ‘What is number?’, is one which has been often asked but
has only been correctly answered in our own time. The answer was given
by Frege in 1884, in his Grundlagen der Arithmetik. ([17]: 11)
Here we have a good expression of an absolutist stance: There is such a thing as the
correct answer to the question, “What is number?”, and, moreover, it is (essentially)
the one Frege gave. (Cardinal) numbers are classes of equinumerous concepts (Frege),
or—Russell would tolerate this much ﬂexibility—equinumerous classes (Russell him-
self). Interestingly, this is immediately preceded by a brief discussion of an alternative
“algebraic” or “structuralist” understanding of number concepts:
It might be suggested that, instead of setting up ‘0’, ‘number’, and ‘suc-
cessor’ as terms of which we know the meaning …, we might let them
stand for any three terms that verify Peano’s ﬁve axioms. They will then
no longer be terms which have a meaning that is deﬁnite though unde-
ﬁned: they will be ‘variables’, terms concerning which we make certain

562
G. Hellman
hypotheses, namely, those stated in the ﬁve axioms, but which are oth-
erwise undetermined. … our theorems … will concern all sets of terms
having certain properties. ([17]: 10)
But no sooner has he described the view than he proceeds to take it off the table. The
passage continues,
Suchaprocedureisnotfallacious; indeedforcertainpurposesitrepresents
a valuable generalization. But … in the ﬁrst place, it does not enable us
to know whether there are any sets of terms verifying Peano’s axioms … .
In the second place … we want our numbers to be such as can be used
for counting common objects, and this requires that our numbers should
have a deﬁnite meaning, not merely that they should have certain formal
properties. (ibid.)
Nowadays, this must be regarded as a rather hasty dismissal. Even to Russell,
one may justly claim, it should have appeared so. For, regarding the ﬁrst reason,
why should an algebraic or structuralist reading of number theory per se carry with
it the assurance demanded, that of mathematical existence of a model? Of course,
somewhere in an overall system one would want such assurance (to whatever extent
that is possible), but neither deﬁnitions nor the use of grammatically proper names
ever by themselves guarantee existence, as surely Russell knew, in connection, for
example, with the ontological argument! Thus, Dedekind [6] ﬁrst formulated the
“Peano postulates” but gave them in the form of a deﬁnition of “simply inﬁnite sys-
tem” (“progression”, in Russell’s terminology), but then attempted to prove existence
separately. (The proof, as we know, went outside mathematics and was not rigorous,
assuming “the totality of objects of Dedekind’s thought”, but the need for a separate
proof was clear.) Moreover, Russell knew full well that one cannot fall back on the
Frege–Russell deﬁnition of number to gain the assurance sought, for he had had his
own bout with the Axiom of Inﬁnity, to which he had had to yield by simply assuming
it (as was done in Zermelo’s set theory as well).
Answering the second objection requires scarcely more resources, surely not ex-
ceeding those at Russell’s command. One can account for counting on an algebraico-
structuralist reading as providing a bijection between enumerated objects and the rel-
evant initial segment of any progression as indicated by the highest numeral reached.
The Frege–Russell solution—in which the class enumerated belongs to the number—
is elegant (in this respect) but hardly privileged. Set theory does it the other way, via
bijections (even if one ﬁxes on a particular deﬁnition of ordinals, say von Neumann’s),
and, to us, the elegance of the Frege–Russell account of counting appears as an ar-
tifact. This is especially so in light of the heavy price paid elsewhere in the system,
e.g., reduplication of numbers at all type levels beyond their ﬁrst appearance, not to
mention their non-existence in the going set theory (ZFC).1
In fairness to Russell, he had already had raised a serious objection against Dede-
kind’s structuralism (one we shall encounter again below in a modern context), and

Russell’s Absolutism vs. (?) Structuralism
563
an alternative version was not at hand. Perhaps it only took a mild lack of sympathy
with the approach to tempt one into an easy dismissal.
In any case, Russell’s “absolutism” was itself not absolute. A few pages after
introducing Frege’s great “discovery”, we ﬁnd the following clue that a touch of
“imposition” is implicated:
We naturally think that the class of couples (for example) is something
different from the number 2. But there is no doubt about the class of
couples: it is indubitable and not difﬁcult to deﬁne, whereas the number
2, in any other sense, is a metaphysical entity about which we can never
feel sure that it exists or that we have tracked it down. It is therefore more
prudent to content ourselves with the class of couples … than to hunt for
a problematical number 2 which must always remain elusive. ([17]: 18)
Moreover, as it turned out, the “correct deﬁnition” even had to be adjusted in light of
paradoxes of naive class theory:
But, for the reasons set forth [above, concerning paradoxes], if for no
others, we cannot accept ‘class’ as a primitive idea … classes cannot be
regarded as part of the ultimate furniture of the world. ([17]: 181–2)
As if this were not “taking back” enough, we are surprised to ﬁnd in the end the
following proposal regarding the nature of mathematical and logical propositions
generally:
Wemaythuslaydown, asanecessary(thoughnotsufﬁcient)characteristic
of logical or mathematical propositions, that they are to be such as can be
obtained from a proposition containing no variables … by turning every
constituent into a variable and asserting that the result is always true or
sometimes true. … logic (or mathematics) is concerned only with forms
… ([17]: 199)
Now, when we consider that relations (or propositional functions) as well as individ-
uals count as constituents of propositions, then we realize that this criterion is met
by construing mathematical propositions as formulated in higher-order logic without
constants. Indeed, it sufﬁces to work with second-order logic for number theory,
analysis, and even set theory. Applying Russell’s criterion to the case of number the-
ory requires replacing ‘0’ and ‘successor’ with an individual and two-place relation
variable, respectively, in any sentence of second-order Peano Arithmetic (in which
the other standard functions are explicitly deﬁnable). We may also replace the term
1To be sure, if one lowers one’s sights and aims to recover just number theory and classical analysis,
the advantages of the Frege–Russell deﬁnition can be realized in a demonstrably consistent second-order
system invented by Boolos called “Frege Arithmetic” [3]. (The demonstration is relative to the consistency
of second-order Peano Arithmetic, also called “classical analysis” in a formal sense.)

564
G. Hellman
‘number’with a unary relation variable, X, considered as the domain to which all quan-
tiﬁers are relativized. But this is just the proposal Russell considered and dismissed
at the outset, as quoted above! More precisely, Russell explicitly considered the re-
placement procedure applied to the Dedekind-Peano axioms. Applying the overall
procedure to an arbitrary sentence A of the language of number theory naturally leads
to the formation of a conditional of the form,
∀R[PA2 →A](S/R),
in which ‘PA2’stands for the conjunction of the axioms and ‘S/R’indicates systematic
replacement of the successor constant with the relation variable ‘R’throughout. (Here,
to avoid clutter, we have dropped ‘0’ as it can be introduced by deﬁnition from ‘S’.)
If A is logically implied by the axioms, the result is a truth of second-order logic.
(If not, the result of replacing A with its negation yields such a truth, in light of the
categoricity of the axioms, as Dedekind established.) Still better, taking the predicate
‘number’ itself into account as suggested, and generalizing, we obtain
∀X∀R[PA2 →A]X(S/R),
where the superscript indicates relativization of all quantiﬁers to domain X. Again we
have second-order logical truths under the same conditions.
By now we have come full circle (at least “up to negation!”), as this is already an
expression of an eliminative structuralism applied to arithmetic, for it quite straight-
forwardly formalizes the claim that the truths of arithmetic are “what hold in any
progression whatever.” As Russell had phrased it, “our theorems … will concern all
sets of terms having certain properties.” Implicitly, indeed almost explicitly, Russell
seems to have endorsed this view after all! Indeed, with but one more step—that
of treating Russell’s phrase, “and asserting that the result is always true”, still more
broadly to include possibilities of progressions, not just actual progressions—we arrive
at the hypothetical component of a modal-structuralist interpretation, which simply
preﬁxes the above with a necessity operator, as governed by a suitable modal logic
(naturally chosen to be S-5, with certain restrictions, see [8]: Ch. 1, and [9]. The same
procedure generalizes to analysis and many extensions, including set theories.
Furthermore, as Russell clearly recognized, the axiom of inﬁnity, however it is
stated precisely, while formulable in such a logical notation, is not a logical truth.
Existence axioms or possibility axioms are still required. The possibility of a progres-
sion,
♦∃X∃R[PA2]X(S/R),
must be assumed, or it can be derived from a still more elementary possibility assump-
tion, which is not hard to formulate. That forms the “categorical component” of the
interpretation, and it is needed to ward off the plague of “if-then’ism”. (Of course, as
is to be expected from strong medicines, there are side-effects.)
Clearly, Russell’s absolutist stance was at odds with some of his actual proposals
concerning the nature of mathematics.
His “logicism” had structuralist elements

Russell’s Absolutism vs. (?) Structuralism
565
within it, and, as we shall see, his critique of Dedekind’s views is of special relevance
in assessing more recent efforts to articulate structuralism.
2. Varieties of Modern Structuralism and Their Challenges
Four main varieties of modern structuralism are readily identiﬁed: (1) set-theoretic
(“STS”), based on model theory, (2) structures as sui generis universals (the “ante
rem” structuralism of Shapiro [18] and Resnik [15]) (“SGS”), (3) modal-structuralism
(“MS”), and (4) an approach based on category theory (“CTS”). These have been
described in some detail elsewhere, see [10] and [11]. Here we recall brieﬂy their
leading characteristics.
STS goes back to the Bourbaki and today would appeal to model theory, with ZF
as the background, as providing general concepts of mathematical structures as well
as a theory of their interrelations and existence. Regarding number systems, although
ﬁxed set-theoretic interpretations are familiar (e.g., the ﬁnite von-Neumann ordinals
for arithmetic, Dedekind cuts in the rationals for real analysis, etc.), these are seen as
convenient ways to “ﬁx ideas”. Arithmetic truths are taken as truths in the language of
arithmetic true in any (standard) model of PA (whether ﬁrst or second order); similarly
for the reals, the complexes, etc. With respect to these theories, STS is a version of
eliminative structuralism, in that numbers as deﬁnite objects, referents of numerals and
other singular terms, are eliminated in favor of multiple structures. This accords with
the insight that the nature of the individuals is irrelevant; what matters are structural
relationships, realizable in many isomorphic ways. More generally, all the spaces
and structures familiar from the branches of ordinary mathematics are understood as
set-theoretic structures, set domains together with functions and relations on them,
whether or not the associated theories are categorical. Notably, however, set theory
itself is not treated structurally: although one investigates various set-models of ZF and
extensions, the ZF axioms themselves are not read “algebraically” or “structurally”,
i.e., as mere deﬁning conditions on structures of interest; rather they are taken as
assertions of truths outright, truths about “the cumulative hierarchy”, itself “too big”
to be a set.
SGS treats mathematical structures as universals, patterns in Resnik’s terminology,
answering to “what all particular systems (realizing key axioms) have in common”,
whether the systems are made up of concrete items or sets. One speaks literally of “the
natural number structure”, for example, made up of “positions” or “places” treated
as abstract objects, not merely schematically as place-holders or “ofﬁces” to be ﬁlled
by particulars. (Hence Shapiro’s term, “ante rem”, to contrast these structures from
the “in re” systems, such as those of mereology (part-whole theory) or set theory.)
It is such positions that are taken as the literal referents of numerals, etc., and the
structural relations among them are taken as directly expressed by relation constants
of our language, e.g., “successor”, “addition”, etc. Thus, this is a non-eliminative
structuralism, closely akin to Dedekind’s preferred conception. Axiom systems in

566
G. Hellman
mathematicsareatoncedeﬁningconditionsonstructuresand assertionsabouttheideal
types they are taken to be about. On Shapiro’s version, in the background is second-
order logic and a list of (assertory) axioms directly governing the existence of ante
rem structures; these resemble the axioms of second-order ZFC but with the addition
of a Coherence Axiom, guaranteeing a structure answering to any “coherent” set of
second-order conditions, where this is a new primitive corresponding to “realizable as
a model” in the framework of STS, cf. [18]: 95.
MS has already been introduced above. Clearly, it is an eliminative structuralism,
more so than STS in that it applies to set theories as well as those of ordinary mathemat-
ics. In its use of second-order logic, however, MS appears to require classes or Fregean
concepts in the background. While such interpretations are possible, a class-free in-
terpretation is available through a combination of mereology and plural quantiﬁcation
[9]. The objects of any entertained structures—now in the in re sense—are unspeci-
ﬁed. So long as it makes sense to speak of wholes or combinations of them, they can
occur in structures. Unlike SGS, no special “structural objects” are involved. Indeed,
through the use of mereology and plurals, structures themselves as objects need not be
recognized. One simply speaks of some, or these, or those, objects related in relevant
ways among themselves or to other objects. A full theory of relations (and functions)
is recovered, so that there need be no recognition of these as objects either. In this
sense, MS can be understood as a (modal) nominalistic reconstruction. (However, it
does not have to be taken that way. Its machinery is available to a wide variety of
ontological frameworks, about which, ofﬁcially, it can remain quite neutral.) Finally,
it is an important feature of MS, in contrast to both STS and SGS, that it recognizes no
absolutely maximal universe or domain for mathematics. It incorporates instead an
Extendability Principle, that any domain whatever can be extended. Comprehension
principles for wholes or for pluralities are restricted to be extensional: collection-like
operations are conﬁned, as it were, to within a world. (Ofﬁcially, worlds or possibilia
of course are not recognized; modal operators are primitive in the system, and are not
explained literally as quantiﬁers.)
CTS is somewhat harder to describe because, although category theory and topos
theory are well developed as branches of mathematics, a structuralist interpretation of
mathematics in categorical terms remains somewhat inchoate. Sometimes it seems to
be suggested that merely formulating mathematics categorically is enough to express a
structuralist philosophy, since, indeed, CT has its own characteristic way of getting at
mathematical structure, via morphisms between structures as point-like objects and via
functorial relations among categories. That view is problematic, however, as it leaves
unaddressed fundamental foundational issues, such as “What is the external, back-
ground logic?”, “What existence axioms govern categories and topoi themselves?”,
“Are modal notions involved?”, “Is an extendability principle recognized, as in MS,
or should we take seriously an all-embracing category of categories?” (see [13]), etc.
A full-ﬂedged CT version of structuralism should address such questions. On one
proposal, ordinary mathematics can be carried out relative to any number of topoi as
universes of discourse, and this can be done without a set-theoretic background [1].

Russell’s Absolutism vs. (?) Structuralism
567
The result is a kind of relativity of ordinary mathematical concepts, and a distinction
then arises between invariant mathematics (e.g., obeying intuitionistic logic, arising
naturally inside a topos) and essentially relative mathematics, e.g., theory of classical
continua for which special conditions on a topos are required (e.g., a choice principle,
well-pointedness, etc.). Topoi are then viewed as “possible universes” for mathemat-
ics; there is no privileged, unique one. Is CTS then “eliminative”? With respect to
number systems, surely it is; one may stipulate, for example, that a topos has “a natural
number object”, but this is not a unique structure in either Dedekind’s or Frege’s or
Russell’s sense. The case of set theory is less clear, as one speaks of “the category of
sets”, and uses boldface type to name it. How literally should this be taken? (Add this
to the list of questions above.)
As will be evident already, none of these versions is problem-free. Vestiges of
absolutism, present in STS and SGS, are not easily avoided. The goal of giving a
structuralist interpretation of set theory (better theories) is sufﬁcient motivation to look
beyond STS.As will be brought out in the next section, however, SGS with its absolute
“structural objects” is subject to a reinforced variant of Russell’s critique of Dedekind’s
structuralism. Moreover, both STS and SGS suffer from commitment to a ﬁxed,
maximal universe for mathematics, violating the extendability principle, which is
ﬁrmly rooted in mathematical thought and practice. Both these problems are overcome
in MS and, pending further clariﬁcation, in CTS as well. But these approaches face
their own characteristic difﬁculties. The various trade-offs are summarized in the
following table.2
Main Varieties of Mathematical Structuralism and Problems
STS
SGS
MS
CTS
Maximal universe
✓
✓
__
__
Sets exceptional despite
✓
__
__
__
multiple set theories
Lack of equivalence
✓
__
(ok)
(ok) (on relative
types
interpretation)
Possibility of gross er-
✓
__
__
__
ror (e.g., missing sets)
“Positions as objects”
__
✓
__
__
Purely structural rela-
__
✓
__
__
tions?
Primitive modality
?
✓
✓
__
(informal)
No account of math.
__
__
__
✓
existence or reference
2In this table, a check-mark indicates that the problem in question does affect the version of structuralism,
so that the aim of the game is to “draw a blank” (unless otherwise noted, as in the third row).
Concerning CTS, despite what we have said, we have taken our best guess as to how to ﬁll in the boxes
(trying to give the view the beneﬁt of the doubt from a structuralist perspective).

568
G. Hellman
The remainder of this paper will be devoted to explanation and discussion of some
of the key boxes and relationships that emerge.3
Let us begin by explaining further the left-most column of problems. The ﬁrst,
“maximal universe” is clear, but it is worth quoting Mac Lane on the matter:
Understanding Mathematical operations leads repeatedly to the formation
of totalities: the collection of all prime numbers, the set of all points on an
ellipse … the set of all subsets of a set … , or the category of all topological
spaces. There are no upper limits; it is useful to consider the “universe”
of all sets (as a class) or the category Cat of all small categories as well as
CAT, the category of all big categories. This is the idea of a totality … .
After each careful delimitation, bigger totalities appear. No set theory
and no category theory can encompass them all–and they are needed to
grasp what Mathematics does. ([14]: 390)
That STS violates this “open-endedness” is familiar from its commitment to a ﬁxed
“real world” of sets. But SGS also appears to violate it in it commitment to a totality of
“all positions in structures” (at least, this is so on Shapiro’s formulation in second-order
logic). However, SGS improves on STS at the next row, as it does apply its “structural
interpretation” to set theories generally, and it need recognize no maximal “totality
of all sets”. It automatically avoids questions such as, “Are the sets really well-
founded?”, “Do they satisfy Choice?”, etc.; as long as the relevant axiom systems are
coherent, there are structures answering to them, and none is ontologically privileged
(although of course some may be of greater mathematical interest than others).
The third row, “lack of equivalence types”, concerns the status of objects such
as Frege–Russell numbers, or equivalence classes under isomorphisms preserving
structure such as “ω-sequence”, “countable, dense linear ordering without endpoints”,
“separable continuum”, “complex plane”, etc. Formation of equivalence classes is a
natural way of passing from particular instances of a type of structure to “the type
itself”, but, asweknow, thisbreaksdowninsettheoryunlesstheinstancesarerestricted
to some level of the cumulative hierarchy (otherwise, proper classes are needed, raising
problems of their own, especially from a structuralist perspective). SGS overcomes all
this, as its abstract structures are supposed to be platonic archetypes, ideal exemplars
answering directly to “what all instances have in common”. MS, of course, recognizes
no such animals, but counts this as a virtue, making sense of “shared structure” in more
modest terms, e.g., by reference to satisfaction of the same axioms or via “structure
preserving maps between structures”, spelled out in the peculiar, MS fashion. CTS,
at least on the “many topoi” relativist view suggested by Bell, also makes a virtue
of the absence of absolute equivalence types. Again, shared structure is explained
via external relations, i.e., morphisms and functorial relations, and one does not miss
maximal or absolute archetypes.
The fourth row concerns impertinent questions occasioned by a literal, set-theoreti-
cal realism, such as “How do you know that the real-world power set of N is full?
3For a fuller discussion of the contents of this table, see my [10] and [11].

Russell’s Absolutism vs. (?) Structuralism
569
Maybe some subsets are missing!” Such questions do not arise on the other ap-
proaches. Each can tell its own story as to just how coherence of the notion of full
power set is sufﬁcient for mathematics (which leaves open the possibility also of
denying coherence, which is a matter prior to structuralist interpretation).
The ﬁfth and sixth rows bring us back to Russell.
3. Russellian Critique of Dedekind-Structuralism
(with Help from Leibniz and Benacerraf)
As SGS illustrates, structuralism has sometimes been conceived in “absolutist” terms.
The trick has been to posit special “structural”, non-spatio-temporal objects, “pure
places” in archetypal structures abstracted from all particular cases, whether them-
selves concrete or abstract.
Shapiro calls the particular cases “systems”, a more
general term than “structure” in the ante rem sense. Structures qualify also as sys-
tems, but they can be self-exemplifying so that no “third man” regress is generated.
(Since, however, plenty of systems are commonly thought of as already abstract, e.g.,
those built out of pure sets, or properties, etc., if recognized, I have called SGS a
“hyperplatonist” view of mathematical structure.)
This procedure has its most distinguished antecedent in Dedekind ([5] and [6]), as
is made clear from correspondence with Weber.4 The natural numbers (or the reals,
the topic of the Weber correspondence) form a unique, particular system over and
above all other simply inﬁnite systems (continua), exemplifying what they all share
in common and supposedly lacking irrelevant features, i.e., those beyond distinctness
from other objects and their roles as deﬁned by structural relationships speciﬁed in
the mathematics itself. (Tait calls the passage from particular realizations, e.g., set
theoretic, to such pure archetypes “Dedekind abstraction”. [19])
Now one may immediately question the idea of “purity”. How can any objects fail
to have mathematically irrelevant properties, such as arise from adventitious relations
to external things, e.g., “being thought of by Dedekind”, “being designated by the
English monosyllable, ‘nine’ ”, “being the number of planets”, etc. Efforts have
been made to salvage purity by distinguishing “essential” or “intrinsic” properties
from the rest, but this is also problematic: surely on the conception being advanced,
“being abstract”, “being non-spatio-temporal”, “lacking color or mass”, etc., qualify
as essential, but the mathematics is silent on such matters. In the Principles, Russell
voiced misgivings along these lines:
4See [7]: vol. 3, 489–90. There is also, however, a letter to Lipschitz (dated June 10, 1876 [7]: §65,
cf. [18]: 173) saying, “if one does not want to introduce new numbers, I have nothing against this …”.
While he may have preferred to think of (natural and real) numbers as special, “newly introduced” objects,
Dedekind recognized that mathematics does not require this, and that what matters is “the holding of the
right properties”, which is compatible with an eliminative structuralism.

570
G. Hellman
It is impossible that the ordinals should be, as Dedekind suggests, nothing
but the terms of such relations as constitute progressions. If they are to be
anything at all, they must be intrinsically something; they must differ from
other entities as points from instants, or colors from sounds … Dedekind
does not show us what it is that all progressions have in common, nor
give any reason for supposing it to be the ordinal numbers, except that
all progressions obey the same laws as ordinals do, which would prove
equally that any assigned progression is what all progressions have in
common … .
His demonstrations nowhere—not even when he comes to cardinals—
involve any property distinguishing numbers from other progressions.
([16]: 249)
Nevertheless, ante rem structures are posited in SGS, in apparent deﬁance of these
strictures. But perhaps it can be conceded that places in structures “must be intrinsi-
cally something”, but that all that need amount to is that they just are different from
the items Russell lists (and a lot more), that they depend essentially on intra-structural
relations to other places, and that they are “grasped” by a kind of abstraction from
“systems” as suggested. This is a stand-off, and further argument is needed to break
it, one way or the other.
Two related objections have in fact emerged recently which challenge the very
coherence of “ante rem structure” and “Dedekind-abstraction”, in support of Russell.
Both have a Leibnizian ﬂavor, and the second comes with a topping of Benacerraf
(retaining a similar ﬂavor).
The ﬁrst, due independently to Keränen [12] and Burgess [4], concerns the notion
of identity of places in an ante rem structure. In a nutshell the argument goes like
this: it seems that these “structural objects” should be individuated sufﬁciently by
intra-structural relations (including functions) alone, without help “from outside” or
from individual constants. (The reasons for this are given in detail in [12].) This yields
a version of Leibniz’ “identity of indiscernibles”: any items bearing exactly the same
intra-structural relations to other items must be not many but one. But this immediately
implies that there can be no non-trivial automorphisms of the structure, i.e., that the
structure is “rigid”. Now, while some structures central to mathematics are rigid, such
as the natural numbers, the reals (as a ﬁeld), and segments of the cumulative hierarchy
of sets, many are not. The complex ﬁeld admits an automorphism interchanging i and
-i; the additive group of integers admits an automorphism interchanging +1 and -1,
etc. Indeed, such structures abound in mathematics, as Keränen observes: every group
of order other than 1 or 2, any geometric ﬁgure with a reﬂectional symmetry, homo-
geneous Euclidean n-space (Burgess), etc. The rigid structures, though fundamental,
are also rather special. Keränen explores possible responses the ante rem structuralist
might give, including invoking haecceities (the property of “being just this thing and
no other”), or giving no account of identity of structural objects at all, and ﬁnds them
all unsatisfactory. Shapiro has replied that an account of identity is not really required.
The debate over this continues.

Russell’s Absolutism vs. (?) Structuralism
571
Another response on behalf of SGS might be to appeal to reduction of all struc-
tures to rigid ones, perhaps technically possible if every structure can be adequately
modelled set-theoretically. This seems alien to the whole SGS program and more in
line with STS. In any case, the proposal is impotent against the second objection.
This objection, which I developed in [10], challenges the very intelligibility of ante
rem structures altogether, rigid as well as non-rigid. Whereas the Keränen-Burgess
objection takes structural relations as given and goes on to question the distinguisha-
bility of the structural objects as relata, this objection goes further in questioning the
intelligibility of purely structural relations, in the context of putatively structural ob-
jects as relata. This is very much in the spirit of Russell’s critique: if we do not appeal
to relata as independently given somehow, but instead think of them as determined
only through structural relations—as surely seems part and parcel of the ante rem
structuralist view—then what have we to go on in specifying structural relations other
than the axioms themselves as deﬁning conditions? What, for example, can it mean to
speak of “the ordering” of “the natural numbers”, as objects of an ante rem structure,
if, in turn we have no independent grasp of what these numbers are apart from their
position in that ordering? As mathematical functions (treated extensionally in clas-
sical mathematics), the successor function of any given system or model is distinct
from that of any other. So the archetypal one we’re after isn’t literally the same as any
other we may be familiar with (such as “the next numeral” in our counting system, or
“the next item” in some spatio-temporal sequence). Does it make sense to speak of
“nextness itself”, as a platonic abstraction from all instances, when anything whatever
can be “next after” anything else in some system or other? It seems we can only make
sense of “next” in the way that Dedekind himself did, namely, as relative to a given
function ϕ, or arrangement of some sort, which is to say, in this case, relative to a given
simply inﬁnite system. Thus, we have a vicious circularity in the very notion of ante
rem structure: such a structure is supposed to consist of purely structural relations
among purely structural objects, but understanding either of these depends on already
understanding the other. Given the objects, you can get the relations, and (if it weren’t
for the Keränen-Burgess objection) vice versa. But you can’t get both at once!
One response to this (given by Shapiro in correspondence) is to deny that structural
relations need be prior to places of an ante rem structure. For example, we have “ﬁnite
cardinal structures” as degenerate cases of ante rem structures, in which there are a
ﬁnite number of “places” but no relations at all (other than identity)! “The view must
be that a structure is determined by its places and relations. Neither is prior to the
other.”
I agree that if we can somehow independently pick out the places, then we can
speak of relations among them. This is a standard platonist procedure, falling back
on, say, designation by certain singular terms in our language. But then the objects
are not given “purely structurally”, but by reference to external, and in this case, even
contingent relations. But if we do not help ourselves to such extra-structural means
of identifying the objects (which, I would suggest, is what we usually do in platonist
mathematical talk), what sense does it make to speak of “places”, if not relative to given

572
G. Hellman
orderings or relations? With ante rem structures as proposed by SGS, we seem to be
in the situation of having to succeed in referring to B (the places) as a precondition of
referring to A (the relations), and vice versa. But then you can’t do both with neither.
You have to do both with both, and that seems impossible.
What, then, of the “ﬁnite cardinal structures”? On reﬂection, these seem utterly
bafﬂing, indeed the ultimate offense against Leibnizian scruples. The “4 cardinal
structure”, for example, is supposed to consist of four distinct abstract things period.
No structural relations at all are involved; it makes no sense to speak of one of them
as “ﬁrst” or as occupying any “position” in any intuitive sense. How is it that any is
distinct from any other? Indeed, how can we make sense of referring to any one of
them as opposed to any other, or mapping any one of them to or from anything else
(which is essential if they are to exemplify cardinality)? Non-identity is not sufﬁcient
for this, and—unlike the natural numbers on an objects-platonist construe, according
to which at least we have standard names for the objects, and unlike “identical bosons”
of the particle physicist which at least “make a difference” by contributing to the total
mass-energy, even if we cannot label them—nothing else is available. With these
purported structures, as we shall see momentarily, the Keränen-Burgess and Hellman
objections come together, in that every permutation of such objects would be a non-
trivial automorphism (“trivially”, so to speak, as there are no relations to preserve)!
This brings us to a ﬁnal consideration. Suppose, for the sake of argument, that,
despite the above argument, we could make sense of “introducing an ante rem struc-
ture”, a rigid one, say, for the natural numbers. Call it < N, ϕ, 1 >, where ϕ is the
privileged successor relation and 1 the initial element of N. Then we immediately
see that indeﬁnitely many other progressions, explicitly deﬁnable in terms of this one,
qualify equally well as candidates to serve as the referents of our numerals, even if
we require “freedom from irrelevant features”, to whatever extent < N, ϕ, 1 > it-
self fulﬁlls this. For we need only consider the result of permuting any (ﬁnite, say)
number of items of N and adjusting ϕ and 1 accordingly. Any such structure, call
it < N, ϕ′, 1′ >, is able to serve as “the archetypal ante rem progression” every bit
as well as < N, ϕ, 1 >. Indeed, on what conceivable grounds can we call one but
not any other “the result of Dedekind-abstraction”. We cannot say, e.g., that “really
1, not 1′", is “ﬁrst” (if the permutation considered moves 1), for “ﬁrst” makes no
sense except relative to a successor function, and, relative to ϕ′, 1′, not 1, is ﬁrst. The
reader may well be reminded of Benacerraf’s famous argument, that numbers cannot
really be sets, since many progressions of sets are equally available to serve as natural
numbers, and it would be absurd to say we are really speaking of one as opposed to
any other [2]. Indeed, he generalized the argument to conclude that natural numbers
cannot “really be” objects at all, and here, with ante rem structures, we have another
example of why not. Hyperplatonist abstraction, far from transcending the problem,
leads straight back to it.
This reminds us again of Russell’s remark, quoted in the opening section above,
on the “prudence” of settling for the class of couples rather than “hunt[ing] for a
problematical number 2 which must always remain elusive”. He was overly sanguine

Russell’s Absolutism vs. (?) Structuralism
573
about “the class of couples”, but his worry about “a metaphysical entity about which
we can never feel sure that it exists or that we have tracked it down” seems to us
exactly on the mark.
4. Beyond Absolutism
The fundamental informal intuition behind structuralism is that, in mathematics, what
matters are structural interrelationships and not the nature of individual objects. STS
runs afoul of this in the case of set theory itself, normally taken as a theory about a
ﬁxed universe of absolute objects, “the sets”. (“absolute” in the senses of “deﬁnite”,
“unconditional”, and even “pure”.) SGS, while even-handed in its application to set
theories along with all other mathematical theories, nevertheless violates the intuition
by positing special absolute objects, intended to stand in complete abstraction from
any irrelevant, non-mathematical features, yet guaranteed by the mere coherence of
suitable mathematical axioms implicitly characterizing them. Surely Russell was right
to question the intelligibility of such “things” and to point to the futility of attempting to
transcend the nature of individual objects by positing objects without any nature. And
we have seen that deeper objections reﬁning Russell’s cut against the very notions of
“ante rem structure” and “Dedekind abstraction”. Moreover, as the table above makes
clear, STS and SGS are “absolutist” in a second sense, in commitment to a maximal
universe of mathematical objects, violating extendability, as already described. We
are naturally led to seek non-absolute alternatives.
As the table also brings out, both MS and CTS bypass these problems of abso-
lutism affecting either STS or SGS, although in very different ways. MS “abstracts”
from the irrelevant features of objects of structures, not by positing special abstract
objects, but by generalizing over whatever (suitably interrelated things) there might
be, which can remain open-ended. Ordinary constants (e.g., numerals) are construed
as “representing places in structures”, not in the literal sense of SGS, but indirectly by
indicating the relevant generalization: ‘2’, in context, is paraphrased by reference to
the third item of any progression (starting with ‘0’), and also as a convenient device in
modal-existential instantiation on the assumption that progressions are possible in the
ﬁrst place (no pun here). CTS, on the other hand, avoids direct talk of items internal to
mathematical structures entirely in favor of morphisms to and from other structures,
these treated as “point-like”, the “objects” of a category. In favorable circumstances
(e.g., existence of terminals), suitable substitutes for “members of a structure” can be
found, and, with ingenuity, CT paraphrases of ordinary set-theoretic conditions can be
expressed. Like MS, CTS “transcends” the nature of individual objects (in the ordi-
nary sense) not by postulation of special entities but by simply remaining silent about
any such matters. MS, recall, enforces silence by sticking to mathematical conditions
in its general statements concerning structures, and further by the thorough substi-
tution of ﬁrst- and second-order variables, as Russell ultimately suggested (cf. §1,

574
G. Hellman
above). CTS, on the other hand, enforces such silence in its own clever way, by con-
ﬁning itself to properties got at via morphisms in a category and/or functorial relations
among categories. Moreover, both MS and CTS avoid “absolutism” with regard to
“the mathematical universe”, again in their distinctive ways, MS by directly adopting
principles of extendability and restricting comprehension to “within a world”, CTS by
not adopting any ofﬁcial ontology and proceeding informally in matters of (external)
logic.
As the table also indicates, however, MS and CTS both confront problems of their
own, in the case of MS problems relating to primitive modality, and, in the case
of CTS, problems arising from failure to address fundamental questions concerning
background logic, universes of discourse, and mathematical existence. If CTS avoids
modality, that may be merely a manifestation of this stance. Interestingly, the “many
topoi” view of Bell does address the question of universes of discourse without falling
back on a domain of sets, and it hints at a modal formulation in which topoi are
thought of as possible worlds for mathematics.
Moreover, there are independent
reasons for thinking that some appeal to modal notions is unavoidable, especially if
one is to do justice to the non-contingency of mathematics and to its open-endedness,
the extendability of its universes and its freedom to introduce ever new totalities, as
described by Mac Lane above.
This suggests that we should seek a way of synthesizing MS and CTS, preserving
their respective advantages while minimizing their liabilities. It turns out that this
is indeed possible: the details cannot be presented here,5 but the upshot is that the
general, neutral apparatus of MS—mereology and plurals, without set-membership
or classes—is sufﬁcient to describe large domains (corresponding to set universes of
inaccessible cardinality), and one can postulate these as mathematical possibilities,
serving as sufﬁcient backgrounds for categories and topoi, and for models of set theory
as well. Of course, far, far less is required for ordinary mathematics, but this gives a
unifying, structuralist framework for extraordinary mathematics, one in which topos
theory and set theory can be developed side-by-side, neither taken as prior to the
other. In this way, the respective structuralist insights of set theory and of category
theory can be simultaneously preserved, without ever introducing absolute objects.
The relativity of mathematics to choice of topos as suggested by Bell is incorporated
in this synthesis, while at the same time the door is left open to classical mathematics
as an objective enterprise.
References
[1]
Bell, John L.: 1986. From absolute to local mathematics. Synthese 69: 409–426.
[2]
Benacerraf, Paul: 1965. What numbers could not be. Philosophical Review 74: 47–73.
[3]
Boolos, George: 1998. The consistency of Frege’s Foundations of Arithmetic, 1987. In:
G. Boolos, Logic, Logic, and Logic, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 183–201.
5For a fuller presentation, see [11].

Russell’s Absolutism vs. (?) Structuralism
575
[4]
Burgess, John: 1999. Review of Stewart Shapiro (1997). Notre Dame Journal of Formal
Logic 40: 283–291.
[5]
Dedekind, Richard: 1872. Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen. Brunswick: Vieweg. Tr. as
Contintuity and Irrational Numbers. In: W. W. Beman (ed.), Essays on the Theory of
Numbers, New York: Dover, 1963, 1–27.
[6]
Dedekind, Richard: 1888. Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen? Brunswick: Vieweg.
Tr. as The Nature and Meaning of Numbers. Edited by W. W. Beman (ed.), New York:
Dover, 1963, 31–115.
[7]
Dedekind, Richard: 1932. Gesammelte mathematische Werke 3. Edited by R. Fricke et
al. (eds.), Brunswick: Vieweg.
[8]
Hellman, Geoffrey: 1989. Mathematics without Numbers: Towards a Modal-Structural
Interpretation. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[9]
Hellman, Geoffrey: 1996. Structuralism without structures. Philosophia Mathematica
(3) 4 : 100–123.
[10]
Hellman, Geoffrey: 2001. Three varieties of mathematical structuralism. Philosophia
Mathematica(3) 9: 184–211.
[11]
Hellman, Geoffrey: 2003. Does category theory provide a framework for mathematical
structuralism. Philosophia Mathematica (3) 11: 129–157.
[12]
Keränen, Jukka: 2001. The identity problem for realist structuralism. Philosophia Math-
ematica (3) 9: 308–330.
[13]
Lawvere, F. William: 1966. The category of categories as a foundation for mathematics.
In: S. Eilenberg et al. (eds.), Proceedings of the Conference on Categorical Algebra, La
Jolla 1965, Berlin: Springer, 1–20.
[14]
Mac Lane, Saunders: 1986. Mathematics: Form and Function. New York: Springer.
[15]
Resnik, Michael: 1997. Mathematics as a Science of Patterns. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
[16]
Russell, Bertrand: 1903. The Principles of Mathematics. London: Allen & Unwin.
[17]
Russell, Bertrand: ﬁrst published 1919. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. New
York: Simon and Shuster.
[18]
Shapiro, Stewart: 1997. Philosophy of Mathematics: Structure and Ontology. NewYork:
Oxford University Press.
[19] Tait, William W.: 1986. Truth and proof: The platonism of mathematics. Synthese 69:
341–370.
Department of Philosophy
Heller Hall 831
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
USA
E-mail: hellm001@umn.edu


Mathematicians and Mathematical Objects
Robert S. D. Thomas
Abstract. The paper indicates why it is possible and even reasonable for mathematicians to be
unconcerned with ontology of mathematical objects. Rather than such objects, mathematics is
about ‘relations between objects’ or ‘types of relation’, in the words of Poincaré and Russell,
the so-called objects being mere pronouns. No ontological position is taken up, and doubt is
cast on the meaningfulness of deciding whether a pronoun exists as distinct from the existence
of what the pronoun may be used to refer to in applied mathematics. Talking about what may or
may not exist is made acceptable to philosophers, perhaps, by the pretence proposed by Mark
Crimmins for semantics, based on that proposed by Kendall Walton for aesthetics.
I am grateful for this opportunity to raise with philosophers the puzzle of their dif-
ferent way of looking at mathematical objects. Speaking then as a mathematician to
philosophers, I’d like to point out and to a small extent justify the view of some of us
and make some small attempt to reconcile you to it. I shall have nothing to do with
platonism on weekdays and formalism on the weekend. The attitude that I have myself
and wish to justify somewhat and to reconcile you to is not caring about ontology,
which despite the generality of its meaning seems always to be the study of things.
Let me elaborate a little. It is my observation that mathematics deals, as Russell wrote
in The Principles of Mathematics, with ‘types of relations … the true subject-matter
discussed, however a bad phraseology may disguise this fact’ ([37]: §27, 23). While
I do not share his apparent view that the usual way of speaking mathematically is just
‘bad phraseology’, it does disguise the subject-matter. It is bad only if one regards
identifying the subject-matter as more important than saying something about it. Rus-
sell acknowledges hints of this perception in De Morgan, development of it by Peirce
and Schröder, and a decisive debt to Moore for his view ([37]: §27, 24), something on
which he agreed with Poincaré.1 My way of describing what Russell calls ‘disguise’
is that, wishing to discuss relations, we postulate—in a peculiarly weak or thin mathe-
matical sense of that word—objects to stand in those relations. If ontology were more
often about relations, we should have some reason to take it more seriously.2
1 ‘Mathematicians do not study objects, but the relations between objects. To them it is a matter of
indifference if these objects are replaced by others, provided that the relations do not change.’—page 20 of
the English translation in [35]. The subject is kinds of n-ary relations, where n ≥2.
2 Frege distinguishes carefully between objects and relations and discusses relations in the part of the
Grundlagen occupying §§70–83. Gray brieﬂy reviews the nineteenth-century exploration of relations by
Peirce, Schröder, and Frege in [16].

578
R. S. D. Thomas
While philosophers might discuss fatherhood as they discuss justice and other
abstractions, the mathematical way of discussing fatherhood would be to postulate
a father and a child and discuss the relation in those terms, which have the function
of standing for whoever is a father and whoever is his child. It may be that there is
some sense in which such postulation calls the postulates into existence or some more
attenuated form of life, but for purposes of the mathematical discussion that is a side
issue. The point of this vagueness as it might be thought or disguise as Russell called
it is that it considers systematically whatever does or might stand in the relations
considered. The Zermelo and von Neumann integers are equally useful as examples
so long as one considers the relevant relations that they exemplify and ignores the
relations that they have but that are not under consideration. This is not wholly unlike
the old-fashioned use of diagrams, which was not misleading as long as one did not
get from them relations that were not actually postulated but happened to appear in the
diagram. Because one is discussing whatever, the object terms of mathematics—or
so I maintain—are pronominal not names.3 As I have explained this at some length
elsewhere [40, 41] and will say more about it later, I’m going to leave it now. The most
extensive expression of the relational view, mainly expressed in terms of functions, is
the book Mathematics: Form and Function by Saunders Mac Lane [31], universally
ignored since it was published in 1986.
So I just go on to point out that I don’t think mathematicians should pay much
attention to ontology. I consider the existence question not sufﬁciently well deﬁned
to be amenable to discussion not at cross-purposes. This is my practical conclusion
from reading something even as judicious as Charles Parsons’s 1982 paper ‘Objects
and Logic’. On the one hand, one can ﬁnd philosophers prepared to advocate the
existence of any and all mathematical objects. On the other hand, one ﬁnds philoso-
phers discouraging us from believing that any mathematical objects exist at all. I am
not sure that they mean opposite things. The ﬁrst sort of argument can have little
effect because the sort of existence that the philosophers advocate is no use to math-
ematicians, and the second sort is better ignored because historically such negative
arguments, whether coming from philosophers or mathematicians themselves, have
only slowed the acceptance of mathematical advances like differential calculus and
complex numbers. Another contrast to much the same purpose is that between the
two social constructivist philosophies of Reuben Hersh and Paul Ernest, both trained
in mathematics. In [20] Hersh says that mathematical objects are socially constructed
and so exist. In [13] Ernest says that mathematics is socially constructed but its objects
do not exist. The opposite ontological theses have no different consequences in the
two versions of social constructivism. This much argument would, I think, sufﬁce for
a mathematical audience. I’d like before I’m done to make my case respectable to a
philosophical audience.
I shall merely allude to Mark Balaguer’s cleverly elaborate argument in [4] that
there is ‘no fact of the matter as to whether “there exist abstract objects” is true’
3 In [16] Jeremy Gray mentions that Peirce called some of his variables ‘pronouns’ in ‘On the algebra
of logic’, Amer. J. Math. 7 (1885), 180–202.

Mathematicians and Mathematical Objects
579
because it is not sufﬁciently clear what that says, ‘i.e., because the sentence does not
pick out a state of affairs that would need to obtain in order for it to be true’ (personal
communication, 2002 6 26). This is very close to my rejection of the narrower question
about mathematical objects. I address only the narrower question.
I am curious about philosophers’ reactions to an argument to the effect that we
must be able to reason dependably about what does not exist as well as what does.
This is an argument that ignores that mathematics must deal with the real and the
unreal on an even footing—as Russell agreed when reviewing Meinong (Russell [36],
quoted in Smith [38]: 308). It is based on what reasoning is for. The evolutionary
advantage conferred on humans by our ability to reason is not that it allows us to think
historically nor to think about the present, which rapidly becomes the past and so no
longer real. It is our capacity to think about and therefore plan the future, much of
which is not only unreal in the sense of not having happened yet (the hypothetical)
but also unreal in the sense of being avoidable (the preventable). Preventable futures
are among the most important and basic matters that we reason about.
One can say that mathematical practice is not or ought not to be inﬂuenced by
ontology. I have heard this challenged with an equivocation on ontology, and so I want
to make clear what I mean. Obviously mathematical practice has been inﬂuenced by
ontology in the sense of what folks think there is; of course what we think inﬂuences
what we do. What needs to be meant is that mathematical practice is not inﬂuenced
by ontology in the sense of what there is; again of course we are inﬂuenced by being
unable to talk sensibly along certain lines. So for the most part we do not talk about
what involves us in contradiction, although that conclusion has lately been challenged.
In my reading of philosophy I have seldom encountered any argument to the effect
that the existence question matters; it is just a major pre-occupation—just there, like
Mount Everest. So I am not countering some major argument but rather trying to
discourage the widespread implicit view that mathematical ontology is important—
more important than considerations that would help us to understand mathematics
better, cf. [32]. What has this matter to do with Russell? I think that Russell made
a wrong turn when he took up what seems to have been Frege’s prejudice that what
matters is only what exists. From his initially favorable disposition toward Meinong,
Russell turned against him and thereafter seems to have lost no opportunity to make
fun of him [38]. By saying that Russell went astray, I do not mean to support Meinong
against Russell. Meinong seems to have thought relations less existent than objects
(merely what is often called ‘subsistent’), while I think the reverse may be closer to the
truth. Nor am I much interested in the locus of the Meinong-Russell debate, impossible
objects. As soon as we determine that mathematical objects are impossible, we ignore
them. The weakness of the mathematical sense of postulation is emphasized by the
fact that we postulate them even for the sake of proving them impossible. But it is
important that we can talk about them—so as to determine that they are impossible.
What I mean about Russell’s wrong turning is that, in dismissing the problems that
Meinong raised or in thinking that he had given them their deﬁnitive solutions, he
was mistaken. Perhaps the latter mistake should be attributed to others, but Russell

580
R. S. D. Thomas
helped them by shifting from the respectful tone of his correspondence with Meinong
to making fun of him later. To put this matter in my own terms, I need to point out
that applied mathematics is different from and in some ways more difﬁcult than pure
mathematics. Meinong, as I understand what he was trying to do, was attempting to
create a mathematical model of reasoning and implication—as was Russell. In all
mathematical modelling efforts there is a practical decision how much to simplify
the modelled in the model in order to have a tractable model. If one simpliﬁes too
much, one gets pure mathematics not usefully related to the area of application. If
one simpliﬁes too little, one has just a description of that area and no mathematics one
can successfully work in. One might say that Meinong erred in the applied direction
and Russell in the pure direction. That Russell appeared to win the day had the
effect, among others, of slowing the effective modelling of this aspect of reasoning
and implication. He prepared the desert landscape that Quine loved so much; the most
fertile land is the temperate zone between Quine’s desert and Meinong’s jungle.
We all make mistakes, and in this turning I think Russell made a mistake, a mistake
that the analytic tradition has persisted in up to the present day. Even Frege was not
able to maintain the view with consistency. In his famous letter to Jourdain4 he made
up the ﬁrst of the science-ﬁction examples beloved of analytic philosophers with his
mountains Aphla and Ateb about which he reasons and obviously expects his reader
to reason in spite of their referential emptiness.5 This science-ﬁction stuff is the one
place where I am fully in sympathy with the analytic rejection of discussing what is
known not to exist. We clearly have a case here of ‘do as I say, not as I do’. I have
collected a little list of objectors to this prejudice [41].
The Quine-Putnam indispensability argument does not argue that the question is
important, that our taking up a ﬁxed view on this matter is indispensable, but rather
assumes that science is the appropriate arbiter of what does and does not exist—
a dubious premise in the light of science’s helplessness in many intimate matters.
And it concludes from scientiﬁc uses of mathematics that the so-called objects of
mathematics must exist. This is just one more argument that mathematical objects do
exist. My rejection of the sort of nineteenth-century scientism that this argument is
based upon is of no interest in itself, but my counterproposal may be worth more. If
4 Philosophical and Mathematical Correspondence, page 80, quoted in [14]: 14ff.
5 Gareth Evans discusses the sort of make-believe that postulates things in section 10.2, ‘Games of
make-believe’, calling them ‘existentially creative’.
An existentially creative game of make-believe can give rise to the possibility of someone
make-believedly thinking of, or referring to, something without actually thinking of, or
referring to, anything. ([14]: 360)
He makes it sound exceptional. In order to say carefully what he means he drops the common locution of
the words’ referring and falls back on the more correct reference by persons. He does mention the basis
for its objectivity, mentioning the ability to ‘focus on the same (empty) place in virtue of containing the
same description’ ([14]: 360ff.) and giving it some emphasis. The logical bog opened up by our habit of
dealing competently with empty singular terms is alluded to by Evans in n. 43 on 37, but not its relevance
to either make-believe (discussed much later in the unﬁnished book) or mathematics (which is not even in
the index).

Mathematicians and Mathematical Objects
581
we are going to use science to study mathematical objects and the uses we make of
them, then it should not be physics that we study but cognitive science, for instance
the work of George Lakoff, Mark Johnson, and Rafael Núñez.6 And the conclusions
we can draw from such studies will not be primarily ontological. They may, however,
be interesting or important. Having read the recent book by Lakoff and Núñez while
I was preparing this paper, I can add that they will certainly be controversial.
I should like to see mathematical epistemology pursued in an ontology-neutral way.
Arguments that mathematical or all abstract objects do not in some sense or other exist
do not carry universal conviction. Arguments that these things do exist likewise fail
to carry the day. Even if Balaguer is not right that there is no matter of fact on the
existence question, there is quite deﬁnitely no accepted answer. It seems sensible
therefore, to base at least some effort in other areas of philosophy of mathematics
on that well-established empirical fact. Philosophy of science lives happily enough
with the threat that any particular scientiﬁc entity may in a year or so dissolve into a
number of other entities, may cease to exist as it was thought to do. Maybe real and
maybe not is how Mario Bunge characterizes ‘the scientiﬁc variety of realism’ in [9]:
262: ‘scientiﬁc theories refer to putatively real entities even though some such entities
may turn out not to exist’. It is common for physical postulates to be thought not to
exist, then to exist, then to be superceded. Let us do the same in mathematics and see
what we can get. We might even get an explanation of why ontology (even regarded
as about facts of the matter) is so unhelpful, what Azzouni calls the ‘epistemic role
puzzle’ [1, 2]. At the very least, relations should get equal billing with objects, since
the former are more basic and also more interesting. I have scandalized philosophers
by my easy acceptance of this anontological attitude and my inability to express how it
is coherent in language that they can accept. Kent Bach has a solution to the problem
for ﬁction in his [3]: 216, but applicable more generally; reference is to the story
(theory or whatever the context) in which the ﬁctional object appears. This seems just
a cop out—for mathematics if not for ﬁction. There is another view associated with
Peter van Inwagen’s [44]7 that Gareth Evans argues against in Varieties of Reference.
It is the view that corresponding to unreal ﬁctional characters in plays, for instance,
there are real abstract objects, which are what authors create along with their ﬁctional
works and are what critics discuss. This would allow there to be no mathematical
objects for the mathematicians but abstract simulacra for the philosophers. Evans
points out that it ignores the need to engage in the make-believe for the sake of the
background information, that the make-believe is there, and that the notion is overly
sophisticated for the needs of such discourse ([14]: 367).
Mark Crimmins’s application [11] of KendallWalton’s notion of make-believe [45]
to Fregean modes of presentation is just the approach required.8 I want to use this tool
6 Lakoff and Johnson [28], Lakoff and Núñez [29].
7 In [21]: 145 Harold Hodes mentions it as ‘frequently attributed to Meinong’ , and attributes it also
to Kripke (‘in a talk given at Cornell in 1982’) and Searle (in ‘The Logical status of ﬁctional discourse’ in
Expression and Meaning, NewYork: Cambridge University Press, 1979), where I have been unable to ﬁnd
it.

582
R. S. D. Thomas
to explain the irrelevance (in the sense I have explained) of ontology to mathematical
practice. I am not attempting to enunciate a philosophy of mathematics but rather to
explain why one can be interested in both mathematics and philosophy of mathematics
and not be interested in having a deﬁnite ontology of mathematics.
Nothing here turns upon Crimmins’s Frege, Russell, and Walton interpretations
being correct; so when I say ‘Frege’I mean Crimmins’s Frege, whom I do not identify
with the historical Frege. Likewise ‘Russell’and ‘Walton’. Crimmins interprets Frege
as making non-trivial sense of identity statements like ‘Hesperus is Phosphorus’ by
making them statements about the identity of the senses of ‘Hesperus’ and ‘Phospho-
rus’, non-trivial because of the different modes of presentation of the one object. And
he interprets Russell as rejecting the attribution of relations in such cases.
Rather, they assert complex claims about what sorts of things exist: for
instance, ‘Hesperus is Phosphorus’ might assert that there exists a thing
that is both the ﬁrst star visible in the evening sky (in one season) and the
last star visible in the morning sky (in another season). ([11]: 2)
Drawing attention to the phenomenology of such statements as ‘Hesperus is Phospho-
rus’and ‘Scott is the author ofWaverley’, Crimmins claims that we are involved in such
cases in what he calls semantic pretence. We make believe that there are two things
and then identify them. The make-believe is not permanent, but it explains our ways of
thinking about non-trivial identities. He also points out that we can make meaningful
statements about real persons in terms of ﬁctional characters, using the example ‘Ann
is as clever as Holmes and more modest than Watson.’ While this statement, like any
statement on its subject, can be faulted for imprecision, its imprecision is not due to the
ﬁctional character of the ﬁctional characters. Because such uses of ﬁctional characters
do not draw us into imaginative play as does reading a story, he calls this pretence
shallow, but he insists that a degree of pretence is needed for such a statement to have
any meaning at all. And I think he is right; the genuine truth condition of the Ann
statement depends upon the ﬁctional truth conditions of statements of the stories. He
sets out the process of interpretation of the Ann statement in ﬁve steps:
There is a transient context of make-believe, in which certain propositions
are expressly made-believe …
The ﬁctional truth of certain other propositions is generated from reality
[in this instance comparisons of Ann and the ﬁctional characters] …
It is ﬁctionally true that I have expressed a proposition with my utterance
of [the Ann statement] …
Given the parameters of the make-believe, for it to be ﬁctionally true that
the proposition I have expressed with [the Ann statement] is true is for
8 StephenYablohasanotherpretence-basedexplanationinvolvingmetaphor[48,49]. J.P.VanBendegem
has also lately written on metaphor in this context [43]. How these writings relate to the so-called metaphors
of Lakoff, Johnson, and Núñez is a large and perhaps difﬁcult question.

Mathematicians and Mathematical Objects
583
[a more complicated statement comparing the degrees of cleverness and
modesty attributed to the characters and Ann’s] to be true. …
For my utterance to be genuinely, seriously true it is necessary and sufﬁ-
cient that it be ﬁctionally true … ([11]: 6)
I have merely sketched Crimmins’s proposal here. He is more elaborate and discusses
literature that he thinks is relevant to his claims about what speaker attitudes are: are
they pretending? Note that he claims a level of pretence that is shallow, just deep
enough to get across the point that the make-believe reference makes.
[I]n distinguishing thoughts by mode of presentation we talk as if we are
distinguishing among the things thought about …we standardly talk as if
we are referring to different things … ([11]: 14)
And of course he argues for his claims. He sums up.
If we do quite standardly talk as if we are linguistically manipulating
things when really we are manipulating modes of presentation, and if
the pretense account gives a plausible story about how thing-language
manages to do this work, then it matters not at all that we do not ordinarily
think of ourselves as pretending that Hesperus and Phosphorus are two
things. ([11]: 15)
What we ordinarily think does not matter; what we need is an explanation. Note,
however, that in this explanation there is a shift from its mattering what there is to
its mattering what we think. But what we think is based on objective evidence both
of the Holmes stories and of Ann. And Crimmins claims to have saved the good part
of Frege’s and Russell’s explanations without the parts he condemns as ‘their worst
problems’ ([11]: 17).
The pretense account offers a deep and phenomenologically plausible
explanation for [standard] semantics. … an understanding of indirectly
serious discourse that has been made possible by Walton’s work in aes-
thetics. ([11]: 32)
Waltonsuggests, somewhattentatively, thatintalkingaboutwhatdoesand
does not exist we might be engaging in a pretense to the effect that ‘exists’
expresses a discriminating property—a property that not everything has.
([11]: 33)
Such pretence is safer than the corresponding afﬁrmation.
This makes marvelous sense of a lot of puzzling talk about existence …
([11]: 33)
We can make non-paradoxical sense of talk about things that do not exist. We need
no longer wonder with C. J. F. Williams [47] whether it is necessary to examine a

584
R. S. D. Thomas
lot of blue buttercups before agreeing that ‘none of them exist, that as a variety blue
buttercup lacks existence’. We can also make sense of talk of what we do not know
to exist. We treat them as if they exist even if we have paid no attention to Hans
Vaihinger [42].
Between the extreme positions of what Mark Balaguer calls full-blooded platonism
(held by James Robert Brown in [8] at least) and Hartry Field’s ﬁctionalism, which
holds that all mathematical reference is empty, there are a large number of potential
positions, many of them held by someone. Yet persons holding all those positions
seem to use realist semantics and communicate successfully for mathematical and
even some philosophical purposes. I do suggest that they are not communicating
as well as would be convenient but not through failures of mathematical reference.
Crimmins’s pretence is what the ﬁctionalist can with conﬁdence be said to be doing,
since mathematical abstractions are, for him, ontologically on a par with Sherlock
Holmes, for whom Crimmins’s picture was developed. Only the full-blooded platonist
needs no pretence. All of the persons with intermediate positions and who differ on
which mathematical objects exist or on what it means that those exist that they think
exist,9 can be understood to be operating under Crimmins’s pretence when they appear
to refer to what they do not afﬁrm the existence of. We need to keep in mind that a
statement to the effect that x is a topic of our thoughts or conversation is more a
statement about us than about x, especially when there is no x. It makes no difference
where the existence-non-existence boundary is, since the coping strategy is invisible;
at an extreme the boundaries could be at different places for several interlocutors and
no one need know or care where the boundaries are. Crimmins’s picture looks exactly
like realist semantics, being parasitic on it, and so it can be attributed to persons most
of whom have never heard of it. It is intended, by me at least, as an explanation for
philosophers of a phenomenon that they can observe for themselves, the mathematical
level of postulation that does not involve any afﬁrmation of existence, and which, for
instance, Brown ([8]: 100) attributes to Hilbert.
The existence of mathematical objects, which seems to have mattered to the an-
cient Greeks, can accordingly be thought of as like training wheels. Needed at ﬁrst,
but as they are needed less and less whether they are there or not becomes of less
importance, eventually being of no importance. This is not to say that training wheels
and mathematical objects do not exist; it is just meant to be a vivid way of pointing out
that to a bicycle rider and a mathematician, respectively, their presence and existence
is of no importance. It is worth emphasizing that I am not saying that mathematical
9 Interpreting the deﬁnition of the empty class in Principia Mathematica as meaning that ‘the empty class
is the domain of the logically contradictory’([33]: 416ff.),Albert Menne concludes that the kind of existence
of an object there is ‘the denial that it is logically contradictory’ ([33]: 417). He objects to a single sort of
existence for ‘Cologne Cathedral, a prime number between 35 and 40, a class that equals the complement
of its complement, the wife of Zeus, and Gulliver’ ([33]: 417), mentioning in passing that to take only
the building as real would render the whole of mathematics ﬁctitious, and claims that existence depends
on the ‘universe of discourse’ we are taking as basic, whether ‘real, mathematical, logical, mythological,
[or] poetical’ respectively. Menne proposes that all existential statements be taken relatively to a material
predicate, allowing those he listed and such others as are needed.

Mathematicians and Mathematical Objects
585
objects do not exist; that is a question on which I have no reason to hold any ﬁxed view.
I do not see how others, even with attitudes I sympathize with, can be conﬁdent of their
conclusions, e.g., Azzouni, ‘… there is really no sense in which the objects postulated
exist apart from their role as referents of particular grammatical structures (e.g., noun
phrases) in systems’ ([1]: 88). I am saying that it does not matter and am trying to
explain, with the aid of pretence of arbitrary depth (to use Crimmins’s metaphor),
why it does not matter. To hold that all mathematicians pretend that mathematical
objects exist would be factually wrong. What is a fact and needs explaining is why
many don’t care and so are free of ontological commitments that many philosophers
demand (of them!)10 that they make.11 To return to Russell, I have been trying to
point out why it is not unreasonable to maintain what Elizabeth Eames [12] says was
his consistent post-Meinong position, that ‘terms of logic and mathematics … may be
10 Field makes such a demand in his second book [15].
… a mathematical theory, taken at face value, is a theory that is primarily about some
postulated realm of mathematical entities: numbers, or functions, or sets or whatever (or
some combination, like numbers and sets together). You can’t consistently believe the
theory without believing in the entities it postulates. ([15]: 2)
Field is presumably using ‘postulate’ in the stronger philosophical sense. This quotation illustrates that the
self-declared ﬁctionalist Field ignores ﬁction, and it also suggests that mathematicians ‘believe in’so-called
mathematical objects. With the invention of non-euclidean geometries, mathematicians and others began
not to believe in even the theories—as everyone had before—much less in the objects they are populated
by. That is the relevance of the view that these stories, which are written like history, might be ﬁction; that
we cannot know which, and that fortunately it does not matter. We know that the axiom sets for elliptic,
euclidean, and hyperbolic geometries contradict one another. Unlike Field, Balaguer [4] does not ignore
ﬁction, but his book does not helpfully relate mathematics and ﬁction.
11 The problem of the objectivity of mathematics is one that can be thought to be intensiﬁed without
ontology, in particular without real objects for our language to refer to. On the other hand, real objects to
which the language is bound can be thought to make one’s or everyone’s reasoning irrelevant or at least to
play second ﬁddle to the previously existing relationships to which one does not have access. A lack of
pre-existing objects or ignoring them if they should happen to exist allows us the freedom to use various
kinds of logic instead of having to depend on the exactly right one, whichever it is. Often referred to in
this connection is Georg Kreisel, in particular his review of Wittgenstein’s Remarks on the Foundations of
Mathematics [25] and the paper [26]. I subscribe to ‘the “old fashioned” idea’, as expressed in that paper,
that one obtains rules and deﬁnitions by analyzing intuitive notions and putting down their
properties …What the “old fashioned” idea assumes is quite simply that the intuitive notions
are signiﬁcant, be it in the external world or in thought (and a precise formulation of what
is signiﬁcant in a subject is the result, not a starting point[,] of research into that subject).
But I think that the signiﬁcant notions are relational, at bottom as objective and sharable as objects. Kreisel
continues:
Informal rigour wants (i) to make this analysis as precise as possible … in particular to
eliminate doubtful properties of the intuitive notions when drawing conclusions about them,
and (ii) to extend their analysis, in particular, not to leave undecided questions which can
be decided by full use of evident properties of these intuitive notions. ([26]: 138ff.)
In a less readily accessible paper Kreisel writes ‘We consider the objectivity of certain notions and try to
decide some questions about it without having to answer whether, in addition, some reality or realizability
external to ourselves is involved.’ ([27]: 20). The touchstones of objectivity in child and adult make-believe
are props according to Walton, and props have their analogues for the world of Holmes in the texts and for
mathematics in what formalism focuses on.

586
R. S. D. Thomas
treated as entirely linguistic’ ([12]: 125), with ‘no implication of the non-existence’
(ibid.) or existence intended.12 Fiction and mathematics are slightly similar ways of
using postulated objects to discuss relations. They and their offspring natural science
represent the most successful way of dealing with relations.
Let me return now to the relational view of mathematical subject-matter. It looks
a bit like a standard straw man called postulationism, and it may be useful to consider
how it looks like postulationism and how they are different. A textbook deﬁnition of
postulationism is that
the axioms of a mathematical theory consitutes [sic] a set of speciﬁcations
which deﬁne a structure that the mathematician wishes to study. ([30]: 19)
I call this a straw man because within two sentences the author, Hugh Lehman, shows
us with Benacerraf’s puzzle that we identify the real numbers as different sets simul-
taneously and so have a contradiction. This illustrates the wisdom of keeping our
discussion at the pronominal level of whatevers and not sinking down to the substan-
tive special cases; that is where the contradictions lie, and they are also not what we
are wanting to talk about. Even categorical postulates allow for distinct interpreta-
tions. Interpreted numbers can be distances or masses, but not distances and masses.
The axioms of a mathematical theory set out the relations holding among whatever
satisﬁes this particular theory; they are statements about whatevers. When one says
whoever is a bachelor is male and unmarried, one is saying something about human
whoevers, but it is just absurd to ask whether the whoever exists or which whoever
you refer to.13 That is not the sort of thing such antecedent-free pronouns are for.
This incompleteness of mathematical statements is, I assume, why Quine thought that
unapplied mathematics is dubious in comparison with the applicable. The relational
view looks like postulationism in Russell’s Principles. That work famously begins
by saying that ‘mathematics is the class of all propositions of the form “p implies q,”
where p and q are propositions containing one or more variables, the same in the two
propositions, and neither p nor q contains any constants except logical constants.’ I
found some difﬁculty in reconciling this statement with the more obviously abstractive
attitude indicated in the context of geometry and dynamics in the preface,
In pure mathematics, actual objects in the world of existence will never be
in question, but only hypothetical objects having those general properties
upon which depends whatever deduction is being considered; and these
general properties will always be expressible in terms of the fundamental
concepts which I have called logical constants. ([37]: xvii)
But the two are connected in §8:
So long as any term in our proposition can be turned into a variable, our
propositioncanbegeneralized; andsolongasthisispossible, itisthebusi-
12 This attitude is exempliﬁed by I. Jané [24], citing the dependability of proofs by contradiction where
pretence is explicit.
13 Thisisacomparisonofpronounswithpronounsnotofmathematicalstatementsandanalyticstatements.

Mathematicians and Mathematical Objects
587
ness of mathematics to do it. If there are several chains of deduction which
differ only as to the meaning of the symbols, so that propositions sym-
bolically identical become capable of several interpretations, the proper
course, mathematically, is to form the class of meanings which may attach
to the symbols, and to assert that the formula in question follows from the
hypothesis that the symbols belong to the class in question. In this way,
symbols which stood for constants become transformed into variables,
and new constants are substituted, consisting of classes to which the old
constants belong. ([37]: 7)
The book’s initial sentence is not so much a recipe for producing mathematical state-
ments as a description of the result of making statements that are already available
into mathematical ones. As a recipe, it looks as though one can make anything up and
call it mathematics, but as a description it is just a bit sloppy and applies to stuff that
no one would call mathematics through a vagueness that is admitted by Russell in the
1938 introduction to the second edition.
In the light of discussion after this paper was delivered, it is perhaps more impor-
tant to distinguish the relational view from structuralism. It is legitimate and indeed
necessary and important to reify relations in mathematical work. Examples are an-
cient proportionality, which is a relation between relations, and the function-space
concept. We would express proportionality by equating two ratios, which are reiﬁed
comparison relations. We now perform algebra with functions as things, but until they
had been reiﬁed they were themselves relations between independent and dependent
variables. Of course they still are, as ratios are still comparisons. Relations do not
stop being relations when they are reiﬁed, but when reiﬁed they can enter into other
relations; it is a syntactic necessity. Structuralism, on the other hand, creates new
highly problematic objects consisting of objects and the relations among them—or,
as I should prefer to say, relations and their objects—and calls them structures. This
is a philosophical rather than mathematical reiﬁcation. It too is perfectly legitimate,
but we do not yet know whether it is necessary and important. It does have the effect
of submerging the relations and making them invisible instead of just ignored.14
Taking the relations as basic greatly reduces the importance of the axioms; they
are a technique of accomplishing the organization we need. Postulation for me is just
an agreement that this is what we’re going to talk about today, what letters we’re going
to use to represent the ‘things’standing in the relations we’re going to discuss. It is the
relations that are important, and they are usually relations that ‘exist’in whatever sense
relations can be said to exist, membership, inclusion, collinearity, non-collinearity,
primality, etc. They are relations we know about and want to study scientiﬁcally.
14 I acknowledge the justice of the complaint that I ought to give credit where credit is due to those
approaches to mathematics that do as I wish. Unfortunately, any adequate evaluation of conceptual realism,
attributed to Gödel (e.g., Wang in ([46]: §8.5.20) and actually defended by Daniel Isaacson in [23]), modal
approaches (in [10], [17, 18, 19] and [39]), and approaches related to category theory as exempliﬁed by
John L. Bell’s [7] (and his [5, 6] on which it is based) would require more space than this whole document
and involve work of a nature and quantity beyond me.

588
R. S. D. Thomas
References
[1]
Azzouni, Jody: 1994. Metaphysical Myths, Mathematical Practice. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press.
[2]
Azzouni, Jody: 2000. Stipulation, logic, and ontological independence. Philosophia
Mathematica (3) 8: 225–243.
[3]
Bach, Kent: 1987. Thought and Reference. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
[4]
Balaguer, Mark: 1998. Platonism and Anti-Platonism in Mathematics. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
[5]
Bell, John L.: 1981. Category theory and the foundations of mathematics. Brit. J. Philos.
Sci. 32: 349–358.
[6]
Bell, John L.: 1986. From absolute to local mathematics. Synthese 69: 409–426.
[7]
Bell, John L.: 1988.Toposes and Local SetTheories: An Introduction. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
[8]
Brown, James R.: 1999. Philosophy of Mathematics. London: Routledge.
[9]
Bunge, Mario: 1983.Treatise on Basic Philosophy,Vol. 6. Dordrecht: Reidel, 1974–1985.
[10]
Chihara, Charles: 1990. Constructibility and Mathematical Existence. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
[11]
Crimmins, Mark: 1998. Hesperus and phosphorus: sense, pretense, and reference. Philos.
Rev. 107: 1–47.
[12]
Eames, Elizabeth R.: 1999. Russell on “What there is”. In [22]: 115–127.
[13]
Ernest, Paul: 1998. Social Constructivism as a Philosophy of Mathematics. Albany, NY:
SUNY Press.
[14]
Evans, Gareth: 1982. Varieties of Reference. Edited by J. McDowell. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
[15]
Field, Hartry: 1989. Realism, Mathematics and Modality. Oxford: Blackwell.
[16]
Gray, Jeremy: 2001. Symbols and suggestions: Communication of mathematics in print.
Math. Intelligencer 23 (2): 59–64.
[17]
Hellman, Geoffrey: 1989. Mathematics without Numbers. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
[18]
Hellman, Geoffrey: 1996. Structuralism without structures. Philosophia Mathematica
(3) 4: 100–123.
[19]
Hellman, Geoffrey: 2001. Three varieties of mathematical structuralism. Philosophia
Mathematica (3) 9: 184–211.
[20]
Hersh, Reuben: 1997. What is Mathematics, Really? New York: Oxford University
Press.
[21]
Hodes, Harold T.: 1984. Logicism and the ontological commitments of arithmetic. J. Phi-
los. 81: 123–149.
[22]
Irvine, Andrew D. (ed.): 1999. Bertrand Russell: Critical Assessments. Vol. III: Lan-
guage, Knowledge and the World. London: Routledge.

Mathematicians and Mathematical Objects
589
[23]
Isaacson, Daniel: 1994. Mathematical intuition and objectivity. In: A. George (ed.),
Mathematics and Mind, New York: Oxford University Press, 118–140.
[24]
Jané, Ignacio: 2001. Reﬂections on Skolem’s relativity of set-theoretical concepts.
Philosophia Mathematica (3) 9: 129–153.
[25]
Kreisel, Georg: 1958. Review of Wittgenstein’s Remarks on the Foundations of Mathe-
matics. British J. Philos. Sci. 9: 135–158.
[26]
Kreisel, Georg: 1967. Informal rigour and completeness proofs. In: I. Lakatos (ed.),
Problems in the Philosophy of Mathematics, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 138–171.
[27]
Kreisel, Georg: 1970. The formalist-positivist doctrine of mathematical precision in the
light of experience. L’Age de la science 3: 17–46.
[28]
Lakoff, George, and Mark Johnson: 1999. Philosophy in the Flesh. New York: Basic
Books.
[29]
Lakoff, George, and Rafael E. Núñez: 2000. Where Mathematics Comes from. NewYork:
Basic Books.
[30]
Lehman, Hugh: 1979. Introduction to the Philosophy of Mathematics. Oxford: Black-
well.
[31]
Mac Lane, Saunders: 1986. Mathematics: Form and Function. New York: Springer.
[32]
Maddy, Penelope: 1992. Indispensability and practice. J. Philos. 89: 275–289.
[33]
Menne, Albert: 1982. Concerning the logical analysis of “existence”. The Monist 65:
415–419.
[34]
Parsons, Charles: 1982. Objects and logic. The Monist 65: 491–516.
[35]
Poincaré, Henri: 1902. La grandeur mathématique et l’expérience. In: La Science et
l’Hypothèse. Paris: Flammarion. English translation W. J. G.: 1952. Mathematical mag-
nitude and experiment. In: Science and Hypothesis, New York: Dover, 17–34.
[36]
Russell, Bertrand A. W.: 1905. Review of Meinong’s Über Gegenstandstheorie. Mind
14. Reprinted in: D. Lackey (ed.), Essays in Analysis, London: Allen & Unwin.
[37]
Russell, Bertrand A. W.: 1937. Principles of Mathematics. Second edition with new
introduction. London: Allen & Unwin. First edition 1903.
[38]
Smith, Janet Farrell: 1985. The Russell-Meinong debate. Philos. Phenomen. Res. 45:
305–350.
[39] Tharp, Leslie: 1989. Myth and mathematics: A conceptualistic philosophy of mathemat-
ics I. Synthese. 81: 167–201.
[40] Thomas, RobertS.D.: 2000.MathematicsandﬁctionI:Identiﬁcation.LogiqueetAnalyse.
43: 301–340.
[41] Thomas, Robert S. D.: 2002. Mathematics and ﬁction II: Analogy. Logique et Analyse.
45: to appear.
[42] Vaihinger, Hans: 1924. The Philosophy of ‘As If’. Abridged translation by C. K. Ogden.
London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner.

590
R. S. D. Thomas
[43] Van Bendegem, Jean Paul: 2000.Analogy and metaphor as essential tools for the working
mathematician. In: F. Hallyn (ed.), Metaphor and Analogy in the Sciences, Dordrecht:
Kluwer, 105–123.
[44] Van Inwagen, Peter: 1977. Creatures of ﬁction. Amer. Philos. Quart. 14: 299–308.
[45] Walton, Kendall L.: 1990. Mimesis as Make-Believe: On the Foundations of the Repre-
sentational Arts. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
[46] Wang Hao: 1996. A Logical Journey: From Gödel to Philosophy. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
[47] Williams, C. J. F.: 1992. Being, Identity, and Truth. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[48] Yablo, Stephen: 1998. Does ontology rest on a mistake?
Aristotelian Society Supple-
mentary Volume 72: 1–33.
[49] Yablo, Stephen: 2001.Apriority and existence. In: P. Boghossian and C. Peacocke (eds.),
New Essays on the Apriori, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 197–228.
St John’s College and Department of Mathematics
University of Manitoba
Winnipeg, Manitoba R3T 2N2
Canada
E-mail: thomas@cc.UManitoba.CA

Russell’s Paradox and Our Conception of
Properties, or:
Why Semantics Is no Proper Guide to the Nature
of Properties
Holger Sturm
Abstract. In this paper I try to defend the following three theses: First, semantics is no proper
guide to the nature of properties. Second, the phenomenon of self-instantiation is not essential
to the nature of properties. Third, ﬁnding a solution to Russell’s paradox is not the deﬁning
task of a theory of properties, in contrast to what most formal workers in the area of property
theory seem to assume.
1. Introduction
Most formal accounts of properties are centered around some ambitious solution to
Russell’s paradox. This reﬂects the fact that the phenomenon of self-application or
self-instantiation is considered to be essential for the nature of properties. According
to this view, it is characteristic for the realm of properties that it accommodates entities
that instantiate themselves, like the property of being a property, or the property of
being an abstract entity. This, together with their ultra-ﬁne identity conditions, is
supposed to distinguish properties from all other kinds of entities.
Such a view usually rests on a semantical conception of properties. Properties
are ﬁrst of all regarded as entities that contribute to the meaning of language. More
precisely, they are identiﬁed with the meanings or senses of certain kinds of linguistic
expressions, such as predicates or their nominalizations. In the last three decades, this
idea has also shown strong inﬂuence on the research within the ﬁeld of theoretical
or referential semantics. A number of philosophers and linguists have made use of
properties as a foundation for natural language semantics, see for instance, [5, 7, 14].
The semantic conception of properties has the consequence that meaning has to be
regarded as the main source of our understanding of what properties are like. To know
the nature of properties is then, at least to a great extent, the same as to know how they
contribute to the meaning of language. From the perspective of theoretical semantics,
this means that to know the nature of properties is to know what theoretical roles they

592
H. Sturm
perform, and how they manage to do so. In the extreme case, this leads to a position
according to which properties are nothing but a particular kind of abstract or formal
entities that have exactly the features that are required for making them suitable for
the purposes of formal theories of meaning.
The main task of this paper is to call the picture just described into question. In
particular, I will try to defend the following three theses. First, semantics is no proper
guide to the nature of properties; in order to understand what properties are, we have
to look somewhere else. This thesis is supposed to apply to both theoretical semantics
as well as to our semantical intuitions based on everyday language use. Second, the
phenomenon of self-instantiation is not essential to the nature of properties. From the
second thesis we can conclude that ﬁnding a solution to Russell’s paradox is not the
deﬁning task of a theory of properties, in contrast to what most formal workers in the
area of property theory seem to assume. And this is the third thesis.
I am pretty sure that many philosophers—especially those working in the ﬁeld
of natural ontology—are willing to accept a position similar to the one that will be
presented below. To give an example, Michael Jubien has argued in [11] that evidence
for a good theory of properties must not be conﬁned to the realm of ... semantics.
But also Armstrong, Mellor, and Tooley, to mention only a few, have rejected the
view that our understanding of properties mainly rests on semantical considerations.
However, their arguments differ essentially from mine. Moreover, I do not share their
optimistic view according to which properties are able to exert a strong explanatory
power within natural ontology. I would accept the position that it is legitimate to use
property talk for reasons of elegance and expressiveness, but I doubt that there are
convincing arguments to the effect that they play an indispensable role in explanation.
But this is a different story which has to be left for another occasion.
To prepare the reader for what is to come, I will begin by laying out the structure
of the paper in some detail. In section 2, I recap the argument underlying Russell’s
paradox and then give a formal presentation of it. In section 3, I sketch some of the
escape routes that have been suggested in the literature. The section closes with the
claim that any reasonable solution to the paradox should rest on a substantial account
of what properties are. This claim raises the problem of ﬁnding a proper source for
such an account, and it is exactly this problem that initiates the considerations that
will be undertaken in the rest of the paper, in the course of which I will present my
arguments against the semantic view of properties.
In section 4 it is shown why our linguistic intuitions relying on everyday language
use do not solve the problem under discussion. Therefore, we must have recourse to a
more theoretical strategy. In order to learn what properties are like, one has to inquire
into the explanatory purposes they are supposed to fulﬁll. This idea, which is quite
popular nowadays, will be the topic of section 5. Following common practice, I will
identify two theoretical domains over which all applications of properties distribute,
namely the domain of theoretical semantics and the domain of natural ontology.
In section 6, I will argue that semantics cannot be taken as the basis for our
understanding of the nature of properties. This will turn out to be the most demanding

Our Conception of Properties
593
part of the paper. The argument consists of a number of methodological considerations
which ﬁnally cut the intimate connection between properties and semantics, and are
supposed to prove my ﬁrst thesis. The second and the third theses follow from the ﬁrst
together with the fact that natural ontology, the other possible source of inspiration,
restsonahierarchicaluniverseofproperties. Thiswillbethetopicoftheﬁnalsection7.
2. Russell’s Paradox
Russell’s paradox has become famous as the most serious challenge every foundational
approach to mathematics has to face. Since mathematics lives in an extensional world,
Russell’s paradox is ﬁrst of all a problem for set-theorists. However, it also has a twin
brother within the realm of properties. Suppose there is a predicate in our language
which expresses, for an arbitrary object x, that x does not instantiate itself, and assume
further that the property of all things that do not instantiate themselves belongs to the
objects we are talking about. We then obtain for this property of non-self-instantiation
that it instantiates itself if and only if it doesn’t instantiate itself. Therefore, classical
logic assumed, we end up in a contradiction.
For the following discussion, it will be useful to have a more formal presentation at
hand.1 So let L be a ﬁrst-order language based on an alphabet consisting of an inﬁnite
list of individual variables v0, v1, . . .; the usual logical symbols ¬, ∧, ∨, →, ↔, ∀, ∃;
an intensional abstractor [. . .], the (binary) instantiation predicate —where t1t2
expresses that t1 instantiates t2—and (optional) a ﬁnite number of relation symbols
R1, . . . , Rn.
The terms and formulas of L are deﬁned by simultaneous recursion, where the only
interesting clause concerns the abstraction terms: If ϕ is a formula and x a variable,
then [ϕ]x is a term which is supposed to denote the property of being a ϕ. To make
life easier, I restrict my attention to unary properties.
Russell’s paradox is now obtained as follows. Suppose we accept the following two
principles—for any L-formula ϕ with no occurrence of y—where the ﬁrst ﬁxes the
meaning of the abstraction term [ϕ(x)]x, and the second reﬂects the fact that [ϕ(x)]x
is treated, according to the principles of classical logic, as a denoting term:
∀y(y[ϕ(x)]x ↔ϕ(y/x))2
(1)
∃y(y = [ϕ(x)]x)
(2)
Consider the formula ϕ := ¬xx. From (1) we immediately obtain
∀y(y[¬xx]x ↔¬yy)
1Strictly speaking, the formal version will only be used in section 3. So the reader who is exclusively
interested in philosophical considerations, may skip the rest of the present section as well as most of section
3.
2ϕ(y/x) denotes the formula we obtain from ϕ by replacing all free occurrences of x with y.

594
H. Sturm
and, by making use of (2), we get
[¬xx]x[¬xx]x ↔¬[¬xx]x[¬xx]x
which forms a contradiction, given the principles of classical propositional logic.
Alternatively, one could do without any abstraction terms and use the following in-
stantiation of the general comprehension principle:
∃x∀y(yx ↔¬yy)
(3)
However, the version with abstraction terms has some advantages and will be taken
as a base for the following discussion.
3. Some Formal Solutions
Since Russell discovered his paradox in 1901, a number of escape strategies have been
proposed. Feferman [9] supplies a coarse, yet informative, classiﬁcation by means of
the following three slogans:
(A) Restrict the language.
(B) Change the logic.
(C) Restrict the basic principles.
The ﬁrst slogan reﬂects the most straightforward route for avoiding the paradox: the
idea is just to exclude “dangerous” expressions like ¬xx or [¬xx]x from the
language. In a most consequent way it has been realized in several accounts based on
typed languages, the most famous of which is the simple version of Russell’s theory
of types due to Ramsey. Another important example is Montague’s intensional logic
IL.
Nowadays, there seems to be wide agreement that for reasons of expressiveness a
proper solution to the paradox should be type-free, for a deviating position consult [1]
or [10]. Philosophers, linguists, and logicians have argued that many important things
one would wish to express are not expressible within a typed language, for details
see [4, 6, 7, 16, 23]. To give an example, typed languages are not able to handle
transcendental predicates, that is, predicates like ‘thinks about’ or ‘loves’ which can
take arguments of different types, see [5, 14]. Moreover, there are convincing reasons
to the effect that a suitable language for property talk should contain variables that
range over the whole universe, including properties of all types as well as individuals,
see [4, 5, 14]. It is evident that the existence of such uniform variables would violate
the usual type restrictions.
But even if we are willing to grant the validity of these arguments—and I feel
strongly inclined to do so—we are not justiﬁed in drawing the more general conclusion

Our Conception of Properties
595
to the effect that all escape routes relying on syntactic restrictions are damned to fail.
For most of the above arguments only address type restrictions, not the general idea of
excluding certain terms from the language. However, I agree with many other authors
that we should dispense with all kinds of syntactic restrictions.
But again, one has to be careful not to draw the wrong conclusions. That self-
referential expressions are admissible in the language, does not imply the existence
of self-instantiating properties; terms like [xx]x need not denote (see below). In
general, type-freedom on the linguistic level does not guarantee type-freedom on the
ontological level. Having a type-free language by means of which we express facts
about entities of a certain kind, is compatible with accepting a hierarchical universe
for the same entities.3
It is time to turn our attention to the two remaining slogans. Escape strategies that
are inspired by (B) or (C) are usually strongly interwoven with each other. Typical
examples can be found among property theories which make use of partial logic.
Although most of them are driven by (B), they also have to change, as a consequence,
(1) and/or (2). Some of these accounts were obtained by adopting techniques which
had originally been developed in the area of truth theory, where Kripke’s famous
paper “Outline of a Theory of Truth” initiated a whole line of research on theories
containing their own truth predicate. Property theories like the ones that were proposed
in [5, 9, 16, 23] are based on the same model-theoretic intuitions that underly theories
of truth developed by Kripke, or Gupta and Herzberger.
Another strategy falling under (B) is based on free logic. The idea is to treat
problematic abstraction terms like [¬xx] as non-denoting terms. As a consequence,
(2) does not apply to them, and, hence, the derivation of Russell’s paradox that has
been given in section 2 is blocked. As for the underlying logic, the propositional
part of classical logic can be preserved, only the principles for the quantiﬁers need to
be replaced with their free variants. For instance, instead of ∀xϕ →ϕ(t), we take
something like ∀xϕ ∧∃x(x = t) →ϕ(t). A very natural account following this line
results in a property theory which shows great similarity with ZF set theory, where
extensionality (and foundation) has been dropped, see [4, 11, 20].
Alternatively, one may wish to treat all abstraction terms as denoting, see [12].
In order to escape the paradox, it is then useful to distinguish two kinds of property-
like entities, similar to the set-class distinction known from set theory. The universal
quantiﬁer in principle (2) will be restricted to objects of the ﬁrst kind, whereas terms
like [¬xx] take their denotations from the second one. A similar account has been
proposed by Cocchiarella [8] within a second-order framework. In the same paper the
author discusses an alternative theory based on the idea of restricting principle (2) to
stratiﬁed terms.
Although these remarks certainly do not exhaust all strategies that have been pro-
posed in the literature for avoiding Russell’s paradox, they should give at least some
3In fact, this is the situation we meet in set theory, where the standard version of ZF relies on a ﬁrst-order
type-free language—so that terms of the form {x : x = x} or {x : x ∈x} are well-formed—but the universe
of all sets carries a (cumulative) hierarchical structure.

596
H. Sturm
hints as to what is possible. I personally prefer a solution in the style of ZF set theory,
but it is not the purpose of this paper to defend any particular solution. Instead, I am
aiming at a more basic and conceptual problem. Before we will be able to evaluate and
compare different accounts in a reasonable way, we ﬁrst need a clear understanding of
what our standards are supposed to be. The crucial question is: what are the criteria
by which we should judge a proposed solution to the paradox, and where can we ﬁnd
them?
To begin with, let’s consider the reasons that are usually offered in order to show
why one should select one solution rather than another. Well, to be somewhat unfair,
though I guess it is only “somewhat”, it seems to be correct to say that many accounts
in the literature are governed by the following rule: preserve the above principles (1)
and (2) for as many terms as possible, without ending up in an inconsistency. This is
an interesting game, no doubt. In particular, it tells us what is the maximum we could
expect. But I don’t think that it is a proper game for ﬁnding an adequate solution to
the paradox.
Instead, I am voting for the following methodological principle, which strikes me
as self-evident, and, thus, for which I have no argument to offer, but which will drive
the philosophical considerations contained in this paper. For an adequate solution it is
not sufﬁcient to avoid the paradox by means of some elegant formal techniques. The
solution has to be part of a substantial theory, where the latter is supposed to explicate
a clear conception of the nature of properties.
4. Can Everyday Language Use Be our Guide?
At ﬁrst sight, we seem to have a direct grip on properties. Properties are entities we
seem to be well acquainted with. They are part of our everyday world, and, hence,
they are deeply involved in our pre-theoretic as well as our scientiﬁc reasoning about
almost everything. So we should expect ourselves to have a clear comprehension of
their nature. At least, we should be able to decide what properties exist, and the latter
should bring us very close to a solution to Russell’s paradox. At the end of this section,
it will turn out that things are not so easy and that our hope was delusive.
Our intimate contact with properties is reﬂected in our language use. We accept
a lot of sentences which deal with properties as true. Of course, we often call them
by different names, we say “features”, “characters”, “traits”, and so on, but, neverthe-
less, what we mean are properties, or special kinds of them. The most characteristic
cases of such property talk distribute over two categories of sentences. The ﬁrst con-
tains sentences by means of which we make universal or existential claims. In more
technical terms, these are sentences which quantify over properties, like
(a) Peter has the same character traits as his cousin.
(b) There are undiscovered properties tying physical particles to each other.

Our Conception of Properties
597
The second category consists of sentences, where abstract nouns that appear to stand
for properties occur in subject position. Famous examples are
(c) Red is a color.
(d) Red resembles orange more than it resembles blue.
Sentences like (a)–(d) were often considered in contexts in which the existence of
properties was at stake. In modern times, this problem has often been discussed in
recourse to Quine’s criterion of ontological commitment. Platonists with respect to
properties have utilized sentences like (a)–(d) in order to show that we are committed to
the existence of properties, whereas nominalists have invented a number of interesting
strategies for avoiding this consequence. Three of the most inﬂuential ones are the
following:
(i) In the case of quantiﬁcation, the nominalist gives quantiﬁers a non-referential,
that is in most cases a substitutional interpretation. Examples as (b) put this strategy to
a severe test, since they express the existence of properties for which we have no lin-
guistic expression at hand. Still, even though nominalists have offered several escape
routes, difﬁculties remain: In the ﬁrst place, the nominalist needs a strong argument
to show that the sentences under discussion have linguistic expressions as their sub-
jects. For the intuitions to the contrary are rather strong. Second, most substitutional
accounts that are able to handle sentences like (b) make use of possible extensions of
the actual vocabulary. There is some evidence to the effect that a satisfying notion
of possible extension of a language depends on the analysis of what a meaningful ex-
pression is. The difﬁcult task for the nominalist is to provide such an analysis without
presupposing the existence of properties, or similar entities.
(ii) The nominalist suggests a suitable paraphrase whose meaning is reasonably
similar to the meaning of the original sentence, and whose ontological commitments
are acceptable from his own point of view. Here the problems are even more serious
than the problems the ﬁrst strategy had to face: To begin with, since sentence and
paraphrase do not have exactly the same meaning, the platonist always seems to be
justiﬁed to refuse the paraphrase and to insist on a nominalist analysis of the original
sentence. Second, there exists no uniform procedure for the nominalist that would
enable him to ﬁnd suitable paraphrases in all cases, and, moreover, there is no argument
to the effect that in each single case he can be successful. Third, and even worse, there
exists a number of cases where all nominalistic attempts have failed so far; many
philosophers are prepared to accept (c) and (d) as cases in point.
(iii) The most promising strategy—which, according to my own view, is the one
Quine favored—is driven by the following idea: When we analyze and evaluate on-
tological commitments, we only have to take into account our best theory(ies), that
is, the theory(ies) we use for scientiﬁc purposes or other serious work. Hence, the
nominalist’s task is to show that sentences like (a)-(d) do not occur in her favored
theory. It does not matter, whether she supports a position according to which natu-
ral language sentences have no ontological commitments at all, and claims that only

598
H. Sturm
sentences in canonical notation do so, or whether she applies the ontological criterion
to the former directly. The important point is that sentences which would commit her
to the existence of the entities under discussion are not part of the theory(ies) she is
willing to accept on the strongest epistemic or ontological standards.
It would be hard work to ﬁnd out whether one of these strategies could successfully
be applied or whether they all must fail. Fortunately, there is no need for doing so. For
our problem is not to decide whether properties exist in general, but to ﬁnd out which
properties exist, at least, as far as their existence would concern Russell’s paradox.
So we can even grant that accepting sentences like (a)-(d) as true commits us to the
existence of properties. What I am not willing to grant is that from this fact we may
draw any interesting conclusions that may help to solve the paradox.
This pessimistic view can be justiﬁed as follows. First, we observe that our di-
rect intuitions relying on everyday language use only establish the existence of very
‘harmless’ properties.4 They do not enable us to make any decisions with respect to
the existence of those properties that are relevant for the paradox. Second, when we
try to extrapolate some general existence principles from the obvious cases that are
covered by our intuitions, we will end up right back where we started, namely in a
paradoxical situation. These two points deserve some comments.
Suppose we are trying to ﬁnd out whether we (should) accept the existence of a
property which instantiates itself. In other words, do our intuitions tell us that the
sentence
(e) There is some property that instantiates itself.
is true, as they have told us that (c) and (d) were true? Or is there any argument, resting
on our intuitions, to the effect that (e) is true? Perhaps the reader is inclined to give a
positive answer by arguing as follows: Take the property of being a property. This is a
property which instantiates every property, and, hence, also itself. So there is at least
one example of a property which instantiates itself. Is this a convincing argument?
Of course not, at best it is an enthymeme, which means that premisses have been
suppressed. The most important premiss concerns the existence of the property of
being a property.
But why should we accept this premiss? Perhaps it is regarded as self-evident in
the sense that the expression “the property of being a property” is well-formed and,
hence, has some denotation, which certainly must be a property. But then we are in
trouble. To see this, take now the property of being a property that does not instantiate
itself. Applying the same principle, this property, call it R, must also exist. But the
latter is exactly the property that was responsible for the paradox. In other words, the
fact that we trust our intuitions without any restrictions was the reason we got into
trouble. So intuitions alone won’t give us a way out.
4This ﬁts perfectly with the fact that many philosophers who support a sparse conception of properties,
and, hence, refuse a simple view on the relation between properties and linguistic items, nevertheless accept
the arguments from quantiﬁcation and abstract reference as (further) evidence for the existence of properties,
see, for instance [2]: 58–63.

Our Conception of Properties
599
The reader might reply that our intuitions are all right, and that they tell us that
neither the universal property nor R exist, or that the universal property exists, but R
does not. The second case looks rather ad hoc to me. We would expect too much
from our intuitions, if they should guarantee the existence of the universal property,
but not the existence of R. But what is more important here is the fact that the present
strategy, just referring to our case-by-case intuitions, gives us no general principles
that would help to decide what properties exist.
Taking all this together, I feel justiﬁed in drawing the conclusion that everyday
language use is no proper guide in our search for an adequate solution to the paradox,
and that insights into the nature of properties should be expected from another source.
5. Explanatory Roles
But from what source? Looking for inspiration, it might be reasonable to brieﬂy
consider sets. To begin with, what counts there as a satisfying solution to the paradox?
At least, the essential condition a proper solution has to fulﬁll is made out quite easily:
It should enable us to use sets as a foundation for the rich ﬁeld of mathematics. Of
course, it would be difﬁcult to formulate this condition in a rigorous manner, but for
our purposes it is sufﬁcient to grasp the idea. It is true, there are also some pragmatic
restrictions to the effect that the accepted set theory should be elegant and relatively
natural—and, perhaps, that at least some of its axioms conform with our intuitions—
but these factors only play a subordinate role. And it is also true that we are confronted
with deep philosophical questions regarding the application of mathematical theories
in sciences. However, as far as I can see, they mainly concern the mathematical
theories themselves, and not so much their set-theoretic shape. So what remains is
the pure demand that it should be possible to develop mathematics within set theory.
And, therefore, to know what sets are is more or less the same as to know what the
particular set theory looks like that ﬁts best for this job.
The situation with respect to properties differs in at least three respects. First, and
in spite of the negative result from section 4, properties are more deeply involved in
our pre-theoretic reasoning about the world than sets are. To use a phrase from Wilfrid
Sellars, they are part of our manifest image of the world. In fact, this is the general
reason why many philosophers are prepared to accept them—beside individuals—as
basic entities in ontology. Second, there is nothing which can determine our concep-
tion of properties in the same way as mathematics determines our conception of sets.
Some will object that semantics can do this job, but in section 6 I will show why this
is wrong.
Instead, and this is the third and most important point, properties can be used
for diverse theoretical purposes; at least, this is the position many philosophers are
currently advocating. Properties are supposed to ﬁll various explanatory roles; they
help to explain phenomena from very different philosophical areas. In this sense,

600
H. Sturm
arguments for the existence of properties have been constructed as inferences to the
best explanation by Swoyer, see [21, 22] and others.5
Viewing properties as entities that have been postulated for theoretical purposes,
suggests a position according to which their nature is at least to some extent—but only
to some6 —determined by the roles they are supposed to ﬁll. Hence, a proper way to
ﬁnd out what properties are is by investigating these roles.
Several philosophers have made the observation that most applications of prop-
erties can be attached to one of the following two domains, natural ontology and
(theoretical) semantics. From the perspective of natural ontology, properties serve as
the basis of objective similarity in the world, and ﬁx the world’s causal structure. Ob-
jects resemble or don’t resemble each other because they instantiate certain properties,
and they have various powers and dispositions due to the fact that they instantiate these
properties. Relying on these intuitions, philosophers have assigned properties a central
position in their philosophical accounts of scientiﬁc realism, causation, dispositions,
natural laws and measurement. Within semantics, properties are regarded as ingre-
dients of a theory of meaning. They are used ﬁrst and foremost as meaning-objects
correlated with general terms.
Many philosophers take it for granted that both types of roles have to be performed,
the semantical as well as the ontological one, but at the same time they doubt that a
single kind of entity is able to perform them all. As a consequence, these philosophers
have postulated two kinds of property-like entities. Prominent examples are Bealer’s
distinction between concepts and qualities, Lewis’s distinction between properties and
universals, and Putnam’s distinction between predicates and properties.
However, whether we should postulate two kinds of properties or not, need not
concern us here. It would be sufﬁcient to have at least one clear notion of what
properties are like. What will concern us for the rest of the paper are the following
two questions:
1. Does semantics give us such a clear notion?
2. What insights do we obtain from the two domains that could enable us to ﬁnd
a reasonable solution to Russell’s paradox?
The reader might miss a third question on the list which amounts to whether natural
ontology can be a proper guide to the nature of properties. I am sorry that I have to
disappoint here, but answering this question is not one of my aims in this paper. So
let’s turn our attention to semantics!
5Of course, the notion of explanation here is highly ambitious. It seems clear that it is different from
the notion of explanation that is at work in science, since the latter means ﬁrst of all causal explanation.
Explanations within ontology have more to do with uniﬁcation or even conceptual analysis. However, it
would go beyond the purposes of this paper to discuss this point. For the following, I make the harmless
assumption that there is at least one sense of explanation according to which properties are able to undertake
explanatory work.
6This qualiﬁcation is essential here, since I regard it as inadequate to identify the nature of properties
with their theoretical roles. We should not completely ignore the fact that properties are part of our everyday
conception of the world. It is exactly this fact which distinguishes them from other abstract objects.

Our Conception of Properties
601
6. Can Semantics Be Our Guide?
The primary motivation for many (formal) theories of properties stems from the desire
to develop a new foundation for natural language semantics. There are various seman-
tical phenomena which seem to require the postulation of properties. In particular,
properties are wanted for the analysis of predicative expressions.
The idea that semantics provides a fundamental testing ground for a prop-
erty theory is based on the assumption that properties are the semantic
counterparts of natural language expressions. So, for example, the sen-
tence John runs says of John that he has or instantiates the property of
running. ([7]: 261)
Other phenomena that appear to imply the existence of properties are self-instantiation,
intensionality—properties are postulated in order to get straight the substitution con-
ditions in intensional contexts—and quantiﬁcation.
Although there is some justiﬁcation for the above view, from a philosophical point
of view it is not sufﬁcient just to postulate the existence of a certain kind of entities, to
attach the label ‘property’ to them, and to correlate them with linguistic expressions.
One has to give a full-blown account of what these entities are like, and, especially,
how and in what sense they act as semantic objects. After all, it is possible to associate
many sorts of things with linguistic expressions. The essential question is what makes
this association a semantical one.
To get a ﬁrst impression of the whole problem, let’s have a short look at the
semantics for modal languages. There is wide agreement that possible world semantics
has some advantages over its algebraic competitor. It goes without saying that the
latter forms an important mathematical tool for investigating modal languages and
logics, but it must be questioned whether it forms an explanatory theory of meaning
that helps to understand modal talk more properly. For instance, it is not clear what
homomorphisms between syntactic and semantic algebras distinguishes from other
sorts of homomorphisms, and what qualiﬁes semantic algebras as objects that give
meaning to linguistic expressions.
The situation for possible world semantics is rather different. First of all, its ingre-
dients, that is to say possible worlds and individuals, form a suitable basis for intuitive
interpretations: many appealing philosophical explanations have been couched in
terms of possible worlds. As a consequence, notions like “truth in a world” obtain
the status of something that is meaningful to us. That we are justiﬁed in viewing the
model-theoretic consequence relation as an explication of our informal notion of cor-
rect reasoning presupposes this kind of meaningfulness. (That this has to be taken with
some care, was shown by Etchemendy.) However, philosophers like Lewis, Plantinga,
and others, were still not satisﬁed. What they tried to do is to develop a full-ﬂedged
theory of possible worlds. Though I have some reservations with respect to the whole
discussion, I agree with the underlying methodological principle: possible worlds are

602
H. Sturm
only able to satisfy explanatory purposes if we have a clear understanding of what
they are.
Transferred to properties, their considerations show that it is not sufﬁcient to use
certain structures to interpret some given language and call some elements from these
structures properties. If properties should do explanatory work, one has to add a theory
which provides at least some information about what their nature is supposed to be.
And to characterize their nature is not exhausted by describing the formal features
they must have in order to perform their roles as meaning objects. For instance, we
need an analysis of the widely accepted fact that the realm of properties is equipped
with a kind of algebraic structure similar to the one that underlies the collection of
predicates. Otherwise Quine was right, and properties are nothing but mysterious
shadows of linguistic expressions.
There certainly exists a very natural reply to the above considerations, which
is in full accordance with common practice as it has been described in section 5.
Properties are postulated in order to explain and analyze certain phenomena. So
they are introduced on purely theoretical grounds, similar to theoretical entities in the
natural sciences, like atoms, ﬁelds, and quarks. It is, therefore, beside the point to
require some characterization of these entities independent of the theoretical roles they
are supposed to play. In a ﬁrst reply to this argument I would like to point out important
asymmetries between properties, on the one hand side, and theoretical entities within
physics or chemistry on the other side.
First, although theoretical entities in science are postulated on theoretical grounds,
thereareempiricalphenomenawhichgivereasonsforpostulatingthem, andweusually
haveempiricalproceduresandexperimentswhichconnecttheseentitieswithempirical
situations. It must be admitted that these correlations can be rather indirect and very
complicated. Nevertheless, they help us to conﬁrm the existence of theoretical entities
by empirical evidence, and hence, in a wider sense, the existence of theoretical entities
can be regarded as an empirical affair. Properties, in contrast, are established by means
ofapriorireasoning, atleast, aslongastheirexistenceisgroundedonpurelysemantical
considerations.
Second, it is reasonable to consider the distinction between theoretical and ob-
servable entities in science as something ﬂexible that can change in the course of
time. As an effect of scientiﬁc and technological developments, entities that have
been postulated on purely theoretical grounds are becoming observable.
Third, although theoretical entities may differ from observable objects in important
respects, with respect to their basic ontological features they are similar. Theoretical
entities belong to the same ontological category as observable objects; they are con-
crete, and, hence, part of the space-time system of our world. In contrast, properties
are abstract objects and hence—according to the common view in semantics—they
are not situated in space and time.
For the semanticist there are, in principle, two different ways of replying to the
above arguments. Either she can contest the disanalogies or she can doubt that they are
of any relevance to the point under discussion. Let’s begin with the ﬁrst alternative. It

Our Conception of Properties
603
is probably quite hard to imagine a reasonable position which denies the disanalogies
completely, but philosophers like David Armstrong seem to come very close to it. At
least they have tried to make them less sharp by arguing that properties—or universals
in Armstrong’s case—are part of our natural world, and that their existence can only
be established by empirical means:
What properties and relations there are in the world is to be decided by
total science, that is, the sum total of all enquiries into the nature of things.
([3]: 8)
I must confess that I have some reservations with respect to Armstrong’s position,
but they need not concern us here. The only important thing is that his position does
not support the semanticist. On the contrary! Since semantics is to a great extent
an a priori affair, the naturalness of properties shows, according to Armstrong, that
properties are ﬁrst and foremost entities which are postulated for reasons that are
independent of semantical considerations.
More promising for the semanticist seems to be the second alternative. Grant the
disanalogies, but doubt their relevance. What is important with respect to properties,
and what justiﬁes the analogy with theoretical entities, is the pure fact that properties
help to explain a number of things. There is no a priori reason to the effect that such
explainers must belong to the category of concrete objects.
Taking this point for granted, the task for the semanticist is then to convince us that
it is properties we are really in need of, and not some other kind of abstract entities.
To this invitation the semanticist has again two different replies. She can either accept
it and supply some reasons in favor of properties, or she refuses it as beside the point,
since properties have been deﬁned as those entities which fulﬁll certain roles.
Let’s consider the ﬁrst alternative ﬁrst. Why should we prefer properties? The most
natural answer refers to their individuation principle. Properties are more ﬁne-grained
than sets, and even more ﬁne-grained than modalized sets, for instance Lewis’s sets of
possibilia. Two properties can be necessarily co-extensional without being identical.
This enables us to make more distinctions within the realm of meaning objects, and it
is just these distinctions we seem to be in need of. The best example stems from the
analysis of intensionality: the task is to ﬁnd meaning objects that supply the correct
substitution conditions for intensional sentences.
For the sake of illustration, it may be useful to describe the structure of the problem
in some schematic way. Given some collection  of sentences, we are searching for
an equivalence relation ∼on the set of expressions occurring in  such that ϕ(θ2)
follows from ϕ(θ1) under the assumption that θ1 ∼θ2, where ∼is deﬁned by means of
the equality relation between the meaning objects correlated with the θi’s. The claim
is that for intensional sentences properties are the suitable meaning objects.
We should be very sceptical about this claim.
That we are really in need of
such ﬁne-grained entities is anything but self-evident. To see this, let’s elaborate a
bit on this point. According to common practice, we can distinguish two kinds of
intensional contexts, modal contexts and intentional contexts, such as propositional

604
H. Sturm
attitudes. For modal contexts properties are not required; this has been observed by
various authors. We can, for instance, work with possible worlds and ordinary sets.
What about intentional contexts, say belief contexts? Here many philosophers and
linguists have argued that ﬁne-grained objects like properties and propositions are
indispensable.
However, the situation is not as clear. In many cases the judgement that properties
are indispensable rests on an overestimation of the reach of semantics. What we
can expect from semantics is that it describes or explicates our conception of correct
reasoning. It may tell us that if somebody believes ϕ then, under such-and-such
conditions, he should also believe ψ, or, if he is committed to ϕ, he is also committed
to ψ. What semantics cannot do is to describe what people actually believe or think.
But it is the latter that is often supposed when one argues from ﬁne-grainedness.
On the other hand “often” does not mean “always”. So what about those cases that
do not rest on the above confusion? Well, I am quite sure that there are no such cases.
There is strong evidence to the effect that it is always possible to replace properties
by other entities. However, a detailed proof for this claim would go beyond the scope
of this paper. Instead, I will try to bring the point home by two further arguments:
First, even if it were desirable to have a proper notion of ﬁne-grainedness, it is
fair to say that at present there is none in sight. What we observe is the following
dilemma: either the suggested solution doesn’t succeed or it pushes properties too
close to linguistic expressions so that, again, they are nothing but worthless duplicates
of the latter. For an instructive example, consider Bealer’s second conception of
properties.
Second, suppose there is a chance to improve our situation by ﬁnding a suitable
notion of ﬁne-grainedness—although I am convinced that this won’t happen—why
should this prove anything to the beneﬁt of properties? In the end, we can always take
a set-theoretic model that is able to perform the roles properties were nominated for.
Since, according to the semanticist’s account, all we know about properties are their
structural features, there is no way to distinguish them from set-theoretic entities that
carry the same structure.
True enough, the semanticist counters, adding quickly that there is no reason for
making this distinction. Taking the second route from above, she identiﬁes properties
with any kind of entities that are equipped with exactly the features required for making
them suitable for her purposes. And, in her eyes, this is everything that can be said
about their nature.
Here we have reached a point where it is hardly possible to convincingly argue
against the semanticist’s position without giving a detailed account of the methodology
of referential semantics, which is certainly something that cannot be done in a twenty-
page article, but would require a whole book, or two. So I have to content with a few
very general remarks.
The ﬁrst repeats a point that has already been made several times before. According
to my view it is misleading to treat properties as abstract entities that have exclusively
been postulated for theoretical purposes. Doing so neglects an important difference

Our Conception of Properties
605
between properties and arbitrary formal entities. It is no accident that properties are
called properties, and that they stand in the center of our attention. We should not give
up the idea that they are part of our manifest image of the world, at least not, if we
take them to be entities that ﬁll explanatory purposes within philosophy.
The second point brings us back to the beginning of this section: In order to
understand what properties are, we need a clear conception of their role as meaning
objects, and how they manage to perform it. But this entails having answers to the
following questions:
• How does it come about that properties are correlated with linguistic expres-
sions?
• What makes this correlation a semantical one?
• How is this related to our ability to understand language?
It is hard to imagine how a successful account of these problems could rest on a purely
instrumental view like the one our semanticist seems to accept.
If the reader is still not convinced, I have to play my last ace by referring back
to the starting-point of our investigation. From Russell’s paradox we learned that a
simple correlation between linguistic expressions and properties, which is reﬂected
by the comprehension principle, cannot hold without exceptions. So the question that
also inspired this paper amounts to what expressions are correlated with properties.
Russell once wrote somewhere that what is true is not something that can be decided
by the police, and this certainly applies to the existence of properties as well. So a
reasonable solution to the paradox cannot be obtained by pure stipulation, but must
be part of a substantial account of properties. This maxim was formulated at the end
of section 3.
The semanticist who subscribes to a view according to which properties are just
entities which have been postulated for theoretical reasons within semantics, and who
reduces their nature to their role as denotations of linguistic items, has no tools at
hand that would allow her to realize the above maxim. In the end, she is confronted
with various formal solutions, but is not able to evaluate them on the ground of some
non-formal criteria.
This remark closes the discussion on the relation between properties and semantics.
I hope I have accumulated sufﬁcient evidence for a negative answer to the ﬁrst question
from the end of section 5, and, hence, that I have proved the ﬁrst main thesis of this
paper. Semantics doesn’t give us a proper notion of what properties are. The latter
also implies a negative answer to the second question from section 5. In order to ﬁnd
suitable conditions for a substantial solution to Russell’s paradox, we have to look
outside semantics.

606
H. Sturm
7. Can Natural Ontology Be Our Guide?
In section 5 I identiﬁed two main domains from which we could expect insights
into the nature of properties that may lead our search for a solution to the paradox,
semantics and natural ontology. The foregoing section proved the ﬁrst to fall short of
our expectations, so that we have to pin our hopes on the second domain. However,
it will turn out that natural ontology is unsuitable for our purposes as well, even if for
completely different reasons.
We begin with the observation—and in a sense we already could stop here—
that all properties operating in natural ontology ﬁnd their place in a universe with
a hierarchical structure. Employing a language of construction, this universe can
be described as follows: At the bottom of the hierarchy, we start with a collection of
individuals. On the ﬁrst level we take (all) properties and relations that instantiate those
individuals. On the second level we take (all) properties and relations instantiating
properties and relations from the ﬁrst level as well as individuals, and so on.
This may remind one of the cumulative hierarchy of sets, and, indeed, this asso-
ciation is completely justiﬁed. But in contrast to the situation in set theory, it would
require some further work to develop the above picture into a proper construction. In
particular, in the case of properties it is not self-evident what exactly the properties
(and relations) are that inhabit a successor level, say level n + 1. For sets the situation
is obvious, we just take all members of the power set of the union of the foregoing
levels, but in the case of properties things are more complicated. Certainly, we can
require that for every set consisting of individuals and properties from levels lower
than n + 1, there exists a property on level n + 1 which has this set as its extension.
But since we lack extensionality, this property need not be unique. Fortunately, these
subtleties can safely be ignored for the following.
What we shouldn’t ignore is the fact that for the purposes of natural ontology we
only need a small part of this hierarchy, although it is highly contested which part
exactly. Even philosophers who refuse to establish the existence of properties on a
priori reasons have nevertheless set up some general principles that effectively impose
strong restrictions on the structure of the universe of properties. For instance, some
have argued in favor of a principle of order invariance which means that all entities
instantiated by a particular property must be of the same level. This condition pushes
the hierarchy closer to the universe that underlies Russell’s simple theory of types.
And although Armstrong, for instance, refuses this principle, he still accepts a weak
principle of order invariance to the effect that the entities contained in an n-tupel
instantiated by a particular relation are all of the same level. Moreover, in [3] he
introduces a principle which excludes properties and relations of a level higher than
2, which yields a very ﬂat hierarchy.
But no matter what principles are accepted, there seems to be common agreement
that everything we need in natural ontology lives in the hierarchical universe. As a
consequence, the phenomenon of self-instantiation plays no role at all. Philosophical

Our Conception of Properties
607
accounts of scientiﬁc realism, causation, laws, disposition and measurement are not
in need of self-instantiating properties. Bad news for the latter!
But many current philosophers are inclined to go even further. According to their
view, it is not only the case that we can do without self-instantiating properties, but
also that our naturalistic conception of properties excludes the possibility of their
existence. Properties are regarded as the entities that make the differences in the
world, and this world is nothing more than the natural space-time system. Moreover,
to make differences in the world means to contribute to the causal structure of the
world.
The essential nature of a property consists in its potential for constituting
to the causal powers of the things that have it, and that properties are
identical just in case they make, in all possible circumstances, the same
contribution to causal powers. ([19]: 291)
Since it is incomprehensible that self-instantiating properties, which are just formal
entities, could have any causal effects, self-instantiating properties cannot exist at all.
So the argument goes.
But even if we do not accept this strong naturalistic position, the phenomenon of
self-instantiation has to give up its dominant role in our thinking about properties,
which was the second main thesis that should be established in this paper. This
conclusion has far-reaching consequences for the status of Russell’s paradox, and for
formal accounts of properties in general. In particular, if philosophers likeArmstrong,
Shoemaker, and Tooley are right, and our knowledge about properties is an empirical
affair, the whole project of developing formal theories of properties that are driven by
the idea of avoiding the paradox turns out to be on the wrong track.
It may still be interesting to do formal work for properties, but the character of
this research will have to change. What is now wanted are ﬂexible formal frameworks
which enable us to describe the ﬁne-structure of the universe of properties as it is
investigated by philosophers inside and outside natural ontology. This new orientation
may further have the pleasing side effect, that it initiates more collaboration between
two groups of researchers—logicians and philosophers—working on problems related
to properties. At present, a fruitful strong cooperation is still missing.
Acknowledgement. I would like to thank Johannes Haag, Volker Halbach, David
Hyder, and an anonymous referee for helpful comments on an earlier version of this
paper.
References
[1]
Anderson, C. Anthony: 1987. Bealer’s quality and concept. Journal of Philosophical
Logic 16: 115–64.

608
H. Sturm
[2]
Armstrong, David M.: 1978. Universals and Scientiﬁc Realism, vol. I. Nominalism and
Realism. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[3]
Armstrong, David M.: 1978. Universals and Scientiﬁc Realism, vol. II. A Theory of
Universals. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[4]
Bealer, George: 1983. Quality and Concept. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
[5]
Bealer, George and Uwe Mönnich: 1989. Property theories. In: D. M. Gabbay and F.
Guenthner (eds.), Handbook of Philosophical Logic IV, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 131–251.
[6]
Castaˆneda, Hector-Neri: 1977. Ontology and grammar: I. Russell’s paradox and the
general theory of properties in natural language. Theoria 42: 44–92.
[7]
Chierchia, Gennaro and Raymond Turner: 1998. Semantics and property theory. Lin-
guistics and Philosophy 11: 261–302.
[8]
Cocchiarella, Nino B.:
1992. Cantor’s power-set theorem versus Frege’s double-
correlation thesis. History and Philosophy of Logic 13: 179–201.
[9]
Feferman, Solomon: 1984. Toward useful type-free theories, I. Journal of Symbolic
Logic 49: 75–111.
[10]
Fine, Kit: 1977. Properties, propositions and sets. Journal of Philosophical Logic 6:
135–91.
[11]
Jubien, Michael: 1989. On properties and property theory. In: G. Chierchia et al. (eds.),
Property Theories, and Semantics, vol. I, Dordrecht: Kluwer, 159-75.
[12]
Lemmon, Edward J.: 1963. A theory of attributes based on modal logic. Acta Philo-
sophica Fennica: 95–122.
[13]
Lewis, David: 1983. New work for a theory of universals. American Philosophical
Quarterly 61: 343–77.
[14]
Menzel, Christopher: 1993. The proper treatment of predication in ﬁne-grained inten-
sional logic. Philosophical Perspectives 7: 61–87.
[15]
Orilia, Francesco: 1991. Type-free property theory, exempliﬁcation and Russell’s para-
dox. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 32: 432–47.
[16]
Orilia, Francesco: 2000. Property theory and the revision theory of deﬁnitions. Journal
of Symbolic Logic 65: 212–246.
[17]
Pollard, Stephen and Norman M. Martin: 1986. Mathematics for property theorists.
Philosophical Studies 49: 177–86.
[18]
Reinhardt, William N.: 1980. Satisfaction deﬁnitions and axioms of inﬁnity in a theory
of properties with necessity operator. In: A. I. Arruda et al. (eds.), Mathematical Logic
in Latin America, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 267–303.
[19]
Shoemaker, Sidney: 1980. Properties and inductive projectability. In: L. J. Cohen and
M. Hesse (eds.), Applications of Inductive Logic. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 291–320 .
[20]
Sturm, Holger: Properties in Natural Ontology: An Axiomatic Approach, forthcoming.
[21]
Swoyer, Chris: 1999. How ontology might be possible: explanation and inference in
metaphysics. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 23: 100–131.

Our Conception of Properties
609
[22]
Swoyer, Chris: 2000. Properties. Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 42ff.
[23]
Turner, Raymond: 1987.A theory of properties. Journal of Symbolic Logic 52: 455–72.
Fachgruppe Philosophie
Universität Konstanz
78457 Konstanz
Germany
E-mail: Holger.Sturm@uni-konstanz.de


The Many Lives of Ebenezer Wilkes Smith
Vann McGee
Abstract. Peter Unger’s “Problem of the Many” is anticipated in Bertrand Russell’s 1923
article, “Vagueness.” Unger’s argument depends on principles about the composition of bodies
that, while highly plausible, are not beyond dispute. Russell’s variant does not depend on the
same principles, looking instead to the lack of a precise answer to the question when a human
life begins or ends. By foreclosing a possible escape from Unger’s conclusion, Russell’s version
of the argument provides, it is argued, persuasive evidence for the inscrutability of reference.
Science tells us that a material body, such as the mountain Kilimanjaro, is made up
out of atoms. Precisely which atoms will vary from time to time, but at each moment
since the mountain’s creation there have been atoms that made up Kilimanjaro. (There
have been various subatomic odds and ends as well, but we may ignore them. Also,
let me take it for granted that, if Kilimanjaro contains part of an atom, it contains the
whole thing.)
That there is a set consisting of the atoms that make up Kilimanjaro is perhaps not
obvious. We are mainly used to talking about sets in the context of pure mathematics,
where the sets we discuss are, by and large, the extensions of fully precise predicates.
“Is an atom that is now part of Kilimanjaro” is an imprecise predicate, and we might
be inclined to suppose that such predicates lack extensions. However, science teaches
us that there is now at least one atom in Kilimanjaro and that there are fewer than 10100
of them, and these two facts1 entail “(∃set x)(∀y)(y ∈x ↔y is an atom that is now
part of Kilimanjaro),” with the aid of principles of set construction so rudimentary that
no one who is willing to abide talk about sets at all is going to deny them:
(∀x)(∃set y)(∀z)(z ∈y ↔z = x).
Unit sets.
(∀set x)(∀set y)(∃set z)(∀w)(w ∈z ↔(w ∈x ∨w ∈y)).
Pairwise unions.
Saying which atoms are elements of {x| x is an atom that is now part of Kiliman-
jaro} is no easy endeavor. There are quite a few atoms that unmistakably are parts of
Kilimanjaro, and quite a few more that unmistakably aren’t, but there is no sharp geo-
logical border where Kilimanjaro leaves off and the surrounding countryside begins.
1We understand “There are at least n” and “There are fewer than n” to be cashed out in terms of
quantiﬁcation theory. “There is least one F” is rendered “(∃x)Fx.” “There are at least n + 1 Fs” is
“(∃y)(Fy ∧there are at least n Fs other than y).” “There are fewer than n Fs” is “∼There are at least n
Fs.”

612
V. McGee
Not every way of partitioning the atoms that aren’t either clearly inside or clearly out-
side Kilimanjaro results in a plausible candidate for {x| x is an atom that is now part
of Kilimanjaro}. For example, we would expect the atoms that make up Kilimanjaro
to be contiguous. This is so because Kilimanjaro is a material body, and disconnected
clumps of atoms don’t make up a material body. Taking such considerations into ac-
count, however, we still ﬁnd quite a large number of smooth, simple closed curves that
enclose a plausible candidate for {x| x is an atom that is now part of Kilimanjaro}, with
no reason to suppose that one of the enclosed sets is a better candidate than another.
Every simple closed curve through the Tanzanian countryside that doesn’t cut
through any atoms2 divides Tanzania into two parts, the part inside the curve and the
part outside.3 In particular, each of our candidate borders of Kilimanjaro encloses part
of Tanzania. Different curves enclose different parts of Tanzania, at least if they differ
enough so that one contains an atom that the other excludes. Kilimanjaro is part of
Tanzania, but there doesn’t appear to be anything, either in the geology of Kilimanjaro
or the use of “Kilimanjaro” that determines precisely which part it is. On the contrary,
there appear to be countless billions of parts of Tanzania that are all perfectly good
candidates for what the name “Kilimanjaro” refers to.
This is a version of Peter Unger’s “Problem of the Many,” which has emerged as
an immensely powerful argument for the inscrutability of reference. It is an argument
of breathtaking breadth. It applies not just to names of mountains but also to names of
people, countries, battles, bridges, and galaxies. It applies to demonstratives, as seen,
for example, when Ernest points toward a snow-capped mountain and says, “That is
the tallest mounting in Africa.” It applies to deﬁnite descriptions, like “the tallest
mountain in Africa,” and it applies to count nouns as well as singular terms. The
geography books tell us that there is exactly one mountain at 3.07˚ S., 37.35˚ E., but
there isn’t anything that picks out exactly one of the individuals at that location as the
local referent of “mountain.”
Unger’sproblemhasdeepconsequences. Folksemanticssupposesthat, inorderfor
a sentence like “The ice pack atop Kilimanjaro is being depleted by global warming”
to be true, speakers’ usage (broadly understood) has to pick out a unique individual
as the referent of “Kilimanjaro.” Unger’s argument shows that this demand cannot be
met. The consequences for our commonsense understanding of de re indirect speech
reports and propositional attitude attributions are even more disturbing. In order for
Ernest to have a de re belief regarding Kilimanjaro that it is the tallest mountain in
Africa, there need to be some features of his mental state, and of the way his mental
state is situated in his body and environment, that single out a particular individual as
the thing his belief is about. Or so it would seem; but the problem of the many shows
that there are no such features.
The thesis that the problem of the many should be thought of as evidence for the
inscrutability of reference, rather than, as Unger himself likes to think of it, as evidence
2We exclude candidate borders that cut through atoms because of our assumption that the constituents
of Kilimanjaro are whole atoms.
3This is the Jordan curve theorem.

The Many Lives of Ebenezer Wilkes Smith
613
that there are no people or mountains, has been developed by Brian McLaughlin and
me at some length elsewhere [18]; there is no need to repeat the discussion here. Here
I am interested in the origin of the problem. The problem of the many was discovered
by Peter Unger,4 but it seldom happens that an important philosophical idea springs
up out of nowhere. Quite often, a thesis developed by a contemporary philosopher
is anticipated in the work of an earlier philosopher. With surprising regularity, that
philosopher is Russell. So it is with the problem of the many, an early version of
which appears in Russell’s 1923 paper, “Vagueness” [22].
TheexampleRussellusesisthenameofaman, EbenezerWilkesSmith, anditrelies
on the observation that there isn’t an exactly determined point at which Smith’s life
begins or ends to conclude that the name lacks precision. Although Russell expends
only a few lines on the puzzle ([22]: 63), the version he presents is interestingly
different from Unger’s. As we shall see, there are a couple of tiny cracks in Unger’s
argument, not enough to raise a realistic hope that one could escape from Unger’s
conclusion, but enough at least to suggest the possibility. Russell’s version doesn’t
have cracks at the same places.
In addition to the problem of the many, other ideas of contemporary currency
are anticipated in Russell’s “Vagueness,” in particular, the idea that the source of
the paradoxes of vagueness is the use of classical logic. We read, “All traditional
logic habitually assumes that precise symbols are being employed. It is therefore not
applicable to this terrestrial life, but only to an imagined celestial existence” ([22]:
65). It’s surprising to hear Russell say this, because it’s a view one expects to hear
from someone who wants to downplay the costs of employing a nonclassical logic
for use with vague terms, by treating appearances of vagueness as exceptional special
cases. Russell, however, is keenly aware of the ubiquity of vagueness, noting (see [22]:
63) that even our most earnest efforts at scientiﬁc rigor succeed only in reducing, not
eliminating, the imprecision in our speech. Nearly every term of our language has
actual or potential borderline cases, so that, if classical logic requires full precision,
we exceed its jurisdiction every time we step outside the realm of pure mathematics.
This, in turn, means that rigor forbids us to apply classical arithmetic and classical
geometry, which rest atop classical logic, in even the most innocuous counting and
measuring situations. We should resist this outcome if we can, for classical applied
arithmetic has proven to be among the most reliable as well as the most successful of
human scientiﬁc endeavors, and we should be reluctant to give it up just to satisfy the
demands of semantic theory.
Russell argues for the imprecision of logic on the grounds that the logical operators
are vague, since they are deﬁned in terms of “true” and “false,” and “true” and “false”
are vague. This line of argument is unconvincing. It could happen that a term we use
to formulate a deﬁnition has borderline cases as well as clear cases, but that the clear
cases are sufﬁcient to pin down precisely the referent of the deﬁned term. Indeed,
this is the case with the logical connectives, at least according to classical, bivalent
4David Lewis [14], Peter van Inwagen [28], and Samuel Wheeler [29] should also be mentioned.

614
V. McGee
semantics. The fact that some sentences containing “∨” lack determinate truth-values
doesn’t show that “∨” is vague, just as the fact that “the greatest prime factor of the
smallest large integer” lacks a well-deﬁned value doesn’t show that the function that
takes an integer > 1 to its largest prime factor is imprecisely deﬁned. Indeed, we
can show that the largest-prime-factor function is speciﬁed precisely (assuming, for
argument, that Arabic numerals are precise), by noting that each possible input to the
function is rigidly denoted by a precise name, and each result of substituting such
a precise name into “the largest prime factor of__” uniquely determines a precisely
nameable output. So any imprecision that occurs in a phrase of the form “the largest
prime factor of__ ” must be the fault of the term that ﬁlls in the blank. The situation is
similar with the truth function “∨.” We can ﬁnd both sentences that are unequivocally
true and sentences that are unequivocally false to plug into the blanks in “__∨__,” and
the result of doing so invariably yields a sentence that is either unequivocally true or
unequivocally false.
The grievance against classical, bivalent semantics is that it doesn’t account for
vagueness. In insisting that, no matter what amount of hair Harry has on his head,
“Harry is bald” is either true or false—a conclusion that follows logically from “‘Harry
is bald’ is true if and only if Harry is bald” and “‘Harry is bald’ is false if and only if
Harry is not bald”—classical semantics doesn’t deny that Harry is a borderline case
of “bald.” Bivalence only implies precision if we assume some principle that ensures
that, if “Harry if bald” is true, then the thoughts and practices of the community
of speakers, together with the conﬁguration of hairs on Harry’s head, make it true,
and no such principle is to be found in classical semantics as presented in Tarski’s
Wahrheitsbegriff. The trouble with classical semantics isn’t that it denies vagueness
but that it ignores it, treating vague and precise predicates just the same way.
To remedy this deﬁciency while maintaining classical logic, three approaches have
been proposed:
(1) To maintain classical semantics, just as it is, but to add a new operator “Deter-
minately,” so that, if Harry is a borderline case of “bald,” Harry will be either
bald or not bald, but he won’t be either determinately bald or determinately
not bald, and “Harry is bald” will be either true or false, but it won’t be either
determinately true or determinately false. The classical rules of inference are
both truth-preserving and determinate-truth-preserving.
(2) To allow truth value gaps, so that, if Harry is a borderline case of “bald,” “Harry
is bald” will be neither true nor false. The classical rules are truth-preserving.
(3) To employ a many-valued logic, with truth values taken from a complete5
Boolean algebra, and logical operators understood compositionally, so that,
5Completeness is a stronger hypothesis than we really need. We assume it because it makes the action
of the quantiﬁers so easy to describe. Let’s call a function taking individuals to truth values a unary Fregean
concept. The existential quantiﬁer designates the operator taking a unary Fregean concept to the supremum
of its range, while the universal quantiﬁer takes it to the inﬁmum of its range. Completeness ensures that
these suprema and inﬁma are deﬁned. The quantiﬁers take n + 1-ary Fregean concepts to n-ary Fregean

The Many Lives of Ebenezer Wilkes Smith
615
for example, the truth value of a disjunction is the sum of the truth values of
its disjuncts. If Harry is a borderline case, “Harry is bald” will have a truth
value intermediate between 1 (truth) and 0 (falsity). If Harry and Jim are both
borderline cases of “bald,” but Harry has markedly less hair than Jim, then the
truth value of “Harry is bald” will be greater than that of “Jim is bald.” The
truth value of the conclusion of a classically valid argument will be greater than
or equal to the inﬁmum of the truth values of its premises.
The key idea that we need to implement any of these proposals is that the usage of
a community of speakers doesn’t single out a unique intended model of the language.
Instead, it picks out a family of acceptable models.
“Models” here are ordinary
classical models, as described, for example, in [2]. A model assigns a set of n-tuples
to each n-place predicate. For arbitrary models, this set can be assigned arbitrarily,
but for acceptable models, the choices are restricted. People who are deﬁnitely bald
will be in the set assigned to “bald” in each acceptable model. People and things
that are deﬁnitely not bald will be outside the set an acceptable model assigns to
“bald.” The range of intermediate cases—what Russell calls the “penumbra”—will
be adjudicated by different acceptable models in different ways, subject to constraints
like the following: Any acceptable model that puts Jim into the set assigned to “bald”
and puts ⟨Harry, Jim⟩into the set assigned to “has less hair (on his scalp) than” will
put Harry into the set assigned to “bald.”
On the bivalent approach, a sentence is determinately true if and only if it is true
in all the acceptable models. On the truth-value-gaps approach, such sentences are
simply true. The many-valued approach takes the truth value of a sentence to be the
set of acceptable models in which it is true, deﬁning the sum of two such sets to be
their union, the product to be their intersection, and so on.
Each approach permits us to introduce an operator “Determinately,” understood so
that Determinately φ says that φ is true in every acceptable model.6 More generally,
an open sentence with n free variables has an extension, consisting of n-tuples that def-
initely satisfy the formula; an antiextension, consisting of n-tuples that deﬁnitely fail
to satisfy the formula; and a penumbra. n-tuples in the extension of φ satisfy Determi-
nately φ. “Determinately” acts a lot like “2,” with acceptable models playing the role
of possible worlds. In particular, precise names—names that denote the same thing
in each acceptable model—play a role analogous to that played by rigid designators
in modal logic. Precise names can be substituted into the scope of “Determinately,”
just as proper names can be substituted into the scope of modal operators. If c is a
precise name of a, then Determinately φ(c) holds just in case a is in the extension
of φ. Precise names can be used to instantiate universal generalizations containing
“Determinately”; imprecise names cannot. Thus, using “It is determinate whether ψ”
concepts in an analogous way. The identity sign designates the binary Fregean concept taking unlike ordered
pairs to 0 and pairs of the form ⟨a, a⟩to 1.
6Because the distinction between acceptable and unacceptable models is imprecise, there will be cases
in which it is indeterminate whether it is indeterminate whether φ. As we ascend the Tarski hierarchy of
languages, we may expect to encounter vagueness all the way up; see [17]: appendix.

616
V. McGee
as an abbreviation for (Determinately ψ ∨Determinately ∼ψ),
(∀x)(∀y)(x and y are integers > 1 →it is determinate whether y
is the largest prime factor of x)
and
The smallest large integer is an integer > 1
do not entail:
(∀y)(it is determinate whether y is the largest prime
factor of the smallest large integer).
Everyday names of ordinary objects—names like “Kilimanjaro,” “the tallest moun-
tain in Africa,” and “Ebenezer Wilkes Smith”—are imprecise.
This was shown
by Gareth Evans in a famous one-page article [3].7 The argument is highly com-
pressed and requires quite a bit of reconstruction,8 but I’ll try my best.
Let a1,
a2, a3,. . . , aN be a list by precise names of all the Kilimanjaro candidates, that is,
of all the mountainlike individuals that we get by adjudicating the disputed atoms
on Kilimanjaro’s border in every possible way.
Thus we have “Kilimanjaro
=
a1 ∨Kilimanjaro = a2 ∨Kilimanjaro = a3 ∨· · · ∨Kilimanjaro = aN,” be-
cause the ais name all the candidates. We also have the law of logic “(∀x)(∀y)(x =
y →Determinately x = y)”, derived from “(∀x) Determinately x = x” and the iden-
tity axiom “(∀x)(∀y)(x = y →Determinately x = x ↔Determinately x = y).”
By hypothesis, each of the ais is precise; so we can substitute ai into the scope of
“Determinately” to obtain “(∀x)(x = ai →Determinately x = ai).” Assuming, for
reductio ad absurdum, that “Kilimanjaro” is precise, we can substitute again to derive
“(Kilimanjaro = ai →Determinately Kilimanjaro = ai).” Thus we obtain the ab-
surd conclusion,“Determinately Kilimanjaro = a1 ∨Determinately Kilimanjaro =
a2 ∨Determinately Kilimanjaro = a3 ∨· · · ∨Determinately Kilimanjaro = aN.”
“ai= Kilimanjaro” is indeterminate. “=” is precise—it denotes the same set of
pairs in every acceptable model (let us agree to ignore indeterminacy at the edge of
the domain of quantiﬁcation). “ai” is precise, by hypothesis. So the only place the
indeterminacy can come from is “Kilimanjaro.”
The argument assumes that there are ﬁnitely many Kilimanjaro candidates and
that each of them can be named precisely, but these assumptions are inessential. If
the collection C includes all the Kilimanjaro candidates, we have “(∃x)(x ∈C ∧
7In regarding Evan’s argument this way, I am taking liberties with the text, inasmuch as Evans himself
takes his topic question to be “Can there be vague objects?” The reason I prefer to interpret the paper so
that its central issue is the vagueness of names, rather than the vagueness of objects is that I am inclined to
agree with Russell in regarding the thesis that there are vague objects, if it is taken literally, as a suggestion
we can dismiss out of hand. “Vagueness and precision alike,” he says ([22]: 62), “are characteristics which
can only belong to a representation, of which language is an example. They have to do with the relation
between a representation and that which it represents. Apart from representation, whether cognitive or
mechanical, there can be no such thing as vagueness or precision; things are what there are, and there is an
end of it.” See [8]: ch. 1.
8In this, I was helped by [13], [1], and [6]. See also [16].

The Many Lives of Ebenezer Wilkes Smith
617
Kilimanjaro = x)”. Assuming that “Kilimanjaro” is precise, we can substitute it
into the scope of “Determinately” in a law of logic to obtain “(∀y)(Kilimanjaro =
y →Determinately Kilimanjaro = y),” from which we derive the absurd conclusion
“(∃x)(x ∈C ∧Determinately Kilimanjaro = x).”
The reconstructed Evans argument shows that, if there are many candidates for
what “Kilimanjaro” refers to, then “Kilimanjaro” is not precise. The only way “Kili-
manjaro” can be precise will be if there is but a single candidate, so that, of the various
things9 that are present at 3.07˚ S., 37.35˚ E., there is only one that closely resem-
bles a mountain. We have already seen that there are numerous apt candidates for
{x|x is an atom that is now part of Kilimanjaro}. The single-candidate thesis would
have it that exactly one of these many sets constitutes an individual;10 or if there is a
sense of “constitute” in which many of the candidate sets constitute individuals, it is
sharply different from the way sets of atoms constitute mountains. It is determined
that exactly one set constitutes an individual (in the right sort of way), but it isn’t
determined which set that is; this is because the constitution relation is vague. If B1
and B2 are two different candidates for Kilimanjaro’s border, then there is a sense
of “constitute” in which the stuff inside B1 constitutes an individual, and a different
sense in which that same individual is constituted by the stuff inside B2, but there is
no sense of “constitute” (or, at least, no sense of “constitute” that closely resembles
the sense in which a mountain is constituted by the stuff inside it) in which both the
stuff inside B1 and the stuff inside B2 constitute individuals.11 If our understanding
of the relation of parts and wholes is governed by the principles of mereology, as
developed by Le´sniewski [10] and by Goodman and Leonard [5], and if we suppose
that a mountain is composed of a lot of tiny parts,12 then the single-candidate thesis
9I intend to use the words “thing,” “entity,” and “individual” as widely as possible, so that everything is
thing, everything is an entity, and everything is an individual, and there isn’t anything that isn’t a thing, an
individual, and an entity.
10I suppose one ought not really to say that a set of atoms constitutes a mountain, but rather that the
members of the set constitute a mountain; but the extra verbiage is tiresome.
11When I speak of the “single-candidate view,” the position I have in mind is one that uses the hypothesis
that there aren’t any other personlike things in the immediate vicinty of Ebenezer Wilkes Smith to evade
the nasty apparent consequences of Unger’s problem. By “consequences” here I mean consequences by
ordinary classical logic. To respond to the paradoxes of vagueness by abandoning classical logic seems
like a bad idea, for reasons given in ([30]: ch. 4), and ([15]: ch. 4); and to respond by both adopting
single-candidate metaphysics and abandoning classical logic seems like overkill. I may reasonably be
accused of battling an imaginary opponent here, inasmuch as no one I know of has explicitly espoused the
single-candidate view, although, in different ways, [31], [7], and [8] have come close. Conversations with
Jónsson have been especially useful in helping me understand the view’s ramiﬁcations.
12These tiny parts won’t be atoms, in the chemist’s sense of “atom.” (They might or might not be atoms in
the mereologist’s sense.) If A is a chemist’s atom that is now part of Kilimanjaro (according to our everyday
way of speaking about parts) but that, due to erosion, will not be part of Kilimanjaro a million years from
now, then a million years from now, the mereological sum Kilimanjaro+A will include a part that won’t be
part of Kilimanjaro, so Kilimanjaro+A is distinct from Kilimanjaro. This was ﬁrst pointed out to me by
Kit Fine, although I don’t know whether it was he who ﬁrst noticed it. The assumption that Kilimanjaro is
composed of tiny parts is nontrivial. Like everyone else, Judith Thomson believes that Kilimanjaro is made
up out of tiny parts, if “part” is understood in the everyday sense, but she thinks that, in the mereologist’s
technical usage, Kilimanjaro doesn’t have any proper parts. She accepts the axioms of mereology, although

618
V. McGee
will founder at the outset. Kilimanjaro is the mereological sum of its tiny parts, and
the axioms of mereology ensure that there are plentiful other mereological sums of
tiny parts that differ from Kilimanjaro only very slightly. But when mereologists talk
about parts and wholes, they employ a technical usage that diverges from ordinary
English, most obviously in the fact that ordinary usage allows us to speak of a thing
losing old parts and acquiring new ones, so that an atom might be part of Kilimanjaro
now but, due to erosion, not a part of it a million years from now. Mereology makes
no such allowance.
Mereology is sufﬁcient, but it isn’t necessary to get the problem of the many
going. Unger’s argument will go through on almost any conception of wholes and
parts, as long as it provides that familiar objects like Kilimanjaro and Ebenezer Wilkes
Smith are made up of many tiny parts and that we get wholes by putting together tiny
parts in fairly arbitrary ways. We can thwart Unger’s argument by adopting the single-
candidate hypothesis, according to which the ways in which tiny pieces can go together
to make wholes is highly restricted.
Folk semantics has it that, whenever the sentence obtained by substituting the
singular term τ into “x exists” is true, τ refers, and, moreover, in order for τ to
refer, the activities of the community of speakers have to single out a particular ob-
ject as τ’s referent. No one who acknowledges semantic indeterminacy13 (and ac-
cepts classical logic) is going to uphold these principles without restriction. “The
shortest tall man” (assuming no ties in height), “the smallest large number,” and
“{x|x is an atom that is currently part of Kilimanjaro}” are counterexamples.
The
single-candidate thesis can save proper names from indeterminacy, perhaps, but, inas-
much as we are going to have indeterminately referring singular terms anyway, if that
was all the thesis got us, it would seem a lot of effort for little gain.
The real attraction of the single-candidate thesis is that it promises to enable us to
uphold the natural way of drawing the distinction between de dicto and de re propo-
sitional attitude attributions and indirect speech reports. On a de dicto or notional
reading of “Ralph believes someone is a spy,” the content of Ralph’s belief is an exis-
tential claim that can be symbolized “(∃x)x is a spy.” On a de re or relational reading,
some particular individual is picked out as the object of Ralph’s belief; (∃x)(Ralph
believes that x is a spy). See [20]. One popular account has it that the content of
Ralph’s belief is a singular proposition, obtained by supplying a suspected espionage
agent as argument to the propositional function described by the open sentence “that
x is a spy.”
Appealing as this account may be, it cannot be correct, if Unger is right about
inscrutability of reference, for there isn’t anything in Ralph’s belief state (even when
we take account of how Ralph’s beliefs are situated in his body and how his body is
she doesn’t think the theory is any use in describing the parts of bodies; bodies are mereological atoms, in
her view. Mereology proves its worth in describing the parts of events; see [24].
13Timothy Williamson [30] denies that there is semantic indeterminacy. He thinks linguistic usage
establishes a sharp boundary for every meaningful term, although speakers are often unable to discern the
boundary.

The Many Lives of Ebenezer Wilkes Smith
619
situated in his environment) that picks out a unique individual as the individual his
belief is about. Suppose that Ralph is correct in the de dicto belief that there is, within
the relevant context, one and only one man in a brown hat, and that that man is a spy,
and suppose further that the germane brown-hatted man is Bernard J. Ortcutt. Even
so, there isn’t anything in Ralph’s belief state that ensures that the content of his belief
is the true singular proposition we get by supplying Ortcutt as an argument to “that x is
a spy,” rather than one of the innumerable false propositions we get by supplying rival
Ortcutt-candidates. (Keep in mind that, on the standard view, it is Ortcutt himself,
and not Ortcutt under a description or Ortcutt under a mode of presentation that is a
component of the true singular proposition.) Ralph points an accusatory ﬁnger and
says, “He is a spy,” but there isn’t anything in Ralph’s gesture or its concomitant
mental state that would make it correct to say (if de re indirect speech reports require
determinate referents) that Ralph said of Ortcutt that he was a spy.
As a device for salvaging the natural account of de re propositional attitude at-
tributions and indirect speech reports, the single-candidate hypothesis has the feel of
wishful thinking. The problem of the many is perplexing to our commonplace ideas
about how language is linked to the world, and we can avoid its discomforts if we
assume that nature is cooperative enough to provide exactly one object for each term
that we ordinarily think of as a denoting proper name. But why should we think nature
would be so kind?
Lewis ([12]: 211–123) makes a complaint against the single-candidate doctrine,
although, regrettably, he doesn’t ﬁll in the details. If we start with a mountain and
repeatedly perform the operation of removing a single atom from its surface, we’ll
eventually obtain something that is clearly not a mountain. This implies by logic that,
at some stage, we have removed a single atom from a mountain and obtained something
that’s not a mountain. It does not, however, imply that “mountain” has a sharp border.
At a certain stage, we remove an atom from a mountain, and we get something that,
while not a mountain, is so very much like a mountain as to be indistinguishable from
one. According to the single-candidate view, if we continue removing atoms one at a
time from what used to be our mountain, eventually we remove a single atom from a
thing, and we’re left with a bunch of atoms that don’t constitute anything at all. This
time, however, we are stuck with a sharp boundary. The alternative—that removing
the atom leaves us with something that, while not existing, enjoys a status so close to
being as to be nearly indistinguishable from being—is unintelligible.
Let us return to EbenezerWilkes Smith. Russell reﬂects that neither birth nor death
(even what we call “sudden death”) is an instantaneous process, so that there will be
stages at the beginning and the end of Smith’s life at which it isn’t determined whether
or not the name “Ebenezer Wilkes Smith” is applicable. So far, we can explain what’s
going on by pointing out that the word “applicable” is vague. But now, imagine a
situation in which I point at the ﬁgure in Smith’s bed, intending to point to Smith, and
I say, “That is Ebenezer Wilkes Smith.” If, unknown to me, Smith is in extremis, it
may be that I speak at a stage at which it is indeterminate whether what I say is true.
But now consider. On the single-candidate model, demonstratives, when used with the

620
V. McGee
level of precision ordinarily thought to constitute a successful act of demonstration,
aren’t vague. “Ebenezer Wilkes Smith” isn’t vague. Identity, we have seen already,
isn’t vague. The sentence is indeterminate, yet there isn’t any place in the sentence
where indeterminacy creeps in.
If we think of a person as made up of temporal stages, we can assimilate the
“Ebenezer Wilkes Smith” example to the “Kilimanjaro” example. It is indeterminate
whether the present moment’s temporal slice of the object I’m pointing to on the bed
is part of Smith. But the example doesn’t depend on the temporal-stage theory or
any other theory of parts. We indicate our Smith-candidate by pointing to it, rather
than by saying what its parts are. This makes the crucial difference that the verb in
the indeterminate sentence isn’t “constitutes,” which is vague, but the “is” of identity,
which is precise.
The problem of the many requires that, for each ordinary name of an ordinary
thing, there be candidates in great profusion for what the name refers to. Without
some substantial metaphysics of temporal stages, the Smith example doesn’t give us
that. It gives us at least two candidates. A proponent of the single-candidate thesis
might contend that there are only two plausible candidates for what I refer to when I
point and say “that.” If Smith were unmistakably alive, I would be referring to Smith,
so what I say would be true. If Smith were undeniably dead, then I would be referring
to Smith’s body, and since Smith’s body outlasts Smith, what I say wouldn’t be true.
As it is, however, my statement is ambiguous between the true proposition that Smith
is Smith and the false proposition that Smith’s body is Smith, so what I have said lacks
a determinate truth value.
The Smith example doesn’t directly refute the single-candidate hypothesis, but
it does the next best thing. It sweeps away our motives for taking the hypothesis
seriously in the ﬁrst place. The primary appeal of the hypothesis is that it purports to
enable us to hold on to the natural account of de re propositional attitude and indirect
speech reports. A secondary motive it that it upholds the folk-semantic account of
the workings of what we ordinarily regard as denoting proper names and successfully
employed demonstratives. But in the Smith example, the hypothesis doesn’t fulﬁll
either promise.
Russell has given us only a single example, but a single clear example is all we
ever really need, and it’s hard to imagine a clearer example of a de re belief than
my belief of the individual I’m pointing to that it’s Ebenezer Wilkes Smith. The
individual my belief is about is right before my eyes, and I’m pointing directly at it.
No one who denies that there is an x such that I say that x is Ebenezer Wilkes Smith
because I believe that x is Ebenezer Wilkes Smith can credibly claim to uphold our
commonsense understanding of de re belief and speech reports. But if there is an
x such that I have said that x is Ebenezer Wilkes Smith because I believe that x is
Ebenezer Wilkes Smith, then it is sometimes correct to say of a thing that a speaker
has ascribed an attribute to it, even though the speaker’s speech act hasn’t singled
out a particular thing as his referent, and it is sometimes possible for a thinker to
believe of a thing that it has a certain attribute even though the speaker’s mental state

The Many Lives of Ebenezer Wilkes Smith
621
doesn’t single out a particular individual as the object of his thought. The single-
candidate theorist faces a dilemma. Either she denies the de re description of what
I have said, in which case she forfeits her claim to be upholding our commonsense
understanding of de re indirect speech reports, or she admits that sometimes a de re
indirect speech report can be correct even though the speaker’s statement doesn’t have
a uniquely determined referent. Similarly for beliefs. Either she denies the de re
description of what I believed, in which case she abandons her claim to have captured
our naive intuitions about de re mental attitude attributions, or she admits that a de
re belief report can sometimes be correct even though there isn’t any particular thing
that the thinker has in mind. But once we allow that true de re indirect speech and
propositional attitude reports that lack uniquely determined referents can be found at
least occasionally, we have no compelling reason to presume that such reports cannot
be found routinely. The promise of the single-candidate hypothesis was that it would
let us uphold the thought that there can never be a true de re report without a uniquely
determined object the report is about. Now that we see that this thought cannot be
sustained even with the single-candidate hypothesis, the hypothesis loses its appeal.
The conclusion we are driven to is one we might also have reached, or so I be-
lieve, by pursuing the line of argument in Chapter Two of Word and Object [21].
Inscrutability of reference is a fact of life. Get used to it.
Acknowledgement. A version of this paper was read at the centenary conference
on Russell’s paradox in Munich, organized by Godehard Link and Ulrich Albert.
Discussion there was quite valuable. I also enjoyed helpful conversations with Brian
McLaughlin, Ólafur Jónsson, and Judith Thomson.
References
[1]
Burgess, John A.: 1989. Vague identity: Evans misrepresented. Analysis 49: 112–119.
[2]
Chang, Chen Chung, and H. Jerome Keisler: 1990. Model Theory, 3rd edition. Amster-
dam: North-Holland.
[3]
Evans, Gareth: 1978. Can there be vague objects? Analysis 38: 208. Reprinted in [9]:
317.
[4]
Fine, Kit: 1975. Vagueness, truth, and logic. Synthese 30: 265–300. Reprinted in [9]:
119–50.
[5]
Goodman, Nelson, and Henry Leonard: 1940. The calculus of individuals and its uses.
Journal of Symbolic Logic 5: 45–55.
[6]
Heck, Jr., Richard G.: 1993. A note on the logic of (higher-order) vagueness. Analysis
53: 201–208.
[7]
Johnston, Mark: 1992. Constitution is not identity. Mind 101: 89–105.
[8]
Jónsson, Ólafur P.: 2001. Vague Objects. Cambridge, MA: MIT doctoral dissertation.

622
V. McGee
[9]
Keefe, Rosanna, and Peter Smith (eds.): 1996. Vagueness: A Reader. Cambridge, MA
and London: MIT Press.
[10]
Le´sniewski, Stanisław: 1927–1931. O podstawach matematyki. Przeglad Filozoﬁczny
(30: 164–206); (31: 261–291); (32: 60–101); (33: 77–105) and (34: 142–170).Abridged
English translation: Topoi 2 (1989): 3–52.
[11]
Lewis, David K.: 1970. General semantics. Synthese 22: 18–67. Reprinted in Lewis,
David K.: 1983. Philosophical Papers, vol. 1. NewYork: Oxford University Press, 189–
229.
[12]
Lewis, David K.: 1986. On the Plurality of Worlds. Oxford and Cambridge, MA: Oxford
University Press.
[13]
Lewis, David K.: 1988. Vague identity: Evans misunderstood. Analysis 48: 128–130.
Reprinted in [9]: 318–320.
[14]
Lewis, David K.: 1993. Many but almost one. In: J. Bacon et al. (eds.), Ontology,
Causality, and Mind, New York: Cambridge University Press, 23–38.
[15]
McGee, Vann: 1991. Truth, Vagueness, and Paradox: An Essay on the Logic of Truth.
Indianapolis: Hackett.
[16]
McGee, Vann: 1997. Kilimanjaro. In: A. Kazmi (ed.), Meaning and Reference. Calgary:
University of Calgary Press. Canadian Journal of Philosophy, supplementary vol. 25:
141–63.
[17]
McGee, Vann, and Brian P. McLaughlin: 1995. Distinctions without a difference. South-
ern Journal of Philosophy 33 supp.: 203–252.
[18]
McGee, Vann, and Brian P. McLaughlin: 2000. The lessons of the many. Philosophical
Topics. 28: 129–151.
[19]
Mehlberg, Henryk: 1958. The Reach of Science. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Excerpt printed in [9]: 85–88.
[20]
Quine, Willard V.: 1956. Quantiﬁers and propositional attitudes. Journal of Philosophy
53: 177–86. Reprinted in: Quine, Willard V.: 1966 The Ways of Paradox. New York:
Random House, 183–94.
[21]
Quine, Willard V.: 1960. Word and Object. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
[22]
Russell, Bertrand: 1923. Vagueness. Australasian Journal of Philosophy and Psychology
1: 84–92. Reprinted in [9]: 61–68.
[23] Tarski, Alfred: 1935. Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen. Studia Log-
ica 1: 261–405. English translation by J. H. Woodger in Tarski, Alfred: 1983. Logic,
Semantics, Metamathematics, 2nd edition. Indianapolis: Hackett, 152–278.
[24] Thomson, Judith J.: 1998. The statue and the clay. Noˆus 32: 149–173.
[25]
Unger, Peter: 1979. I do not exist. In: G. MacDonald (ed.), Perception and Identity,
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 235–51.
[26]
Unger, Peter: 1980. The problem of the many. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 5: 411–67.
[27] Van Fraassen, Bas C.: 1966. Singular terms, truth value gaps, and free logic. Journal of
Philosophy 63: 464–95.

The Many Lives of Ebenezer Wilkes Smith
623
[28] Van Inwagen, Peter: 1990. Material Beings. Ithaca, NY: Cornell.
[29] Wheeler, Samuel C.: 1979. On that which is not. Synthese 41: 155–173.
[30] Williamson, Timothy: 1994. Vagueness. London: Routledge.
[31]
Zadeh, Lofti: 1975. Fuzzy sets and approximate reasoning. Synthese 30: 407–428.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Department of Linguistics & Philosophy
77 Massachusetts Ave., Room 32-D931
Cambridge, MA 02139
USA
E-mail: vmcgee@MIT.EDU


What Makes Expressions Meaningful?
A Reﬂection on Contexts and Actions
Albert Visser
Abstract. This paper is about contexts and linguistic actions. Various intuitions are presented
concerning contexts. I consider the idea that sentences are the appropriate contexts to make
words meaningful. I argue against a version of the context principle loosely based on what
Dummett calls a truistic interpretation of the slogan: the sentence is the unit of meaning.
Finally, I draw attention to the existence of sub-sentential expressions that are used for global
discourse actions.
Before we begin our banquet, I would like to say a few words. And here they are:
Nitwit! Blubber! Oddment! Tweak! Thank you!
Albus Dumbledore
1. Introduction
In this paper I discuss the question: what kind of thing makes an expression mean-
ingful? The leading idea is that expressions are made meaningful by being uttered in
appropriate contexts. But, then, what are utterances and what are contexts?
In section 2, I introduce various intuitions concerning context and action. Some
context principles are presented and a distinction is introduced between utterances and
pre-utterances.
In section 3, I discuss the question whether the sentence has a primary role to play
as meaning-conveying context. I argue against a version of Frege’s context principle.
The principle that I (try to) refute is loosely based on a supposed truism, discussed
by Dummett in [3], to the effect that the sentence is the unit of meaning. I feel that a
careful refutation of such principles is important, because adherence to such a principle
may form an obstacle to a proper understanding of discourse and discourse actions.
Moreover, forcing sentences into a role they are not meant to play, obscures the nature
of sentences as units of local discourse organization.
Finally, in section 4, I argue that uses of sub-sentential expressions may have trans-
sentential roles. This section is directly related to ideas from Dynamic Predicate Logic
and Discourse Representation Theory. I will, however, give no technical realizations
of the ideas sketched.

626
A. Visser
Conventions: I will use double quotes, italics or display when expressions are men-
tioned. I have no extra conventions for distinguishing, for instance, mention of a string
of letters from mention of a word. In cases where it counts, I will simply use expres-
sions like “the Dutch word “verﬂucht””, etc. I will use italics and display when text
is quoted. Both italics and single quotes will be used for a variety of further purposes.
Especially, the use of italics is somewhat overloaded. I hope that the context will
resolve ambiguities in all cases.
2. Text in Context
In this section, I introduce various intuitions concerning context. I discuss, in passing,
the notion of utterance.
2.1. Context & Language
Let us look at an exchange of letters between a Roman father and his son: ﬁlius:
rus eo. pater: i. (Allegedly, this is the shortest exchange of letters ever.) This
translates into something like: son: I’m going to the country. father: do go. I don’t
know how many angels can dance on a needle’s point, but surely lots of things can
occur at the same place in a text. Apparently “i” is/carries: an assertion/speech act,
a text/discourse, a sentence, a word, a syllable, a morpheme, a letter, a visible item.
Note that it is the Latin word “i” that is made present here and not the English
word “I”. Clearly, the physical item present on the page does not intrinsically carry all
other items. Something extra is needed. This something is given with the utterance
situation. I will call this something: context1. Different items in the list demand
different ‘parts’ or ‘aspects’ of the utterance situation for their individuation. For
example, the German word “verﬂucht” (damned) is written in the same letters as the
Dutch word “verﬂucht” (smell of paint). Yet, they are quite different words. Thus,
if we compare a German (written) utterance of “verﬂucht” and a Dutch (written)
utterance of “verﬂucht”, I would be inclined to believe that the individual aspects of
these utterances that are relevant for making the string of letters “verﬂucht” available
are of the same type. However, the aspects that are relevant for making the words
available cannot be of the same type.
Context1saren’talwaysindividuatingcontexts. E.g., acontextprovidesthespeaker,
the time of speech, … . Thus, it contributes to the interpretation of the words “I” and
“now”. We can study such contexts taking the occurrence of the words for granted, as
is done in the logical literature following Kaplan’s pioneering paper, see [24]. Here
are two basic intuitions.
1. Context1 is co-individuated with the material it makes present.

What Makes Expressions Meaningful?
627
2. Context1 is of a different kind than the material it makes present.
Our ﬁrst intuition has non-reductionist implications. Assuming that the material made
available by a context is not by itself ‘neutral’, in the sense of unconnected to human
intentionality, the context will not be neutral either. Thus, I do not think that, for
instance, the existence of words has a neutral explanation, if only we consider enough
of their ‘environment’.
Our discussion to this point suggests some possible ‘context principles’.
For
example,
α The fundamental form of language is text in context1.
β An expression only exists in the context1 associated with an utterance.
These proposals are more like schemata for principles than fully articulated principles,
given the unclarity of such expressions as “text” and “utterance”. This schematicity
can have some advantages. E.g., we can understand text at different levels. Text might
be strings of symbols, underlying graphs, strings of words, fully meaningful text, … .
For each level of text the principle stipulates the need for an appropriate notion of
context.
The advantage of principle (β) is that it explicitly relates contexts to intentional
actions, viz., utterances. To give the principle as stated some plausibility, (i) we
must construe the notion of utterance rather broadly. Moreover (ii), as I will show,
utterances might be the wrong ‘level’ to serve for individuation of expressions.
Ad (i): we want to allow utterances that are not necessarily assertions, questions,
etc. We want an address on an envelope or a list of items to be also utterances.
“Salami” as occurring on a shopping list is surely a word. So, by (β), it must be part
of an appropriate utterance.1
Ad (ii): there are problematic utterances, were no author of the utterance seems
to be available. Consider the case of an ATM machine. I put my card in the machine
and the machine asks: (1) do you want to know your balance? At a later time you put
your card in the same machine and the machine asks: (2) do you want to know your
balance? I submit that (1) and (2) are utterances and that they are different utterances.
The utterance determines the addressee and the addressees of (1) and (2) differ. On
the other hand, I do not think that the machine utters these utterances. The machine is
lacking the right kind of intentionality to be the author of an utterance. Also it is not the
programmers of the machine or the directors of the bank who utter these utterances,
as it were indirectly. It would be miraculous if one could produce so many utterances
without doing anything. Rather the programmers made a kind of pre-utterance that is
activated by certain circumstances to produce/instantiate an utterance. Intentionality
comes in at the level of the pre-utterance.
1What about the entries of a dictionary? Are they words? A dictionary lists words, not the items referred
to by the words. We could simply take the entries of the dictionary to be names of the words listed and,
hence, as words.

628
A. Visser
It is attractive to modify our principle and say that the words already exist at the
level of the pre-utterance, even if in the case of theATM example it is somewhat hard to
say what precisely constitutes the pre-utterance. Consider a book in which the author
addresses the reader: dear reader … . With respect to every reader, we seem to have a
differentutterance—eveninthecasewhereweconsidersubsequentreadersofthesame
copy of the book. If we use the modiﬁed principle, we can simply say that the book
contains an occurrence of the word “reader” at the given location. Under the original
principle, we have to say either that in the book an und für sich on that location just a
‘pre-word’ exists that instantiates a word on any occasion of reading, or alternatively
that, with any possible reader, a ﬁxed corresponding utterance is associated—a priori,
so to speak—and, hence that there are a large number of words, one for every possible
reader, already present at that location in the book. I do not think either of these last
two possibilities is particularly attractive. Thus, my preference would be to go for a
modiﬁed version of (β). Perhaps a ﬁrst attempt to deﬁne text could be: a text is an
abstraction from a structured sequence of pre-utterances.
A further question is as follows. Do we ﬁnd different pre-utterances at line n in
different copies of the same book? This discussion is outside of the scope of this
paper. My hunch is that they do contain the same pre-utterance and that, thus, the
occurrences of the word “dear” on the given location in the various copies are strictly
identical.2
In the next subsection, I consider Context in a more technical setting.
2.2. Contexts in Logic & Computer Science
Context1 has an important analogue in Predicate Logic: the context of a formula is an
assignment or a set of assignments. The view of assignments as contexts is exploited
in Dynamic Predicate Logic where meanings are modeled as context modiﬁers. A
formula, modeling an utterance, does not only demand an input assignment for its
interpretation, the process of its interpretation also modiﬁes the input assignment by
creating and ﬁlling certain new variables / ﬁles / discourse referents. See [15], [23]
and [32].
Our notion of Context1 belongs to the (context/text) duality. In technical devel-
opments we also have a (context/content) duality. Let us call the associated notion:
Context2. The most familiar example of context2 is the ﬁbered view on Predicate
Logic. Here the set of free variables is supplied locally with the formula. So the
primary syntactic objects are of the form ⟨V, A⟩, where V is a (ﬁnite) set of variables
and where A is a formula with free variables among the elements of V . The meaning
of ⟨V, A⟩over a model with domain D is of the form is ⟨V, F⟩, where F ⊆DV . In
this framework the quantiﬁers appear as adjoints of the embedding functor:
embV,V ∪{x} : ⟨V, F⟩→⟨V ∪{x}, {g∈DV ∪{x} | (g ↾V ) ∈F}⟩.
2I think some serious rethinking of the familiar notions of type, token and occurrence is long overdue.

What Makes Expressions Meaningful?
629
Another example of context2 is formed by the type assignments to variables in Martin-
Löf type theory.3
Finally, we have, in term rewriting, the notion of context as string / formula / term
with a hole. Let us call this Context3. (See chapter 2, by Jan Willem Klop and Roel
de Vrijer of [40].)
It would be quite satisfying to see what—vom höheren Standpunkt—the connec-
tions between the various notions of context are.
3. Sentences as Contexts?
The most famous principle regarding contexts is Frege’s Context Principle. Here is
Frege’s most well-known formulation of the principle.
▷Nur im Zusammenhange eines Satzes bedeuten die Wörter etwas.
See [11]: §62, 71.
The principle is often paraphrased as: only in the context of a sentence does a word
have meaning. It is hard to see why such a special role should be given to sentences.
Sentences, like words are syntactical items. Why should, with respect to meaning,
one syntactical category be prior to another one? And what kind of priority are we
talking about here?
In this section, I will critically discuss a version of the context principle derived
from an interpretation, due to Dummett, of the slogan: the sentence is the unit of
meaning. Our discussion will be structured around various remarks and ideas from
Dummett’s classical book FREGE, Philosophy of Language, or: FPL [3]. However,
it is important to note that my explication of the principle goes beyond what is stated
in Dummett’s text.
Conventions: Sentences in their role as contexts seem to be a mixture of context1
and context3. In this section and the next, I will drop the subscripts. Contexts will be
mostly contexts1. Also I will ignore subtleties like the distinction between utterances
and pre-utterances.
3.1. Acts and Moves in the Language-Game
Dummettmakesadistinctionbetweenlinguisticacts, i.e., actsconstitutingafull-blown
move in the language-game and other acts playing a role in producing language. Here
is an analogy. Checking what cards one has, is certainly an act, possibly even an
essential act, in a card-game, but it does not constitute a move in the game. According
3For an example of an attempt to build a semantics by iterated use of context2, see [43].

630
A. Visser
to Dummett, as I reconstruct him, uttering a non-sentential expression is clearly an
act. It is just not a linguistic act, i.e., a move in the language-game.
One may have doubts about this distinction. After all, we were never provided with
a list of the rules of the language-game. So, how do we know what does and what does
not constitute a move in the bewildering variety of actions involved in language-use?
In other words, the game metaphor is indeed just that: a metaphor. So, why should
there be a deﬁnite notion about what constitutes a proper move?
In what follows, I will simply follow Dummett in the assumption that some clear-
cut distinction can be made between linguistic acts or moves in the language-game on
the one hand and other acts involved in the production of language. The assumption
is a presupposition for Dummett’s interpretation of the slogan: the sentence is the unit
of meaning. If the assumption fails, the principle we are going to discuss, will be
meaningless.
In this paper, I will use utterance in a broad sense: utterances are acts, but not
necessarily moves in the language-game. For example, the utterance of a sentence
will contain the utterances of various words as sub-utterances.
3.2. A Truism
According to Dummett, it is a truism …
… that we cannot say anything by means of a sequence of words that
stops short of being a sentence—cannot make an assertion, express a
wish, ask a question, give a command, etc., in short do what Wittgenstein
called ‘making a move in the language-game’—except where the context
supplies a supplementation of the words spoken that amounts to a sentence
embodying them.
His reason is:
… (in a logical rather than a typographical sense) an expression with
which we can make a move in the language-game (or ‘perform a linguistic
act’) is precisely what a sentence is. ([3]: 3)
Dummett views the slogan: the sentence is the unit of meaning, as a way of summa-
rizing the supposed truism.
The true context principle is not this truism, according to Dummett. The true
context principle provides the philosophical insight behind the truism. Dummett’s
formulation of the underlying insight is as follows. In the order of explanation the
sense of a sentence is primary, but in the order of recognition the sense of a word is
primary ([3]: 4). Our version of the context principle will not be Dummett’s, but an
expanded version of the supposed truism.
Note the clever exception that Dummett makes in his formulation of the supposed
truism. This move is designed to block an almost inexhaustible list of counterexamples

What Makes Expressions Meaningful?
631
against the principle. This exception will emerge as part (b) of our version of the
sentential context principle.
3.3. A Truistic Context Principle
The interpretation of the slogan: the sentence is the unit of meaning, doesn’t say
anything about how arbitrary expressions derive their meanings from their role in
sentences. What if an expression α occurs as part of a non-sentential expression β
that amounts to a sentence γ due to contextual supplementation? Does α derive its
meaning from γ ? The Truistic Context Principle addresses such matters.
Let us say that a linguistic act, or move in the language-game, is minimal if it has
no proper part, in the sense of sub-act, that is again a linguistic act. Let us call our
version of the context principle TCP, for Truistic Context Principle. TCP consists of
two theses.
a) An utterance of an expression is a meaningful use of that expression, if that
utterance is part of an action that constitutes a minimal move in the language-
game.
b) Consider a meaningful utterance u of an expression α. Let u be part of an
action u′ that constitutes a minimal move in the language game. Suppose u′
takes place in a certain context c. Then either u′ is an utterance of a sentence
β or there is an alternative action v′, in the same context c, that implements the
same (or sufﬁciently similar) move in the language-game as u′, such that v′ is
an utterance of a sentence γ and such that v′ contains an utterance v of α that
is sufﬁciently similar to u.
The qualiﬁcation that ‘v must be sufﬁciently similar to u’is designed to block examples
in which α occurs in the expansion γ in a way not corresponding to the ﬁrst use u of α.
Suppose, e.g., someone says to his spouse with an angry face: food, and the expansion
is: I want my dinner now, for, as your husband, I have the right to get my food in
time.4 (The claim to have a right to food is wholly conveyed by the angry look.) Then,
probably, the use of food in the expansion is not sufﬁciently similar to the original use
of the word. I am afraid that it would be no mean task to ﬁnd a satisfactory explication
of the notion of sufﬁcient similarity as employed here.
Here is TCP in a different formulation. Intra-sentential uses of non-sentential
expressions derive their point from the use made of the embedding sentences to make
a move in the language-game. Stand-alone extra-sentential uses of non-sentential
expressions receive their point because these uses can be simulated by intra-sentential
uses of the same expressions. Thus, there must be some appropriate relationship
between the stand-alone utterance and the embedded utterance. It is not sufﬁcient that
4I neither do recommend such behaviour, nor support the attitudes underlying it.

632
A. Visser
the expression occurs in the sentence the use of which results in the same linguistic
act as the use of the stand-alone expression in an appropriate context.
Note that (a) follows from two more attractive theses.
a1) An utterance of an expression is a meaningful use of that expression, if that
utterance is part of an action that constitutes a move in the language-game
a2) Utterances with the part-of ordering form a well-founded partial ordering.
In the following subsections, I will discuss three issues concerning TCP. Some im-
portant issues will remain undiscussed. For example, not only in Dummett’s philoso-
phy, but in the mainstream logical tradition, a number of assumptions about sentence-
structure and about the role this structure plays in the semantic evaluation process play
a central role. I feel these assumptions need some substantial rethinking—if we are
after a better understanding of language. This area of problems is of direct importance
to the present discussion. In appendix A, I will make some sketchy remarks about
these matters.
3.4. Existence of Expansions
For the moment, I will assume that sentences are sentences in the usual sense. In the
next subsection 3.5, I will consider what happens, when we (re)interpret sentences
according to Dummett’s deﬁnition.
Is it always possible to ﬁnd sentential expansions to accommodate examples of
unembedded meaningful utterances of words, as promised in (b) of TCP? Let us
consider some examples.
1. With what shall I cut it? With an axe, dear Henry. The answer, With an axe, dear
Henry, can clearly be expanded to: You shall cut it with an axe, dear Henry.
The expansion is rather canonical in such cases. This example illustrates that
in some cases convincing expansions are available.
2. A child is walking with his mother. A cow is grazing in the ﬁeld. The child
says: cow. We could expand this to: there is a cow, or to: that is a cow.
The child is doing many things at the same time: showing off its newly acquired
linguistic competence, drawing attention to the cow, and so on. None of these is
particularly well described as asserting a truth or expressing a thought. I submit
that, e.g., drawing attention to should be considered as one of the primary kinds
of a linguistic act. The example illustrates that the conventional repertoire
of linguistic acts, making an assertion, expressing a wish, asking a question,
giving a command ([3]: 3), should be extended to acts like drawing attention
to something.
3. Consider an address on an envelope: Harry Potter, 4 Privet Drive, Little Whing-
ing.

What Makes Expressions Meaningful?
633
It would seem to me that an address is a meaningful use of language. Here is a
possible expansion: Dear mailman, please deliver this letter to Harry Potter. He
lives in the Privet Drive, no. 4 in LittleWhinging. Well, that’s two sentences. We
canremedyitbyinserting“and”or“;” betweenthem. Still, itisdoubtfulwhether
the expansion gives us precisely the same linguistic act as simply the address.
For instance, someone could meaningfully use an address without knowing that
a mailman delivers the letters, even believing that letters are delivered by other
means. Of course, we can ﬁnd other expansions like: deliver this letter to
Harry Potter, 4 Privet Drive, Little Whinging. This would make an address a
command. How do we know that it is not simply the assertive statement: This
letter is intended for Harry Potter, 4 Privet Drive, Little Whinging?
This example illustrates that it is probably impossible to ﬁnd a sentential expan-
sion that really simulates the linguistic act of writing an address. All expansions
add too much.
4. Consider a shopping list: 2 juice, …. A possible expansion is: I want to buy:
2 juice, …. Another: whoever does the shopping has to buy: 2 juice, …. Or
perhaps: Do get: 2 juice, ….
This example illustrates the same problem as the previous one: expansions
add too much. Moreover, I confess to the intuition that the understanding of a
sentence containing a list partly rests upon our understanding of lists. Of course,
a list should have a point. It is always a list with a purpose. This purpose is,
in a sense, not part of the list. The question is: must this point be codiﬁed in a
sentence?
5. Consider a title of a chapter, e.g., De Lispeltuut. Here is a possible expansion:
this chapter is about the Lispeltuut. Another possibility would be in this chapter
I am going to tell you about the Lispeltuut.
I guess these expansions are pretty close to what one wants to convey with the
chapter title. However, if we write the expanding sentence as a chapter title,
it is the place where it occurs—not its content—that makes it into a title. The
point is that the linguistic act of giving a chapter title cannot be subsumed under
assertion.
6. Consider counting the number of guests at a party: 1, 2, 3, …. Here is an attempt
to give an expansion: There is at least one guest. There are at least two guests,
There are at least three guests. …. Again these are many sentences. We could
remedy this by inserting and between the sentences. I have grave doubts that
any such an expansion really is equivalent to counting. For example, from the
current expansion it would follow that the discourse 1, 2 is logically equivalent
to its sub-discourse 2. Sounds funny.
This example illustrates that there is no plausible expansion for counting. Note
that the example is particularly relevant since the status of number words was
Frege’s primary concern in Grundlagen.
7. I see my student Joost on the other side of the road. I call him: Joost.

634
A. Visser
It is hard to imagine an sentential expansion that doesn’t add unwanted material.
8. Consider David Kaplan saying: Albert, Albert, Albert, at the end of my talk at
the Russell conference.
How could one ever ﬁnd an expansion exactly capturing the impact of that?
In some of our examples (e.g., addresses) there are only expansions that implement
a linguistic act that has the original act as a part, but such that every one of these
expansions adds too much. One way to counter these examples would be to weaken
thesis (b) in the appropriate way. Examples like counting seem to lack any appropriate
expansion. The upshot is that there is at least reasonable doubt that all meaningful
uses of words can be expanded faithfully to sentences, i.e., in such a way that, keeping
the original context of utterance ﬁxed, the original linguistic act is simulated by the
new one.
3.5. Redeﬁning the Sentence
Dummett’s reason for thinking that the supposed truism is indeed a truism, rests on
his deﬁnition of sentence. I will scrutinize this deﬁnition in more detail to see whether
it can serve to make TCP more evident.
On page 34 of FPL, Dummett states his deﬁnitions of sentence and word as follows.
A sentence is a linguistic unit: it is the smallest bit of language which
one can use to say anything—to ‘make a move in the language-game’, in
Wittgenstein’s terminology. A word, regarded from a different viewpoint,
is another kind of linguistic unit: it is the smallest bit of language to which
one can attribute a sense.
Evidently ‘smallest’ cannot mean smallest qua number of letters or phonemes in the
embodiment of the expressions: this would lead to absurd results. A ﬁrst guess is that
it means: minimal in the constituent ordering (with the given property). For instance,
the deﬁnition of sentence will become:
▷Something is a sentence if it can be used to make a move in the language-game
and if it has no proper constituent that can be used to make a move in the
language game.
Under this interpretation, words and sentences become a sort of atoms. Indeed, Dum-
mett remarks in a footnote that his deﬁnition of word will not always coincide with
what the printer makes, mentioning, e.g., verb-endings as an example. Thus, Dum-
mett is aware that his ‘words’ are more like morphemes.5 Words in the usual sense
become complex expressions. For instance, “unutterable” is an expression with three
constituent words: “un”, “utter” and “able”.
5See [26], for an introduction.

What Makes Expressions Meaningful?
635
Now consider (1) “John came and Mary went” and (2) “John said that Mary
went”. Here both (1) and (2) have the smaller constituent “Mary went”, so they are
not sentences. So it would seem that the word “and” as a connective of sentences and
the word “that” in its role of introducing a sentential clause, never occur in a sentence.
Hence, according to the Dummett-Frege philosophy, they do not have meaning.
Of course, this is not what Dummett intends. I think that the right reconstruction
is in the spirit of the formulation of our thesis (a):
▷Somethingisasentenceifitcanbeusedtomakeaminimalmoveinthelanguage-
game. I.o.w., an expression α is a sentence if there is an utterance u of α such
that u constitutes a minimal move in the language-game.
E.g., when we say “John said that Mary went” no move in the language-game is
supposed to correspond with the sub-utterance of “Mary went”, which does not imply
that there are no unrelated utterances of “Mary went” that do constitute moves in the
language-game. Under this reconstruction Dummett simply misstated his deﬁnition:
he married the ‘smallest’ to the wrong partner. He should not have said: it is the
smallest bit of language which one can use to say anything, but: it is the bit of
language that can correspond to a smallest way of saying something.6,7
TheprincipleTCPclearlydoesnotfollowfromDummett’sdeﬁnitionofsentence, since
we cannot infer that every minimal move in the language-game (that involves the use
at least one expression) can also be made by an utterance of a sentence (containing that
expression in the right way)—as (b) implies. We need something like the assumption
that, every linguistic act can be made as the utterance of some expression. (In fact,
even this assumption is not enough, since it does not guarantee the possibility of
‘simulation’.)
How does Dummett’s deﬁnition of sentence interact with the clever phrase: except
where the context supplies a supplementation of the words spoken that amounts to a
sentence embodying them? In the phrase it is explicitly conceded that non-sentential
expressions, in certain contexts, can be used to the same effect as an utterance of an
appropriate sentence. So, in these contexts, these expressions are used with a linguistic
act as result. But if that is so, they seem to be, by Dummett’s own deﬁnition, themselves
sentences and not in need of further supplementation. So we might conclude that (i)
many more things are sentences than one would naively suspect and (ii) thesis (b) of
TCP is superﬂuous, since it is automatically fulﬁlled: in all cases we only need the
identity-expansion.
Is it possible to block this proliferation of ‘sentences’? One might argue that, yes,
there are actions that amount to moves in the language-game, such that (i) the only
6If we compare the discourses “John came and Mary went” and “John came. Mary went”, then we may
feel some doubt even about the amended deﬁnition. If we assert “John came and Mary went”, do we then
not, ipso facto, assert “John came”?
7There is a different line of questioning Dummett’s deﬁnition of sentence. One can ask oneself what
precisely a ‘bit of language’ is. Is it a neutral thing, like an equivalence class of equiform tokens (as Tarski
has it in his footnote 5 of [39])? Or is it something different? I will not pursue this line in the present paper.

636
A. Visser
linguistic aspects of these actions are the utterance of an expression α, but (ii) no,
these actions are not themselves utterances of α. So, for instance, the move in the
language-game made by saying “with an axe, dear Henry” is not implemented by the
utterance: with an axe, dear Henry, but by a larger action, presumably containing
‘hidden parts’.
Maybe the defect of the utterance of “with an axe, dear Henry” is that the non-
sentential expression exploits the context in a more substantial way than the expanding
sentence. However, that difference cannot be simply that sentences do not need a
context. Consider “he was quite happy”. Clearly, context is needed in an essential
way to provide the reference of “he” and the time corresponding to “was”. Even if
we would allow only eternal sentences, some context is needed to make an act an
utterance of a given eternal sentence.
I suspect that no good account of linguistic act is possible, to obtain, via Dummett’s
deﬁnition, a class of sentences that even roughly coincides with the class of things
usually called sentences. To that purpose, you simply cannot avoid things like saying
that a sentence is organized around the verb, that around it the arguments are speciﬁed
according to various strategies, etcetera. On the other hand, simply coining a new
word “sentence” to replace the old one, makes the slogan: the sentence is the unit of
meaning not just empty, but also misleading. Nothing about the form of the words
is relevant, just the underlying move in the language-game. The slogan should have
been: the move in the language-game is the unit of meaning.
3.6. Is TCP Strong Enough?
In the previous subsection, we formulated a doubt about whether TCP really supports
the slogan that the sentence is the unit of meaning in any intuitive sense. It seems to
me that this doubt even exists independently of Dummett’s deﬁnition of sentence.
In TCP, it is the fact that the word is part, in an appropriate way, of a linguistic
act that makes the word meaningful, not the act-preserving sentence that we construct
around it. Only if you could claim a more substantial status for the expansion than
just its possibility in principle, would the expansion really contribute to the possession
of meaning by an uttered word. Perhaps, always when we utter a stand-alone non-
sentential expression, we actually have in mind an expanding sentence. From her side
the hearer only understands the utterance of the stand-alone non-sentential expression
if she infers the sentence that the speaker had in mind, or a close equivalent, from
the utterance plus the associated context. However, all such theories seem to be quite
implausible.
3.7. Conclusion
I argued against one version of the context principle: TCP. Regrettably, many variants
escape these criticisms. We could, for example, grant that there are irreducible extra-

What Makes Expressions Meaningful?
637
sentential uses of phrases that amount to full-blown linguistic acts, but still claim
that the understanding of these uses is derivative from our understanding of uses of
the same words in sentences.8 Of course, I am committed to the thesis that there is
something generally wrong about sentential context principles.9
In the next section, I will follow a different line. Not stand-alone uses of non-
sentential expressions but certain intra-sentential uses of non-sentential expressions
will be considered. I will claim that these uses implement acts whose effects are not
restricted to the sentence in which they occur. The effects are trans-sentential. I think
that examples along this line are more effective to show that the intuition behind the
sentence-as-unit-of-meaning idea is essentially misguided.
4. Discourse
In this section, I will discuss examples like “a man” and “he”. I argue that the un-
derstanding of these phrases involves understanding their use in trans-sentential dis-
course. Understanding the indeﬁnite article “a” is to understand its use in expanding
open-ended discourse, not its use in a single sentence. The actions performed by
uttering such phrases can be clearly formulated. Indeed, we are close—in dynamic
semantics—to giving satisfactory formal modelings of these actions. Moreover, the
acts performed by uttering these phrases serve the purpose of facilitating the transmis-
sion of information—surely one of the major aims of language. I submit that these
actions have as good a claim as anything to embodying full-blown, honest-to-god
moves in the language-game.
4.1. Referring Expressions in Discourse
Frege, as reconstructed by Dummett, holds that the sentence is the primary linguistic
entity to perform linguistic acts. Larger discourses also embody linguistic acts in virtue
of forming a sequence of sentences.10 However, uses of intra-sentential non-sentential
expressions do not constitute full-blown linguistic acts or moves in the language game.
Let us consider the case of saying a name in discourse. Robert Sokolowski dis-
cusses in his paper [37] (reprinted as chapter 9 of [38]) the case where he is dealing
8Note, however, that such weakenings of TCP, strengthen the considerations of subsection 3.6.
9I even think that some related non-sentential context principles are false. Consider, e.g., the alternative
context principle: an utterance of an expression is a meaningful use of that expression, if that utterance is
part of an utterance that expresses a thought. There are aspects of the meaning of expressions that cannot
be reduced to any speciﬁc thought they help to express.
10… to a ﬁrst approximation, the understanding of speech just is the understanding, in succession, of the
sentences composing it ([4]: 373). In a footnote to the same page: A second approximation would have
to take account of one inessential feature, the back-reference of demonstratives, and one essential one, the
genuine or purported logical connections between the assertions made.

638
A. Visser
with ‘Topper’. Now Margaret says: Topper. What Margaret does is, according to
Sokolowski, targeting Topper for disclosure and moving Topper to presentational
form. Something like that seems to be more or less right. Consider for example a
half-heard discourse.
… Topper mumble mumble he has already eaten mumble …
The embedding sentence in which “Topper” ﬁrst occurs is irrelevant for the long range
discourse effect of the utterance of “Topper”. Uttering “Topper” (in the right kind of
context) contributes to the thoughts expressed by the utterances of sentences in which
“Topper” does not occur. Saying “Topper” makes him salient to be picked up later
by an anaphor. In some versions of Discourse Representation Theory (DRT), see
[22], this idea is reﬂected by analyzing saying “Topper” as addition to the current
information of the following discourse representation structure:
x
Topper = x
The idea is that saying “Topper” implements the following action: a new discourse
referent x is introduced to be picked up by subsequent uses of anaphors—this is
witnessed by the occurrence of x in the top box—, and that simultaneously the value
of this referent is constrained to be the value of “Topper”—witnessed by the identity in
the lower box, see [22]. I do not think this is completely right yet. The local role in the
embedding sentence of saying “Topper” is not well represented. The right analysis
must be something like this: saying Topper in a sentential context simultaneously
realizes the following discourse actions.
1. Topper is made salient. A global referent is introduced to be picked up by uses
of anaphors in subsequent discourse.
2. The value of this referent is constrained to be the value of the global referent
Topper.
3. The value of the current argument role (e.g., subject) is identiﬁed with the value
of “Topper”. Topper is made the subject of the sentence uttered.
Similarly, saying a man in an appropriate context amounts to the instructions (i)
introduce a new discourse referent, (ii) constrain the possible values of this referent
to be men, and (iii) set the value of the new referent equal to the value of the current
argument role.
I turn to the case of deﬁnite descriptions. It seems to me that the primary role of
deﬁnite descriptions is as anaphors. The discourse actions corresponding to uttering
a deﬁnite description are like this:
1. Import an appropriate discourse referent from the context. The material in the
‘body’ of the description is there to help locate the intended referent.

What Makes Expressions Meaningful?
639
2. Make the imported referent salient in order to pick it up again by later uses of
anaphors.
3. Makethevalueoftheimportedreferentequaltothevalueofthecurrentargument
role (like subject or object).
Note the differences with Russell’s great theory of deﬁnite descriptions, see [34, 35].
(i) Our descriptions are terms. (ii) The ‘identifying’ part is active at another level:
we want to select a discourse referent out of a stock of contextually given discourse
referents, not ﬁnd a uniquely determined denotation.11 Of course, information about
the value of the discourse referent is ipso facto information about it.
Uses of names, indeﬁnite descriptions and deﬁnite descriptions implement trans-
sentential structuring discourse actions. In uttering a sentence that contains such a
phrase one not only makes an assertion, but one also makes certain referents available
for further use in the discourse.
Such discourse actions often have two kinds of incompleteness. (i) They call upon
the context for certain material to use and (ii) they create an expectation of further
actions (to give them a point). If I simply say a man followed by silence, this would
seem surpassingly strange. Does this kind of incompleteness disqualify these actions
for the desired status of move in the language-game? I do not think so. Let us quote
Dummett again:
Uttering an expression which refers to an object has in itself no signif-
icance considered in isolation from any context which determines what
the person is trying to do by uttering that expression; only a context will
give a point to the utterance. If, e.g., I say, out of the blue, ‘the highest
mountain in the world’, I have indeed uttered an expression which is en-
dowed with a certain sense, and thereby a certain reference; but, until I
have indicated what point I had in mind in doing this, I cannot be con-
sidered to have done anything right or wrong. The natural reaction to my
utterance would be, ‘What about it?’, or, ‘Well, go on.’ … ([3]: 297f.)
I couldn’t agree with him more. However, then he12 goes on to assign sentences a
special status.
… Now the utterance of a sentence does not require a special context to
give it point, but is governed by a general convention—at least in certain
types of situation—that in uttering them we are understood as saying that
their reference is truth.
11Donnellan’s the man over there drinking champagne clearly is sufﬁcient to pick up the discourse
referent, even if the embedded information is false for the denotation. Here is another suggestive example:
A man and his son entered the room. The son greeted everybody loudly. Together with them a second of the
man’s sons came in. He was remarkably silent.
12Or, more precisely, Frege as reconstructed by Dummett.

640
A. Visser
I think this just isn’t so (even after suitably adapting the typically Fregean bit about
‘their reference being truth’). Utterances of sentences may exhibit precisely the same
kind of incompleteness of standing in need of a point to be supplied by subsequent
discourse. If I am reporting what happened at a party and if I say (i) A man came
in, then further disclosure would be expected to give the utterance a point. Similarly,
when in mathematical discourse, I say (ii) Let x be a prime number greater than 7, I
would be expected to go on. This expectation-generating aspect is no reason at all to
deny that what one does in saying (i) or (ii), in the right kind of context, amounts to
a full-blown move in the language-game. So why could saying, in the right kind of
context, the highest mountain in the world not also amount to a move?
Dummett contrasts Frege’s doctrine of the priority of the sentence, to Aristotle’s
view that the role of words is to express ideas and that the role of complex expressions
is to express complex ideas ([3]: 3). The kind of view I propose here also diverges
from Aristotle: saying a word can be a linguistic act, an act that cannot be simply
identiﬁed with just the act of expressing an idea.
In appendixA, I discuss the relationship of the ideas described above with predicate
logic. I also sketch a few ideas about discourse structure.
4.2. So What Is a Sentence?
At the end of the paper, it seems appropriate, to state my view of what the sentence is. In
slogan: the sentence is the playground of a local strategy to get information into place.
Sentence structure in a wide sense embodies directions to handle information. The
sentence is centered around the verb with its associated argument structure. Sentences
in different languages implement various strategies to connect referring phrases to the
various argument roles.13
The sentence is not the only linguistic object embodying some strategy to get
information into place. A list, for example embodies another strategy, but lists are not
sentences and sentences are not lists.14
The nature of the sentence as the realization of an organizational idea is obscured
by theories that make sentences the sine qua non of meaningful thought.
A. Sentence Structure & Discourse Structure
The presence of long range discourse actions distinguishes natural language from
predicate logic. The way predicate logic is set up mirrors its original design ideas.
We wanted a language that would allow full and fully explicit control. The use of
13I do not believe that all aspects of sentence structure are functional for directing information into place.
But I do believe that some aspects are thus functional.
14For some remarks on sentence structure versus discourse structure, see appendix A.

What Makes Expressions Meaningful?
641
explicit variable names, the speciﬁc scoping mechanisms that restrict the scope of a
quantiﬁer to the part of the parse tree below it, they are all embodiments of the desire
for control. The various mechanisms for control make predicate logic quite different
from natural language. As a corollary one must be very careful to project properties
of predicate logic, that well-understood model, onto natural language. It is certainly
quite wrong to think of predicate logic as revealing the underlying form of natural
language, whatever that may be, in any direct or simple way.
One reason why the study of traditional predicate logic is misleading—if we want
to reﬂect on the nature of language and meaning—, is the fact that it embodies a strict
separation between the syntax of formulas and the syntax of proofs. Proofs are built
on top of formulas. Such discourse actions as suppose and unsuppose in hypothetical
reasoning are not part of the formulas, but part of the syntax of proofs.
The example of suppose and unsuppose as we would use it in (semi-)natural lan-
guage illustrates an important theme: the analogy between some discourse actions
and brackets. The ‘discourse brackets’ suppose and unsuppose enclose a stretch of
discourse in which a certain assumption is entertained.15 A similar view can be taken
for a man. Saying a man opens a ‘discourse mode’ in which a new discourse referent
has a value. (See [41] and [20] for a version of dynamic semantics, where this view
becomes evident.)
Our examples suggest that the traditional separation between categorematical and
syncategorematical, is not as clear-cut as one might think. A bracket can be alter-
natively viewed as corresponding to an action, and thus as a meaningful piece of
text.16
In the classical view, we only understand what a sentence means after (i) it has been
parsed, (ii) the meanings of all constituents are computed inside out, following the
construction of the sentence. The same kind of view would be totally implausible for
discourse structure. We cannot wait till a discourse is ﬁnished, before understanding
may happen.
I propose that we view sentence structure and discourse structure as different but
related ways to get information into place. Sentences are a local way of information
management, which exploits the fact that the verb naturally comes equipped with
‘argument places’. Discourse structure is a global way. The actions we associated
with uses of referring expressions in subsection 4.1, have a portmanteau character:
they split into parallel sub-actions. One is concerned with sentence structure, one is
concerned with discourse structure and one is concerned with content. Thus, sentence
structuring and discourse structuring run in parallel in natural language. We also
increase the content. However, there is no reason to link the content increasing actions
in general more to sentence structure than to discourse structure. For instance, if we
say a man, we constrain the value of the discourse referent we just introduced to be a
man. This constraint has global signiﬁcance.
15A formal study of suppose and unsuppose as discourse brackets/actions was undertaken in [44].
16There is an analogy between the ‘ambiguity’ of brackets and the two ways of viewing Polish notation.
See [42].

642
A. Visser
Acknowledgement. I thank Menno Lievers for many pointers to the literature and for
his careful reading of the penultimate draft. (Unfortunately, I had no space to address
all his criticisms.) I am grateful to Godehard Link, both for his comments and for
his insistence, without which this paper would never have been ﬁnished. I thank the
audience of my talk at the Russell conference for helpful remarks and comments.
References
[1]
Aristotle: 1966. Categories, and De Interpretatione.Translated with notes by J. L.Ackrill.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
[2]
Sciullo, Anna-Maria: 1988. On the Deﬁnition of Word. Cambridge: MIT Press.
[3]
Dummett, Michael: 1981. FREGE, Philosophy of Language. London: Duckworth.
[4]
Dummett, Michael: 1981. The Interpretation of Frege’s Philosophy. London: Duck-
worth.
[5]
Dummett, Michael: 1995. The context principle: centre of Frege’s philosophy. In: I. Max
and W. Stelzner, Logik und Mathematik, Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 3–19.
[6]
Frege, Gottlob: 1970. Translations from the Philosophical Papers. London: Blackwell.
[7]
Frege, Gottlob: 1975. Über Sinn und Bedeutung. In [8]: 40–65. Also in [16]: 142–160.
English translation in [6]: 56–78.
[8]
Frege, Gottlob:
1975. Funktion, Begriff, Bedeutung. Göttingen:
Vandenhoeck &
Ruprecht.
[9]
Frege, Gottlob: 1976. Der Gedanke. In: G. Patzig (ed.), Logische Untersuchungen.
Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 30–53.
[10]
Frege, Gottlob: 1983. Logische Mängel in der Mathematik. In: H. Hermes et al. (eds.),
Gottlob Frege. Nachgelassene Schriften, Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag, 171–181.
[11]
Frege, Gottlob: 1988. Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik. Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag.
[12]
Frege, Gottlob: 1998. Grundgesetze der Arithmetik I/II. Hildesheim: Georg OlmsVerlag.
[13]
Frege, Gottlob: 1998. Begriffsschrift. In: I.Angelelli, Begriffsschrift und andereAufsätze,
Hildesheim: Georg Olms Verlag, 1–88.
[14]
Greenberg, Marvin J.: 1996. Euclidean and Non Euclidean Geometries. Freeman, 3d
edition.
[15]
Groenendijk, Jeroen and Martin Stockhof: 1991. Dynamic predicate logic. Linguistics
and Philosophy 14: 39–100.
[16]
Harnish, Robert M.: 1994. Basic Topics in the Philosophy of Language. New York:
Harvester Wheatsheaf.
[17]
Hilbert, David and Paul Bernays: 1939. Grundlagen der Mathematik II. Berlin: Springer.
[18]
Hilbert, David and S. Cohn-Vossen: 1973. Anschauliche Geometrie. Darmstadt: Wis-
senschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.

What Makes Expressions Meaningful?
643
[19]
Hofstadter, Daniel. R.: 1979. Gödel, Escher, Bach: an Eternal Golden Braid. NewYork:
Basic Books, Inc.
[20]
Hollenberg, Marco and Cees Vermeulen: 1996. Counting variables in a dynamic setting.
Journal of Logic and Computation vol. 6 5: 725–744.
[21]
Kamp, Hans: 1981. Truth, interpretation and information. In: J. Groenendijk et al. (eds.),
A Theory of Truth and Semantic Representation, Dordrecht: Foris, 1–41.
[22]
Kamp, Hans and Uwe Reyle: 1993. From Discourse to Logic I/II. Dordrecht: Kluwer.
[23]
Kamp, Hans and Jan van Eijck: 1997. Representing discourse in context. In: J. van
BenthemandA.terMeulen, HandbookofLogicandLanguage,Amsterdam&Cambridge:
Elsevier & MIT Press, 179–237.
[24]
Kaplan, David: 1989. Demonstratives. In: J. Almog et al. (eds.), Themes from Kaplan,
New York: Oxford University Press, 481–563.
[25]
Kaplan, David: 1990. Words. Aristotelian Society Supp. 64: 93–119.
[26]
Katamba, Francis: 1994. English Words. London: Routledge.
[27]
Lyons, John: 1995. Linguistic Semantics: an Introduction. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
[28]
Manguel, Alberto: 1996. A History of Reading. New York: Penguin Putnam Inc.
[29]
Mill, John S.: 1843. A System of Logic.
[30]
Mill, John S.: 1994. Of Names. In [16]: 130–141.
[31]
Montague, Richard: 1970. Universal grammar. Theoria 36: 373–398.
[32]
Muskens, Reinhard, Johan van Benthem, and Albert Visser: 1997. Dynamics. In: J. van
BenthemandA.terMeulen, HandbookofLogicandLanguage,Amsterdam&Cambridge:
Elsevier & MIT Cambridge, 587–648.
[33]
Peirce, Charles S.: 1906. Prolegomena to an apology for pragmaticism. In: C. Hartshorne
and P. Weiss, Collected Papers of Charles Sanders Peirce, Cambridge: Belknap Press of
Harvard University Press.
[34]
Russel, Bertrand: 1905. On denoting. Mind 14: 479–493.
[35]
Russell, Bertrand: 1919. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. London: George
Allen and Unwin.
[36]
Russell, Bertrand: 1940. An Enquiry into Meaning and Truth. London: GeorgeAllen and
Unwin.
[37]
Sokolowski, Robert: 1988. Referring. The Review of Metaphysics 42: 27–49.
[38]
Sokolowski, Robert: 1992. Pictures, Quotations and Distinctions. Notre Dame: Univer-
sity of Notre Dame Press.
[39] Tarski, Alfred: 1944. The semantic conception of truth and the foundations of semantics.
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 4: 341–375.
[40] Terese: 2003. Term Rewriting Systems. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
[41] Vermeulen, Cees F. M.: 1993. Sequence semantics for dynamic predicate logic. Journal
of Logic, Language and Information 2: 217–254.

644
A. Visser
[42] Visser, Albert: 2001. On the Ambiguation of Polish Notation. Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Preprint Series 26, Department of Philosophy, Utrecht University, Heidelberglaan 8,
3584 CS Utrecht,
http://preprints.phil.uu.nl/aips/.
[43] Visser, Albert and Cees Vermeulen: 1996. Dynamic bracketing and discourse represen-
tation. Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic 37: 321–365.
[44]
Zeinstra, Liesbeth: 1990. Reasoning as Discourse. Master’s thesis, Department of Phi-
losophy, Utrecht University.
Universiteit Utrecht
Heidelberglaan 8
3584 CS Utrecht
Netherlands
E-mail: Albert.Visser@phil.uu.nl

List of Contributors
John L. Bell is Professor of Philosophy and Adjunct Professor, Department of Math-
ematics, at the University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.
Ulrich Blau is Professor of Logic and Philosophy of Science at the University of
Munich, Germany.
Andrea Cantini is Professor of Logic at the Università degli Studi di Firenze, Firenze,
Italy.
Solomon Feferman is Professor of Mathematics and Philosophy at Stanford Univer-
sity, Stanford, CA, USA.
Hartry Field is Professor of Philosophy at NewYork University, NewYork, NY, USA.
Harvey Friedman is Professor of Mathematics at Ohio State University, Columbus,
OH, USA.
Sy D. Friedman is Professor of Mathematical Logic at the University of Vienna,
Austria and Professor of Mathematics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA.
Nicholas Grifﬁn is Canada Research Chair in Philosophy and Director of the Bertrand
Russell Research Centre at McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
Kai Hauser is Professor of Mathematics at the Technische Universität Berlin, Ger-
many.
Allen P. Hazen is Lecturer of Philosophy at the Unversity of Melbourne, Australia.
Geoffrey Hellman is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Minnesota, Min-
neapolis, USA.
Thomas Hürter is Editor, MIT Technology Review, Hannover, Germany.
Andrew D. Irvine is Professor of Philosophy at the University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, Canada.
Gerhard Jäger is Professor of Theoretical Computer Science and Logic at the Uni-
versity of Bern, Switzerland.
Gregory Landini is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA,
USA.

646
List of Contributors
Shaughan Lavine is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Arizona, Tucson,
AZ, USA.
Godehard Link is Professor of Logic and Philosophy of Science at the University of
Munich, Germany.
Bernard Linsky is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Alberta, Edmonton,
Alberta, Canada.
David Charles McCarty is Professor of Philosophy at Indiana University, Blooming-
ton, IN, USA.
Vann McGee is Professor of Philosophy at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA.
Jan Mycielski is Professor of Mathematics at the University of Colorado, Boulder,
CO, USA.
Karl-Georg Niebergall is Privatdozent of Philosophy, Logic and Philosophy of Sci-
ence at the University of Munich, Germany.
Volker Peckhaus is Professor of Philosophy of Science and Technology at the Univer-
sity of Paderborn, Germany.
Dieter Probst is Research Associate in Theoretical Computer Science and Logic at
the University of Bern, Switzerland.
Michael Rathjen is Professor of Mathematics at the University of Leeds, England,
and at Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA.
Francisco Rodríguez-Consuegra is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Va-
lencia, Spain.
Philippe de Rouilhan is Director of Research at the Centre National de la Recherche
Scientiﬁque (CNRS), Institut d’Histoire et de Philosophie des Sciences et des Tech-
niques (IHPST), Paris, France.
Peter Schuster is Privatdozent of Mathematics at the University of Munich, Germany.
Helmut Schwichtenberg is Professor of Mathematics at the University of Munich,
Germany.
Holger Sturm is Researcher in Logic and Philosophy at the University of Konstanz,
Germany.
Robert S. D. Thomas is Professor of Mathematics, University of Manitoba,Winnipeg,
Canada.
AlbertVisser is Professor of Philosophy at the University of Utrecht, The Netherlands.

List of Contributors
647
Kai F. Wehmeier is Assistant Professor of Logic and Philosophy of Science at the
University of California, Irvine, CA, USA.
W. HughWoodin is Professor of Mathematics at the University of California at Berke-
ley, Berkeley CA, USA.


Name Index
Ackermann, Wilhelm, 147n
Aczel, Peter, 149, 194, 195, 232n, 261
Aquinas, 192
Aristotle, 166, 192
Armstrong, David M., 592, 603, 606,
607
Ayer, Alfred J., 482
Azzouni, Jody, 581
Balaguer, Mark, 551, 584
Baltag, Alexandru, 149n
Barendregt, Henk, 236n
Barwise, Jon, 149n, 194
Bealer, George, 600, 604
Bell, John L., 20, 568, 574, 587
Benacerraf, Paul, 572
Berkeley, George, 497
Berkowski, Hermann, 511
Bernays, Paul, 142n, 193, 313
Bishop, Errett, 195, 227, 233n, 449
Blackwell, Ken, 495
Blass, Andreas, 147n
Blau, Ulrich, 21
Blumenthal, Otto, 504
Boole, George, 507, 509
Boolos, George, 222, 248n, 563
Bourbaki, Nicolas, 565
Bradley, Francis H., 3n, 353, 427, 432
Bricmont, Jean, 546
Bridges, Douglas, 242
Broad, Charles D., 422n, 487
Brouwer, Luitzen, 449, 451, 518ff
Brown, James Robert, 584
Bunge, Mario, 581
Bunn, Robert, 352
Burali-Forti, Cesare, 3n, 350n, 351
Burgess, John, 248n, 253, 473, 570
Buridan, John, 464
Cantini, Andrea, 20, 201
Cantor, Georg, 3n, 5, 93, 96, 250, 375,
534, 551, 553
Carnap, Rudolf, 14, 439, 442, 449, 523
Church, Alonzo, 12n, 13, 435n, 453
Chwistek, Leon, 442n, 446n
Cocchiarella, Nino, 389n, 595
Coffa, Alberto, 350
Cohen, Paul, 29, 33, 85, 93, 101
Conway, John, 311, 321
Crimmins, Mark, 581
Cusanus, Nicolaus, 96n
Davoren, Jen M., 22, 452
De Morgan, Augustus, 577
Dedekind, Richard, 350, 375, 412, 511,
553, 562, 569
Descartes, René, , 96n, 112, 497
Donnellan, Keith, 639n
du Bois-Reymond, Emil, 22, 523, 529
du Bois-Reymond, Paul, 22, 522ff
Dummett, Michael, 248, 630
Eames, Elizabeth, 496, 585
Ernest, Paul, 578
Etchemendy, John, 601
Euclid, 102
Evans, Gareth, 580, 616
Fechner, Gustav, 529
Feferman, Solomon, 12n, 13f, 19,
148n, 154n, 161f, 193, 200,
268n, 272, 594
Fernando, Tim, 150
Ferreira, Fernando, 251
Feyerabend, Paul, 17n
Field, Hartry, 15, 20, 584
Fine, Kit, 10n, 248n
Finsler, Paul, 193

650
Name Index
Fleischer, Heinrich, 508
Frege, Gottlob, 2, 5, 9f, 11n, 20, 247ff,
350, 375, 412, 507ff, 534,
561, 579, 625
Friedman, Harvey M., 18
Friedman, Sy D., 18
Fries, Jacob F., 510
Galilei, Galileo, 4, 16
Garciadiego, Alejandro, 350
Gentzen, Gerhard, 455
Geuvers, Herman, 236n
Gödel, Kurt, 2, 6f, 12f, 18, 85, 93, 97,
98, 101, 142n, 146n, 449,
587
Goesch, Heinrich, 511f
Goldfarb, Warren, 252
Goodman, Nelson, 15, 449, 617
Grattan-Guinness, Ivor, 350
Grelling, Kurt, 510n, 511f
Grifﬁn, Nicholas, 2n, 21, 489
Grim, Peter, 261
Grishin, V. N., 275
Grothendieck, Alexander, 148
Gupta, Anil, 595
Hacker, Peter M. S., 496
Hale, Robert, 248n
Hauser, Kai, 18
Hazen, Allen P., 10n, 22, 452
Heck, Richard, 248n, 251
Hellinger, Ernst, 506
Hellman, Geoffrey, 23
Helmholtz, Hermann von, 529
Hempel, Carl G., 496, 497
Hersh, Reuben, 578
Herzberger, Hans, 595
Hessenberg, Gerhard, 5n, 510f
Hilbert, David, 2f, 93, 102, 159f, 162,
351, 455, 517, 533, 551
Hodes, Harold, 581
Hürter, Tobias, 19
Husserl, Edmund, 18, 104, 110, 507f
Hylton, Peter, 393n, 489, 490, 496
Inwagen, Peter van, 581
Irvine, Andrew D., 15, 22
Isaacson, Daniel, 587
Jäger, Gerhard, 14, 18
Jané, Ignacio, 586
Jensen, Ronald, 86, 149f
Jónsson, Ólafur, 617, 621
Jordan, Camille, 612
Jubien, Michael, 592
Kaiser, Karl, 510
Kant, Immanuel, 4, 102
Kaplan, David, 395n
Keränen, Jukka, 570
Klaua, Dietrich, 321n
Kleene, Stephen, 288n
Klein, Felix, 5
Kneser, Martin, 236
Kotarbi´nski, Tadeusz, 537
Kreisel, Georg, 200, 585n
Kripke, Saul, 193, 288, 317n
Kunen, Kenneth, 87, 534
Landini, Gregory, 8n, 11n, 21f, 439,
442n, 452, 472, 476
Lavine, Shaughan, 15, 19, 22, 153,
163, 165f, 173, 177n
Leblanc, Hugues, 462
Lehman, Hugh, 586
Leibniz, Gottfried, 96n, 484, 489
Leonard, Henry, 617
Le´sniewski, Stanisław, 165n, 617
Levy, Azriel, 141
Lewis, David, 193, 600, 601, 613n,
619
Lindström, Ingrid, 202
Link, Godehard, 136n, 138n, 140n,
150, 183n
Linsky, Bernard, 21, 435n
Locke, John, 96n
Lorenzen, Paul, 167, 200

Name Index
651
Lycan, Bill, 490
Mac Lane, Saunders, 146, 147, 578
Mach, Ernst, 523
Maddy, Penelope, 288n
Martin, Donald, 440
McCarty, David Charles, 22, 394
McGee, Vann, 23
McLaughlin, Brian P., 613, 621
Meinong, Alexius, 579
Mellor, D. H., 592
Menne, Albert, 584
Meyerhof, Otto, 511
Mines, Ray, 233
Mirimanoff, Dimitry, 193
Montague, Richard, 141, 594
Moore, George E., 421, 432, 489, 577
Moore, Gregory, 3n, 350
Moss, Lawrence, 149n, 194
Muller, Frederik, 147n
Müller, Johannes, 529
Mycielski, Jan, 15, 19, 22, 153, 163f,
173, 177n, 549, 552n
Myhill, John, 195
Nelson, Edward, 181
Nelson, Leonard, 22, 509ff
Neurath, Otto, 496, 497
Niebergall, Karl-Georg, 19, 150
Palmgren, Erik, 232n
Parsons, Charles, 578
Parsons, Terence, 251
Pawlikowski, Janusz, 549
Peano, Giuseppe, 351, 379, 412, 508
Peckhaus, Volker, 2n, 5, 6n, 22
Peirce, Charles S., 453, 577
Planck, Max, 2
Plantinga, Alvin, 601
Plato, 484
Poincaré, Henri, 2, 5, 12, 191, 373,
533, 540, 577
Probst, Dieter, 18
Proclus, 102
Pudlák, Pavel, 158
Putnam, Hilary, 14, 551, 600
Quine, Willard V., 7, 14f, 136, 149,
273, 376, 495, 551, 580, 597,
602
Ramsey, Frank P., 14n, 349, 377, 379,
451, 464, 512, 594
Rao, Vidhyanath, 148n
Rathjen, Michael, 19, 232n
Reinhardt, Wiliam, 534
Resnik, Michael, 565
Richman, Fred, 231n, 237, 243n
Robinson, Abraham, 12
Rodríguez-Consuegra, Francisco, 8n,
21
Rouilhan, Philippe de, 21, 444n, 446n
Rüede, Christian, 119, 127
Rüstow, Alexander, 512f
Ruitenberg, Willem, 237
Russell, Bertrand, 1ff, 29, 49, 136ff,
191ff, 247f, 259f, 264f,
311, 349ff, 373ff, 401ff,
417ff, 435ff, 449ff, 481ff,
501, 507, 510f, 533, 543ff,
561ff, 567, 569ff, 577ff,
585ff, 594, 605, 611, 613,
615f, 619f, 639
Schlick, Moritz, 523
Scholz, Heinrich, 507
Schröder, Ernst, 507, 509, 577
Schroeder-Heister, Peter, 251
Schuster, Peter, 20
Schütte, Kurt, 13, 200
Schwichtenberg, Helmut, 20
Scott, Dana, 261n, 534
Sellars, Wilfrid, 599
Shapiro, Stewart, 551, 565
Shoemaker, Sidney, 607
Skolem, Thoralf, 452
Słupecki, Jerzy, 537
Sokal, Alan, 546

652
Name Index
Solovay, Robert, 13
Specker, Ernst, 136, 150, 275
Steinhaus, Hugo, 534
Stout, George F., 424
St Paul, 349
Sturm, Holger, 23
Swoyer, Chris, 600
Tait, William, 159n, 569
Tarski, Alfred, 13, 404n, 537, 614
Thomas, Robert S. D., 23
Thomson, James, 168
Thomson, Judith J., 617n, 621
Tooley, Michael, 592, 607
Troelstra, Anne, 236n, 243
Twardowski, Kazimierz, 537
Unger, Peter, 611ff, 617n
Urmson, J. O., 496
van Bendegem, Jean Paul, 582n
van Dalen, Dirk, 243
van Inwagen, Peter, 613n
Vaught, Robert L., 141
Visser, Albert, 23
von Mises, Richard, 523
von Neumann, John, 352
Waismann, Friedrich, 171
Walton, Kendall, 581
Wang, Hao, 13, 200
Wasow, Thomas, 136n
Watson, John, 466
Wehmeier, Kai F., 20
Weierstrass, Karl, 375, 553
Weyl, Hermann, 13f, 192, 200, 451,
473, 512, 543
Wheeler, Samuel, 613n
Whitehead, Alfred N., 351, 375
Williams, C. J. F., 583
Williamson, Timothy, 618n
Wilson, Edward, 546
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 423, 428, 430,
451, 464, 466, 494f, 523
Wood, Alan, 491
Woodin, W. Hugh, 16, 18, 101, 113,
187, 534
Wright, Crispin, 248n
Yablo, Stephen, 582
Young, William H., 509
Zalta, Edward, 248n
Zeno, 320, 353
Zermelo, Ernst, 2, 507ff

Subject Index
absolute undecidability, 525
absolutism, 23
AC, see axiom (scheme) of choice
acceptable ordinal, 301
acquaintance, 450
act
of collection, 110
of consciousness, 104
of reﬂection, 110
actual inﬁnite, 166, 549, 558
AD, see determinacy axiom
admissible set theory, 121
AFA, see anti-foundation axiom
algebra of logic, 507, 509
ambiguity, 135
systematic, 135
typical, 135
anti-foundation axiom (AFA), 19, 20,
149, 194
antinomy of inﬁnite number, 354
approximate splitting principle, 229
arithmetic in ramiﬁed logics, 472
armageddon, 186
assumptions of inﬁnity, 162
axiom (scheme)
of inﬁnity, 14n
for propositions and truth, 261
for the ε-operator, 537
large cardinal, 31
multiplicative, 438
Newcomp, 50, 52
of anti-foundation (AFA), 19, 20,
149, 194
of choice (AC), 31, 438, 537
of dependent choice (DC), 198,
227
of determinacy (AD), 16, 33, 537
of extensionality, 438, 443
of inclusion subtlety, 52
of inﬁnity, 14n, 45, 438, 451
of projective determinacy (PD),
16, 31, 32
of reducibility, 14, 192, 418, 435,
437, 438, 449, 450, 469
of reﬂection, 141
of subtlety, 50
of weak inclusion subtlety, 53
Axiom of Solvability, 518, 529
axiomatic method, 102
axiomatic program, 508
axiomatization, 502
of logic, 509
of set theory, 509
Baire property, 35
bar induction, 520
basic law V, 248
basic set theory, 121
Begriffsschrift, 247
Berry paradox, 378
β-conversion, 454
bisimulation, 203
Bolzano–Weierstrass theorem, 519
2 principle, 86
Bradley’s paradox, 21, 419, 426, 429,
432
Bradley’s regress, 423
British hegelianism, 353
British idealism, 489
Brouwer’s intuitionism, 517
Burali-Forti paradox, 191, 349, 378
Cantor’s Absolute, 96
Cantor’s paradox, 1, 349, 350, 378,
502f, 506
Cantor’s theorem, 20, 221, 249, 250,
260, 350

654
Subject Index
Cantorian set theory, 504
cardinal
inaccessible, 96
indescribable, 18, 51, 97
large, 96
Mahlo, 18, 51, 97
measurable, 90, 97, 112
strong, 97
subtle, 18, 50f
supercompact, 97
superstrong, 89
weakly compact, 51, 106
Woodin, 33, 89, 90, 97, 99, 106
categorematical, 641
categorial grammar, 12
category of all categories, 145
category theory, 19, 23, 140, 145, 587
axiomatic foundations, 146
naive, 148
structuralism based on, 565
circularity, 192
class
proper, 306
virtual, 49
class of all classes, 359
class symbol
in Russell’s substitutional theory,
387
scope of, 439
class theory
impredicative, 313
coinduction principle, 215
combinatory logic, 261
common knowledge, 193
complemented subset, 222
complex of entities, 419
comprehension, 248, 384
elementary, 266
naive, 285
stratiﬁed, 273
stratiﬁed explicit, 274
computer science, 11
concept, 248
conceptual realism, 587
conceptualist approach, 9
conditional
material, 288
conditional platonism, 32
consciousness, 104
consistency proof, 251
for arithmetic, 509
constituents, 430
constitution, 105
of sets, 110
of the concept of set, 110
constructible hierarchy, 75
constructible sets, 85, 99, 103
constructible universe, 13
relativized to R, 33
constructionalism, 449
constructive AFA set theory (CZFA),
198
constructive analysis, 227
constructive set theory, 195
constructive Zermelo–Fraenkel set
theory (CZF), 196
constructivism, 12, 22, 412, 540
contemporary physics, 554
fundamental assumption of, 554
context, 626
in language, 626
in logic and computer science,
628
context principle, 23
Frege’s, 625, 629
truistic, 631
context1, 626, 628
context2, 628
context3, 629
context/content duality, 628
context/text duality, 628
contextual deﬁnition, 393, 453
continuum, 322
nonstandard, 526
continuum hypothesis, 18, 29, 44, 99
continuum problem, 93, 100, 113, 504

Subject Index
655
corecursion principle, 215
course-of-values, 248
cumulative hierarchy, 95
Curry paradox, 286
Curry property, 290, 298
cut-elimination, 462
CZF,seeconstructiveZermelo–Fraenkel
set theory
CZFA, see constructiveAFA set theory
DC, see dependent choice axiom
Dedekind inﬁnite, 396
Dedekind real
in constructive analysis, 241
deﬁnite description, 436, 453, 639
1
1-comprehension, 20
dependentchoiceaxiom(DC),198, 227
descriptive set theory, 16, 89
detachable subset, 222
determinacy axiom (AD), 16, 33, 537
Determinately(sententialoperator), 614,
615
diagonal argument, 522
diagonalization, 20, 223, 527
restricted, 278
disambiguation, 135
conventions, 139, 143
discourse, 23, 637
discourserepresentationtheory(DRT),
638
DRT, see discourse representation
theory
dynamic predicate logic, 628
EFA, see exponential function
arithmetic
effective topos, 224
Ehrenfeucht–Mostowski theorem, 150
elementary comprehension, 266
elementary extension, 254
Empiricist, 524, 527
endless regress, 424, 429
epistemic paradox, 464
ε-operator, 537f
ersatz properties, 296
evidence, 102
excluded middle, 289
expansion
sentential, 632
explicit mathematics, 148, 193
exponentialfunctionarithmetic(EFA),
50
extender model, 88
extensional simple type theory, 451
extensionality, 468
extensionality axiom, 438, 443
extra sentential, 631
extrapolation, 22, 549
justiﬁcation of, 553, 558
extrinsic evidence, 102
fallibilism, 22
ﬁbered view on predicate logic, 628
ﬁction, logical, 401f
ﬁctionalism, 584
ﬁgural moment, 111
ﬁlling, 109, 112
Fin(T ), 153, 163, 549, 557
Fin(ZF), 153
ﬁnal coalgebra theorem, 217
ﬁne structure theory, 86
ﬁnitarily justiﬁed system, 161
ﬁnite mathematics, 154, 165, 549, 557
of the indeﬁnitely large, 549
ﬁnite mathematics of the indeﬁnitely
large, 22
ﬁnitistic theory, 19, 153, 158ff, 177
ﬁnitistically reducible, 153, 154ff
ﬁxed point approach to the semantic
paradoxes, 288
ﬁxed point lemma, 186
forcing, 31, 93, 101
form of a complex, 429
formal concept, 425
formalism, 534, 538, 543, 577
foundationalism, 22, 481, 491

656
Subject Index
founding, 107
four storey truth hierarchy, 319
free logic, 595
Frege Arithmetic, 11n
Frege structure, 261
Frege’s context principle, 625, 629
Frege–Russelldeﬁnitionofnumber, 562
fulﬁllment, 107
functor category, 146
fundamental assumption of
contemporary physics, 554
fundamental theorem of algebra, 236
0 (ordinal), 18, 200
Gentzen’s Hauptsatz, 475
Gestalt-qualities, 111
Gödel ﬁxed point, 182
Gödel’s incompleteness theorems, 2,
159, 182
Gödel’s completeness theorem, 37
Grelling’s paradox, 510n, 512
Grundgesetze, 248
haecceities, 570
hermeneutic circle, 193
Hilbert circle, 507
Hilbert’s paradox, 2, 22, 504ff, 510f
Hilbert’s program, 159, 517ff, 551
Hume’s Principle, 11n
Idealist, 524, 527
identity statement, 582
‘if-then’ism, 564
Ignorabimus, 22, 523
impredicative, 254
impredicative class theory, 313
impredicative deﬁnitions, 191
inclusion subtlety, 52
incomplete symbol, 8, 385, 419, 436,
453
inconsistent multiplicities, 350
indescribable cardinal, 18, 51
individuals, 407f, 410
Inﬁnitärcalcül, 522
inﬁnitary mathematics, 551
inﬁnite
actual, 549, 558
the actual, 166
the potential, 154, 166
inﬁnite game, 30, 98
determined, 31, 98
inﬁnitesimal number, 320
inﬁnitesimals, 522, 525, 527
inﬁnity axiom, 45, 438, 451
inscrutability of reference, 612, 621
inseparability, 268
insolubilia, 376
intensional interpretation, 435
intensional logic, 12, 464, 594
intentional paradox, 464
intentionality, 104
interactive prover Coq, 236
intermediate theory (Russell),
21,
401ff
formal language of, 408f
intermediate value theorem, 234
intra-sentential, 631
intrinsic evidence, 102
intuition, 94, 542
intuitionism, 22, 517, 530, 540, 543
intuitive act, 107
iterative concept of set, 95, 111
justiﬁcation of extrapolation, 553, 558
knowledge by acquaintance, 483
knowledge by description, 483
König/Dixon paradox, 378
KP, see Kripke–Platek set theory
Kripke’s theory of truth, 21, 193, 288,
317n, 595
Kripke–Fefermanself-referentialtruth,
278
Kripke–Plateksettheory(KP),18, 120,
199
L, 112
lambda abstraction, 261

Subject Index
657
large cardinal, 96
large cardinal axioms, 31
large cardinal hierarchy, 100
large ordinal, 315
largest ﬁxed point, 209
law of excluded middle, 289
Lebesgue measurability, 16, 30
Liar paradox, 2, 191, 317, 379, 505,
512
limit ordinal, 315
linguistic paradox, 349
litorial, 315
locally ﬁnite theory Fin(T ), 163
logical atomism, 8, 21, 417, 485
logical paradox, 376
logical product, 259
logical syntax, 7
logicism, 14, 543
LR, see reﬂexion logic
Mahlo cardinal, 18, 51, 97
many-valued logic, 614
Martin-Löf type theory, 12, 196, 202,
629
material conditional, 288
paraconsistent approach, 288
mathematical induction, 22
Russell’s proof of, 452, 472
mathematical object, 23, 105, 584
mathematical practice, 579
mathematics
explicit, 148, 193
ﬁnite, 154, 165, 549, 557
inﬁnitary, 551
reverse, 15
measurable cardinal, 90
measurement, 552, 555ff
scientiﬁc, 22
mental construction, 535
mental mechanism, 536
mereology, 617
metapredicative Mahlo, 19, 119, 122
metatheory, 7
modal operators, 168
modal paradox, 260
monism, 419
Morse–Kelley set theory, 308
move in the language-game, 630
multi-valued semantics, 21, 292
multiple relation theory of judgement,
420, 431, 453
multiplicative axiom, 438
Mycielski-translation
into Fin(ZF), 173
naive category theory, 148
naive comprehension, 285
naive theory of properties, 285
natural language philosophy, 495
natural ontology, 592, 606
natural property, 309
naturalistic conception of properties,
607
naturalized epistemology, 495
NBG, see Neumann–Bernays–Gödel
set theory
Nelson circle, 509f
neo-Hegelian, 4
Neue Fries’sche Schule, 510
Neumann–Bernays–Gödel set theory
(NBG), 12, 86, 308
neutral monism, 375
New Foundations (NF), 19, 20, 136,
273, 535
with urelements (NFU), 149, 260
subsystems, 275ff
Newcomp (comprehension axiom
scheme), 50, 52
NF, see New Foundations
NFU, see New Foundations with
urelements
no-classes theory, 9, 192, 265, 435
noema, 105, 109, 114
nominalism, 15, 597
non-standard analysis, 12
non-well-founded sets, 193

658
Subject Index
nonstandard continuum, 526
number 0
deﬁnition of, 441
object sense, 105, 106
objective, 112
objective world, 554
objectivity, 104
objectual quantiﬁcation, 374
Ockham’s Razor, 8
 Conjecture, 37
-logic, 29, 34, 101, 113
-proof, 36
-soundness, 36
ontological atom, 484
ontological commitment, 597
ontological development, 466
ontological eliminativism, 374
ontology, 21
open (truth value), 317
order (vs. type), 405
order completeness, 232, 234
order indiscernibles, 556
ordinal
acceptable, 301
0, 18, 200
large, 315
limit, 315
proof-theoretic, 119
subtle, 52
successor, 315
transdeﬁnite, 315
ordinal analysis, 18
paradox
Berry, 378
Bradley, 21, 419, 426, 429, 432
Burali-Forti (greatest ordinal),
191, 349, 378
Cantor (greatest cardinal), 1, 349,
350, 378, 502f, 506
Curry, 286
epistemic, 464
Grelling, 510n, 512
Hilbert, 2, 22, 504ff, 510f
intentional, 464
König/Dixon, 378
Liar, 2, 191, 317, 379, 505, 512
linguistic, 349
logical, 376
modal, 260
of propositions, 20, 377
po/ao, 377, 388
recurrence, 2
Richard, 378
Russell, 1, 29, 49, 137, 191, 247,
265, 285, 349, 350, 501f,
505, 511, 512, 593, 600, 605
in a constructive context, 221
predicational variant, 364
selfreferential, 349
semantic, 317, 349, 376, 464
ﬁxed point approach, 288
set-theoretic, 464
Skolem, 534
Zermelo, 501, 505, 507, 510
paradox of propositions, 401
patterns
mathematical structures as, 565
PD, see projective determinacy axiom
perception, 106
perspective variations, 106
phenomenology, 104, 114
physical quantity, 554, 556
pigeon hole principle, 476
platonism, 21, 94, 311, 313, 449, 538,
551, 577
conditional, 32
Gödel’s, 12
po/ao paradox, 377, 388
possible world semantics, 601
postulationism, 586
potential inﬁnite, 154, 166
PRA,seeprimitiverecursivearithmetic
pre-utterance, 628
predicable, 1, 364

Subject Index
659
predicate logic, 628
dynamic, 628
ﬁbered view, 628
predicative, 252
predicative analysis, 473
predicative class hierarchy, 319
predicativism, 12, 200
system W, 14
predicativity, 402
primitive recursive arithmetic (PRA),
19, 155
principle of disjunction (of types), 404
principles for propositions and truth,
261
problem of the many, 612
projectivedeterminacyaxiom(PD),16,
31, 32, 98, 102, 112
projective sets, 29, 98
measure problem, 44
proof-theoretic ordinal, 119
proof-theoretical reducibility, 154
proper class, 306
property
Baire, 35
natural, 309
naturalistic conception, 607
semantical conception, 591
semantically-conceived, 309
property theories, 595
proposition, 7, 419, 450
elementary, 405ff
elimination of, 406ff
general, 404f
hierarchy of, 404f, 410ff
paradox of, 20
propositional function, 8, 418, 450
propositional object, 261
quantiﬁcation, 9
objectual, 374
substitutional, 450, 459
Quine–Putnam indispensability, 14,
551
ramiﬁed analysis, 272
ramiﬁed second-order logic, 457
ramiﬁed theory of types, 10, 450
ramiﬁed third-order logic, 457
ramiﬁed types, 457
rationalism, 22, 535, 538f
real number, 324
in constructive analysis, 227
transdeﬁnite, 345
transﬁnite, 329, 336
recurrence paradox, 2
recursively saturated, 254
reducibility
ﬁnitistic, 154
proof-theoretical, 154
reduction
of material objects
to sense-data, 483
reductionism, 14
reﬂected truth, 318
reﬂection principle, 97, 111
reﬂective universes, 141
reﬂexion logic (LR), 21, 317
regressive method, 15, 491
relations, 418
resource consciousness, 15
restricted diagonalization, 278
reverse mathematics, 15
Richard paradox, 378
Robinson’s arithmetic, 253
Russell’s eliminativism, 375
Russell’s method of analysis, 487
Russell’s paradox, 1, 29, 49, 137, 191,
221, 247, 265, 285, 349, 350,
501f, 505, 511, 512, 534,
593, 600, 605
in a constructive context, 221
predicational variant, 1, 364
Russell’s substitutional theory, 373ff
axiom schemata for the 1905
version, 380
axiom schemata for the 1906
version, 390

660
Subject Index
Russell’s theory of knowledge, 22, 482
Russell–Zermeloparadox, seeRussell’s
paradox
Russell-the-fallibilist, 481
Russell-the-foundationalist, 481
satisfaction, 306
schema V, 254
scope
of class symbols, 439
second-order logic, 248
second-order number theory, 30, 98
self-application, 591
self-instantiation, 591, 592, 606
self-predication, 1, 11
self-referential imperative, 312, 324
self-referential paradox, 349
self-referential truth
Kripke–Feferman, 278
semantic paradox, 193, 317, 349, 376,
464
semantic pretence, 582
semanticalconceptionofproperties, 591
semantically unfounded sentence, 317
semantics, 23, 592, 601
3-valued, 292
multi-valued, 21, 292
realist, 584
substitutional, 469
sense-data, 483ff
sentence, 640
deﬁnition of, 634
sentential expansion, 632
sequential completeness, 231, 234
set
constructible, 85, 99, 103
non-well-founded, 193
projective, 29, 44, 98
virtual, 49, 61
set continuous class operator, 208
set theory
New Foundations (NF), 535
admissible, 121
axiomatization of, 509
basic, 121
Cantorian, 504
constructive, 195
CZFA, 198
Zermelo–Fraenkel (CZF), 196
descriptive, 16, 89
Kripke–Platek (KP), 18, 120, 199
KPi0, 18, 120
Morse–Kelley, 308
Neumann–Bernays–Gödel
(NBG), 12, 86, 308
New Foundations (NF), 19, 20,
136, 273
subsystems, 275ff
with urelements (NFU), 149,
260
with universes, 141
Zermelo Z, 11
Zermelo–Fraenkel (ZF), 11, 13,
33, 141, 596
with choice (ZFC), 34
with reﬂective universes, 141
with the Axiom of Choice
(ZFC), 141
set-theoretic paradox, 464
sharp operation, 18
 operation, 119, 122
signitive act, 107
simple theory of types, 11, 137, 438,
606
simultaneous dual substitution, 385
single-candidate thesis, 617ff
Skolem paradox, 534
solution lemma, 207, 212
stratiﬁcation, 273
stratiﬁed comprehension, 273
stratiﬁed explicit comprehension, 274
stratiﬁed truth, 273
stratiﬁed T-schema, 280
streams, 213
structural realism, 374
structuralism, 23, 587

Subject Index
661
ante rem, 565
Dedekind’s, 23, 562, 569
eliminative, 565
modal, 565, 587
set-theoretic, 565
subcountable, 223
subject and predicate, 426, 430
subjective, 112
subjectivity, 104
substitution, 7, 376
simultaneous dual, 385
substitutional interpretation, 452
substitutional quantiﬁcation, 450, 459
substitutional semantics, 469
substitutionaltheory(Russell), 21, 373ff,
402, 404
subtle cardinal, 18, 50f
subtle ordinal, 52
successor ordinal, 315
superstrong cardinal, 89
symbolic explicitness, 6
syncategorematical, 641
T-schema
stratiﬁed, 280
tertium non datur, 519
theory of intuition, 542
theory of judgment, 406ff, 418, 426
theory of properties, 23
naive, 285
theory of truth, 13, 20, 595
Kripke, 21, 193, 288, 317n, 595
theory of types, 10
Martin-Löf, 12, 196, 202, 629
of attributes
axiom schemata for, 384
ramiﬁed, 10, 402, 450
simple, 11, 137, 438, 606
extensional, 451
third truth value, 317
thought-objects, 533
3-valued semantics, 292
topoi, 567
transcendence, 109
transcendental, 113
transcendental predicate, 594
transdeﬁnite ordinal, 315
transdeﬁnite real numbers, 345
transdeﬁnite well-ordering, 314
transﬁnite real numbers, 329, 336
truistic context principle, 631
truth, 541
hierarchy, 319
reﬂected, 318
self-referential, 278
stratiﬁed, 273
theory of, 595
unreﬂected, 318
truth value gaps, 614
twofold nature of relations, 426
type, 403f
of level n, 467
ramiﬁed, 457
simple, 466
type free language, 595
type symbol, 383
typed λ-calculus, 456
types
doctrine of, 401
ramiﬁed theory of, 402
typical ambiguity, 19, 135
uncountable, 223
unfounded sentence, 317
unit of meaning, 23, 630, 637
universalism, 403f
universally Baire, 35
universals, 424
unreﬂected truth, 318
V , 95, 103, 113
vagueness, 23, 613
value-range, 248
Veblen function, 19n, 201
ternary, 129
V = L, 61, 86

662
Subject Index
vicious circle principle, 10, 12, 192,
374, 377, 402ff
vicious regress, 192
virtual class, 49
virtual set, 49, 61
von Neumann hierarchy, 85
Wadge hierarchy, 36
weak counterexamples, 524
weak inclusion subtlety, 53
weakly compact cardinal, 51
well-ordering
transdeﬁnite, 314
Wiener–Kuratowski pair, 453
Woodin cardinal, 33, 89, 90, 97
word
deﬁnition of, 634
Zeno’s paradox, 320ff
Zermelo set theory Z, 11
Zermelo’s paradox, 501, 505, 507, 510
Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory (ZF), 11,
13, 33, 596
with choice (ZFC), 34, 93, 110
0# exists (large cardinal axiom), 88, 90
ZF, see Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory
ZFC, see Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory
with choice

