
DEATH AND DYING
END-OF-LIFE CONTROVERSIES
1

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
      
      PDF Not Available Due to Copyright Terms 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
             
 
 
 
 
              
 
 
      
      PDF Not Available Due to Copyright Terms 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
PREFACE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . vii
CHAPTER 1
Death through the Ages: A Brief Overview . . . . . . . . . 1
Different cultures continue to react to death in different ways.
This chapter examines beliefs and rituals spanning three million
years of human history. Particular attention is paid to modern
approaches to death, including hospice care.
CHAPTER 2
Redefining Death. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
The definition of death has changed significantly throughout the
past quarter century. Medical practitioners and institutions and
the federal government have presented their own definitions, often
finding themselves in disagreement. Controversy also surrounds
the concept of near-death experience.
CHAPTER 3
The End of Life: Ethical Considerations. . . . . . . . . . 13
Just as religions differ in the way they view death, doctors and
patients often disagree about end-of-life care. This chapter
explores such topics as patient involvement in decision making
and the treatment of AIDS.
CHAPTER 4
The End of Life: Medical Considerations . . . . . . . . . 23
This chapter examines the leading causes of death and the effec-
tiveness of life-sustaining treatments and end-of-life care. Persist-
ent vegetative state and organ donation are considered in depth.
CHAPTER 5
Seriously Ill Children . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Unfortunately, some children do not outlive their parents. This
chapter explores such medical concerns as birth defects and
reflects on the roles that parents, guardians, courts, and medical
practitioners play in caring for critically ill children.
CHAPTER 6
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide . . 57
Some people choose to take their own lives or ask for assistance in
their deaths—decisions that draw starkly different reactions
among religions, cultures, medical practitioners, and special inter-
est groups. Federal and state laws diverge as well. This chapter
details Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act and the Netherlands’
legal euthanasia policy.
CHAPTER 7
Advance Directives. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Adults have the right to decide in advance which medical treat-
ments they want in the event they become physically or mentally
unable to communicate their wishes. The two types of advance
directives—living wills and durable powers of attorney for health
care—are explained, as are the legal, historical, and practical
effects of advance directives.
CHAPTER 8
Courts and the End of Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 97
This chapter examines legal decisions concerning patients, guar-
dians, physicians, hospitals, and nursing homes.
CHAPTER 9
The Cost of Health Care . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .111
High-quality health care comes at an increasingly high cost. This
chapter explores the types of health care plans available, including
their coverage of hospice, in-home care, and nursing-home care.
CHAPTER 10
Older Adults . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .133
Americans are living increasingly longer lives. This chapter exam-
ines the health problems that afflict the elderly and takes a look at
geriatricians, the doctors who treat them.
CHAPTER 11
Public Opinion about Life and Death . . . . . . . . . . .149
People have many concerns about getting older and dying. This
chapter uses selected opinion polls to illustrate some of them.
IMPORTANT NAMES AND ADDRESSES . . . . . . . . . .155
RESOURCES . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .157
INDEX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .159
Death and Dying
v

PREFACE
Death and Dying: End-of-Life Controversies is part of
the Information Plus Reference Series. The purpose of each
volume of the series is to present the latest facts on a topic of
pressing concern in modern American life. These topics
include today’s most controversial and most studied social
issues: abortion, capital punishment, care for the elderly,
crime, health care, the environment, immigration, minori-
ties, social welfare, women, youth, and many more.
Although written especially for the high school and under-
graduate student, this series is an excellent resource for
anyone in need of factual information on current affairs.
By presenting the facts, it is Thomson Gale’s inten-
tion to provide its readers with everything they need to
reach an informed opinion on current issues. To that
end, there is a particular emphasis in this series on the
presentation of scientific studies, surveys, and statis-
tics. These data are generally presented in the form of
tables, charts, and other graphics placed within the text
of each book. Every graphic is directly referred to and
carefully explained in the text. The source of each
graphic is presented within the graphic itself. The data
used in these graphics are drawn from the most repu-
table and reliable sources, in particular from the var-
ious branches of the U.S. government and from major
independent polling organizations. Every effort has
been made to secure the most recent information avail-
able. The reader should bear in mind that many major
studies take years to conduct, and that additional years
often pass before the data from these studies are made
available to the public. Therefore, in many cases the
most recent information available in 2006 dated from
2003 or 2004. Older statistics are sometimes presented
as well, if they are of particular interest and no more
recent information exists.
Although statistics are a major focus of the Infor-
mation Plus Reference Series, they are by no means its
only content. Each book also presents the widely held
positions and important ideas that shape how the book’s
subject is discussed in the United States. These positions
are explained in detail and, where possible, in the words
of their proponents. Some of the other material to be
found in these books includes: historical background;
descriptions of major events related to the subject; rele-
vant laws and court cases; and examples of how these
issues play out in American life. Some books also feature
primary documents, or have pro and con debate sections
giving the words and opinions of prominent Americans on
both sides of a controversial topic. All material is pre-
sented in an even-handed and unbiased manner; the
reader will never be encouraged to accept one view of
an issue over another.
HOW TO USE THIS BOOK
Death is one of the universal human experiences.
This and its ultimately unknowable nature combine to
make it a topic of great interest to most Americans.
How we die and how we deal with the deaths of others
evokes profound religious and/or ethical issues about
which many people hold very strong beliefs. When
these beliefs are in conflict with those of others, they
can result in some of the most serious and divisive
controversies in the modern United States. This book
examines how Americans deal with death, with a par-
ticular focus on the highly charged political and moral
issues of living wills, life-sustaining treatments, end-of-
life care funding, and physician-assisted suicide.
Death and Dying: End-of-Life Controversies consists
of eleven chapters and three appendices. Each of the
chapters is devoted to a particular aspect of death and
dying in the United States. For a summary of the informa-
tion covered in each chapter, please see the synopses
provided in the Table of Contents at the front of the book.
Death and Dying
vii

Chapters generally begin with an overview of the basic
facts and background information on the chapter’s topic,
then proceed to examine subtopics of particular interest.
For
example,
Chapter
6:
Suicide,
Euthanasia,
and
Physician-Assisted Suicide begins with background infor-
mation on how suicide and euthanasia have been regarded
by different cultures throughout history. The chapter then
moves on to deal with suicide and euthanasia in the
United States more specifically, including how many
Americans commit suicide. The controversies in the
United States surrounding physician-assisted suicide and
euthanasia are then discussed in depth. This includes
reports on studies of who requests physician assistance
in committing suicide and why; an examination of orga-
nizations and individuals who support and oppose eutha-
nasia and assisted suicide; and a history of Oregon’s
Death with Dignity Act and its consequences. Finally,
legal physician-assisted suicide as practiced in Europe,
and its impact on the United States, is scrutinized. Read-
ers can find their way through a chapter by looking for the
section and subsection headings, which are clearly set off
from the text. Or, they can refer to the book’s extensive
Index if they already know what they are looking for.
Statistical Information
The tables and figures featured throughout Death
and Dying: End-of-Life Controversies will be of particu-
lar use to the reader in learning about this issue. These
tables and figures represent an extensive collection of the
most recent and important statistics on death, as well as
related issues—for example, graphics in the book cover
death rates for suicide; reasons for choosing hospice care;
Medicare coverage of various end-of-life needs; the rise
in life expectancy over the last century; and public opi-
nion about the most fearful aspects of death. Thomson
Gale believes that making this information available to
the reader is the most important way in which we fulfill
the goal of this book: to help readers understand the issues
and controversies surrounding death and dying in the
United States and reach their own conclusions.
Each table or figure has a unique identifier appear-
ing above it for ease of identification and reference.
Titles for the tables and figures explain their purpose.
At the end of each table or figure, the original source
of the data is provided.
In order to help readers understand these often com-
plicated statistics, all tables and figures are explained in
the text. References in the text direct the reader to the
relevant statistics. Furthermore, the contents of all tables
and figures are fully indexed. Please see the opening
section of the Index at the back of this volume for a
description of how to find tables and figures within it.
Appendices
In addition to the main body text and images,
Death and Dying: End-of-Life Controversies has three
appendices. The first is the Important Names and
Addresses directory. Here the reader will find contact
information for a number of government and private
organizations that can provide further information on
aspects of death and dying. The second appendix is the
Resources section, which can also assist the reader in
conducting his or her own research. In this section the
author and editors of Death and Dying: End-of-Life Con-
troversies describe some of the sources that were most
useful during the compilation of this book. The final
appendix is the Index.
ADVISORY BOARD CONTRIBUTIONS
The staff of Information Plus would like to extend
its heartfelt appreciation to the Information Plus Advi-
sory Board. This dedicated group of media profes-
sionals provides feedback on the series on an ongoing
basis. Their comments allow the editorial staff who
work on the project to continually make the series
better and more user-friendly. Our top priorities are
to produce the highest-quality and most useful books
possible, and the Advisory Board’s contributions to
this process are invaluable.
The members of the Information Plus Advisory
Board are:
• Kathleen R. Bonn, Librarian, Newbury Park High
School, Newbury Park, California
• Madelyn Garner, Librarian, San Jacinto College—
North Campus, Houston, Texas
• Anne Oxenrider, Media Specialist, Dundee High
School, Dundee, Michigan
• Charles R. Rodgers, Director of Libraries, Pasco-
Hernando Community College, Dade City, Florida
• James N. Zitzelsberger, Library Media Department
Chairman, Oshkosh West High School, Oshkosh,
Wisconsin
COMMENTS AND SUGGESTIONS
The editors of the Information Plus Reference
Series welcome your feedback on Death and Dying:
End-of-Life Controversies. Please direct all correspon-
dence to:
Editors
Information Plus Reference Series
27500 Drake Rd.
Farmington Hills, MI 48331-3535
viii
Preface
Death and Dying

CHAPTER 1
DEATH THROUGH THE AGES: A BRIEF OVERVIEW
Strange, is it not? That of the myriads who Before us
passed the door of Darkness through, Not one returns to
tell us of the road, Which to discover we must travel too.
Omar Khayya´m
Death is the inevitable conclusion of life, a universal
destiny that all living creatures share. Although all socie-
ties throughout history have realized that death is the
certain fate of human beings, different cultures have
responded to it in different ways. Through the ages,
attitudes toward death and dying have changed and con-
tinue to change, shaped by religious, intellectual, and
philosophical beliefs and conceptions. In modern times,
advances in medical science and technology continue to
influence ideas about death and dying.
ANCIENT TIMES
Archaeologists have found that as early as the
Paleolithic period (about 2.5 to 3 million years ago),
humans held metaphysical beliefs about death and dying.
Tools and ornaments excavated at burial sites suggest
that our earliest ancestors believed that some element of
a person survived the dying experience.
Ancient Hebrews (circa 1020–586 BCE), while
acknowledging the existence of the soul, were not pre-
occupied with the afterlife. They lived according to the
commandments of their God, to whom they entrusted
their eternal destiny. Early Egyptians (circa 2900–950
BCE), on the other hand, thought that preservation of
the dead body (mummification) guaranteed a happy after-
life. They believed that a person had a dual soul—the ka
and the ba. The ka was the spirit that dwelled near the
body, while the ba was the vitalizing soul that lived on in
the netherworld. Similarly, the ancient Chinese (circa
2500–1000 BCE) also believed in a dual soul, one part
of which continued to exist after the death of the body. It
was this spirit that the living venerated during ancestor
worship.
Among the ancient Greeks (circa 2600–1200 BCE),
death was greatly feared. Greek mythology—full of
tales of gods and goddesses who exacted punishment
on disobedient humans—caused the living to follow
rituals meticulously when burying their dead so as not
to displease the gods. Although reincarnation is usually
associated with Asian religions, some Greeks were
followers of Orphism, a religion that taught that the
soul underwent numerous reincarnations until purifica-
tion was achieved.
THE CLASSICAL AGE
Mythological beliefs among the ancient Greeks
persisted into the classical age. The Greeks believed
that after death the psyche—a person’s vital essence—
lived on in the underworld. The Greek writer Homer
(circa
800–700
BCE)
greatly
influenced
classical
Greek attitudes about death through his epic poems
the Iliad and the Odyssey. Greek mythology was freely
interpreted by writers after Homer, and belief in eter-
nal judgment and retribution continued to evolve
throughout this period.
Certain Greek philosophers also influenced concep-
tions of death. Pythagoras (circa 580–500 BCE), for
example, opposed euthanasia (‘‘good death,’’ or mercy
killing) because it might disturb the soul’s journey
toward final purification as planned by the gods. On the
other hand, Socrates (circa 470–399 BCE) and Plato
(circa 428–347 BCE) believed that people could choose
to end their lives if they were no longer useful to them-
selves or the state.
Like Socrates and Plato, the classical Romans (circa
509–264 BCE) believed that a person suffering from
intolerable pain or an incurable illness should have the
right to choose a ‘‘good death.’’ They considered eutha-
nasia a ‘‘mode of dying’’ that allowed a person’s right to
take control of an intolerable situation and distinguished
Death and Dying
1

it from suicide, an act considered to be a shirking of
responsibilities to one’s family and to humankind.
THE MIDDLE AGES
During the European Middle Ages (circa 500–1485),
death—with its accompanying agonies—was accepted as
a destiny everyone shared, but it was still feared. As a
defense against this phenomenon that could not be
explained, medieval people confronted death together,
as a community. Because medical practices in this era
were crude and imprecise, the ill and dying person often
endured prolonged suffering. A lengthy period of dying,
however, gave the dying individual an opportunity to feel
forewarned about impending death, to put his or her
affairs in order, and to confess sins. The medieval
Church, with its emphasis on the eternal life of the soul
in Heaven or Hell, held great power over people’s notions
of death.
By the late Middle Ages the fear of death had inten-
sified due to the Black Death—the great plague of 1347–
51. The Black Death killed more than twenty-five million
people in Europe alone. Commoners watched not only
their neighbors stricken but also saw church officials and
royalty struck down: Queen Eleanor of Aragon and King
Alfonso XI of Castile met with untimely deaths, and so
did many at the papal court at Avignon, France. With
their perceived ‘‘proper order’’ of existence shaken, the
common people became increasingly preoccupied with
their own deaths and with the Last Judgment, God’s
final and certain determination of the character of each
individual. Because the Last Judgment was closely linked
to an individual’s disposition to Heaven or Hell, the
event of the plague and such widespread death was
frightening.
THE RENAISSANCE
From the fourteenth through the sixteenth centuries,
Europe experienced new directions in economics, the
arts,
and
social,
scientific,
and
political
thought.
Nonetheless, obsession with death did not diminish with
this ‘‘rebirth’’ of Western culture. A new self-awareness
and emphasis on humans as the center of the universe
further fueled the fear of dying.
By the sixteenth century many European Christians
were rebelling against religion and had stopped relying
on church, family, and friends to help ease their passage
to the next life. The religious upheaval of the Protestant
Reformation of 1520, which emphasized the individual
nature of salvation, caused further uncertainties about
death and dying.
The seventeenth century marked a shift from a reli-
gious to a more scientific exploration of death and dying.
Lay people drifted away from the now disunited
Christian Church toward the medical profession, seeking
answers in particular to the question of ‘‘apparent death,’’
a condition in which people appeared to be dead but were
not. In many cases unconscious patients mistakenly
believed to be dead were hurriedly prepared for burial
by the clergy, only to ‘‘come back to life’’ during burial
or while being transported to the cemetery.
An understanding of death and its aftermath was
clearly still elusive, even to physicians who disagreed
about what happened after death. Some physicians
believed that the body retained some kind of ‘‘sensibility,’’
after death. Thus, many people preserved cadavers so that
the bodies could ‘‘live on.’’ Alternatively, some physicians
applied the teachings of the Catholic Church to their
medical practice and believed that once the body was
dead, the soul proceeded to its eternal fate and the body
could no longer survive. These physicians did not preserve
cadavers and pronounced them permanently dead.
THE EIGHTEENTH CENTURY
The fear of apparent death that took root in the seven-
teenth century resurfaced with great intensity during the
eighteenth century. Coffins were built with contraptions
to enable any prematurely buried person to survive and
communicate from the grave. (See Figure 1.1.)
For the first time the Christian Church was blamed
for hastily burying its ‘‘living dead,’’ particularly because
it had encouraged the abandonment of ‘‘pagan’’ burial
traditions such as protracted mourning rituals. In the
wake of apparent death incidents, more lengthy burial
traditions were revived.
THE NINETEENTH CENTURY
In the nineteenth century premature and lingering
deaths remained commonplace. Death typically took
place in the home following a lengthy deathbed watch.
Family members prepared the corpse for viewing in the
home, not in a funeral parlor. However, this practice
changed during the late nineteenth century, when profes-
sional undertakers took over the job of preparing and
burying the dead. They provided services such as ready-
ing the corpse for viewing and burial, building the coffin,
digging the grave, and directing the funeral procession.
Professional embalming and cosmetic restoration of
bodies became widely available, all carried out in a
funeral parlor where bodies were then viewed instead of
in the home.
Cemeteries changed as well. Prior to the early nine-
teenth century, American cemeteries were unsanitary,
overcrowded, weed-filled places bearing an odor of decay.
That began to change in 1831 when the Massachusetts
Horticultural Society purchased seventy-two acres of
fields, ponds, trees, and gardens in Cambridge and built
2
Death through the Ages: A Brief Overview
Death and Dying

Mount Auburn cemetery. This cemetery was to become a
model for the landscaped garden cemetery in the United
States. These cemeteries were tranquil places where those
grieving could visit the graves of loved ones and find
comfort in the beautiful surroundings.
Literature of the time often focused on and romanti-
cized death. Death poetry, consoling essays, and mourning
manuals became available after 1830, which comforted the
grieving with the concept that the deceased were released
from worldly cares in Heaven and that they would be
reunited there with other deceased loved ones. The deadly
lung disease tuberculosis—called consumption at the
time—was pervasive during the nineteenth century in
Europe and the United States. The disease caused sufferers
to develop a certain appearance—an extreme pallor and
thinness, with a look often described as haunted—that
actually became a kind of fashion statement. The fixation
on the subject by writers such as Edgar Allan Poe and
the English Romantic poets helped fuel the public’s
fascination with death and dying. In the late twentieth
and early twenty-first centuries the popularization of the
‘‘Goth look’’ is sometimes associated with the tubercular
appearance.
Spiritualism
By the mid-nineteenth century the romanticizing of
death took on a new twist in America. Spiritualism,
in which the living communicated directly with the
dead,
began
in
1848
in
the
United
States
with
Maggie and Katie Fox of Hydesville, New York. The
sisters claimed to have communicated with the spirit
of a man murdered by a former tenant in their house.
The practice of conducting ‘‘sittings’’ to contact the
dead gained instant popularity. Mediums, such as the
Fox sisters, were supposedly sensitive to ‘‘vibrations’’
from the disembodied souls that temporarily lived in
that part of the spirit world just outside the earth’s
limits.
This was not the first time people had tried to com-
municate with the dead. Spiritualism has been practiced
in cultures all over the world. For example, many Native
Americans believe shamans (priests or medicine men)
have the power to communicate with the spirits of the
dead. The Old Testament (I Samuel 28:7–19) recounts
the visit of King Saul to a medium at Endor who sum-
moned the spirit of the prophet Samuel, which predicted
the death of Saul and his sons.
The mood in the United States in the 1860s and
1870s was ripe for Spiritualist se´ances. Virtually every-
one had lost a son, husband, or other loved one during the
Civil War (1861–65). Some survivors wanted assurances
that their loved ones were all right; others were simply
curious about life after death. Those who had drifted
away from traditional Christianity embraced this new
Spiritualism, which claimed scientific proof of survival
after physical death.
THE MODERN AGE
Modern medicine has played a vital role in the way
people die and, consequently, the manner in which the
dying process of a loved one affects relatives and friends.
With advancements in medical technology, the dying pro-
cess has become depersonalized, as it has moved away
from the familiar surroundings of home and family to the
sterile world of hospitals and strangers. Certainly, the insti-
tutionalization of death has not diminished the fear of
dying. Now the fear of death also involves the fear of
separation: for the living, the fear of not being present when
a loved one dies, and for the dying, the prospect of facing
death without the comforting presence of a loved one.
Changing Attitudes
In the last decades of the twentieth century, atti-
tudes about death and dying slowly began to change.
Aging baby boomers (people born between 1946 and
1964), facing the deaths of their parents, began to con-
front their own mortality. While medical advances con-
tinue to increase life expectancy, they have raised an
FIGURE 1.1
Device for indicating life in buried persons, 1882
Death and Dying
Death through the Ages: A Brief Overview
3

entirely new set of issues associated with death and
dying. For example, how long should advanced medical
technology be used to keep comatose people alive?
How should the elderly or incapacitated be cared for?
Is it reasonable for people to stop medical treatment,
or even actively end their lives, if that is what they
wish?
The works of psychiatrist Elisabeth Kubler-Ross,
including the pioneering book On Death and Dying
(New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1969),
have helped individuals from all walks of life confront
the reality of death and restore dignity to those who are
dying. One of the most respected authorities on death,
grief, and bereavement, Kubler-Ross and her theories
have influenced medical practices undertaken at the end
of life, as well as the attitudes of physicians, nurses,
clergy, and others who care for the dying.
During the late 1960s, medical education was
revealed to be seriously deficient in areas related to death
and dying. But initiatives underway in the late twentieth
and early twenty-first centuries have offered more
comprehensive training about end-of-life care. With the
introduction of in-home hospice care, more terminally ill
people have the option of spending their final days at
home with their loved ones. With the veil of secrecy
lifted and open public discussions about issues related
to the end of life, Americans appear more ready to learn
about death and to learn from the dying.
Hospice Care
In the Middle Ages hospices were refuges for the
sick, the needy, and travelers. The modern hospice move-
ment developed in response to the need to provide
humane care to terminally ill patients, while at the same
time lending support to their families. The English phy-
sician Dame Cicely Saunders is considered the founder of
the modern hospice movement—first in England in 1967
and later in Canada and the United States. The soothing,
calming care provided by hospice workers is called
palliative care, and it aims to relieve patients’ pain and
the accompanying symptoms of terminal illness, while
providing comfort to patients and their families.
Hospice may refer to a place—a freestanding facility
or designated floor in a hospital or nursing home—or to a
program such as hospice home care, in which a team of
health care professionals helps the dying patient and
family at home. Hospice teams may involve physicians,
nurses, social workers, pastoral counselors, and trained
volunteers.
WHY PEOPLE CHOOSE HOSPICE CARE. Hospice work-
ers consider the patient and family to be the ‘‘unit of
care’’ and focus their efforts on attending to emotional,
psychological, and spiritual needs as well as physical
comfort and well-being. With hospice care, as a patient
nears death, medical details move to the background as
personal details move to the foreground to avoid provid-
ing care that is not wanted by the patient, even if some
clinical benefit might be expected.
THE POPULATION SERVED. Hospice facilities served
621,100 people in 2000; of these, 85.5% died while in
hospice care. (See Table 1.1. Note: at this writing the
National Home and Hospice Care Survey, from which
these data are derived, is being redesigned; no new data
are available.) Nearly 80% of hospice patients were
sixty-five years of age and older, and 26.5% were
eighty-five years of age or older. Male hospice patients
numbered 309,300, while 311,800 were female. The
vast majority was white (84.1%). Approximately half
of the patients served were unmarried, but most of these
unmarried patients were widowed. Nearly 79% of
patients used Medicare as their primary source of pay-
ment for hospice services.
Although more than half (57.5%) of those admitted
to hospice care in 2000 had cancer (malignant neo-
plasms) as a primary diagnosis, patients with other
primary diagnoses, such as Alzheimer’s disease and
heart, respiratory, and kidney diseases, were also served
by hospice. (See Table 1.2. No new home and hospice
care data are available at this writing.)
4
Death through the Ages: A Brief Overview
Death and Dying

TABLE 1.1
Hospice care discharges by length of service, according to selected patient characteristics, 2000
Length of service in days
Discharges
Percent distribution
Percent
Less than
30 days
length
length
Discharge characteristic
Number
distribution
Total
30 days
or more
of service
of service
Total
621,100
100.0
100.0
62.8
37.2
46.9
15.6
Sex
Male
309,300
49.8
100.0
66.7
33.3
42.8
14.5
Female
311,800
50.2
100.0
58.9
41.1
50.9
18.1
Age at discharge
Under 65 years
126,900
20.4
100.0
64.1
35.9
43.9
15.0
65 years and over
494,300
79.6
100.0
62.4
37.6
47.7
16.3
65–74 years
153,100
24.7
100.0
65.0
35.0
41.2
16.4
75–84 years
176,400
28.4
100.0
62.3
37.7
50.6
16.5
85 years and over
164,800
26.5
100.0
60.2
39.8
50.5
15.9*
Racea
White
522,500
84.1
100.0
62.6
37.4
46.7
14.8
Black or African American and other races
64,300
10.3
100.0
68.5
31.5
53.6*
15.8
Black or African American
50,100
8.1
100.0
66.8
33.2
61.1*
14.9*
Unknown
34,400
5.5
100.0
55.5
44.5*
36.7
26.8*
Marital status at discharge
Married
293,400
47.2
100.0
67.5
32.5
40.0
11.7
Not married
289,500
46.6
100.0
58.8
41.2
54.1
18.5
Widowed
206,400
33.2
100.0
58.7
41.3
53.5
18.4*
Divorced or separated
35,200
5.7
100.0
63.1
36.9
74.8*
14.3*
Single or never married
47,900
7.7
100.0
56.3
43.7
41.5
19.5*
Unknown
38,300
6.2
100.0
56.4*
43.6*
45.3
24.2*
Primary source of payment
Medicare
488,000
78.6
100.0
61.5
38.5
48.1
16.7
All other sources
133,200
21.4
100.0
67.6
32.4
42.4
10.3*
Medicaid
31,400
5.1
100.0
73.7
26.3*
24.3
5.4*
Privateb
80,600
13.0
100.0
64.4
35.6
49.4*
11.0*
Otherc
21,100
3.4
100.0
70.9
29.1*
42.5
7.0*
Reason for discharge
Died
531,000
85.5
100.0
66.7
33.3
42.4
13.6
Did not die
90,200
14.5
100.0
39.5
60.5
73.1
43.6*
Services no longer needed from agencyd
49,000
7.9
100.0
29.2*
70.8
86.2
64.7
Transferred to inpatient caree
14,500
2.3
100.0
*
63.9*
81.7
71.0
Other and unknown
26,700
4.3
100.0
60.2*
39.8*
44.4
10.0*
*Data do not meet standard of reliability or precision (sample size is less than 30) and are, therefore, not reported. If shown with a number, data should not be assumed reliable because
the sample size is 30–59.
aPrior to 1998, only one race was recorded. Since 1998, more than one race may be recorded. The categories “White” and “Black or African American” include only those discharges for
whom that one race was reported. Discharges for whom more than one race was reported are included in “Black or African American and other races.”
bIncludes private insurance, own income, family support, Social Security benefits, retirement funds, and welfare.
cIncludes unknown source and no charge for care.
dIncludes recovered, stabilized, treatment plan completed, no longer eligible for hospice care, and insurance coverage no longer available.
eIncludes transferred to hospital, nursing home, or other inpatient or residental care.
Notes: Numbers may not add to totals because of rounding. Percents and average and median lengths of service are based on the unrounded figures.
SOURCE: Barbara J. Haupt, “Table 1. Number and Percent Distribution of Hospice Care Discharges by Length of Service, according to Selected Patient
Characteristics: United States, 2000,” in “Characteristics of Hospice Care Discharges and Their Length of Service: United States, 2000,” Vital and Health
Statistics, series 13, no. 154, August 2003, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_13/sr13_154.pdf (accessed November 8, 2005)
Average
Median
Death and Dying
Death through the Ages: A Brief Overview
5

TABLE 1.2
Hospice care discharges, by primary and all-listed diagnoses at admission, 2000
Primary diagnosisa
All-listed diagnosesb
Number of
Number of
Diagnosis
discharges
Percent
diagnoses
Percent
Total
621,100
100.0
1,437,500
100.0
Infectious and parasitic diseases
11,400*
1.8*
18,900*
1.3*
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) disease
9,400*
1.5*
9,700*
0.8*
Neoplasms
363,000
58.4
599,300
41.7
Malignant neoplasms
357,000
57.5
592,000
46.8
Malignant neoplasms of large intestine and rectum
51,500
8.3
60,000
4.7
Malignant neoplasm of trachea, bronchus and lung
120,500
19.4
146,100
11.5
Malignant neoplasm of bone, connective tissue and skin
10,500*
1.7*
46,000
3.6
Malignant neoplasm of breast
16,400
2.6
18,000
1.4
Malignant neoplasm of female genital organs
15,200*
2.5*
15,700*
1.2*
Malignant neoplasm of prostate
20,600
3.3
33,700
2.7
Malignant neoplasm of urinary organs
15,500
2.5
26,900
2.1
Malignant neoplasm of hemotopoietic tissue
22,500
3.6
30,600
2.4
Malignant neoplasm of other and unspecified sites
84,200
13.6
214,900
17.0
Endocrine, nutritional, and metabolic diseases and 
immunity disorders
*
*
60,100
4.2
Diabetes mellitus
*
*
47,100
3.7
Mental disorders
23,800
3.8
58,600
4.1
Diseases of the nervous system and sense organs
32,100
5.2
64,700
4.5
Alzheimer’s disease
16,900*
2.7*
27,600*
2.2*
Diseases of the circulatory system
72,900
11.7
243,100
16.9
Heart disease
42,500
6.8
109,200
8.6
Ischemic heart disease
*
*
21,600*
1.7*
Congestive heart failure
23,500
3.8
49,600
3.9
Cerebro vascular disease
16,900
2.7
37,800
3.0
Other diseases of the circulatory system
29,600
4.8
83,900
6.6
Diseases of the respiratory system
42,800
6.9
124,200
8.6
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and allied 
conditions
27,600
4.4
65,800
5.2
Diseases of the digestive system
12,000*
1.9*
36,100
2.5
Diseases of the genito urinary system
7,600*
1.2*
32,200
2.2
Diseases of the musculoskeletal system and 
connective tissue
*
*
22,800*
1.6*
Symptoms, signs and ill-defined conditions
34,800
5.6
92,900
6.5
Supplementary classification
*
*
23,700*
1.6*
Posthospital aftercare
*
*
16,600*
1.3*
Unknown or no diagnosis
*
*
. . .
. . .
*Figure does not meet standard of reliability or precision because the sample size is less than 30 if shown without an estimate. If shown with an estimate, the sample size is between 0
and 59.
. . . Category not applicable.
aPrimary diagnosis is the diagnosis that is chiefly responsible for the discharges’s admission to hospice care.
bUp to six diagnoses are recorded for each patient at admission.
Notes: Numbers may not add to totals because of rounding. Percentages are based on the unrounded numbers.
SOURCE: “Table 13. Number and Percentage of Hospice Care Discharges, by Primary and All-Listed Diagnoses at Admission: United States, 2000,” National
Home and Hospice Care Data, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, 2003, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nhhcsd/
hospicecaredischarges00.pdf (accessed November 8, 2005)
6
Death through the Ages: A Brief Overview
Death and Dying

CHAPTER 2
REDEFINING DEATH
TRADITIONAL DEFINITION OF DEATH
The processes of human life are sustained by many
factors, but oxygen is the key to life. Respiration and
blood circulation provide the body’s cells with the oxygen
needed to perform their life functions. When an injury or a
disease compromises respiration or circulation, a break-
down in the oxygen supply can occur. As a result, the
cells, deprived of essential life-sustaining oxygen, dete-
riorate. Using the criteria of a working heart and lungs,
defining death was once quite simple—a person was
considered dead once he or she stopped breathing or was
without a detectable heartbeat.
A NEW CRITERION FOR DEATH
Advances in medical science have complicated the
definition of death. Life-saving measures such as cardio-
pulmonary resuscitation (CPR) or defibrillation (electri-
cal shock) can restart cardiac activity. The development
of the mechanical respirator in the 1950s also prompted a
change in the concept of death. An unconscious patient,
unable to breathe without assistance, could be kept alive
with a respirator and, based on the heart and lung criteria,
the patient could not be declared dead.
Further complicating the issue was the transplanta-
tion of the first human heart. Experimental organ trans-
plantation has been performed since the early 1900s. In
the 1960s transplantation of organs such as kidneys
became routine practice. Kidneys could be harvested
from a patient whose heart had stopped and who there-
fore could be declared legally dead. A successful heart
transplant, on the other hand, required a beating heart
from a ‘‘dead’’ donor. On December 3, 1967, South
African surgeon Christiaan Barnard transplanted a heart
from a fatally injured accident victim into a man named
Louis Washkansky.
Physicians who had been debating how best to handle
patients whose life functions were supported mechanically
now faced a new dilemma. With the first successful heart
transplant, such patients now became potential heart
donors, and it became necessary to ensure that a patient
was truly dead before the heart was actually removed.
Thus physicians proposed a new criterion for death—irre-
versible cessation of brain activity, or what many termed
‘‘brain death.’’
The Harvard Criteria
In 1968 the Ad Hoc Committee of the Harvard
Medical School to Examine the Definition of Brain
Death was organized. The goal of the Harvard Brain
Death Committee, as it was also known, was to redefine
death. On August 5, 1968, the committee published its
report, ‘‘A Definition of Irreversible Coma,’’ in the
Journal of the American Medical Association. This land-
mark report, known as the Harvard Criteria, listed the
following guidelines for identifying irreversible coma:
• Unreceptivity and unresponsivity—the patient is com-
pletely unaware of externally applied stimuli and
inner need. He/she does not respond even to intensely
painful stimuli.
• No movements or breathing—the patient shows no
sign of spontaneous movements and spontaneous
respiration and does not respond to pain, touch,
sound, or light.
• No reflexes—the pupils of the eyes are fixed and
dilated. The patient shows no eye movements even
when the ear is flushed with ice water or the head is
turned. He/she does not react to harmful stimuli and
exhibits no tendon reflexes.
• Flat electroencephalogram (EEG)—this shows lack of
electrical activity in the cerebral cortex.
The Harvard Criteria could not be used unless
reversible causes of brain dysfunction, such as drug
intoxication and hypothermia (abnormally low body
Death and Dying
7

temperature—below 32.2 degrees centigrade or 89.96
degrees Fahrenheit core temperature), had been ruled
out. The committee further recommended that the four
tests be repeated twenty-four hours after the initial test.
The Harvard committee stated, ‘‘Our primary pur-
pose is to define irreversible coma as a new criterion
for death.’’ Despite this, the committee in effect rein-
forced brain death—a lack of all neurological activity in
the brain and brain stem—as the legal criterion for the
death of a patient. A patient who met all four guidelines
could be declared dead, and his or her respirator could be
withdrawn. The committee added, however, ‘‘We are
concerned here only with those comatose individuals
who have no discernible central nervous system activ-
ity.’’ Brain death differs somewhat from irreversible
coma; patients in deep coma may show brain activity
on an EEG, even though they may not be able to breathe
on their own. People in a persistent vegetative state are
also in an irreversible coma; however, they show more
brain activity on an EEG than patients in deep coma and
are able to breathe without the help of a respirator. Such
patients were not considered dead by the committee’s
definition because they still had brain activity.
Criticisms of the Harvard Criteria
In 1978 Public Law 95–622 established the ethical
advisory body called the President’s Commission for the
Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical
and
Behavioral
Research.
Later,
President
Ronald
Reagan assigned the President’s Commission the task of
defining death. The President’s Commission reported that
‘‘the ‘Harvard Criteria’ have been found to be quite
reliable. Indeed, no case has yet been found that met
these criteria and regained any brain functions despite
continuation of respirator support.’’
The President’s Commission, however, noted the
following deficiencies in the Harvard Criteria:
• The phrase ‘‘irreversible coma’’ is misleading. Coma
is a condition of a living person. A person lacking in
brain functions is dead and, therefore, beyond the
condition called coma.
• The Harvard Brain Death Committee failed to note
that spinal cord reflexes can continue or resume activ-
ity even after the brain stops functioning.
• ‘‘Unreceptivity’’ cannot be tested in an unresponsive
person who has lost consciousness.
• The committee had not been ‘‘sufficiently explicit and
precise’’ in expressing the need for adequate testing of
brain stem reflexes, especially apnea (absence of the
impulse to breathe, leading to an inability to breathe
spontaneously). Adequate testing to eliminate drug
and metabolic intoxication as possible causes of
the coma had also not been spelled out explicitly.
Metabolic intoxication refers to the accumulation of
toxins (poisons) in the blood resulting from kidney or
liver failure. Though these toxins can severely impair
brain functioning and cause coma, the condition is
potentially reversible.
• Although all persons who satisfy the Harvard Criteria
are dead (with irreversible cessation of whole-brain
functions), many dead individuals cannot maintain
circulation long enough for re-testing after a twenty-
four-hour interval.
THE GOVERNMENT REDEFINES DEATH
In 1981 the President’s Commission published Defining
Death:
Medical,
Legal
and
Ethical
Issues
in
the
Determination of Death (http://www.bioethics.gov/reports/
past_commissions/defining_death.pdf). In its report to Pres-
ident Ronald Reagan and the Congress, the Commission
proposed a model statute, the Uniform Determination of
Death Act, the guidelines of which would be used to define
death:
• [Determination of Death.] An individual who has
sustained either (1) irreversible cessation of circula-
tion and respiratory functions, or (2) irreversible ces-
sation of all functions of the entire brain, including
the brain stem, is dead. A determination of death must
be
made
in
accordance
with
accepted
medical
standards.
• [Uniformity of Construction and Application.] This
Act shall be applied and construed to effectuate its
general purpose to make uniform the law with respect
to the subject of this Act among states enacting it.
Brain Death
The President’s Commission incorporated two for-
mulations or concepts of the ‘‘whole-brain definition’’
of death. The Commission stated that these two concepts
were ‘‘actually mirror images of each other. The
Commission has found them to be complementary;
together they enrich one’s understanding of the ‘defini-
tion’ [of death].’’
The first whole-brain formulation states that death
occurs when the three major organs—the heart, lungs,
and brain—suffer an irreversible functional breakdown.
These organs are closely interrelated, so that if one stops
functioning permanently, the other two will also stop
working. While traditionally the absence of the ‘‘vital
signs’’ of respiration and circulation have signified death,
this is simply a sign that the brain, the core organ, has
permanently ceased to function. Even if individual cells
or organs continue to live, the body as a whole cannot
survive for long. Therefore, death can be declared even
before the whole system shuts down.
8
Redefining Death
Death and Dying

The second whole-brain formulation ‘‘identifies the
functioning of the whole brain as the hallmark of life
because the brain is the regulator of the body’s integra-
tion.’’ Because the brain is the seat of consciousness and
the director of all bodily functions, when the brain dies,
the person is considered dead.
Reason for Two Definitions of Death
The President’s Commission claimed that its aim was
to ‘‘supplement rather than supplant [take the place of]
the existing legal concept.’’ The brain-death criteria were
not being introduced to define death in a new way. In
most cases the cardiopulmonary definition of death
would be sufficient. Only comatose patients on respira-
tors would be diagnosed using the brain-death criteria.
Criteria for Determination of Death
The Commission did not include in the proposed
Uniform Determination of Death Act any specific medi-
cal criteria for diagnosing brain death. Instead it had a
group of medical consultants develop a summary of cur-
rently accepted medical practices. The Commission sta-
ted that ‘‘such criteria—particularly as they relate to
diagnosing death on neurological grounds—will be con-
tinually revised by the biomedical community in light of
clinical experience and new scientific knowledge.’’
These Criteria for Determination of Death read as follows
(with medical details omitted here):
1. An individual with irreversible cessation of circula-
tory and respiratory functions is dead. A) Cessation
is recognized by an appropriate clinical examination.
B) Irreversibility is recognized by persistent cessa-
tion of functions during an appropriate period of
observation and/or trial of therapy.
2. An individual with irreversible cessation of all func-
tions of the entire brain, including the brainstem, is
dead. A) Cessation is recognized when evaluation
discloses that cerebral cortical and brainstem func-
tions are absent. B) Irreversibility is recognized
when evaluation discloses that: the cause of coma
is established and is sufficient to account for the loss
of brain functions; the possibility of recovery of any
brain functions is excluded; and the cessation of all
brain functions persists for an appropriate period of
observation and/or trial of therapy.
The Criteria for Determination of Death further warn
that conditions such as drug intoxication, metabolic intox-
ication, and hypothermia may be confused with brain
death. Physicians should practice caution when dealing
with young children and persons in shock. Infants and
young children, who have more resistance to neurological
damage, have been known to recover brain functions.
Shock victims, on the other hand, might not test well
due to a reduction in blood circulation to the brain.
The Brain-Death Concept and Brain-Death
Criteria around the World
Since the development of brain-death criteria in the
United States, most countries have adopted the brain-
death concept. Nevertheless, determining brain death
varies worldwide. One reason has to do with cultural or
religious beliefs. For example, in Japan it is believed that
the soul lingers in the body for some time after death.
Such a belief may influence the length of time the patient
is observed before making the determination of death.
Eelco F. M. Wijdicks of the Mayo Medical Center in
Rochester,
Minnesota,
surveyed
brain-death
criteria
throughout the world and reported his results in ‘‘Brain
Death
Worldwide:
Accepted
Fact
but
No
Global
Consensus in Diagnostic Criteria’’ (Neurology, vol. 58,
no. 1, January 8, 2002). Wijdicks obtained brain-death
guidelines for adults in eighty countries and determined
that seventy of the eighty countries had guidelines for
clinical practice in determining brain death. In examin-
ing these guidelines Wijdicks found major differences in
the procedures used for diagnosing brain death in adults.
For example, in some countries brain-death criteria are
left up to the physician to determine, while in other
countries written guidelines are extremely complicated.
In some countries confirmatory laboratory tests are man-
datory, while in others they are not. Due to these and
many other differences in brain-death diagnostic criteria
across countries, Wijdicks suggests that countries world-
wide consider standardizing procedures to determine
brain death.
What are the diagnostic criteria for determining brain
death in the United States? In ‘‘Variability among
Hospital
Policies
for
Determining
Brain
Death
in
Adults’’ (Critical Care Medicine, vol. 32, no. 6, June
2004), David Powner, Michael Hernandez, and Terry
Rives explain that there is no federally mandated defini-
tion for brain death or method for certifying brain death.
Thus, states have adopted the Uniform Determination of
Death Act as described in the prior section. Within each
hospital, however, actual clinical practice is determined
by the medical staff and administrative committees. The
researchers studied six hundred randomly selected hospi-
tals to determine whether differences exist among hospital
policies for certification of brain death. They determined
that differences exist and suggested that policies be stan-
dardized. Wijdicks and Ronald E. Cranford list clinical
criteria
for
brain
death
in
‘‘Clinical
Diagnosis
of
Prolonged States of Impaired Consciousness in Adults’’
(Mayo Clinic Proceedings, vol. 80, no. 8, August 2005).
(See Table 2.1.)
Brain Death and Persistent Vegetative State
In the past people who suffered severe head injuries
usually died from apnea. Today rapid emergency medical
Death and Dying
Redefining Death
9

intervention allows them to be placed on respirators
before breathing stops. In some cases the primary brain
damage may be reversible, and unassisted breathing
eventually resumes. In many cases, however, brain
damage is irreversible, and, if the respirator is not dis-
connected, it will continue to pump blood to the dead
brain.
The brain stem, traditionally called the lower brain, is
usually more resistant to damage from oxygen depriva-
tion, or anoxia. Less serious brain injury may cause
irreversible damage to the cerebrum, or higher brain,
but may spare the brain stem. (See Figure 2.1.) When
the cerebrum is irreversibly damaged yet the brain stem
still functions, the patient goes into a persistent vegeta-
tive state (PVS), also called persistent noncognitive state.
PVS patients, lacking in the higher-brain functions, are
awake but unaware. They swallow, grimace when in
pain, yawn, open their eyes, and may even breathe with-
out a respirator. Table 2.2 lists the criteria for the diag-
nosis of a persistent vegetative state.
The case of Karen Ann Quinlan called attention to
the ramifications of the persistent vegetative state. In
1975 Quinlan suffered a cardiopulmonary arrest after
ingesting a combination of alcohol and drugs. In 1976
Joseph Quinlan was granted court permission to discon-
tinue artificial respiration for his comatose daughter.
Even after life support was removed, Karen remained in
a persistent vegetative state until she died of multiple
infections in 1985.
A more recent case that has refocused national atten-
tion on the persistent vegetative state is that of Terri
Schiavo, who entered a PVS in 1990, when her brain
was deprived of oxygen during a heart attack brought on
by an eating disorder. Her husband argued that she would
never recover and that his wife would not want to be kept
alive by artificial means. He petitioned a Florida court to
remove her feeding tube. In October 2003 a Florida judge
ruled that the tube should be removed. But Schiavo’s
parents believed that their daughter would recover and
requested that Florida Governor Jeb Bush intervene. The
Florida legislature subsequently gave Governor Bush the
authority to override the courts, and the feeding tube was
reinserted six days after its removal.
In May 2004 the law that allowed Governor Bush to
intervene in the case was ruled unconstitutional by a
Florida appeals court. The case was then appealed to
the U.S. Supreme Court, which in January 2005 refused
to hear the appeal and reinstate the Florida law. In March
2005 doctors removed Terri Schiavo’s feeding tube. She
TABLE 2.1
Criteria for brain death
Coma
Absence of motor responses
Absence of pupillary responses to light and pupils at midposition with respect to
dilatation (4–6 mm)
Absence of corneal reflexes
Absence of caloric responses
Absence of gag reflex
Absence of coughing in response to tracheal suctioning
Absence of respiratory drive at PaCO2 that is 60 mm Hg or 20 mm Hg above normal
baseline values
SOURCE: Eelco F.M. Wijdicks and Ronald E. Cranford, “Table 3. Clinical
Criteria for Brain Death,” in “Clinical Diagnosis of Prolonged States of
Impaired Consciousness in Adults,” Mayo Clinic Proceedings, vol. 80, no. 8,
August 2005
TABLE 2.2
Criteria for a persistent vegetative state (PVS)
1. No evidence of awareness of themselves or their environment; they are incapable of
interacting with others
2. No evidence of sustained, reproducible, purposeful, or voluntary behavioral responses
to visual, auditory, tactile, or noxious stimuli
3. No evidence of language comprehension or expression
4. Intermittent wakefulness manifested by the presence of sleep-wake cycles
5. Sufficiently preserved hypothalamic and brainstem autonomic functions to survive if
given medical and nursing care
6. Bowel and bladder incontinence
7. Variably preserved cranial nerve (pupillary, oculocephalic, corneal, vestibulo-ocular,
and gag) and spinal reflexes
SOURCE: Eelco F.M. Wijdicks and Ronald E. Cranford, “Table 1. Criteria for
the Diagnosis of a Persistent Vegetative State,” in “Clinical Diagnosis of
Prolonged States of Impaired Consciousness in Adults,” Mayo Clinic
Proceedings, vol. 80, no. 8, August 2005
FIGURE 2.1
Parts of the brain
Cerebrum
SOURCE: “Figure 2. Anatomic Interrelationships of Heart, Lungs, and
Brain,” in Defining Death: A Report on the Medical, Legal and Ethical
Issues in the Determination of Death, President’s Commission for the
Study of Ethical Problems in Medicine and Biomedical and Behavioral
Research, July 1981,  http://www.bioethics.gov/reports/past_ 
commissions/defining_death.pdf (accessed November 1, 2005)
Mid-brain
Medulla
Cerebellum
Brain
stem
Spinal cord
Pons
10
Redefining Death
Death and Dying

died thirteen days later. An autopsy showed extensive
damage throughout the cerebrum. Damage was so severe
that the autopsy report noted that Schiavo must have been
blind.
Patients in a persistent vegetative state are not dead,
and so the brain-death criteria do not apply to them.
They can survive for years with artificial feeding and
antibiotics
for
possible
infections.
The
President’s
Commission reported on a patient who remained in a
persistent vegetative state for thirty-seven years: Elaine
Esposito, who lapsed into a coma after surgery in 1941
and died in 1978.
THE NEAR-DEATH EXPERIENCE
The term ‘‘near-death experience’’ was first used by
Dr. Raymond Moody in Life after Life (Harrisburg, PA:
Stackpole Books, 1976), a compilation of interviews with
people who claimed to have come back from the dead.
A decade earlier, Dr. Elisabeth Kubler-Ross investigated
out-of-body episodes recounted by her patients.
The near-death experience is not a phenomenon
limited to modern times. It has been recounted in various
forms of mysticism, as well as by well-known historical
figures such as the Greek philosopher Plato (circa 428–347
BCE) and Benedictine historian and theologian St. Bede
(circa 672–735). It appears, however, that the development
and administration of emergency resuscitation has contrib-
uted to widespread reports of near-death experiences.
Some people who were revived after having been
declared clinically dead have recounted remarkably simi-
lar patterns of experiences. They reported leaving their
body and watching, in a detached manner, while others
tried to save that body. They felt no pain, but rather
experienced complete serenity. After traveling through a
tunnel, they encountered a radiant light. Some claimed
they had met friends and relatives who had died; many
attested to seeing their whole lives replayed and of ulti-
mately being given either a choice or a command to
return to their bodies.
Many people who have had a near-death experience
believe that they have experienced a spiritual event of
great importance. For example, they may believe that
they saw, or even entered, the afterlife. Studies conducted
during the 1990s indicated that the near-death experience
might be related to one or more physical changes in the
brain. These changes include the gradual onset of anoxia
(oxygen deprivation) in the brain; residual electrical
activity in the brain; the release of endorphins in response
to stress; or drug-induced hallucinations produced by
drug therapies used during resuscitation attempts or
resulting from prior drug abuse.
Not everyone who has been close to death has had a
near-death experience. These experiences are atypical
reactions to trauma, and the involvement of the temporal
lobes of the brain in these experiences has been explored
by researchers for decades. Most recently, Willoughby
Britton and Richard Bootzin investigated temporal lobe
functioning in forty-three individuals who had experienced
life-threatening events. Of these forty-three participants,
twenty-three reported having had near-death experiences
during those events (‘‘Near-Death Experiences and the
Temporal Lobe,’’ Psychological Science, vol. 15, no. 4,
April 2004). The researchers found that people who
reported near-death experiences had more of certain types
of temporal lobe activity than those who did not have such
experiences. The researchers concluded that ‘‘altered tem-
poral lobe functioning may be involved in the near-death
experience and that individuals who have had such experi-
ences
are physiologically distinct from
the
general
population.’’
Death and Dying
Redefining Death
11

CHAPTER 3
THE END OF LIFE: ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
Defining death has become a complex matter.
Innovative medical technology, while saving many lives,
has also blurred the lines between life and death. The
controversy about the definition of death is but one of the
ethical issues, or principles of moral conduct, related to
end-of-life care and decision making. For example,
should a son or daughter request the withdrawal of nutri-
tion and hydration from a parent in a persistent vegetative
state, knowing that parent’s respect for the sanctity of
life? Does a physician honor a patient’s do-not-resuscitate
request when it goes against the physician’s ethical con-
victions? Who should determine when medical care is
futile and no longer benefits the dying patient?
The answers to questions about care at the end of life,
as well as decisions made by persons who are dying and
by their loved ones, vary in response to cultural influ-
ences, family issues, and spiritual beliefs. Historical,
social, cultural, political, and religious convictions shape
ethical beliefs about death and guide the actions of health
care professionals and persons who are terminally ill. For
people of faith, religious convictions are vitally important
when making end-of-life decisions.
RELIGIOUS TEACHINGS
All major religions consider life sacred. When it
comes to death and dying, they take seriously the fate
of the soul, be it eternal salvation (as in Christian belief)
or reincarnation (as in Buddhist philosophy).
Roman Catholicism
According to Catholic teachings, death is contrary to
God’s plan for humankind. In the Old Testament story of
Genesis, when God created human beings, he did not
intend for them to die. But when Adam and Eve—the
first humans—disobeyed God in the Garden of Eden,
physical death was the consequence of their sin. In the
New Testament section of the Bible, Jesus Christ was the
Son of God who, out of love for humankind, was born
into the world and died as a man. God raised Jesus from
the dead after his crucifixion to live eternally with him
in Heaven, and Jesus promised humankind the same
opportunity. According to Christian doctrine, Jesus thus
‘‘transformed the curse of death into a blessing’’
(Catechism of the Catholic Church, Second Edition,
English Translation, Doubleday, 1997).
HISTORY. Early Christians believed that God was the
giver of life, and therefore he alone could take life away.
They viewed euthanasia as usurping that divine right. The
early Christian philosopher St. Augustine (circa 354–430)
taught that people must accept suffering because it comes
from God. According to Augustine, suffering not only
helps one grow spiritually but also prepares Christians
for the eternal joy that God has in store for them.
Moreover, the healthy were exhorted to minister to the
sick not for the purpose of helping to permanently end
their suffering, but in order to ease their pain.
St. Thomas Aquinas (circa 1225–74), considered one
of the greatest Catholic theologians, taught that ending
one’s suffering by ending one’s life was sinful. To help
another take his or her life was just as sinful. However, in
1516 Sir Thomas More (circa 1477–1535), an English
statesman, humanist, and loyal defender of the Catholic
Church, published Utopia, which described an ideal
country governed by reason. More argued that if a disease
is not only incurable but also causes pain that is hard to
control, it is permissible to free the sufferer from his or
her painful existence. This was a major departure from
the medieval acceptance of suffering and death as the
earthly price to be paid for eternal life.
PRINCIPLE OF DOUBLE EFFECT. Catholic moral theo-
logians were said to have developed the ethical principle
known as the ‘‘Rule of Double Effect.’’ According to this
principle, ‘‘Effects that would be morally wrong if caused
intentionally are permissible if foreseen but unintended.’’
Death and Dying
13

For example, a physician prescribes an increased dosage of
the painkiller morphine to ease a patient’s pain, not to bring
about his or her death. However, it is foreseen that a potent
dosage may depress the patient’s respiration and hasten
death. The Catechism of the Catholic Church states:
The use of painkillers to alleviate the sufferings of the
dying, even at the risk of shortening their days, can be
morally in conformity with human dignity if death is
not willed as either an end or a means, but only fore-
seen and tolerated as inevitable.
ON EUTHANASIA. Over the years, Catholic theolo-
gians have debated balancing the preservation of God-
given life with the moral issue of continuing medical
treatments that are of no apparent value to patients. In
1957 Pope Pius XII stated that if a patient is hopelessly
ill, physicians may discontinue heroic measures ‘‘to per-
mit the patient, already virtually dead, to pass on in
peace’’ (‘‘The Prolongation of Life’’). He added that if
the patient is unconscious, relatives may request with-
drawal of life support under certain conditions.
In Nutrition and Hydration: Moral and Pastoral
Reflections the Committee for Pro-Life Activities of the
National Conference of Catholic Bishops (Washington,
DC: NCCB, 1992) stated:
In the final stage of dying, one is not obligated to
prolong the life of a patient by every possible means:
‘‘When inevitable death is imminent in spite of the
means used, it is permitted in conscience to make the
decision to refuse forms of treatment that would only
secure a precarious and burdensome prolongation of
life, so long as the normal care due the sick person in
similar cases is not interrupted.’’
The Eastern Orthodox Church
The Eastern Orthodox Church resulted from the divi-
sion between Eastern and Western Christianity during the
eleventh century. Differences in doctrines and politics,
among other things, caused the separation. The Eastern
Orthodox Church does not have a single worldwide lea-
der like the Roman Catholic pope. Instead, national jur-
isdictions called ‘‘Sees’’ are each governed by a bishop.
Eastern Orthodoxy relies on the Scriptures, tradition,
and the decrees of the first seven ecumenical councils to
regulate its daily conduct. In matters of present-day mor-
ality, such as the debates on end-of-life issues, contem-
porary Orthodox ethicists explore possible courses of
action that are in line with the ‘‘sense of the Church.’’
The sense of the Church is deduced from Church laws
and dissertations of the Fathers of the Church, as well as
previous council decisions. Their recommendations are
subject to further review.
‘‘The Stand of the Orthodox Church on Controversial
Issues,’’ by the Reverend Stanley Harakas, Th.D. (http://
www.goarch.org/en/ourfaith/articles/article7101.asp), states,
‘‘The Orthodox Church has a very strong pro-life stand
which in part expresses itself in opposition to doctrinaire
advocacy of euthanasia.’’ However, the article quotes cur-
rent Orthodox theology to clarify that ‘‘the Church distin-
guishes between euthanasia and the withholding of extra-
ordinary means to prolong life. It affirms the sanctity of
human life and man’s God-given responsibility to preserve
life. But it rejects an attitude which disregards the inevit-
ability of physical death.’’
Protestantism
The different denominations of Protestantism have
varying positions about euthanasia. While many hold that
active euthanasia is morally wrong, they believe that
prolonging life by extraordinary measures is not neces-
sary. In other words, though few would condone active
euthanasia, many accept passive euthanasia. (Active
euthanasia involves the hastening of death through the
administration of lethal drugs. Passive euthanasia refers
to withdrawing life support or medical interventions
necessary to sustain life, such as removing a patient from
a
ventilator.)
Among
the
Protestant
denominations
that support the latter view are the Jehovah’s Witnesses,
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints (Mormons),
the Lutheran Churches, the Reformed Presbyterians, the
Presbyterian
Church
in
America,
the
Christian
Life
Commission of the Southern Baptist Convention, and the
General Association of the General Baptists.
Some denominations have no official policy on active
or passive euthanasia. However, many individual ethicists
and representatives within these churches agree with other
denominations that active euthanasia is morally wrong but
that futile life supports serve no purpose. Among these
churches are the Seventh Day Adventists, the Episcopal
Church, and the United Methodist Church.
Christian Scientists believe that prayer heals all dis-
eases. They claim that illnesses are mental in origin and
therefore cannot be cured by outside intervention, such as
medical help. Some also believe that seeking medical
help while praying diminishes or even cancels the effec-
tiveness of the prayers. Because God can heal even those
diseases others see as incurable, euthanasia has no prac-
tical significance among Christian Scientists.
The Unitarian Universalist Association, a union of
the Unitarian and Universalist Churches, is perhaps the
most liberal when it comes to the right to die. The
Association believes that ‘‘human life has inherent dig-
nity, which may be compromised when life is extended
beyond the will or ability of a person to sustain that
dignity.’’ Furthermore, ‘‘Unitarian Universalists advocate
the right to self-determination in dying, and the release
from civil or criminal penalties of those who, under
proper safeguards, act to honor the right of terminally
ill patients to select the time of their own deaths’’ (http://
www.uua.org/actions/health/88die-dignity.html).
14
The End of Life: Ethical Considerations
Death and Dying

Judaism
In the United States there are three main branches of
Judaism. The Orthodox tradition adheres strictly to
Jewish laws. Conservative Judaism advocates adapting
Jewish precepts to a changing world, but all changes must
be consistent with Jewish laws and tradition. Reform
Judaism, while accepting the ethical laws as coming from
God, generally considers the other laws of Judaism as
‘‘instructional but not binding.’’
Like the Roman Catholics, Jews believe that life is
precious because it is a gift from God. No one has the right
to extinguish life, because one’s life is not his or hers in the
first place. Generally, rabbis from all branches of Judaism
agree that active euthanasia is not morally justified. It is
tantamount to murder, which is forbidden by the Torah
(the Five Books of Moses). Moreover, Jewish teaching
holds that men and women are stewards entrusted with
the preservation of God’s gift of life and therefore are
obliged to hold on to that life as long as possible.
PROLONGING
LIFE
VERSUS
HASTENING
DEATH.
While Jewish tradition maintains that a devout believer
must do everything possible to prolong life, this admonition
is subject to interpretation even among Orthodox Jews.
The Torah and the Talmud provide the principles
and laws that guide Jews. The Talmud—the definitive
rabbinical compilation of Jewish laws, lore, and com-
mentary—has provided continuity to Jewish culture by
interpreting the Torah and adapting it to the constantly
changing situations of Jewish people.
On the subject of prolonging life versus hastening
death, when that life is clearly nearing death, the Talmud
narrates a number of situations involving people who are
considered ‘‘goses’’ (literally, the death rattle is in the
patient’s throat, or one whose death is imminent).
Scholars often refer to the story of Rabbi Haninah ben
Teradyon, who, during the second century, was con-
demned to be burned to death by the Romans. To prolong
his agonizing death, the Romans wrapped him in some
wet material. At first the rabbi refused to hasten his own
death; however, he later agreed to have the wet material
removed, thus bringing about a quicker death.
Some Jews interpret this Talmudic narration to mean
that in the final stage of a person’s life, it is permissible
to remove any hindrance to the dying process. In this
modern age of medicine, this may mean implementing a
patient’s wish, such as the do-not-resuscitate directive or
the withdrawal of artificial life support.
Islam
Islam was founded by the prophet Muhammad in the
seventh century. The Qur’an (also transliterated as
Koran), which is composed of God’s revelations to
Muhammad, and the Sunnah, Muhammad’s teachings
and deeds, are the sources of Islamic beliefs and practice.
Although there are numerous sects and cultural diversi-
ties within the religion, all Muslims (followers of Islam)
are bound by a total submission to the will of Allah, or
God. The basic doctrines of Allah’s revelations were
systematized into definitive rules and regulations that
now comprise the Shari’ah, or the religious law that
governs the life of Muslims.
Muslims look to the Shari’ah for ethical guidance in
all aspects of life, including medicine. Sickness and pain
are part of life and must be accepted as Allah’s will. They
should be viewed as a means to atone for one’s sins.
Death, on the other hand, is simply a passage to another
existence in the afterlife. Those who die after leading a
righteous life will merit the true life on Judgment Day.
The Qur’an (chapter 2, verse 28) states, ‘‘How do you
disbelieve in God seeing you were dead and He gave you
life and then He shall cause you to die, then He shall give
you life, then unto Him you shall be returned?’’
Islam teaches that life is a gift from Allah; therefore,
no one can end it except Allah. The prophet Muhammad
said, ‘‘Whosoever takes poison and thus kills himself, his
poison will be in his hand; he will be tasting it in Hell,
always abiding therein, and being accommodated therein
forever.’’ While an ailing person does not have the right
to choose death, even if he or she is suffering, Muslims
heed the following admonition (Islamic Code of Medical
Ethics, Kuwait Document, Kuwait Rabi 1, 1401, First
International Conference on Islamic Medicine, 1981):
[The] doctor is well advised to realize his limit and not
transgress it. If it is scientifically certain that life cannot
be restored, then it is futile to diligently [maintain] the
vegetative state of the patient by heroic means. . . . It is
the process of life that the doctor aims to maintain and
not the process of dying. In any case, the doctor shall not
take a positive measure to terminate the patient’s life.
Hinduism
The Eastern religious tradition of Hinduism is
founded on the principle of reincarnation—the cycle of
life, death, and physical rebirth. Hindus believe that death
and dying are intricately interwoven with life, and that
the individual soul undergoes a series of physical life
cycles before uniting with Brahman, or God. ‘‘Karma’’
refers to the ethical consequences of a person’s actions
during a previous life, which determine the quality of his
or her present life. A person can neither change nor
escape his or her karma. By conforming to ‘‘dharma,’’
the religious and moral law, an individual is able to fulfill
obligations from the past life. Life is sacred because it
offers one the chance to perform good acts toward the
goal of ending the cycle of rebirths.
A believer in Hinduism, therefore, views pain and
suffering as personal karma, and serious illness as a
Death and Dying
The End of Life: Ethical Considerations
15

consequence of past misdeeds. Death is simply a passage
to another rebirth, which brings one closer to God.
Artificial medical treatments to sustain life are not recom-
mended, and medical intervention to end life is discour-
aged. Active euthanasia simply interrupts one’s karma
and the soul’s evolution toward final liberation from
reincarnations.
Buddhism
Buddhism, like Hinduism, is based on a cycle of
reincarnation. To Buddhists, the goals of every life are
emancipation from ‘‘samsara,’’ the compulsory cycle of
rebirths, and attainment of ‘‘nirvana,’’ enlightenment or
bliss. Like the Hindus, Buddhists believe that sickness,
death, and karma are interrelated. Followers of Siddhartha
Gautama, also called Buddha (circa 563–483 BCE), the
founder of Buddhism, claim that Buddha advised against
taking too strict a position when it comes to issues such as
the right to die.
The fourteenth Dalai Lama, Tenzin Gyatso, spiritual
leader of Tibetan Buddhism, has commented on the use
of mechanical life support when the patient has no chance
to recover. Rather than advocating or condemning pas-
sive euthanasia, he advised that each case be considered
individually (Sogyal Rinpoche, The Tibetan Book of
Living and Dying, San Francisco, CA: Harper, 1992):
If there is no such chance for positive thoughts
[Buddhists believe that a dying person’s final thoughts
determine the circumstances of his next life], and in
addition a lot of money is being spent by relatives
simply in order to keep someone alive, then there seems
to be no point. But each case must be dealt with
individually; it is very difficult to generalize.
BIOETHICS AND MEDICAL PRACTICE
Since ancient times, medical practice has been con-
cerned with ethical issues. But only since the last half of the
twentieth century have rapid advances in medicine given
rise to so many ethical dilemmas. In matters of death and
dying the debate continues on such issues as physicians’
honoring a patient’s do-not-resuscitate order, withholding
food and fluids, and withdrawing artificial respiration.
There are four basic tenets of bioethics: autonomy,
beneficence, nonmaleficence, and justice. Autonomy
refers to self-rule and self-determination. Beneficence is
action that is in the best interest of the patient.
Nonmaleficence means to do no harm. Justice is the
practice of treating patients in comparable circumstances
the same way, and also refers to equitable distribution of
resources, risks, and costs. Although bioethics is subject
to change and reinterpretation, medical practice continues
to rely on these principles to guide the actions of physi-
cians and other health care providers.
The Hippocratic Oath
The earliest written document to deal with medical
ethics is generally attributed to Hippocrates (circa 460–
370 BCE), known as the father of medicine. For more
than two thousand years the Hippocratic Oath has been
adopted by Western physicians as a code of ethics, defin-
ing their conduct in the discharge of their duties. In part,
the oath states:
I will follow that method of treatment, which, accord-
ing to my ability and judgment, I consider for the
benefit of my patients, and abstain from whatever is
deleterious [harmful] and mischievous. I will give no
deadly medicine to anyone if asked, nor suggest any
such counsel.
Nonetheless, some scholars claim that the giving of
‘‘deadly medicine’’ did not refer to euthanasia. During
the time of Hippocrates, helping a suffering person end
his or her life was common practice. The oath might
therefore have been more an admonition to the medical
profession to avoid acting as an accomplice to murder,
rather than to refrain from the practice of euthanasia.
Some physicians believe that literal interpretation of
the oath is not necessary. It simply offers guidelines that
allow for adaptation to modern-day situations. In fact, in
1948 the World Medical Association modified the
Hippocratic Oath to call attention to the atrocities com-
mitted by Nazi physicians. Known as the Declaration of
Geneva, the document reads in part:
I will practice medicine with conscience and dignity.
The health and life of my patient will be my first
consideration. . . . I will not permit consideration of
race, religion, nationality, party politics, or social stand-
ing to intervene between my duty and my patient. I will
maintain the utmost respect for human life from the
time of its conception. Even under threat, I will not use
my knowledge contrary to the laws of humanity.
The Physician’s Role
Even in ancient times, as can be gleaned from the
Hippocratic Oath, physicians believed they knew what
was best for their patients. Patients relied on their doc-
tors’ ability and judgment, and usually did not question
the treatments prescribed. Doctors were not even required
to tell their patients the details of their illness, even if
they were terminally ill.
Beginning in the 1960s many patients assumed a
more active role in their medical care. The emphasis on
preventive medicine encouraged people to take responsi-
bility for their own health. Physicians were faced with a
new breed of patients who wanted to be active partici-
pants in their health care. Patients also wanted to know
more
about
modern
technologies
and
procedures
that were evolving in medicine. With this new health
consciousness, physicians and hospitals assumed the
responsibility for informing and educating patients, and
16
The End of Life: Ethical Considerations
Death and Dying

increasingly were legally liable for failing to inform
patients of the consequences of medical treatments and
procedures.
To compound the complexity of the changing
patient-physician relationship, modern technology, which
could sometimes prolong life, was also prolonging death.
Historically, physicians had been trained to prevent and
combat death, rather than to deal with dying patients,
communicate with the patient and the family about a
terminal illness, prepare them for an imminent death, or
respond to a patient requesting assisted suicide.
Until
the
late
1990s,
medical
education
pro-
grams offered very little in the area of end-of-life care.
Drs. J. Andrew Billings and Susan Block reported that a
1991 survey of medical school deans revealed that only 11%
of schools offered a full-term course on death and dying
(‘‘Palliative Care in Undergraduate Medical Education,’’
Journal of the American Medical Association, vol. 278,
no. 9, September 3, 1997). About 52% offered death educa-
tion as part of other required courses, while another 30%
offered only one or two lectures as part of another course. In
1997, while some medical schools offered information on
dealing with death as part of other required courses, only 5
of 126 medical schools in the United States offered a sepa-
rate required course on death and dying.
This situation began to improve in the late 1990s.
The Education for Physicians on End-of-Life Care
(EPEC) Project, developed in 1998 by the American
Medical Association (AMA), is an ambitious training
program that aims to provide physicians with the knowl-
edge they need to care for dying patients. The curriculum
emphasizes development of skills and competence in the
areas of communication, ethical decision making, pallia-
tive care, psychosocial issues, and pain and symptom
management. The program became fully operational in
1999 and provides curricula to all leaders of medical
societies, medical school deans, and major medical orga-
nizations. The EPEC Project was supported from 1996 to
2003 with funding from the Robert Wood Johnson
Foundation. After 2003 it was sponsored by and housed
at Northwestern University Medical School in Chicago
with a mission to educate all health care professionals on
the essential clinical competencies in end-of-life care.
In 2002 Amy M. Sullivan and her colleagues surveyed
associate deans at sixty-two accredited U.S. medical
schools to determine attitudes and practices of end-of-life
care teaching in the undergraduate medical curriculum
(‘‘End-of-Life Care in the Curriculum: A National Study
of Medical Education Deans,’’ Academic Medicine, vol.
79, no. 8, August 2004). Research results revealed that
29% of the deans surveyed reported that their medical
schools offered courses or clerkships primarily focused
on end-of-life care. However, two-thirds of the medical
school deans admitted that not enough time was devoted
in the curriculum to this topic. Table 3.1 shows the per-
ceptions of these deans as to the barriers to teaching end-
of-life care at U.S. medical schools. The most significant
barrier is lack of time in the curriculum, followed by lack
of faculty expertise and lack of funding.
Contemporary Ethical Guidelines for Physicians
Physicians are trained to save lives, not to let people
die. Advanced medical technology, with respirators and
parenteral nutrition (artificial feeding devices that pro-
vide nutrition to an otherwise unconscious patient), can
prolong the process of dying. Dr. Ira Byock, in Dying
Well: The Prospect for Growth at the End of Life (New
York: G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1997), admitted:
A strong presumption throughout my medical educa-
tion was that all seriously ill people required vigorous
life-prolonging treatments, including those who were
expected to die, even patients with advanced, chronic
illness such as widespread cancer, end-stage congestive
heart failure, and kidney or liver failure. It even
extended to patients who saw death as a relief from
the suffering caused by their illness.
The Council on Ethical and Judicial Affairs of the
AMA published guidelines for physicians dealing with
patients in nonemergency situations (‘‘Decisions Near the
End
of
Life,’’
http://www.ama-assn.org/apps/pf_new/
pf_online?f_n=browse&doc=policyfiles/HnE/H-140.966.
HTM). They were originally written in 1991, reaffirmed
in 1996 and 1997, and appended in 2000. The following
guidelines are the most recent as of this writing:
Our AMA believes that:
1. The principle of patient autonomy requires that physi-
cians must respect the decision to forgo life- sustaining
treatment of a patient who possesses decision-making
capacity. Life-sustaining treatment is any medical treat-
ment that serves to prolong life without reversing the
underlying medical condition. Life-sustaining treatment
TABLE 3.1
Perceptions of associate deans of barriers to teaching end-of-life
care at U.S. medical schools, 2002
A moderate
Only a little/
Barrier
A lot
amount
not at all
Lack of time
54%
29%
17%
Lack of faculty expertise
21%
32%
47%
Lack of funding
17%
27%
56%
Faculty perception that current 
teaching is adequate
4%
38%
58%
End-of-life care is a low priority
9%
24%
67%
Lack of faculty leader
15%
17%
69%
Lack of clinical services
2%
19%
79%
Lack of faculty interest
2%
19%
79%
Lack of teaching materials
2%
15%
83%
SOURCE: Amy M. Sullivan, et al., “Table 3. Perceptions of 51 Associate
Deans of Barriers to Teaching End-of-Life Care at U.S. Medical Schools,
2002,” in “End-of-Life Care in the Curriculum: A National Study of Medical
Education Deans,” Academic Medicine, vol. 79, no. 8, August 2004
Death and Dying
The End of Life: Ethical Considerations
17

includes, but is not limited to, mechanical ventilation,
renal dialysis, chemotherapy, antibiotics, and artificial
nutrition and hydration.
2. There is no ethical distinction between withdrawing and
withholding life-sustaining treatment.
3. Physicians have an obligation to relieve pain and suffer-
ing and to promote the dignity and autonomy of dying
patients in their care. This includes providing effective
palliative treatment even though it may foreseeably has-
ten death. More research must be pursued, examining the
degree to which palliative care reduces the requests for
euthanasia or assisted suicide.
4. Physicians must not perform euthanasia or participate in
assisted suicide. A more careful examination of the issue
is necessary. Support, comfort, respect for patient auto-
nomy, good communication, and adequate pain control
may decrease dramatically the public demand for euth-
anasia and assisted suicide. In certain carefully defined
circumstances, it would be humane to recognize that
death is certain and suffering is great. However, the
societal risks of involving physicians in medical interven-
tions to cause patients’ deaths is too great to condone
euthanasia or physician-assisted suicide at this time.
5. Our AMA supports continued research into and education
concerning pain management. (CEJA Rep. B, A-91;
Reaffirmed by BOT Rep. 59, A-96; Reaffirmation A-
97; Appended: Sub. Res. 514, I-00)
Another prominent professional medical organiza-
tion, the American College of Physicians (ACP), revised
its recommendations about end-of-life care in the fourth
edition of its code of ethics, The American College of
Physicians Ethics Manual (Philadelphia, PA: ACP, 1998,
http://www.annals.org/cgi/content/full/128/7/576). It is
the most recent edition of the manual as of this writing.
Its guidelines for decision-making near the end of life
emphasize that capable and informed adults nearly
always have the legal and ethical right to refuse treat-
ment. They advise physicians to practice empathy,
to compromise, and to negotiate with patients who wish
to forego recommended treatment. The guidelines offer
an approach to clinical ethical decision making that not
only involves defining the problems and reviewing facts
and uncertainties, but also considers the patient’s emo-
tional state, ethnicity, culture, and religious traditions.
PATIENT AUTONOMY
According to the principle of patient autonomy, com-
petent patients have the right to self-rule—to choose
among medically recommended treatments and refuse
any treatment they do not want. To be truly autonomous,
they have to be told about the nature of their illness,
prospects for recovery, the course of the illness, alterna-
tive
treatments,
and
treatment
consequences.
After
thoughtful consideration, a patient makes an informed
choice and grants ‘‘informed consent’’ to treatment.
Decisions about medical treatment may be influenced
by the patient’s psychological state, family history, cul-
ture, values, and religious beliefs.
Once informed by their physicians about their ill-
nesses and medical options, patients also have the right
to forego treatment. Former first lady Jacqueline Kennedy
Onassis, after a difficult battle to arrest her non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma, refused further treatment. When doctors told
Ms. Onassis that the cancer had spread to her brain and
liver and that there was nothing else they could do, she
asked to go home. She signed a living will that forbade
any heroic measures should the doctor diagnose her con-
dition as hopeless. Once home, she received only pallia-
tive care (care to relieve symptoms rather than cure),
lapsed into a coma, and died soon after, on May 19, 1994.
Not All Patients Want to Know
While patient autonomy is a fundamental aspect of
medical ethics, not all patients want to know about their
illnesses or to be involved in decisions about their term-
inal care. H. Russell Searight and Jennifer Gafford in
‘‘Cultural Diversity at the End of Life: Issues and
Guidelines for Family Physicians’’ (American Family
Physician, vol. 71, no. 3, February, 2005, http://www.aafp.
org/afp/20050201.515.pdf) note that the concept of
patient autonomy is not easily applied to members of
some racial or ethnic groups. Searight and Gafford
explained the three basic dimensions in end-of-life treat-
ment that vary culturally: communication of bad news,
locus of decision making, and attitudes toward advance
directives and end-of-life care.
Members of some ethnic groups, such as many
Africans and Japanese, soften bad news by using terms
that do not overtly state that a person has a potentially
terminal condition. For example, the term ‘‘growth’’ or
‘‘blood disease’’ may be used rather than telling a
person they have a cancerous tumor or leukemia.
That idea is taken one step further in many Hispanic,
Chinese, and Pakistani communities in which the term-
inally ill are generally protected from knowledge of
their condition. Many reasons exist for this type of
behavior, such as viewing the discussion of serious
illness and death as disrespectful or impolite, not
wanting to cause anxiety or eliminate hope in the
patient, or believing that speaking about a condition
makes it real. Many people of Asian and European
cultures believe that it is cruel to inform a patient of
a terminal diagnosis.
The phrase ‘‘locus of decision making’’ refers to those
making the end-of-life decisions: the physician, the family,
and/or the patient. The locus of decision-making varies
among cultures. The North American cultural norm is indi-
vidual decision for one’s own medical care. Koreans and
Mexican Americans often approach end-of-life decision
18
The End of Life: Ethical Considerations
Death and Dying

making differently, abiding by a collective decision process
in which relatives make treatment choices for a family mem-
ber without that person’s input. Eastern Europeans and
Russians often look to the physician as the expert in end-of-
life decision-making. In Asian, Indian, and Pakistani cultures,
physicians and family members may share decision making.
An advance directive (often called a living will) is a
written statement that explains a person’s wishes about
end-of-life medical care. Completion of advance directives
varies among cultures. For example, Searight and Gafford
noted that approximately 40% of elderly Caucasians have
completed advance directives, while only 16% of elderly
African-Americans have done the same.
Polly Mazanec and Mary Kay Tyler note in ‘‘Cultural
Considerations in End-of-Life Care: How Ethnicity, Age,
and
Spirituality
Affect
Decisions
When
Death
Is
Imminent’’ (Home Healthcare Nurse, vol. 22, no. 5, May
2004) that there are many differences among African-
Americans, Chinese Americans, Filipino Americans, and
Hispanic or Latino Americans regarding the role of the
family at the end of life, preferences for the environment
of the dying person, and preparation of the body after death.
Mazanec and Tyler suggest that often a lack of attention to
such cultural needs in end-of-life care can be a predominant
factor in a person’s experience of dying.
Due to differences among cultures regarding various
facets of end-of-life decision making and preparedness, it
appears important for physicians to realize patient auton-
omy is far from a universally held ideal. There are differ-
ences of opinion not only among ethnic groups but also
within each ethnic group, such as differences with age.
People bring their cultural values to bear on decisions
about terminal care.
Health Care Proxies and Surrogate Decision Makers
When a patient is incompetent to make informed
decisions about his or her medical treatment, a proxy or
a surrogate must make the decision for that patient. Some
patients, in anticipation of being in a position of incom-
petence, will execute a durable power of attorney for
health care, designating a proxy. Most people choose
family members or close friends who will make all med-
ical decisions, including the withholding or withdrawal of
life-sustaining treatments.
When a proxy has not been named in advance, health
care providers usually involve family members in medi-
cal decisions. Most states have laws that govern surrogate
decision making. Some states designate family members,
by order of kinship, to assume the role of surrogates.
THE DESIRE TO DIE
AIDS (acquired immunodeficiency syndrome) has
directed societal attention to end-of-life decision making
because patients infected with HIV (human immuno-
deficiency virus), which weakens the immune system
and leads to AIDS, are faced with decisions about life-
prolonging therapies for a disease that as yet has no cure.
They know that a number of disorders await them as their
immune system is progressively destroyed, including
severe wasting, infections, intense pain, blindness, and
dementia. Some AIDS patients who do not wish to
undergo this protracted dying process or deplete family
resources in prolonged care may ask for a physician’s aid
to hasten death. Likewise, many patients with incurable
cancer who are suffering as they die would like their
death to be hastened.
Diane E. Meier et al surveyed 3,021 physicians
younger than sixty-five years from the 1996 American
Medical Association Physician Master File in August
1996
(‘‘Characteristics
of
Patients
Requesting
and
Receiving
Physician-Assisted
Death,’’
Archives
of
Internal Medicine, vol. 163, no. 13, July 14, 2003). The
researchers wanted to determine patient characteristics
associated
with
acts
of
physician-assisted
suicide.
Physician-assisted suicide was defined as ‘‘writing a pre-
scription or administering a lethal injection with the
primary intention of ending the patient’s life.’’ Of the
3,021 physicians surveyed, 1,902 (63%) responded.
More than half the patients requesting and receiving
physician-assisted death were male (61%) and most of
the patients were white (89%). Nearly half (47%) of those
in the sample were college graduates, and nearly half
(47%) had cancer as a primary diagnosis. Infection with
HIV was the primary diagnosis for 13%. Thirty-eight
percent were experiencing severe pain and 42% were
experiencing severe discomfort other than pain. About
half (49%) were depressed (as diagnosed by their physi-
cians) at the time of their request; 53% were dependent
for most or all of their personal care; and 42% were
bedridden. Nearly three-quarters of those in the sample
(72%) were expected to live one month or more, while
the remaining 28% were expected to live less than a
month. About half of those in the sample requested a
lethal prescription (52%) to hasten their death.
Meier and her colleagues analyzed their survey data
to identify factors associated with a physician honoring a
request for aid in dying. The factor most likely to predict
that a physician would honor such a request was the
specificity of the request. That is, specific requests for
assistance, such as requests for lethal prescriptions or
lethal injections, were predictors of requests being
honored, while nonspecific requests were not predictors
of requests being honored. Other predictors of physi-
cians’ decisions to honor patients’ requests for assistance
in dying included severe pain, severe discomfort other
than pain, and a life expectancy of less than one month.
Some patients were believed to be depressed at the time
of their request, and although physicians did honor some
Death and Dying
The End of Life: Ethical Considerations
19

of these requests, they were less likely to honor a request
if they knew the patient was depressed.
Further analysis of the survey data identified factors
associated with a physician honoring a request for aid in
dying for patients requesting a lethal injection and those
requesting a prescription for a lethal dose of medication.
For patients requesting a lethal injection, those with
severe physical discomfort other than pain and patients
with a life expectancy of less than one month were
significantly more likely to have their request honored
than patients without these characteristics. For patients
requesting a prescription for a lethal dose of medication,
those with severe pain and severe physical discomfort
other than pain were significantly more likely to have
their request honored than patients without these charac-
teristics. In both groups patients who were depressed at
the time of their requests were less likely to have their
requests honored than those who were not depressed.
Marijke
C.
Jansen-van
der
Weide,
Bregje
D.
Onwuteaka-Philipsen, and Gerrit van der Wal published
a study in 2005 that revealed characteristics of patients in
the Netherlands who explicitly requested euthanasia or
physician-assisted
suicide
between
April
2000
and
December 2002. Table 3.2 shows that, as in the Meier
study, more than half the patients requesting euthanasia
and assisted suicide (EAS) were male (54%). Most of the
patients were diagnosed with cancer (90%), a greater
percentage than in the Meier study. Although only 9%
were diagnosed with depression, 92% were ‘‘feeling
bad.’’ The three most often cited reasons for requesting
EAS were pointless suffering (75%), deterioration or loss
of dignity (69%), and weakness or tiredness (60%).
Results of the Jansen-van der Weide et al study shed
some light on reasons why physicians were reluctant to
grant requests for EAS (see Table 3.3.) Of the 570
patients who had initially requested EAS, sixty-five died
before EAS was administered, seventy-two died before a
final decision was rendered, sixty-eight changed their
mind and no longer wanted EAS, 101 were refused, and
253 had their requests carried out. Physicians caring for
patients in all five categories were reluctant to grant the
EAS request in some cases. Physicians caring for 52% of
the ‘‘refused’’ patients cited doubts about their patients’
hopeless and unbearable suffering. This doubt was pre-
valent across groups. Other common doubts expressed by
physicians were those about the availability of alternative
treatment, personal doubts in particular cases, doubts
about the patient being depressed, and doubts about a
well-considered and persistent request. Not usually sig-
nificant in a physician’s reluctance to grant EAS were
concerns that the patient was too close to death, that the
request for EAS was voluntary, and that the family was
against EAS.
Table 3.4 shows the odds ratio (OR) for factors
associated with refusing a request for EAS. A factor
shown in the table with a high OR was more likely than
a factor with a lower OR to influence a physician to
refuse a request for EAS. The table shows that the factor
most likely to have influenced a physician to refuse an
EAS request was the patient not being competent or fully
competent (did not have all of his or her mental facul-
ties). Two other factors associated with refusal were the
physician’s perception that the patient’s unbearable or
hopeless suffering was experienced to a lesser extent than
would be necessary to consider EAS. The lower portion
of the table shows that depression was the reason most
likely to have influenced a patient to request EAS, while
not wanting to burden their family was the second most
influential factor.
20
The End of Life: Ethical Considerations
Death and Dying

Death and Dying
The End of Life: Ethical Considerations
21

22
The End of Life: Ethical Considerations
Death and Dying

CHAPTER 4
THE END OF LIFE: MEDICAL CONSIDERATIONS
CAUSES OF DEATH
During the twentieth century the primary causes of
death in the United States changed. In the 1800s and
early 1900s infectious (communicable) diseases such as
influenza, tuberculosis, and diphtheria were the leading
causes of death. These have been replaced by chronic
diseases; heart disease, cancer (malignant neoplasms),
and stroke (cerebrovascular diseases) were the three lead-
ing causes of death in 2003. (See Table 4.1.)
In 2003 the age-adjusted death rate (which accounts
for changes in the age distribution of the population
across time) for heart disease was 232.3 deaths per one
hundred thousand people, while that for cancer was 190.1
per one hundred thousand persons. (See Table 4.1.)
Together, these two diseases accounted for 50.7% of all
deaths in the United States in 2003. Deaths from heart
disease have been decreasing since 1950, while cancer
mortality has been dropping only since 1990.
Not surprisingly, the leading causes of death vary by
age. For those ages one to forty-four, accidents and their
adverse effects were the leading causes of death in 2002
and 2003, as well as the leading cause of death for
those ages one to thirty-four in 1999, 2000, and 2001.
For those ages thirty-five to forty-four, cancer was the
leading cause of death in 1999, 2000, and 2001, with
accidents and their adverse effects second, and heart
disease third. Cancer and heart disease caused most
deaths among those forty-five years and older from
1999 to 2003. (See Table 4.2.) The Institute of Medicine
of the National Academies reports that heart disease,
cancer,
and
stroke
‘‘disproportionately
affect
older
people’’—those sixty-five years of age and over, which
is supported by the figures in Table 4.2.
According to an HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report
begun in 1993, 1996 marked the first year a decline
occurred in U.S. deaths due to AIDS. This downward
trend in annual numbers of deaths due to AIDS continued
from 1998 through 2000. From 2001 to 2003 the number
of cases increased and plateaued with slightly higher
numbers of total deaths. (See Table 4.3.) In 2004 the
number of deaths from AIDS decreased. From 2000
through 2004 most males with AIDS contracted HIV
via male-to-male sexual contact or injection drug use.
Most females contracted the virus by heterosexual con-
tact or injection drug use. Children most often contracted
the virus perinatally (immediately before and after birth)
from infected mothers. The South and the Northeast,
respectively, experienced more AIDS deaths during these
years than other parts of the United States.
AIDS, the final stage of HIV infection, has had a
tremendous effect on society. This epidemic has brought
a painful, drawn-out process of dying to many, including
young
adults—an
age
group
previously
relatively
untouched by death, particularly from infectious disease.
THE STUDY TO UNDERSTAND PROGNOSES
AND PREFERENCES FOR OUTCOMES AND
RISKS OF TREATMENTS (SUPPORT)
During the twentieth century in the United States, the
process of dying shifted from the familiar surroundings of
home to the hospital. While hospitalization ensures that
the benefits of modern medicine are readily available,
many patients dread leaving the comfort of their homes
and losing, to some extent, control over their end-of-life
decisions.
Between 1989 and 1994, in an effort to ‘‘improve
end-of-life decision making and reduce the frequency of
a mechanically supported, painful, and prolonged process
of dying,’’ a group of investigators from various disci-
plines undertook the largest study of death and dying ever
conducted in the United States. The project, known as the
Study to Understand Prognoses and Preferences for
Outcomes
and
Risks
of
Treatments
(SUPPORT),
included more than nine thousand patients who suffered
Death and Dying
23

from life-threatening illnesses. Patients enrolled in the
study had about a 50% chance of dying within six
months.
The researchers published the results of their study in
‘‘A Controlled Trial to Improve Care for Seriously Ill
Hospitalized Patients’’ (Journal of the American Medical
Association, vol. 274, no. 20, November 22/29, 1995). The
SUPPORT investigators hypothesized that increased com-
munication between patients and physicians, better under-
standing of patients’ wishes, and the use of computer-based
projections of patient survival would result in ‘‘earlier
treatment decisions, reductions in time spent in undesirable
states before death, and reduced resource use.’’
Phase I of the study was observational. The research-
ers reviewed patients’ medical records and interviewed
patients, surrogates (people who make decisions if
patients
became
incompetent),
and
physicians.
Discussions and decisions about life-sustaining measures
were observed.
The researchers interviewed patients, families, and
surrogates about the patients’ thoughts on cardiopulmon-
ary resuscitation (CPR), their perceptions of their quality
of life, the frequency and severity of their pain, and their
satisfaction with the care provided. The physicians who
acknowledged responsibility for the patients’ medical
decisions were also interviewed to determine their under-
standing of patients’ views on CPR and how patients’
wishes influenced their medical care. The surrogates
were again interviewed after the patients’ deaths.
Problems with End-of-Life Care
Phase I of SUPPORT found a lack of communication
between physicians and patients, showed aggressive
treatment of dying patients, and revealed a disturbing
picture of hospital death. Of the 4,301 patients, 31%
expressed a desire that CPR be withheld. But only 47%
of physicians reported knowledge of their patients’
wishes. About half (49%) of patients who requested not
to be resuscitated did not have a do-not-resuscitate
(DNR) order in their medical charts. Of the 79% who
died with a DNR order, 46% of the orders were written
within only two days of death.
The patients’ final days in the hospital included an
average of eight days in ‘‘generally undesirable states’’—
in an intensive care unit (ICU), receiving artificial
respiration, or in a coma. More than a third (38%) stayed
ten days in the ICU, while almost half (46%) were
mechanically ventilated within three days prior to death.
Surrogates reported that 50% of conscious patients com-
plained of moderate or severe pain at least half the time
in their last three days.
TABLE 4.1
Death rates for the 15 leading causes of death, 2003, and percent change, 2002–03
[Death rates on an annual basis per 100,000 population: age-adjusted rates per 100,000 U.S. standard population]
Age-adjusted death rate
Percent
2003
Hispanic to
of total
crude
2002 to
Male to
Black to
Non-Hispanic
Rank*
Cause of death
Number
deaths
death rate
2003
2003
female
white
white
. . .
All causes
2,448,288
100.0
841.9
832.7
1.5
1.4
1.3
0.8
1
Diseases of heart
685,089
28.0
235.6
232.3
3.5
1.5
1.3
0.8
2
Malignant neoplasms
556,902
22.7
191.5
190.1
1.8
1.5
1.2
0.7
3
Cerebrovascular diseases
157,689
6.4
54.2
53.5
4.8
1.0
1.5
0.8
4
Chronic lower respiratory diseases
126,382
5.2
43.5
43.3
0.5
1.4
0.7
0.4
5
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
109,277
4.5
37.6
37.3
1.1
2.2
1.0
0.8
6
Diabetes mellitus
74,219
3.0
25.5
25.3
0.4
1.3
2.1
1.6
7
Influenza and pneumonia
65,163
2.7
22.4
22.0
2.7
1.4
1.1
0.8
8
Alzheimer’s disease
63,457
2.6
21.8
21.4
5.9
0.8
0.8
0.6
9
Nephritis, nephrotic syndrome and nephrosis
42,453
1.7
14.6
14.4
1.4
1.4
2.3
1.0
10
Septicemia
34,069
1.4
11.7
11.6
0.9
1.2
2.3
0.8
11
Intentional self-harm (suicide)
31,484
1.3
10.8
10.8
0.9
4.3
0.4
0.4
12
Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis
27,503
1.1
9.5
9.3
1.1
2.2
0.9
1.6
13
Essential (primary) hypertension and 
hypertensive renal disease
21,940
0.9
7.5
7.4
5.7
1.0
2.8
1.0
14
Parkinson’s disease
17,997
0.7
6.2
6.2
5.1
2.2
0.4
0.5
15
Assault (homicide)
17,732
0.7
6.1
6.0
1.6
3.6
5.7
2.9
. . .
All other causes (residual)
416,932
17.0
143.4
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . . Category not applicable.
*Rank based on number of deaths.
SOURCE: Donna L. Hoyert, et al., “Table 2. Percentage of Total Deaths, Death Rates, Age-Adjusted Death Rates for 2003, Percentage Change in Age-Adjusted
Death Rates from 2002 to 2003 and Ratio of Age-Adjusted Death Rates by Race and Sex for the 15 Leading Causes of Death for the Total Population in 2003:
United States,” in Deaths: Final Data for 2003, Health E-Stats, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, January 19,
2006, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/finaldeaths03_tables.pdf#2 (accessed February 27, 2006)
Percent
change
Ratio
24
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
Death and Dying

Death rates, by age, for the 15 leading causes of death, 1999–2003
[Rates on an annual basis per 100,000 population in specified group; age-adjusted rates per 100,000 U.S. standard population. Rates are based on populations enumerated as of April 1 for 2000 and estimated as of July 1 for all other years.]
Age
Under
1–4
5–14
15–24
25–34
35–44
45–54
55–64
65–74
75–84
85 years
Age-adjusted
Cause of death and year
All agesa
1 yearb
years
years
years
years
years
years
years
years
years
and over
rate
All causes
2003
841.9
700.0
31.5
17.0
81.5
103.6
201.6
433.2
940.9
2,255.0
5,463.1
14,593.3
832.7
2002
847.3
695.0
31.2
17.4
81.4
103.6
202.9
430.1
952.4
2,314.7
5,556.9
14,828.3
845.3
2001
848.5
683.4
33.3
17.3
80.7
105.2
203.6
428.9
964.6
2,353.3
5,582.4
15,112.8
854.5
2000
854.0
736.7
32.4
18.0
79.9
101.4
198.9
425.6
992.2
2,399.1
5,666.5
15,524.4
869.0
1999
857.0
736.0
34.2
18.6
79.3
102.2
198.0
418.2
1,005.0
2,457.3
5,714.5
15,554.6
875.6
Diseases of heart
2003
235.6
11.0
1.2
0.6
2.7
8.2
30.7
92.5
233.2
585.0
1,611.1
5,278.4
232.3
2002
241.7
12.4
1.1
0.6
2.5
7.9
30.5
93.7
241.5
615.9
1,677.2
5,466.8
240.8
2001
245.8
11.9
1.5
0.7
2.5
8.0
29.6
92.9
246.9
635.1
1,725.7
5,664.2
247.8
2000
252.6
13.0
1.2
0.7
2.6
7.4
29.2
94.2
261.2
665.6
1,780.3
5,926.1
257.6
1999
259.9
13.8
1.2
0.7
2.8
7.6
30.2
95.7
269.9
701.7
1,849.9
6,063.0
266.5
Malignant neoplasms
2003
191.5
1.9
2.5
2.6
4.0
9.4
35.0
122.2
343.0
770.3
1,302.5
1,698.2
190.1
2002
193.2
1.8
2.6
2.6
4.3
9.7
35.8
123.8
351.1
792.1
1,311.9
1,723.9
193.5
2001
194.4
1.6
2.7
2.5
4.3
10.1
36.8
126.5
356.5
802.8
1,315.8
1,765.6
196.0
2000
196.5
2.4
2.7
2.5
4.4
9.8
36.6
127.5
366.7
816.3
1,335.6
1,819.4
199.6
1999
197.0
1.8
2.7
2.5
4.5
10.0
37.1
127.6
374.6
827.1
1,331.5
1,805.8
200.8
Cerebrovascular diseases
2003
54.2
2.5
0.3
0.2
0.5
1.5
5.5
15.0
35.6
112.9
410.7
1,370.1
53.5
2002
56.4
2.9
0.3
0.2
0.4
1.4
5.4
15.1
37.2
120.3
431.0
1,445.9
56.2
2001
57.4
2.7
0.4
0.2
0.5
1.5
5.5
15.1
38.0
123.4
443.9
1,500.2
57.9
2000
59.6
3.3
0.3
0.2
0.5
1.5
5.8
16.0
41.0
128.6
461.3
1,589.2
60.9
1999
60.0
2.7
0.3
0.2
0.5
1.4
5.7
15.2
40.6
130.8
469.8
1,614.8
61.6
Chronic lower respiratory 
diseases
2003
43.5
0.8
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.7
2.1
8.7
43.3
163.2
383.0
635.1
43.3
2002
43.3
1.0
0.4
0.3
0.5
0.8
2.2
8.7
42.4
163.0
386.7
637.6
43.5
2001
43.2
1.0
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.7
2.2
8.5
44.1
167.9
379.8
644.7
43.7
2000
43.4
0.9
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.7
2.1
8.6
44.2
169.4
386.1
648.6
44.2
1999
44.5
0.9
0.4
0.3
0.5
0.8
2.0
8.5
47.5
177.2
397.8
646.0
45.4
Accidents (unintentional 
injuries)
2003
37.6
23.6
10.9
6.4
37.1
31.5
37.8
38.8
32.9
44.1
101.9
278.9
37.3
2002
37.0
23.5
10.5
6.6
38.0
31.5
37.2
36.6
31.4
44.2
101.3
275.4
36.9
2001
35.7
24.2
11.2
6.9
36.1
29.9
35.4
34.1
30.3
42.8
100.9
276.4
35.7
2000
34.8
23.1
11.9
7.3
36.0
29.5
34.1
32.6
30.9
41.9
95.1
273.5
34.9
1999
35.1
22.3
12.4
7.6
35.3
29.6
33.8
31.8
30.6
44.6
100.5
282.4
35.3
TABLE 4.2
Death and Dying
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
25

Diabetes mellitus
2003
25.5
d
d
0.1
0.4
1.6
4.6
13.9
38.5
90.8
181.1
317.5
25.3
2002
25.4
d
d
0.1
0.4
1.6
4.8
13.7
37.7
91.4
182.8
320.6
25.4
2001
25.1
d
d
0.1
0.4
1.5
4.3
13.6
37.8
91.4
181.4
321.8
25.3
2000
24.6
d
d
0.1
0.4
1.6
4.3
13.1
37.8
90.7
179.5
319.7
25.0
1999
24.5
d
d
0.1
0.4
1.4
4.3
12.9
38.3
91.8
178.0
317.2
25.0
Influenza and pneumonia
2003
22.4
8.0
1.0
0.4
0.5
0.9
2.2
5.2
11.2
37.3
151.1
666.1
22.0
2002
22.8
6.5
0.7
0.2
0.4
0.9
2.2
4.8
11.2
37.5
156.9
696.6
22.6
2001
21.8
7.4
0.7
0.2
0.5
0.9
2.2
4.6
10.7
36.3
148.5
685.6
22.0
2000
23.2
7.6
0.7
0.2
0.5
0.9
2.4
4.7
11.9
39.1
160.3
744.1
23.7
1999
22.8
8.4
0.8
0.2
0.5
0.8
2.4
4.6
11.0
37.2
157.0
751.8
23.5
Alzheimer’s disease
2003
21.8
d
d
d
d
d
d
0.2
2.0
20.9
164.4
802.4
21.4
2002
20.4
d
d
d
d
d
d
0.1
1.9
19.7
158.1
752.3
20.2
2001
18.9
d
d
d
d
d
d
0.2
2.1
18.7
147.5
710.3
19.1
2000
17.6
d
d
d
d
d
d
0.2
2.0
18.7
139.6
667.7
18.1
1999
16.0
d
d
d
d
d
d
0.2
1.9
17.4
129.5
601.3
16.5
Nephritis, nephrotic syndrome 
and nephrosis
2003
14.6
4.5
d
0.1
0.2
0.7
1.8
4.9
13.6
40.1
109.5
293.1
14.4
2002
14.2
4.3
d
0.1
0.2
0.7
1.7
4.7
13.0
39.2
109.1
288.6
14.2
2001
13.9
3.3
d
0.0
0.2
0.6
1.7
4.6
13.0
40.2
104.2
287.7
14.0
2000
13.2
4.3
d
0.1
0.2
0.6
1.6
4.4
12.8
38.0
100.8
277.8
13.5
1999
12.7
4.4
d
0.1
0.2
0.6
1.6
4.0
12.0
37.1
97.6
268.9
13.0
Septicemia
2003
11.7
6.9
0.5
0.2
0.4
0.8
2.1
5.3
13.1
32.6
85.0
202.5
11.6
2002
11.7
7.3
0.5
0.2
0.3
0.8
1.9
5.2
12.6
34.7
86.5
203.0
11.7
2001
11.3
7.7
0.7
0.2
0.3
0.7
1.8
5.0
12.3
32.8
82.3
205.9
11.4
2000
11.1
7.2
0.6
0.2
0.3
0.7
1.9
4.9
11.9
31.0
80.4
215.7
11.3
1999
11.0
7.5
0.6
0.2
0.3
0.7
1.8
4.6
11.4
31.2
79.4
220.7
11.3
Intentional self-harm 
(suicide)
2003
10.8
. . .
. . .
0.6
9.7
12.7
14.9
15.9
13.8
12.7
16.4
16.9
10.8
2002
11.0
. . .
. . .
0.6
9.9
12.6
15.3
15.7
13.6
13.5
17.7
18.0
10.9
2001c
10.8
. . .
. . .
0.7
9.9
12.8
14.7
15.2
13.1
13.3
17.4
17.5
10.7
2000
10.4
. . .
. . .
0.7
10.2
12.0
14.5
14.4
12.1
12.5
17.6
19.6
10.4
1999
10.5
. . .
. . .
0.6
10.1
12.7
14.3
13.9
12.2
13.4
18.1
19.3
10.5
Death rates, by age, for the 15 leading causes of death, 1999–2003 [CONTINUED]
[Rates on an annual basis per 100,000 population in specified group; age-adjusted rates per 100,000 U.S. standard population. Rates are based on populations enumerated as of April 1 for 2000 and estimated as of July 1 for all other years.]
Age
Under
1–4
5–14
15–24
25–34
35–44
45–54
55–64
65–74
75–84
85 years
Age-adjusted
Cause of death and year
All agesa
1 yearb
years
years
years
years
years
years
years
years
years
and over
rate
TABLE 4.2
26
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
Death and Dying

Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis
2003
9.5
d
d
d
d
0.9
6.8
18.3
23.0
29.5
30.0
20.1
9.3
2002
9.5
d
d
d
0.1
0.9
7.0
18.0
22.9
29.4
31.4
21.4
9.4
2001
9.5
d
d
d
0.1
1.0
7.4
18.5
22.7
30.0
30.2
22.2
9.5
2000
9.4
d
d
d
0.1
1.0
7.5
17.7
23.8
29.8
31.0
23.1
9.5
1999
9.4
d
d
d
0.1
1.0
7.3
17.4
23.7
30.6
31.9
23.2
9.6
Essential (primary) hypertension
and hypertensive renal
disease
2003
7.5
d
d
d
0.1
0.2
0.8
2.5
6.3
16.9
51.7
188.9
7.4
2002
7.0
d
d
d
0.1
0.2
0.8
2.3
5.7
16.0
48.2
180.4
7.0
2001
6.8
d
d
d
0.1
0.3
0.7
2.4
5.8
15.5
47.7
171.9
6.8
2000
6.4
d
d
d
d
0.2
0.8
2.3
5.9
15.1
45.5
162.9
6.5
1999
6.1
d
d
d
d
0.2
0.7
2.2
5.5
15.2
43.6
152.1
6.2
Parkinson’s disease
2003
6.2
d
d
d
d
d
d
0.2
1.3
12.7
67.8
138.2
6.2
2002
5.9
d
d
d
d
d
d
0.1
1.2
12.2
63.9
135.2
5.9
2001
5.8
d
d
d
d
d
d
0.1
1.2
11.7
64.6
134.2
5.9
2000
5.6
d
d
d
d
d
d
0.1
1.1
11.5
61.9
131.9
5.7
1999
5.2
d
d
d
d
d
d
0.1
1.0
11.0
58.2
124.4
5.4
Assault (homicide)
2003
6.1
8.5
2.4
0.8
13.0
11.3
7.0
4.9
2.8
2.4
2.5
2.2
6.0
2002
6.1
7.5
2.7
0.9
12.9
11.2
7.2
4.8
3.2
2.3
2.3
2.1
6.1
2001c
7.1
8.2
2.7
0.8
13.3
13.1
9.5
6.3
4.0
2.9
2.5
2.4
7.1
2000
6.0
9.2
2.3
0.9
12.6
10.4
7.1
4.7
3.0
2.4
2.4
2.4
5.9
1999
6.1
8.7
2.5
1.1
12.9
10.5
7.1
4.6
3.0
2.6
2.5
2.4
6.0
Note: “. . .”Category not applicable.
aFigures for age not stated included in “all ages” but not distributed among age groups.
bDeath rates for “under 1 year” (based on population estimates) differ from infant mortality rates (based on live births).
cFigures include September 11, 2001 related deaths for which death certificates were filed as of October 24, 2002.
dFigure does not meet standards of reliability or precision.
SOURCE: “Table 9. Death Rates by Age and Age-Adjusted Death Rates for the 15 Leading Causes of Death in 2003: United States, 1999–2003,” unpublished table from Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
National Center for Health Statistics, February 27, 2006
Death rates, by age, for the 15 leading causes of death, 1999–2003 [CONTINUED]
[Rates on an annual basis per 100,000 population in specified group; age-adjusted rates per 100,000 U.S. standard population. Rates are based on populations enumerated as of April 1 for 2000 and estimated as of July 1 for all other years.]
Age
Under
1–4
5–14
15–24
25–34
35–44
45–54
55–64
65–74
75–84
85 years
Age-adjusted
Cause of death and year
All agesa
1 yearb
years
years
years
years
years
years
years
years
years
and over
rate
TABLE 4.2
Death and Dying
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
27

Phase II: Intervention to Improve Care
Phase II of SUPPORT was implemented to address
the shortcomings documented in Phase I. It tested an
intervention delivered by experienced nurses and lasted
another two years, involving patient participants with
characteristics similar to those in Phase I. This time,
however, the doctors were given printed reports about
the patients and their wishes regarding life-sustaining
treatments. SUPPORT nurses facilitated the flow of
information among patients, families, and health care
personnel, and helped manage patients’ pain. To deter-
mine if the intervention worked in addressing prob-
lems in the care of seriously ill hospitalized patients at
medical centers, researchers measured outcomes on five
TABLE 4.3
Estimated numbers of deaths of persons with AIDS, by year of death and selected characteristics, 2000–04
Year of death
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
through 2004a
Age at death (years)
13
52
46
32
28
18
5,094
13–14
8
4
11
7
16
266
15–19
41
44
39
43
32
1,055
20–24
167
215
167
175
184
8,808
25–29
710
635
595
569
505
44,516
30–34
1,993
1,744
1,555
1,373
1,157
96,357
35–39
3,346
3,292
3,108
2,969
2,404
116,206
40–44
3,523
3,835
3,726
3,800
3,378
100,633
45–49
3,081
3,121
3,364
3,432
3,016
67,842
50–54
1,966
2,152
2,396
2,524
2,314
39,936
55–59
1,007
1,141
1,228
1,403
1,343
22,452
60–64
593
655
621
726
701
12,946
65
652
728
702
801
730
13,004
Race/ethnicity
White, not Hispanic
5,325
5,194
5,210
5,091
4,316
229,220
Black, not Hispanic
8,605
9,011
8,974
8,950
7,978
201,045
Hispanic
3,025
3,195
3,117
3,537
3,228
93,163
Asian/Pacific Islander
95
100
91
81
82
3,272
American Indian/Alaska Native
66
81
84
73
91
1,578
Transmission category
Male adult or adolescent
Male-to-male sexual contact
5,955
6,068
6,016
5,990
5,450
256,053
Injection drug use
4,070
4,074
4,062
4,116
3,308
109,070
Male-to-male sexual contact and injection drug use
1,324
1,366
1,323
1,322
1,180
39,467
Heterosexual contact
1,389
1,528
1,513
1,634
1,548
24,268
Otherb
195
166
167
160
113
9,843
Subtotal
12,933
13,202
13,080
13,222
11,599
438,701
Female adult or adolescent
Injection drug use
1,892
1,907
1,977
1,989
1,744
41,178
Heterosexual contact
2,150
2,342
2,331
2,470
2,327
39,576
Otherb
87
91
91
101
67
4,142
Subtotal
4,129
4,340
4,400
4,560
4,138
84,897
Child (13 years at diagnosis)
Perinatal
72
66
59
61
57
4,982
Otherc
5
3
6
6
4
533
Subtotal
77
69
65
67
61
5,515
Region of residence
Northeast
5,200
5,130
5,213
5,654
4,019
169,693
Midwest
1,622
1,646
1,623
1,199
1,234
50,333
South
7,078
7,386
7,361
7,839
7,192
181,690
West
2,567
2,683
2,585
2,428
2,540
108,183
U.S. dependencies, possessions, and associated nations
672
766
763
730
814
19,214
Totald
17,139
17,611
17,544
17,849
15,798
529,113
Note: These numbers do not represent reported case counts. Rather, these numbers are point estimates, which result from adjustments of reported case counts. The reported case
counts are adjusted for reporting delays and for redistribution of cases in persons initially reported without an identified risk factor. The estimates do not include adjustment for
incomplete reporting.
aIncludes persons who died with AIDS, from the beginning of the epidemic through 2004.
bIncludes hemophilia, blood transfusion, perinatal, and risk factor not reported or not identified.
cIncludes hemophilia, blood transfusion, and risk factor not reported or not identified.
dIncludes persons of unknown race or multiple races and persons of unknown sex. Cumulative total includes 836 persons of unknown race or multiple races. Because column totals were
calculated independently of the values for the subpopulations, the values in each column may not sum to the column total.
SOURCE: “Table 7. Estimated Numbers of Deaths of Persons with AIDS, by Year of Death and Selected Characteristics, 2000–2004—United States,” in
HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report: Cases of HIV Infection and AIDS in the United States, 2004, vol. 16, November 2005, http://www.cdc.gov/hiv/stats/
2004SurveillanceReport.pdf (accessed November 17, 2005)
Cumulative
28
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
Death and Dying

quantitative outcomes: incidence and timing of DNR
orders; patient-physician agreement on CPR preferences;
days in an intensive care unit in a comatose condition or
receiving mechanical ventilation; pain; and hospital
resource use.
RESULTS OF PHASE II. The SUPPORT intervention
failed to produce changes in the outcomes that were
measured (Patricia A. Murphy et al, ‘‘Under the Radar:
Contributions
of
the
SUPPORT
Nurses,’’
Nursing
Outlook, vol. 49, no. 5, September/October 2001).
Bernard Lo (‘‘Improving Care Near the End of Life:
Why Is It So Hard?,’’ Journal of the American Medical
Association, vol. 274, no. 20, November 22/29, 1995)
believes that the results reported in the SUPPORT study
raise more questions than answers. Among other issues,
Lo claims that while Phase I showed poor doctor-patient
communication, Phase II, instead of directly addressing
this shortcoming, added a third party, the SUPPORT
nurses, to do the physicians’ job.
Patricia Murphy and her colleagues note that their
analysis of SUPPORT nurses’ narratives suggests, how-
ever, that the nurses made a difference during the inter-
vention in ways that were not acknowledged by the
measurement of the five quantitative outcomes. The
nurses supported patients and their families, brought
them information, and helped them interpret it. They note
that many of the nurses’ narratives suggest that effective
communication is a precondition of patient or family
readiness ‘‘to hear a grave prognosis, engage in serious
decision making, or ‘let go’ of a loved one.’’
B. A. Ditillo in ‘‘The Emergence of Palliative Care:
A New Specialized Field of Medicine Requiring an
Interdisciplinary
Approach’’
(Critical
Care
Nursing
Clinics of North America, vol. 14, no. 2, June 2002)
suggests that the movement in the United States to
improve end-of-life care (the palliative care movement)
is a result of the SUPPORT study. Ditillo notes that ‘‘the
delivery of effective palliative care requires an interdis-
ciplinary team approach in order to meet the complex
needs of patients and families.’’ These complex needs
include help in understanding various life-sustaining
treatments and support to decide whether to accept or
refuse such treatments at the end of life.
LIFE-SUSTAINING TREATMENTS
Life-sustaining treatments, also called life support,
can take over many functions of an ailing body. Under
normal conditions, when a patient suffers from a trea-
table illness, life support is a temporary measure used
only until the body can function on its own. The
ongoing debate about prolonging life-sustaining treat-
ments concerns the incurably ill and permanently
unconscious.
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is composed of
two basic life-support skills administered in the event of
cardiac or respiratory arrest: artificial circulation and
artificial respiration. Cardiac arrest may be caused by a
heart attack, which is an interruption of blood flow to the
heart muscle. A coronary artery clogged with an accu-
mulation of fatty deposits is a common cause of inter-
rupted blood flow to the heart. Respiratory arrest, on the
other hand, may be the result of an accident such as
drowning, or the final stages of a pulmonary disease such
as emphysema.
In CPR artificial circulation is accomplished by com-
pressing the chest rhythmically to cause blood to flow
sufficiently to give a person a chance for survival.
Artificial respiration is accomplished by breathing into
the victim’s nose and mouth. It is important that CPR be
done properly, or it may not be effective and may harm
the victim. Heath care professionals may go beyond
typical CPR procedures and deliver oxygen directly
into the lungs through a tube inserted down the trachea
(windpipe). Rarely, a tracheotomy is performed. In
this procedure an opening is made in the windpipe
through which a breathing tube is inserted. Electrical
shock and medication may also be used to ‘‘jump
start’’ the heart.
CPR, initially intended for healthy individuals who
unexpectedly suffered heart stoppage, is now widely
used in a variety of circumstances. While CPR does
not always work (it has a 20–50% success rate in
healthy people), it does help save lives. Generally, fol-
lowing CPR, healthy people eventually resume normal
lives. The outcome is quite different, however, for
patients in the final stages of a terminal illness. Nancy
Dubler and David Nimmons (Ethics on Call, New York:
Harmony Books, 1992) observe that for people with a
terminal disease, dying after being ‘‘successfully’’
resuscitated virtually ensures a slower, harder, more
painful death.
REFUSAL
OF
CPR
WITH
A
DO-NOT-RESUSCITATE
ORDER. A person not wishing to be resuscitated in case
of cardiac or respiratory arrest may ask a physician to
write a DNR order on his or her chart. This written order
instructs health care personnel not to initiate CPR, which
can be very important because CPR is usually performed
in an emergency. Even if a patient’s living will includes
refusal of CPR, emergency personnel rushing to a patient
have no time to check the living will. A DNR order on a
patient’s chart is more accessible.
NONHOSPITAL DNR ORDERS. Most hospitals have
policies governing DNR orders in the event a patient
has no advance directives refusing CPR. (An advance
directive is a written document stating how you want
medical decisions to be made if you lose the ability to
Death and Dying
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
29

make those decisions for yourself.) Outside the hospital
setting, such as at home, people who do not want CPR
performed in case of an emergency can request a non-
hospital DNR order from their physicians. (See Figure
4.1 for a map of the United States showing states that had
laws authorizing nonhospital DNR orders as of January
2004.) Also called a pre-hospital DNR order, it instructs
emergency medical personnel to withhold CPR. The
DNR order may be on a bracelet, necklace, or a wallet
card. However, laypersons performing CPR on an indivi-
dual with a nonhospital DNR order cannot be prosecuted
by the law.
Mechanical Ventilation
When a patient’s lungs are not functioning properly,
a ventilator, or respirator, breathes for the patient.
Oxygen is supplied to the lungs through a tube inserted
through the mouth or nose into the windpipe. Mechanical
ventilation is generally used to temporarily maintain nor-
mal breathing in those who have been in serious acci-
dents or who suffer from a serious illness, such as
pneumonia.
Today, a person who suffers cardiac or respiratory
arrest is attached to a respirator after CPR has restarted
FIGURE 4.1
States with statutes or protocols authorizing nonhospital DNR orders (the District of Columbia and 45 states: Alabama*, Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado,
Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine*, Maryland, Massachusetts*, Minnesota*, Michigan, Missouri*,
Montana, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey*, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon*, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota*, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin and Wyoming).
Jurisdictions without statutes or protocols authorizing nonhospital DNR orders (5 states: Iowa, Mississippi, Nebraska, North Dakota, and Vermont).
*States that have not enacted nonhospital DNR statutes but have regulations; or local or state-wide protocols adopted by government agencies or by private, professional
organizations that regulate nonhospital DNR orders.
Note: This map refers to statutes that address DNR orders in the nonhospital setting only. Some of these statutes explicitly apply also to inpatient situations. However, most
hospitals already have institutional policies regarding DNR orders, in compliance with the accreditation standards of the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Health Care
Organizations.
SOURCE: “State Laws and Protocols Governing Nonhospital Do-Not-Resuscitate (DNR) Orders,” in End-of-Life Law Digest, The National Hospice and
Palliative Care Organization, 2004
State laws governing nonhospital do-not-resuscitate (DNR) orders, 2004
WA
CA
NV
ID
MT
WY
UT
CO
NM
TX
OK
KS
NE
SD
ND
MN
IA
MO
AR
LA
MS
AL
GA
FL
SC
NC
TN
KY
VA
WV
IN
IL
WI
MI
OH
PA
NY
ME
NH
MA
CT
MD
NJ
DE
VT
OR
AZ
AK
HI
RI
30
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
Death and Dying

the heart. In some cases, if the patient needs ventilation
indefinitely, the physician might perform a tracheotomy
to open a hole in the neck for placement of the breathing
tube in the windpipe. Even if a patient has irreversible
brain damage, as long as the brain stem is functioning,
the person is considered alive and the mechanical respira-
tor cannot be withdrawn.
Ventilators are also used on terminally ill patients. In
these cases the machine keeps the patient breathing but
does nothing to cure the disease. Those preparing a living
will are advised to give clear instructions about their
desires regarding continued use of an artificial respirator
that could prolong the process of dying.
Artificial Nutrition and Hydration
Artificial nutrition and hydration (ANH) is another
modern-day technology that has further complicated the
dying process. Today, nutrients and fluids supplied intra-
venously or through a stomach or intestinal tube can
indefinitely sustain the nutritional and hydration needs
of comatose and terminally ill patients. ANH has a strong
emotional impact because it relates to basic sustenance.
In addition, the symbolism of feeding can be so powerful
that families who know that their loved one would not
want to be kept alive may still feel that not feeding is
wrong. However, appetite loss is common in dying
patients and is not a significant contributor to their suf-
fering.
As
discussed
in
‘‘Artificial
Nutrition
and
Hydration and End-of-Life Decision Making’’ (National
Hospice and Palliative Care Organization, 2005, http://
www.caringinfo.org/files/public/QA_artificial_Nutrition_
booklet.pdf), the withdrawal of ANH from a dying patient
does not lead to a long and painful death. Moreover,
evidence exists that avoiding ANH contributes to a more
comfortable death.
ANH has traditionally been used in end-of-life care
when patients experience a loss of appetite and difficulty
swallowing. Health care practitioners use ANH to pro-
long life, prevent aspiration pneumonia (inflammation of
the lungs due to inhaling food particles or fluid), maintain
independence and physical function, and decrease suffer-
ing and discomfort. However, artificial nutrition and
hydration do not always accomplish these goals, as noted
in the Hospice and Palliative Nurses Association (HPNA)
position paper ‘‘Artificial Nutrition and Hydration in
End-of-Life Care’’ (Home Healthcare Nurse, vol. 22,
no. 5, May 2004). The position paper points out that
results of studies ‘‘show that tube feeding does not appear
to prolong life in most patients with life-limiting, pro-
gressive diseases; moreover, complications from tube
placement may increase mortality. Furthermore, artifi-
cially delivered nutrition does not protect against aspira-
tion and in some patient populations may actually
increase the risk of aspiration and its complications.’’
The American Dietetic Association (ADA) has taken
the formal position that ‘‘the development of clinical and
ethical criteria for the nutrition and hydration of persons
through the life span should be established by members
of the health care team. Registered dietitians should work
collaboratively to make nutrition, hydration, and feeding
recommendations in individual cases’’ (‘‘Position of the
American Dietetic Association: Ethical and Legal Issues
in Nutrition, Hydration, and Feeding,’’ Journal of the
American Dietetic Association, vol. 102, no. 5, May
2002). The ADA suggests that the patient should deter-
mine the extent of his or her nutrition and hydration, and
that shared decision making should occur between health
care professionals and the family when the patient cannot
make such decisions.
Kidney Dialysis
Kidney dialysis is a medical procedure by which a
machine takes over the function of the kidneys in remov-
ing waste products from the blood. Dialysis can be used
when an illness or injury temporarily impairs kidney
function. It may also be used by patients with irreversibly
damaged kidneys awaiting organ transplantation.
Kidney failure may also occur as an end-stage of a
terminal illness. While dialysis may cleanse the body of
waste products, it cannot cure the disease. People who
wish to let their illness take its course may refuse dialy-
sis. They will eventually lapse into a coma and die.
DISORDERS OF CONSCIOUSNESS
A coma is a deep state of unconsciousness caused by
damage to the brain, often from illness or trauma. Most
people in a coma recover within a few days, but some do
not. Figure 4.2 shows the possible outcomes for those
who do not recover from a coma quickly. For some, their
brain dies. That is, they irreversibly lose all cerebral and
brainstem function. Table 2.1 in Chapter 2 lists the clin-
ical criteria for brain death.
More typically, patients who do not recover quickly
from a coma progress to a vegetative state. Those in a
vegetative state for one month are then referred to as
being in a persistent vegetative state (PVS), and after a
longer period (see Figure 4.2) are referred to as being in a
permanent vegetative state. ‘‘Permanent’’ implies no
chance of recovery.
Table 2.2 in Chapter 2 lists the criteria for the diag-
nosis of a persistent vegetative state. As Table 2.2 shows,
patients in a PVS are unaware of themselves or their
environment. They do not respond to stimuli, under-
stand language, or have control of bowel and bladder
functions. They are intermittently awake but are not
conscious—a condition often referred to as ‘‘eyes open
unconsciousness.’’
Death and Dying
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
31

Some patients in a PVS may recover further to regain
partial consciousness. This condition is called a mini-
mally conscious state (MCS). Table 4.4 lists the criteria
for a minimally conscious state. Partial consciousness
(MCS) means that perception is severely altered, but the
patient shows an awareness of self or the environment
and exhibits behaviors such as following simple com-
mands and smiling or crying at appropriate times. Some
patients emerge from a MCS and some remain in a
minimally conscious state permanently.
Another disorder of consciousness that rarely occurs
after a coma is locked-in syndrome. The patient with
locked-in syndrome has full consciousness, but all the
voluntary muscles of the body are paralyzed except
(usually) for those that control vertical eye movement
and blinking. Persons with locked-in syndrome commu-
nicate primarily with eye or eyelid movements.
Treatment of PVS Patients
In ‘‘The Vegetative and Minimally Conscious States:
Consensus-Based Criteria for Establishing Diagnosis and
Prognosis’’ (Neurorehabilitation, vol. 19, no. 4, 2004),
Joseph T. Giacino discusses implications for treatment of
patients in both a vegetative and a minimally conscious
state. He notes that early interventions should focus on
maintaining the patient’s physical health and preventing
complications. Standard interventions include stretching
exercises, skin care, nutritional supplementation, and
pain management. In minimally conscious patients, func-
tional communication systems and interaction should be
established. If the patient does not improve and the cri-
teria for permanence of the condition are met, decisions
must be made concerning changes in the level of care and
whether life-sustaining treatment should be withdrawn.
At this time professionals having expertise in the evalua-
tion and management of patients with disorders of
consciousness should be consulted to determine an appro-
priate course of action.
Chances of Recovery
Giacino summarizes the consensus opinion of the
major professional organizations in neurorehabilitation
and neurology concerning, among other things, the prog-
nosis of patients in a vegetative state (VS). The article notes
that the probability of recovery of consciousness from a
vegetative state depends on the length of time a patient
has been in this condition and whether it was brought on
by traumatic injuries or by non-traumatic causes.
After three months in a vegetative state, the prob-
ability of recovering from a trauma-induced VS is
approximately 35% and from a non-trauma-induced VS
is 10%. Of the 35% who will recover from a trauma-
induced VS, about 20% will still have severe disabilities
at one year post-injury while the remaining 15% will
have moderate to good outcomes.
Of those persons with trauma-induced VS who do not
begin recovery by three months, 35% will die and the
other 30% will remain in a VS at one year post-injury. Of
those alive at six months, approximately 30% will die,
50% will remain in a VS, and 15% will recover con-
sciousness by twelve months.
Of those people with non-trauma-induced VS who do
not begin recovery by three months, approximately half
will die during the next nine months and the other half will
remain in a VS. No cases of recovery after six months in a
non-trauma-induced VS have been documented.
FIGURE 4.2
Flow chart of cerebral insult and coma
Acute brain injury
Coma
Locked-in syndrome
Vegetative state
Chronic coma 
(very rare)
Brain death
Death
Minimally conscious state
Permanent 
vegetative state 
(3 months if non-traumatic,
1 year if traumatic) 
Confusional state
Increasing independence
SOURCE: Steven Laureys, et al., “Figure 1. Flow Chart of Cerebral Insult
and Coma,” in “Brain Function in Coma, Vegetative State, and Related
Disorders,” The Lancet Neurology, vol. 3, no. 9, September 2004,
pp. 537–46, © 2004 with permission from Elsevier
TABLE 4.4
Criteria for a minimally conscious state (MCS)
To diagnose a minimally conscious state, limited but clearly discernible evidence of 
self- or environmental awareness must be demonstrated on a reproducible or sustained
basis by one or more of the following behaviors
1. Follows simple commands
2. Gestural or verbal yes/no responses (regardless of accuracy)
3. Intelligible verbalization
4. Purposeful behavior, including movements or affective behaviors that occur in
contingent relationship to relevant environmental stimuli and are not due to reflexive
activity. Some examples of qualifying purposeful behavior are
Appropriate smiling or crying in response to the linguistic or visual content of 
emotional but not to neutral topics or stimuli
Vocalizations or gestures that occur in direct response to the linguistic content of
questions
Reaching for objects that demonstrates a clear relationship between object 
location and direction of reach
Touching or holding objects in a manner that accommodates the size and shape 
of the object
Pursuit eye movement of sustained fixation that occurs in direct response to 
moving or salient stimuli
SOURCE: Eelco F.M. Wijdicks and Ronald E. Cranford, “Table 2. Criteria for
a Minimally Conscious State,” in “Clinical Diagnosis of Prolonged States of
Impaired Consciousness in Adults,” Mayo Clinic Proceedings, vol. 80, no. 8,
August 2005
32
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
Death and Dying

ORGAN TRANSPLANTATION
Most organ and tissue donations are from people who
have died as a result of brain injury and subsequent brain
death. Once death is pronounced, the body is kept on
mechanical support (if possible) to maintain the organs
until it is determined whether the person will be a donor.
There are some organ and tissue donations that can
come from living people. For example, it is possible to
lead a healthy life with only one of the two kidneys that
humans are born with, so people with two health kidneys
will sometimes donate one to someone in need. Portions
of the liver, lungs, and pancreas have also been trans-
planted out of a living donor, but this is less common. In
most cases, living donors make their donations to help a
family member or close friend.
Organ transplantation has come a long way since the
first kidney was transplanted from one identical twin to
another in 1954. The introduction in 1983 of cyclospor-
ine, an immunosuppressant drug that helps prevent the
body’s immune system from rejecting a donated organ,
made it possible to successfully transplant a variety of
organs and tissues.
Figure 4.3 and Figure 4.4 show the organs and tissues
transplantable with today’s immunosuppressant drugs
and technologies. The organs that may be transplanted
from people who have died are the heart, intestines,
kidneys, liver, lungs, and pancreas. Tissues that may be
harvested for transfer include bone, cartilage, cornea,
heart valves, pancreas islet cells, skin, tendons, and veins.
Living persons may donate a kidney, parts of a lung or
liver, or bone marrow. Typically, donated organs must be
transplanted within six to forty-eight hours of harvest,
while some tissue may be stored for future use.
Soon after organ transplantation began, the demand
for donor organs exceeded the supply. In 1984 Congress
passed the National Organ Transplant Act (PL 98–507) in
order to create ‘‘a centralized network to match scarce
donated organs with critically ill patients.’’ (See Figure
4.5 for the process of matching organ donors and recipi-
ents.) Today, organ transplant is an accepted medical
treatment for end-stage illnesses.
The United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS), a
private company under contract with the Division of
Transplantation
of
the
Department
of
Health
and
Human Services (HHS), manages the national transplant
waiting list. It maintains data on all clinical organ trans-
plants and distributes organ donor cards. (See Figure 4.6.)
UNOS reported that 89,811 people were waiting for a
transplant in the United States as of November 2005. In
2003, 7,147 people died while awaiting a transplant
because donor organs were not available for them.
Table 4.5 shows the waiting list for organs at the
end of the year, from 1994 through 2003. ‘‘Total
registrations’’ refers to all the registrations from all
transplant centers for all organs. Therefore, this figure
is larger than ‘‘total patients,’’ which is the number of
patients waiting for a transplant. An individual may
show up as more than one registration in the ‘‘registra-
tions’’ category because that individual may be regis-
tered at more than one transplant center or for more
than one organ. However, individuals waiting for trans-
plants are counted only once in the ‘‘total patients’’
category, but they may show up more than once in
the listing of organ types under that heading if they
need more than one organ.
FIGURE 4.3
Transplantable organs
Heart
Lungs
Kidneys
Liver
Pancreas
Intestine
SOURCE: “3.1. Background: Transplantable Organs,” in Decision:
Donation, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health
Resources and Services Administration, Healthcare Systems Bureau,
Division of Transplantation, 2004, http://www.organdonor.gov/student/
docs/OrganDonorAllPages.pdf (accessed November 9, 2005)
Death and Dying
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
33

FIGURE 4.4
Transplantable tissues
Cartilage
Cartilage
Eye-sclera
Eye-sclera
Eye-cornea
Eye-cornea
Rotator cuff 
in shoulder
Rotator cuff
Heart valve
Heart valve
Blood
Humerus
Skin
Femur
Head
Proximal
Shaft
Distal
Achilles’ tendon
Achilles’ tendon
Skin
Rib cartilage
Rib cartilage
Blood vessels
Nerve
Blood vessels
Artery
Vein
Proximal
Shaft
Distal
Femur
Femoral nerve
Blood
SOURCE: “3.2. Background: Transplantable Tissues,” in Decision: Donation, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Healthcare Systems Bureau,
Division of Transplantation, 2004, http://www.organdonor.gov/student/docs/OrganDonorAllPages.pdf (accessed November 9, 2005)
Humerus
34
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
Death and Dying

FIGURE 4.5
1. PATIENT enters the system
• 
Acceptable organ donors can range in 
age from newborn to senior citizens.
• 
Donors are people generally in good 
health who have died suddenly, often
through accidents, and have been
declared brain dead. In this condition,
brain function has permanently ceased,
but the heart and lungs continue to
function with the use of artificial life
supports. 
• 
There are 58 organ procurement 
organizations (OPOs) across the
country (including Puerto Rico) that
provide procurement services to the
257 transplant centers nationwide. 
Transplant center
A. DONOR enters the system
Donor hospital
Waiting
list
B. Hospital and organ procurement 
 organization (OPO) evaluate donor, 
 transmit organ availability to OPTN.
C. OPO compares available organ with 
 OPTN patient waiting list. When 
 suitable patient is found, recovery 
 team is notified.
2. Transplant center evaluates patient, 
 adds name to waiting list, and 
 transmits requests to OPTN.
3. OPTN adds patient to its waiting 
 list. When suitable organ match 
 is found, transplant center is 
 notified. 
4. Transplant team receives organ, 
 performs transplant. 
D. Recovery team removes organ. 
 Organ is transported to recipient 
 transplant center.
Waiting
list
Organ Procurement and Transplant Network*
Scientific Registry 
of 
Transplant Recipients*
Transplant 
data
Followup: 
6 month, 12 month, 
then annually
• 
There are almost 91,000 patients on 
the waiting list.
Matching donors and recipients: The Organ Procurement & Transplantation Network (OPTN) and the Scientific Registry of Transplant
Recipients (SRTR)
*Operated by the United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS), Richmond, VA, under contract with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services
Administration, Division of Transplantation.
SOURCE: Questions and Answers about Organ Donation, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration,
Division of Transplantation, n.d. Data updated as of October 2005.
Death and Dying
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
35

In 2003, 59.2% of all organs transplanted were kid-
neys, up slightly from 58.4% in 2000. Of the remainder,
21.4% were livers, up from 20.9% in 2000; 8.1% were
hearts, down from 9.4% in 2000; 4.3% were lungs, nearly
identical to 2000; nearly 0.5% were pancreas transplants
alone, slightly less than in 2000; and only 0.2% were
intestines, up from 0.1% in 2000. The remaining were
multi-organ procedures, for a total of 25,076 transplants
in 2003, up from 22,967 in 2000 and 18,172 in 1994. (See
Table 4.6.)
The number of all donors rose 62% between 1994
and 2003, from 8,201 to 13,275. While the number of
deceased donors increased 27%, from 5,099 to 6,455,
living donors showed a significant increase of 120%,
from 3,102 to 6,820. (See Table 4.7.)
Organ Donation
The Uniform Anatomical Gift Act of 1968 gives a
person the opportunity to sign a donor card indicating a
desire to donate organs or tissue after death. People who
wish to be donors should complete a donor card (see
Figure 4.6), which should be carried at all times.
Alternatively, the wish to be a donor can be indicated
on a driver’s license or in a living will. Prospective
donors should inform their family and physician of their
decision. At the time of death, hospitals always ask for
the family’s consent, even if a donor has already indi-
cated his or her wish to donate organs. Should the family
TABLE 4.5
United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) and Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients (SRTR) national patient waiting list for organ
transplant, end of year, 1994–2003
Year
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
Total registrations
37,252
43,240
49,295
55,522
62,360
68,200
74,861
80,332
82,152
86,355
Organ type
Kidney
27,196
30,565
33,968
37,392
40,863
43,683
47,299
50,458
53,392
57,211
Pancreas transplant
alone
166
183
204
225
278
248
313
391
406
455
Pancreas after kidney
89
137
159
157
186
283
460
685
796
935
Kidney-pancreas
1,015
1,166
1,377
1,530
1,756
2,136
2,453
2,476
2,514
2,472
Liver
3,993
5,576
7,346
9,438
11,744
14,183
16,448
18,285
17,122
17,515
Intestine
73
82
81
92
97
107
143
171
185
175
Heart
2,894
3,421
3,644
3,824
4,081
3,956
3,973
3,925
3,775
3,529
Lung
1,623
1,906
2,277
2,632
3,102
3,376
3,568
3,732
3,765
3,874
Heart-Lung
203
204
239
232
253
228
204
209
197
189
Total patients
35,751
41,592
47,456
53,445
59,947
65,362
71,752
77,065
78,781
82,885
Organ type
Kidney
25,827
29,046
32,298
35,569
38,765
41,253
44,665
47,717
50,535
54,231
Pancreas transplant
alone
164
181
201
221
272
246
312
383
403
452
Pancreas after kidney
89
136
155
153
182
280
456
674
784
925
Kidney-pancreas
989
1,145
1,351
1,492
1,697
2,051
2,366
2,371
2,412
2,390
Liver
3,955
5,526
7,261
9,297
11,562
13,958
16,133
17,953
16,790
17,171
Intestine
71
82
81
89
95
107
141
168
183
172
Heart
2,885
3,413
3,635
3,810
4,066
3,933
3,957
3,905
3,760
3,519
Lung
1,570
1,861
2,237
2,586
3,058
3,311
3,520
3,685
3,717
3,836
Heart-Lung
201
202
237
228
250
223
202
209
197
189
SOURCE: “Table 1.3. Waiting List at End of Year, 1994 to 2003,” in 2004 OPTN/SRTR Annual Report 1994–2003, Department of Health and Human Services,
Health Resources and Services Administration, Healthcare Systems Bureau, Division of Transplantation, February 7, 2005, http://www.optn.org/AR2004/
default.htm (accessed November 2, 2005)
FIGURE 4.6
Organ/Tissue Donor Card
I wish to donate my organs and tissues. I wish to give: 
any needed organs and tissues
only the following organs and 
tissues:
Donor 
Signature
Date
Witness
Witness
D
o
n
a
t
e
L
i
f
e
Organ/tissue donor card
SOURCE: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Healthcare
Systems Bureau, Division of Transplantation, http://www.organdonor
.gov/newdonorcard.pdf (accessed November 9, 2005)
36
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
Death and Dying

refuse, the doctors will not take the organs, despite the
deceased’s wish. In 2003 most organ donors whose cause
of death was known died of a stroke (42.7%) or head
trauma (40.5%). Anoxia (lack of oxygen) was the cause
of death of 13.2% of organ donors. (See Table 4.8.)
In
1986
the
Consolidated
Omnibus
Budget
Reconciliation Act (PL 99–509) required all hospitals
receiving federal funding to adopt procedures to identify
potential organ donors and notify families of their option
to donate. In June 1998 the government transferred this
TABLE 4.6
United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) and Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients (SRTR) transplants, by organ and donor type,
1994–2003
Year
Organ/donor type
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
All organs
Total
18,172
19,260
19,556
20,090
21,299
21,803
22,967
23,918
24,548
25,076
Deceased
15,085
15,790
15,794
16,049
16,766
16,817
17,094
17,360
17,936
18,270
Living
3,087
3,470
3,762
4,041
4,533
4,986
5,873
6,558
6,612
6,806
Kidney
Total
10,540
10,980
11,255
11,557
12,298
12,612
13,407
14,076
14,524
14,853
Deceased
7,533
7,597
7,593
7,632
7,890
7,915
7,958
8,065
8,288
8,389
Living
3,007
3,383
3,662
3,925
4,408
4,697
5,449
6,011
6,236
6,464
Pancreas
transplant 
alone
Total
38
37
45
64
72
123
119
128
140
117
Deceased
38
36
45
64
72
123
118
127
139
117
Living
*
1
*
*
*
*
1
1
1
*
Pancreas after
kidney
Total
54
67
113
130
157
221
303
306
376
343
Deceased
54
67
112
130
157
221
303
306
376
343
Living
*
*
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Kidney/pancreas
Total
748
916
857
847
969
939
913
889
902
868
Deceased
746
910
847
841
967
931
907
886
902
865
Living
2
6
10
6
2
8
6
3
*
3
Liver
Total
3,548
3,829
3,930
4,015
4,369
4,605
4,802
4,984
5,060
5,364
Deceased
3,488
3,775
3,868
3,929
4,277
4,354
4,407
4,466
4,699
5,044
Living
60
54
62
86
92
251
395
518
361
320
Intestine
Total
6
22
15
23
28
31
30
42
42
52
Deceased
6
21
13
21
26
29
27
42
41
48
Living
*
1
2
2
2
2
3
*
1
4
Heart
Total
2,321
2,346
2,319
2,267
2,310
2,157
2,167
2,171
2,112
2,024
Deceased
2,318
2,346
2,318
2,267
2,310
2,157
2,167
2,171
2,112
2,024
Living
3
*
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Lung
Total
722
871
812
930
866
891
959
1,059
1,041
1,080
Deceased
707
846
788
908
837
863
940
1,034
1,028
1,065
Living
15
25
24
22
29
28
19
25
13
15
Heart-lung
Total
71
69
38
62
46
51
46
27
31
28
Deceased
71
69
38
62
46
51
46
27
31
28
Living
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Multi-organ
Total
124
123
172
195
184
173
221
236
320
347
Deceased
124
123
172
195
184
173
221
236
320
347
Living
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*None in category.
Notes: An organ that is divided into segments (liver, lung, pancreas, intestine) is counted once per transplant. Kidney-pancreas and heart-lung transplants are counted as one transplant. 
Other multiple organ transplants are counted only in the multiple organ row.
SOURCE: “Table 1.7. Transplants by Organ and Donor Type, 1994 to 2003,” in 2004 OPTN/SRTR Annual Report 1994–2003, Department of Health and Human
Services, Health Resources and Services Administration, Healthcare Systems Bureau, Division of Transplantation, February 7, 2005, http://www.optn.org/
AR2004/default.htm (accessed November 2, 2005)
Death and Dying
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
37

responsibility from hospitals to local organ procurement
organizations because the hospitals were not doing the job
well. The HHS estimates that twelve thousand to fifteen
thousand potential organ donors die each year whose
families are never asked to donate their loved ones’
organs. Under the new procedure, hospitals are required
to report every death to the procurement organizations.
To promote awareness of organ and tissue donation,
Congress in 1997 authorized the Internal Revenue
Service (IRS) to include organ and tissue donor informa-
tion with federal tax refund checks. In another effort to
increase public support for organ donation, the U.S.
Postal Service introduced a new stamp in 1998 showing
two intertwined figures, their hands reaching to touch
each other’s hearts.
By 2001 demand continued to outpace the supply of
available organs and tissues for transplants. Governors
of many states began a variety of programs aimed at
increasing public awareness of the lack of donor organs
and honoring people who have chosen to become
donors.
For
example,
Alabama
Governor
Don
Siegelman
created
an
Alabama
Donor
Registry;
Georgia Governor Roy Barnes designated March 2001
as Eye Donor Month; and Utah Governor Michael O.
Leavitt and his state’s legislature adopted a resolution
to improve public awareness about organ and tissue
donation. Governors of at least nine states forged part-
nerships with local advocacy, medical, religious, and
business groups to strengthen support for transplant
programs.
TABLE 4.7
United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS) and Scientific Registry of Transplant Recipients (SRTR) organ donors, by organ and donor type,
1994–2003
Year
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
All organs
Total 
8,201
8,854
9,200
9,534
10,352
10,837
11,875
12,662
12,811
13,275
Deceased 
5,099
5,363
5,418
5,479
5,794
5,824
5,985
6,080
6,187
6,455
Living
3,102
3,491
3,782
4,055
4,558
5,013
5,890
6,582
6,624
6,820
Kidney
Total 
7,806
8,393
8,709
9,014
9,749
10,090
10,944
11,542
11,872
12,221
Deceased
4,797
5,003
5,038
5,083
5,338
5,386
5,489
5,528
5,636
5,754
Living
3,009
3,390
3,671
3,931
4,411
4,704
5,455
6,014
6,236
6,467
Pancreas
Total 
1,362
1,296
1,302
1,328
1,464
1,636
1,710
1,822
1,873
1,777
Deceased
1,360
1,289
1,291
1,322
1,462
1,628
1,703
1,818
1,872
1,774
Living
2
7
11
6
2
8
7
4
1
3
Liver
Total 
4,153
4,390
4,525
4,685
4,936
5,198
5,392
5,624
5,654
6,000
Deceased
4,093
4,336
4,463
4,599
4,844
4,947
4,997
5,106
5,293
5,680
Living
60
54
62
86
92
251
395
518
361
320
Intestine
Total 
62
123
50
74
80
98
90
115
113
126
Deceased
62
122
48
72
78
96
87
115
112
122
Living
*
1
2
2
2
2
3
*
1
4
Heart
Total 
2,528
2,491
2,463
2,426
2,449
2,316
2,283
2,276
2,222
2,121
Deceased
2,525
2,491
2,462
2,426
2,449
2,316
2,283
2,276
2,222
2,121
Living
3
*
1
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Lung
Total 
948
901
802
872
817
834
861
936
945
991
Deceased
918
856
757
836
764
778
825
887
920
962
Living
30
45
45
36
53
56
36
49
25
29
Donation after 
cardiac death
Total 
57
64
71
78
75
87
119
169
189
271
Deceased
57
64
71
78
75
87
119
169
189
271
*None in category
Notes: Includes only organs recovered for transplant. The number of transplants using living donors may be different from the number of living donors. This is because there is a small
number of multi-organ living donors and multiple donors for one transplant. For example, a living donor might donate a kidney and pancreas segment; or two living donors might each
donate a lung lobe for one transplant procedure. A donor of an organ divided into segments (liver, lung, pancreas, intestine) is counted only once for that organ. A donor of multiple
organs is counted once for each organ recovered. Donors after cardiac death are included in the deceased donor counts as well and are counted separately on the last line.
SOURCE: “Table 1.1. U.S. Organ Donors by Organ and Donor Type, 1994 to 2003,” in 2004 OPTN/SRTR Annual Report 1994–2003, Department of Health and
Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration, Healthcare Systems Bureau, Division of Transplantation, February 7, 2005, http://www.optn.org/
AR2004/default.htm (accessed November 2, 2005)
38
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
Death and Dying

State programs were also reinforced by a national
organ donation initiative announced by HHS Secretary
Tommy
G.
Thompson
in
April
2001.
Secretary
Thompson
called upon
powerful alliances
between
employers and unions to promote donation. Called the
‘‘Workplace Partnership for Life,’’ this coalition by 2004
was made up of hundreds of organizations and busi-
nesses, including some of the largest U.S. employers:
Aetna,
American
Airlines,
Bank
of
America,
DaimlerChrysler, Ford Motor Company, General Motors
Corporation, 3M, MetLife, and Verizon.
Transplant Regulations
In March 1998 the Clinton administration ordered
UNOS to change its organ allocation policy. The network
fought the new rules for two years in favor of the system
already in place, which was based on geography. When an
organ became available in a local area, that organ was
offered to the sickest patient in that area. If no local patient
needed the organ, it was then offered regionally, and last
of all, nationally. The government, however, wanted
organs to be given to the sickest patients first, regardless
of geographic location. Secretary of HHS in the Clinton
administration, Donna Shalala maintained, ‘‘People are
dying unnecessarily, not because they don’t have health
insurance, not because they don’t have access to care, but
simply because of where they happen to live in the coun-
try. We need a level playing field for all patients.’’
A system based on need rather than location took
effect in March 2000, although the issue of precisely who
would decide the allocation of organs remained unre-
solved until April 2000, when the U.S. House of
Representatives passed a proposal to restore decision
making to UNOS, where it has remained.
TABLE 4.8
Deceased organ donor causes of death, 1994–2003, any organ
Year
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
Total
5,099
5,363
5,418
5,479
5,794
5,824
5,985
6,080
6,187
6,455
Cause of death
Anoxia
360
527
526
562
639
640
619
697
741
855
Cerebrovascular/stroke
1,417
2,052
2,270
2,236
2,478
2,509
2,612
2,631
2,627
2,757
Head trauma
2,019
2,618
2,456
2,489
2,497
2,429
2,520
2,545
2,610
2,614
Central nervous system tumor
42
53
50
63
57
61
62
52
56
48
Other
81
98
86
109
88
171
171
154
153
175
Unknown
4
15
30
20
35
14
1
1
b
6
Different coding pre 4/94
1,176
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
Cause of death (percentages)a
Anoxia
7.1%
9.8%
9.7%
10.3%
11.0%
11.0%
10.3%
11.5%
12.0%
13.2%
Cerebrovascular/stroke
27.8%
38.3%
41.9%
40.8%
42.8%
43.1%
43.6%
43.3%
42.5%
42.7%
Head trauma
39.6%
48.8%
45.3%
45.4%
43.1%
41.7%
42.1%
41.9%
42.2%
40.5%
Central nervous system tumor
0.8%
1.0%
0.9%
1.1%
1.0%
1.0%
1.0%
0.9%
0.9%
0.7%
Other
1.6%
1.8%
1.6%
2.0%
1.5%
2.9%
2.9%
2.5%
2.5%
2.7%
Unknown
0.1%
0.3%
0.6%
0.4%
0.6%
0.2%
0.0%
0.0%
b
0.1%
Different coding pre 4/94
23.1%
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
b
aPercentages are calculated based on totals including missing and unknown cases.
bNone in category.
Notes: Includes donors or organs recovered for transplant and not used, as well as those transplanted. Form changes on April 1, 1994 changed the way cause of death was calculated.
Not all recovered organs are actually transplanted.
SOURCE: Adapted from “Table 2.1. Deceased Donor Characteristics, 1994 to 2003 Deceased Donors of Any Organ,” in 2004 OPTN/SRTR Annual Report
1994–2003, Department of Health and Human Services, Health Resources and Services Administration, Healthcare Systems Bureau, Division of
Transplantation, February 7, 2005, http://www.optn.org/AR2004/default.htm (accessed November 2, 2005)
Death and Dying
The End of Life: Medical Considerations
39

CHAPTER 5
SERIOUSLY ILL CHILDREN
What greater pain could mortals have than this; To see
their children dead before their eyes?
—Euripides
To a parent, the death of a child is an affront to the
proper order of things. Children are supposed to outlive
their parents, not the other way around. And when a child
comes into the world irreparably ill, what is a parent to
do—insist on continuous medical intervention, hoping
against hope that a miracle happens, or let nature take
its course and allow the newborn to die? When a five-
year-old child has painful, life-threatening disabilities,
the parent is faced with a similar agonizing decision.
That decision is the parent’s to make, preferably with
the advice of a sensitive physician. But what if the ailing
child is an adolescent who refuses further treatment for a
terminal illness? Does a parent honor that wish?
INFANT MORTALITY
Since 1960 the infant mortality rate in the United
States has declined 73%—from twenty-six deaths per
one thousand live births in 1960 to seven deaths per
one thousand live births in 2002, according to the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
Table 5.1 shows the decline from 1983 to 2002, while
Table 5.2 shows figures for 2002 and preliminary figures
for 2003. The data in these two tables differ slightly due
to the use of different data sets.
Advances in neonatology (the medical subspecialty
concerned with the care of newborns, especially those at
risk), which date back to the 1960s, have contributed to
the huge drop in infant death rates. Infants born prema-
turely or with low birth weights, who were once likely to
die, now can survive life-threatening conditions because
of the development of neonatal intensive care units
(NICUs). However, the improvements are not consistent
for newborns of all races.
African-American infants are more than twice as
likely as white and Hispanic infants to die before their
first birthday. In 2002 the national death rate for African-
American infants was 14.4 per one thousand live births,
compared with 5.9 for non-Hispanic white infants per one
thousand live births and 5.6 for Hispanic infants per one
thousand live births. In 2003 the national death rate for
African-American infants was 14.1 per one thousand live
births, compared with 5.8 for non-Hispanic white infants
per one thousand live births and 5.9 for Hispanic
infants per one thousand live births. (See Table 5.2.)
Additionally, the life expectancy at birth of African-
American babies is less than that of white babies:
African-American babies born in 2003 had a life expec-
tancy of 72.7 years, while white babies born that same
year had a life expectancy of seventy-eight years. (See
Table 5.3.)
Leading Causes of Infant Mortality
Birth defects are the leading cause of infant mortality
in the United States. Some of the more serious birth
defects are anencephaly (a condition in which most of
the brain and spinal cord are missing), spina bifida (a
condition in which the spinal column does not close
completely, leaving portions of the spinal cord exposed),
and Down syndrome (a condition in which babies are
born with an extra copy of chromosome 21 in their cells,
which results in anatomical and developmental problems,
along with cognitive deficits).
According to the CDC, one in every thirty-three
babies born in the United States each year have birth
defects. Babies born with birth defects have a greater
chance of illness and long-term disability than babies
without birth defects.
Birth defects, which are identified as ‘‘congenital
malformations, deformations, and chromosomal abnorm-
alities’’ by the International Classification of Diseases
Death and Dying
41

(Tenth Revision, 1992), accounted for 20.1% of all infant
deaths in 2003 (5,714 out of 28,422 total causes). (See
Table 5.4.)
Disorders related to short gestation (premature birth)
and low birth weight accounted for the second-leading
cause of infant mortality (4,844 out of 28,422, or 17%).
Among African-American infants, such disorders were
the leading cause of death (22.7%; 1,903 out of 8,400
deaths from all causes). Other causes of infant deaths
were sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), maternal
complications of pregnancy, and complications of the
placenta, cord, and membranes. These five leading causes
of infant mortality accounted for more than half (54.2%)
of the total infant deaths in all races. (See Table 5.4.)
BIRTH DEFECTS
The March of Dimes Birth Defects Foundation, a
national volunteer organization that seeks to improve
infant health by preventing birth defects and lowering
infant mortality rates, reported in its online quick refer-
ences and fact sheets on birth defects (http://www.march
ofdimes.com/pnhec/4439_1206.asp) that about 120,000
TABLE 5.1
Infant, neonatal, and postneonatal mortality rates, by race and Hispanic origin of mother, selected years 1983–2002
[Data are based on linked birth and death certificates for infants]
Race and Hispanic origin
of mother
1983a
1985a
1990a
1995b
1998b
1999b
2000b
2001b
2002b
Infantc deaths per 1,000 live births
All mothers
10.9
10.4
8.9
7.6
7.2
7.0
6.9
6.8
7.0
White
9.3
8.9
7.3
6.3
6.0
5.8
5.7
5.7
5.8
Black or African American
19.2
18.6
16.9
14.6
13.8
14.0
13.5
13.3
13.8
American Indian or Alaska Native
15.2
13.1
13.1
9.0
9.3
9.3
8.3
9.7
8.6
Asian or Pacific Islander
8.3
7.8
6.6
5.3
5.5
4.8
4.9
4.7
4.8
Chinese
9.5
5.8
4.3
3.8
4.0
2.9
3.5
3.2
3.0
Japanese
5.6*
6.0*
5.5*
5.3*
3.4*
3.5*
4.5*
4.0*
4.9*
Filipino
8.4
7.7
6.0
5.6
6.2
5.8
5.7
5.5
5.7
Hawaiian
11.2
9.9*
8.0*
6.5*
9.9
7.0*
9.0
7.3*
9.6
Other Asian or Pacific Islander
8.1
8.5
7.4
5.5
5.7
5.1
4.8
4.8
4.7
Hispanic or Latinod, e
9.5
8.8
7.5
6.3
5.8
5.7
5.6
5.4
5.6
Mexican
9.1
8.5
7.2
6.0
5.6
5.5
5.4
5.2
5.4
Puerto Rican
12.9
11.2
9.9
8.9
7.8
8.3
8.2
8.5
8.2
Cuban
7.5
8.5
7.2
5.3
3.7*
4.6
4.6
4.2
3.7
Central and South American
8.5
8.0
6.8
5.5
5.3
4.7
4.6
5.0
5.1
Other and unknown Hispanic or Latino
10.6
9.5
8.0
7.4
6.5
7.2
6.9
6.0
7.1
Not Hispanic or Latino:
Whitee
9.2
8.6
7.2
6.3
6.0
5.8
5.7
5.7
5.8
Black or African Americane
19.1
18.3
16.9
14.7
13.9
14.1
13.6
13.5
13.9
Neonatalc deaths per 1,000 live births
All mothers
7.1
6.8
5.7
4.9
4.8
4.7
4.6
4.5
4.7
White
6.1
5.8
4.6
4.1
4.0
3.9
3.8
3.8
3.9
Black or African American
12.5
12.3
11.1
9.6
9.4
9.5
9.1
8.9
9.3
American Indian or Alaska Native
7.5
6.1
6.1
4.0
5.0
5.0
4.4
4.2
4.6
Asian or Pacific Islander
5.2
4.8
3.9
3.4
3.9
3.2
3.4
3.1
3.4
Chinese
5.5
3.3
2.3
2.3
2.7
1.8
2.5
1.9
2.4
Japanese
3.7*
3.1*
3.5*
3.3*
2.5*
2.8*
2.6*
2.5*
3.7*
Filipino
5.6
5.1
3.5
3.4
4.6
3.9
4.1
4.0
4.1
Hawaiian
7.0*
5.7*
4.3*
4.0*
7.2*
4.9*
6.2*
3.6*
5.6*
Other Asian or Pacific Islander
5.0
5.4
4.4
3.7
3.9
3.3
3.4
3.2
3.3
Hispanic or Latinod, e
6.2
5.7
4.8
4.1
3.9
3.9
3.8
3.6
3.8
Mexican
5.9
5.4
4.5
3.9
3.7
3.7
3.6
3.5
3.6
Puerto Rican
8.7
7.6
6.9
6.1
5.2
5.9
5.8
6.0
5.8
Cuban
5.0*
6.2
5.3
3.6*
2.7*
3.5*
3.2*
2.5*
3.2*
Central and South American
5.8
5.6
4.4
3.7
3.6
3.3
3.3
3.4
3.5
Other and unknown Hispanic or Latino 
6.4
5.6
5.0
4.8
4.5
4.8
4.6
3.9
5.1
Not Hispanic or Latino:
Whitee
5.9
5.6
4.5
4.0
3.9
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.9
Black or African Americane
12.0
11.9
11.0
9.6
9.4
9.6
9.2
9.0
9.3
Postneonatalc deaths per 1,000 live births
All mothers
3.8
3.6
3.2
2.6
2.4
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.3
White
3.2
3.1
2.7
2.2
2.0
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.9
Black or African American
6.7
6.3
5.9
5.0
4.4
4.5
4.3
4.4
4.5
American Indian or Alaska Native
7.7
7.0
7.0
5.1
4.4
4.3
3.9
5.4
4.0
Asian or Pacific Islander
3.1
2.9
2.7
1.9
1.7
1.7
1.4
1.6
1.4
Chinese
4.0
2.5*
2.0*
1.5*
1.3*
1.2*
1.0*
1.3*
0.7*
Japanese
*
2.9*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
Filipino
2.8*
2.7
2.5
2.2
1.6
1.9
1.6
1.5*
1.7
Hawaiian
4.2*
4.3*
3.8*
*
*
*
*
3.7*
4.0*
Other Asian or Pacific Islander
3.0
3.0
3.0
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.4
1.6
1.4
42
Seriously Ill Children
Death and Dying

babies are born annually in the United States with birth
defects—a rate of one out of every thirty-three babies.
The Foundation notes that birth defects are the leading
cause of death for children younger than one year of age
in the United States.
A birth defect may be a structural defect, a deficiency
of function, or a disease present at birth. Some birth
defects are genetic—inherited abnormalities such as
Tay-Sachs disease (a fatal disease that generally affects
children of Eastern European Jewish ancestry), or
chromosomal irregularities such as Down syndrome.
Other birth defects result from environmental factors—
infections during pregnancy, such as rubella (German
measles),
or drugs used by the pregnant woman.
Although the specific causes of many birth defects are
unknown, scientists think that many result from a combi-
nation of genetic and environmental factors. Though
many birth defects are impossible to prevent, some can
be prevented, such as those caused by maternal alcohol
and drug consumption during pregnancy.
Two birth defects that have been the subject of con-
siderable ethical debate are neural tube defects (NTDs) and
permanent disabilities coupled with operable but life-
threatening factors. An example of the latter is Down syn-
drome, a genetic abnormality that causes mental retardation
and, frequently, malformations of the heart or kidneys.
Neural Tube Defects
Neural tube defects are abnormalities of the brain and
spinal cord resulting from the failure of the neural tube to
develop properly during early pregnancy. The neural tube
is the embryonic nerve tissue that develops into the brain
and the spinal cord. In the period 1995–96, four thousand
pregnancies were affected with NTDs. The number
dropped to three thousand in 1999–2000. The Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, which reported these
figures (Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, vol. 53,
no. 17, May 7, 2004), suggested that the decline was due
to an increase in folic acid consumption by pregnant
women during those years.
Folic acid has been shown to prevent 50–70% of
NTDs if women contemplating pregnancy consume suf-
ficient folic acid before conception and then throughout
the first trimester of pregnancy. Thus, in 1992, the U.S.
Public Health Service recommended that all women cap-
able of becoming pregnant consume four hundred micro-
grams of folic acid daily. In addition, the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) mandated that as of January
1998 all enriched cereal grain products be fortified with
folic acid.
The two most common NTDs are anencephaly and
spina bifida.
ANENCEPHALY. Anencephalic
infants
die
before
birth (in utero or stillborn) or shortly thereafter. The inci-
dence of anencephaly dropped significantly from 1991
(0.018%) to 2003 (0.011%) in the states where data were
reported. The largest drop during that time period was
from 1991 to 1992. Since then, the general trend has been
downward. (See Figure 5.1.)
Issues of brain death and organ donation sometimes
surround anencephalic infants. One case that gained
TABLE 5.1
Hispanic or Latinod, e
3.3
3.2
2.7
2.1
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
Mexican
3.2
3.2
2.7
2.1
1.9
1.8
1.8
1.7
1.8
Puerto Rican
4.2
3.5
3.0
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.4
2.5
2.4
Cuban
2.5*
2.3*
1.9*
1.7*
*
*
*
1.7*
*
Central and South American
2.6
2.4
2.4
1.9
1.7
1.4
1.4
1.6
1.6
Other and unknown Hispanic or Latino
4.2
3.9
3.0
2.6
2.0
2.5
2.3
2.1
2.0
Not Hispanic or Latino:
Whitee
3.2
3.0
2.7
2.2
2.0
1.9
1.9
1.9
1.9
Black or African Americane
7.0
6.4
5.9
5.0
4.5
4.6
4.4
4.5
4.6
*Estimates are considered unreliable. Rates preceded by an asterisk are based on fewer than 50 deaths in the numerator. Rates not shown are based on fewer than 20 deaths in the
numerator.
aRates based on unweighted birth cohort data.
bRates based on a period file using weighted data.
cInfant (under 1 year of age), neonatal (under 28 days), and postneonatal (28 days–11 months).
dPersons of Hispanic origin may be of any race.
ePrior to 1995, data shown only for states with an Hispanic-origin item on their birth certificates.
Notes: The race groups white, black, American Indian or Alaska Native, and Asian or Pacific Islander include persons of Hispanic and non-Hispanic origin. National linked files do not
exist for 1992–94. Data for additional years are available.
SOURCE: Adapted from “Table 19. Infant, Neonatal, and Postneonatal Mortality Rates, according to Detailed Race and Hispanic Origin of Mother: United
States, Selected Years 1983–2002,” in Health, United States, 2005, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics,
November 2005, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus05.pdf (accessed February 27, 2006)
Infant, neonatal, and postneonatal mortality rates, by race and Hispanic origin of mother, selected years 1983–2002 [CONTINUED]
[Data are based on linked birth and death certificates for infants]
Race and Hispanic origin
of mother
1983a
1985a
1990a
1995b
1998b
1999b
2000b
2001b
2002b
Death and Dying
Seriously Ill Children
43

national attention was that of Theresa Ann Campo in
1992. Prior to their daughter’s birth, Theresa’s parents
(a Florida couple) discovered through prenatal testing
that their baby would be born without a fully developed
brain. They decided to carry the fetus to term and donate
her organs for transplantation. When baby Theresa was
born, her parents asked for her to be declared brain dead.
But Theresa’s brain stem was still functioning, so the
court ruled against the parents’ request. Baby Theresa
died ten days later and her organs were not usable for
transplant, having deteriorated as a result of oxygen
deprivation.
Some physicians and ethicists agree that even if
anencephalic babies have a brain stem, they should be
considered brain dead. Lacking a functioning higher
brain, these babies can feel nothing; they have no con-
sciousness. Others fear that declaring anencephalic
babies dead could be the start of a ‘‘slippery slope’’ that
might eventually include babies with other birth defects,
such as spina bifida, in the same category. Spina bifida
defects range from mild to severe. Other people are
concerned that anencephalic babies may be kept alive
for the purpose of harvesting their organs for transplant
at a later date.
SPINA BIFIDA. Spina bifida, which literally means
‘‘divided spine,’’ is caused by the failure of the vertebrae
(backbone) to completely cover the spinal cord early in
fetal development, leaving the spinal cord exposed.
Depending upon the amount of nerve tissue exposed,
spina bifida defects range from minor developmental
disabilities to paralysis.
Before the advent of antibiotics in the 1950s, most
babies with severe spina bifida died soon after birth. With
antibiotics and numerous medical advances, some of
these newborns can be saved.
The treatment of newborns with spina bifida can pose
serious ethical problems. Should an infant with a milder
form of the disease be treated actively while another with
severe defects is left untreated? In severe cases should the
newborn be sedated and not be given nutrition and hydra-
tion until death occurs? Or should this seriously disabled
infant be cared for while suffering from bladder and
bowel malfunctions, infections, and paralysis? What if
infants who have been left to die unexpectedly survive?
Would they be more disabled than if they had been
treated right away?
The development of fetal surgery to correct spina
bifida before birth added another dimension to the
debate. There are risks for both the mother and the fetus
during and after fetal surgery, but techniques have
improved since the first successful surgery of this type
in 1997. In 2003 the National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development (NICHD), a part of the
National Institutes of Health (NIH), funded a study to
compare how babies who have prenatal surgery do com-
pared with those who have postnatal surgery. In 2006 the
study was ongoing. The NICHD predicts that by the year
2020, routine diagnosis and treatment of congenital mal-
formations by means of fetal surgery will be standard
therapy for most disabling malformations that are cur-
rently treated in young infants.
In the United States the rates of spina bifida have
been declining since 1960, and, though there was a slight
increase in the mid-1990s, the rates decreased from
nearly 0.025% in 1991 to about 0.019% in 2003. (See
Figure 5.2; note that not all states participated in report-
ing spina bifida cases.) As mentioned previously, the
decline is an early indicator of successful efforts to
TABLE 5.2
Infant deaths and infant mortality rates, by age, race, and
Hispanic origin, 2002 and 2003  
 
 
 
[Data are based on the continuous file of records received from the states. Rates per
1,000 live births. Figures for 2003 are based on weighted data rounded to the nearest
individual, so categories may not add to totals. Rates for Hispanic origin should be
interpreted with caution because of the inconsistencies between reporting Hispanic origin
on birth and death certificates.]
2003
2002
Hispanic origin
Number
Rate
Number
Rate
All racesa
Under 1 year
28,428
6.9
28,034
7.0
Under 28 days
19,108
4.7
18,747
4.7
28 days–11 months
9,320
2.3
9,287
2.3
Total whiteb
Under 1 year
18,768
5.8
18,369
5.8
Under 28 days
12,698
3.9
12,354
3.9
28 days–11 months
6,070
1.9
6,015
1.9
Non-Hispanic white
Under 1 year
13,450
5.8
13,463
5.9
Under 28 days
9,048
3.9
9,014
3.9
28 days–11 months
4,402
1.9
4,449
1.9
Total blackb
Under 1 year
8,437
14.1
8,524
14.4
Under 28 days
5,626
9.4
5,646
9.5
28 days–11 months
2,812
4.7
2,878
4.8
Hispanicc
Under 1 year
5,389
5.9
4,943
5.6
Under 28 days
3,676
4.0
3,331
3.8
28 days–11 months
1,712
1.9
1,612
1.8
aIncludes races other than white or black.
bRace and Hispanic origin are reported separately on both the birth and death certificate.
Race categories are consistent with the 1977 Office of Management and Budget
standards. California, Hawaii, Idaho, Maine, Montana, New York, and Wisconsin reported
multiple-race data in 2003. The multiple-race data for these states were bridged to the
single race categories of the 1977 Office of Management and Budget standards for
comparability with other states. Data for persons of Hispanic origin are included in the
data for each race group, according to the decedent’s reported race.
cIncludes all persons of Hispanic origin of any race.
Note: Data are subject to sampling or random variation.
SOURCE: Donna L. Hoyert, et al., “Table 4. Infant Deaths and Infant
Mortality Rates, by Age and Race and Hispanic Origin: United States, Final
2002 and Preliminary 2003,” in “Deaths, Preliminary Data for 2003,”
National Vital Statistics Reports, vol. 53, no. 15, February 28, 2005,
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr53/nvsr53_15.pdf (accessed February
28, 2006)
Age and race and 
44
Seriously Ill Children
Death and Dying

prevent this defect by increasing folic acid consumption
among women of childbearing age.
Down Syndrome
Down syndrome is a birth defect caused by chromo-
somal irregularities. Instead of the normal forty-six chro-
mosomes, Down syndrome newborns have an extra copy
of chromosome 21, giving them a total of forty-seven
chromosomes. Along with having certain anatomical
differences from non-Down syndrome children, Down
children have varying degrees of mental retardation, and
approximately 40% have congenital heart diseases.
The CDC estimates prevalence of Down syndrome at
birth as approximately ten cases per ten thousand live
births. The occurrence of this birth defect rises with
increasing maternal age, with a marked increase seen in
children of women over thirty-five years of age.
In the past babies born with Down syndrome were
usually institutionalized. Many died in infancy. Today,
with the help of modern medical care, children with
Down syndrome are typically raised at home and attain
adulthood, although their life expectancy is shorter than
average (approximately fifty-five years). Except for the
most severe heart defects, many other malformations
accompanying Down syndrome may be corrected by
surgery. Depending on the degree of mental retardation,
many people with Down syndrome are able to hold jobs
and live independently.
Birth Defects Prevention Acts of 1998 and 2003
On April 21, 1998, President Bill Clinton signed into
law the Birth Defects Prevention Act (PL 105–168),
which authorized a nationwide network of birth defects
research and prevention programs and called for a nation-
wide information clearinghouse on birth defects.
The Children’s Health Act of 2000 (PL 106–310)
authorized expanded research and services for a variety
of childhood health problems. In addition, it created the
National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental
Disabilities (NCBDDD) at the CDC. Developmental dis-
abilities are conditions that impair day-to-day function-
ing, such as difficulties with communication, learning,
behavior, and motor skills. They are chronic conditions
that initially appear in persons age eighteen years or
younger.
The Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities
Prevention Act of 2003 revised and extended the Birth
Defects Prevention Act of 1998. It also reauthorized the
NCBDDD through 2007. The NCBDDD works with
state health departments, academic institutions, and
other public health partners to monitor birth defects
and developmental disabilities, as well as to support
research to identify their causes or risk factors. In
addition, the center develops strategies and promotes
programs to prevent birth defects and developmental
disabilities.
The Economic Cost of Long-Term Care for Birth
Defects and Developmental Disabilities
Research examining selected developmental disabil-
ities associated with major birth defects was reported by
Pierre Decoufle et al (‘‘Increased Risk for Developmental
Disabilities in Children Who Have Major Birth Defects:
A Population-Based Study,’’ Pediatrics, vol. 108, no. 3,
TABLE 5.3
Deaths and life expectancy at birth, by race and sex; maternal and infant deaths and mortality rates, by race, 2002 and 2003
All racesa
White
Black
Measure and sex
2003
2002
2003
2002
2003
2002
All deaths
2,448,288
2,443,387
2,103,714
2,102,589
291,300
290,051
Age-adjusted death rateb
832.7
845.3
817.0
829.0
1,065.9
1,083.3
Male
994.3
1,013.7
973.9
992.9
1,319.1
1,341.4
Female
706.2
715.2
693.1
701.3
885.6
901.8
Life expectancy at birthc
77.5
77.3
78.0
77.7
72.7
72.3
Male
74.8
74.5
75.3
75.1
69.0
68.8
Female
80.1
79.9
80.5
80.3
76.1
75.6
All maternal deaths
495
357
280
190
183
148
Maternal mortality rate
12.1
8.9
8.7
6.0
30.5
24.9
All infant deaths
28,025
28,034
18,440
18,369
8,402
8,524
Infant mortality rated
6.85
6.97
5.72
5.79
14.01
14.36
aIncludes races other than white and black.
bAge-adjusted death rates are per 100,000 U.S. standard population, based on the year 2000 standard.
cLife expectancy at birth stated in years.
dInfant mortality rates are deaths under 1 year per 1,000 live births in specified group.
SOURCE: Donna L. Hoyert, et al., “Table 1. Deaths, Age-Adjusted Death Rates, and Life Expectancy at Birth, by Race and Sex; Maternal and Infant Deaths and
Mortality Rates, by Race: United States, 2002 and 2003,” in Deaths: Final Data for 2003, Health E-Stats, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National
Center for Health Statistics, January 19, 2006, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hestat/finaldeaths03_tables.pdf#2 (accessed February 27, 2006)
Death and Dying
Seriously Ill Children
45

September 2001). The investigators linked data from two
independent population-based surveillance systems to
find out if major birth defects were associated with ser-
ious developmental disabilities.
When compared with children who had no major
birth defects, the prevalence of developmental disabilities
among children with major birth defects was extremely
high. The researchers observed that conditions such as
mental retardation, cerebral palsy (a disorder marked by
muscular impairment usually caused by brain damage),
epilepsy (a disorder of the brain that results in seizures),
autism (a brain disorder that affects communication,
social interaction, and imaginative play), profound hear-
ing loss, and legal blindness ‘‘prove costly in terms of
special education services, medical and supportive care,
demands on caregivers, and economic loss to society.’’
They concluded, ‘‘Our data suggest that birth defects
TABLE 5.4
Ten leading causes of infant deaths and infant mortality rates, by
race and Hispanic origin, 2003 
[Data are based on a continuous file of records received from the states. Rates are per
100,000 live births. Figures are based on weighted data rounded to the nearest individual,
so categories may not add to totals or subtotals. Rates for Hispanic origin should be
interpreted with caution because of inconsistencies between reporting Hispanic origin on
birth and death certificates.]
Ranka
Cause of death and age
Number
Rate
All racesb
. . .
All causes
28,422
694.7
1
Congenital malformations, deformations 
and chromosomal abnormalities
5,714
139.7
2
Disorders related to short gestation and 
low birth weight, not elsewhere classified
4,844
118.4
3
Sudden infant death syndrome
1,994
48.7
4
Newborn affected by maternal complications 
of pregnancy
1,734
42.4
5
Newborn affected by complications of placenta,
cord and membranes
1,112
27.2
6
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
928
22.7
7
Diseases of the circulatory system
834
20.4
8
Respiratory distress of newborn
819
20.0
9
Bacterial sepsis of newborn
766
18.7
10
Neonatal hemorrhage
648
15.8
. . .
All other causes
9,029
220.7
Total whitec
. . .
All causes
18,800
582.4
1
Congenital malformations, deformations 
and chromosomal abnormalities
4,378
135.6
2
Disorders related to short gestation and 
low birth weight, not elsewhere classified
2,769
85.8
3
Sudden infant death syndrome
1,246
38.6
4
Newborn affected by maternal complications 
of pregnancy
1,117
34.6
5
Newborn affected by complications of placenta, 
cord and membranes
756
23.4
6
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
621
19.2
7
Diseases of the circulatory system
539
16.7
8
Respiratory distress of newborn
537
16.6
9
Neonatal hemorrhage
476
14.8
10
Bacterial sepsis of newborn
465
14.4
. . .
All other causes
5,896
182.7
Non-Hispanic 
white
. . .
All causes
13,454
579.7
1
Congenital malformations, deformations 
and chromosomal abnormalities
3,002
129.3
2
Disorders related to short gestation and low 
birth weight, not elsewhere classified
1,894
81.6
3
Sudden infant death syndrome
1,025
44.2
4
Newborn affected by maternal complications 
of pregnancy
803
34.6
5
Newborn affected by complications of placenta, 
cord and membranes
559
24.1
6
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
501
21.6
7
Diseases of the circulatory system
398
17.1
8
Respiratory distress of newborn
388
16.7
9
Neonatal hemorrhage
359
15.5
10
Bacterial sepsis of newborn
346
14.9
. . .
All other causes
4,179
180.1
TABLE 5.4
Total blackc
. . .
All causes
8,400
1,401.4
1
Disorders related to short gestation and low 
birth weight, not elsewhere classified
1,903
317.4
2
Congenital malformations, deformations 
and chromosomal abnormalities
1,041
173.7
3
Sudden infant death syndrome
656
109.5
4
Newborn affected by maternal complications 
of pregnancy
563
93.9
5
Newborn affected by complications of placenta, 
cord and membranes
311
51.9
6
Bacterial sepsis of newborn
279
46.6
7
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
272
45.4
8
Respiratory distress of newborn
255
42.6
9
Diseases of the circulatory system
241
40.3
10
Necrotizing enterocolitis of newborn
158
26.4
. . .
All other causes
2,721
453.9
Hispanicd
. . .
All causes
5,425
594.7
1
Congenital malformations, deformations 
and chromosomal abnormalities
1,381
151.4
2
Disorders related to short gestation and low 
birth weight, not elsewhere classified
888
97.4
3
Newborn affected by maternal complications 
of pregnancy
319
35.0
4
Sudden infant death syndrome
245
26.9
5
Newborn affected by complications of placenta, 
cord and membranes
201
22.1
6
Respiratory distress of newborn
152
16.6
7
Diseases of the circulatory system
142
15.5
8
Accidents (unintentional injuries)
123
13.5
9
Bacterial sepsis of newborn
120
13.1
10
Neonatal hemorrhage
120
13.1
. . .
All other causes
1,734
190.1
aRank based on number of deaths.
bIncludes races other than white and black.
cRace and Hispanic origin are reported separately on both the birth and death certificate.
Race categories are consistent with the 1977 Office of Management and Budget
standards. California, Hawaii, Idaho, Maine, Montana, New York, and Wisconsin reported
multiple-race data in 2003. The multiple-race data for these states were bridged to the
single race categories of the 1977 Office of Management and Budget standards for
comparability with other states. Data for persons of Hispanic origin are included in the
data for each race group, according to the decedent’s reported race.
dIncludes all persons of Hispanic origin of any race.
Notes: “. . .”Category not applicable. Data are subject to sampling or random variation.
SOURCE: Donna L. Hoyert, et al., “Table 8. Infant Deaths and Infant
Mortality Rates for the 10 Leading Causes of Infant Death, by Race and
Hispanic Origin: United States, Preliminary 2003,” in “Deaths, Preliminary
Data for 2003,” National Vital Statistics Reports, vol. 53, no. 15, February
28, 2005, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr53/nvsr53_15.pdf (accessed
February 28, 2006)
Ten leading causes of infant deaths and infant mortality rates, by
race and Hispanic origin, 2003  [CONTINUED]
[Data are based on a continuous file of records received from the states. Rates are per
100,000 live births. Figures are based on weighted data rounded to the nearest individual,
so categories may not add to totals or subtotals. Rates for Hispanic origin should be
interpreted with caution because of inconsistencies between reporting Hispanic origin on
birth and death certificates.]
Ranka
Cause of death and age
Number
Rate
46
Seriously Ill Children
Death and Dying

pose a greater burden on society than previously
recognized.’’
The majority of people with birth defects and/or
developmental disabilities require long-term care or ser-
vices. Table 5.5 shows the economic costs of mental
retardation, cerebral palsy, hearing loss, and vision
impairment. Of these four developmental disabilities,
mental retardation has the highest rate, at twelve affected
children per one thousand, and the highest cost at more
than $1 million per person.
LOW BIRTH WEIGHT AND PREMATURITY
Low Birth Weight
Infants who weigh less than twenty-five hundred
grams (or five pounds, eight ounces) at birth are
considered to be of low birth weight. Those born
weighing less than fifteen hundred grams (three pounds,
four ounces) have very low birth weight. Low birth
weight may result from various causes, including pre-
mature birth, poor maternal nutrition, teen pregnancy,
drug and alcohol use, smoking, or sexually transmitted
diseases.
In 2003, 7.9% of the more than four million live
births that year were low-birth-weight infants, the highest
level reported in more than two decades. About 1.4%
were very-low-birth-weight infants. African-American
mothers were about twice as likely as white and
Hispanic
mothers
to
have
low-birth-weight
babies
(13.6% of children born to non-Hispanic African-
American birth mothers had low birth weight compared
with 7% and 6.7%, respectively, born to non-Hispanic
white and Hispanic mothers). (See Table 5.6 and Table
5.7.) The highest percentages of low-birth weight babies
FIGURE 5.1
Anencephalus rates and number of live births with
anencephalus, 1991–2003
Anencephalus
cases
Total 
live births
Year
Rate
2002
2003
2001
2000
1999
1998
1997
1996
1995
1994
1993
1992
1991
348
441
343
376
382
349
434
416
408
387
481
457
655
3,645,770
3,715,577
3,640,555
3,640,376
3,533,565
3,519,240
3,469,667
3,478,723
3,484,539
3,527,482
3,562,723
3,572,890
3,564,453
9.55
11.14
9.42
10.33
10.81
9.92
12.51
11.96
11.71
10.97
13.50
12.79
18.38
Rate per 100,000
20
15
10
5
1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Year
Note: Excludes data for Maryland, New Mexico, and New York, which did not
require reporting for anencephalus for some years.
SOURCE: Adapted from “Figure 2. Anencephalus Rates, 1991–2002,”
and “Table 2. Number of Live Births and Anencephalus Cases and
Rates per 100,000 Live Births for the United States, 1991–2002,”
Trends in Spina Bifida and Anencephalus in the United States,
1991–2002, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National
Center for Health Statistics, 2004, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/
pubs/pubd/hestats/spine_anen.htm (accessed December 1, 2005). Data
for 2003 are unpublished from the National Vital Statistics System,
NCHS, CDC, December 1, 2005.
FIGURE 5.2
Spina bifida rates and number of live births with spina bifida,
1991–2003
2002
20.13
2001
2003
18.89
20.05
2000
20.85
1999
20.72
1998
22.45
1997
24.70
1996
26.36
1995
27.98
1994
25.51
1993
25.15
1992
22.84
1991
734
702
730
759
732
790
857
917
975
900
896
816
887
3,645,770
3,715,577
3,640,555
3,640,367
3,533,565
3,519,240
3,469,667
3,478,723
3,484,539
3,527,482
3,562,723
3,572,890
3,564,453
24.88
Year
Spina bifida cases
Total live births
Rate
Rate per 100,000
30
25
20
15
1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002
Year
2003
SOURCE: Adapted from “Figure 1. Spina Bifida Rates, 1991–2002,” and
“Table 1. Number of Live Births and Spina Bifida Cases and Rates per
100,000 Live Births for the United States, 1991–2002,” Trends in Spina
Bifida and Anencephalus in the United States, 1991–2002, Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics,
2004, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/pubs/pubd/hestats/spine_anen 
.htm (accessed December 1, 2005). Data for 2003 are unpublished from
the National Vital Statistics System, NCHS, CDC, December 1, 2005.
Note: Excludes data for Maryland, New Mexico, and New York, which did not
require reporting for spina bifida for some years.
Death and Dying
Seriously Ill Children
47

are born to teenage mothers and to women over forty
years of age. (See Table 5.7.)
Like the proportion of low-birth-weight babies, the
proportion of very-low-birth-weight babies has also been
increasing since the 1980s, although rates stabilized from
the late 1990s through 2003. (See Table 5.8.) The
increase in low- and very-low-birth-weight babies during
the 1990s is attributed to the increase in the multiple birth
rate. Babies born as part of a multiple birth are at much
greater risk of low birth weight than babies born as a
single birth.
Prematurity
The usual length of human pregnancy is forty weeks.
Infants born before thirty-seven weeks of pregnancy are
considered premature. A premature infant does not have
fully formed organ systems. If the premature infant is
born with a birth weight comparable to a full-term baby
and has organ systems only slightly undeveloped, the
chances of survival are great. Premature infants of very
low birth weight are susceptible to numerous risks and
are less likely to survive than full-term infants. If they
survive, they may suffer from mental retardation and
other abnormalities of the nervous system.
A severe medical condition called hyaline membrane
disease, or respiratory distress syndrome (RDS), com-
monly affects premature infants. It is caused by the
inability of the immature lungs to function properly.
Occurring right after birth, it may cause infant death
within hours. Intensive care includes the use of a
mechanical ventilator to facilitate breathing. Also, pre-
mature infants’ immature gastrointestinal systems pre-
clude
them
from
taking
in
nourishment
properly.
Unable to suck and swallow, they must be fed through
a stomach tube.
WHO MAKES MEDICAL DECISIONS
FOR INFANTS?
Prior to the 1980s in the United States, the courts
were supportive of biologic parents making decisions
regarding the medical care of their newborns. Parents
often made these decisions in consultation with pediatri-
cians. Medical advancements in the 1970s, however,
allowed for the survival of infants who would have not
had a chance for survival prior to that time. Parents’ and
physicians’ decisions became more challenging and
complex.
The history of federal and state laws pertaining to the
medical care of infants began in 1982 with the ‘‘Baby
Doe’’ regulations. These regulations created a standard of
medical care for infants: the possibility of future handi-
caps in a child should play no role in his or her medical
treatment decisions.
The ‘‘Baby Doe’’ Rules
In April 1982 an infant with Down syndrome was
born at Bloomington Hospital in Indiana. The infant also
had esophageal atresia, an obstruction in the esophagus
that prevents the passage of food from the mouth to the
stomach. Following their obstetrician’s recommendation,
the parents decided to forego surgery to repair the baby’s
esophagus. The baby would be kept pain-free with med-
ication and allowed to die.
Disagreeing with the parents’ decision, the hospital
took them to the county court. The judge ruled that the
parents had the legal right to their decision, which was
based on a valid medical recommendation. The Indiana
Supreme Court refused to hear the appeal. Before the
county prosecutor could present the case to the U.S.
Supreme Court, the six-day-old baby died.
TABLE 5.5
Estimated prevalence and lifetime economic costs for certain developmental disabilities, by cost category, 2003
Direct
Direct
Indirect
Total
Average
medical costsb
nonmedical
costsd
costs
costs per
Developmental disability
Ratea
(millions)
costsc(millions)
(millions)
(millions)
person
Mental retardation
12.0
$7,061
$5,249
$38,927
$51,237
$1,014,000
Cerebral palsy
3.0
1,175
1,054
9,241
11,470
921,000
Hearing loss
1.2
132
640
1,330
2,102
417,000
Vision impairment
1.1
159
409
1,915
2,484
566,000
Note: Lifetime economic costs are present value estimates, in 2003 dollars, of lifetime costs for persons born in 2000, based on a 3% discount rate.
aPer 1,000 children aged 5–10 years, on the basis of Metropolitan Atlanta Developmental Disabilities Surveillance Program data for 1991–1994.
bIncludes physician visits, prescription medications, hospital inpatient stays, assistive devices, therapy and rehabilitation (for persons aged 18 years), and long-term care (for persons
aged 18–76 years), adjusted for age-specific survival.
cIncludes costs of home and vehicle modifications for persons aged  76 years and costs of special education for persons aged 3–17 years.
dIncludes productivity losses from increased morbidity (i.e., inability to work or limitation in the amount or type of work performed) and premature mortality for persons aged  35 years
with mental retardation, aged  25 years with cerebral palsy, and aged  17 years with hearing loss and vision impairment.
SOURCE: A. Honeycutt, et al., “Table. Estimated Prevalence and Lifetime Economic Costs for Mental Retardation, Cerebral Palsy, Hearing Loss, and Vision
Impairment, by Cost Category—United States, 2003,” in “Economic Costs Associated with Mental Retardation, Cerebral Palsy, Hearing Loss, and Vision
Impairment—United States, 2003,” Morbidity & Mortality Weekly Report, vol. 53, no. 3, January 30, 2004, http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/wk/mm5303.pdf
(accessed December 5, 2005)
48
Seriously Ill Children
Death and Dying

The public outcry following the death of ‘‘Baby
Doe’’ (the infant’s court-designated name) brought
immediate reaction from President Ronald Reagan’s
administration. The Department of Health and Human
Services
(HHS)
informed
all
hospitals
receiving
federal
funding
that
discrimination
against
handi-
capped newborns would violate Section 504 of the
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (PL 93–112). This section
(nondiscrimination under federal grants and programs)
states:
No otherwise qualified individual with a disability in
the United States . . . shall, solely by reason of her or his
disability, be excluded from the participation in, be
denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination
under any program or activity receiving Federal finan-
cial assistance.
Furthermore, all hospital delivery rooms and nur-
series were
ordered to have
posters warning that
‘‘DISCRIMINATORY
FAILURE
TO
FEED
AND
CARE
FOR
HANDICAPPED
INFANTS
IN
THIS
FACILITY IS PROHIBITED BY FEDERAL LAW.’’
The posters listed a toll-free hotline for anonymous
reports of failure to comply.
Although government investigators (called ‘‘Baby
Doe’’ squads) were summoned to many hospitals to
verify claims of mistreatment (the hotline had five hun-
dred calls in its first three weeks alone), no violation of
the law could be found. On the contrary, the investigators
found doctors resuscitating babies who were beyond
treatment because they feared legal actions. Finally, a
group led by the American Academy of Pediatrics filed
TABLE 5.6
Percent of births with selected medical or health characteristics, by race, Hispanic origin, and birthplace of mother, 2003
Origin of mother
Hispanic
Central
Other and
All
Puerto
and South
unknown
Characteristic
originsa
Total
Mexican
Rican
Cuban
American
Hispanic
Totalb
White
Black
All births
Mother
Prenatal care beginning in the first trimesterc
84.1
77.5
76.5
81.2
92.1
79.2
77.0
86.1
89.0
75.9
Late or no prenatal carec
3.5
5.3
5.6
3.7
1.3
4.7
5.4
3.0
2.1
6.0
Smokerc, d
10.7
2.7
2.0
7.9
2.4
1.1
6.6
12.6
14.3
8.3
Drinkerc, e
0.7
0.4
0.4
0.6
0.3
0.3
0.9
0.8
0.9
0.8
Weight gain of less than 16 lbsf
12.3
15.2
16.9
12.8
7.8
12.3
13.2
11.6
10.2
17.7
Median weight gainf
30.5
28.7
27.3
30.7
31.9
30.1
30.3
30.7
31.0
29.8
Cesarean delivery rate
27.5
26.5
25.8
27.6
39.8
28.4
25.9
27.8
27.6
29.2
Infant
Preterm birthsg
12.3
11.9
11.7
13.8
11.8
11.4
12.6
12.5
11.3
17.8
Birthweight
Very low birthweighth
1.4
1.2
1.1
2.0
1.4
1.2
1.3
1.5
1.2
3.1
Low birthweighti
7.9
6.7
6.3
10.0
7.0
6.7
8.0
8.3
7.0
13.6
4,000 grams or morej
8.9
8.2
8.5
6.2
8.3
8.0
7.0
9.0
10.4
4.8
5-minute Apgar score of less than 7k, l
1.4
1.1
1.1
1.5
0.8
0.9
1.2
1.5
1.3
2.3
Births to mothers born in the 50 states
and District of Columbia
Mother
Prenatal care beginning in the first trimesterc
85.7
80.8
80.6
80.7
91.5
84.2
77.8
86.3
89.1
75.9
Late or no prenatal carec
3.0
4.1
4.1
3.9
1.4
3.1
5.2
2.9
2.1
5.8
Smokerc, d
13.1
5.8
4.7
9.1
3.5
3.5
8.7
13.8
14.9
9.3
Drinkerc, e
0.9
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.5
0.5
1.1
0.9
0.9
0.8
Weight gain of less than 16 lbsf
11.9
13.6
14.7
12.2
7.9
9.0
13.1
11.7
10.2
18.0
Median weight gainf
30.7
30.3
30.1
30.8
32.6
31.0
30.5
30.8
31.0
30.0
Cesarean delivery rate
27.7
26.8
26.6
27.0
35.8
26.8
25.6
27.8
27.7
28.9
Infant
Preterm birthsg
12.7
13.0
13.0
13.6
12.4
11.6
13.3
12.7
11.4
18.3
Birthweight
Very low birthweighth
1.5
1.4
1.3
2.0
1.7
1.6
1.3
1.5
1.2
3.2
Low birthweighti
8.3
7.8
7.4
10.0
7.8
7.6
8.7
8.4
7.1
14.0
4,000 grams or morej
9.1
7.3
7.6
6.3
7.3
7.4
6.8
9.3
10.4
4.4
5-minute Apgar score of less than 7k, l
1.5
1.2
1.2
1.4
0.9
1.0
1.2
1.5
1.3
2.4
Non-Hispanic
Births to mothers born outside the 50 states
and District of Columbia
Mother
Prenatal care beginning in the first trimesterc
79.1
75.6
74.1
82.3
92.6
78.5
75.2
84.5
86.9
76.5
Late or no prenatal carec
5.1
5.9
6.5
3.4
1.1
4.9
5.8
3.8
3.1
6.9
Smokerc,d
1.5
0.9
0.5
5.7
1.5
0.8
1.5
2.4
4.5
1.0
Drinkerc,e
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.4
*
0.3
0.3
0.5
0.8
0.2
Weight gain of less than 16 lbsf
13.8
16.2
18.2
13.9
7.7
12.7
13.3
10.7
9.0
15.9
Median weight gainf
28.9
27.3
25.9
30.3
31.0
29.8
29.8
30.3
30.7
28.5
Cesarean delivery rate
26.9
26.4
25.3
28.9
43.3
28.6
26.8
27.6
26.0
31.7
Death and Dying
Seriously Ill Children
49

suit in March 1983 to have the Baby Doe rules over-
turned because they believed them to be harsh, unreason-
ably intrusive, and not necessarily in the best interests of
the child. After various legal battles, in 1986 the U.S.
Supreme Court ruled that the HHS did not have the
authority to require such regulations and invalidated
them.
Child Abuse Amendments of 1984 and Their Legacy
As the Baby Doe regulations were being fought in
the courts, Congress enacted and President Reagan
signed the Child Abuse Amendments of 1984 (PL 98–
457; CAA). The CAA extended and improved the provi-
sions of the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment Act
and the Child Abuse Prevention and Treatment and
Adoption Reform Act of 1978. The CAA established that
states’ child protection services systems would respond to
complaints of medical neglect of children, including
instances of withholding medically indicated treatment
from disabled infants with life-threatening conditions. It
noted that parents were the ones to make medical deci-
sions for their disabled infants based on the advice of
their physicians. These laws have been amended many
times over the years, most recently by the Keeping
Children and Families Safe Act of 2003 (PL 108–36),
without voiding the states’ and parents’ responsibilities to
disabled infants.
Born-Alive Infants Protection Act of 2001
The Born-Alive Infants Protection Act of 2001 (PL
107–207) was signed by President George W. Bush on
August 5, 2002. The purpose of the law is to ensure that
all infants born alive, whether developmentally able to
survive long-term, are given legal protection as persons
under federal law. The law neither prohibits nor requires
medical care for newly born infants who are below a
certain weight or developmental age.
The American
Academy
of
Pediatrics
Neonatal
Resuscitation Program (NRP) Steering Committee has
responded that the law ‘‘should not in any way affect the
approach that physicians currently follow with respect to
the extremely premature infant. . . . At the time of delivery,
and regardless of the circumstances of the delivery, the
medical condition and prognosis of the newly born infant
should be assessed. At that point decisions about withhold-
ing or discontinuing medical treatment that is considered
futile may be considered by the medical care providers in
conjunction with the parents acting in the best interest of
their child. Those newly born infants who are deemed
appropriate to not resuscitate or to have medical support
withdrawn should be treated with dignity and respect, and
provided with ‘comfort care’ measures’’ (David Boyle et al,
‘‘Born-Alive Infants Protection Act of 2001, Public Law
No. 107–207,’’ Pediatrics, vol. 111, 2003, http://pediatrics.
aappublications.org/cgi/reprint/111/3/680-a).
TABLE 5.6
Percent of births with selected medical or health characteristics, by race, Hispanic origin, and birthplace of mother, 2003 [CONTINUED]
Origin of mother
Hispanic
Central
Other and
All
Puerto
and South
unknown
Characteristic
originsa
Total
Mexican
Rican
Cuban
American
Hispanic
Totalb
White
Black
Infant
Preterm birthsg
11.0
11.2
11.0
14.2
11.3
11.4
10.5
10.7
9.5
14.2
Birthweight
Very low birthweighth
1.1
1.0
0.9
2.0
1.1
1.1
0.9
1.3
1.0
2.6
Low birthweighti
6.6
6.0
5.7
10.0
6.3
6.6
5.9
7.5
6.2
10.0
4,000 grams or morej
8.2
8.7
9.0
6.1
9.2
8.1
7.4
7.4
10.4
7.7
5-minute Apgar score of less than 7k, l
1.1
1.0
1.1
1.6
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.2
0.9
1.9
*Figure does not meet standards of reliability or precision; based on fewer than 20 births in the numerator.
aIncludes origin not stated.
bIncludes races other than white and black.
cExcludes data for Pennsylvania and Washington, which implemented the 2003 Revision to the U.S. Standard Certificate of Live Birth for data year 2003. This change has resulted in a
lack of comparability between data based on the 2003 Revision and data based on the 1989 Revision to the U.S. Certificate of Live Birth.
dExcludes data for California, which did not report tobacco use on the birth certificate.
eExcludes data for California, which did not report alcohol use on the birth certificate.
fExcludes data for California, which did not report weight gain on the birth certificate. Median weight gain shown in pounds.
gBorn prior to 37 completed weeks of gestation.
hBirthweight of less than 1,500 grams (3 lb 4 oz).
iBirthweight of less than 2,500 grams (5 lb 8 oz).
jEquivalent to 8 lb 14 oz.
kThe Apgar score is one measure of a newborn’s health immediately after birth. The best possible score is 10.
lExcludes data for California and Texas, which did not report 5-minute Apgar score on the birth certificate.
Notes: Race and Hispanic origin are reported separately on birth certificates. Race categories are consistent with the 1977 Office of Management and Budget standards. Persons of
Hispanic origin may be of any race. In this table Hispanic women are classified only by place of origin; non-Hispanic women are classified by race.
SOURCE: Joyce A. Martin, et al., “Table 25. Percentage of Births with Selected Medical or Health Characteristics, by Hispanic Origin of Mother and by Race
for Mothers of Non-Hispanic Origin and by Place of Birth of Mother: United States, 2003,” in “Births: Final Data for 2003,” National Vital Statistics Reports,
vol. 54, no. 2, September 8, 2005, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr54/nvsr54_02.pdf (accessed November 2, 2005)
Non-Hispanic
50
Seriously Ill Children
Death and Dying

Number and percent of low birthweight and number of live births by selected characteristics, 2003
Birthweightb
Age and race and
Less than
500–
1,000–
1,500–
2,000–
2,500–
3,000–
3,500–
4,000–
4,500–
5,000
Hispanic origin
500
999
1,499
1,999
2,499
2,999
3,499
3,999
4,499
4,999
grams
Not
of mother
Number
Percent
Total
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
or more
stated
All racesc
All ages
324,064
7.9
4,089,950
6,307
22,980
29,930
63,791
201,056
711,003
1,557,864
1,131,577
309,721
46,690
5,431
3,600
Under 15 years
848
12.7
6,661
32
85
87
149
495
1,698
2,694
1,220
179
14
1
7
15–19 years
40,211
9.7
414,580
804
3,152
3,637
7,462
25,156
92,531
169,390
91,699
18,154
2,014
178
403
15 years
2,103
11.5
18,238
50
191
210
412
1,240
4,423
7,548
3,524
553
59
2
26
16 years
4,402
10.7
41,344
77
381
414
825
2,705
9,843
16,996
8,390
1,502
146
19
46
17 years
7,549
10.1
74,802
161
622
670
1,383
4,713
16,990
30,720
16,087
3,053
295
32
76
18 years
11,268
9.6
117,750
234
858
981
2,066
7,129
26,522
48,060
26,044
5,127
574
43
112
19 years
14,889
9.2
162,446
282
1,100
1,362
2,776
9,369
34,753
66,066
37,654
7,919
940
82
143
20–24 years
82,494
8.0
1,032,305
1,604
5,732
7,084
15,167
52,907
199,835
412,228
264,313
63,142
8,526
878
889
25–29 years
76,631
7.1
1,086,366
1,522
5,399
6,943
14,862
47,905
178,150
415,463
314,316
86,511
12,886
1,477
932
30–34 years
71,477
7.3
975,546
1,454
4,944
6,822
14,636
43,621
148,022
357,144
293,569
88,696
14,155
1,701
782
35–39 years
40,550
8.7
467 642
685
2,863
4,059
8,797
24,146
72,708
164,600
137,185
43,764
7,397
991
447
40–44 years
10,655
10.6
101,005
194
730
1,151
2,403
6,177
16,858
34,639
27,995
8,908
1,626
198
126
45–54 years
1,198
20.5
5,845
12
75
147
315
649
1,201
1,706
1,280
367
72
7
14
White totald
All ages
223,612
6.9
3,225,848
3,593
14,096
20,173
44,419
141,331
511,317
1,220,632
951,782
270,180
41,156
4,664
2,505
Under 15 years
378
10.3
3,677
8
41
42
68
219
838
1,573
752
124
10
1
1
15–19 years
24,774
8.3
298,347
409
1,771
2,193
4,604
15,797
61,144
123,409
72,095
14,884
1,666
138
237
15 years
1,107
9.6
11,484
26
93
107
221
660
2,503
4,899
2,522
396
45
2
10
16 years
2,536
9.0
28,151
30
199
247
482
1,578
6,120
11,844
6,301
1,197
119
12
22
17 years
4,669
8.8
52,941
78
357
418
849
2,967
11,026
21,981
12,452
2,487
249
27
50
18 years
7,054
8.2
85,734
127
496
596
1,281
4,554
17,756
35,474
20,627
4,246
467
33
77
19 years
9,408
7.8
120,037
148
626
825
1,771
6,038
23,739
49,211
30,193
6,558
786
64
78
20–24 years
53,600
6.8
790,910
824
3,323
4,447
9,751
35,255
140,299
316,971
217,687
53,701
7,340
717
595
25–29 years
54,143
6.2
871,496
901
3,401
4,750
10,617
34,474
130,541
330,559
267,011
75,912
11,397
1,267
666
30–34 years
52,407
6.6
795,902
882
3,209
4,927
10,888
32,501
110,515
287,041
252,401
78,817
12,650
1,503
568
35–39 years
29,593
7.8
379,773
435
1,791
2,878
6,520
17,969
54,448
132,207
117,123
38,636
6,593
854
319
40–44 years
7,751
9.6
81,031
125
500
824
1,718
4,584
12,592
27,513
23,658
7,799
1,436
177
105
45–54 years
966
20.6
4,712
9
60
112
253
532
940
1,359
1,055
307
64
7
14
Low birthweighta
Non-Hispanic white
All ages
163,331
7.0
2,321,904
2,529
9,998
14,882
32,915
103,007
356,232
858,305
700,819
206,407
31,570
3,415
1,825
Under 15 years
144
10.3
1,399
3
19
18
30
74
309
551
323
67
5
0
0
15–19 years
14,904
8.6
172,620
258
1,122
1,369
2,811
9,344
33,960
69,160
43,514
9,726
1,120
75
161
15 years
525
10.8
4,878
10
46
53
113
303
994
1,973
1,152
208
21
0
5
16 years
1,266
9.5
13,375
16
111
119
232
788
2,703
5,432
3,208
684
68
4
10
17 years
2,666
9.3
28,550
49
218
253
509
1,637
5,654
11,474
6,991
1,556
159
16
34
18 years
4,316
8.6
50,484
88
321
380
789
2,738
10,061
20,199
12,708
2,795
323
21
61
19 years
6,131
8.1
75,333
95
426
564
1,168
3,878
14,548
30,082
19,455
4,483
549
34
51
20–24 years
36,764
7.0
522,275
571
2,273
3,141
6,777
24,002
91,307
204,117
146,151
37,745
5,273
497
421
25–29 years
39,730
6.3
627,437
615
2,438
3,503
7,900
25,274
92,116
233,898
194,930
56,873
8,508
904
478
30–34 years
41,263
6.6
626,315
661
2,383
3,849
8,613
25,757
85,088
223,247
201,188
63,791
10,175
1,132
431
35–39 years
23,634
7.8
303,354
319
1,334
2,282
5,231
14,468
42,777
104,440
94,704
31,608
5,284
665
242
40–44 years
6,083
9.4
64,600
95
380
628
1,340
3,640
9,895
21,760
19,149
6,344
1,152
137
80
45–54 years
809
20.8
3,904
7
49
92
213
448
780
1,132
860
253
53
5
12
TABLE 5.7
Death and Dying
Seriously Ill Children
51

Black totald
All ages
80,088
13.4
599,847
2,427
7,765
8,204
15,654
46,038
143,176
228,356
117,889
25,428
3,546
504
860
Under 15 years
437
16.1
2,726
20
42
41
76
258
807
1,016
416
41
3
0
6
15–19 years
14,092
14.0
100,951
359
1,281
1,328
2,620
8,504
27,963
39,811
16,167
2,493
246
33
146
15 years
913
15.1
6,056
21
92
93
178
529
1,777
2,361
852
125
13
0
15
16 years
1,686
14.5
11,654
41
172
154
312
1,007
3,374
4,565
1,739
243
20
6
21
17 years
2,648
13.8
19,145
74
249
238
483
1,604
5,349
7,643
3,020
436
22
4
23
18 years
3,861
13.9
27,817
100
329
348
729
2,355
7,808
10,877
4,474
678
81
8
30
19 years
4,984
13.8
36,279
123
439
495
918
3,009
9,655
14,365
6,082
1,011
110
15
57
20–24 years
25,500
13.0
196,268
730
2,228
2,386
4,856
15,300
49,599
76,813
36,184
6,970
838
114
250
25–29 years
17,182
12.3
139,947
557
1,733
1,816
3,341
9,735
31,287
53,465
29,962
6,744
958
146
203
30–34 years
13,021
13.4
97,529
495
1,431
1,471
2,601
7,023
20,197
35,739
21,850
5,546
907
120
149
35–39 years
7,712
15.5
49,889
200
865
904
1,652
4,091
10,553
17,226
10,784
2,965
476
76
97
40–44 years
2,007
16.9
11,895
64
171
237
470
1,065
2,632
4,086
2,400
632
114
15
9
45–54 years
137
21.3
642
2
14
21
38
62
138
200
126
37
4
0
0
Number and percent of low birthweight and number of live births by selected characteristics, 2003 [CONTINUED]
Birthweightb
Age and race and
Less than
500–
1,000–
1,500–
2,000–
2,500–
3,000–
3,500–
4,000–
4,500–
5,000
Hispanic origin
500
999
1,499
1,999
2,499
2,999
3,499
3,999
4,499
4,999
grams
Not
of mother
Number
Percent
Total
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
or more
stated
Low birthweighta
Non-Hispanic black
All ages
77,947
13.6
576,033
2,350
7,575
7,998
15,211
44,813
138,440
218,901
112,139
23,992
3,340
484
790
Under 15 years
423
16.0
2,642
20
40
40
75
248
784
986
402
38
3
0
6
15–19 years
13,738
14.1
97,509
342
1,250
1,296
2,562
8,288
27,154
38,392
15,462
2,364
229
32
138
15 years
884
15.1
5,852
21
90
88
175
510
1,726
2,279
818
120
13
0
12
16 years
1,637
14.6
11,247
37
165
151
307
977
3,277
4,396
1,660
234
17
6
20
17 years
2,575
14.0
18,431
70
238
230
472
1,565
5,169
7,352
2,884
406
20
3
22
18 years
3,779
14.1
26,915
98
323
343
710
2,305
7,601
10,502
4,282
639
76
8
28
19 years
4,863
13.9
35,064
116
434
484
898
2,931
9,381
13,863
5,818
965
103
15
56
20–24 years
24,899
13.2
189,020
707
2,179
2,333
4,735
14,945
48,011
73,795
34,567
6,620
786
109
233
25–29 years
16,668
12.5
133,821
544
1,694
1,772
3,228
9,430
30,194
51,072
28,330
6,332
895
142
188
30–34 years
12,667
13.6
93,346
480
1,396
1,432
2,523
6,836
19,462
34,164
20,738
5,202
865
112
136
35–39 years
7,484
15.7
47,661
195
837
872
1,606
3,974
10,166
16,383
10,230
2,798
446
74
80
40–44 years
1,933
16.9
11,419
60
165
232
445
1,031
2,532
3,923
2,290
605
112
15
9
45–54 years
135
22.0
615
2
14
21
37
61
137
186
120
33
4
0
0
TABLE 5.7
52
Seriously Ill Children
Death and Dying

Hispanice
All ages
60,973
6.7
912,329
1,037
4,140
5,366
11,655
38,775
157,583
366,508
252,230
63,688
9,619
1,246
482
Under 15 years
244
10.4
2,356
5
24
24
36
155
556
1,045
444
61
5
0
1
15–19 years
10,120
7.9
128,524
160
669
853
1,834
6,604
27,891
55,455
29,109
5,255
565
60
69
15 years
610
9.0
6,818
16
50
60
110
374
1,552
3,021
1,409
194
25
2
5
16 years
1,303
8.6
15,151
15
91
129
256
812
3,520
6,566
3,163
524
57
8
10
17 years
2,054
8.2
24,986
28
147
171
348
1,360
5,533
10,756
5,573
952
93
11
14
18 years
2,791
7.8
35,927
40
174
226
503
1,848
7,866
15,574
8,050
1,472
146
12
16
19 years
3,362
7.4
45,642
61
207
267
617
2,210
9,420
19,538
10,914
2,113
244
27
24
20–24 years
17,173
6.3
273,311
254
1,075
1,339
3,052
11,453
50,176
114,882
72,521
16,079
2,105
225
150
25–29 years
14,624
5.9
246,361
274
975
1,266
2,780
9,329
38,964
97,748
72,557
19,065
2,921
364
118
30–34 years
11,122
6.6
169,054
209
813
1,075
2,277
6,748
25,497
63,815
50,866
14,839
2,460
370
85
35–39 years
5,914
7.8
75,801
104
455
601
1,272
3,482
11,665
27,649
22,118
6,939
1,281
190
45
40–44 years
1,641
10.2
16,172
29
119
190
374
929
2,692
5,689
4,432
1,399
272
35
12
45–54 years
135
18.0
750
2
10
18
30
75
142
225
183
51
10
2
2
aLess than 2,500 grams (5 lb 8 oz).
bLess than 500 grams1 lb 1 oz or less
3,000–3,499 grams6 lb 10 oz–7 lb 11 oz
500–999 grams1 lb 2 oz–2 lb 3 oz
3,500–3,999 grams7 lb 12 oz–8 lb 13 oz
1,000–1,499 grams2 lb 4 oz–3 lb 4 oz
4,000–4,499 grams8 lb 14 oz–9 lb 14 oz
1,500–1,999 grams3 lb 5 oz–4 lb 6 oz
4,500–4,999 grams9 lb 15 oz–11 lb 0 oz
2,000–2,499 grams4 lb 7 oz–5 lb 8 oz
5,000 grams or more11 lb 1 oz or more
2,500–2,999 grams5 lb 9 oz–6 lb 9 oz.
cIncludes races other than white and black and origin not stated.
dRace and Hispanic origin are reported separately on the birth certificate. Race categories are consistent with the 1977 Office of Management and Budget standards. Data for persons of Hispanic origin are included in the data for each group according to
the mother’s reported race.
eIncludes all persons of Hispanic origin of any race.
SOURCE: Joyce A. Martin, et al., “Table 45. Number and Percentage Low Birthweight and Number of Live Births by Birthweight, by Age and Race and Hispanic Origin of Mother: United States, 2003,” in “Births: Final
Data for 2003,” National Vital Statistics Reports, vol. 54, no. 2, September 8, 2005, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr54/nvsr54_02.pdf (accessed November 2, 2005)
Number and percent of low birthweight and number of live births by selected characteristics, 2003 [CONTINUED]
Birthweightb
Age and race and
Less than
500–
1,000–
1,500–
2,000–
2,500–
3,000–
3,500–
4,000–
4,500–
5,000
Hispanic origin
500
999
1,499
1,999
2,499
2,999
3,499
3,999
4,499
4,999
grams
Not
of mother
Number
Percent
Total
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
grams
or more
stated
Low birthweighta
TABLE 5.7
Death and Dying
Seriously Ill Children
53

MEDICAL DECISION-MAKING FOR
OLDER CHILDREN
Under U.S. law, children under the age of eighteen
cannot provide legally binding consent regarding their
health care. Parents or guardians legally provide that
consent, and, in most situations, physicians and the courts
give parents wide latitude in the medical decisions they
make for their children.
TABLE 5.8
Low-birth-weight live births, by mother’s race, Hispanic origin, and smoking status, selected years 1970–2003
[Data are based on birth certificates]
Birth-weight, race, Hispanic
origin of mother, and smoking
status of mother
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
Low birth-weight 
(less than 2,500 grams)
Percent of live birthsa
All races
7.93
7.38
6.84
6.75
6.97
7.32
7.57
7.62
7.57
7.68
7.82
7.93
White
6.85
6.27
5.72
5.65
5.70
6.22
6.52
6.57
6.55
6.68
6.80
6.94
Black or African American
13.90
13.19
12.69
12.65
13.25
13.13
13.05
13.11
12.99
12.95
13.29
13.37
American Indian or Alaska Native
7.97
6.41
6.44
5.86
6.11
6.61
6.81
7.15
6.76
7.33
7.23
7.37
Asian or Pacific Islanderb
—
—
6.68
6.16
6.45
6.90
7.42
7.45
7.31
7.51
7.78
7.78
Chinese
6.67
5.29
5.21
4.98
4.69
5.29
5.34
5.19
5.10
5.33
5.52
—
Japanese
9.03
7.47
6.60
6.21
6.16
7.26
7.50
7.95
7.14
7.28
7.57
—
Filipino
10.02
8.08
7.40
6.95
7.30
7.83
8.23
8.30
8.46
8.66
8.61
—
Hawaiian
—
—
7.23
6.49
7.24
6.84
7.15
7.69
6.76
7.91
8.14
—
Other Asian or Pacific Islander
—
—
6.83
6.19
6.65
7.05
7.76
7.76
7.67
7.76
8.16
—
Hispanic or Latinoc
—
—
6.12
6.16
6.06
6.29
6.44
6.38
6.41
6.47
6.55
6.69
Mexican
—
—
5.62
5.77
5.55
5.81
5.97
5.94
6.01
6.08
6.16
6.28
Puerto Rican
—
—
8.95
8.69
8.99
9.41
9.68
9.30
9.30
9.34
9.68
10.01
Cuban
—
—
5.62
6.02
5.67
6.50
6.50
6.80
6.49
6.49
6.50
7.04
Central and South American
—
—
5.76
5.68
5.84
6.20
6.47
6.38
6.34
6.49
6.53
6.70
Other and unknown Hispanic 
or Latino
—
—
6.96
6.83
6.87
7.55
7.59
7.63
7.84
7.96
7.87
8.01
Not Hispanic or Latino:c
White
—
—
5.69
5.61
5.61
6.20
6.55
6.64
6.60
6.76
6.91
7.04
Black or African American
—
—
12.71
12.62
13.32
13.21
13.17
13.23
13.13
13.07
13.39
13.55
Cigarette smokerd
—
—
—
—
11.25
12.18
12.01
12.06
11.88
11.90
12.15
12.40
Nonsmokerd
—
—
—
—
6.14
6.79
7.18
7.21
7.19
7.32
7.48
7.66
Very low birth-weight 
(less than 1,500 grams)
All races
1.17
1.16
1.15
1.21
1.27
1.35
1.45
1.45
1.43
1.44
1.46
1.45
White
0.95
0.92
0.90
0.94
0.95
1.06
1.15
1.15
1.14
1.16
1.17
1.17
Black or African American
2.40
2.40
2.48
2.71
2.92
2.97
3.08
3.14
3.07
3.04
3.13
3.07
American Indian or Alaska Native
0.98
0.95
0.92
1.01
1.01
1.10
1.24
1.26
1.16
1.26
1.28
1.30
Asian or Pacific Islanderb
—
—
0.92
0.85
0.87
0.91
1.10
1.08
1.05
1.03
1.12
1.09
Chinese
0.80
0.52
0.66
0.57
0.51
0.67
0.75
0.68
0.77
0.69
0.74
—
Japanese
1.48
0.89
0.94
0.84
0.73
0.87
0.84
0.86
0.75
0.71
0.97
—
Filipino
1.08
0.93
0.99
0.86
1.05
1.13
1.35
1.41
1.38
1.23
1.31
—
Hawaiian
—
—
1.05
1.03
0.97
0.94
1.53
1.41
1.39
1.50
1.55
—
Other Asian or Pacific Islander
—
—
0.96
0.91
0.92
0.91
1.12
1.09
1.04
1.06
1.17
—
Hispanic or Latinoc
—
—
0.98
1.01
1.03
1.11
1.15
1.14
1.14
1.14
1.17
1.16
Mexican
—
—
0.92
0.97
0.92
1.01
1.02
1.04
1.03
1.05
1.06
1.06
Puerto Rican
—
—
1.29
1.30
1.62
1.79
1.86
1.86
1.93
1.85
1.96
2.01
Cuban
—
—
1.02
1.18
1.20
1.19
1.33
1.49
1.21
1.27
1.15
1.37
Central and South American
—
—
0.99
1.01
1.05
1.13
1.23
1.15
1.20
1.19
1.20
1.17
Other and unknown Hispanic 
or Latino
—
—
1.01
0.96
1.09
1.28
1.38
1.32
1.42
1.27
1.44
1.28
Not Hispanic or Latino:c
White
—
—
0.87
0.91
0.93
1.04
1.15
1.15
1.14
1.17
1.17
1.18
Black or African American
—
—
2.47
2.67
2.93
2.98
3.11
3.18
3.10
3.08
3.15
3.12
Cigarette smokerd
—
—
—
—
1.73
1.85
1.87
1.91
1.91
1.88
1.88
1.92
Nonsmokerd
—
—
—
—
1.18
1.31
1.44
1.43
1.40
1.42
1.45
1.44
aExcludes live births with unknown birthweight. Percent based on live births with known birthweight.
bFor 2003, data are not shown for Asian or Pacific Islander subgroups during the transition from single race to multiple race reporting.
cPrior to 1993, data from states lacking an Hispanic-origin item on the birth certificate were excluded. Data for non-Hispanic white and non-Hispanic black women for years prior to 1989
are not nationally representative and are provided for comparison with Hispanic data.
dPercent based on live births with known smoking status of mother and known birthweight. Data from states that did not require the reporting of mother’s tobacco use during pregnancy
on the birth certificate are not included. Reporting area for tobacco use increased from 43 states and the District of Columbia (DC) in 1989 to 49 states and DC in 2000–02. In 2003
California did not require reporting of tobacco use during pregnancy. Data for 2003 also exclude Pennsylvania and Washington that implemented the 2003 revision to the U.S. Standard
Certificate of Live Birth. Tobacco use data based on the 2003 revision are not comparable with data based on the 1989 revision to the U.S. Standard Certificate of Live Birth.
Notes: “—”Data not available. The race groups, white, black, American Indian or Alaska Native, and Asian or Pacific Islander, include persons of Hispanic and non-Hispanic origin.
Persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race. Interpretation of trend data should take into consideration expansion of reporting areas and immigration.
SOURCE: “Table 13. Low-Birthweight Live Births, according to Mother’s Detailed Race, Hispanic Origin, and Smoking Status: United States, Selected Years
1970–2003,” in Health, United States, 2005, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, November 2005, http://www.cdc
.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus05.pdf (accessed February 27, 2006)
54
Seriously Ill Children
Death and Dying

Religious Beliefs and Medical Treatment
When a parent’s decisions are not in the best interests
of the child, the state may intervene. Nonetheless, forty-
six states exempt parents from child abuse and neglect
laws if they rely on spiritual healing rather than
seek medical treatment for their minor children. The
states without these laws are Hawaii, Massachusetts,
Nebraska, and North Carolina (Kenneth S. Hickey and
Laurie
Lyckholm,
‘‘Child
Welfare
versus
Parental
Autonomy: Medical Ethics, the Law, and Faith-Based
Healing,’’ Theoretical Medicine, vol. 25, no. 4, 2004).
Confusing the issue, however, is the agreement of the
courts that religious exemption laws are no defense
against criminal neglect. The legal distinction between
practicing one’s religion and criminal conduct in the
treatment of one’s children remains unclear.
Adolescents
The United Nations defines adolescents as people
between the ages of ten and nineteen. Early adolescence
is from ten to fourteen years, while late adolescence is
from fifteen to nineteen years.
More than three thousand U.S. adolescents die each
year from chronic illnesses such as cancer, heart disease,
AIDS, and metabolic disorders (David Freyer, ‘‘Care of
the
Dying
Adolescent:
Special
Considerations,’’
Pediatrics, vol. 113, no. 2, February 2004). While many
laws concerning minors have changed, such as allowing
minors to seek medical treatment for reproductive health
and birth control services without parental consent, most
states have no laws for end-of-life decisions by minors
who are adolescents.
Freyer notes that although the law does not consider
adolescents under the age of eighteen to be competent
to make their own health care decisions, health care
practitioners often do. A broad consensus has developed
among pediatric health care practitioners, developmental
psychologists, ethicists, and lawyers that by the age of
fourteen years, terminally ill adolescents (unless they
demonstrate otherwise) ‘‘have the functional compe-
tence to make binding medical decisions for themselves,
including decision relating to the discontinuance of
life-sustaining therapy and other end-of-life issues.’’
According
to
Freyer,
some
experienced
health
care practitioners think that terminally ill children as
young as ten years ‘‘often meet the criteria for
having
functional
competence
and
should
have
substantial, if not decisive, input on major end-of-life
care decisions, including the discontinuation of active
therapy.’’
Death and Dying
Seriously Ill Children
55

CHAPTER 6
SUICIDE, EUTHANASIA, AND PHYSICIAN-ASSISTED SUICIDE
BACKGROUND
The Merriam-Webster dictionary definition of eutha-
nasia, which derives from the Greek for ‘‘easy death,’’ is
‘‘the act or practice of killing or permitting the death of
hopelessly sick or injured individuals . . . in a relatively
painless way for reasons of mercy.’’ This present-day
definition differs from that of the classical Greeks, who
considered euthanasia simply ‘‘one mode of dying.’’ To
the Greeks, euthanasia was a rational act by people who
deemed their lives no longer useful. That these indivi-
duals sought the help of others to end their lives was
considered morally acceptable.
The movement to legalize euthanasia in England
began in 1935 with the founding of the Voluntary
Euthanasia Society by such well-known figures as
George Bernard Shaw, Bertrand Russell, and H. G.
Wells. In 1936 the House of Lords (one of the houses
in the British Parliament) defeated a bill that would have
permitted
euthanasia
in
cases
of
terminal
illness.
Nonetheless, it was common knowledge that physicians
practiced euthanasia. The same year, it was rumored that
King George V, who had been seriously ill for several
years, was ‘‘relieved of his sufferings’’ by his physician,
with the approval of his wife, Queen Mary.
The Euthanasia Society of America was established
in 1938. In 1967 this group prepared the first living will.
Renamed the Society for the Right to Die in 1974, it
merged
in
1991
with
another
organization
called
Concern for Dying, and the two became Choice in
Dying (CID). While CID took no position on physician-
assisted suicide (PAS), it ‘‘advocated for the rights of
dying patients.’’ It also educated the public about the
importance of advance directives and end-of-life issues.
In early 2000 CID dissolved, although many of its
staff remained to found Partnership for Caring, Inc.,
which continues its programs. That organization’s goal
was to ‘‘ensure that everyone in this country soon has
access to quality end-of-life care.’’ Then, in early 2004,
Partnership for Caring merged with Last Acts, a coalition
of professional and consumer organizations that work to
improve end-of-life care. The merged organization was
named Last Acts Partnership, and its mission was to
provide education, service, and counseling to people
who needed accurate and reliable information about
end-of-life care. Last Acts Partnership was also an advo-
cate for policy reform in end-of-life issues. In 2005 Last
Acts Partnership ceased its activities and all rights and
copyrights to material produced by Partnership for
Caring, Last Acts, and Last Acts Partnership were legally
obtained by the National Hospice and Palliative Care
Organization (NHPCO).
Euthanasia and the Nazis
The Nazis’ version of euthanasia was a bizarre inter-
pretation of an idea espoused by two German professors,
Alfred Hoche and Karl Binding, in their 1920 book The
Permission to Destroy Life Unworthy of Life. While
initially advocating that it was ethical for physicians to
assist in the death of those who requested an end to their
suffering, the authors later argued that it was also per-
missible to end the lives of the mentally retarded and the
mentally ill.
Some contemporary opponents of euthanasia fear
that a society that allows physician-assisted suicide
may eventually follow the path of Nazi dictator
Adolf Hitler’s euthanasia program, which began with
the killing of physically and mentally impaired indivi-
duals and culminated in the annihilation of entire
religious and ethnic groups considered by the Nazis
to be unworthy of life. But those supporting euthanasia
argue that unlike the murderous Nazi euthanasia pro-
gram designed by Hitler and his followers, modern-day
proposals are based upon voluntary requests by indivi-
duals in situations of physical suffering and would be
sanctioned by laws passed by democratic governments.
Death and Dying
57

Distinguishing between Euthanasia and Physician-
Assisted Suicide
In the United States the debate over euthanasia distin-
guishes between active and passive euthanasia. Active
euthanasia, also called voluntary active euthanasia by those
who distinguish it from the kind of euthanasia practiced by
the Nazis, involves the hastening of death through the
administration of lethal drugs, as requested by the patient
or another competent individual who represents the patient’s
wishes.
Passive euthanasia, on the other hand, involves fore-
going medical treatment, knowing that such a decision will
result in death. This action is not considered illegal because
the underlying illness, permitted to run its natural course,
will ultimately cause death. It is generally accepted in the
United States that terminally ill individuals have a right to
refuse medical treatment, as do those who are sick but
not terminally so. But some people think that allowing
patients to forego medical treatment is a practice tantamount
to enabling suicide and is therefore morally reprehensible.
The debate about euthanasia in the United States has
been expanded to include the question of whether a com-
petent, terminally ill patient has the right to physician-
assisted suicide, in which a physician provides the means
(such as lethal drugs) for the patient to self-administer
and commit suicide. The distinction between the two
actions, euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide, is at
times difficult to define: a patient in the latter stages
of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, or Lou Gehrig’s
disease), for example, is physically unable to kill him- or
herself; therefore, a physician who aids in such a person’s
suicide would technically be committing euthanasia.
SUICIDE
Different Cultures and Religions
Different religions and cultures have viewed suicide
in different ways. Ancient Romans who dishonored
themselves or their families were expected to commit
suicide in order to maintain their dignity and, frequently,
the family property. Early Christians were quick to
embrace martyrdom as a guarantee of eternal salvation,
but during the fourth century St. Augustine discouraged
the practice. He and later theologians were concerned
that many Christians who were suffering in this world
would see suicide as a reasonable and legitimate way to
depart to a better place in the hereafter. The view of the
Christian theologian St. Thomas Aquinas (circa 1225–74)
is reflected in the contemporary Roman Catholic teaching
that ‘‘suicide contradicts the natural inclination of the
human being to preserve and perpetuate his life . . . and
is contrary to love for the living God.’’
While Islam and Judaism also condemn the taking of
one’s own life, Buddhist monks and nuns have been known
to commit suicide by self-immolation (burning themselves
alive) as a form of social protest. In a ritual called suttee,
which is now outlawed, widows in India showed devotion to
their deceased husbands by being cremated with them,
sometimes throwing themselves on the funeral pyres,
although it was not always voluntary. Widowers (men
whose wives had died), however, did not follow this custom.
Quasi-religious reasons sometimes motivate mass sui-
cide. In 1978 more than nine hundred members of a group
known as the People’s Temple killed themselves in
Jonestown, Guyana. In 1997 a group called Heaven’s
Gate also committed mass suicide in California. The devas-
tating terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, were the
result of a suicidal plot enacted by religious extremist
groups. Suicide bombings in other parts of the world have
also been attributed to extremist groups that have twisted or
misinterpreted the fundamental tenets of Islam to further
their political objectives.
The Japanese people have traditionally associated a
certain idealism with suicide. During the twelfth century,
samurai warriors practiced voluntary seppuku (more com-
monly known as hara-kiri) or ritual self-disembowelment,
to avoid dishonor at the hands of their enemies. Some
samurai committed this form of slow suicide to atone
for wrongdoing or to express devotion to a superior who
had died. Even as recently as 1970, famed author Yukio
Mishima publicly committed seppuku. During World
War II, Japanese kamikaze pilots inflicted serious
casualties with suicidal assaults in which they would
purposely crash their planes into enemy ships, killing
themselves along with enemy troops.
Suicide is still commonly practiced in modern Japan.
In early 1998 several government officials and businessmen
hanged themselves in separate incidents involving scandals
that attracted public attention. The reasons given for the
suicides ranged from proclaiming innocence to assuming
responsibility for wrongdoing. In November 2005 the Daily
Yomiuri newspaper (Tokyo) reported that government sta-
tistics showed that more than thirty thousand suicides had
occurred in Japan each year from 1998 to 2004.
Suicide in America
With the exception of certain desperate medical
situations, suicide in the United States is generally con-
sidered an unacceptable act, the end result of irrationality
or severe depression. It is often referred to as a permanent
solution to a short-term problem.
In spite of this generally held belief, suicide was the
eleventh-leading cause of death in America in 2003. There
were almost twice as many suicides as homicides that year.
(See Table 4.1 in Chapter 4.) Nevertheless, since 1950 the
national suicide rate has dropped from 13.2 suicides per one
hundred thousand people to 10.9 per one hundred thousand
in 2002. However, that rate is up from a low of 10.4
suicides per one hundred thousand in 2000. (See Table 6.1.)
58
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
Death and Dying

TABLE 6.1
Death rates for suicide, by sex, race, Hispanic origin, and age, selected years 1950–2002
[Data are based on death certificates]
Sex, race, Hispanic origin,
and age
1950a
1960a
1970
1980
1990
2000
2001
2002
All persons
Deaths per 100,000 resident population
All ages, age adjustedb
13.2
12.5
13.1
12.2
12.5
10.4
10.7
10.9
All ages, crude
11.4
10.6
11.6
11.9
12.4
10.4
10.8
11.0
Under 1 year
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
1–4 years
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
5–14 years
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.8
0.7
0.7
0.6
15–24 years
4.5
5.2
8.8
12.3
13.2
10.2
9.9
9.9
15–19 years
2.7
3.6
5.9
8.5
11.1
8.0
7.9
7.4
20–24 years
6.2
7.1
12.2
16.1
15.1
12.5
12.0
12.4
25–44 years
11.6
12.2
15.4
15.6
15.2
13.4
13.8
14.0
25–34 years
9.1
10.0
14.1
16.0
15.2
12.0
12.8
12.6
35–44 years
14.3
14.2
16.9
15.4
15.3
14.5
14.7
15.3
45–64 years
23.5
22.0
20.6
15.9
15.3
13.5
14.4
14.9
45–54 years
20.9
20.7
20.0
15.9
14.8
14.4
15.2
15.7
55–64 years
26.8
23.7
21.4
15.9
16.0
12.1
13.1
13.6
65 years and over
30.0
24.5
20.8
17.6
20.5
15.2
15.3
15.6
65–74 years
29.6
23.0
20.8
16.9
17.9
12.5
13.3
13.5
75–84 years
31.1
27.9
21.2
19.1
24.9
17.6
17.4
17.7
85 years and over
28.8
26.0
19.0
19.2
22.2
19.6
17.5
18.0
Male
All ages, age adjustedb
21.2
20.0
19.8
19.9
21.5
17.7
18.2
18.4
All ages, crude
17.8
16.5
16.8
18.6
20.4
17.1
17.6
17.9
Under 1 year
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
1–4 years
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
5–14 years
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
1.1
1.2
1.0
0.9
15–24 years
6.5
8.2
13.5
20.2
22.0
17.1
16.6
16.5
15–19 years
3.5
5.6
8.8
13.8
18.1
13.0
12.9
12.2
20–24 years
9.3
11.5
19.3
26.8
25.7
21.4
20.5
20.8
25–44 years
17.2
17.9
20.9
24.0
24.4
21.3
22.1
22.2
25–34 years
13.4
14.7
19.8
25.0
24.8
19.6
21.0
20.5
35–44 years
21.3
21.0
22.1
22.5
23.9
22.8
23.1
23.7
45–64 years
37.1
34.4
30.0
23.7
24.3
21.3
22.5
23.5
45–54 years
32.0
31.6
27.9
22.9
23.2
22.4
23.4
24.4
55–64 years
43.6
38.1
32.7
24.5
25.7
19.4
21.1
22.2
65 years and over
52.8
44.0
38.4
35.0
41.6
31.1
31.5
31.8
65–74 years
50.5
39.6
36.0
30.4
32.2
22.7
24.6
24.7
75–84 years
58.3
52.5
42.8
42.3
56.1
38.6
37.8
38.1
85 years and over
58.3
57.4
42.4
50.6
65.9
57.5
51.1
50.7
Female
All ages, age adjustedb
5.6
5.6
7.4
5.7
4.8
4.0
4.0
4.2
All ages, crude
5.1
4.9
6.6
5.5
4.8
4.0
4.1
4.3
Under 1 year
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
1–4 years
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
5–14 years
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.3
15–24 years
2.6
2.2
4.2
4.3
3.9
3.0
2.9
2.9
15–19 years
1.8
1.6
2.9
3.0
3.7
2.7
2.7
2.4
20–24 years
3.3
2.9
5.7
5.5
4.1
3.2
3.1
3.5
25–44 years
6.2
6.6
10.2
7.7
6.2
5.4
5.5
5.8
25–34 years
4.9
5.5
8.6
7.1
5.6
4.3
4.4
4.6
35–44 years
7.5
7.7
11.9
8.5
6.8
6.4
6.4
6.9
45–64 years
9.9
10.2
12.0
8.9
7.1
6.2
6.6
6.7
45–54 years
9.9
10.2
12.6
9.4
6.9
6.7
7.2
7.4
55–64 years
9.9
10.2
11.4
8.4
7.3
5.4
5.7
5.7
65 years and over
9.4
8.4
8.1
6.1
6.4
4.0
3.9
4.1
65–74 years
10.1
8.4
9.0
6.5
6.7
4.0
3.9
4.1
75–84 years
8.1
8.9
7.0
5.5
6.3
4.0
4.0
4.2
85 years and over
8.2
6.0
5.9
5.5
5.4
4.2
3.4
3.8
White malec
All ages, age adjustedb
22.3
21.1
20.8
20.9
22.8
19.1
19.6
20.0
All ages, crude
19.0
17.6
18.0
19.9
22.0
18.8
19.5
19.9
15–24 years
6.6
8.6
13.9
21.4
23.2
17.9
17.6
17.7
25–44 years
17.9
18.5
21.5
24.6
25.4
22.9
24.0
24.0
45–64 years
39.3
36.5
31.9
25.0
26.0
23.2
24.7
25.9
65 years and over
55.8
46.7
41.1
37.2
44.2
33.3
33.7
34.2
65–74 years
53.2
42.0
38.7
32.5
34.2
24.3
26.3
26.8
75–84 years
61.9
55.7
45.5
45.5
60.2
41.1
40.2
40.6
85 years and over
61.9
61.3
45.8
52.8
70.3
61.6
55.0
53.9
Death and Dying
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
59

The National Vital Statistics System (NVSS), which is
a part of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), collects data from the fifty states, two cities (New
York City and Washington, DC), and five territories
(Puerto
Rico,
the Virgin
Islands, Guam,
American
Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands). Each is responsible for registering vital events:
births, deaths, marriages, divorces, and fetal deaths.
Suicide data are compiled as part of the death data.
To add more specificity to violent death data, the
CDC instituted the National Violent Death Reporting
System (NVDRS) in 2003. The NVDRS is a state-based
system that collects information on the numbers and
TABLE 6.1
Black or African
American malec
All ages, age adjustedb
7.5
8.4
10.0
11.4
12.8
10.0
9.8
9.8
All ages, crude
6.3
6.4
8.0
10.3
12.0
9.4
9.2
9.1
15–24 years
4.9
4.1
10.5
12.3
15.1
14.2
13.0
11.3
25–44 years
9.8
12.6
16.1
19.2
19.6
14.3
14.4
15.1
45–64 years
12.7
13.0
12.4
11.8
13.1
9.9
9.7
9.6
65 years and over
9.0
9.9
8.7
11.4
14.9
11.5
11.5
11.7
65–74 years
10.0
11.3
8.7
11.1
14.7
11.1
10.7
9.7
75–84 yearsd
*
*
*
10.5
14.4
12.1
13.5
13.8
85 years and over
—
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
American Indian or
Alaska Native malec
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
19.3
20.1
16.0
17.4
16.4
All ages, crude
—
—
—
20.9
20.9
15.9
17.0
16.8
15–24 years
—
—
—
45.3
49.1
26.2
24.7
27.9
25–44 years
—
—
—
31.2
27.8
24.5
27.6
26.8
45–64 years
—
—
—
*
*
15.4
17.0
14.1
65 years and over
—
—
—
*
*
*
*
*
Asian or Pacific malec
—
—
—
*
*
*
*
*
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
10.7
9.6
8.6
8.4
8.0
All ages, crude
—
—
—
8.8
8.7
7.9
7.7
7.6
15–24 years
—
—
—
10.8
13.5
9.1
9.1
8.7
25–44 years
—
—
—
11.0
10.6
9.9
9.3
9.3
45–64 years
—
—
—
13.0
9.7
9.7
8.2
9.1
65 years and over
—
—
—
18.6
16.8
15.4
18.3
14.4
Hispanic or Latino malec, e
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
—
13.7
10.3
10.1
9.9
All ages, crude
—
—
—
—
11.4
8.4
8.3
8.3
15–24 years
—
—
—
—
14.7
10.9
9.5
10.6
25–24 years
—
—
—
—
16.2
11.2
11.8
10.9
45–64 years
—
—
—
—
16.1
12.0
11.4
11.9
65 years and over
—
—
—
—
23.4
19.5
18.5
17.5
White, not Hispanic
or Latino malee
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
—
23.5
20.2
21.0
21.4
All ages, crude
—
—
—
—
23.1
20.4
21.4
21.9
15–24 years
—
—
—
—
24.4
19.5
19.6
19.3
25–44 years
—
—
—
—
26.4
25.1
26.4
26.9
45–64 years
—
—
—
—
26.8
24.0
25.9
27.2
65 years and over
—
—
—
—
45.4
33.9
34.4
35.1
White femalec
All ages, age adjustedb
6.0
5.9
7.9
6.1
5.2
4.3
4.5
4.7
All ages, crude
5.5
5.3
7.1
5.9
5.3
4.4
4.6
4.8
15–24 years
2.7
2.3
4.2
4.6
4.2
3.1
3.1
3.1
25–44 years
6.6
7.0
11.0
8.1
6.6
6.0
6.2
6.6
45–64 years
10.6
10.9
13.0
9.6
7.7
6.9
7.3
7.5
65 years and over
9.9
8.8
8.5
6.4
6.8
4.3
4.1
4.3
Black or African
American femalec
All ages, age adjustedb
1.8
2.0
2.9
2.4
2.4
1.8
1.8
1.6
All ages, crude
1.5
1.6
2.6
2.2
2.3
1.7
1.7
1.5
15–24 years
1.8
*
3.8
2.3
2.3
2.2
1.3
1.7
25–44 years
2.3
3.0
4.8
4.3
3.8
2.6
2.6
2.4
45–64 years
2.7
3.1
2.9
2.5
2.9
2.1
2.6
2.1
65 years and over
*
*
2.6
*
1.9
1.3
1.6
1.1
Death rates for suicide, by sex, race, Hispanic origin, and age, selected years 1950–2002 [CONTINUED]
[Data are based on death certificates]
Sex, race, Hispanic origin,
and age
1950a
1960a
1970
1980
1990
2000
2001
2002
60
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
Death and Dying

kinds of violent deaths along with details regarding those
deaths. Six states joined the NVDRS in 2003.
Figure 6.1 shows that suicide rates in the United
States declined from 1993 to 1999, and then rose slightly
between 2000 and 2002, falling again in 2003. (The 2003
data are not shown on Table 6.1.) The rate for the six
NVDRS states is lower than the national rate, but rose
from 2002 to 2003 when suicide rates were declining
across the U.S.
Gopal K. Singh and Mohammad Siahpush compared
the suicide rates in rural and urban populations in the
United States. In ‘‘Increasing Rural-Urban Gradients in
U.S. Suicide Mortality, 1970–1997’’ (American Journal
of Public Health, vol. 92, no. 7, July 2002), Singh and
Siahpush reported that the rate of suicide in rural popula-
tions of males increased between 1970 and 1997, while
the rate of suicide in urban populations of males
decreased over the same period. Although the rates are
lower for females and the changes not as dramatic, a
decrease was also noted in the suicide rate for urban
females, while the suicide rate among rural females
remained relatively stable.
In explaining these differences, Singh and Siahpush
suggest that both rural and urban areas have experienced
profound social and demographic changes during the
past three decades. They contend, however, that change
has affected life in rural areas more than in urban areas.
TABLE 6.1
American Indian or Alaska
Native femalec
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
4.7
3.6
3.8
4.0
4.1
All ages, crude
—
—
—
4.7
3.7
4.0
4.1
4.3
15–24 years
—
—
—
*
*
*
*
7.4
25–44 years
—
—
—
10.7
*
7.2
6.1
5.6
45–64 years
—
—
—
*
*
*
*
*
65 years and over
—
—
—
*
*
*
*
*
Asian or Pacific 
Islander femalec
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
5.5
4.1
2.8
2.9
3.0
All ages, crude
—
—
—
4.7
3.4
2.7
2.8
2.9
15–24 years
—
—
—
*
3.9
2.7
3.6
25–44 years
—
—
—
5.4
3.8
3.3
2.9
3.3
45–64 years
—
—
—
7.9
5.0
3.2
3.8
3.8
65 years and over
—
—
—
*
8.5
5.2
4.9
6.8
Hispanic or Latino femalec, e
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
—
2.3
1.7
1.6
1.8
All ages, crude
—
—
—
—
2.2
1.5
1.5
1.6
15–24 years
—
—
—
—
3.1
2.0
2.3
2.1
25–44 years
—
—
—
—
3.1
2.1
2.0
2.0
45–64 years
—
—
—
—
2.5
2.5
2.3
2.5
65 years and over
—
—
—
—
*
*
*
1.9
White, not Hispanic 
or Latino femalee
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
—
5.4
4.7
4.9
5.1
All ages, crude
—
—
—
—
5.6
4.9
5.0
5.3
15–24 years
—
—
—
—
4.3
3.3
3.3
3.4
25–44 years
—
—
—
—
7.0
6.7
6.9
7.5
45–64 years
—
—
—
—
8.0
7.3
7.8
8.0
65 years and over
—
—
—
—
7.0
4.4
4.3
4.5
*Rates based on fewer than 20 deaths are considered unreliable and are not shown.
aIncludes deaths of persons who were not residents of the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
bAge-adjusted rates are calculated using the year 2000 standard population.
cThe race groups, white, black, Asian or Pacific Islander, and American Indian or Alaska Native, include persons of Hispanic and non-Hispanic origin. Persons of Hispanic origin may be
of any race. Death rates for the American Indian or Alaska Native and Asian or Pacific Islander populations are known to be underestimated.
dIn 1950 rate is for the age group 75 years and over.
ePrior to 1997, excludes data from states lacking an Hispanic-origin item on the death certificate.
Notes: “. . .”Category not applicable.“—”Data not available. Starting with, 2003, rates for 1991–99 were revised using intercensal population estimates based on census 2000. Rates
for 2000 were revised based on census 2000 counts. Rates for 2001 and 2002 were computed using 2000-based postcensal estimates. Figures for 2001 include September 11-related
deaths for which death certificates were filed as of October 24, 2002. Age groups were selected to minimize the presentation of unstable age-specific death rates based on small
numbers of deaths and for consistency among comparison groups.
SOURCE: “Table 46. Death Rates for Suicide, according to Sex, Race, Hispanic Origin, and Age: United States, Selected Years 1950–2002,” in Health, United
States, 2005, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, November 2005, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus05.pdf
(accessed February 27, 2006)
Death rates for suicide, by sex, race, Hispanic origin, and age, selected years 1950–2002 [CONTINUED]
[Data are based on death certificates]
Sex, race, Hispanic origin,
and age
1950a
1960a
1970
1980
1990
2000
2001
2002
Death and Dying
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
61

They note that high levels of social isolation, as often
occurs in rural areas, are correlated with high suicide
rates.
Suicide among Young People
According
to
the
American
Association
of
Suicidology, the rate of suicide among young people
increased 200% between the 1950s and 1990s. During
the 1990s death rates for suicide declined, but in some
age groups the rate of suicide attempts actually rose. In
2003 suicide was the third-leading cause of death among
people ages fifteen to twenty-four. (See Table 4.2 in
Chapter 4.) While females are more likely to attempt
suicide, males are more likely to die from their attempts
(‘‘Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United States,
2003,’’ Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, vol. 53,
No. SS–2, May 21, 2004).
While the overall suicide rate among African-
American youths has been relatively low in comparison
with that of white males, the rate rose among African-
American males between 1950 and 1990. (See Table 6.1.)
By 1990 the death rate for suicide among African-
American males ages twenty-five to forty-four years
had risen to a high of 19.6 suicides per one hundred
thousand. After 1990 the suicide rate for young African-
American males steadily declined, and by 2000 it
dropped to 14.3 per one hundred thousand. The rate rose
slightly in 2001 to 14.4, and then rose more dramatically
in 2002, to 15.1 per one hundred thousand.
Death rates for suicide rose for white males ages
twenty-five to forty-four from 1950 through 1990. By
2000 the death rate had declined to 22.9, but it rose again
to 24 in 2001 and 2002. (See Table 6.1.)
In 1990 the highest suicide death rate among youth
ages fifteen to twenty-four was 49.1 suicides per one
hundred thousand people among male American Indian
or Alaska Natives. (See Table 6.1.) By 2001 this rate fell
to 24.7 per one hundred thousand but rose again in 2002
to 27.9.
While death rates from suicide declined among
young adults ages fifteen to nineteen between 1990 and
2002 (see Table 6.1), the percentage of high school
students who attempted suicide increased from 7.3% in
1991 to 8.5% in 2003, peaking in 2001 at 8.8%. (See
Table 6.2.) The percentage of students injured during a
suicide attempt also rose from 1.7% in 1991 to 2.9% in
2003.
Table 6.3 shows that the percentage of high school
students who attempted suicide was highest among ninth
graders and decreased as grade level increased. The per-
centage of suicide attempts requiring medical attention
followed the same pattern: a higher percentage of the
suicide attempts of ninth graders required medical atten-
tion than did those of older students, and this percentage
decreased as grade level increased. Hispanic students
were the most likely to attempt suicide and white students
the least likely. In addition, suicide attempts were highest
among high school students living in Ohio, Texas,
Michigan, and Kentucky. (See Table 6.4.)
The CDC also collects data on the percentage of high
school students who feel sad or hopeless, who seriously
consider attempting suicide, and who make a suicide
plan. In 2003 nearly 30% of high school students in all
grades felt sad or hopeless. Approximately 17% seriously
considered attempting suicide, and 16% to 17% made a
suicide plan. (See Table 6.5.) In 2003 the states in which
more than 30% of high school students felt sad or hope-
less were Arizona, Florida, Kentucky, Ohio, Texas, West
Virginia, and Wyoming. (See Table 6.6.)
Figures 6.2 and 6.3 show the annual suicide rates
among young people by method. The use of firearms
was the method most frequently used by ten- to fourteen-
year-olds from 1992 to 1996. In 1997 and from 1999 to
2001 suffocation (e.g. hanging) overtook firearms as the
most frequently used method of suicide in this age group.
Poisoning is the third most widely used method of sui-
cide, although its use decreased from 1992 to 1996 and
then somewhat stabilized by 2001. Other methods (for
FIGURE 6.1
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003
Rate
Age-adjusted suicide rates, 1993–2003
[Per 100,000 population]
SOURCE: Adapted from T.L. Serpi, et al., “Figure. Age-Adjusted
Homicide and Suicide Rates, by Year—United States and Six NVDRS
States, 2000–2003,” in “Homicide and Suicide Rates—National Violent
Death Reporting System, Six States, 2003,” Morbidity and Mortality
Weekly Report, vol. 54, no. 15, April 22, 2005, http://www.cdc.gov/ 
mmwr/PDF/wk/mm5415.pdf (accessed December 7, 2005)
Note: The data were age adjusted to the 2000 standard U.S. population.
Year
Suicide U.S.
Suicide six states
62
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
Death and Dying

example, jumping from high places such as bridges) were
used infrequently from 1992 to 2001.
Although the use of firearms to commit suicide
dropped considerably in the fifteen- to nineteen-year-
old age group, it was still the most frequently used
method in 2001. (See Figure 6.3.) The use of suffocation
to commit suicide increased slightly from 1992 to 2001.
Poisoning and other methods of suicide ranked low in
this age group during those years, as in the ten- to
fourteen-year-old group. Poisoning declined in use from
1992 to 1997, and then stabilized. As a comparison, in
the general population in 2002, 54% (17,108) of
those who took their own lives used a firearm, 20%
(6,462) used suffocation, and 17% (5,486) used poison.
Other methods were used much less frequently. (See
Table 6.7.)
The statistics in this section underscore the urgent need
for prevention, education, and support programs to help
teens and young adults at risk. The National Center for
Injury Prevention and Control (NCIPC) sponsors initiatives
to raise public awareness of suicide and institutes strategies
to reduce suicide deaths. Along with supporting research
about risk factors for suicide in the general population,
NCIPC develops programs for high-risk populations.
SUICIDE AMONG GAY AND LESBIAN ADOLESCENTS.
The suicide rate for gay and lesbian adolescents is
dramatically higher than for the general adolescent
TABLE 6.2
Suicide ideation, attempts, and injuries among students in grades 9–12, by sex, grade level, race, and Hispanic origin, selected years
1991–2003
[Data are based on a national sample of high school students, grades 9–12]
Sex, grade level, race,
and Hispanic origin
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
Percent of students who seriously considered suicidea
Total
29.0
24.1
24.1
20.5
19.3
19.0
16.9
Male
Total
20.8
18.8
18.3
15.1
13.7
14.2
12.8
9th grade
17.6
17.7
18.2
16.1
11.9
14.7
11.9
10th grade
19.5
18.0
16.7
14.5
13.7
13.8
13.2
11th grade
25.3
20.6
21.7
16.6
13.7
14.1
12.9
12th grade
20.7
18.3
16.3
13.5
15.6
13.7
13.2
Not Hispanic or Latino:
White
21.7
19.1
19.1
14.4
12.5
14.9
12.0
Black or African American
13.3
15.4
16.7
10.6
11.7
9.2
10.3
Hispanic or Latino
18.0
17.9
15.7
17.1
13.6
12.2
12.9
Female
Total
37.2
29.6
30.4
27.1
24.9
23.6
21.3
9th grade
40.3
30.9
34.4
28.9
24.4
26.2
22.2
10th grade
39.7
31.6
32.8
30.0
30.1
24.1
23.8
11th grade
38.4
28.9
31.1
26.2
23.0
23.6
20.0
12th grade
30.7
27.3
23.9
23.6
21.2
18.9
18.0
Not Hispanic or Latino:
White
38.6
29.7
31.6
26.1
23.2
24.2
21.2
Black or African American
29.4
24.5
22.2
22.0
18.8
17.2
14.7
Hispanic or Latino
34.6
34.1
34.1
30.3
26.1
26.5
23.4
Percent of students who attempted suicidea
Total
7.3
8.6
8.7
7.7
8.3
8.8
8.5
Male
Total
3.9
5.0
5.6
4.5
5.7
6.2
5.4
9th grade
4.5
5.8
6.8
6.3
6.1
8.2
5.8
10th grade
3.3
5.9
5.4
3.8
6.2
6.7
5.5
11th grade
4.1
3.4
5.8
4.4
4.8
4.9
4.6
12th grade
3.8
4.5
4.7
3.7
5.4
4.4
5.2
Not Hispanic or Latino:
White
3.3
4.4
5.2
3.2
4.5
5.3
3.7
Black or African American
3.3
5.4
7.0
5.6
7.1
7.5
7.7
Hispanic or Latino
3.7
7.4
5.8
7.2
6.6
8.0
6.1
Female
Total
10.7
12.5
11.9
11.6
10.9
11.2
11.5
9th grade
13.8
14.4
14.9
15.1
14.0
13.2
14.7
10th grade
12.2
13.1
15.1
14.3
14.8
12.2
12.7
11th grade
8.7
13.6
11.4
11.3
7.5
11.5
10.0
12th grade
7.8
9.1
6.6
6.2
5.8
6.5
6.9
Not Hispanic or Latino:
White
10.4
11.3
10.4
10.3
9.0
10.3
10.3
Black or African American
9.4
11.2
10.8
9.0
7.5
9.8
9.0
Hispanic or Latino
11.6
19.7
21.0
14.9
18.9
15.9
15.0
Death and Dying
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
63

TABLE 6.2
Percent of students with an injurious suicide attempta, b
Total
1.7
2.7
2.8
2.6
2.6
2.6
2.9
Male
Total
1.0
1.6
2.2
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.4
9th grade
1.0
2.1
2.3
3.2
2.6
2.6
3.1
10th grade
0.5
1.3
2.4
1.4
1.8
2.5
2.1
11th grade
1.5
1.1
2.0
2.6
2.1
1.6
2.0
12th grade
0.9
1.5
2.2
1.0
1.7
1.5
1.8
Not Hispanic or Latino:
White
1.0
1.4
2.1
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.1
Black or African American
0.4
2.0
2.8
1.8
3.4
3.6
5.2
Hispanic or Latino
0.5
2.0
2.9
2.1
1.4
2.5
4.2
Female
Total
2.5
3.8
3.4
3.3
3.1
3.1
3.2
9th grade
2.8
3.5
6.3
5.0
3.8
3.8
3.9
10th grade
2.6
5.1
3.8
3.7
4.0
3.6
3.2
11th grade
2.1
3.9
2.9
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.9
12th grade
2.4
2.9
1.3
2.0
1.3
1.7
2.2
Not Hispanic or Latino:
White
2.3
3.6
2.9
2.6
2.3
2.9
2.4
Black or African American
2.9
4.0
3.6
3.0
2.4
3.1
2.2
Hispanic or Latino
2.7
5.5
6.6
3.8
4.6
4.2
5.7
aResponse is for the 12 months preceding the survey.
bA suicide attempt that required medical attention.
Notes: Only youths attending school participated in the survey. Persons of Hispanic origin may be of any race.
SOURCE: “Table 62. Suicidal Ideation, Suicide Attempts, and Injurious Suicide Attempts among Students in Grades 9–12, by Sex, Grade Level, Race, and
Hispanic Origin: United States, Selected Years 1991–2003,” in Health, United States, 2005, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for
Health Statistics, November 2005, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus05.pdf (accessed February 27, 2006)
Suicide ideation, attempts, and injuries among students in grades 9–12, by sex, grade level, race, and Hispanic origin, selected years
1991–2003 [CONTINUED]
[Data are based on a national sample of high school students, grades 9–12]
Sex, grade level, race,
and Hispanic origin
1991
1993
1995
1997
1999
2001
2003
TABLE 6.3
Percentage of high school students who actually attempted suicide and whose suicide attempt required medical attention, by sex,
race/ethnicity, and grade, 2003
Attempted suicidea,b
Suicide attempt required medical attentiona
Female
Male
Total
Female
Male
Total
Category
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Race/ethnicity
Whitec
10.3
3.7
6.9
2.4
1.1
1.7
Blackc
9.0
7.7
8.4
2.2
5.2
3.7
Hispanic
15.0
6.1
10.6
5.7
4.2
5.0
Grade
9
14.7
5.8
10.1
3.9
3.1
3.5
10
12.7
5.5
9.1
3.2
2.1
2.6
11
10.0
4.6
7.3
2.9
2.0
2.4
12
6.9
5.2
6.1
2.2
1.8
2.1
Total
11.5
5.4
8.5
3.2
2.4
2.9
aDuring the 12 months preceding the survey.
bOne or more times.
cNon-Hispanic.
SOURCE: Jo Anne Grunbaum, et al., “Table 18. Percentage of High School Students Who Actually Attempted Suicide and Whose Suicide Attempt Required
Medical Attention, by Sex, Race/Ethnicity, and Grade—United States, Youth Risk Behavior Survey, 2003,” in “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United
States, 2003,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, vol. 53, no. SS-2, May 21, 2004, http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/SS/SS5302.pdf (accessed November 9,
2005)
64
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
Death and Dying

population (S. McAndrew and R. Warne, ‘‘Ignoring the
Evidence Dictating the Practice: Sexual Orientation,
Suicidality and the Dichotomy of the Mental Health
Nurse,’’ Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health
Nursing, vol. 11, no. 4, 2004). Adolescence (the transi-
tion to adulthood) is often a difficult period. For gay and
lesbian adolescents, this transition is compounded by
having to come to terms with their sexuality in a society
generally unaccepting of homosexuality.
At this period in their lives, when the need to
confide in and gain acceptance from friends and
family may be crucial, gay and lesbian adolescents
are often torn between choices that do not necessarily
meet either of these needs. Those who are open about
their sexual orientation risk disappointing or even alie-
nating their families and facing the hostility of their
peers. Teens who choose not to disclose their homo-
sexuality may suffer emotional distress because they
have nowhere to turn for emotional support. In either
scenario, despair, isolation, anger, guilt, and over-
whelming depression may promote suicidal thoughts
or actual suicide attempts.
TABLE 6.4
Percentage of high school students who actually attempted suicide and whose suicide attempt required medical attention, by sex and
selected U.S. sites, 2003
Attempted suicidea, b
Suicide attempt required medical attentiona
Female
Male
Total
Female
Male
Total
Site
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
State surveys
Alabama
10.7
3.8
7.3
3.9
1.4
2.6
Alaska
10.0
6.1
8.1
1.5
2.6
2.1
Arizona
11.2
4.2
7.8
3.6
1.2
2.5
Delaware
11.5
5.5
8.6
3.5
2.0
2.7
Florida
11.8
6.2
9.0
3.9
2.9
3.4
Georgia
8.7
8.2
8.5
3.0
3.0
3.0
Idaho
11.3
5.8
8.6
3.3
1.9
2.7
Indiana
8.1
5.1
6.6
2.2
1.1
1.6
Kentucky
10.3
9.8
10.3
3.6
3.4
3.7
Maine
12.1
5.3
9.0
3.7
2.0
2.9
Massachusetts
9.4
7.3
8.4
2.7
2.8
2.8
Michigan
12.9
7.8
10.5
3.9
2.4
3.2
Mississippi
8.5
4.1
6.6
2.8
2.1
2.5
Missouri
9.8
4.8
7.3
2.7
1.4
2.0
Montana
12.3
6.8
9.7
3.8
2.3
3.0
Nebraska
11.3
6.4
8.8
3.7
3.2
3.4
Nevada
11.9
5.9
8.8
3.7
2.2
2.9
New Hampshire
11.4
3.9
7.7
4.0
0.9
2.5
New York
9.7
3.7
6.8
2.7
1.5
2.1
North Carolina
c
c
c
c
c
c
North Dakota
8.9
5.2
7.2
2.8
2.6
2.8
Ohio
12.8
10.8
11.9
5.7
4.2
5.0
Oklahoma
8.3
5.8
7.0
3.3
1.4
2.4
Rhode Island
9.5
6.9
8.3
2.5
3.1
2.9
South Dakota
12.4
6.3
9.3
3.1
2.4
2.7
Tennessee
11.5
6.4
8.9
3.8
2.5
3.1
Texasd
13.5
7.5
10.6
3.7
2.8
3.3
Utah
8.8
6.2
7.5
1.5
2.5
2.0
Vermont
9.9
4.6
7.2
2.8
1.7
2.3
West Virginia
12.8
6.0
9.3
2.6
2.5
2.5
Wisconsin
11.8
4.7
8.2
3.8
1.1
2.5
Wyoming
12.9
5.5
9.1
4.1
2.7
3.4
Median
11.3
5.9
8.5
3.5
2.4
2.7
Range
8.1–13.5
3.7–10.8
6.6–11.9
1.5–5.7
0.9–4.2
1.6–5.0
Local surveyse
Boston PS, MA
9.1
8.6
8.9
2.9
2.4
2.6
Broward County PS, FL
10.7
6.0
8.5
3.3
2.3
2.9
Chicago PS, IL
13.4
10.4
12.1
3.7
5.4
4.7
Dallas ISD, TX
13.0
5.3
9.5
2.0
1.3
1.7
DeKalb County PS, GA
8.5
6.1
7.4
2.5
2.8
2.6
Detroit PS, MI
14.1
9.2
12.0
4.5
2.8
3.7
District of Columbia PS
12.2
12.0
12.1
2.2
4.8
3.5
Los Angeles USD, CA
17.5
5.0
11.4
4.5
1.4
3.0
Memphis PS, TN
11.2
7.1
9.3
3.8
2.7
3.3
Miami-Dade County PS, FL
12.5
5.9
9.3
3.7
1.8
2.8
Milwaukee PS, WI
11.4
10.3
10.9
3.8
3.0
3.4
New Orleans PS, LA
10.9
10.0
10.4
3.6
4.2
3.9
New York City PS, NY
11.3
5.1
8.4
2.2
1.5
1.9
Death and Dying
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
65

Exact data are not available for suicide rates of gay,
lesbian, and bisexual teenagers because the sexual orien-
tation of suicide victims often is unknown. But according
to a 2006 study by the McCreary Center Society in
British Columbia, Canada, lesbian teenagers are at parti-
cularly high risk of suicide (‘‘Lesbian Teens Face Higher
Risk of Suicide: Study,’’ Toronto Star, June 2, 2006). In
fact, the study found that suicide attempts among lesbian
girls increased from one in five in 1992, to one in four in
1998, to one in three in 2003. In all, 38% of lesbian
teenagers surveyed reported that they had attempted sui-
cide in the past year, versus just 8.2% of heterosexual
girls surveyed. Only 8.8% of gay male teenagers, and
3.3% of straight males, reported having attempted suicide
in the past year, according to the survey.
EUTHANASIA AND PHYSICIAN-
ASSISTED SUICIDE
The American Constitution does not guarantee the
right to choose to die. The U.S. Supreme Court, how-
ever, recognized as of 2005 that Americans have a
fundamental right to privacy, or what is sometimes
called the ‘‘right to be left alone.’’ While the right to
TABLE 6.4
Orange County PS, FL
12.1
6.4
9.3
4.1
2.8
3.5
Palm Beach County SD, FL
10.3
8.1
9.4
3.1
4.2
3.8
Philadelphia SD, PA
14.2
9.9
12.3
3.4
2.6
3.1
San Bernardino USD, CA
13.2
9.5
11.5
5.3
3.9
4.8
San Diego USD, CA
13.1
8.9
10.9
2.9
3.6
3.3
Median
12.1
8.3
9.9
3.5
2.8
3.3
Range
8.5–17.5
5.0–12.0
7.4–12.3
2.0–5.3
1.3–5.4
1.7–4.8
aDuring the 12 months preceding the survey.
bOne or more times.
cNot available.
dSurvey did not include students from one of the state’s large school districts.
ePSpublic school, SDschool district, ISDindependent school district, USDunified school district.
SOURCE: Jo Anne Grunbaum, et al., “Table 19. Percentage of High School Students Who Actually Attempted Suicide and Whose Suicide Attempt Required
Medical Attention, by Sex—Selected U.S. Sites, Youth Risk Behavior Survey, 2003,” in “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United States, 2003,” Morbidity
and Mortality Weekly Report, vol. 53, no. SS-2, May 21, 2004, http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/SS/SS5302.pdf (accessed November 9, 2005)
Percentage of high school students who actually attempted suicide and whose suicide attempt required medical attention, by sex and
selected U.S. sites, 2003 [CONTINUED]
Attempted suicidea, b
Suicide attempt required medical attentiona
Female
Male
Total
Female
Male
Total
Site
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
TABLE 6.5
Percentage of high school students who felt sad or hopeless, who seriously considered attempting suicide, and who made a suicide plan,
by sex, race/ethnicity, and grade, 2003
Felt sad or hopelessa, b
Seriously considered attempting suicideb
Made a suicide planb
Female
Male
Total
Female
Male
Total
Female
Male
Total
Category
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Race/ethnicity
Whitec
33.3
19.6
26.2
21.2
12.0
16.5
18.6
13.9
16.2
Blackc
30.8
21.7
26.3
14.7
10.3
12.5
12.4
8.4
10.4
Hispanic
44.9
25.9
35.4
23.4
12.9
18.1
20.7
14.6
17.6
Grade
9
35.7
21.0
28.0
22.2
11.9
16.9
20.9
14.8
17.7
10
36.9
22.7
29.7
23.8
13.2
18.3
19.5
13.1
16.3
11
35.9
22.1
28.9
20.0
12.9
16.4
17.9
14.4
16.2
12
32.6
22.0
27.4
18.0
13.2
15.5
16.2
13.7
14.9
Total
35.5
21.9
28.6
21.3
12.8
16.9
18.9
14.1
16.5
aFelt so sad or hopeless almost every day for 2 weeks in a row that they stopped doing some usual activities.
bDuring the 12 months preceding the survey.
cNon-Hispanic.
SOURCE: Anne Grunbaum, et al., “Table 16. Percentage of High School Students Who Felt Sad or Hopeless, Who Seriously Considered Attempting Suicide,
and Who Made a Suicide Plan, by Sex, Race/Ethnicity, and Grade—Youth Risk Behavior Survey, 2003,” in “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United States,
2003,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, vol. 53, no. SS-2, May 21, 2004, http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/SS/SS5302.pdf (accessed November 9, 2005)
66
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
Death and Dying

privacy is not explicitly mentioned in the Constitution,
the Supreme Court has interpreted several amendments
as encompassing this right. In Roe v. Wade (410 US
113, 1973) the High Court ruled that the Fourteenth
Amendment protects the right to privacy against state
action, specifically a woman’s right to abortion. In the
landmark Karen Ann Quinlan case, the Court held that
the right to privacy included the right to refuse
unwanted medical treatment and, as a consequence,
the right to die.
The Acceptability of Euthanasia and Physician-
Assisted Suicide
In ‘‘When Is Physician Assisted Suicide or Euthanasia
Acceptable?’’ (Journal of Medical Ethics, vol. 29, no. 6,
December, 2003), S. Frileux and colleagues examined
the opinion of the general public on euthanasia and
physician-assisted suicide (PAS). Frileux and colleagues
define these terms as follows: ‘‘In physician-assisted
suicide, the physician provides the patient with the
means to end his or her own life. In euthanasia, the
TABLE 6.6
Percentage of high school students who felt sad or hopeless, who seriously considered attempting suicide, and who made a suicide plan,
by sex and selected U.S. sites, 2003
Seriously considered
Felt sad or hopelessa, b
attempting suicideb
Made a suicide planb
Female
Male
Total
Female
Male
Total
Female
Male
Total 
Site
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
State surveys
Alabama
31.3
23.1
27.1
17.2
11.6
14.4
15.1
8.7
11.9
Alaska
30.1
20.8
25.2
21.1
12.7
16.7
16.6
8.6
12.5
Arizona
39.3
21.1
30.4
23.0
11.8
17.6
15.4
9.5
12.6
Delaware
33.7
21.0
27.4
20.0
11.0
15.6
14.0
9.2
11.7
Florida
37.6
22.7
30.1
20.4
11.3
15.8
14.8
10.3
12.6
Georgia
35.0
22.1
28.5
19.8
13.1
16.4
14.5
11.4
13.0
Idaho
35.9
21.9
28.7
22.4
13.4
17.8
17.4
12.4
14.9
Indiana
30.3
21.0
25.5
18.9
13.3
16.0
14.0
11.2
12.6
Kentucky
36.7
23.6
30.1
21.0
14.3
17.6
14.8
13.8
14.5
Maine
31.3
18.2
24.7
21.5
12.4
17.1
17.9
11.8
15.0
Massachusetts
35.0
21.1
28.0
20.0
12.7
16.3
15.0
10.0
12.5
Michigan
36.5
24.1
30.2
21.8
14.1
18.1
15.9
12.3
14.2
Mississippi
35.0
21.7
28.7
16.1
10.4
13.5
13.3
9.3
11.6
Missouri
32.1
20.2
26.0
21.5
12.2
16.8
15.9
9.9
12.9
Montana
33.1
20.2
26.4
24.2
13.8
18.9
18.0
11.7
14.8
Nebraska
31.6
19.2
25.3
24.0
12.2
17.9
20.1
14.5
17.2
Nevada
36.4
23.7
29.9
24.2
12.2
18.1
17.6
12.7
15.1
New Hampshire
34.2
21.6
28.0
22.5
12.9
17.8
16.9
9.6
13.3
New York
34.3
21.3
27.8
19.6
9.3
14.4
14.0
7.8
10.9
North Carolina
38.4
22.7
30.6
23.0
13.2
18.1
c
c
c
North Dakota
27.3
14.8
20.8
17.6
9.8
13.6
13.7
9.1
11.3
Ohio
37.4
23.9
30.6
21.3
15.2
18.2
16.5
11.8
14.1
Oklahoma
32.3
22.1
27.1
17.1
13.7
15.4
14.5
11.8
13.3
Rhode Island
29.4
19.4
24.3
16.5
11.9
14.1
13.2
9.3
11.2
South Dakota
31.4
18.1
24.6
21.8
15.9
18.8
18.0
12.1
15.0
Tennessee
37.4
19.6
28.3
21.6
13.6
17.5
17.7
10.6
14.1
Texasd
40.9
22.7
31.7
22.2
12.6
17.3
15.7
11.2
13.4
Utah
31.9
21.6
26.6
18.0
14.2
16.1
14.0
10.8
12.4
Vermont
29.4
18.4
23.8
c
c
c
16.7
10.6
13.6
West Virginia
41.7
22.6
31.9
24.0
12.1
17.8
19.4
10.5
14.8
Wisconsin
33.5
17.6
25.3
25.6
13.8
19.6
c
c
c
Wyoming
36.9
23.5
30.2
24.8
17.5
21.0
17.5
14.1
15.8
Median
34.2
21.4
27.9
21.5
12.7
17.3
15.8
10.7
13.3
Range
27.3–41.7
14.8–24.1
20.8–31.9
16.1–25.6
9.3–17.5
13.5–21.0
13.2–20.1
7.8–14.5
10.9–17.2
Local surveyse
Boston PS, MA
36.7
21.4
29.1
17.2
8.3
12.9
15.7
7.7
11.9
Broward County PS, FL
38.8
23.0
30.9
18.9
10.0
14.5
13.3
8.6
11.1
Chicago PS, IL
35.6
26.0
31.1
15.7
11.0
13.5
13.0
9.3
11.2
Dallas ISD, TX
40.1
20.2
30.4
22.1
8.2
15.3
17.1
6.2
11.7
DeKalb County PS, GA
34.7
22.2
28.5
18.7
8.5
13.7
12.9
8.4
10.7
Detroit PS, MI
37.5
24.8
31.4
17.7
11.0
14.6
13.1
9.5
11.4
District of Columbia PS
36.4
25.6
31.1
18.5
9.6
14.2
15.9
10.8
13.5
Los Angeles USD, CA
44.2
25.1
34.6
22.9
9.2
16.0
18.9
10.4
14.6
Memphis PS, TN
34.7
20.3
27.4
15.0
10.1
12.5
12.3
9.4
10.9
Miami-Dade County PS, FL
37.9
23.3
30.5
17.2
8.8
12.9
13.7
8.0
10.8
Milwaukee PS, WI
39.0
23.2
31.1
20.3
13.0
16.7
c
c
c
New Orleans PS, LA
32.6
18.8
25.9
12.4
10.6
11.5
9.5
7.6
8.6
New York City PS, NY
39.3
24.9
32.2
17.8
9.3
13.6
13.5
7.9
10.7
Death and Dying
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
67

physician deliberately and directly intervenes to end
the patient’s life; this is sometimes called ‘active eutha-
nasia’ to distinguish it from withholding or withdrawing
treatment needed to sustain life.’’ Their study posed the
questions: ‘‘Should a terminally ill patient be allowed to
die? Should the medical profession have the option of
helping such a patient to die?’’ The study found that
acceptability of PAS or euthanasia appeared to depend
on four factors: the level of patient suffering, the extent
to which the patient requested death, the age of the patient,
and the degree of curability of the illness. In general,
people judged euthanasia as less acceptable than PAS.
L. C. Kaldjian and colleagues conducted a study to
determine the attitudes of internists (doctors specializing
in internal medicine) towards PAS and other end-of-life
TABLE 6.6
Orange County PS, FL
37.0
18.6
27.8
20.2
10.3
15.3
15.0
10.1
12.6
Palm Beach County SD, FL
39.9
24.9
32.5
22.2
13.1
17.7
15.4
9.7
12.7
Philadelphia SD, PA
38.9
28.5
33.9
18.7
9.1
14.0
15.6
9.2
12.4
San Bernardino USD, CA
38.9
24.7
31.9
20.1
12.6
16.6
16.4
13.4
15.0
San Diego USD, CA
40.7
22.0
31.1
24.6
14.4
19.4
21.7
11.8
16.7
Median
38.3
23.2
31.1
18.7
10.0
14.3
15.0
9.3
11.7
Range
32.6–44.2
18.6–28.5
25.9–34.6
12.4–24.6
8.2–14.4
11.5–19.4
9.5–21.7
6.2–13.4
8.6–16.7
aFelt so sad or hopeless almost every day for 2 weeks in a row that they stopped doing some usual activities.
bDuring the 12 months preceding the survey.
cNot available.
dSurvey did not include students from one of the state’s large school districts.
ePSpublic school, SDschool district, ISDindependent school district, USDunified school district.
SOURCE: Jo Anne Grunbaum, et al., “Table 17. Percentage of High School Students Who Felt Sad or Hopeless, Who Seriously Considered Attempting Suicide,
and Who Made a Suicide Plan, by Sex—Selected U.S. Sites, Youth Risk Behavior Survey, 2003,” in “Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance—United States, 2003,”
Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, vol. 53, no. SS-2, May 21, 2004, http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/SS/SS5302.pdf (accessed November 9, 2005)
Percentage of high school students who felt sad or hopeless, who seriously considered attempting suicide, and who made a suicide plan,
by sex and selected U.S. sites, 2003 [CONTINUED]
Seriously considered
Felt sad or hopelessa, b
attempting suicideb
Made a suicide planb
Female
Male
Total
Female
Male
Total
Female
Male
Total 
Site
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
Percent
FIGURE 6.2
[Per 100,000 population]
1.2
1.0
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.2
0
Rate
Year
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
Annual suicide rates among persons aged 10–14 years, by
year and method, 1992–2001
SOURCE: “Figure 1. Annual Suicide Rates among Persons Aged 10–14
Years, by Year and Method—United States, 1992–2001,” in “Methods
of Suicide among Persons Aged 10–19 Years—United States,
1992–2001,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, vol. 53, no. 22,
June 11, 2004, http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/wk/mm5322.pdf
(accessed November 9, 2005)
Firearm
Suffocation
Poisoning
All others
FIGURE 6.3
0
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
8.0
9.0
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
Rate
Year
[Per 100,000 population]
Annual suicide rates among persons aged 15–19 years, by
year and method, 1992–2001
SOURCE: “Figure 2. Annual Suicide Rates among Persons Aged
15–19 Years, by Year and Method—United States, 1992–2001,” in
“Methods of Suicide among Persons Aged 10–19 Years—United States,
1992–2001,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, vol. 53, no. 22,
June 11, 2004, http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/PDF/wk/mm5322.pdf
(accessed November 9, 2005)
Firearm
Suffocation
Poisoning
All others
68
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
Death and Dying

care issues (‘‘Internists’ Attitudes toward Terminal
Sedation in End of Life Care,’’ Journal of Medical Ethics,
vol. 30, no. 5, October 2004). Most physicians in the study
(96%) agreed that it is appropriate to increase pain-reducing
medication when needed in end-of-life care. More than
three-quarters (78%) also agreed that if a terminally ill
patient has pain that cannot be managed well, terminal
sedation (TS) is appropriate. (TS means alleviating the pain
and discomfort of dying people by sedating them or by
providing medication that alleviates their
painful
or
uncomfortable symptoms but that has complete seda-
tion as a side effect. These patients are not usually
given nutrition or fluids. TS is controversial because
some feel it is tantamount to euthanasia, only slower,
while still being perfectly legal.) One-third (33%)
agreed that PAS is acceptable in some circumstances.
The results of the Kaldjian study also revealed that
those who reported more experience with terminally ill
patients were relatively more likely to support TS but not
PAS than those who reported less or no experience with
terminally ill patients. Those most likely to support both
TS and PAS were those with no experience with termin-
ally ill patients. In addition, the data showed that those
who did not attend religious services or attended less than
monthly were most likely to support both TS and PAS,
while those who attended weekly were least likely to
support both. No matter the number of terminal patients
physicians cared for in the preceding year or the fre-
quency with which they attended religious services, a
large proportion supported TS but not PAS.
Assisted Suicide Funding Restriction Act of 1997
In April 1997 President Bill Clinton signed into law
the Assisted Suicide Funding Restriction Act of 1997 (PL
105–12). The law bans federal funding of ‘‘active means
of causing death, such as by lethal injection or the provi-
sion of a lethal oral drug overdose.’’ It does not, however,
prohibit the use of federal funds for actions some
consider to be passive euthanasia—withholding or with-
drawing medical treatment or artificial nutrition and
hydration, which may eventually lead to death. Neither
does it prohibit ‘‘the use of items, goods, benefits, or
services’’ to relieve pain or discomfort, even if they
hasten death, so long as they are not intended to do so.
Patients Requesting Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia
Diane E. Meier et al studied various characteristics of
patients requesting and receiving euthanasia and PAS and
reported
the
results
in
‘‘Characteristics
of
Patients
Requesting and Receiving Physician-Assisted Death’’
(Archives of Internal Medicine, vol. 163, no. 13, July 14,
2003). The 1,902 physicians who responded to the research-
ers’ survey reported 415 recent requests for aid in dying. Of
these requests, 361 (89%) came from patients alone or in
conjunction with their families. Only forty-six requests
(11%) came from the family alone. Of the requests, 52%
were for a lethal prescription, 25% for a lethal injection, and
23% for either a prescription or an injection.
Meier and her colleagues found that the patients
requesting euthanasia or PAS were predominantly male
(61%), forty-six to seventy-five years old (56%), and of
white European descent (89%). Almost half (47%) were
college graduates and had a primary diagnosis of cancer.
A large number were experiencing severe pain (38%)
or severe discomfort other than pain (42%). Many
were
described
by
their
physicians
as
dependent
(53%), bedridden (42%), and expected to live less than
one month (28%).
MarijkeC.Jansen-vanderWeide,BregjeD.Onwuteaka-
Philipsen, and Gerrit van der Wal published a study in 2005
that revealed characteristics of patients in the Netherlands
who explicitly requested euthanasia or physician-assisted
suicide from April 2000 to December 2002. As in the Meier
study, more than half the patients requesting euthanasia and
assisted suicide (EAS) were male (54%). Most of the patients
were diagnosed with cancer (90%), a greater percentage than
in the Meier study. Although only 9% were diagnosed with
depression, 92% were ‘‘feeling bad.’’
Reasons for Assisted Suicide Requests
In an earlier study, ‘‘A National Survey of Physician
Assisted Suicide and Euthanasia in the United States’’
(New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 338, no. 17,
April 23, 1998), Meier and her colleagues surveyed
physicians across medical specialties and throughout the
country ‘‘to assess the prevalence of requests for assis-
tance with suicide or euthanasia and of compliance with
such requests.’’ The physicians were asked to describe
the reasons patients were requesting assistance to die.
TABLE 6.7
Number of suicide deaths and suicide death rates, 2002
Mechanism
Number
Rate of death
of suicide
of deaths
(per 100,000 population)
All mechanisms
31,655
11.0
Firearm
17,108
5.9
Suffocation
6,462
2.2
Poisoning
5,486
1.9
Fall
740
0.3
Cut/pierce
566
0.2
Drowning
368
0.1
Other specified, classifiable
315
0.1
Other specified, not elsewhere classified
200
0.1
Fire/flame
150
0.1
Unspecified
145
0.1
All transport
112
0.0
Motor vehicle traffic
112
0.0
SOURCE: Adapted from “Table 18. Number of Deaths, Death Rates, and Age-
Adjusted Death Rates for Injury Deaths by Mechanism and Intent of Death:
United States, 2002,” in “Deaths: Final Data for 2002,” National Vital
Statistics Reports, vol. 53, no. 5, October 12, 2004, http://www.cdc.gov/
nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr53/nvsr53_05acc.pdf (accessed March 3, 2006)
Death and Dying
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
69

The patients’ reasons, as perceived by the physicians,
were:
• Discomfort other than pain (reported by 79% of the
physicians)
• Loss of dignity (53%)
• Fear of uncontrollable symptoms (52%)
• Actual pain (50%)
• Loss of meaning in life (47%)
• Being a burden (34%)
• Dependency (30%)
Interestingly, the patients’ primary concerns were not
physical (pain and suffering), but were more likely to be
focused on loss of control, being a burden or dependent
on others, and loss of dignity.
Results of the Jansen-van der Weide, Onwuteaka-
Philipsen, and van der Wal study revealed some of the
same reasons patients requested assistance in dying. The
three most often cited reasons for requesting euthanasia or
PAS were pointless suffering (75%), deterioration or loss of
dignity (69%), and weakness or tiredness (60%). Depres-
sion was the reason most likely to have influenced a patient
to request assistance in dying, while not wanting to burden
his or her family was the second most influential factor.
PAIN NOT THE MAJOR REASON FOR REQUESTS TO
DIE. Ezekiel Emanuel, an associate professor at Harvard
Medical School and a member of the National Bioethics
Advisory Commission, suggests that, contrary to popular
belief, pain is not the major motivation behind a patient’s
request to die. In ‘‘Whose Right to Die?’’ (Atlantic
Monthly, March 1997), Emanuel reported that empirical
studies support this fact. Washington State physicians
who received requests to assist in death or to perform
euthanasia indicated that severe pain played a role in
patient decisions in only about one-third of the requests.
Emanuel’s own study of cancer patients in Boston
revealed that patients in pain were more likely to oppose
euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide.
According to Emanuel, studies in the Netherlands—
where assisted suicide and euthanasia have been prac-
ticed for many years—provide more evidence that pain is
a minor factor in requests to end one’s life. (The
Netherlands, Belgium, and the state of Oregon in the
United States are the only places in the world where
physician-assisted suicide is legal.) A 1996 update of
the Dutch government’s landmark Remmelink Report
illustrated that, while pain played some role in 32% of
the requests, there was not a single case in which pain
was the only reason for requesting assistance to die.
The findings of Emanuel’s study are remarkably
similar to those revealed by the Meier and Jansen-van
der Weide studies. Emanuel found that the major reasons
for assisted suicide and euthanasia requests ranged from
depression to hopelessness to fear of loss of dignity and
being a burden. His Boston study also showed that
depressed patients were more likely to discuss euthana-
sia, to stockpile drugs for future suicide, and to have read
the suicide manual Final Exit by the Hemlock Society.
Nurses and Patient Requests for Assisted Suicide
According to a national survey, one in five nurses
who worked in adult critical care units have hastened a
patient’s death. In this survey, ‘‘The Role of Critical Care
Nurses in Euthanasia and Assisted Suicide’’ (New
England Journal of Medicine, vol. 334, no. 21, May 23,
1996), David A. Asch, M.D., defined euthanasia and
assisted suicide as circumstances in which a person per-
forms an act with the specific intent of causing or hasten-
ing a patient’s death. In this category Dr. Asch included
intentional overdose of narcotics or other substances, or
providing explicit advice to patients about how to commit
suicide. Withholding and withdrawing life-sustaining
treatment, such as removing a mechanical ventilator,
were not included.
A total of 852 nurses responded to the survey.
Sixteen percent (129 nurses) reported that they had parti-
cipated in active euthanasia and assisted suicide at least
once in their careers. Sixty-five percent of those nurses
who participated at least once in active euthanasia or
assisted suicide had done so three or fewer times, while
5% reported doing so more than twenty times.
Based on the responses, Dr. Asch estimated that at
least 7% (fifty-eight nurses) had engaged in euthanasia or
assisted suicide at least once without a request from
either the patient or a surrogate. Eight percent (sixty-
two nurses) indicated having done so at least once
without a request from the attending physician. These
sixty-two nurses further indicated some instances in
which they practiced euthanasia or assisted suicide fol-
lowing an attending physician’s explicit request, or with
the physician’s advance knowledge.
Reasons given by the nurses for practicing euthanasia
or assisted suicide included concern about the overuse of
life-sustaining technology; a sense of responsibility for
the patient’s welfare; a desire to relieve suffering; and a
desire to overcome the perceived unresponsiveness of
physicians toward that suffering.
Some experts questioned the accuracy of the survey’s
results and considered the survey questions ambiguous.
Others claimed that the interpretation of euthanasia and
assisted suicide was questionable in cases in which the
dispensing of pain-relieving medicine resulted in death.
Many nurses expressed concern that publicizing the
results of the study would undermine the patients’ and
families’ trust in nurses who work in intensive care units.
70
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
Death and Dying

Individually and as members of professional associa-
tions, nurses continue to grapple with questions about
end-of-life care and patient requests for assisted suicide.
To assist all nurses in providing competent and compas-
sionate care for the dying, the Oncology Nursing Society
(ONS) published a position paper and practice guidelines,
‘‘The Nurse’s Responsibility to the Patient Requesting
Assisted Suicide,’’ in January 2001. (Oncology nurses
care for terminally ill patients more often than nurses in
other clinical settings.)
The ONS guidelines encourage nurses to engage in
frank discussions with patients requesting assisted sui-
cide, while actively seeking to identify and address
patients’ previously unmet needs. Although ONS guide-
lines definitively prohibit nurse involvement in assisted
suicide, the professional society also cautions nurses to
‘‘resist the inclination to abandon terminally ill patients
who request assisted suicide.’’ The guidelines advise, ‘‘In
state(s) where assisted suicide is legal, the nurse may
choose to continue to provide care or may withdraw from
the situation after transferring responsibility for care to a
nursing colleague.’’
SUPPORTERS OF ASSISTED SUICIDE
End-of-Life Choices
On July 21, 2003, the Hemlock Society officially
became End-of-Life Choices. The organization advocates
for legislation to allow Americans to live with the free-
dom of choosing a dignified death, and also informs and
educates the public about the right to die.
End-Of-Life Choices was founded as the Hemlock
Society in 1980 by Derek Humphry, a journalist from
England. In 1975 Humphry helped his wife take her own
life to end the pain and suffering caused by her terminal
bone cancer. Humphry recounted this incident in Jean’s
Way: A Love Story (New York: Harper and Row, 1978).
The book launched his career in the voluntary euthanasia
movement two years later.
In
1991
Humphry
published
Final
Exit:
The
Practicalities of Self-Deliverance and Assisted Suicide
for the Dying (Eugene, OR: The Hemlock Society). The
suicide manual, which was on the New York Times best-
seller list for eighteen weeks, gives explicit instructions
on how to commit suicide. While Humphry insisted that
his how-to book was written only to those who were
terminally ill, and not those suffering from depression,
some
physicians
were
concerned
about
how
the
book would affect those suffering from depression.
Dr. Sherwin B. Nuland felt that depression was not a
strong enough justification for teaching people how to kill
themselves, to help them do it, or to bestow blessing on it
(How We Die, New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1994). In his
opinion, no one with judgment impaired by depression is
in a position to make a critical decision about ending his or
her life.
In October 1991, while Final Exit was selling out at
bookstores, Humphry’s second wife, Ann Wickett, whom
he had divorced the year before, committed suicide. She
had been diagnosed with cancer and was reportedly
depressed.
Humphry retired from the Hemlock Society in 1992,
but his more recent activities have also sparked contro-
versy. In 1999 he recorded a video depicting a variety of
methods for committing suicide. Though it had been
available from the Hemlock Society USA for several
months, the video drew even more criticism when it aired
on public television in Oregon a number of times in 2000.
Critics asserted that this airing provided dangerous infor-
mation, particularly to people who were depressed or
mentally ill and to children.
In 2004 Humphry published The Good Euthanasia
Guide 2005: Where, What, and Who in Choices in Dying.
Much of the book describes international suicide laws.
Dr. Jack Kevorkian
Dr. Jack Kevorkian first earned the nickname
‘‘Dr. Death’’ when, as a medical resident, he would
photograph patients at the time of death to gather data
that would help him differentiate death from coma,
shock, and fainting. During his study and residency, he
suggested unconventional ideas, such as the harvesting of
organs from death row inmates. His career as a doctor
was also ‘‘checkered’’ (Kevorkian’s own word) and nota-
ble for controversy.
In the late 1980s Kevorkian retired from pathology
work and pursued an interest in the concept of physician-
assisted suicide, becoming one of its best-known and
most passionate advocates. He constructed a machine that
would allow a patient to press a red button and self-
administer a lethal dose of poisonous potassium chloride,
along with thiopental, a painkiller. With the use of this
device, Kevorkian claims to have assisted in more than
130 suicides.
The
first
patient
to
commit
suicide
with
Kevorkian’s assistance and his suicide device, called
Mercitron, was Janet Adkins. Adkins, a Hemlock
Society
member,
sought
Kevorkian’s
aid
because
she did not want to wait until she lost her cognitive
abilities to Alzheimer’s disease. In June 1990 Adkins
committed suicide in Kevorkian’s van in a public
campground.
In 1991 Kevorkian assisted in the deaths of two
Michigan women on the same day. Sherry Miller, age
forty-three, had multiple sclerosis; Marjorie Wantz, age
fifty-eight, complained of a painful pelvic disease.
Neither one was terminally ill, but court findings showed
Death and Dying
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
71

that they both suffered from depression. In 1996 Dr.
Kevorkian was tried for the assisted deaths of Miller
and Wantz under the common law that considers assisted
suicide illegal. He was acquitted.
Kevorkian continued to draw media attention with
increasingly controversial actions. In February 1998
twenty-one-year-old Roosevelt Dawson, a paralyzed uni-
versity student, became the youngest person to commit
suicide with Kevorkian’s help. In June 1998 Kevorkian
announced that he was donating kidneys from Joseph
Tushkowski, a quadriplegic whose death he had assisted.
His actions were denounced by transplant program leaders,
medical ethicists, and most of the public. The organs were
refused by all medical centers and transplant teams.
In October 1998 Kevorkian euthanized fifty-two-
year-old Thomas Youk, a man afflicted with Lou
Gehrig’s disease, at the patient’s request. Dr. Kevorkian
videotaped the death and gave the video to the CBS
television show 60 Minutes for broadcast. The death
was televised nationwide in November 1998 during
primetime and included an interview with Kevorkian.
He taunted Oakland County, Michigan, prosecutors to
file charges against him. They did, and Kevorkian was
convicted of second-degree murder in March 1999. On
April 13, 1999, the seventy-year-old retired pathologist
was sentenced to ten to twenty-five years in prison.
While in prison, Kevorkian has staged three hunger
strikes and has been subjected to force-feeding by prison
officials. As of February 2006, Kevorkian remained in
prison. He will be eligible for parole in May 2007 but
told the Daily Oakland Press in 2004 that he expects to
die in prison.
ASSISTED SUICIDE’S DETRACTORS
In general, physician-assisted suicide is seen as
being at odds with the work of doctors and nurses. In
2001 the American College of Physicians–American
Society of Internal Medicine (ACP–ASIM) released its
position on physician-assisted suicide in ‘‘Physician-
Assisted Suicide’’ (Annals of Internal Medicine, vol.
135, no. 3, August 7, 2001). The organization stated that
it does not support the legalization of physician-assisted
suicide. In addition, the organization noted that not only
would the routine practice of physician-assisted suicide
raise serious ethical concerns, it ‘‘would undermine the
patient-physician relationship and the trust necessary to
sustain it.’’
In 2005 the ACP—the largest medical specialty
society in the United States—again officially opposed
physician-assisted suicide. The organization’s formal
position statement on this topic was published within
the fifth edition of its ‘‘Ethics Manual’’ in the journal
Annals of Internal Medicine (vol. 142, no. 7, April 5,
2005) and at http://www.acponline.org/ethics/ethicman
5th.htm. The statement reads:
The College does not support legalization of physician-
assisted suicide. After much consideration, the College
concluded that making physician-assisted suicide legal
raised serious ethical, clinical, and social concerns and
that the practice might undermine patient trust and
distract from reform in end of life care. The College
was also concerned with the risks that legalization
posed to vulnerable populations, including poor per-
sons, patients with dementia, disabled persons, those
from minority groups that have experienced discrimi-
nation, those confronting costly chronic illnesses, or
very young children. One state, Oregon, has legalized
the practice of physician-assisted suicide, and its
experience is being reviewed. Other states might lega-
lize this practice, but the major emphasis of the College
and its members, including those who might lawfully
participate in the practice, must focus on ensuring that
all persons facing serious illness can count on good care
through to the end of life, with prevention or relief of
suffering, commitment to human dignity, and support
for the burdens borne by family and friends. Physicians
and patients must continue to search together for
answers to the problems posed by the difficulties of
living with serious illness before death, without violat-
ing the physician’s personal and professional values,
and without abandoning the patient to struggle alone.
In 1994 the American Nurses Association (ANA)
position statement on assisted suicide was adopted by
its board of directors. The ANA ‘‘believes that the nurse
should not participate in assisted suicide. Such an act is in
violation of the Code for Nurses with Interpretive
Statements (Code for Nurses) and the ethical traditions
of the profession. Nurses, individually and collectively,
have an obligation to provide comprehensive and com-
passionate end-of-life care which includes the promotion
of comfort and the relief of pain, and at times, foregoing
life-sustaining
treatments’’
(http://www.nursingworld.
org/readroom/position/ethics/etsuic.htm).
The American Medical Association (AMA) updated
its position statement on physician-assisted suicide in
1996. The AMA states: ‘‘Allowing physicians to partici-
pate in assisted suicide would cause more harm than
good. Physician-assisted suicide is fundamentally incom-
patible with the physician’s role as healer, would be
difficult or impossible to control, and would pose serious
societal risks’’ (http://www.ama-assn.org/ama/pub/cate
gory/8459.html).
THE BATTLE OVER LEGALIZING PHYSICIAN-
ASSISTED SUICIDE
In early 2006 Oregon was the only state with a law
allowing physician-assisted suicide and then only in
limited circumstances. Attempts to allow assisted suicide
have been defeated in California, Washington, Michigan,
Maine, and Wyoming. In addition, an assisted suicide
72
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
Death and Dying

proposal was shelved in the Hawaii legislature. In 2004
thirty-five states had explicit laws against assisted sui-
cide. Nine states had ‘‘common law’’ provisions against
assisted suicide. This means there was a precedent of
customs, usage, and court decisions that would support
prosecution of an individual assisting in a suicide. Three
states (North Carolina, Utah, and Wyoming) have abol-
ished their common law provisions and do not have
statutes criminalizing assisted suicide, but they do not
have laws allowing it either.
The Oregon Death with Dignity Act
In November 1994 Oregon voters approved Measure
16 by a vote of 51% to 49%, making Oregon the first
jurisdiction in the United States to legalize physician-
assisted suicide. Under the Oregon Death with Dignity
Act (ODDA), a mentally competent adult resident of
Oregon who is terminally ill (likely to die within six
months) may request a prescription for a lethal dose of
medication to end his or her life. (See Table 6.8 to see
what the Oregon law does and does not do.) Critics
charge that assisted death is now ‘‘state-subsidized’’
because Medicaid money may be used to pay for physician-
assisted suicide for the poor.
Between 1994 and 1997 the ODDA was kept on hold
due to legal challenges. In November 1997 Oregonians
voted to defeat a measure to repeal the 1994 law.
Immediately after this voter reaffirmation of the Death
with Dignity Act, the Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA) warned Oregon doctors that they could be arrested
or have their medical licenses revoked for prescribing
lethal doses of drugs. DEA administrator Thomas
Constantine, under pressure from some members of
Congress, stated that prescribing a drug for suicide would
be a violation of the Controlled Substances Act (PL 91–
513) because assisted suicide was not a ‘‘legitimate
medical purpose.’’ Janet Reno, who was then the U.S.
Attorney General, overruled Constantine and decided that
that portion of the Controlled Substances Act would not
apply in states that legalize assisted suicide. Those
opposed to the practice observed that Reno’s ruling was
inconsistent with other rulings, citing the government’s
opposite ruling in states that have legalized marijuana for
medical use. (Reno maintained that the prescription of
marijuana is still illegal, regardless of its medicinal
value.)
In response to the DEA decision, Congress moved
toward passage of the Pain Relief Promotion Act. This
law would prevent the use of federally controlled drugs
for the purpose of assisted suicide and euthanasia. It
would also strengthen protections for doctors who use
narcotics to manage patients’ pain, provide research
grants, and establish a program for palliative care. As of
June 2000, the House had passed the measure (HR 2260)
271 to 156. In April 2000 it was favorably reported out of
the Senate Judiciary Committee; however, a scheduled
vote was stalled in the Senate, and as of June 2006 the
Act had not been passed.
On November 6, 2001, John Ashcroft, who succeeded
Janet Reno as U.S. Attorney General, overturned Reno’s
1998 ruling that prohibited the DEA from acting against
physicians who use drugs under Oregon’s physician-
assisted suicide law. Attorney General Ashcroft said
that taking the life of terminally ill patients is not a
‘‘legitimate medical purpose’’ for federally controlled
drugs. The Oregon Medical Association and Washington
State Medical Association opposed Attorney General
Ashcroft’s ruling, and even physicians opposed to assisted
suicide expressed concern that the ruling might compro-
mise patient care and that any DEA investigation might
discourage physicians from prescribing pain medication to
patients in need.
The State of Oregon disagreed so vehemently with
Attorney
General
Ashcroft’s
interpretation
of
the
Controlled Substances Act that on November 7, 2001,
Oregon’s attorney general filed suit, claiming that
Ashcroft was acting unconstitutionally. A November 8,
2001, restraining order allowed the Death with Dignity
Act to remain in effect while the case was tried.
On April 17, 2002, U.S. District Judge Robert E.
Jones ruled in favor of the Death with Dignity Act. His
decision read, in part:
State statutes, state medical boards, and state regula-
tions control the practice of medicine. The [Controlled
Substances Act] was never intended, and the [U.S.
Department
of
Justice]
and
[Drug
Enforcement
Administration] were never authorized, to establish a
national medical practice or act as a national medical
board. To allow an attorney general—an appointed
executive whose tenure depends entirely on whatever
TABLE 6.8
Provisions of Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act
What the law does do
The Death with Dignity law allows Oregon residents to obtain medication from their
physicians after two explicit oral requests and a written request have been made.
Key facts
•
At least two doctors must concur on diagnosis, prognosis and the patient’s 
capability;
•
The patient must provide a written request to their physician witnessed by two
individuals who are not family members or primary caregivers;
•
The patient must ultimately administer the prescription him/herself.
What the law doesn’t do
•
Allow non-Oregonians to use the law;
•
Allow anyone other than the patient to make the request;
•
Allow euthanasia. The law explicitly prohibits euthanasia, which is typically
defined as having someone other than the patient administer a life-ending
medication.
SOURCE: Adapted from “Death with Dignity Primer,” Death with Dignity
National Center
Death and Dying
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
73

administration occupies the White House—to deter-
mine the legitimacy of a particular medical practice
without a specific congressional grant of such authority
would be unprecedented and extraordinary. . . . Without
doubt, there is tremendous disagreement among highly
respected medical practitioners as to whether assisted
suicide or hastened death is a legitimate medical prac-
tice, but opponents have been heard and, absent a
specific prohibitive federal statute, the Oregon voters
have made the legal, albeit controversial, decision that
such a practice is legitimate in this sovereign state.
The Justice Department appealed the ruling to
the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals. On May 26, 2004,
the court stopped Ashcroft’s attempts to override the
Oregon law. The divided three-judge panel ruled that
Ashcroft overstepped his authority when he declared
that physicians who prescribe lethal drug doses are in
violation of the 1970 federal drug law and when he
instructed the federal DEA to prosecute the physicians.
In addition, the Court noted that Ashcroft’s interpreta-
tion
of
the
Controlled
Substances
Acts
violated
Congress’s intent.
In February 2005 the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to
hear the Bush administration’s challenge of Oregon’s
physician-assisted suicide law. On January 17, 2006, the
Supreme Court let stand Oregon’s physician-assisted sui-
cide law. The High Court held that the Controlled
Substances Act ‘‘does not allow the Attorney General to
prohibit doctors from prescribing regulated drugs for use
in physician-assisted suicide under state law permitting
the procedure.’’ Writing for the majority, Justice Anthony
Kennedy stated that both Ashcroft and Attorney General
Alberto Gonzales did not have the power to override the
Oregon physician-assisted suicide law. Kennedy also
added that it should not be the attorney general who
determines what is a ‘‘legitimate medical purpose’’ for
the administration of drugs, because the job description
for the attorney general does not include making health
and medical policy.
ANALYSIS OF THE EFFECTS OF THE OREGON DEATH
WITH DIGNITY ACT. In March 1998 an Oregon woman in
her mid-eighties who had terminal breast cancer ended
her life with a lethal dose of barbiturates. Hers was the
first known death under Oregon’s assisted-suicide law.
By the end of 2004, a total of 208 people had reportedly
committed suicide with a doctor’s assistance under the
ODDA. According to the Seventh Annual Report on
Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act (Oregon Department of
Human Services, Office of Disease Prevention and
Epidemiology, March 10, 2005, http://egov.oregon.gov/
DHS/ph/pas/docs/year7.pdf), thirty-seven Oregon patients
used legal physician-assisted suicide in 2004, and forty-
two patients did so in 2003. The report also noted that
sixty prescriptions for lethal medication were written in
2004, and sixty-eight in 2003. Prescriptions for lethal
medication increased every year from 1998 to 2003. In
1998 twenty-four prescriptions were written.
The median age of people who took lethal medica-
tion in 2004 was sixty-four, and 78% percent suffered
from end-stage cancer. Physicians were asked if patients
voiced any of seven end-of-life concerns that might have
contributed to their requests for lethal medication. In
nearly all cases physicians reported that patients had
multiple concerns contributing to the request. The most
frequently cited concerns were losing autonomy (ability
to make independent choices; 87%), a decreasing ability
to participate in activities that make life enjoyable (92%),
and loss of dignity (78%).
Based on the Oregon Health Division’s annual
reports, groups in favor of the legalization of assisted
suicide conclude that the law is working as intended
and without abuse. Opponents of the law continue
to charge that the law discriminates against the elderly
and seriously ill and express concern about reporting
requirements.
The
Oregon
Health
Division
admits,
‘‘Underreporting cannot be assessed, and noncompliance
is difficult to assess because of the possible repercussions
for
noncompliant
physicians
reporting
data
to
the
division.’’
OREGON
PHYSICIANS’,
NURSES’,
AND
SOCIAL
WORKERS’ ATTITUDES TOWARD THE ODDA. Bioethicists,
physicians, legislators, and patient advocacy groups have
watched with interest to learn whether the attitudes and
practices of Oregon physicians and other health care
practitioners would change in response to the passage of
the Death with Dignity Act. In early 1999 researchers
mailed questionnaires to 3,981 Oregon physicians to find
out about their experiences with the Act. The responses
of the 2,641 physicians who returned the survey by
August 1999 were reported by Linda Ganzini, M.D.,
et al in ‘‘Oregon Physicians’ Attitudes about and
Experiences with End-of-Life Care since Passage of the
Oregon Death with Dignity Act’’ (Journal of the
American Medical Association, vol. 285, no. 18, May 9,
2001).
Ganzini and her colleagues found that 51% of
responding physicians supported the Act, 32% opposed
it, and 17% neither supported nor opposed it. Four out of
five respondents said their attitude about the law was
unchanged since it passed; however, among those whose
feelings had changed, nearly twice as many supported the
Act as opposed it. Thirty percent considered prescribing
lethal medication under the Act immoral or unethical,
and 46% were unwilling to prescribe lethal medication.
Despite their reluctance to assist patients to die, more
than half of the respondents (53%) reported that if term-
inally ill, they would consider seeking physician assis-
tance to end their own lives.
74
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
Death and Dying

The researchers found that more than three-quarters
of physicians who had cared for a terminally ill patient
in the prior year had sought to improve their knowledge
of depression, their ability to recognize and treat the
illness, as well as prescribing pain medication. Nearly
all respondents (91%) indicated some degree of comfort
discussing the Act with patients and 36% said patients
had asked them whether they would be willing to
prescribe lethal medication. Nearly 60% of physicians
who were not morally opposed to prescribing lethal
medication expressed concerns about adhering to fed-
eral DEA law and feared public scrutiny and hospital
sanction.
In 2001 Lois L. Miller, along with Ganzini and
colleagues (see previous paragraphs) researched the atti-
tudes of Oregon hospice nurses and social workers to
legalized assisted suicide (Miller et al, ‘‘Attitudes and
Experiences of Oregon Hospice Nurses and Social
Workers
Regarding
Assisted
Suicide,’’
Palliative
Medicine, vol. 18, no. 8, 2004). They found that 48% of
the 306 hospice nurses who responded to the survey and
72% of the eighty-five social workers who responded
supported the ODDA.
Miller noted that results showed a much higher per-
centage of social workers (78%) supported the ODDA
than did hospice nurses (48%). The researchers suggested
that this dissimilarity reflects different emphases in the
nurses and social workers professional organizations’
codes of ethics and position statements on assisted sui-
cide. The American Nurses Association’s position state-
ment emphasizes the patient, while that of the U.S.
National Association of Social Workers views client
self-determination as a primary guiding principle. Table
6.9 summarizes the differences in the attitudes toward the
ODDA among Oregon physicians, nurses, and social
workers.
EUTHANASIA AND PHYSICIAN-ASSISTED
SUICIDE IN EUROPE
The Netherlands
Euthanasia became legal in the Netherlands on April
10, 2001. Prior to that date, active euthanasia was a
criminal offense under Article 293 of the Dutch Penal
Code, which read, ‘‘He who takes the life of another
person on this person’s explicit and serious request will
be punished with imprisonment of up to twelve years or a
fine of the fifth category.’’ At the same time, however,
Section 40 of the same penal code stated that an indivi-
dual was not punishable if he or she was driven by ‘‘an
irresistible force’’ (legally known as force majeure) to put
another person’s welfare above the law. This might
include a circumstance in which a physician is confronted
with the conflict between the legal duty of not taking a
life and the humane duty to end a patient’s intolerable
suffering.
ORIGIN OF OPEN PRACTICE. In 1971 Dr. Geertruida
Postma granted an elderly nursing home patient’s request
to die by injecting the patient with morphine and ending
her life. The patient was her seventy-eight-year-old
mother, who was partially paralyzed and was tied to a
chair to keep her from falling. Dr. Postma was found
guilty of murder, but her penalty consisted of a one-week
suspended jail sentence and one-year probation. This
light sentence encouraged other physicians to come
forward, admitting they had also assisted in patients’
suicides.
Two
years
later
the
Royal
Dutch
Medical
Association announced that, should a physician assist in
the death of a terminally ill patient, it was up to the court
to decide if the physician’s action could be justified by
‘‘a
conflict
of
duties.’’
In
Alkmaar,
Netherlands,
Dr. Schoonheim helped Marie Barendregt to die in
1982, using a lethal injection. The ninety-five-year-old,
severely disabled Barendregt had initially signed an
advance directive refusing artificial (life-prolonging)
treatment. Schoonheim assisted in Barendregt’s death
with the knowledge of the patient’s son and after con-
sultation with two independent physicians. In 1984 the
Dutch
Supreme
Court,
ruling
on
this
well-known
Alkmaar case (the court case is referred to by the name
of the city where the trial took place), found Schoonheim
not guilty of murder.
Since then, until euthanasia was legalized, each
euthanasia case brought under prosecution was judged
on its individual circumstances. The force majeure
defense
ensured
acquittal,
while
compliance
with
certain guidelines for performing euthanasia laid down
by the Royal Dutch Medical Association and the
Dutch
courts
in
1984
protected
physicians
from
prosecution.
TABLE 6.9
Proportion of Oregon physicians, nurses, and social workers in
support of and opposition to the Oregon Death with Dignity Act,
1999 and 2001
1999 survey
2001 survey
Physicians
Nurses
Social workers
(percent)
(percent)
(percent)
Support ODDA*
51
48
72
Oppose ODDA*
32
36
13
Neutral on ODDA*
17
16
15
More supportive since 1994
13
16
24
More opposed since 1994
7
9
5
*ODDA is Oregon Death with Dignity Act.
SOURCE: Lois L. Miller, et al., “Table 3. Proportion of Physicians, Nurses,
Social Workers in Support of and Opposition to ODDA,” in “Attitudes and
Experiences of Oregon Hospice Nurses and Social Workers Regarding
Assisted Suicide,” Palliative Medicine, vol. 18, no. 8, 2004
Death and Dying
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
75

On April 10, 2001, the Dutch Parliament voted forty-
six to twenty-eight to legalize physician-assisted suicide
by passing the Termination of Life on Request and
Assisted Suicide (Review Procedures) Act. Arguments
in favor of the bill included public approval ratings of
90%. In May 2001 the results of a Dutch public opinion
poll revealed that nearly half of respondents favored
making lethal drugs available to older adults who no
longer wanted to live.
MONITORING
OF
EUTHANASIA
AND
PHYSICIAN-
ASSISTED SUICIDE. Euthanasia and physician-assisted sui-
cide have been monitored in the Netherlands since 1994,
with the first review procedure given approval by the
Dutch government in 1991. Although euthanasia and
PAS were not yet legal in that country, physicians were
required to report cases and would not be prosecuted if
they met the requirements for prudent practice that had
been developed. The substantive requirements asserted
that ‘‘the patient’s request must be voluntary and well
considered’’; ‘‘the patient’s condition must be unbearable
and hopeless’’; ‘‘no acceptable alternatives for treatment
are available’’; and ‘‘the method is medically and techni-
cally appropriate.’’ The procedural requirements asserted
that ‘‘another doctor is consulted before proceeding’’ and
‘‘the case is reported as an unnatural death’’ (Bregje D.
Onwuteaka-Philipsen et al, ‘‘Dutch Requirements for
Prudent Practice in Euthanasia and Physician Assisted
Suicide,’’
in
‘‘Dutch
Experience
of
Monitoring
Euthanasia,’’ British Medical Journal, vol. 331, no.
7518, September 24, 2005). The procedure was evaluated
in 1996, and a new system was introduced in 1998, but
euthanasia and PAS remained illegal.
The Termination of Life on Request and Assisted
Suicide (Review Procedures) Act was passed in 2001
and enacted in 2002. Along with legalizing euthanasia
and PAS, this law established a revised review procedure
(as suggested in its name). Throughout the review
changes, the requirements for prudent practice did not
change and were the main focus of review. The purpose
of the review process was to have physicians report on
euthanasia and PAS, and to follow prudent practice.
Success of the review process depends on whether
physicians report euthanasia and PAS. Onwuteaka-
Philipsen and colleagues reported that cases increased
from 480 in 1990 (before the review procedure) to 1460
in 1995 and to 2216 in 1999. The numbers decreased
during 2001 to 2003 but rose in 2004. The researchers
also compared the reported cases with the total number of
cases, which they determined by large-scale anonymous
survey research of Dutch physicians in 1990, 1995, and
2001. The researchers determined that the notification
rate increased from 18% in 1990 to 54% in 2001. Thus,
the review process appears to have been successful in
increasing the reporting of euthanasia and PAS. Research
is ongoing to determine whether the decrease in reported
cases since 1999 is due to a decrease in reporting or to a
decrease in the occurrence of euthanasia and PAS.
Euthanasia in Belgium
The Belgian Act on Euthanasia passed in 2002 after
the Netherlands law, making Belgium the second country
to legalize euthanasia. The law applies to competent
adults who have an incurable illness causing unbearable,
constant suffering and patients in a persistent vegetative
state who made their wishes known within the prior five
years in front of two witnesses. It allows someone to
terminate the life of another at their ‘‘voluntary, well-
considered, and repeated’’ request, but does not allow
PAS. All acts of euthanasia must be reported.
Switzerland Allows Assisted Suicide but
Not Euthanasia
Euthanasia is not legal in Switzerland, but the coun-
try allows suicide assisted by physicians or people with
no medical training. Suicide and assisted suicide has been
legal in Switzerland since 1937. The Swiss criminal code
states that suicide may be assisted for altruistic reasons,
but that assisted suicide is a crime if motivated for finan-
cial gain or for what it deems ‘‘negative’’ reasons.
Although legal, assisted suicide is not considered an
appropriate part of medical practice by the Swiss
Academy of Medical Sciences, so physicians do not
assist in suicides of the terminally ill. Members of
EXIT (the Swiss Society for Humane Dying) are allowed
to help terminally ill Swiss residents commit suicide in
their homes. In January 2006 the Vaud University
Hospital Center in Lausanne began allowing EXIT to
help patients already admitted to the hospital and who
could no longer go home to take their own lives.
Great Britain Considers Euthanasia and Physician-
Assisted Suicide
In November 2005 a bill was introduced in the House
of Lords that would allow both assisted suicide and eutha-
nasia. It sets requirements for either procedure, including
assessment by a physician that the adult patient is likely to
die within a few months, is competent to make a request to
die, and is suffering unbearably. The patient must sign a
declaration of intent to choose death. If the declaration is
not revoked by the patient within fourteen days, then the
patient can receive the means to take his or her own life.
76
Suicide, Euthanasia, and Physician-Assisted Suicide
Death and Dying

CHAPTER 7
ADVANCE DIRECTIVES
The movement toward greater patient participation in
health care that began in the 1960s and 1970s focused
increasing attention on the desire for control over nearly
all aspects of medical care, including critical care.
Dramatic medical and technological advances further
underscored the importance of planning ahead for end-
of-life care. Baby boomers (the generation of people born
between 1946 and 1964), on the threshold of aging and
faced with caring for elderly parents, have become
increasingly aware of the need to make provisions for
their own future medical treatment. Some hope that
executing advance directives will help protect their right
to self-determination (the right to make one’s own med-
ical decisions, including the right to accept or refuse
treatments).
A BRIEF HISTORY OF ADVANCE DIRECTIVES
Advance directive is the general term that refers to a
person’s request (oral and/or written) concerning health
care, should he or she become incompetent. There are
two main documents in an advance directive: a living
will and a durable power of attorney for health care.
Many states have special forms or specific procedures
for creating an advance directive. Some people think it is
sufficient to tell a loved one or a physician what they
desire. But the National Health Lawyers Association
stresses that although courts have enforced oral instruc-
tions, and physicians often consider the information that
family members offer about a patient’s requests, the
wishes of the terminally ill are more likely to be honored
if they are written down. In 1967 the Euthanasia Society
of America and attorney Luis Kutner, cofounder of
Amnesty International, devised the first living will (later
called an advance directive).
California was the first state to recognize the legality
of living wills (1976) and the durable power of attorney
for health care (1984). The California Natural Death Act
of 1976 states that to preserve ‘‘dignity and privacy . . .
any adult person may execute a directive directing the
withholding or withdrawal of life-sustaining procedures
in a terminal condition.’’
All fifty states and the District of Columbia passed
laws recognizing the use of living wills and durable
power of attorney for health care, although the provisions
of these laws vary from state to state. As of January 2004,
forty-six states and the District of Columbia had laws
authorizing both living wills and the appointment of a
health care proxy or agent. Alaska’s law permits living
wills only; even if a patient has a health care agent,
that agent is not permitted to order the termination
of
life-sustaining
treatment.
While
Massachusetts,
Michigan, and New York laws only authorize the
appointment of a health care agent, their laws do permit
the inclusion of specific instructions about medical care
at the end of life within the appointment of the agent.
(See Figure 7.1.)
LIVING WILLS
As mentioned previously, a living will is one part of
an advance directive. It is a document that outlines a
patient’s preferences about end-of-life medical treatments
in the event that he or she is unable to communicate or
make his or her own decisions. Laws regulating living
wills vary from state to state. For example, thirty-one
states did not allow the withdrawal of life support from
pregnant patients in 2004. Thus, a pregnant woman’s
living will could not be honored in those states if the
living will asked for the withholding or withdrawal of life
support. (See Figure 7.2.)
Living wills enable people to list the types of medical
treatments they want or do not want. It is therefore
important for an individual contemplating a living will
to know what these treatments involve. Some examples
of life-prolonging treatments patients should consider
Death and Dying
77

when preparing a living will include cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR), mechanical ventilation, artificial
nutrition and hydration, and kidney dialysis.
An advance directive form included in the model
Uniform Health Care Decisions Act (UHCDA) offers
several options that include treatments to prolong life.
(See Table 7.1, Part 2: Instructions for Health Care.)
This
model
law
was
approved
by
the
National
Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws
in 1993 to provide some consistency among state
advance directives and remained a model law as of
June 2006.
Another form, called ‘‘Five Wishes,’’ was developed
in Florida by a nonprofit organization called Aging with
Dignity and is now distributed nationwide. The document
probes legal and medical issues as well as spiritual and
emotional ones. It even outlines small details, such as
requests for favorite music to be played and poems to be
read, and provides space for individuals to record their
wishes for funeral arrangements. The document is rela-
tively easy to complete because it uses simplified lan-
guage rather than legal or medical jargon. As of June
2005, ‘‘Five Wishes’’ met living will or advance directive
criteria
in
thirty-seven
states
and
the
District
of
FIGURE 7.1
State laws governing living wills and appointment of health care agents, 2004
Note: The specifics of living will and health care agent legislation vary greatly from state to state. In addition, many states also have court-made law that affects residents’ rights.
SOURCE: “State Statutes Governing Living Wills and Appointment of Health Care Agents,” in End-of-Life Law Digest, The National Hospice and Palliative
Care Organization, 2004 
Jurisdictions with legislation that authorizes both living wills and the appointment of a health care agent (the District of Columbia and 46 states: Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas,
California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Minnesota, Mississippi,
Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island,
South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin and Wyoming). 
Alaska’s Power of Attorney Act precludes health care agent authority to terminate life-sustaining medical procedures. The act does provide that the health care agent may
enforce a declaration. 
States with legislation that authorizes only the appointment of a health care agent (3 states: Massachusetts, Michigan and New York). 
WA
CA
NV
ID
MT
WY
UT
CO
NM
TX
OK
KS
NE
SD
ND
MN
IA
MO
AR
LA
MS
AL
GA
FL
SC
NC
TN
KY
VA
WV
IN
IL
WI
MI
OH
PA
NY
ME
NH
MA
CT
MD
NJ
DE
VT
OR
AZ
AK
HI
RI
78
Advance Directives
Death and Dying

Columbia. It did not meet advance directive criteria in these
thirteen states: Oregon, Nevada, Utah, Texas, Oklahoma,
Kansas, Alabama, Kentucky, Indiana, Ohio, Wisconsin,
Vermont, and New Hampshire. Other forms were necessary
in those states, although the ‘‘Five Wishes’’ document can
still serve as a guide for family and physicians.
Pro-Life Alternative to Living Wills
The National Right to Life Committee (NRLC)
opposes active and passive euthanasia and offers an alter-
native to the standard living will. Called the ‘‘Will to
Live,’’ it does not consider artificial nutrition and hydra-
tion as forms of medical treatment but as basic necessities
for the preservation of life.
DURABLE POWER OF ATTORNEY
FOR HEALTH CARE
A durable power of attorney for health care, also
called a medical power of attorney, is another part of an
advance directive. It designates a health care agent or
proxy authorized to make medical treatment decisions on
behalf of a patient who can no longer make these decisions
FIGURE 7.2
State laws governing the withdrawal of life support from pregnant patients, 2004
States with living will statutes that explicitly forbid the withholding or withdrawal of life support from pregnant patients (31 states: Alabama, Alaskaa, Arkansasa, Coloradob,
Connecticut, Delaware, Georgiac, Idaho, Illinoisa, Indiana, Iowaa, Kansasa, Kentuckya, Mississippi, Missouri, Montanaa, Nebraskaa, Nevadaa, New Hampshire, North Dakota,
Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvaniaa, Rhode Islanda, South Carolina, South Dakotaa, Texas, Utah, Washington, Wisconsin and Wyoming). 
Jurisdictions whose living will statutes make no mention of pregnancy (the District of Columbia and 12 states: California, Florida, Hawaii, Louisiana, Maine, New Mexico,
North Carolina, Oregon, Tennessee, Vermont, Virginia and West Virginia). 
States with living will statutes that permit the principal to choose to refuse life support if she is pregnant (4 states: Arizona, Maryland, Minnesota and New Jersey).
States without a living will statute (3 states: Massachusetts, Michigan and New York).
aLife support cannot be withheld/withdrawn if the fetus can develop to the point of live birth with continued life support.
bLife support cannot be withheld/withdrawn if the fetus is viable.
cExplicitly permits individuals to choose to have living will honored during pregnancy, but only until the point of viability.
SOURCE: “Pregnancy Restrictions in Living Will Statutes,” in End-of-Life Law Digest, The National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization, 2004
WA
CA
NV
ID
MT
WY
UT
CO
NM
33
TX
OK
KS
NE
SD
ND
MN
IA
MO
AR
LA
MS
AL
GA
FL
SC
NC
TN
KY
VA
WV
IN
IL
WI
MI
OH
PA
NY
ME
NH
MA
CT
MD
NJ
DE
VT
OR
AZ
110
AK
HI
RI
Death and Dying
Advance Directives
79

for himself or herself. (See Table 7.1, Part 1: Power of
Attorney for Health Care.) The role of this agent or proxy
begins as soon as the physician certifies that a patient is
incompetent to make his or her own decisions. The agent’s
role may or may not be limited to end-of-life care.
While a living will provides specific directions about
medical treatment, it cannot address every possible future
medical situation. Most standard living wills apply only
to limited circumstances, such as terminal illness or
permanent coma. There are, however, many medical
TABLE 7.1
Advance health-care directive
Optional Form
The following form may, but need not, be used to create an advance health-care directive. The other sections of this [Act] govern the effect of this or any other writing used to create
an advance health-care directive. An individual may complete or modify all or any part of the following form:
ADVANCE HEALTH-CARE DIRECTIVE
Explanation
You have the right to give instructions about your own health care. You also have the right to name someone else to make health-care decisions for you. This form lets you do either
or both of these things. It also lets you express your wishes regarding donation of organs and the designation of your primary physician. If you use this form, you may complete or
modify all or any part of it. You are free to use a different form.
Part 1 of this form is a power of attorney for health care. Part 1 lets you name another individual as agent to make health-care decisions for you if you become incapable of making
your own decisions or if you want someone else to make those decisions for you now even though you are still capable. You may also name an alternate agent to act for you if your first
choice is not willing, able, or reasonably available to make decisions for you. Unless related to you, your agent may not be an owner, operator, or employee of [a residential long-term
health-care institution] at which you are receiving care.
Unless the form you sign limits the authority of your agent, your agent may make all health-care decisions for you. This form has a place for you to limit the authority of your agent.
You need not limit the authority of your agent if you wish to rely on your agent for all health-care decisions that may have to be made. If you choose not to limit the authority of your
agent, your agent will have the right to:
(a) consent or refuse consent to any care, treatment, service, or procedure to maintain, diagnose, or otherwise affect a physical or mental condition;
(b) select or discharge health-care providers and institution;
(c) approve or disapprove diagnostic tests, surgical procedures, programs of medication, and orders not to resuscitate; and
(d) direct the provision, withholding, or withdrawal of artificial nutrition and hydration and all other forms of health care.
Part 2 of this form lets you give specific instructions about any aspect of your health care. Choices are provided for you to express your wishes regarding the provision, withholding,
or withdrawal of treatment to keep you alive, including the provision of artificial nutrition and hydration, as well as the provision of pain relief. Space is also provided for you to add to the
choices you have made or for you to write out any additional wishes.
Part 3 of this form lets you express an intention to donate your bodily organs and tissues following your death.
Part 4 of this form lets you designate a physician to have primary responsibility for your health care.
After completing this form, sign and date the form at the end. It is recommended but not required that you request two other individuals to sign as witnesses. Give a copy of the
signed and completed form to your physician, to any other health-care providers you may have, to any health-care institution at which you are receiving care, and to any health-care
agents you have named. You should talk to the person you have named as agent to make sure that he or she understands your wishes and is willing to take the responsibility.
You have the right to revoke this advance health-care directive or replace this form at any time.
* * * * * * * * *
PART 1
POWER OF ATTORNEY FOR HEALTH CARE
1. DESIGNATION OF AGENT: I designate the following individual as my agent to make health-care decisions for me:
(name of individual you choose as agent)
(address)
(city)
(state)
(zip code)
(home phone)
(work phone)
OPTIONAL: If I revoke my agent’s authority or if my agent is not willing, able, or reasonably available to make a health-care decision for me, I designate as my first alternate agent:
(name of individual you choose as first alternate agent)
(address)
(city)
(state)
(zip code)
(home phone)
(work phone)
OPTIONAL: If I revoke the authority of my agent and first alternate agent or if neither is willing, able, or reasonably available to make a health-care decision for me, I designate as my
second alternate agent:
(name of individual you choose as first alternate agent)
(address)
(city)
(state)
(zip code)
(home phone)
(work phone)
(Add additional sheets if needed.)
80
Advance Directives
Death and Dying

treatments that require decision making. Examples of
these are surgical procedures, diagnostic tests, blood
transfusion, the use of antibiotics, radiation therapy, and
chemotherapy.
A durable power of attorney for health care is gen-
erally more flexible than a living will. It allows indivi-
duals to appoint proxies (agents) who will use their
judgment to respond to unforeseen situations based on
TABLE 7.1
Advance health-care directive [CONTINUED]
3. WHEN AGENT’S AUTHORITY BECOMES EFFECTIVE: My agent’s authority becomes effective when my primary physician determines that I am unable to make my own health-care
decisions unless I mark the following box. If I mark this box [ ], my agent’s authority to make health-care decisions for me takes effect immediately.
4. AGENT’S OBLIGATION: My agent shall make health-care decisions for me in accordance with this power of attorney for health care, any instructions I give in Part 2 of this form,
and my other wishes to the extent known to my agent. To the extent my wishes are unknown, my agent shall make health-care decisions for me in accordance with what my agent 
determines to be in my best interest. In determining my best interest, my agent shall consider my personal values to the extent known to my agent. 
NOMINATION OF GUARDIAN: If a guardian of my person needs to be appointed for me by a court, I nominate the agent designated in this form. If that agent is not willing, able, or
reasonably available to act as guardian, I nominate the alternate agents whom I have named, in the order designated.
PART 2
INSTRUCTIONS FOR HEALTH CARE
If you are satisfied to allow your agent to determine what is best for you in making end-of-life decisions, you need not fill out this part of the form. If you do fill out this part of the
form, you may strike any wording you do not want.
6. END-OF-LIFE DECISIONS: I direct that my health-care providers and others involved in my care provide, withhold, or withdraw treatment in accordance with the choice I have
marked below:
[ 
] (a) Choice Not To Prolong Life
I do not want my life to be prolonged if (i) I have an incurable and irreversible condition that will result in my death within a relatively short time, (ii) I become unconscious 
and, to a reasonable degree of medical certainty, I will not regain consciousness, or (iii) the likely risks and burdens of treatment would outweigh the expected benefits, OR
[ 
] (b) Choice To Prolong Life
I want my life to be prolonged as long as possible within the limits of generally accepted health-care standards.
7. ARTIFICIAL NUTRITION AND HYDRATION: Artificial nutrition and hydration must be provided, withheld, or withdrawn in accordance with the choice I have made in paragraph 
(6) unless I mark the following box. If I mark this box [ 
], artificial nutrition and hydration must be provided regardless of my condition and regardless of the choice I have made in 
paragraph (6).
8. RELIEF FROM PAIN: Except as I state in the following space, I direct that treatment for alleviation of pain or discomfort be provided at all times, even if it hastens my death:
9. OTHER WISHES: (If you do not agree with any of the optional choices above and wish to write your own, or if you wish to add to the instructions you have given above, you may
do so here.) I direct that:
(Add additional sheets if needed.)
PART 3
DONATION OF ORGANS AT DEATH (OPTIONAL)
10. Upon my death (mark applicable box)
[ 
] (a) I give any needed organs, tissues, or parts, OR
[ 
] (b) I give the following organs, tissues, or parts only
[ 
] (c) My gift is for the following purposes (strike any of the following you do not want)
(i) Transplant
(ii) Therapy 
(iii) Research 
(iv) Education
2. AGENT’S AUTHORITY: My agent is authorized to make all health-care decisions for me, including decisions to provide, withhold, or withdraw artificial nutrition and hydration and
other forms of health care to keep me alive, except as I state here:
Death and Dying
Advance Directives
81

their knowledge of the patient and the patient’s values
and beliefs. Because there is no uniform advance direc-
tive statute nationally, the rights of health care agents
vary across states. Limits on agent’s powers in each state
and the District of Columbia as of September 1, 2004, are
shown in Table 7.2.
In the Absence of Durable Power of Attorney
for Health Care
Physicians usually involve family members in med-
ical decisions when the patient has not designated a
health care proxy in advance. Many states have family
consent or surrogate consent laws for this purpose. (See
Figure 7.3.) Some have laws that designate the order in
which family members may assume the role of surrogates
or decision makers. For example, the spouse may be the
prime surrogate, followed by an adult child, then the
patient’s parent, etc.
ADDITIONAL INSTRUCTIONS IN
ADVANCE DIRECTIVES
Artificial Nutrition and Hydration
Some living wills contain a provision for the with-
drawal of nutrition and hydration. (See Table 7.1, Part 2:
Instructions for Health Care.) Artificial nutrition and
TABLE 7.1
Advance health-care directive [CONTINUED]
PART 4
PRIMARY PHYSICIAN (OPTIONAL)
11. I designate the following physician as my primary physician:
(name of physician)
(address)
(city)
(state)
(zip code)
(phone)
OPTIONAL: If the physician I have designated above is not willing, able, or reasonably available to act as my primary physician, I designate the following physician as my primary
physician:
(name of physician)
(address)
(city)
(state)
(zip code)
(phone)
* * * * * * * * * *
EFFECT OF COPY: A copy of this form has the same effect as the original. 
12. SIGNATURES: Sign and date the form here:
(date)
(sign your name)
(address)
(print name)
(city)
(state)
Optional SIGNATURES OF WITNESSES:
(First witness)
(Second witness)
(print name)
(print name)
(address)
(address)
(city)
(state)
(city)
(state)
(signature of witness)
(signature of witness)
(date)
(date)
SOURCE: “Advance Health-Care Directive,” in Patient Self-Determination Act: Providers Offer Information on Advance Directives but Effectiveness Uncertain, 
U.S. General Accounting Office, August 1995, http://www.gao.gov/archive/1995/he95135.pdf (accessed November 7, 2005)
82
Advance Directives
Death and Dying

Death and Dying
Advance Directives
83

84
Advance Directives
Death and Dying

Death and Dying
Advance Directives
85

86
Advance Directives
Death and Dying

Death and Dying
Advance Directives
87

88
Advance Directives
Death and Dying

Death and Dying
Advance Directives
89

90
Advance Directives
Death and Dying

Death and Dying
Advance Directives
91

92
Advance Directives
Death and Dying

hydration are legally considered medical treatments and
may, therefore, be refused. But this form of treatment
remains controversial in the right-to-die issue because
food and drink are the most basic forms of life sustenance
yet they are not usually needed by dying persons and may
make them less comfortable. The unresolved problem is
mirrored in the fact that not all states’ advance directive
statutes (laws) address this issue. (See Figure 7.4 and
Figure 7.5.)
Relief from Pain
Some living wills also enable an individual to give
instructions about the management of pain. While a
number of studies have shown that pain is not the
primary motivation for assisted suicide requests, many
people have seen family and friends suffer painful
deaths, and they fear the same fate. Experts advise
that
advance
directives
should
expressly
indicate
desires for pain control and comfort care, even when
individuals
have
chosen
to
forego
life-sustaining
treatments.
In the past, patient pain may not have been ade-
quately treated because medical professionals lacked
training or feared overprescribing pain medications. A
variety of legislative and education initiatives by states
and medical professional societies have dramatically
improved pain management. The Federation of State
Medical
Boards
has
developed
guidelines
to
help
FIGURE 7.3
State laws governing surrogate decision-making for terminally ill patients in the absence of advance directives, 2004
Jurisdictions with statutes authorizing surrogate decision-making in the absence of advance directives (the District of Columbia and 29 states: Alabama, Arizona, Arkansas,
Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Hawaii, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Mississippi, Montana, Nevada, New Mexico, North Carolina,
Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Carolina, Texas, Utah, Virginia, West Virginia and Wyoming). 
States without statutes authorizing surrogate decision making (21 states: Alaska, California, Georgia, Idaho, Kansas, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri,
Nebraska, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Yorka, North Dakota, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Tennessee, Vermont, Washington and Wisconsinb). 
aNew York does authorize surrogate decision-making for do-not-resuscitate order decisions.
bWisconsin does authorize surrogate decision-making for the sole purpose of admittance of a terminally ill incapacitated patient to hospice.
SOURCE: “State Statutes Governing Surrogate Decision-Making,” in End-of-Life Law Digest, The National Hospice and Palliative Care Organization, 2004
WA
CA
NV
ID
MT
WY
UT
CO
NM
TX
OK
KS
NE
SD
ND
MN
IA
MO
AR
LA
MS
AL
GA
FL
SC
NC
TN
KY
VA
WV
IN
IL
WI
MI
OH
PA
NY
ME
NH
MA
CT
MD
NJ
DE
VT
OR
AZ
AK
HI
RI
Death and Dying
Advance Directives
93

physicians use medication to manage pain safely and
effectively. Special instruction in pain management for
patients with life-limiting illnesses is now offered in
many medical and nursing schools.
Further pressure to improve pain management can
come from patients and their families. In December
2000 a California jury held a physician liable for
prescribing too little pain medication for a patient
dying from lung cancer. The children of eighty-five-
year-old William Bergman sued his physician for
elder abuse on the grounds that the doctor failed to
prescribe strong enough medication to control their
father’s pain before, during, and after his hospital-
ization in 1998. The jury awarded the family $1.5
million, but to comply with the state limit on such
awards, the sum was reduced to $250,000. Advocates
for improved end-of-life care hoped the verdict would
remind
physicians
about
the
importance
of
pain
management.
FIGURE 7.4
State laws governing the refusal of artificial nutrition and hydration in living wills, 2004
States with living will statutes that permit individuals to refuse artificial nutrition and hydration through their living wills (42 states: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Arizonaa,
California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinoisb, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Minnesota, Mississippi, Nevada,
New Jersey, New Hampshire, New Mexico, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee,
Texas, Utah, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia, Wisconsin and Wyoming). 
States without living will statutes (3 states: Massachusetts, Michigan and New York).
Jurisdictions whose living will statutes do not explicitly address the issue of artificial nutrition and hydration (the District of Columbia and 4 states: Kansas, Montana,
Nebraska, and Vermont). 
States with living will statutes that require the provision of nutrition and hydration except in very limited circumstances (1 state: Missouric). 
aThe authority to withhold or withdraw artificial nutrition and hydration is only explicitly mentioned in the sample document, not in the text of the statute.
bArtificial nutrition and hydration cannot be withheld or withdrawn if the resulting death is due to starvation or dehydration.
cThe medical power of attorney statute in Missouri permits appointed agents to refuse artificial nutrition and hydration on behalf of the principal.
SOURCE: “Artificial Nutrition and Hydration in Living Will Statutes,” in End-of-Life Law Digest, The National Hospice and Palliative Care
Organization, 2004
WA
CA
NV
ID
MT
WY
UT
CO
NM
TX
OK
KS
NE
SD
ND
MN
IA
MO
AR
LA
MS
AL
GA
FL
SC
NC
TN
KY
VA
WV
IN
IL
WI
MI
OH
PA
NY
ME
NH
MA
CT
MD
NJ
DE
VT
OR
AZ
AK
HI
RI
94
Advance Directives
Death and Dying

COMBINED ADVANCE DIRECTIVE LAWS
Some states have separate laws that govern living
wills and durable powers of attorney for health care.
The National Conference of State Legislatures (NCSL)
and the Center to Improve Care of the Dying (CICD)
believe that rather than having separate laws for these
two documents, states should combine right-to-die laws
into a single statute. By September 2004, twenty-two
states had done just that. (See Table 7.2.) Of these states,
Alabama, Alaska, Delaware, Hawaii, Maine, Mississippi,
and New Mexico had also adopted the Uniform Health-
Care Decisions Act (UHCDA) as a model.
The UHCDA has been recommended by the NCSL
and the CICD as a model law because it is simple and
comprehensive. It contains provisions governing living
wills and durable powers of attorney, as well as limits
on an agent’s powers. The law permits instructions
regarding one’s future health care to be either written
or oral. States using the law as a model may adopt the
optional combined directive, which does not require
witnesses to the document. It further enables individuals
to express their preferences about organ donation and to
designate a primary physician. (See Table 7.1, Part 3
and Part 4.)
FIGURE 7.5
State laws governing the refusal of artificial nutrition and hydration by health care agents, 2004
States with statutes that permit health care agents to order the withholding or withdrawal of artificial nutrition and hydration (41 states: Alabama, Arizona, California,
Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri,
Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, South Dakota,
Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Virginia, Vermont, Washington, West Virginia, and Wisconsin). 
Jurisdictions whose medical power of attorney statutes do not explicitly address the issue of artificial nutrition and hydration (the District of Columbia and 9 states:
Arkansas, California, Kansas, Massachusetts, Michigan, Montana, North Dakota, Rhode Island, and Wyoming). 
Alaska’s Power of Attorney Act precludes health care agent authority to terminate life-sustaining medical procedures. The act does provide that the agent may enforce
a declaration. 
WA
CA
NV
ID
MT
WY
UT
CO
NM
TX
OK
KS
NE
SD
ND
MN
IA
MO
AR
LA
MS
AL
GA
FL
SC
NC
TN
KY
VA
WV
IN
IL
WI
MI
OH
PA
NY
ME
NH
MA
CT
MD
NJ
DE
VT
OR
AZ
AK
HI
RI
SOURCE: “Artificial Nutrition and Hydration in Statutes Authorizing Health Care Agents,” in End-of-Life Law Digest, The National Hospice and Palliative
Care Organization, 2004
Death and Dying
Advance Directives
95

Along with showing the type of health care power of
attorney and combined advance directive legislation in
each state, Table 7.2 shows other related information,
including the comity provision. If a state has a comity
provision, it has legislation specifically requiring that
another state’s living will, a health care power of attor-
ney, or both, be honored within their borders.
IMPORTANCE OF COMMUNICATION
FOR END-OF-LIFE CARE
The consideration of an advance directive should be
the start of an ongoing discussion among the individual,
family members, and the family doctor about end-of-life
health care. Discussions about one’s advance directive do
not have to be limited to treatment preferences and med-
ical circumstances. Sometimes knowing things such as
the patient’s religious beliefs and values can be important
for the proxy when speaking for the patient’s interests.
The Center for Health Law and Ethics at the University
of New Mexico has devised a values questionnaire to
help people examine their attitudes about issues related
to illness, health care, and dying. It may serve as a
valuable tool to guide discussions between the patient
and the proxy, as well as among family members.
When preparing an advance directive, it is vitally
important for the family and proxy to fully understand
the care and measures that are wanted. Even when a
patient has a living will calling for no ‘‘heroic measures,’’
if the family demands such medical intervention, it is
likely that the hospital or doctor will comply with the
family’s wishes rather than risk a lawsuit.
Highlighting the need for communication, a 1998
study of 250 terminally ill patients and their families
showed that only 66% of the families surveyed accurately
predicted the level of treatment their dying family mem-
ber would want. Researchers from the Georgetown
University Center for Clinical Bioethics separately ques-
tioned the patient and the patient’s likely surrogate about
the treatment that the patient would desire in three dif-
ferent end-of-life scenarios. One-third of the surrogates
chose differently than the patient, evenly divided between
picking too much and too little treatment.
Bernard Lo and Robert Steinbrook also highlight the
need for patient-physician communication regarding end-
of-life matters in ‘‘Resuscitating Advance Directives’’
(Archives of Internal Medicine, vol. 164, no. 14, July
26, 2004). The authors state that ‘‘Advance directives
have not fulfilled their promise of facilitating decisions
about end-of-life care for incompetent patients,’’ and
explain that legal requirements and restrictions make it
difficult for patients to complete advance directives dur-
ing visits to their doctors. They suggest that the patient’s
discussion with the physician is probably more important
to the patient’s end-of-life care than is the legal
document. Lo and Steinbrook thus conclude that the
procedures for the written advance directives should be
simplified to foster this discussion.
The National Conference of State Legislatures and
the Center to Improve Care of the Dying also recognize
that standard advance directives may not be applicable to
specific medical conditions and to medical conditions
that may evolve over time. Thus, if patients have had
end-of-life care discussions with their physicians, Lo and
Steinbrook suggest, then ‘‘physicians can identify and
correct misunderstandings about the medical situation,
options, and outcomes.’’ The NCSL and the CICD believe
that—in
addition
to
patient-physician
discussions—
patients should have access to advance directives that
are flexible enough to allow for changes in their
medical conditions and end-of-life education as was
initially intended in the Patient Self-Determination Act
of 1990.
THE PATIENT SELF-DETERMINATION ACT
In1990CongressenactedthePatientSelf-Determination
Act (PSDA) as part of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation
Act of 1990 (PL 101–508). This legislation was intended to
‘‘reinforce individuals’ constitutional right to determine their
final health care.’’
The PSDA took effect on December 1, 1991. It requires
all health care providers participating in Medicare (a
program of the federal government through which people
age sixty-five and older receive health insurance) and
Medicaid (a program run by the federal and state
governments to provide health insurance to people
younger than sixty-five years of age who cannot afford
to pay for private health insurance) to provide all
patients over age eighteen with the following written
information:
• The patient’s rights under the law to participate in
decisions about his or her medical care, including the
right to accept or refuse treatments
• The patient’s right under state law to complete
advance directives, which will be documented in his
or her medical records
• The health care provider’s policies honoring these
rights
Providers include hospitals, nursing homes, home
health care providers, hospices, and health maintenance
organizations (HMOs), but not outpatient-service provi-
ders
or
emergency
medical
personnel.
The
PSDA
requires health care providers to educate their staff and
the community about advance directives. It also prohibits
hospital personnel from discriminating against patients
based on whether they have an advance directive.
(Patients are informed that having an advance directive
is not a prerequisite to receiving medical care.)
96
Advance Directives
Death and Dying

CHAPTER 8
COURTS AND THE END OF LIFE
Traditionally, death was defined as the total cessation
of circulatory and respiratory functions. In 1968 the Ad
Hoc Committee of the Harvard Medical School defined
irreversible coma, or brain death, as a new criterion for
death. As medical technology has become increasingly
able to maintain patients who would otherwise die from
severe injuries or illnesses, the debate about defining
death, and about whether patients have the right to
choose to die, has intensified.
THE RIGHT TO PRIVACY: KAREN ANN QUINLAN
The landmark case of Karen Ann Quinlan was the
first to deal with the dilemma of withdrawing life-
sustaining treatment from a patient who was not terminally
ill but who was not really ‘‘alive.’’ The decision to
terminate life support, which was once a private matter
between the patient’s family and doctor, became an issue
to be decided by the courts. The New Jersey Supreme
Court ruling on this case became the precedent for nearly
all right-to-die cases nationwide.
In 1975 twenty-one-year-old Karen Ann Quinlan
suffered cardiopulmonary arrest after ingesting a combi-
nation of alcohol and drugs. She subsequently went into a
persistent vegetative state (PVS). Dr. Fred Plum, a neu-
rologist, described her as no longer having any cognitive
function but retaining the capacity to maintain the vege-
tative parts of neurological function. She grimaced, made
chewing movements, uttered sounds, and maintained a
normal blood pressure, but she was entirely unaware of
anyone or anything. The medical opinion was that
Quinlan had some brainstem function, but that in her case
it could not support breathing. She had been on a respira-
tor since her admission to the hospital.
Quinlan’s parents
asked that her
respirator
be
removed and that she be allowed to die. Quinlan’s doctor
refused, claiming that his patient did not meet the
Harvard Criteria for brain death. Based on the existing
medical standards and practices, a doctor could not ter-
minate a patient’s life support if that patient did not meet
the legal definitions for brain death. According to the
Harvard Criteria, Quinlan could not be declared legally
dead, and medical experts believed she would die if the
respirator were removed.
Quinlan’s father, Joseph Quinlan, went to court to
seek appointment as his daughter’s guardian (because she
was of legal age) and to gain the power to authorize ‘‘the
discontinuance of all extraordinary procedures for sus-
taining Quinlan’s vital processes.’’ The court denied his
petition to have Quinlan’s respirator turned off and also
refused to grant him guardianship over his daughter.
First and Eighth Amendments Are Irrelevant to Case
Joseph
Quinlan
subsequently
appealed
to
the
Supreme Court of New Jersey (Quinlan, 70 N.J. 10, 355
A.2d 647, 1976). He requested, as a parent, to have
Quinlan’s life support removed based on the U.S.
Constitution’s First Amendment—the right to religious
freedom. The court rejected his request. It also consid-
ered the Eighth Amendment—protection against cruel
and unusual punishment—inapplicable in Quinlan’s case,
stating that this amendment applied to protection from
excessive criminal punishment. The court considered
Quinlan’s cruel and unusual circumstances not punish-
ment inflicted by the law or state, but the result of ‘‘an
accident of fate and nature.’’
The Right to Privacy
The New Jersey Supreme Court stated, however, that
an individual’s right to privacy was most relevant to the
case. Although the U.S. Constitution does not expressly
indicate a right to privacy, U.S. Supreme Court rulings in
past cases had not only recognized this right but had
also determined that some areas of the right to privacy
are guaranteed by the Constitution. For example, the
Death and Dying
97

Supreme Court had upheld the right to privacy in
Griswold v. Connecticut (the right to marital privacy, or
the right to use contraception, 381 US 479, 1965) and in
Roe v. Wade (the right to abortion, 410 US 113, 1973).
The U.S. Supreme Court had further presumed that the
right to privacy included a patient’s right to refuse med-
ical treatment in some situations.
Based on these U.S. Supreme Court rulings, the New
Jersey Supreme Court ruled that ‘‘Karen’s right of priv-
acy may be asserted on her behalf by her guardian under
the peculiar circumstances here present,’’ and further
noted:
We have no doubt . . . that if Karen were herself mira-
culously lucid for an interval (not altering the existing
prognosis of the condition to which she would soon
return) and perceptive of her irreversible condition, she
could effectively decide upon discontinuance of the
life-support apparatus, even if it meant the prospect of
natural death.
The State’s Interest
Balanced against Quinlan’s constitutional right to
privacy was the state’s interest in preserving life. Judge
Hughes of the New Jersey Supreme Court noted that in
many cases the court had ordered medical treatment
continued because the minimal bodily invasion (usually
blood transfusion) resulted in recovery. He indicated that,
in Quinlan’s case, bodily invasion was far greater than
minimal, consisting of twenty-four-hour nursing care,
antibiotics, respirator, catheter, and feeding tube. Judge
Hughes further noted:
We think that the State’s interest . . . weakens and the
individual’s right to privacy grows as the degree of
bodily invasion increases and the prognosis dims.
Ultimately there comes a point at which the indivi-
dual’s rights overcome the State’s interest.
Prevailing Medical Standards and Practices
Quinlan’s physicians had refused to remove the
respirator because they did not want to violate the pre-
vailing medical standards and practices. Even though
Quinlan’s physicians assured the court that the possibility
of lawsuits and criminal sanctions did not influence their
decision in this specific case, the court believed that
the threat of legal ramifications strongly influenced the
existing medical standards and practices of health care
providers.
The
court
also
observed
that
life-prolongation
advances had rendered the existing medical standards
ambiguous (unclear), leaving doctors in a quandary.
Moreover, modern devices used for prolonging life, such
as respirators, had confused the issue of ‘‘ordinary’’ and
‘‘extraordinary’’ measures. Therefore, the court sug-
gested that respirators could be considered ‘‘ordinary’’
care for a curable patient, but ‘‘extraordinary’’ care for
irreversibly unconscious patients.
The court also suggested that hospitals form ethics
committees to assist physicians with difficult cases like
Quinlan’s. These committees would be similar to a multi-
judge panel exploring different solutions to an appeal.
The committees would not only diffuse professional
responsibility, but also eliminate any possibly unscrupu-
lous motives of physicians or families. The justices con-
sidered the court’s intervention on medical decisions an
infringement on the physicians’ field of competence.
Is It Homicide?
The state had promised to prosecute anyone who
terminated Quinlan’s life support because such an act
would constitute homicide. The New Jersey Supreme
Court, however, rejected this consequence because the
resulting death would be from natural causes. The court
stated:
The exercise of a constitutional right, such as we have here
found, is protected from criminal prosecution....The
constitutional protection extends to third parties whose
action is necessary to effectuate the exercise of that right.
After the Respirator Was Removed
In March 1976 the New Jersey Supreme Court ruled
that, if the hospital ethics committee agreed that Quinlan
would not recover from irreversible coma, her respirator
could be removed. Furthermore, all parties involved
would be legally immune from criminal and civil prose-
cution. However, after Quinlan’s respirator was removed,
she continued to breathe on her own and remained in a
PVS until she died of multiple infections in 1985.
Some people wondered why the Quinlans did not
request permission to discontinue Karen’s artificial nutri-
tion and hydration. In Karen Ann: The Quinlans Tell
Their Story (New York: Doubleday and Company,
1977) the Quinlans stated that they would have had moral
problems with depriving their daughter of food and
antibiotics.
SUBSTITUTED JUDGMENT
Superintendent of Belchertown State School
et al v. Joseph Saikewicz
Joseph Saikewicz was a mentally incompetent resi-
dent
of
the
Belchertown
State
School
of
the
Massachusetts Department of Mental Health. In April
1976 Saikewicz was diagnosed with acute myeloblastic
monocytic leukemia. He was sixty-seven years old but
had the mental age of about two years and eight months.
The superintendent of the mental institution petitioned
the court for a guardian ad litem (a temporary guardian
for the duration of the trial). The court-appointed
98
Courts and the End of Life
Death and Dying

guardian recommended that it would be in the patient’s
best interests that he not undergo chemotherapy.
In May 1976 the probate judge ordered nontreatment
of the disease based in part on findings of medical experts
who indicated that chemotherapy might produce remis-
sion of leukemia in 30 to 50% of the cases. If remission
occurred, it would last between two and thirteen months.
Chemotherapy, however, would make Saikewicz suffer
adverse side effects that he would not understand.
Without chemotherapy, the patient might live for several
weeks or months, but would die without the pain or
discomfort associated with chemotherapy.
In fact, Saikewicz died on September 4, 1976, from
pneumonia, a complication of the leukemia. Nevertheless,
his case was heard by the Supreme Court of Massachusetts
in order to establish a precedent on the question of sub-
stituted judgment (Superintendent of Belchertown State
School et al v. Joseph Saikewicz, Mass., 370 N.E.2d 417,
1977).
The court agreed that extraordinary measures should
not be used if the patient would not recover from the
disease. The court also ruled that a person has a right to
the preservation of his or her bodily integrity and can
refuse medical invasion. The Massachusetts Supreme
Court turned to Quinlan for support of its right of privacy
argument.
THE RIGHTS OF AN INCOMPETENT PATIENT. Once the
right to refuse treatment had been established, the court
declared that everyone, including an incompetent person,
has the right of choice:
To presume that the incompetent person must always
be subjected to what many rational and intelligent
persons may decline is to downgrade the status of the
incompetent person by placing a lesser value on his
intrinsic human worth and vitality.
Referring to Quinlan, the Saikewicz court recom-
mended that the patient not receive the treatment most
people with leukemia would choose. (Unlike some later
courts, the Quinlan court accepted the premise that a
vegetative patient would not want to remain ‘‘alive.’’)
The Saikewicz court believed that the ‘‘substituted judg-
ment’’ standard would best preserve respect for the integ-
rity and autonomy of the patient. In other words, the
decision maker—in this case, the court—would put itself
in Saikewicz’s position and make the treatment decision
the patient most likely would make were he competent.
The court believed Saikewicz would have refused
treatment.
In evaluating the role of the hospital and the guardian
in the decision-making process, the Saikewicz court
rejected the Quinlan court’s recommendation that an
ethics committee should be the source of the decision.
The court instead concluded:
We do not view the judicial resolution of this most
difficult and awesome question—whether potentially
life-prolonging treatment should be withheld from a
person incapable of making his own decision—as con-
stituting a ‘‘gratuitous encroachment’’ on the domain of
medical expertise. Rather, such questions of life and
death seem to us to require the process of detached but
passionate investigation and decision that forms the
ideal on which the judicial branch of government was
created.
The Case of John Storar
John Storar, a fifty-two-year-old mentally retarded
man with a mental age of about eighteen months, was
diagnosed with terminal cancer. His mother, Dorothy
Storar, petitioned the court to discontinue blood transfu-
sions that were delaying her son’s death, which would
probably occur within three to six months.
At the time of the hearing, Storar required two units
of blood every week or two. He found the transfusions
disagreeable and had to be given a sedative before the
procedure. He also had to be restrained during the trans-
fusions. Without the blood transfusions, however, there
would be insufficient oxygen in his blood, causing his
heart to beat faster and his respiratory rate to increase.
After transfusions, the doctor reported, Storar had more
energy and was able to resume most of his normal
activities.
The probate court granted Mrs. Storar the right to
terminate the treatments, but the order was stayed and
treatment continued pending the appeal to the New York
Appellate Division (or appellate court) (Charles S. Soper,
as Director of Newark Developmental Center et al v.
Dorothy Storar, N.Y., 420 N.E.2d 64, 1981). Storar died
before the case could be heard, rendering the decision
moot, but because the issue was considered to be of
public importance, the appellate court proceeded to hear
the case.
The appellate court agreed with the probate court that
a guardian can make medical decisions for an incompe-
tent patient. However, the parent/guardian ‘‘may not
deprive a child of life-saving treatment.’’ In this case
there were two threats to Storar’s life—the incurable
cancer and the loss of blood that could be remedied with
transfusions. Because the transfusions did not, in the eyes
of the majority opinion written by Judge Wachtler, cause
much pain, the appellate court overturned the probate
court’s ruling.
Judge Jones, dissenting from the determination,
believed the treatments did not serve Storar’s best inter-
ests. They did not relieve his pain and, in fact, caused him
additional pain. Since the blood transfusions would not
cure his cancer, they could be considered extraordinary
treatments. Finally, the judge reasoned that Storar’s
mother had cared for him for a long time and knew best
Death and Dying
Courts and the End of Life
99

how he felt, and therefore the court should respect her
decision.
COMPETENT PATIENTS’ WISHES
Satz v. Perlmutter
Not all the cases of patients seeking to terminate life
support concern incompetent people. Abe Perlmutter,
seventy-three years old, was suffering from amyotrophic
lateral sclerosis (ALS; sometimes called Lou Gehrig’s
disease). ALS is always fatal after prolonged physical
degeneration, but it does not affect mental functions.
Perlmutter’s 1978 request to have his respirator
removed was approved by the Circuit Court of Broward
County, Florida. At a bedside hearing, the court ques-
tioned whether the patient truly understood the conse-
quences of his request. Perlmutter told the judge that, if
the respirator were removed, ‘‘It can’t be worse than what
I’m going through now.’’
The state appealed the case before the Florida
District Court of Appeals (appellate court), citing the
state’s duty to preserve life and to prevent the unlawful
killing of a human being. The state also noted the hospi-
tal’s and the doctors’ fear of criminal prosecution and
civil liability. In Michael J. Satz, State Attorney for
Broward County, Florida v. Abe Perlmutter (Fla. App.,
362 So.2d, 160, 1978) the appellate court concluded that
Perlmutter’s right to refuse treatment overrode the state’s
interests, and found in Perlmutter’s favor.
THE STATE’S INTERESTS. An individual’s right to
refuse medical treatment is generally honored as long as
it is consistent with the state’s interests, which include:
• Interest in the preservation of life
• Need to protect innocent third parties
• Duty to prevent suicide
• Requirement that it help maintain the ethical integrity
of medical practice
In the Perlmutter case the Florida District Court of
Appeals found that the preservation of life is an important
goal, but not when the disease is incurable and causes the
patient to suffer. The need to protect innocent third par-
ties refers to cases in which a parent refuses treatment
and a third party suffers, such as the abandonment of a
minor child. Perlmutter’s children were all adults and
Perlmutter was not committing suicide. Were it not for
the respirator, he would be dead; therefore, disconnecting
it would not cause his death but would result in the
disease running its natural course. Finally, the court
turned to Quinlan and Saikewicz to support its finding
that there are times when medical ethics dictates that a
dying person needs comfort more than treatment. The
court concluded:
Abe Perlmutter should be allowed to make his choice to
die with dignity. . . . It is all very convenient to insist on
continuing Mr. Perlmutter’s life so that there can be no
question of foul play, no resulting civil liability and no
possible trespass on medical ethics. However, it is quite
another matter to do so at the patient’s sole expense and
against his competent will, thus inflicting never-ending
physical torture on his body until the inevitable, but
artificially suspended, moment of death. Such a course
of conduct invades the patient’s constitutional right of
privacy, removes his freedom of choice and invades his
right to self-determine.
The state again appealed the case, this time to the
Supreme Court of Florida, which, in Michael J. Satz, etc.
v. Abe Perlmutter (Fla., 379 So.2d 359, 1980), supported
the decision by the Florida District Court of Appeals.
THE SUBJECTIVE, LIMITED-OBJECTIVE,
AND PURE-OBJECTIVE TESTS
In the Matter of Claire C. Conroy
Claire Conroy was an eighty-four-year-old nursing-
home patient suffering from ‘‘serious and irreversible
mental and physical impairments with a limited life
expectancy.’’ In March 1984 her nephew (her guardian
and only living relative) petitioned the Superior Court of
Essex County, New Jersey, for removal of her nasogastric
feeding tube. Conroy’s guardian ad litem, appointed by
the court, opposed the petition. The Superior Court
approved the nephew’s request, and the guardian ad litem
appealed. Claire Conroy died with the nasogastric tube in
place while the appeal was pending. Nonetheless, the
appellate court chose to hear the case (In the Matter of
Claire C. Conroy, 486 A.2d 1209, [N.J. 1985]). The court
reasoned that this was an important case and that its
ruling could influence future cases with comparable
circumstances.
Conroy suffered from heart disease, hypertension,
and diabetes. She also had a gangrenous leg, bedsores,
and an eye problem that required irrigation. She lacked
bowel control, could not speak, and had a limited swal-
lowing ability. In the appeals trial one medical expert
testified that Conroy, although awake, was seriously
demented. Another doctor testified that ‘‘although she
was confused and unaware, ‘she responds somehow.’’’
Both experts were not sure if the patient could feel
pain, although she had moaned when subjected to painful
stimuli. They agreed, though, that if the nasogastric tube
were removed, Conroy would die a painful death.
Conroy’s nephew testified that his aunt would never
have wanted to be maintained in this manner. She feared
doctors and had avoided them all her life. Because she
was Roman Catholic, a priest was brought in to testify. In
his judgment the removal of the tube would be ethical
and moral even though her death might be painful.
100
Courts and the End of Life
Death and Dying

The appeals court held that:
The right to terminate life-sustaining treatment based
on a guardian’s judgment was limited to incurable and
terminally ill patients who are brain dead, irreversibly
comatose, or vegetative, and who would gain no med-
ical benefit from continued treatment.
Furthermore, a guardian’s decision did not apply to
food withdrawal, which hastens death. The court consid-
ered this active euthanasia, which it did not consider
ethically permissible.
THE THREE TESTS. The court proposed three tests to
determine if Conroy’s feeding tube should have been
removed. The subjective test served to clarify what
Conroy would have decided about her tube feeding if
she were able to do so. The court listed acceptable
expressions of intent that should be considered by surro-
gates or the court—spoken expressions, living wills, dur-
able power of attorney, oral directives, prior behavior,
and religious beliefs.
If the court determines that patients in Conroy’s cir-
cumstance have not explicitly expressed their wishes, two
other ‘‘best interests’’ tests may be used: the limited-objective
and the pure-objective tests. The limited-objectivetest permits
discontinuing life-sustaining treatment if medical evidence
shows that the patient would reject treatment that would only
prolong suffering and that medication would not alleviate
pain. Under this test, the court requires the additional evidence
from thesubjective test.
The pure-objective test applies when there is no
trustworthy evidence, or any evidence at all, to help guide
a decision. The burden imposed on the patient’s life by
the treatment should outweigh whatever benefit would
result from the treatment. ‘‘Further, the recurring, una-
voidable and severe pain of the patient’s life with the
treatment should be such that the effect of administering
life-sustaining treatment would be inhumane.’’
Conroy, the court concluded in January 1985, failed
the tests. Her intentions, while perhaps clear enough to
help support a limited-objective test (she had shown
some evidence of a desire to reject treatment) were not
strong enough for the subjective test (clear expressions of
her intent). In addition, the information on her possible
pain versus benefits of remaining alive was not sufficient
for either the limited-objective test (her pain might out-
weigh her pleasure in life) or the pure-objective test (her
pain would be so great it would be inhumane to continue
treatment). Had Conroy survived the appellate court’s
decision, the court would have required her guardian to
investigate these matters further before reaching a
decision.
Judge Handler, dissenting in part, disagreed with the
majority’s decision to measure Conroy’s ‘‘best interests’’
in terms of the possible pain she could have been
experiencing. First, in many cases pain can be controlled
through medication. Second, pain levels cannot always
be determined, as was shown in Conroy’s case. Finally,
not all patients make a decision based on pain. Some fear
being dependent on others, especially when their bodily
functions deteriorate; others value personal privacy and
dignity. Bodily integrity may be more important than
simply prolonging life. Judge Handler supported reliance
on knowledgeable, responsible surrogates as opposed to
standards set in a series of tests.
CAN DOCTORS BE HELD LIABLE?
Barber v. Superior Court of the State of California
Historically, physicians have been free from prosecu-
tion for terminating life support. A precedent was set in
1983, however, when two doctors were charged with mur-
der and conspiracy to commit murder after agreeing to
requests from a patient’s family to discontinue life support
(Barber v. Superior Court of the State of California, 195
Cal.Rptr. 484 [Cal.App. 2 Dist. 1983]). The two physicians
were Drs. Neil Barber and Robert Nejdl.
Clarence Herbert suffered cardio-respiratory arrest
following surgery. He was revived and placed on a
respirator. Three days later his doctors diagnosed him
as deeply comatose. The prognosis was that he would
likely never recover. The family requested in writing that
Herbert’s respirator and other life-sustaining equipment
be removed. The doctors complied, but Herbert contin-
ued to breathe on his own. After two days the family
asked the doctors to remove the intravenous tubes that
provided nutrition and hydration. The request was
honored. From that point until his death, Mr. Herbert
received care that provided a clean and hygienic environ-
ment and allowed for preservation of his dignity.
A superior court judge ruled that because the doctors’
behavior intentionally shortened the patient’s life, they had
committed murder. The Court of Appeals, however, found
that a patient’s right to refuse treatment, and a surrogate’s
right to refuse treatment for an incompetent, superseded
any liability that could be attributed to the physicians.
In ruling that the physicians’ compliance with the
request of Herbert’s family did not constitute murder,
the Court of Appeals stated that ‘‘cessation of ‘heroic’
life support measures is not an affirmative act but rather a
withdrawal or omission of further treatment.’’ In addi-
tion, artificial nutrition and hydration also constituted a
medical treatment.
WHAT ARE THE HOSPITAL’S RIGHTS?
Patricia E. Brophy v. New England Sinai Hospital, Inc.
In 1983 Paul E. Brophy, Sr., suffered an aneurysm (a
blood-filled sac formed by dilation of a blood vessel with
Death and Dying
Courts and the End of Life
101

a weak wall, which makes the vessel more prone to burst)
that left him in a PVS. He was not brain dead, nor was he
terminal. He had been a fireman and emergency medical
technician and often expressed the opinion that he never
wanted to be kept alive artificially.
Patricia Brophy brought suit when physicians refused
to remove or clamp a gastrostomy tube (g-tube) that
supplied nutrition and hydration to her husband. The
Massachusetts
Appeals
Court
ruled
against
Mrs.
Brophy, but the Massachusetts Supreme Court allowed
substituted judgment for a comatose patient who had
previously made his intentions clear.
The Massachusetts Supreme Court, however, did
agree with the Massachusetts Appeals Court ruling that
the hospital could not be forced to withhold food and
water, which went against the hospital’s ethical beliefs.
Consequently, the Massachusetts Supreme Court ordered
New England Sinai Hospital to facilitate Brophy’s trans-
fer to another facility or to his home where his wife could
carry out his wishes (Patricia E. Brophy v. New England
Sinai Hospital, Inc., 497 N.E.2d 626, [Mass. 1986]).
VITALIST DISSENSIONS. Justices Nolan and Lynch of
the Massachusetts Supreme Court strongly disagreed
with the majority opinion to allow removal of the gastro-
stomy tube. Justice Nolan argued that food and water
were not medical treatments that could be refused. In
his view food and water are basic human needs, and by
permitting removal of the g-tube, the court gave its stamp
of approval to euthanasia and suicide.
Justice Lynch believed the Massachusetts Supreme
Court majority had ignored what he considered valid
findings by the Massachusetts Appeals Court which
found that Brophy’s wishes, as expressed in his wife’s
substituted-judgment decision of withholding food and
water, did not concern intrusive medical treatment.
Rather, Brophy’s decision, if he were competent to make
it, was to knowingly terminate his life by declining food
and water. This was suicide and the state was, therefore,
condoning suicide. Justice Lynch concluded:
This case raises for the first time in this Commonwealth
the question whether an individual has a legal right to
choose to die, and to enlist the assistance of others to
effectuate that choice on the ground that, irrespective of
the nature of available life-prolonging treatment, life in
any event is not worth living and its continuation is
intolerable.
In the Matter of Beverly Requena
Beverly Requena was a competent fifty-five-year-old
woman with ALS (Lou Gehrig’s disease). She informed
St. Clare’s/Riverside Medical Center—a Roman Catholic
hospital—that when she lost the ability to swallow, she
would refuse artificial feeding. The hospital filed a suit to
force Requena to leave the hospital, citing its policy
against withholding food or fluids from a patient.
Time was running out for Requena. She was paral-
yzed from the neck down, and unable to make sounds,
although she could form words with her lips. At the time
of the hearing, she could not eat but could suck some
nutrient liquids through a straw. Soon she would not even
be able to do that. Judge Stanton described the patient:
Requena seems to have significant pain. . . . Her body is
now almost totally useless. She is trapped within it.
Most understandably, she feels enormous frustration
and experiences a pervasive sense of helplessness and
hopelessness. Her situation is desperately sad.
The court did not question Requena’s right to refuse
nutrition, nor did the hospital question that right. That
was a right that had been upheld in many prior cases. But
reasserting its policy of refusing to participate in the
withholding or withdrawal of artificial nutrition and
hydration, the hospital offered to help transfer Requena
to another facility that was willing to fulfill her wishes.
Requena did not want to transfer to another hospital.
In the last seventeen months, she had formed a relation-
ship of trust in, and affection for, the staff. She also liked
the familiar surroundings. The court found that being
forced to leave would upset her emotionally and psycho-
logically. The hospital staff was feeling stress as well.
They were fond of Requena and did not want to see her
die a presumably painful death from dehydration.
Judge Stanton ruled that Requena could not be
removed from the hospital without her consent, and
that the hospital would have to accede to her wishes
(In the Matter of Beverly Requena, 517 A.2d 869
[N.J.Super.A.D. 1986]). He stressed the importance of
preserving the personal worth, dignity, and integrity of
the patient. The hospital may provide her information
about her prognosis and treatment options, but Requena
alone had the right to decide what was best for her.
WHAT ARE THE NURSING HOME’S RIGHTS?
In the Matter of Nancy Ellen Jobes
In 1980 twenty-four-year-old Nancy Ellen Jobes was
in a car accident. At the time, she was four-and-a-half
months pregnant. Doctors who treated her determined
that her fetus was dead. During the surgery to remove
the fetus, Jobes suffered loss of oxygen and blood flow to
the brain. Never regaining consciousness, she was moved
to the Lincoln Park Nursing Home several months later.
The nursing home provided nourishment to Jobes
through a jejunostomy tube (j-tube) inserted into the
jejunum of her small intestine. Five years later, Jobes’s
husband, John H. Jobes, asked the nursing home to stop
his wife’s artificial feeding. The nursing home refused,
citing moral considerations.
102
Courts and the End of Life
Death and Dying

The trial court appointed a guardian ad litem, who,
after reviewing the case, filed in favor of Mr. Jobes. The
nursing home moved to appoint a ‘‘life advocate’’ (a
person who would support retaining the feeding tube),
which was turned down by the trial court. The Supreme
Court of New Jersey heard the case (In the Matter of
Nancy Ellen Jobes, 529 A.2d 434 [N.J. 1987]).
DIFFERING
INTERPRETATIONS
OF
PERSISTENT
VEGETATIVE STATE. Whether Jobes was in a PVS was
hotly debated, revealing how different medical interpre-
tations of the same patient’s condition can produce dif-
ferent conclusions. After Mr. Jobes initiated the suit, his
wife was transferred to Cornell Medical Center for four
days of observation and testing. Dr. Fred Plum, a world-
renowned neurologist who had coined the term ‘‘persis-
tent vegetative state,’’ and his associate Dr. David Levy
concluded, after extensive examination and testing, that
Jobes was indeed in a PVS and would never recover.
On the other hand, Drs. Maurice Victor and Allan
Ropper testified for the nursing home. Having examined
Jobes for about one-and-a-half hours, Dr. Victor reported
that, although the patient was severely brain-damaged, he
did not believe she was in a PVS. She had responded to
his commands, such as to pick up her head or to stick out
her tongue. However, he could not back up his testimony
with any written record of his examination.
Dr. Ropper had also examined Jobes for about an
hour and a half. He testified that some of the patient’s
motions, such as lifting an arm off the bed, excluded her
from his definition of PVS. (His definition of PVS dif-
fered from Dr. Plum’s in that it excluded patients who
made reflexive responses to outside stimuli—a definition
that
would
have
also
excluded
Karen
Quinlan.)
Testimony from the nurses who had cared for Jobes over
the past years was also contradictory, with some asserting
she smiled or responded to their care and others saying
they saw no cognitive responses.
The New Jersey Supreme Court concluded that the
neurological experts, especially Drs. Plum and Levy,
‘‘offered sufficiently clear and convincing evidence to
support the trial court’s finding that Jobes is in an irre-
versibly vegetative state.’’ However, the court could find
no ‘‘clear and convincing’’ evidence that Jobes, if she
were competent, would want the j-tube removed. Jobes’s
family and friends, including her minister, had testified
that in general conversation she had mentioned that she
would not want to be kept alive with artificial life sup-
ports. The court did not accept these past remarks as clear
evidence of the patient’s intent.
With no clear and convincing evidence of Jobes’s
beliefs about artificial feeding, the New Jersey Supreme
Court turned to In re Quinlan for guidance. The court
stated:
Our review of these cases and medical authorities con-
firms our conclusion that we should continue to defer,
as we did in Quinlan, to family members’ substituted
judgments about medical treatment for irreversibly
vegetative patients who did not clearly express their
medical
preferences
while
they
were
competent.
Those decisions are best made because the family is
best able to decide what the patient would want.
THE NURSING HOME’S RESPONSIBILITY. The New
Jersey Supreme Court reversed the trial court decision
that had allowed the nursing home to refuse to participate
in the withdrawal of the feeding tube. The court noted,
‘‘Mrs. Jobes’s family had no reason to believe that they
were surrendering the right to choose among medical
alternatives when they placed her in the nursing home.’’
The court pointed out that it was not until 1985, five
years after Jobes’s admission to the Lincoln Park
Nursing Home, and only after her family requested the
removal of her feeding tube, that her family learned of
the policy. The court ordered the nursing home to comply
with the family’s request.
Justice O’Hern dissented on both issues. He claimed
that not all families may be as loving as Jobes’s. He was
concerned for other individuals whose family might not
be so caring, but who would still have the authority to
order the withdrawal of life-sustaining treatments. He
also disagreed with the order given the nursing home to
comply with the family’s request to discontinue Jobes’s
feeding. ‘‘I believe a proper balance could be obtained by
adhering to the procedure adopted [in] In re Quinlan, that
would have allowed the nonconsenting physician not to
participate in the life-terminating process.’’
CLEAR AND CONVINCING EVIDENCE
Throughout the history of right-to-die cases, there
has been considerable debate about how to determine a
patient’s wishes. How clearly must a patient have
expressed his or her wishes before becoming incompe-
tent? Does a parent or other family member best repre-
sent the patient? Are casual conversations sufficient to
reveal intentions, or must there be written instructions?
In the Matter of Philip K. Eichner, on Behalf
of Joseph C. Fox
Eighty-three-year-old Joseph Fox went into a PVS
after a hernia operation. He was a member of a Roman
Catholic religious order, the Society of Mary. The local
director of the society, Philip Eichner, filed suit, asking
for permission to have Fox’s respirator removed.
The court reasoned that ‘‘the highest burden of proof
beyond a reasonable doubt should be required when
granting the relief that may result in the patient’s death.’’
The need for high standards ‘‘forbids relief whenever the
evidence is loose, equivocal, or contradictory.’’ Fox,
however, had discussed his feelings in the context of
Death and Dying
Courts and the End of Life
103

formal religious discussions. Only two months before his
final hospitalization, he had stated he would not want his
life prolonged if his condition were hopeless. The court
argued, ‘‘These were obviously solemn pronouncements
and not casual remarks made at some social gathering,
nor can it be said that he was too young to realize or feel
the consequences of his statements’’ (In the Matter of
Philip K. Eichner, on Behalf of Joseph C. Fox v. Denis
Dillon, as District Attorney of Nassau County, N.Y., 420
N.E.2d 64, 1981).
The case of Joseph Fox was the first where the
reported
attitudes
of
an
incompetent
patient
were
accepted as ‘‘clear and convincing.’’
In the Matter of Westchester County Medical
Center, on Behalf of Mary O’Connor
Not all patients express their attitudes about the use
of life-sustaining treatments in serious religious discus-
sions as did Joseph Fox. Nonetheless, courts have
accepted evidence of ‘‘best interests’’ or ‘‘substituted
judgments’’ in allowing the termination of life-sustaining
treatments.
In 1985 Mary O’Connor had a stroke that rendered
her mentally and physically incompetent. More than two
years later she suffered a second major stroke, after
which she had additional disabilities and difficulty
swallowing. O’Connor’s two daughters moved her to a
long-term
geriatric
facility
associated
with
the
Westchester County Medical Center. During her hospital
admission, her daughters submitted a signed statement to
be
added
to
their
mother’s
medical
records.
The
document stated that O’Connor had indicated in many
conversations that ‘‘no artificial life support be started or
maintained in order to continue to sustain her life.’’
In June 1988, when Mary O’Connor’s condition dete-
riorated, she was admitted to Westchester County
Medical Center. Because she was unable to swallow,
her physician prescribed a nasogastric tube. The daugh-
ters objected to the procedure, citing their mother’s
expressed wish. The hospital petitioned the court for
permission to provide artificial feeding, without which
O’Connor would starve to death within seven to ten days.
The lower court found in favor of O’Connor’s daughters.
The hospital subsequently brought the case of the
seventy-seven-year-old woman before the Court of
Appeals of New York (In the Matter of Westchester
County Medical Center, on Behalf of Mary O’Connor,
531 N.E.2d 607 [N.Y. 1988]).
O’Connor’s physician testified that she was not in a
coma. While he anticipated that O’Connor’s awareness
might improve in the future, he believed she would never
regain the mental ability to understand complex matters.
This included the issue of her medical condition and
treatment. The physician further indicated that, if his
patient were allowed to starve to death, she would experi-
ence pain and ‘‘extreme, intense discomfort.’’
A neurologist testifying for the daughters reported
that O’Connor’s brain damage would keep her from
experiencing pain. If she did have pain in the process of
starving to death, she could be given medication.
However, the doctor admitted he could not be ‘‘medically
certain’’ because he had never had a patient die under the
same circumstances.
The New York Court of Appeals majority concluded
that, although family and friends testified that Mary
O’Connor ‘‘felt that nature should take its course and
not use artificial means’’ and that it is ‘‘monstrous’’ to
keep someone alive by ‘‘machinery,’’ these expressions
did not constitute clear and convincing evidence of her
present desire to die. Also, she had never specifically
discussed the issue of artificial nutrition and hydration.
Nor had she ever expressed her wish to refuse artificial
medical treatment should such refusal result in a painful
death.
The court further noted that O’Connor’s statements
about refusing artificial treatments had generally been
made in situations involving terminal illness, specifically
cancer—her husband had died of cancer and so did two
of her brothers, her stepmother, and a close friend. Judge
Wachtler, speaking for the Court of Appeals majority,
stressed that O’Connor was not terminally ill, was con-
scious, and could interact with others, albeit minimally.
Her main problem was that she could not eat on her own,
and her physician could help her with that. Writing for
the majority, Judge Wachtler stated:
Every person has a right to life, and no one should be
denied essential medical care unless the evidence
clearly
and
convincingly
shows
that
the
patient
intended to decline the treatment under some particular
circumstances. . . . This is a demanding standard, the
most rigorous burden of proof in civil cases. It is
appropriate here because if an error occurs it should
be made on the side of life.
THIS IS TOO RESTRICTIVE. New York Court of
Appeals’ Judge Simons differed from the majority in
his opinion of O’Connor’s condition. O’Connor’s ‘‘con-
versations’’ were actually limited to saying her name and
the words okay, all right, and yes. Neither the hospital
doctor nor the neurologist who testified for her daughters
could say for sure that she understood their questions.
The court majority mentioned the patient’s squeezing her
doctor’s hand in response to some questions, but failed to
add that she did not respond to most questions.
While it was true the patient was not terminally ill,
her severe mental and physical injuries—should nature
take its course—would result in her death. Judge Simons
believed the artificial feeding would not cure or improve
her deteriorating condition.
104
Courts and the End of Life
Death and Dying

The Court of Appeals’ Judge Wachtler had noted that
O’Connor talked about refusing artificial treatment in the
aftermath of the deaths of loved ones from cancer. He
claimed this had no bearing on her present condition,
which was not terminal. Judge Simons pointed out that
O’Connor had worked for twenty years in a hospital
emergency room and pathology laboratory. She was no
casual observer of death, and her ‘‘remarks’’ about not
wanting artificial treatment for herself carried a lot of
weight. Her expressed wishes to her daughters, who were
nurses and coworkers in the same hospital, could not be
considered ‘‘casual,’’ as the majority observed. Judge
Simons stated:
Until today, under New York law, decisions concerning
medical treatment remained the right of the patient.
Today’s opinion narrowly circumscribes our rule to a
degree that makes it all but useless. Few, if any,
patients can meet the demanding standard the majority
has adopted. . . .
The majority, disguising its action as an application of
the rule on self-determination, has made its own sub-
stituted judgment by improperly finding facts and
drawing inferences contrary to the facts found by the
courts below. Judges, the persons least qualified by
training, experience, or affinity to reject the patient’s
instructions, have overridden Mrs. O’Connor’s wishes,
negated her long-held values on life and death, and
imposed on her and her family their ideas of what her
best interests require.
THE CASE OF NANCY CRUZAN
While O’Connor set a rigorous standard of proof
for the state of New York, Cruzan was the first right-to-
die case heard by the U.S. Supreme Court. It confirmed
the legality of such strict standards for the entire country.
Cruzan, by Cruzan v. Harmon
In January 1983 twenty-five-year-old Nancy Beth
Cruzan lost control of her car. A state trooper found
her lying face-down in a ditch. She was in cardiac and
respiratory arrest. Paramedics were able to revive her,
but a neurosurgeon diagnosed ‘‘a probable cerebral
contusion compounded by significant anoxia.’’ The
final diagnosis estimated she suffered anoxia (depriva-
tion of oxygen) for twelve to fourteen minutes. At the
trial the judge stated that after six minutes of oxygen
deprivation, the brain generally suffers permanent
damage.
At the time of the U.S. Supreme Court hearing in
1990, Cruzan was able to breathe on her own but was
being nourished with a gastrostomy feeding tube. Doctors
had surgically implanted the feeding tube about a month
after
the
accident,
following
the
consent
of
her
then-husband. Medical experts diagnosed the thirty-
three-year-old patient to be in a PVS, capable of living
another thirty years. Cruzan had been a ward of the state
of Missouri since January 1986.
Cruzan’s case was first heard by a Missouri trial
court, which gave her parents, Joyce and Lester Cruzan,
Jr., the right to terminate artificial nutrition and hydra-
tion. The state and the court-appointed guardian ad litem
appealed to the Missouri Supreme Court (Nancy Beth
Cruzan, By Co-guardians, Lester L. Cruzan, Jr., and
Joyce Cruzan v. Robert Harmon, 760 S.W.2d 408
[Mo.banc 1988]). The guardian ad litem believed it was
in Cruzan’s best interests to have the artificial feeding
tube removed. However, he felt it was his duty as her
attorney to take the case to the state supreme court
because ‘‘this is a case of first impression in the state of
Missouri.’’ (A case of first impression is one without a
precedent.)
THE RIGHT TO PRIVACY. The Missouri Supreme
Court
stressed
that
the
state
Constitution
did
not
expressly provide for the right of privacy, which would
support an individual’s right to refuse medical treatment.
While the U.S. Supreme Court had recognized the right
of privacy in such cases as Roe v. Wade and Griswold v.
Connecticut, this right did not extend to the withdrawal
of food and water. In fact, the U.S. Supreme Court, in
Roe v. Wade, stressed that it ‘‘has refused to recognize an
unlimited right of this kind in the past.’’
THE STATE’S INTEREST IN LIFE. In Cruzan’s case the
Missouri
Supreme
Court
majority
confirmed
that
the state’s interest in life encompassed the sanctity of life
and the prolongation of life. The state’s interest in the
prolongation of life was especially valid in Cruzan’s case.
She was not terminally ill and, based on medical evi-
dence, would ‘‘continue a life of relatively normal dura-
tion if allowed basic sustenance.’’ Furthermore, the state
was not interested in the quality of life. The court was
mindful that its decision would apply not only to Cruzan
and feared treading a slippery slope. ‘‘Were the quality of
life at issue, persons with all manner of handicaps might
find the state seeking to terminate their lives. Instead, the
state’s interest is in life; that interest is unqualified.’’
THE GUARDIANS’ RIGHTS. The Missouri Supreme
Court ruled that Cruzan had no constitutional right to
die and that there was no clear and convincing evidence
that she would not wish to continue her vegetative exis-
tence. The majority further found that her parents, or
guardians, had no right to exercise substituted judgment
on their daughter’s behalf. The court concluded:
We find no principled legal basis which permits the co-
guardians in this case to choose the death of their ward. In
the absence of such a legal basis for that decision and in
the face of this State’s strongly stated policy in favor of
life, we choose to err on the side of life, respecting the
rights of incompetent persons who may wish to live
despite a severely diminished quality of life.
Death and Dying
Courts and the End of Life
105

The Missouri Supreme Court, therefore, reversed the
judgment of the Missouri trial court that had allowed
discontinuance of Cruzan’s artificial feeding.
THE
STATE
DOES
NOT
HAVE
AN
OVERRIDING
INTEREST. In his dissent Missouri Supreme Court Judge
Blackmar indicated that the state should not be involved
in cases such as Cruzan’s. He was not convinced that the
state had spoken better for Cruzan’s interests than did her
parents. The judge also questioned the state’s interest in
life in the context of espousing capital punishment, which
clearly establishes ‘‘the proposition that some lives are
not worth preserving.’’
Judge Blackmar did not share the majority’s opinion
that acceding to the guardians’ request would lead to the
mass euthanasia of handicapped people whose conditions
did not come close to Cruzan’s. He stressed that a court
ruling is precedent only for the facts of that specific case.
Besides, one of the very purposes of courts is to protect
incompetent people against abuse. He claimed:
The principal opinion attempts to establish absolutes,
but does so at the expense of human factors. In so
doing, it unnecessarily subjects Nancy and those close
to her to continuous torture, which no family should be
forced to endure.
‘‘ERRONEOUS
DECLARATION
OF
LAW.’’ Missouri
Supreme Court’s Judge Higgins, also dissenting, mainly
disagreed with the majority’s basic premise that the more
than fifty precedent-setting cases from sixteen other states
were based on an ‘‘erroneous declaration of law.’’ And yet,
Judge Higgins noted, all cases cited by the majority upheld
an individual’s right to refuse life-sustaining treatment,
either personally or through the substituted judgment of a
guardian. The judge could not understand the majority’s
contradiction of its own argument.
Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of Health
Cruzan’s father appealed the Missouri Supreme Court’s
decision and, in December 1989, the U.S. Supreme Court
heard arguments in the case (Nancy Beth Cruzan, by her
Parents and Co-Guardians, Lester L. Cruzan et ux v.
Director, Missouri Department of Health et al, 497 US
261, 1990). This was the first time the right-to-die issue
had been brought before the U.S. Supreme Court, which
chose not to rule on whether Cruzan’s parents could
have her feeding tube removed. Instead, it considered
whether the U.S. Constitution prohibited the state of
Missouri from requiring clear and convincing evidence
that an incompetent person desires withdrawal of life-
sustaining treatment. In a five-to-four decision the
Supreme Court held that the U.S. Constitution did not
prohibit the state of Missouri from requiring convincing
evidence that an incompetent person wants life-sustaining
treatment withdrawn.
Chief Justice William Rehnquist wrote the opinion,
with Justices White, O’Connor, Scalia, and Kennedy
joining. (Justices Brennan, Marshall, Blackmun, and
Stevens dissented.) The court majority believed that its
rigorous requirement of clear and convincing evidence
that Cruzan had refused termination of life-sustaining
treatment was justified. An erroneous decision not to
withdraw the patient’s feeding tube meant that the patient
would continue to be sustained artificially. Possible med-
ical advances or new evidence of the patient’s intent
could correct the error. An erroneous decision to termi-
nate the artificial feeding could not be corrected, because
the result of that decision—death—is irrevocable. The
chief justice concluded:
No doubt is engendered by anything in this record but
that Nancy Cruzan’s mother and father are loving and
caring parents. If the State were required by the United
States Constitution to repose a right of ‘‘substituted
judgment’’ with anyone, the Cruzans would surely qua-
lify. But we do not think the Due Process Clause
requires the State to repose judgment on these matters
with anyone but the patient herself. [The Due Process
clause of the Fourteenth Amendment provides that no
state shall ‘‘deprive any person of life, liberty, or prop-
erty, without due process of law.’’]
STATE
INTEREST
SHOULD
NOT
OUTWEIGH
THE
FREEDOM
OF
CHOICE. Justice
Brennan,
dissenting,
pointed out that the state of Missouri’s general interest
in the preservation of Cruzan’s life in no way outweighed
her freedom of choice—in this case the choice to refuse
medical treatment. ‘‘The regulation of constitutionally
protected decisions . . . must be predicated on legitimate
state concerns other than disagreement with the choice
the individual has made. . . . Otherwise, the interest in
liberty protected by the Due Process Clause would be a
nullity.’’
Justice Brennan believed the state of Missouri had
imposed an uneven burden of proof. The state would only
accept clear and convincing evidence that the patient had
made explicit statements refusing artificial nutrition and
hydration. However, it did not require any proof that she
had made specific statements desiring continuance of
such treatment. Hence, it could not be said that the state
had accurately determined Cruzan’s wishes.
Justice Brennan disagreed that it is better to err on
the side of life than death. He argued that, to the patient,
erring from either side is ‘‘irrevocable.’’ He explained:
An erroneous decision to terminate artificial nutrition
and hydration, to be sure, will lead to failure of that last
remnant of physiological life, the brain stem, and result
in complete brain death. An erroneous decision not to
terminate life support, however, robs a patient of the
very qualities protected by the right to avoid unwanted
medical treatment. His own degraded existence is
106
Courts and the End of Life
Death and Dying

perpetuated; his family’s suffering is protracted; the
memory he leaves behind becomes more and more
distorted.
STATE
USES
NANCY
CRUZAN
FOR
‘‘SYMBOLIC
EFFECT.’’ Justice Stevens, in a separate dissenting opi-
nion, believed the state of Missouri was using Cruzan for
the ‘‘symbolic effect’’ of defining life. The state sought to
equate Nancy’s physical existence with life. But Justice
Stevens pointed out that life is more than physiological
functions. In fact, life connotes a person’s experiences
that make up his or her whole history, as well as ‘‘the
practical manifestation of the human spirit.’’
Justice Stevens viewed the state’s refusal to let
Cruzan’s guardians terminate her artificial feeding as
ignoring
their
daughter’s
interests,
and
therefore,
‘‘unconscionable’’:
Insofar as Nancy Cruzan has an interest in being
remembered for how she lived rather than how she
died, the damage done to those memories by the pro-
longation of her death is irreversible. Insofar as Nancy
Cruzan has an interest in the cessation of any pain, the
continuation of her pain is irreversible. Insofar as
Nancy Cruzan has an interest in a closure to her life
consistent with her own beliefs rather than those of the
Missouri legislature, the State’s imposition of its con-
trary view is irreversible. To deny the importance of
these consequences is in effect to deny that Nancy
Cruzan has interests at all, and thereby to deny her
personhood in the name of preserving the sanctity of
her life.
CRUZAN CASE FINALLY RESOLVED. On December 14,
1990, nearly eight years after Cruzan’s car accident, a
Missouri circuit court ruled that new evidence presented
by three more friends constituted ‘‘clear and convincing’’
evidence that she would not want to continue existing in
a persistent vegetative state. The court allowed the
removal of her artificial feeding. Within two hours of
the ruling, Cruzan’s doctor removed the tube. Cruzan’s
family kept a twenty-four-hour vigil with her, until she
died on December 26, 1990. Cruzan’s family, however,
believed she had left them many years earlier.
THE TERRI SCHIAVO CASE
Like Cruzan, the case of Terri Schiavo involved a
young woman in a persistent vegetative state and the
question of whether her nutrition and hydration could
be discontinued.
In 1990 Schiavo suffered a loss of potassium in her
body due to an eating disorder. This physiological imbal-
ance caused her heart to stop beating, which deprived her
brain of oxygen and resulted in a coma. She underwent
surgery to implant a stimulator in her brain, an experi-
mental treatment. The brain stimulator implant appeared
to be a success, and the young woman appeared to be
slowly emerging from her coma.
Years later, even though Schiavo was continually
provided with appropriate stimulation to recover, she
remained in a persistent vegetative state. Her husband,
Michael Schiavo, believing that she would never recover
and saying that his wife did not want to be kept alive by
artificial means, petitioned a Florida court to remove her
feeding tube. Her parents, however, believed that she
could feel, understand, and respond. They opposed the
idea of removing the feeding tube.
In 2000 a Florida trial court determined that Schiavo
did not wish to be kept alive by artificial means based on
her clear and direct statement to that effect to her hus-
band. However, Schiavo’s parents appealed the ruling,
based on their belief that their daughter responded to their
voices and could improve with therapy. They also con-
tested the assertion that their daughter did not want to be
kept alive by artificial means. Schiavo had left no living
will to clarify her position, but under Florida’s Health
Care Advance Directives Law, a patient’s spouse is sec-
ond in line to make a decision about whether life support
should be suspended (after a court-appointed guardian),
adult children are third, and parents are fourth.
Constitutional Breach?
By October 2003 Schiavo’s parents had exhausted
their appeals; the Florida appellate courts upheld the
ruling of the trial court. At that time, a Florida judge
ruled that removal of the tube take place. However,
Schiavo’s parents requested that Florida Governor Jeb
Bush intervene. In response, the Florida legislature devel-
oped House Bill 35–E (‘‘Terri’s Law’’) and passed this
bill on October 21, 2003. The law gave Governor Bush
the authority to order Schiavo’s feeding tube reinserted,
and he did that by issuing Executive Order No. 03–201
that same day, six days after the feeding tube had been
removed.
Legal experts noted that the Florida legislature, in
passing Terri’s Law, appeared to have taken judicial
powers away from the judicial branch of the Florida
government and had given them to the executive branch.
If this were the case, then the law was unconstitutional
under Article 2, Section III, of the Florida constitution,
which states: ‘‘No person belonging to one branch shall
exercise any powers appertaining to either of the other
branches
unless
expressly
provided
herein.’’
Thus,
Michael Schiavo challenged the law’s constitutionality
in
Pinellas
County
Circuit
Court.
Governor
Bush
requested that the Pinellas County Circuit Court Judge
dismiss
Michael
Schiavo’s
lawsuit
arguing
against
Terri’s Law. On April 30, 2004, Judge Charles A. Davis
rejected the Governor’s technical challenges, denying the
Governor’s motion to dismiss. In May 2004 the law that
allowed Governor Bush to intervene in the case was ruled
unconstitutional by a Florida appeals court.
Death and Dying
Courts and the End of Life
107

Continued Appeals
Schiavo’s parents then appealed the case to the
Florida
Supreme
Court,
which
heard
the
case
in
September 2004. The High Court upheld the ruling of
the lower court, with the seven justices ruling unani-
mously and writing that Terri’s Law was ‘‘an unconstitu-
tional encroachment on the power that has been reserved
for the independent judiciary.’’ Nonetheless, Schiavo’s
parents continued their legal fight to keep her alive, and
a stay on the tube’s removal was put in place while their
appeals were pending. Shortly thereafter, in October
2004, Governor Bush asked the Florida Supreme Court
to reconsider its decision. The court refused the request.
Attorneys for the Florida governor then asked the U.S.
Supreme Court to hear the Schiavo case. The Supreme
Court rejected the request, which essentially affirmed
lower court rulings that the governor had no legal right
to intervene in the matter. In February 2005 a Florida
judge ruled that Michael Schiavo could remove his wife’s
feeding tube in March of that year. On March 18, 2005,
the tube was removed. Days later, in an unprecedented
action, the United States House and Senate approved leg-
islation, which was quickly signed by President George W.
Bush, granting Terri Schiavo’s parents the right to sue in
federal court. In effect, this legislation allowed the court to
intervene in the case and restore Terri’s feeding tube.
When Schiavo’s parents appealed to the court, however,
a federal judge refused to order the feeding tube reinserted.
They then filed an appeal with the U.S. Supreme Court.
Once again the High Court refused to hear the case.
The Effect of the Schiavo Situation
on End-of-Life Decision Making
Terri Schiavo died on April 1, 2005. Her death and the
events leading up to her death resulted in an intense debate
among Americans over end-of-life decisions and brought
new attention to the question of who should make the
decision to stop life support. By the time of Terri
Schiavo’s death, new end-of-life legislation has been intro-
duced in about ten states. Nonetheless, it was unclear how
many of these proposals were likely to become law.
The medical examiners who conducted Terri Schiavo’s
autopsy found her brain ‘‘profoundly atrophied,’’ only half
the normal size, and noted that ‘‘no amount of therapy or
treatment would have regenerated the massive loss of neu-
rons.’’ An autopsy cannot definitively establish a persistent
vegetative state, but the Schiavo findings were seen as
‘‘very consistent’’ with a PVS.
THE CONSTITUTIONALITY OF
ASSISTED SUICIDE
Washington v. Glucksberg
FOURTH AMENDMENT PROTECTION. In January 1994
four Washington State doctors, three terminally ill
patients, and the organization Compassion in Dying filed
a suit in the U.S. District Court. The plaintiffs sought to
have the Washington Revised Code 9A.36.060(1) (1994)
declared unconstitutional. This Washington law states:
‘‘A person is guilty of promoting a suicide attempt when
he knowingly causes or aids another person to attempt
suicide.’’
According to the plaintiffs, mentally competent term-
inally ill adults have the right, under the Equal Protection
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment, to a physician’s
assistance in determining the time and manner of their
death. In Compassion in Dying v. Washington (850
F. Supp. 1454, 1459, [WD Wash. 1994]), the U.S.
District Court agreed, stating that the Washington
Revised Code violated the Equal Protection Clause’s
provision that ‘‘all persons similarly situated . . . be treated
alike.’’
In its decision the District Court relied on Planned
Parenthood of Southeastern Pennsylvania v. Casey (a
reaffirmation of Roe v. Wade’s holding of the right to
abortion, 505 US 833, 1992) and Cruzan v. Director,
Missouri Department of Health (the right to refuse
unwanted life-sustaining treatment, 497 US 261, 1990).
The court found Washington’s statute against assisted
suicide unconstitutional because the law ‘‘places an
undue burden on the exercise of [that] constitutionally
protected liberty interest.’’
In 1995 a panel (three or more judges but not the full
court) of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit Court
reversed the District Court’s decision, stressing that in the
205 years of United States history, no court had ever
recognized the right to assisted suicide (Compassion in
Dying v. Washington, 49 F. 3d 586, 591, 1995). In 1996
the Ninth Circuit Court reheard the case en banc (by the
full court), reversed the panel’s decision, and affirmed
the U.S. District Court’s ruling (Compassion in Dying v.
Washington, 79 F. 3d 790, 798, 1996).
The en banc Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
Court did not mention the Equal Protection Clause viola-
tion as indicated by the District Court; however, it
referred to Casey and Cruzan, adding that the U.S.
Constitution recognizes the right to die. Quoting from
Casey, Judge Stephen Reinhardt wrote:
Like the decision of whether or not to have an abortion,
the decision how and when to die is one of ‘‘the most
intimate and personal choices a person may make in a
lifetime, . . . central to personal dignity and autonomy.’’
THE U.S. SUPREME COURT DECIDES. The state of
Washington and its attorney general appealed to the
U.S. Supreme Court (Washington et al v. Harold
Glucksberg et al, 117 S.Ct 2258, 1997). U.S. Supreme
Court Chief Justice William Rehnquist, instead of addres-
sing the plaintiffs’ initial question of whether mentally
108
Courts and the End of Life
Death and Dying

competent terminally ill adults have the right to physician-
assisted suicide, reframed the issue, focusing on ‘‘whether
Washington’s prohibition against ‘caus[ing]’ or ‘aid[ing]’
a suicide offends the Fourteenth Amendment to the United
States Constitution.’’
Chief Justice Rehnquist recalled the more than seven
hundred years of Anglo-American common-law tradition
disapproving of suicide and assisted suicide. He added
that assisted suicide is considered a crime in almost every
state, with no exceptions granted to mentally competent
terminally ill adults.
PRIOR SUBSTANTIVE DUE-PROCESS CASES. The plain-
tiffs argued that in prior substantive due-process cases,
such as Cruzan, the U.S. Supreme Court had acknowl-
edged the principle of self-autonomy by ruling ‘‘that
competent dying persons have the right to direct the
removal of life-sustaining medical treatment and thus
hasten death.’’ Chief Justice Rehnquist claimed that,
although committing suicide with another’s help is just
as personal as refusing life-sustaining treatment, it is not
similar to refusing unwanted medical treatment. In fact,
according to the chief justice, in Cruzan, the court speci-
fically stressed that most states ban assisted suicide.
STATE’S INTEREST. The U.S. Supreme Court pointed
out that Washington’s interest in preserving human life
includes the entire spectrum of that life, from birth to
death, regardless of a person’s physical or mental condi-
tion. The court agreed with the state that allowing
assisted suicide might imperil the lives of vulnerable
populations such as the poor, the elderly, and the dis-
abled. The state included the terminally ill in this group.
The U.S. Supreme Court justices agreed with the state
of Washington that legalizing physician-assisted suicide
would eventually lead to voluntary and involuntary eutha-
nasia. Because a health care proxy’s decision is legally
accepted as an incompetent patient’s decision, what if the
patient cannot self-administer the lethal medication? In
such a case a physician or a family member would have
to administer the drug, thus committing euthanasia.
The U.S. Supreme Court unanimously ruled that:
[The Washington Revised] Code . . . does not violate the
Fourteenth Amendment, either on its face (in all or
most cases in which it might be applied) or ‘‘as applied
to competent terminally ill adults who wish to hasten
their deaths by obtaining medication prescribed by their
doctors.’’ Our holding permits this debate to continue,
as it should in a democratic society. The decision of the
en banc Court of Appeals is reversed, and the case is
remanded [sent back] for further proceedings consistent
with this opinion.
PROVISION
OF
PALLIATIVE
CARE. U.S. Supreme
Court Justices Sandra Day O’Connor and Stephen
Breyer, concurring, wrote that ‘‘terminally ill patients in
New York and Washington . . . can obtain palliative care
(care that relieves pain but does not cure the illness), even
potentially lethal doses of drugs that are foreseen to result
in death.’’ Hence, the justices did not see the need to
address a dying person’s constitutional right to obtain
relief from pain. Justice O’Connor believed the court
was justified in banning assisted suicide for two reasons:
‘‘The difficulty of defining terminal illness and the risk
that a dying patient’s request for assistance in ending his
or her life might not be truly voluntary.’’
Vacco v. Quill
REFUSING
LIFE-SUSTAINING
TREATMENT
ESSENTI-
ALLY THE SAME AS ASSISTED SUICIDE. In 1994 three New
York physicians and three terminally ill patients sued the
state attorney general. They claimed, before the U.S.
District
Court,
that
New
York
violated
the
Equal
Protection Clause by prohibiting physician-assisted suicide.
The state permits a competent patient to refuse life-
sustaining treatment, but not to obtain physician-assisted
suicide. These, claimed the plaintiffs, are ‘‘essentially
the same thing’’ (Quill v. Koppell, 870 F. Supp. 78, 84–85
[SDNY 1994]). The court disagreed, stating that withdraw-
ing life support to let nature run its course differs from
intentionally using lethal drugs to cause death.
The plaintiffs brought their case to the Court of
Appeals for the Second Circuit (appellate court), which
reversed the District Court’s ruling (Quill v. Vacco, 80 F.
3d 716, 1996). The appellate court found that the New York
statute does not treat equally all competent terminally ill
patients wishing to hasten their deaths. The court stated:
The ending of life by [the withdrawal of life-support
systems]
is
nothing
more
or
less
than
assisted
suicide. . . . To the extent that [New York’s statutes]
prohibit a physician from prescribing medications to
be self-administered by a mentally competent, termin-
ally ill person in the final stages of his terminal illness,
they are not rationally related to any legitimate state
interest.
REFUSING
LIFE-SUSTAINING
TREATMENT
DIFFERS
FROM ASSISTED SUICIDE. New York’s attorney general
appealed the case to the U.S. Supreme Court (Dennis C.
Vacco, Attorney General of New York et al v. Timothy E.
Quill et al, 117 S.Ct 2293, 1997). The Supreme Court
distinguished between withdrawing life-sustaining medi-
cal treatment and assisted suicide. The court contended
that when a patient refuses life support, he or she dies
because the disease has run its natural course. On the other
hand, if a patient self-administers lethal drugs, death
results from that medication.
The court also distinguished between the physician’s
role in both scenarios. A physician who complies with a
patient’s request to withdraw life support does so to
honor a patient’s wish because the treatment no longer
Death and Dying
Courts and the End of Life
109

benefits the patient. Likewise, when a physician pre-
scribes pain-killing drugs, the needed drug dosage might
hasten death, although the physician’s only intent is to
ease pain. However, when a physician assists in suicide,
his or her prime intention is to hasten death. The U.S.
Supreme Court, therefore, reversed the ruling made by
the Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
STATE LEGISLATURES REJECT PHYSICIAN-
ASSISTED SUICIDE
U.S. Supreme Court justices John Paul Stevens and
David Souter issued opinions encouraging individual states
to enact legislation to permit physician-assisted suicide in
selected cases. At the state level, more than thirty bills to
legalize physician-assisted suicide have been introduced.
As of February 2006, Oregon remained the only state with a
law that legalizes the practice. The Oregon legislation was
approved in 1994 and reaffirmed by voters in 1997.
Many state ballot initiatives failed to garner enough
votes to legalize physician-assisted suicide. Voters in
California in 1988 and again in 1992 rejected the initia-
tive. Assembly Bill 651, a measure that would permit
doctors to prescribe lethal drugs to terminally ill patients,
was to be discussed in the California legislature in March
2006. Washington State voters rejected a physician-
assisted initiative in 1991, Michigan in 1998, Maine in
2000, and Wyoming in 2004. In addition, an assisted
suicide proposal was shelved in the Hawaii legislature
in 2004 and unsuccessful in another try in 2005, and it
was being discussed in the Vermont and Arizona legis-
latures in 2006.
THE SUPREME COURT RULING ON
PHYSICIAN-ASSISTED SUICIDE IN OREGON
In late 2001 Attorney General John Ashcroft reversed
a decision made by his predecessor Janet Reno by assert-
ing that the federal Controlled Substances Act could be
used against Oregon physicians who helped patients com-
mit suicide by prescribing lethal drugs. If that were the
case, then the federal Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA) could disallow the prescription-writing privileges
of any Oregon physician who prescribed drugs com-
monly used for assisted suicide. The possibility would
also exist for those physicians to be criminally prosecuted
as well. In response, the state of Oregon filed a lawsuit
against Ashcroft’s decision.
In May 2004 a federal appeals court upheld Oregon’s
Death with Dignity Act. The decision, by a divided three-
judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the
Ninth
Circuit
in
San
Francisco,
said
the
Justice
Department did not have the power to punish physicians
for prescribing medication for the purpose of assisted
suicide. The majority opinion stated that Ashcroft over-
stepped his authority in trying to block enforcement of
Oregon’s law.
In February 2005 the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to
hear the Bush administration’s challenge of Oregon’s
physician-assisted suicide law. On January 17, 2006, the
Supreme Court let stand Oregon’s physician-assisted sui-
cide law. The High Court held that the Controlled
Substances Act ‘‘does not allow the Attorney General to
prohibit doctors from prescribing regulated drugs for use
in physician-assisted suicide under state law permitting
the procedure.’’ Writing for the majority, Justice Anthony
Kennedy stated that both Ashcroft and Attorney General
Alberto Gonzales did not have the power to override the
Oregon physician-assisted suicide law. Kennedy also
added that it should not be the attorney general who
determines what is a ‘‘legitimate medical purpose’’ for
the administration of drugs, because the job description
for the attorney general does not include making health
and medical policy.
110
Courts and the End of Life
Death and Dying

CHAPTER 9
THE COST OF HEALTH CARE
INCREASING COSTS
Americans want quality medical care despite its
increasingly high cost. In 1960 the United States spent
5.2% of its gross domestic product (GDP—the total
value of all the goods and services produced by the
nation) on health care. In 1970 this percentage had risen
2% to 7.2%, and by 1980 it had risen to 9.1%—almost
another 2%. But in the next thirteen years, health care
expenditures rose 4.7%, to 13.8% ($916.5 billion) of the
GDP.
During
the
next
few
years
that
percentage
dropped slightly (although actual dollars continued to
rise), but it was back to 13.8% of the GDP by the year
2000. Then in 2001 through 2004 the cost of health
care increased dramatically, to 14.6% of the GDP in
2001, 15.4% in 2002, 15.9% in 2003, and 16% in 2004.
Table 9.1 compares the growth in national health care
expenditures and in GDP, and presents the national
health
expenditures
as
a
percentage
of
the
GDP
(1960–2004).
The Consumer Price Index (CPI) is a measure of the
average change in prices paid by consumers. For many
years the medical component of the CPI increased at a
greater rate than any other component, even food and
housing. Between 1960 and 2002 the average annual
percent change from the previous year shown in the
overall CPI (‘‘All items’’ in the ‘‘average annual percent
change from previous year shown’’ portion of Table 9.2)
was well below the average annual percent change for
medical care. From 2003 to 2004 the overall CPI
increased
by
2.7%,
while
medical
care
increased
by 4.4%.
In 2004, fifty-five cents (55%) of every dollar spent
for health care came from private funds, including
private
health
insurance
(thirty-five
cents),
out-of-
pocket expenses (thirteen cents), and other private
sources (seven cents). The remaining forty-six cents
came from federal or state government sources. (The
numbers do not add to 100 because of rounding; see
Figure 9.1.)
In 2004 hospital and physician costs, traditionally
composing the greater part of health care expenses,
were 30% and 21%, respectively, while prescription
drug costs were 10% of all health care expenses. (See
Figure 9.1.)
GOVERNMENT HEALTH CARE PROGRAMS
Unlike most developed countries, the United States
does not have a universal health care program. Two
government entitlement programs that provide health
care coverage for older adults (age sixty-five and older),
the poor, and the disabled are Medicare and Medicaid.
Enacted in 1965 as amendments to the Social Security
Act of 1935 (PL 89–97), these programs went into effect
in 1966. In 1972 amendments to Medicare extended
medical insurance coverage to those disabled long
term and those with chronic kidney disease or end-stage
renal disease. In 2004 nearly forty-two million older
adults and people with disabilities were enrolled in
Medicare, with total expenditures of nearly $309 billion.
(See Table 9.3.)
The Original Medicare Plan
The Original Medicare Plan, enacted under Title
XVIII (‘‘Health Insurance for the Aged’’) of the Social
Security Act, comprises two health-related insurance
plans:
• Part A (hospital insurance) is funded by Social
Security payroll taxes. It pays for inpatient hospital
care, which includes physicians’ fees, nursing ser-
vices, meals, a semiprivate room, special care units,
operating room costs, laboratory tests, and some drugs
and supplies. It also pays for skilled nursing facility
care after hospitalization, home health care visits by
Death and Dying
111

TABLE 9.1
National health expenditures, selected calendar years 1960–2004
Item
1960
1970
1980
1990
1993
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Amount in billions
National health expenditures  
$27.6
$75.1
$254.9
$717.3
$916.5
$1,129.7
$1,195.6
$1,270.3
$1,358.5
$1,474.2
$1,607.9
$1,740.6
$1,877.6
Private
20.7
46.8
147.6
427.3
514.2
614.1
662.3
710.2
756.3
807.2
881.4
957.2
1,030.3
Public
6.8
28.3
107.3
290.0
402.3
515.6
533.2
560.1
602.2
667.0
726.5
783.4
847.3
Federal
2.9
17.7
71.6
193.9
277.7
365.1
372.5
390.0
418.4
465.0
509.5
554.4
600.0
State and local
4.0
10.6
35.7
96.2
124.7
150.5
160.7
170.1
183.8
202.0
217.1
229.0
247.3
U.S. population*
186
210
230
254
265
278
281
284
287
290
293
296
299
Amount in billions
Gross domestic product
$526
$1,039
$2,790
$5,803
$6,657
$8,304
$8,747
$9,268
$9,817
$10,128
$10,470
$10,971
$11,734
Per capita amount
$148
$357
$1,106
$2,821
$3,461
$4,070
$4,257
$4,471
$4,729
$5,079
$5,485
$5,879
$6,280
Private
111
222
640
1,680
1,942
2,212
2,358
2,500
2,633
2,781
3,007
3,233
3,446
Public
37
135
466
1,140
1,520
1,857
1,899
1,971
2,096
2,298
2,478
2,646
2,834
Federal
15
84
311
762
1,049
1,315
1,326
1,373
1,456
1,602
1,738
1,873
2,007
State and local
21
50
155
378
471
542
572
599
640
696
740
774
827
Percent distribution
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Private
75.2
62.3
57.9
59.6
56.1
54.4
55.4
55.9
55.7
54.8
54.8
55.0
54.9
Public
24.8
37.7
42.1
40.4
43.9
45.6
44.6
44.1
44.3
45.2
45.2
45.0
45.1
Federal
10.4
23.6
28.1
27.0
30.3
32.3
31.2
30.7
30.8
31.5
31.7
31.9
32.0
State and local
14.4
14.1
14.0
13.4
13.6
13.3
13.4
13.4
13.5
13.7
13.5
13.2
13.2
Percent of gross domestic product
5.2
7.2
9.1
12.4
13.8
13.6
13.7
13.7
13.8
14.6
15.4
15.9
16.0
Average annual percent growth from previous year shown
10.5
13.0
10.9
8.5
5.4
5.8
6.3
6.9
8.5
9.1
8.2
7.9
Private
8.5
12.2
11.2
6.4
4.5
7.9
7.2
6.5
6.7
9.2
8.6
7.6
Public
15.3
14.2
10.5
11.5
6.4
3.4
5.0
7.5
10.8
8.9
7.8
8.2
Federal
20.0
15.0
10.5
12.7
7.1
2.0
4.7
7.3
11.1
9.6
8.8
8.2
State and local
10.3
12.9
10.4
9.0
4.8
6.8
5.8
8.1
9.9
7.4
5.5
8.0
U.S. population
1.2
0.9
1.0
1.4
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.1
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
Gross domestic product
7.0
10.4
7.6
4.7
5.7
5.3
6.0
5.9
3.2
3.4
4.8
7.0
*Census resident based population less armed forces over seas and less the population of outlying areas.
Note: Numbers and percents may not add to totals because of rounding. Dollar amounts shown are in current dollars.
SOURCE: “Table 1. National Health Expenditures Aggregate and Per Capita Amounts, Percent Distribution, and Average Annual Percent Growth, by Source of Funds: Selected Calendar Years 1960–2004,” in NHE Web
Tables, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Office of the Actuary, http://www.cms.hhs.gov/NationalHealthExpendData/downloads/tables.pdf (accessed February 28, 2006)
National health expenditures  
National health expenditures  
National health expenditures  
National health expenditures  
112
The Cost of Health Care
Death and Dying

nurses or medical technicians, and hospice care for
the terminally ill.
• Part B (medical insurance) is an elective medical
insurance. Because Part A does not pay all health care
costs and other expenses associated with hospitaliza-
tion, many beneficiaries enroll in the Part B plan.
Most people pay
a monthly premium for this
coverage. Those monthly premiums and general fed-
eral revenues finance Part B. Coverage includes
physicians’ and surgeons’ services, diagnostic and
laboratory tests, outpatient hospital services, outpati-
ent physical therapy, speech pathology services, home
health care services, and medical equipment and
supplies.
The Original Medicare Plan coverage (Part A and
Part B) has ‘‘gaps,’’ which means that it does not cover
all medical costs and services. Medigap insurance is
supplemental
Medicare
insurance
sold
by
private
TABLE 9.2
Consumer price index and average annual percent change for general items and medical care components, selected years 1960–2004
[Data are based on reporting by samples of providers and other retail outlets]
Items and medical care
components
1960
1970
1980
1990
1995
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Consumer price index (CPI)
All items
29.6
38.8
82.4
130.7
152.4
172.2
177.1
179.9
184.0
188.9
All items excluding medical care
30.2
39.2
82.8
128.8
148.6
167.3
171.9
174.3
178.1
182.7
All services
24.1
35.0
77.9
139.2
168.7
195.3
203.4
209.8
216.5
222.8
Food
30.0
39.2
86.8
132.4
148.4
167.8
173.1
176.2
180.0
186.2
Apparel
45.7
59.2
90.9
124.1
132.0
129.6
127.3
124.0
120.9
120.4
Housing
—
36.4
81.1
128.5
148.5
169.6
176.4
180.3
184.8
189.5
Energy
22.4
25.5
86.0
102.1
105.2
124.6
129.3
121.7
136.5
151.4
Medical care
22.3
34.0
74.9
162.8
220.5
260.8
272.8
285.6
297.1
310.1
Components of medical care
Medical care services
19.5
32.3
74.8
162.7
224.2
266.0
278.8
292.9
306.0
321.3
Professional services
—
37.0
77.9
156.1
201.0
237.7
246.5
253.9
261.2
271.5
Physicians’ services
21.9
34.5
76.5
160.8
208.8
244.7
253.6
260.6
267.7
278.3
Dental services
27.0
39.2
78.9
155.8
206.8
258.5
269.0
281.0
292.5
306.9
Eye glasses and eye carea
—
—
—
117.3
137.0
149.7
154.5
155.5
155.9
159.3
Services by other medical professionalsa
—
—
—
120.2
143.9
161.9
167.3
171.8
177.1
181.9
Hospital and related services
—
—
69.2
178.0
257.8
317.3
338.3
367.8
394.8
417.9
Hospital servicesb
—
—
—
—
—
115.9
123.6
134.7
144.7
153.4
Inpatient hospital servicesb, c
—
—
—
—
—
113.8
121.0
131.2
140.1
148.1
Outpatient hospital servicesa, c
—
—
—
138.7
204.6
263.8
281.1
309.8
337.9
356.3
Hospital rooms
9.3
23.6
68.0
175.4
251.2
—
—
—
—
—
Other inpatient servicesa
—
—
—
142.7
206.8
—
—
—
—
—
Nursing homes and adult day careb
—
—
—
—
—
117.0
121.8
127.9
135.2
140.4
Medical care commodities
46.9
46.5
75.4
163.4
204.5
238.1
247.6
256.4
262.8
269.3
Prescription drugs and medical supplies
54.0
47.4
72.5
181.7
235.0
285.4
300.9
316.5
326.3
337.1
Nonprescription drugs and medical suppliesa
—
—
—
120.6
140.5
149.5
150.6
150.4
152.0
152.3
Internal and respiratory over-the-counter
drugs
—
42.3
74.9
145.9
167.0
176.9
178.9
178.8
181.2
180.9
Nonprescription medical equipment 
and supplies
—
—
79.2
138.0
166.3
178.1
178.2
177.5
178.1
179.7
Average annual percent change from previous year shown
All items
...
2.7
7.8
4.7
3.1
2.5
2.8
1.6
2.3
2.7
All items excluding medical care
...
2.6
7.8
4.5
2.9
2.4
2.7
1.4
2.2
2.6
All services
...
3.8
8.3
6.0
3.9
3.0
4.1
3.1
3.2
2.9
Food
...
2.7
8.3
4.3
2.3
2.5
3.2
1.8
2.2
3.4
Apparel
...
2.6
4.4
3.2
1.2
0.4
1.8
2.6
2.5
0.4
Housing
...
—
8.3
4.7
2.9
2.7
4.0
2.2
2.5
2.5
Energy
...
1.3
12.9
1.7
0.6
3.4
3.8
5.9
12.2
10.9
Medical care
...
4.3
8.2
8.1
6.3
3.4
4.6
4.7
4.0
4.4
Components of medical care
Medical care services
. . .
5.2
8.8
8.1
6.6
3.5
4.8
5.1
4.5
5.0
Professional services
. . .
—
7.7
7.2
5.2
3.4
3.7
3.0
2.9
3.9
Physicians’ services
. . .
4.6
8.3
7.7
5.4
3.2
3.6
2.8
2.7
4.0
Dental services
. . .
3.8
7.2
7.0
5.8
4.6
4.1
4.5
4.1
4.9
Eye glasses and eye carea
. . .
—
—
—
3.2
1.8
3.2
0.6
0.3
2.2
Services by other medical professionalsa
. . .
—
—
—
3.7
2.4
3.3
2.7
3.1
2.7
Hospital and related services
. . .
—
—
9.9
7.7
4.2
6.6
8.7
7.3
5.9
Hospital servicesb
. . .
—
—
—
—
—
6.6
9.0
7.4
6.0
Inpatient hospital servicesb, c
. . .
—
—
—
—
—
6.3
8.4
6.8
5.7
Outpatient hospital servicesa, c
. . .
—
—
—
8.1
5.2
6.6
10.2
9.1
5.4
Hospital rooms
. . .
9.8
11.2
9.9
7.4
—
—
—
—
—
Other inpatient servicesa
. . .
—
—
—
7.7
—
—
—
—
—
Nursing homes and adult day careb
. . .
—
—
—
—
—
4.1
5.0
5.7
3.8
Death and Dying
The Cost of Health Care
113

insurance companies to pay these gaps in Original
Medicare
Plan
coverage.
Except
in
Massachusetts,
Minnesota, and Wisconsin, there are ten standardized
plans labeled Plan A through Plan J. Medigap policies
only work with the Original Medicare Plan.
Medicare Advantage Plans
Medicare Advantage Plans are offered by private
companies that have contracts with Medicare to provide
Medicare services. Although there are generally lower
copayments (the amounts patients pay for each medical
service) and extra benefits with Medicare Advantage
Plans versus the Original Medicare Plan, patients gener-
ally must see physicians that belong to the plan and go
to certain hospitals to get services. Medicare Advan-
tage
Plans
include
Medicare
Health
Maintenance
Organizations (HMOs), Medicare Preferred Provider
Organizations (PPOs), Medicare Special Needs Plans
(designed for specific groups of people), and Medicare
Private Fee-for-Service Plans (PFFS).
Other Medicare Health Plans
Other types of Medicare Health Plans include
Medicare Cost Plans, Demonstrations, and Programs of
All-inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE). Medicare
Cost Plans are limited in number and combine features
of both Medicare Advantage Plans and the Original
Medicare Plan. Demonstrations are special projects that
test possible future improvements in Medicare costs,
coverage, and quality of care. PACE provides services
for frail elderly Americans.
Medicare Prescription Drug Plans
On January 1, 2006, Medicare began to offer insur-
ance coverage for prescription drugs to everyone with
Medicare. Its Medicare Prescription Drug Plans typically
pay half a person’s prescription drug costs. Most people
pay a monthly premium for this coverage. Medicare
Prescription Drug Plans are available with the Original
Medicare Plan, Medicare Advantage Plans, and the other
Medicare health plans.
Medicaid
The Medicaid health insurance program, enacted
under
Title
XIX
(‘‘Grants
to
States
for
Medical
Assistance Programs’’) of the Social Security Act, pro-
vides medical assistance to low-income people, including
those with disabilities and members of families with
dependent children. Jointly financed by federal and state
governments, Medicaid coverage includes hospitaliza-
tion, physicians’ services, laboratory fees, diagnostic
screenings, and long-term nursing home care.
In 2001, while people age sixty-five and older made
up only 8.3% of all Medicaid recipients, they received
slightly more than one-fourth (25.9%) of all Medicaid
benefits. The average payment was $12,725 per older
adult, compared with $11.318 for the blind and disabled,
$2,059 for adults in families with dependent children, and
$1,448 for children under the age of twenty-one. (See
Table 9.4.)
WHO PAYS FOR END-OF-LIFE CARE?
The Committee on Care at the End of Life of the
Institute of Medicine (IOM) noted in its 1997 report
Approaching Death: Improving Care at the End of Life
(Washington, DC) that nearly three-fourths (74.7%) of
those who die each year are age sixty-five or older.
Medicare covers these older adults during the terminal
stage of their lives. Medicaid further covers 13% of
TABLE 9.2
Medical care commodities
. . .
0.1
5.0
8.0
4.6
3.1
4.0
3.6
2.5
2.5
Prescription drugs and medical supplies
. . .
1.3
4.3
9.6
5.3
4.0
5.4
5.2
3.1
3.3
Nonprescription drugs and medical suppliesa
. . .
—
—
—
3.1
1.2
0.7
0.1
1.1
0.2
Internal and respiratory over-the-counter
drugs
. . .
—
5.9
6.9
2.7
1.2
1.1
0.1
1.3
0.2
Nonprescription medical equipment and
supplies
. . .
—
—
5.7
3.8
1.4
0.1
0.4
0.3
0.9
aDecember 1986100.
bDecember 1996100.
cSpecial index based on a substantially smaller sample.
Notes: “—”Data not available. “. . .”Category not applicable. Consumer price index for all urban consumers (CPI-U) U.S. city average, detailed expenditure categories. 1982–84100,
except where noted. Data are not seasonally adjusted.
SOURCE: “Table 120. Consumer Price Index and Average Annual Percent Change for All Items, Selected Items, and Medical Care Components: United States,
Selected Years 1960–2004,” in Health, United States, 2005, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, November 2005,
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus05.pdf (accessed February 27, 2006)
Consumer price index and average annual percent change for general items and medical care components, selected years 1960–2004 
[CONTINUED]
[Data are based on reporting by samples of providers and other retail outlets]
Items and medical care
components
1960
1970
1980
1990
1995
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
114
The Cost of Health Care
Death and Dying

those older adults who have exhausted their Medicare
benefits, as well as poor and disabled younger patients.
Health programs under the Department of Veterans
Affairs and the Department of Defense also pay for
terminal care.
In his June 11, 2003, testimony to the U.S. Senate
Committee on Appropriations, Donald Hoover of the
Rutgers Institute for Health, Health Care Policy, and
Aging Research presented data on medical expendi-
tures during the last year of life for Americans age
sixty-five and older. Hoover noted that Medicare
currently pays most end-of-life medical costs for indi-
viduals in this age group but stated that the elderly
may be expected to pay an increasing proportion of
end-of-life costs as the number of elderly individuals
in the population increases and end-of-life costs increase
as a result. The results of Hoover’s research are also
published in the report ‘‘Medical Expenditures during the
Last
Year
of
Life:
Findings
from
the
1992–1996
Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey,’’ (Health Services
Research, vol. 37, no. 6, December 2002).
The research results of Hoover and his colleagues
showed that an average person over age sixty-five who
died between 1992 and 1996 created approximately
$40,000 of medical expenditures in his or her last year
of life. Of this amount, Medicare paid approximately
$32,800 (82%), supplemental/private insurance paid
about $2,000 (5%), and the individual paid approxi-
mately $5,200 (13%). Hoover noted that several initia-
tives such as hospice and advanced directives have
attempted to reduce end-of-life medical costs. However,
those costs have not decreased notably as a fraction of
Medicare expenditures over the past twenty-five years.
Currently about 25% of Medicare expenditures and about
20% of all health care expenditures for the elderly go to
those in their last year of life.
No specific information about the cost of end-of-life
care exists for the one-fourth of those who die every year
who are under age sixty-five. Such care is more than
likely financed by employer health insurance, personal
funds, Medicare, and Medicaid. Nonetheless, aside from
funds paid out for hospice services, the government
has no other information about this group’s terminal
health care.
Medicare Hospice Benefits
In 1982 Congress created a Medicare hospice ben-
efit program (Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Act,
PL 97–248, 122) to provide services to terminally ill
patients with six months or less to live. In 1989 the
Government Accounting Office (GAO; now called the
Government Accountability Office) reported that only
35% of eligible hospices were Medicare-certified, in part
due to the Health Care Financing Administration’s low
rates of reimbursement to hospices. That same year
Congress gave hospices a 20% increase in reimburse-
ment rates through a provision in the Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act (PL 101–239, 6005).
Under the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (PL 105–
33), Medicare hospice benefits are divided into three
benefit periods:
FIGURE 9.1
Other spendingc
25%
Program
administration
and net cost
7%
Where it came from
Where it went
Private
insurance
35%
Out-of-pocket
13%
Medicare
17%
Medicaid and
SCHIP
16%
Other publica
13%
Other
privateb
7%
Prescription
drugs
10%
Nursing home
care
6%
Physician
and clinical
services
21%
Hospital
care
30%
a“Other public” includes programs such as workers’ compensation, public health
activity, Department of Defense, Department of Veteran’s Affairs, Indian Health
Service, state and local hospital subsidies and school health. 
b“Other private” includes industrial in-plant, privately funded construction, and
non-patient revenues, including philanthropy. 
c“Other spending” includes dentist services, other professional services, home
health, durable medical products, over-the-counter medicines and sundries, public
health, other personal health care, research and structures and equipment. 
Note: Numbers shown may not add to 100.0 because of rounding.
SOURCE: “The Nation’s Health Dollar, Calendar Year 2004: Where It
Came From, Where It Went,” Centers for Medicare and Medicaid
Services, Office of the Actuary, http://www.cms.hhs.gov/NationalHealth 
ExpendData/downloads/PieChartSourcesExpenditures2004.pdf
(accessed February 28, 2006)
The nation’s health dollar, 2004
Death and Dying
The Cost of Health Care
115

• An initial ninety-day period
• A subsequent ninety-day period
• An unlimited number of subsequent sixty-day periods,
based on a patient’s satisfying the program eligibility
requirements
At the start of each period the Medicare patient must
be recertified as terminally ill. After the patient’s death,
the patient’s family receives up to thirteen months of
bereavement service.
In 2004 there were 2,670 Medicare-certified hos-
pices, a substantial increase from thirty-one hospices in
1984. This growth was stimulated in part by increased
reimbursement rates established by Congress in 1989.
Of the 2,670 hospices, 656 were with home health
agencies (HHA), 562 were affiliated with hospitals
(HOSP), 14 were with skilled nursing facilities (SNF),
and 1,438 were freestanding hospices (FSTG). (See
Table 9.5.) Medicare pays most of the cost of hospice
care.
Terminally ill Medicare patients who stayed in a
hospice incurred less Medicare cost than those who
stayed in a hospital or skilled nursing facility. In 2004 a
one-day stay in a hospice cost Medicare $127, compared
with $493 for a skilled nursing facility and $3,502 for a
hospital. (See Table 9.6.)
The Hospice Association of America (HAA) con-
tends that terminally ill patients often wait too long to
enter hospice care. The HAA believes that the diffi-
culty of predicting when death may occur could
account for part of the delay, along with the reticence
of caregivers, patients, and family to accept a terminal
prognosis.
While terminal care is often associated with hospice,
the
hospice
Medicare
benefit
represents
a
small
TABLE 9.3
Medicare enrollees and expenditures, by type of service, selected years 1970–2004
[Data are compiled from various sources by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services]
Type of service
1970
1980
1990
1995
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004a
Enrollees
Number in millions
Totalb
20.4
28.4
34.3
37.6
39.7
40.1
40.5
41.1
41.7
Hospital insurance
20.1
28.0
33.7
37.2
39.3
39.7
40.1
40.6
41.2
Supplementary medical insurance
19.5
27.3
32.6
35.6
37.3
37.7
38.0
38.4
38.8
Expenditures
Amount in billions
Total
$7.5
$36.8
$110.8
$184.0
$221.8
$244.8
$265.7
$280.8
$308.9
Total hospital insurance (HI)
5.3
25.6
66.8
117.4
131.1
143.4
152.5
154.6
170.6
HI payments to managed care organizationsc
—
0.0
2.7
6.7
21.4
20.8
19.2
19.5
20.8
HI payments for fee-for-service utilization
5.3
25.5
64.2
110.7
109.7
122.6
133.3
135.1
149.8
Inpatient hospital
4.8
24.1
56.9
82.3
87.1
95.6
104.1
108.6
116.2
Skilled nursing facility
0.2
0.4
2.5
9.1
11.1
13.4
15.3
14.8
16.9
Home health agency
0.1
0.5
3.7
16.2
3.8
4.2
5.0
4.8
5.8
Home health agency transferd
—
—
—
—
1.7
3.1
1.2
2.2
—
Hospice
—
—
0.3
1.9
3.0
3.7
4.9
6.2
7.6
Administrative expensese
0.2
0.5
0.8
1.2
2.9
2.5
2.8
2.8
3.3
Total supplementary medical insurance (SMI)
2.2
11.2
44.0
66.6
90.7
101.4
113.2
126.1
138.3
SMI payments to managed care organizationsc
0.0
0.2
2.8
6.6
18.4
17.6
17.5
17.3
18.7
SMI payments for fee-for-service utilizationf
2.2
11.0
41.2
60.0
72.3
83.8
95.7
108.9
119.6
Physician/suppliesg
1.8
8.2
29.6
—
—
—
—
—
—
Outpatient hospitalh
0.1
1.9
8.5
—
—
—
—
—
—
Independent laboratoryi
0.0
0.1
1.5
—
—
—
—
—
—
Physician fee schedule
—
—
—
31.7
37.0
42.0
44.8
48.2
53.8
Durable medical equipment
—
—
—
3.7
4.7
5.4
6.6
7.7
8.0
Laboratoryj
—
—
—
4.3
4.0
4.4
5.0
5.5
6.0
Otherk
—
—
—
9.9
13.7
16.0
19.6
22.6
25.0
Hospitall
—
—
—
8.7
8.5
12.8
13.5
15.3
17.4
Home health agency
—
0.2
0.1
0.2
4.4
4.4
5.1
5.1
5.9
Home health agency transferd
—
—
—
—
1.7
3.1
1.2
2.2
—
Administrative expensese
0.2
0.6
1.5
1.6
1.8
1.8
2.3
2.4
3.4
Percent distribution of expenditures
Total hospital insurance (HI)
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
HI payments to managed care organizationsc
—
0.0
4.0
5.7
16.3
14.5
12.6
12.6
12.2
HI payments for fee-for-service utilization
100.0
99.6
96.1
94.3
83.7
85.5
87.4
87.4
87.8
Inpatient hospital
90.6
94.5
85.1
70.1
66.5
66.7
68.2
70.3
68.1
Skilled nursing facility
3.8
1.6
3.7
7.8
8.5
9.4
10.1
9.6
9.9
Home health agency
1.9
2.0
5.5
13.8
2.9
2.9
3.3
3.1
3.4
Home health agency transferd
—
—
—
—
1.3
2.2
0.8
1.4
—
Hospice
—
—
0.4
1.6
2.3
2.6
3.2
4.0
4.4
Administrative expensese
3.8
2.0
1.2
1.0
2.2
1.7
1.9
1.8
2.0
116
The Cost of Health Care
Death and Dying

proportion of the total Medicare dollars spent. In 2004
only about 2.5% ($7.2 billion) of all Medicare benefit
payments went to hospice care. The 2005 projected hos-
pice spending was comparably small ($8.6 billion, or
2.6% of the projected $326 billion total Medicare expen-
ditures). (See Table 9.7.)
Medicaid Hospice Benefits
Hospice services also comprise a small portion of
Medicaid reimbursements. In 2002 Medicaid reimburse-
ments for hospice accounted for only 0.3% ($706.2 mil-
lion) of the $214.2 billion total expenditures. (See Table
9.8.) Providing hospice care under Medicaid is optional
for each state. In 2002 forty-seven states and Washington,
D.C., offered hospice benefits. (See Table 9.9.)
LONG-TERM HEALTH CARE
Longer life spans and life-sustaining technologies
have created an increasing need for long-term care. For
some older people, relatives provide the long-term care;
but those who require labor-intensive, round-the-clock
care often stay in nursing homes.
Home Health Care
The concept of home health care began as post–acute
care after hospitalization, an alternative to longer, costlier
hospital stays. Home health care services have grown
tremendously
since
the
1980s.
In
1997
the
U.S.
Department of Census estimated that approximately
twenty thousand home care agencies existed. In 2003
the National Association for Home Care and Hospice
(NAHC) reported that 7,265 home care agencies were
Medicare certified.
In 1972 Medicare extended home care coverage
to people under sixty-five only if they were disabled
or suffered from end-stage renal disease. By the year
2000 Medicare coverage for home health care was
limited to patients immediately following discharge
TABLE 9.3
Medicare enrollees and expenditures, by type of service, selected years 1970–2004 [CONTINUED]
[Data are compiled from various sources by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services]
Type of service
1970
1980
1990
1995
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004a
Percent distribution of expenditures
Total supplementary medical insurance (SMI)
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
SMI payments to managed care organizationsc
0.0
1.8
6.4
9.9
20.3
17.3
15.5
13.7
13.5
SMI payments for fee-for-service utilizationf
100.0
98.2
93.6
90.1
79.8
82.7
84.5
86.3
86.5
Physician/suppliesg
85.7
73.2
67.3
—
—
—
—
—
—
Outpatient hospitalh
4.8
17.0
19.3
—
—
—
—
—
—
Independent laboratoryi
0.0
0.9
3.4
—
—
—
—
—
—
Physician fee schedule
—
—
—
47.5
40.8
41.5
39.6
38.2
38.9
Durable medical equipment
—
—
—
5.5
5.2
5.4
5.8
6.1
5.8
Laboratoryj
—
—
—
6.4
4.4
4.3
4.4
4.3
4.3
Otherk
—
—
—
14.8
15.1
15.8
17.3
17.9
18.1
Hospitall
—
—
—
13.0
9.4
12.6
12.0
12.2
12.6
Home health agency
0.0
1.8
0.2
0.3
4.8
4.4
4.5
4.0
4.2
Home health agency transferd
—
—
—
0.0
1.9
3.1
1.1
1.7
—
Administrative expensese
9.5
5.4
3.4
2.4
2.0
1.8
2.0
1.9
2.5
aPreliminary figures.
bAverage number enrolled in the hospital insurance (HI) and/or supplementary medical insurance (SMI) programs for the calendar year.
cMedicare-approved managed care organizations.
dReflects home health transfer amounts between HI and SMI.
eIncludes research, costs of experiments and demonstration projects, and peer review activity.
fType of service reporting categories for fee-for-service reimbursement differ before and after 1991.
gIncludes payment for physicians, practitioners, durable medical equipment, and all suppliers other than independent laboratory, which is shown separately through 1990. Beginning in
1991, those physician services subject to the physician fee schedule are so broken out. Payments for laboratory services paid under the laboratory fee schedule and performed in a
physician office are included under “laboratory” beginning in 1991. Payments for durable medical equipment are broken out and so labeled beginning in 1991. The remaining services
from the “physician” category are included in “other.”
hIncludes payments for hospital outpatient department services, for skilled nursing facility outpatient services, for Part B services received as an inpatient in a hospital or skilled nursing
facility setting, and for other types of outpatient facilities. Beginning in 1991, payments for hospital outpatient department services, except for laboratory services, are listed under
“hospital.” Hospital outpatient laboratory services are included in the “laboratory” line.
iBeginning in 1991, those independent laboratory services that were paid under the laboratory fee schedule (most of “independent lab”) are included in the “laboratory” line; the
remaining services are included in “physician fee schedule” and “other” lines.
jPayments for laboratory services paid under the laboratory fee schedule performed in a physician office, independent lab, or in a hospital outpatient department.
kIncludes payments for physician-administered drugs; free-standing ambulatory surgical center facility services; ambulance services; supplies; free-standing end-stage renal disease
(ESRD) dialysis facility services; rural health clinics; outpatient rehabilitation facilities; psychiatric hospitals; and federally qualified health centers.
lIncludes the hospital facility costs for Medicare Part B services that are predominantly in the outpatient department, with the exception of hospital outpatient laboratory services, which
are included on the “laboratory” line. Physician reimbursement is included on the “physician fee schedule” line.
Notes: “—”Data not available. 0.0 quantity greater than 0 but less than 0.05. “—”Quantity zero. Percents are calculated using unrounded data. Table includes service disbursements
as of February 2005 for Medicare enrollees residing in Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, Guam, other outlying areas, foreign countries, and unknown residence. Totals do not necessarily equal
the sum of rounded components.
SOURCE: “Table 139. Medicare Enrollees and Expenditures and Percent Distribution, according to Type of Service: United States and Other Areas, Selected
Years 1970–2004,” in Health, United States, 2005, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, November 2005,
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus05.pdf (accessed February 27, 2006)
Death and Dying
The Cost of Health Care
117

from the hospital. As of 2003 Medicare covered
beneficiaries’ home
health
care
services
with
no
requirement for prior hospitalization. There were also
no limits to the number of professional visits or to
the length of coverage. As long as the patient’s con-
dition
warranted
it,
the
following
services
were
provided:
• Part-time or intermittent skilled nursing and home
health aide services
• Speech-language pathology services
• Physical and occupational therapy
• Medical social services
• Medical supplies
• Durable medical equipment (with a 20% co-pay)
Over time, the population receiving home care ser-
vices has changed. Today much of home health care is
associated with rehabilitation from critical illnesses, and
fewer
users
are
long-term
patients
with
chronic
conditions. In 2000, 75% (1,017,900) of home health
users received medical/skilled nursing services, 44%
(600,900)
received
personal
care,
37%
(502,600)
received therapy, and 12% (160,000) received psychoso-
cial services. (See Table 9.10.)
Medicare payments for home health care peaked in
1997 and began to decline in 1998. From 1998 to 1999
Medicare spending for home health care dropped nearly
33%. (See Table 9.11.) Likewise, the number of home
care agencies that were Medicare certified declined from
a high of 10,444 in 1997, to 8,080 in 1998, then to 7,747
in 1999. (See Table 9.12.) NAHC believes that the
decline in agencies since 1997 is the direct result of
changes in Medicare home health reimbursement enacted
as part of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (PL 105–33;
see next section).
Relaxed eligibility criteria for home health care,
including elimination of the requirement of an acute
hospitalization before receiving home care in 2003,
enabled an increased number of beneficiaries to use home
TABLE 9.4
Medicaid recipients and medical vendor payments, by eligibility, race, and ethnicity, selected fiscal years 1972–2001
[Data are compiled by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services from the Medicaid data system]
Basis of eligibility and
race and ethnicity
1972
1980
1990
1995
1997
1998a
1999b
2000
2001
Recipients
Number in millions
All recipients
17.6
21.6
25.3
36.3
34.9
40.6
40.1
42.8
46.0
Percent of recipients
Basis of eligibility:c
Aged (65 years and over)
18.8
15.9
12.7
11.4
11.3
9.8
9.4
8.7
8.3
Blind and disabled
9.8
13.5
14.7
16.1
17.6
16.3
16.7
16.1
15.4
Adults in families with dependent childrend
17.8
22.6
23.8
21.0
19.5
19.5
18.7
20.5
21.1
Children under age 21e
44.5
43.2
44.4
47.3
45.3
46.7
46.9
46.1
45.7
Other Title XIXf
9.0
6.9
3.9
1.7
6.3
7.8
8.4
8.6
9.5
Race and ethnicity:g
White
—
—
42.8
45.5
44.4
41.3
—
—
40.2
Black or African American
—
—
25.1
24.7
23.5
24.2
—
—
23.1
American Indian or Alaska Native
—
—
1.0
0.8
1.0
0.8
—
—
1.3
Asian or Pacific Islander
—
—
2.0
2.2
1.9
2.5
—
—
3.0
Hispanic or Latino
—
—
15.2
17.2
14.3
15.6
—
—
17.9
Unknown
—
—
14.0
9.6
14.9
15.5
—
—
14.6
Vendor paymentsh
Amount in billions
All payments
$6.3
$23.3
$64.9
$120.1
$124.4
$142.3
$153.5
$168.3
$186.3
Percent distribution
Total
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Basis of eligibility:
Aged (65 years and over)
30.6
37.5
33.2
30.4
30.3
28.5
27.7
26.4
25.9
Blind and disabled
22.2
32.7
37.6
41.1
43.5
42.4
42.9
43.2
43.1
Adults in families with dependent childrend
15.3
13.9
13.2
11.2
9.9
10.4
10.3
10.6
10.7
Children under age 21e
18.1
13.4
14.0
15.0
14.1
16.0
15.7
15.9
16.3
Other Title XIXf
13.9
2.6
1.6
1.2
2.2
2.6
3.4
3.9
3.9
Race and ethnicity:g
White
—
—
53.4
54.3
55.0
54.3
—
—
54.4
Black or African American
—
—
18.3
19.2
18.5
19.6
—
—
19.8
American Indian or Alaska Native
—
—
0.6
0.5
0.6
0.8
—
—
1.1
Asian or Pacific Islander
—
—
1.0
1.2
0.9
1.4
—
—
2.5
Hispanic or Latino
—
—
5.3
7.3
6.8
8.2
—
—
9.4
Unknown
—
—
21.3
17.6
18.2
15.7
—
—
12.9
118
The Cost of Health Care
Death and Dying

health services. Table 9.12 shows that the number of
Medicare-certified home care agencies increased from a
low of 6,861 in 2001 to 7,265 in 2003. In addition,
Medicare payments for home health care increased by
7.5% in 2002 over 2001. In 2004 and 2005 payments
increased 10.9% and 11.6% over the prior year, respec-
tively. (See Table 9.11.)
MEDICARE
LIMITS
HOME
CARE
SERVICES. The
Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (PL 105–33) aimed to cut
approximately $16.2 billion from Medicare home care
expenditures over a period of five years. The federal
government sought to return home health care to its
original concept of short-term care plus skilled nursing
and
therapy
services.
Medicare
beneficiaries
who
received home health care would lose certain personal
care services, such as assistance with bathing, dressing,
and eating.
The Balanced Budget Act sharply curtailed the
growth of home care spending, greatly affecting health
care providers. As mentioned in the prior section,
annual Medicare home health care spending fell nearly
33% between 1998 and 1999 in response to tightened
eligibility requirements for skilled nursing services, lim-
ited
per-visit
payments,
and
increasingly
stringent
claims review. (See Table 9.11.) The changes forced
many agencies to close and transfer their patients to
other home health care companies. In addition, the
number of current home health care patients declined
(see Figure 9.2), in large part due to decreased funding.
However, the decline began one year prior to the
Balanced Budget Act, so more factors than decreased
Medicare funding are likely to be playing a role in the
decline.
Nursing Home Care
Growth of the home health care industry in the 1980s
and early to mid-1990s is only partly responsible for the
decline in the rate of Americans entering nursing homes
(residents per one thousand population), as shown in
Table 9.13. Declines also occurred in years when num-
bers of home health care patients declined as well.
Another reason for the decline in the rate of nursing home
residents may be that the elderly are choosing assisted
living and continuing-care retirement communities that
offer alternatives to nursing home care. There is also a
TABLE 9.4
Vendor payments per recipienth
Amount
All recipients 
$358
$1,079
$2,568
$3,311
$3,568
$3,501
$ 3,819
$3,936
$ 4,053
Basis of eligibility:
Aged (65 years and over)
580
2,540
6,717
8,868
9,538
10,242
11,268
11,929
12,725
Blind and disabled
807
2,618
6,564
8,435
8,832
9,095
9,832
10,559
11,318
Adults in families with dependent childrend
307
662
1,429
1,777
1,809
1,876
2,104
2,030
2,059
Children under age 21e
145
335
811
1,047
1,111
1,203
1,282
1,358
1,448
Other Title XIXf
555
398
1,062
2,380
1,242
1,166
1,532
1,778
1,680
Race and ethnicity:g
White
—
—
3,207
3,953
4,421
4,609
—
—
5,489
Black or African American
—
—
1,878
2,568
2,798
2,836
—
—
3,480
American Indian or Alaska Native
—
—
1,706
2,142
2,500
3,297
—
—
3,452
Asian or Pacific Islander
—
—
1,257
1,713
1,610
1,924
—
—
3,283
Hispanic or Latino
—
—
903
1,400
1,699
1,842
—
—
2,126
Unknown
—
—
3,909
6,099
4,356
3,531
—
—
3,576
aPrior to 1999 recipient counts exclude those individuals who only received coverage under prepaid health care and for whom no direct vendor payments were made during the year; and
vendor payments exclude payments to health maintenance organizations and other prepaid health plans ($19.3 billion in 1998 and $18 billion in 1997). The total number of persons who
were Medicaid eligible and enrolled was 41.4 million in 1998, 41.6 million in 1997, and 41.2 million in 1996.
bStarting in 1999, the Medicaid data system was changed.
cIn 1980 and 1985 recipients are included in more than one category. In 1990–96, 0.2–2.5 percent of recipients have unknown basis of eligibility. From 1997 onwards, unknowns are
included in “Other Title XIX.”
dIncludes adults in the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program. From 1997 onwards includes adults in the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program.
From 2001 onwards includes women in the Breast and Cervical Cancer Prevention and Treatment Program.
eIncludes children in the AFDC program. From 1997 onwards includes children and foster care children in the TANF program.
fIncludes some participants in the supplemental security income program and other people deemed medically needy in participating states. From 1997 onwards excludes foster care
children and includes unknown eligibility.
gRace and ethnicity as determined on initial Medicaid application. Categories are mutually exclusive. Starting in 2001, Hispanic category included Hispanic persons regardless of race.
Persons indicating more than one race were included in the unknown category.
hVendor payments exclude disproportionate share hospital payments ($15.5 billion in fiscal year 2001).
Notes: “—”Data not available. 1972 data are for fiscal year ending June 30. All other years are for fiscal year ending September 30.
SOURCE: “Table 142. Medicaid Recipients and Medical Vendor Payments, according to Basis of Eligibility, and Race and Ethnicity: United States, Selected
Fiscal Years 1972–2001,” in Health, United States, 2005, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, November 2005,
http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus05.pdf (accessed February 27, 2006)
Medicaid recipients and medical vendor payments, by eligibility, race, and ethnicity, selected fiscal years 1972–2001 [CONTINUED]
[Data are compiled by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services from the Medicaid data system]
Basis of eligibility and
race and ethnicity
1972
1980
1990
1995
1997
1998a
1999b
2000
2001
Death and Dying
The Cost of Health Care
119

trend toward healthy aging—more older adults are living
longer with fewer disabilities.
Still, in 1999 (the latest data available) nearly 1.5
million adults age sixty-five and older were nursing home
residents. Most were white (87.1%) and female (74.3%),
and more than half (51.5%) were eighty-five years and
older. (See Table 9.13.)
Nursing homes provide terminally ill residents with
end-of-life services in different ways:
• Caring for patients in the nursing home
• Transferring patients who request it to hospitals or
hospices
• Contracting with hospices to provide palliative care
(care that relieves the pain but does not cure the
illness) within the nursing home
A combination of federal, state, and private monies
finance
nursing
home
care.
According
to
the
Administration on Aging, in 2000 almost half of the
funds came from Medicaid, one-third came from private
payment, 10% from Medicare, and 5% from private
insurance.
Patients in a Persistent Vegetative State
The precise number of patients in a persistent vege-
tative state (PVS) is unknown because no system is in
place to count them. The costs to maintain such patients
range from $2,000 to $10,000 per month, depending on
the acuity of care needed (the type, degree, or extent of
required services).
The End-Stage Renal Disease Program
End-stage renal disease (ESRD) is the final phase
of irreversible kidney disease and requires either kidney
TABLE 9.5
Medicare-certified hospices, by type, 1984–2004 
Home health
Hospital-
Skilled nursing
Year
agency-based
based
facility-based
Freestanding
Total
1984
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
31
1985
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
158
1986
113
54
10
68
245
1987
155
101
11
122
389
1988
213
138
11
191
553
1989
286
182
13
220
701
1990
313
221
12
260
806
1991
325
282
10
394
1,011
1992
334
291
10
404
1,039
1993
438
341
10
499
1,288
1994
583
401
12
608
1,604
1995
699
460
19
679
1,857
1996
815
526
22
791
2,154
1997
823
561
22
868
2,274
1998
763
553
21
878
2,215
1999
762
562
22
928
2,274
2000
739
554
20
960
2,273
2001
690
552
20
1,003
2,265
2002
676
557
17
1,072
2,322
2003
653
561
16
1,214
2,444
2004
656
562
14
1,438
2,670
Notes: Home health agency-based (HHA) hospices are owned and operated by freestanding proprietary and nonprofit home care agencies. Hospital-based (HOSP) hospices are operating
units or departments of a hospital.
SOURCE: “Table 1. Number of Medicare-Certified Hospices, by Auspice, 1984–2004,” in Hospice Facts & Statistics, National Association for Home Care &
Hospice, March 2005, http://www.nahc.org/hospicefands.pdf (accessed November 10, 2005)
TABLE 9.6
Comparison of hospital, SNF, and hospice Medicare charges, 1998–2004
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
Hospital inpatient charges per day
$2,177
$2,583
$2,762
$3,069
$3,164
$3,354
$3,502
Skilled nursing facility charges per day
482
424
413
422
444
465
493
Hospice charges per covered day of care
113
116
121
125
128
123
127
SOURCE: “Table 13. Comparison of Hospital, SNF, and Hospice Medicare Charges, 1998–2004,” in Hospice Facts & Statistics, National Association for Home
Care & Hospice, March 2005, http://www.nahc.org/hospicefands.pdf (accessed November 10, 2005)
120
The Cost of Health Care
Death and Dying

transplantation or dialysis to maintain life. Dialysis is a
medical procedure in which a machine takes over the
function of the kidneys by removing waste products
from the blood. Medicare beneficiaries with ESRD are
high-cost users of Medicare services. Amendments to
the Social Security Act in 1972 extended Medicare
coverage to include ESRD patients. According to the
Centers
for
Medicare
and
Medicaid’s
2005
CMS
Statistics, Medicare enrollees with end-stage renal dis-
ease increased from 66,700 in 1980 to 359,400 in 2004,
an increase of 439%.
TABLE 9.8
Medicaid payments, by type of service, fiscal years 2001 and
2002
2001
Percent
2002
Percent
($ millions)
of total
($ millions)
of total
Inpatient hospital
25,943.1
13.8
29,127.1
13.6
Nursing home
37,322.7
19.9
39,282.2
18.3
Physician
7,438.7
4.0
8,354.6
3.9
Outpatient hospital
7,496.1
4.0
8,470.6
4.0
Home healthd
16,655.4
8.9
19,287.8
9.0
Hospiceb
546.1
0.3
706.2
0.3
Prescription drugs
23,764.4
12.7
28,408.2
13.3
ICF (MR) servicesc
9,700.9
5.2
10,681.3
5.0
Other
58,592.5
31.3
69,879.5
32.6
Total paymentsa
187,459.9
100.0
214,197.5
100.0
aTotal outlays include hospice outlays from the Form CMS-64 plus payments for all
service types included in the Medicaid Statistical Information System (MSIS), not just the
eight service types listed.
bHospice outlays come from Form CMS-64 and do not include Medicaid State Children’s
Health Insurance Program (SCHIP). All other expenditures come from the MSIS. The
federal share of Medicaid’s hospice spending in 2001 was $314.6 million, or 57.6% of
the total. In fiscal year 2002, it was $404.7 million, or 57.3% of total Medicaid hospice
payments.
cICF is intermediate care facilities. MR is Medicaid reimbursed.
dHome health includes both home health and personal support services.
SOURCE: “Table 9. Medicaid Payments, by Type of Service, FY 2001 & FY
2002,” in Hospice Facts & Statistics, National Association for Home Care &
Hospice, March 2005, http://www.nahc.org/hospicefands.pdf (accessed
November 10, 2005)
TABLE 9.9
Number of states offering hospice under Medicaid, selected years
1987–2002
Total
States
Year
number
States added
dropped
1987
6
FL, KY, MI, MN, ND, VT
1988
15
DE, HI, IL, MA, NE, NY, NC, RI, TX, WI
MN
1989
24
AZ, CA, GA, ID, KS, MO, MT, PA, TN, UT
NE
1990
32
AL, AK, IA, MD, MN, NM, OH, VA, WA
TN
1991
34
CO, MS, TN
AK
1992
35
NJ
1993
36
DC, WV
AZ
1994
38
OR, WY
1995
40
AK, SC
1996
41
AR
1997
42
IN
1998
44
AZ, NV
1999
44
2002
47
TN, MN, ME
SOURCE: “Table 10. Number of States Offering Hospice under Medicaid,
Selected Years, 1987–2002,” in Hospice Facts & Statistics, National
Association for Home Care & Hospice, March 2005, http://www.nahc.org/
hospicefands.pdf (accessed November 10, 2005)
TABLE 9.7
Medicare benefit payments, fiscal years 2004 and 2005
2004 (estimated)
2005 (projected)
Amount
Percent
Amount
Percent
($ millions)
of total
($ millions)
of total
Total Medicare benefit payments*
295,334
100.0
326,019
100.0
Part A
Hospital care
113,624
38.5
119,398
36.6
Skilled nursing facility
16,468
5.6
16,976
5.2
Home health
5,501
1.9
6,152
1.9
Hospice
7,238
2.5
8,599
2.6
Managed care
20,932
7.1
27,764
8.5
Total
163,764
55.5
178,889
54.9
Part B
Physician
52,022
17.6
56,096
17.2
Durable medical equipment
7,868
2.7
8,136
2.5
Carrier lab
3,202
1.1
3,447
1.1
Other carrier
13,821
4.7
14,731
4.5
Hospital
16,883
5.7
18,573
5.7
Home health
5,689
1.9
6,370
2.0
Intermediary lab
2,651
0.9
2,834
0.9
Other intermediary
10,414
3.5
11,213
3.4
Managed care
18,830
6.4
24,573
7.5
Total
131,379
44.5
145,975
44.8
*Part A total does not include peer review organization payments. Figures may not add to totals due to rounding.
SOURCE: “Table 4. Medicare Benefit Payments, FY2004 and FY2005,” in Hospice Facts & Statistics, National Association for Home Care & Hospice, March
2005, http://www.nahc.org/hospicefands.pdf (accessed November 10, 2005)
Death and Dying
The Cost of Health Care
121

The segment of Medicare beneficiaries with a dis-
ability or ESRD rose from 3% of all Medicare benefici-
aries in 1980 to 5.4% in 2000. This group is projected to
grow to 8.7% by the year 2020 and level off in the next
decade. (See Figure 9.3.)
PATIENTS WITH TERMINAL DISEASES
Terminal patients often receive high-technology
intensive care that simply prolongs the dying process.
Studies by the Health Care Financing Administration
(HCFA; now the CMS) found that ‘‘medical services
generally
become
much
more
intense
as
death
approaches.’’ In the United States the fear of malpractice
suits, physicians trained to fight death to the end, and
government reimbursement encourage continued medical
care at all costs.
Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a set
of signs, symptoms, and certain diseases occurring
together when the immune system of a person infected
with the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) becomes
extremely weakened. According to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention (CDC), advances in treatment
during the mid- to late 1990s slowed the progression of
HIV infection to AIDS and led to dramatic decreases in
AIDS deaths. The decrease in AIDS deaths continued from
1999 to 2003 with a 3% decrease in deaths. Nonetheless,
the number of AIDS diagnoses increased an estimated 4%
from 1999 to 2003. In 2003 an estimated 43,171 people
became infected with HIV. The CDC estimated that in
2003
18,017
people
died
of
AIDS.
Cumulatively
through 2003, 929,985 people had been diagnosed with
AIDS, 524,060 people had died from the syndrome,
and 405,926 were living with it.
In 2003 the federal government spent $16.7 billion
on research, education and prevention, medical care,
and cash assistance for HIV/AIDS patients—a nearly
ninety-nine-fold increase over the $209 million spent
in 1985. More than half (61.3%, or $10.2 billion) was
spent on medical care. (See Table 9.14.)
In 2006 the per-person cost of AIDS medication in
the U.S. was approximately $10,000 annually. In other
parts of the world costs have been brought down to as
low as $140 per person per year. Former President
Bill Clinton suggested that those lower prices could
drive down prices in the U.S. as well (‘‘Clinton:
Worlds AIDS Fight May Lower Drug Costs,’’ ABC
News,
February
19,
2006,
http://abcnews.go.com/
GMA/Health/story?id=1637770&page=1&CMP=OTC-
RSSFeeds0312).
MEDICAID ASSISTANCE. The financing of health care
for AIDS patients has increasingly become the responsi-
bility of Medicaid, the entitlement program that provides
medical assistance to low-income Americans. This is
due, in large part, to the rising incidence of AIDS among
poor people and intravenous drug users—the groups least
likely to have private health insurance. Further, many
patients who might once have had private insurance
through their employers lose their coverage when they
become too ill to work. These individuals eventually turn
to Medicaid and other public programs for medical
assistance.
Some people, whose employment and economic
condition previously afforded the insurance coverage
TABLE 9.10
Number of current home health care patients by services
received, 2000
Selected servicesa
Number
All patientsb
1,355,300
Medical/skilled nursing
Total medical and/or skilled nursing
1,017,900
Physician
32,300
Skilled nursing
1,016,500
Equipment and/or medication
Total equipment/medication
174,800
Durable medical equipment and supplies
109,500
Medications
88,900
Personal care
Total personal care
600,900
Continuous home care
53,100
Companion
40,400
Homemaker-householdc
329,400
Personal care
476,400
Transportation
25,300*
Respite care
17,000*
Therapeutic
Total therapeutic
502,600
Dietary and/or nutritional
60,200
Enterostomal therapy
17,700*
IV therapyd
52,700
Occupational therapy
112,300
Physical therapy
360,700
Respiratory therapy
29,500
Speech therapy and/or audiology
30,600
Other high tech caree
11,000*
Psychosocial
Total psychosocial
160,000
Counseling
22,400
Psychological
14,700*
Social
117,500
Spiritual and/or pastoral care
15,300*
Referral
34,800
Othere, f
46,300
*Figure does not meet standard of reliability or precision because the sample size is
between 30 and 59.
aNumbers will not add to totals because a patient may be included in more than one
category.
bTotal number of home health care patients.
cIncludes Meals on Wheels.
dIV is intravenous.
eIncludes enteral nutrition and dialysis.
fIncludes dental, vocational therapy, volunteers, and other services.
SOURCE: Adapted from “Table 6. Number of Current Home Health Care
Patients by Services Received, by Sex and Race: United States, 2000,” in
National Home and Hospice Care Data, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/
data/nhhcsd/curhomecare00.pdf (accessed November 7, 2005)
122
The Cost of Health Care
Death and Dying

they needed, find their situation changed once they
test positive for HIV. Some may become virtually
ineligible
for
private
health
insurance
coverage.
Others
require
government
assistance
because
insurance companies can declare HIV infection a
‘‘pre-existing condition,’’ making it ineligible for pay-
ment of insurance claims. In addition, some insurance
companies limit AIDS coverage to relatively small
amounts.
THE RYAN WHITE COMPREHENSIVE AIDS RESOURCES
EMERGENCY (CARE) ACT. Currently, the CARE Act (PL
101–381) is the only federal program providing funds
specifically for medical and support services for HIV/
AIDS patients. It was initially passed in 1990 and was
reauthorized in 1996 and 2000. Appropriations of
CARE funds follow one of four formulas:
• Under the Title I formula, the federal government
provides emergency assistance to metropolitan areas
disproportionately affected by the HIV epidemic. To
qualify for Title I financing, eligible metropolitan
areas (EMAs) must have more than two thousand
cumulative AIDS cases reported during the preceding
five years and a population of at least five hundred
thousand. In fiscal year (FY) 2005, fifty-one EMAs
in twenty-one states, the District of Columbia,
and Puerto Rico received $587.4 million. (See
Table 9.15.)
• Under the Title II formula, funds are provided to state
governments. Ninety percent of Title II funds are
allocated based on AIDS patient counts, while 10%
are distributed through competitive grants to public
and nonprofit agencies. In addition, states receive
funding to support AIDS Drug Assistance Programs
(ADAPs), which provide medication to low-income
HIV patients who are uninsured or underinsured. In
2005 alone the federal government provided nearly
$1.1 billion for ADAPs funds and for improved health
care and support services for HIV/AIDS patients. (See
Table 9.16.)
• Title III funds are designated for Early Intervention
Services (EIS) and Planning. EIS grants support out-
patient
HIV
services
for
low-income
people
in existing primary care systems, and Planning grants
aid those working to develop HIV primary care.
• Title IV programs focus on the development of assis-
tance for women, infants, and children.
Cancer
Cancer, in all its forms, is very expensive to treat.
Compared with other diseases, there are more options for
cancer treatment, more adverse side effects that require
treatment, and a greater potential for unrelieved pain.
According to the American Cancer Society’s 2006
Cancer Facts & Figures, the overall estimated cost of
TABLE 9.11
Medicare payments and annual percent change, by benefit type, fiscal years 1998–2005
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005*
Benefit type
Amount ($ billions)
Managed care
31.9
37.4
39.8
42.1
33.9
36.5
39.8
52.3
Inpatient hospitals
87.0
85.7
86.5
93.2
102.1
108.6
113.6
119.4
Skilled nursing facilities
13.6
11.5
10.6
12.4
14.7
14.5
16.5
17.0
Home health
14.0
9.4
9.2
9.3
10.0
10.1
11.2
12.5
Hospice
2.1
2.5
2.8
3.4
4.5
5.9
7.2
8.6
Physicians
32.3
33.4
36.0
40.4
44.2
47.3
52.0
56.1
Outpatient hospitals
10.5
8.5
8.4
10.1
12.8
14.7
16.9
18.6
Other
14.6
15.7
17.2
20.3
23.7
27.4
30.0
35.2
Durable medical equipment
4.1
4.3
4.6
5.3
6.2
7.6
7.9
8.1
Prescription drugs
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
0.2
1.2
Total, part A
134.3
129.3
126.2
136.0
144.1
153.1
163.8
178.9
Total, part B
75.8
79.1
88.9
100.5
108.1
119.5
131.4
146.0
Total, part D
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
0.2
1.2
Total Medicare
210.1
208.4
215.1
236.5
252.1
272.6
295.3
329.0
Percent change from previous year by benefit type
Managed care
17.2
6.4
5.8
19.5
7.7
9.0
31.4
Inpatient hospitals
1.5
0.9
7.7
9.5
6.4
4.6
5.1
Skilled nursing facilities
15.4
7.8
17.0
18.5
1.4
13.8
3.0
Home health
32.9
2.1
1.1
7.5
1.0
10.9
11.6
Hospice
19.1
12.0
21.4
32.4
31.1
22.0
19.4
Physicians
3.4
7.8
12.2
9.4
7.0
9.9
7.9
Outpatient hospitals
19.1
1.2
20.2
26.7
14.8
15.0
10.1
Other
7.5
9.6
18.0
16.7
15.6
9.5
17.3
Durable medical equipment
4.9
7.0
15.2
17.0
22.6
3.9
2.5
Notes: *Fiscal year 2005 numbers are estimated.
SOURCE: “Table 4. Medicare Payments and Annual Percent Change, by Benefit Type, Fiscal Years 1998–2005,” in Basic Statistics about Home Care, National
Association for Home Care & Hospice, January 2006, unpublished data
Death and Dying
The Cost of Health Care
123

cancer to the nation in 2005 was $209.9 billion. Of this
amount, $74 billion was due to direct medical costs—the
total of all health expenditures. Of the remainder, $17.5
billion was the cost of lost productivity due to illness, and
$118.4 billion was the cost of lost productivity due to
premature death.
MEDICARE, CLINICAL TRIALS, AND CANCER. Some
health insurance plans cover all or a portion of the costs
associated with clinical trials (research studies that offer
promising new anticancer drugs and treatment to patients
enrolled). Policies vary, and some plans decide whether
they will pay for clinical trials on a case-by-case basis.
Some health plans limit coverage to patients for whom
no standard therapy is available. Others cover clinical
trials only if they are not much more expensive than
standard treatment, and many choose not to cover any
costs involved with clinical trials.
On June 7, 2000, President Clinton revised Medicare
payment policies to enable beneficiaries to participate in
clinical trials. Prior to this policy change, many older adults
were prevented from participating in clinical trials because
they could not afford the costs associated with the trials.
TABLE 9.12
Number of Medicare-certified home care agencies, by type, selected years 1967–2003
Freestanding agencies
Facility-based agencies
Visiting
Private
Other
Hospital-
Skilled
nurse
Combination
Public
Proprietary
not-for-profit
freestanding
based
nursing
Year
associationsa
agenciesb
agenciesc
agenciesd
agenciese
agenciesf
agenciesg
facilitiesi
Total
1967
549
93
939
0
0
39
133
0
0
1,753
1975
525
46
1,228
47
0
109
273
9
5
2,242
1980
515
63
1,260
186
484
40
359
8
9
2,924
1985
514
59
1,205
1,943
832
4
1,277
20
129
5,983
1990
474
47
985
1,884
710
0
1,486
8
101
5,695
1991
476
41
941
1,970
701
0
1,537
9
105
5,780
1992
530
52
1,083
1,962
637
28
1,623
3
86
6,004
1993
594
46
1,196
2,146
558
41
1,809
1
106
6,497
1994
586
45
1,146
2,892
597
48
2,081
3
123
7,521
1995
575
40
1,182
3,951
667
65
2,470
4
166
9,120
1996
576
34
1,177
4,658
695
58
2,634
4
191
10,027
1997
553
33
1,149
5,024
715
65
2,698
3
204
10,444
1998
460
35
968
3,414
610
69
2,356
2
166
8,080
1999
452
35
918
3,192
621
65
2,300
1
163
7,747
2000
436
31
909
2,863
560
56
2,151
1
150
7,152
2001
425
23
867
2,835
543
68
1,976
1
123
6,861
2002
430
27
850
3,027
563
79
1,907
1
119
7,007
2003
439
27
888
3,402
546
74
1,776
0
113
7,265
Note: 2003 data obtained in January, 2004.
aVisiting nurse associations are freestanding, voluntary, nonprofit organizations governed by a board of directors and usually financed by tax-deductible contributions as well as by
earnings.
bCombination agencies are combined government and voluntary agencies. These agencies are sometimes included with counts for visiting nurse associations.
cPublic agencies are government agencies operated by a state, county, city, or other unit of local government having a major responsibility for preventing disease and for community
health education.
dProprietary agencies are freestanding, for-profit home care agencies.
ePrivate not-for-profit agencies are freestanding and privately developed, governed, and owned nonprofit home care agencies. These agencies were not counted separately prior to 1980.
fOther freestanding agencies that do not fit one of the categories for freestanding agencies listed above.
gHospital-based agencies are operating units or departments of a hospital. Agencies that have working arrangements with a hospital, or perhaps are even owned by a hospital but operated
as separate entities, are classified as freestanding agencies under one of the categories listed above.
hRefers to agencies based in rehabilitation facilities.
iRefers to agencies based in skilled nursing facilities.
SOURCE: “Table 1. Number of Medicare-Certified Home Care Agencies, by Auspice, for Selected Years, 1967–2003,” in Basic Statistics about Home Care,
National Association for Home Care & Hospice, updated 2004, http://www.nahc.org/04HC_Stats.pdf (accessed March 1, 2006)
Rehabilitation
facilitiesh
FIGURE 9.2
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
Number in thousands
2000
1998
1996
1994
1992
Number of current home health care patients, 1992, 1994,
1996, 1998, 2000
SOURCE: “Current Patient Trends. Number of Current Home Health
Care Patients: United States, 1992, 1994, 1996, 1998, 2000,” in
National Home and Hospice Care Data, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, http://www.cdc
.gov/nchs/about/major/nhhcsd/nhhcschart.htm (accessed November 7,
2005)
All ages
65 years and over
Less than 65 years
124
The Cost of Health Care
Death and Dying

Alzheimer’s Disease
Liesi E. Hebert et al, in ‘‘Alzheimer Disease in the U.S.
Population: Prevalence Estimates Using the 2000 Census’’
(Archives of Neurology, vol. 60, no. 8, August 2003), esti-
mate that in 2000 there were 4.5 million people with
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) in the U.S. population. AD is a
form of dementia characterized by memory loss, behavior
and personality changes, and decreasing thinking abilities.
Care and treatment of those suffering from dementia cost
the United States as much as $100 billion each year.
THE COST OF DYING
The Canadian Health Services Research Foundation
(CHSRF),
in
‘‘Myth:
The
Cost
of
Dying
Is
an
Increasing Strain on the Healthcare System’’ (CHSRF,
2003), reported that treating the dying is not growing
and overwhelming health care systems. The report
describes research conducted in North America and
Europe, showing that thirty years of research debunk
the myth that health care costs in the last year of life
are extraordinarily high and are increasing. Research
spanning countries and continents, the report notes,
shows that treating the dying accounts for only about
10% to 12% of many countries’ total health care
budgets.
In ‘‘Medicare Expenditures during the Last Year of
Life: Findings from the 1992–1996 Medicare Current
Beneficiary Survey—Cost of Care’’ (Donald R. Hoover
et
al,
Health
Services
Research,
vol.
37,
no.
6,
December, 2002), the authors show that approximately
22% of total annual U.S. health care expenditures is
spent during the last year of life. This figure is higher
than noted in the previous paragraph. These expenses
consume about 26% of the Medicare budget and about
TABLE 9.13
Nursing home residents 65 years of age and over, by age, sex, and race, 1973–74, 1985, 1995, and 1999
[Data are based on a sample of nursing home residents]
Residents
Residents per 1,000 population
Age, sex, and race
1973–74
1985
1995
1999
1973–74
1985
1995
1999
Age
65 years and over, age adjusteda
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
58.5
54.0
45.9
43.3
65 years and over, crude
961,500
1,318,300
1,422,600
1,469,500
44.7
46.2
42.4
42.9
65–74 years
163,100
212,100
190,200
194,800
12.3
12.5
10.1
10.8
75–84 years
384,900
509,000
511,900
517,600
57.7
57.7
45.9
43.0
85 years and over
413,600
597,300
720,400
757,100
257.3
220.3
198.6
182.5
Male 
65 years and over, age adjusteda
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
42.5
38.8
32.8
30.6
65 years and over, crude
265,700
334,400
356,800
377,800
30.0
29.0
26.1
26.5
65–74 years
65,100
80,600
79,300
84,100
11.3
10.8
9.5
10.3
75–84 years
102,300
141,300
144,300
149,500
39.9
43.0
33.3
30.8
85 years and over
98,300
112,600
133,100
144,200
182.7
145.7
130.8
116.5
Female
65 years and over, age adjusteda
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
67.5
61.5
52.3
49.8
65 years and over, crude
695,800
983,900
1,065,800
1,091,700
54.9
57.9
53.7
54.6
65–74 years
98,000
131,500
110,900
110,700
13.1
13.8
10.6
11.2
75–84 years
282,600
367,700
367,600
368,100
68.9
66.4
53.9
51.2
85 years and over
315,300
484,700
587,300
612,900
294.9
250.1
224.9
210.5
Whiteb
65 years and over, age adjusteda
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
61.2
55.5
45.4
41.9
65 years and over, crude
920,600
1,227,400
1,271,200
1,279,600
46.9
47.7
42.3
42.1
65–74 years
150,100
187,800
154,400
157,200
12.5
12.3
9.3
10.0
75–84 years
369,700
473,600
453,800
440,600
60.3
59.1
44.9
40.5
85 years and over
400,800
566,000
663,000
681,700
270.8
228.7
200.7
181.8
Black or African Americanb
65 years and over, age adjusteda
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
28.2
41.5
50.4
55.6
65 years and over, crude
37,700
82,000
122,900
145,900
22.0
35.0
45.2
51.1
65–74 years
12,200
22,500
29,700
30,300
11.1
15.4
18.4
18.2
75–84 years
13,400
30,600
47,300
58,700
26.7
45.3
57.2
66.5
85 years and over
12,100
29,000
45,800
56,900
105.7
141.5
167.1
183.1
aAge adjusted by the direct method to the year 2000 population standard using the following three age groups: 65–74 years, 75–84 years, and 85 years and over.
bBeginning in 1999 the instruction for the race item on the questionnaire was changed so that more than one race could be recorded. In previous years only one racial category could be
checked. Estimates for racial groups presented in this table are for residents for whom only one race was recorded. Estimates for residents where multiple races were checked are 
unreliable due to small sample sizes and are not shown.
Notes: “. . .”Category not applicable. Excludes residents in personal care or domiciliary care homes. Age refers to age at time of interview. Civilian population estimates used to
compute rates for the 1990s are 1990-based postcensal estimates, as of July 1.
SOURCE: “Table 102. Nursing Home Residents 65 Years of Age and Over, according to Age, Sex, and Race: United States, 1973–74, 1985, 1995, and 1999,” in
Health, United States, 2006, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, November 2005, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/
hus/hus05.pdf (accessed February 27, 2006)
Death and Dying
The Cost of Health Care
125

18% of non-Medicare budgets. The researchers note,
however, that end-of-life Medicare expenses grew at
the same rate as did other Medicare expenses in the
early 1990s and are not growing more quickly than
other Medicare expenses.
Why aren’t health care costs in the last year of life
rising? The CHSRF report comments that most people
die without using costly high-tech equipment, and many
die after only two weeks or less in a hospital. In the
United States nearly half (46%) of Medicare recipients
were not hospitalized before they died. Hospitalization
dramatically drives up the cost of dying in America,
and many terminally ill patients are choosing alterna-
tives to hospitalization, such as hospice and home
health care.
FIGURE 9.3
Growth in the number and percent of Medicare beneficiaries
with disabilities or end stage renal disease, selected years 
1970–2030 
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
Medicare enrollment (millions)
[The number of people Medicare serves will nearly double by 2030]
1970
1980
1990
2000
2010
2020
2030
Calendar year
20.4
28.4*
34.3
39.6*
45.9
61.0*
76.8
8.6
8.7
7.3
5.4
3.3
3.0
20.4
25.5
31.0
34.1
38.6
52.2
68.2
SOURCE: “Number of Medicare Beneficiaries,” in Program Information 
on Medicare, Medicaid, SCHIP, and Other Programs of the Centers for
Medicare and Medicaid Services, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid 
Services, June 2002, http://www.cms.hhs.gov/TheChartSeries/ 
(accessed February 28, 2006)
*Numbers may not sum due to rounding.
Disabled & end-stage renal disease
Elderly
126
The Cost of Health Care
Death and Dying

TABLE 9.14
Federal spending for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-related activities, by agency and type of activity, selected fiscal years
1985–2003
[Data are compiled from federal government appropriations]
Agency and type of activity
1985
1990
1995
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003a
Agency
Amount in millions
All federal spending
$209
$3,070
$7,019
$10,779
$12,025
$14,184
$14,988
$16,677
Department of Health and Human Services,
total
201
2,372
5,200
8,494
9, 621
11,406
12,039
13,292
Department of Health and Human Services
discretionary spending, totalb
109
1,592
2,700
4,094
4, 546
5,226
5,789
6,142
National Institutes of Health
66
908
1,334
1,793
2,004
2,247
2,499
2,717
Substance Abuse and Mental
Health Services Administration
—
50
24
92
110
157
169
171
Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention
33
443
590
657
687
859
931
936
Food and Drug Administration
9
57
73
70
76
76
76
80
Health Resources and Services
Administration (HRSA)
—
113
661
1,416
1,599
1,815
1,917
2,025
Agency for Healthcare Research and 
Quality
—
8
9
2
2
3
3
2
Office of the Secretaryc
—
10
6
12
13
15
14
18
Indian Health Service
—
3
4
4
4
4
4
4
Emergency Fund
. . .
. . .
. . .
50
50
50
50
50
Global AIDS Trust Fund
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
125
99
The International Mother and Child HIV
Prevention Initiatived
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
40
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services
75
780
2,500
4,400
5,000
5,600
6,250
7,150
Social Security Administratione
17
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
Ricky Ray Hemophilia Relief Fund (HRSA)f
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
75
580
. . .
. . .
Social Security Administratione
. . .
239
881
1,158
1,240
1,259
1,351
1,395
Department of Veterans Affairs
8
220
317
401
345
405
391
396
Department of Defense
—
124
110
86
97
108
96
78
Agency for International Development
—
71
120
139
200
430
510
873
Department of Housing and Urban Development
—
—
171
225
232
257
277
292
Office of Personnel Management
—
37
212
266
279
292
297
321
Other departments
—
7
8
10
11
27
27
30
Activity
Amount in millions
Research
75
1,013
1,460
1,900
2,125
2,368
2,614
2,821
Department of Health and Human Services
discretionary spendingb
75
974
1,417
1,869
2,085
2,328
2,580
2,800
Department of Veterans Affairs
—
6
5
7
7
7
8
8
Department of Defense
—
33
38
24
33
33
26
13
Education and prevention
33
591
770
902
998
1,396
1,629
1,940
Department of Health and Human Services
discretionary spendingb
33
460
604
719
751
950
1,091
1,130
Department of Veterans Affairs
—
29
31
30
33
35
35
Department of Defense
—
28
12
10
10
17
17
11
Agency for International Development
—
71
120
139
200
380
473
749
Other
—
3
3
4
4
14
13
15
Medical care
83
1,227
3,738
6,595
7,356
8,324
9,117
10,229
Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services:
Medicaid (federal share)
70
670
1,500
2,900
3,300
3,700
4,200
4,800
Medicare
5
110
1,000
1,500
1,700
1,900
2,050
2,350
Department of Health and Human Services
discretionary spendingb
—
158
680
1,507
1,711
1,948
2,118
2,212
Department of Veterans Affairs
8
185
281
364
305
363
348
353
Department of Defense
—
63
60
52
54
58
53
54
Agency for International Development
—
—
—
—
—
50
38
124
Office of Personnel Management
—
37
212
266
279
292
297
321
Other
—
4
5
6
7
13
14
15
Death and Dying
The Cost of Health Care
127

TABLE 9.14
Federal spending for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-related activities, by agency and type of activity, selected fiscal years
1985–2003 [CONTINUED]
Agency and type of activity
1985
1990
1995
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003a
Cash assistance
17
239
1,052
1,383
1,547
2,096
1,628
1,687
Social Security Administration:
Disability insurance
12
184
631
828
870
919
961
985
Supplemental security income
5
55
250
330
370
340
390
410
Department of Housing and Urban Development
—
—
171
225
232
257
277
292
Ricky Ray Hemophilia Relief Fundf
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
75
580
. . .
. . .
Notes: “—”Quantity zero. “. . .”Category not applicable.
aPreliminary figures.
bDiscretionary spending is contrasted with entitlement spending. Medicare and Medicaid are examples of entitlement spending.
cThe Office of the Assistant Secretary for Health prior to fiscal year 1996 (FY1996).
dThe International Mother and Child HIV Prevention Initiative was introduced in 2002 with funding starting in fiscal year 2003 (FY2003).
ePrior to 1995 the Social Security Administration was part of the Department of Health and Human Services.
fThe Ricky Ray Hemophilia Relief Fund was established by the U.S. Congress in 1998 to make compassionate payments to certain individuals who were treated with antihemophilic factor
between July 1, 1982 and December 31, 1987, and who contracted HIV. Some family members may also be covered by the fund.
SOURCE: “Table 128. Federal Spending for Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)-Related Activities, according to Agency and Type of Activity, United States,
Selected Fiscal Years 1985–2003,” in Health, United States, 2004, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, September
2004, ftp://ftp.cdc.gov/pub/Health_Statistics/NCHS/Publications/Health_US/hus04tables/ (accessed February 27, 2006)
128
The Cost of Health Care
Death and Dying

TABLE 9.15
Ryan White CARE (Comprehensive AIDS Resources Emergency) Act Title I Grant Awards, 1992–2005
Eligible
metropolitan
areas
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
Atlanta, GA
$3,130,126
$5,490,571
$7,488,801
$9,091,331
$9,208,162
$12,632,117
$12,021,454
$13,147,268
$15,507,832
$15,992,692
$17,554,590
$18,751,178
$18,339,732
$19,126,568
Austin, TX
$2,124,274
$2,398,671
$3,337,861
$2,856,752
$3,175,509
$3,575,995
$3,922,582
$3,946,480
3,995,912
3,800,520
3,851,321
Baltimore, MD
$1,898,561
$3,250,343
$3,923,438
$4,715,150
$8,364,074
$10,033,688
$12,184,481
$13,478,549
$15,351,112
$16,698,367
$17,986,832
21,458,791
19,710,879
19,179,964
Bergen-Passaic, NJ
$2,019,121
$2,847,639
$3,369,095
$4,292,593
$4,354,291
$4,320,176
$4,626,995
$5,234,104
$5,313,602
5,203,065
4,814,704
4,376,432
Boston, MA
$2,823,768
$4,154,744
$6,955,035
$7,079,242
$8,360,436
$9,033,443
$9,463,130
$10,647,381
$12,469,255
$15,363,160
$15,198,508
15,398,403
14,848,697
13,651,229
Caguas, PR
$902,928
$1,064,876
$1,431,210
$1,405,197
$1,610,314
$1,713,686
$1,750,404
$1,768,847
1,623,395
1,816,647
1,816,497
Chicago, IL
$4,327,603
$7,390,763
$9,625,451
$12,099,865
$13,164,930
$15,741,071
$15,995,512
$18,227,884
$19,003,954
$22,963,079
$23,005,863
23,225,285
25,426,760
24,992,277
Cleveland, OH
$1,384,956
$1,877,513
$2,459,443
$2,933,058
$3,107,796
$3,384,855
$3,535,615
3,593,703
3,486,936
3,464,211
Dallas, TX
$3,119,688
$4,542,034
$6,935,644
$8,176,385
$7,820,653
$8,129,583
$9,082,217
$10,164,078
$11,077,000
$12,098,406
$12,001,240
13,205,009
12,820,583
13,038,882
Denver, CO
$3,375,884
$3,092,041
$3,549,707
$4,668,572
$4,278,161
$4,150,341
$4,581,734
$4,840,128
$4,741,353
5,035,812
4,529,097
4,305,958
Detroit, MI
$2,091,739
$2,849,559
$2,406,902
$4,405,380
$6,087,121
$5,628,350
$6,585,744
$7,234,813
$7,612,631
$8,363,876
8,766,530
8,590,281
8,605,663
Dutchess County, NY
$609,583
$581,761
$776,847
$854,481
$1,220,662
$1,208,858
$1,362,331
$1,271,442
1,337,041
1,231,242
1,222,865
Ft. Lauderdale, FL
$3,065,827
$4,591,215
$6,814,599
$5,091,994
$6,584,204
$8,312,185
$10,128,631
$10,810,324
$11,437,539
$13,816,037
$14,872,845
14,695,524
14,749,550
14,611,634
Ft. Worth, TX
$2,255,398
$1,902,232
$2,618,024
$2,935,543
$2,968,606
$3,298,024
$3,376,074
3,503,726
3,373,450
3,502,064
Hartford, CT
$3,048,467
$2,661,473
$3,613,029
$4,019,409
$4,417,574
$4,868,180
$4,648,410
4,679,151
4,552,237
4,498,360
Houston, TX
$5,826,845
$7,820,319
$10,133,592
$10,233,981
$10,312,524
$10,768,697
$12,722,479
$15,489,996
$17,665,434
$19,283,756
$19,720,190
20,526,823
19,128,572
19,911,575
Hudson
$2,181,853
$3,618,220
$4,140,141
$3,770,366
$3,767,874
$4,600,103
$5,320,300
$5,015,785
$5,541,714
$6,167,889
$6,278,761
Jacksonville, FL
$2,418,868
$2,725,251
$3,762,713
$3,443,168
$3,683,146
$4,175,873
$4,799,813
$5,019,332
5,166,800
4,863,093
5,025,194
Jersey City, NJ
6,426,456
5,884,194
5,644,838
Kansas City, MO
$2,655,564
$2,726,195
$2,514,291
$2,884,537
$2,622,409
$2,952,910
$3,064,120
$3,386,127
$3,328,170
3,138,000
3,240,813
2,786,392
Las Vegas, NV
$75,000
$3,402,697
$3,689,337
$4,455,787
$4,231,997
4,658,661
4,473,401
4,531,754
Los Angeles, CA
$9,788,087
$19,190,269
$25,568,865
$31,216,202
$26,555,597
$30,227,298
$30,637,106
$33,540,737
$34,683,327
$35,020,216
$37,962,755
39,994,550
36,644,121
36,834,089
Miami, FL
$5,923,065
$9,716,264
$15,258,563
$19,195,347
$15,156,078
$18,863,208
$18,472,153
$21,248,387
$23,450,383
$25,385,904
$27,097,189
27,024,359
25,540,011
24,551,236
Middlesex-Somerset- 
Hunterdon, NJ
$2,198,883
$1,919,076
$2,597,923
$2,555,029
$2,750,975
$2,888,808
$2,925,300
2,991,173
2,723,697
2,689,723
Minneapolis- 
St. Paul, MN
$1,370,726 $1,990,700 $2,570,712 $2,548,603 $2,826,949 $3,216,026 $3,220,400 3,255,148
3,093,915
3,011,747
Nassau- Suffolk, NY
$2,012,809
$2,886,968
$3,895,849
$3,683,885
$4,697,795
$4,939,871
$5,632,012
$6,118,736
$6,532,144
$6,242,641
6,470,593
5,951,789
5,805,121
New Haven, CT
$2,136,872
$2,711,634
$4,002,182
$5,336,678
$5,348,730
$6,100,471
$6,261,941
$6,944,353
$6,644,351
7,545,500
7,069,348
7,050,669
New Orleans, LA
$1,796,972
$3,243,332
$3,503,009
$2,087,199
$4,727,682
$4,921,857
$5,695,360
$5,935,834
$6,942,652
$7,066,837
7,326,105
6,787,028
7,323,546
New York, NY
$35,894,688
$44,469,219
$100,054,267
$93,587,184
$92,241,697
$92,459,373
$95,325,334
$96,961,856
$107,560,148
$119,256,891
$117,739,488
103,875,412
122,103,117
117,906,710
Newark, NJ
$5,363,563
$3,542,848
$7,009,180
$11,791,405
$9,725,848
$11,612,530
$12,630,257
$14,390,269
$14,554,092
$16,254,538
$17,467,481
17,706,875
15,312,104
15,412,565
Norfolk, VA
$75,000
$3,665,087
$4,089,698
$4,736,759
$4,906,134
5,168,622
4,820,201
4,726,063
Oakland, CA
$2,123,466
$2,602,816
$3,929,287
$4,148,299
$4,741,595
$5,905,961
$5,926,194
$6,218,532
$6,704,657
$6,776,406
$6,987,208
7,024,473
6,611,607
6,092,561
Orange County, CA
$1,839,726
$2,702,937
$3,319,282
$3,629,317
$4,401,330
$3,810,759
$4,300,690
$4,670,880
$4,956,671
$5,564,004
5,683,092
5,233,329
5,041,476
Orlando, FL
$2,715,587
$3,194,835
$3,599,489
$4,319,349
$4,609,839
$4,907,180
$6,007,600
$6,497,014
$7,225,978
7,329,133
7,821,786
7,963,150
Philadelphia, PA
$3,671,248
$4,729,230
$7,374,936
$9,836,096
$10,345,478
$13,465,328
$14,081,773
$16,011,451
$18,134,011
$22,114,655
$23,522,981
24,744,302
24,448,485
24,051,724
Phoenix, AZ
$2,217,471
$2,447,784
$2,901,602
$3,380,053
$3,412,037
$3,865,319
$5,001,568
$6,575,645
$6,422,556
6,867,905
6,814,427
6,467,107
Ponce, PR
$1,280,364
$1,176,793
$1,908,071
$1,685,036
$2,183,463
$2,200,114
$2,487,768
$2,460,695
$2,607,961
$2,858,721
2,611,677
2,718,331
2,431,319
Portland, OR
$2,402,734
$2,688,924
$3,472,480
$3,057,466
$3,115,251
$3,216,312
$3,513,044
$3,649,120
3,687,601
3,567,475
3,445,252
Riverside- 
San Bernardino, CA
$2,402,010
$2,656,331
$4,687,432
$5,986,979
$5,634,427
$6,463,388
$6,913,948
$6,940,381
$7,428,435
7,199,843
6,823,183
6,362,841
Sacramento, CA
$2,463,814
$2,038,827
$2,389,370
$2,578,873
$2,744,171
$2,899,765
$2,840,714
2,660,029
2,968,051
2,782,514
St. Louis, MO
$2,248,247
$2,581,330
$2,587,364
$3,506,350
$3,561,850
$3,664,771
$4,239,080
$4,432,316
$4,767,604
5,068,856
4,371,154
4,494,789
Death and Dying
The Cost of Health Care
129

TABLE 9.15
Ryan White CARE (Comprehensive AIDS Resources Emergency) Act Title I Grant Awards, 1992–2005 [CONTINUED]
Eligible
metropolitan
areas
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
San Antonio, TX
$1,731,222
$2,396,426
$3,014,191
$2,952,239
$3,014,654
$3,163,374
$3,862,398
$3,876,586
3,806,139
3,833,443
3,893,845
San Diego, CA
$2,778,724
$3,761,979
$5,233,574
$5,628,252
$6,592,104
$8,198,109
$8,452,437
$8,872,685
$9,071,625
$10,577,352
$10,436,496
10,765,303
10,287,797
9,741,708
San Francisco, CA
$19,043,763
$27,217,076
$39,275,384
$32,119,914
$35,397,274
$37,194,634
$36,394,914
$36,218,513
$35,246,477
$35,771,651
$33,561,470
33,941,235
29,849,780
28,297,777
San Jose, CA
$2,275,044
$1,992,602
$2,445,480
$2,486,136
$2,612,060
$2,866,655
$2,754,005
2,798,524
2,656,550
2,497,465
San Juan, PR
$3,579,982
$4,679,777
$8,456,057
$10,269,416
$8,199,506
$10,550,845
$11,658,912
$11,912,865
$13,558,330
$15,094,482
$16,235,174
14,772,898
14,732,565
14,695,304
Santa Rosa, CA
$1,207,605
$1,142,456
$1,330,630
$1,225,807
$1,127,018
$1,152,406
$1,206,194
$1,131,226
1,106,742
1,107,428
1,049,715
Seattle, WA
$2,824,570
$3,233,903
$4,048,484
$4,289,545
$5,481,431
$5,060,533
$5,303,343
$5,488,688
$5,852,286
$5,978,779
6,286,678
5,842,615
5,631,611
Tampa,
St. Petersburg, FL
$2,265,553
$3,304,312
$4,231,119
$4,610,201
$6,548,952
$6,536,189
$7,236,728
$8,016,131
$8,595,830
$8,530,778
8,856,949
8,719,669
9,196,277
Vineland-Millville
Bridgeton, NJ
$340,644
$454,338
$677,001
$594,001
$688,648
$684,897
$807,157
$910,779
810,259
847,898
875,354
Washington, DC
$5,127,184
$7,447,578
$9,408,935
$10,787,072
$12,849,067
$15,838,868
$16,710,726
$18,322,558
$19,903,750
$24,507,346
$25,980,259
27,871,807
26,951,014
29,431,967
West Palm 
Beach, FL
$3,582,542
$3,770,641
$3,390,914
$5,122,618
$5,965,481
$6,711,944
$7,169,030
$7,795,848
$9,156,524
9,871,953
9,408,695
9,526,597
Total
$119,668,041
$182,326,998
$320,336,851
$349,916,505
$372,829,731
$429,377,900
$445,326,000
$485,816,900
$526,811,000
$582,727,700
$597,256,000
$599,513,000
$595,342,001
$587,425,500
SOURCE: Adapted from “Title I Funding History,” and “Ryan White CARE Act: Fiscal Year 2003 Title I Awards,” in “HHS Awards $600 Million for AIDS Care in Major Urban Areas,” HHS News, and “Ryan White
CARE Act: Fiscal Year 2004 Title I Awards,” in “HHS Awards $595 Million for AIDS Care in Major Urban Areas,” in News Release, and “Ryan White CARE Act: Fiscal Year 2005 Title I Awards,” in “HHS Awards
Almost $1.7 Billion for HIV/AIDS Care,” in HHS News, March 2, 2005, Health Resources and Services Administration, HIV/AIDS Bureau, http://www.hhs.gov/news/press/2005pres/20050302.html (accessed
November 7, 2005)
130
The Cost of Health Care
Death and Dying

TABLE 9.16
Ryan White CARE (Comprehensive AIDS Resources Emergency) Act Title II Grant Awards, 1996–2005
State
Fiscal year 1996
Fiscal year 1997
Fiscal year 1998
Fiscal year 1999
Fiscal year 2000
Fiscal year 2001
Fiscal year 2002
Fiscal year 2003
Fiscal year 2004
Fiscal year 2005
AL
$2,756,823
$4,167,971
$5,110,076
$7,294,833
$8,223,550
$10,100,107
$11,005,960
$10,867,008
$11,317,534
$11,881,914
AK
$288,443
$362,917
$444,562
$593,491
$644,658
$863,456
$898,686
$926,023
974,705
1,006,313
AZ
$2,260,259
$3,496,214
$4,553,503
$6,281,940
$7,876,550
$9,267,392
$10,130,689
$11,255,601
11,648,614
12,732,077
AR
$1,369,814
$2,050,008
$2,505,494
$3,313,331
$3,729,267
$3,970,060
$4,397,016
$4,933,831
4,933,831
5,161,119
CA
$36,282,354
$57,920,029
$73,677,524
$95,937,546
$106,594,028
$108,968,671
$115,580,982
$118,274,998
121,425,527
121,734,064
CO
$2,509,154
$3,734,969
$4,614,053
$5,755,742
$6,501,977
$7,384,159
$7,988,712
$7,447,255
7,759,634
7,759,634
CT
$3,651,778
$6,120,430
$8,267,209
$11,422,933
$12,473,062
$13,071,734
$13,873,014
$14,915,598
15,175,723
15,746,598
DE
$1,259,006
$1,942,410
$2,429,055
$3,065,717
$3,444,082
$3,952,853
$4,549,172
$5,129,211
5,340,795
5,432,326
DC
$3,332,588
$5,490,772
$7,719,573
$11,009,761
$12,208,813
$13,851,117
$15,492,398
$16,875,124
18,323,488
18,951,519
FL
$25,220,349
$41,314,996
$53,845,136
$73,482,287
$84,151,932
$90,768,728
$99,913,339
$108,800,440
111,668,948
116,883,905
GA
$7,394,151
$12,340,139
$16,211,799
$21,473,723
$24,609,445
$29,063,413
$31,581,983
$32,523,811
33,354,271
36,312,311
HI
$1,180,678
$1,701,733
$1,933,618
$2,425,061
$2,714,578
$2,973,119
$2,879,231
$3,134,711
3,298,130
3,298,130
ID
$285,657
$362,917
$444,562
$581,700
$637,862
$946,929
$977,028
$940,179
964,689
965,496
IL
$7,260,236
$12,033,969
$15,478,545
$21,516,441
$23,741,440
$26,962,344
$29,041,633
$32,061,756
34,870,568
36,007,864
IN
$2,762,555
$4,301,051
$5,362,040
$7,161,199
$7,813,244
$8,888,172
$9,607,370
$10,080,837
11,402,950
11,631,445
IA
$613,264
$917,406
$1,104,116
$1,450,320
$1,597,254
$1,684,688
$1,886,371
$2,046,335
2,067,375
2,111,150
KS
$1,050,840
$1,565,364
$1,888,481
$2,407,272
$2,680,639
$2,856,155
$2,993,080
$3,061,160
3,061,160
3,130,712
KY
$1,344,978
$2,078,323
$2,882,026
$4,075,831
$4,679,465
$5,757,688
$6,377,776
$6,566,479
6,688,723
6,962,984
LA
$4,080,447
$6,969,329
$9,199,630
$13,072,061
$14,659,595
$16,282,740
$19,462,270
$19,165,624
21,324,721
23,096,176
ME
$536,845
$719,201
$806,854
$970,811
$1,053,098
$1,165,524
$1,222,848
$1,291,963
1,333,909
1,333,909
MD
$6,521,685
$10,948,524
$14,847,982
$20,672,553
$23,625,388
$25,567,961
$28,539,346
$33,236,307
34,509,971
36,055,252
MA
$4,836,051
$7,528,256
$9,780,533
$12,626,775
$15,135,145
$17,849,167
$19,027,859
$20,165,312
20,190,874
20,190,874
Ml
$3,897,084
$5,814,246
$7,690,514
$10,452,742
$11,836,551
$12,389,033
$13,817,447
$14,902,329
15,455,849
15,983,050
MN
$1,249,617
$1,878,085
$2,365,346
$2,995,477
$3,429,038
$3,583,168
$3,930,918
$4,041,505
4,059,707
4,183,467
MS
$1,868,450
$2,760,714
$3,623,766
$4,995,545
$5,940,732
$7,005,955
$7,994,828
$8,927,096
9,454,950
10,514,013
MO
$3,131,126
$4,586,448
$5,952,010
$7,811,393
$8,842,764
$9,100,570
$10,041,335
$10,231,106
10,250,137
10,500,632
MT
$129,912
$201,037
$375,524
$477,324
$493,995
$766,328
$784,249
$798,932
810,671
810,671
NE
$506,277
$733,358
$931,421
$1,206,634
$1,363,635
$1,556,845
$1,752,274
$1,735,366
1,757,215
1,757,215
NV
$2,049,946
$3,001,392
$3,898,380
$4,647,952
$4,962,828
$5,341,517
$5,768,265
$6,248,392
6,456,309
6,654,115
NH
$332,092
$529,197
$651,190
$861,790
$927,722
$1,137,986
$1,170,914
$1,225,589
1,257,028
1,281,115
NJ
$13,135,111
$21,380,789
$28,345,926
$37,702,846
$40,762,441
$43,471,413
$45,652,579
$47,117,129
47,641,537
47,641,537
NM
$882,641
$1,183,568
$1,687,316
$2,476,155
$2,684,197
$2,842,890
$3,042,298
$3,338,463
3,338,463
3,489,677
NY
$38,324,520
$64,354,160
$87,884,362
$127,095,837
$138,462,204
$147,829,027
$153,793,751
$166,416,534
169,263,213
171,786,592
NC
$4,810,589
$7,053,271
$8,657,402
$11,672,934
$13,337,097
$16,397,641
$17,948,397
$18,905,269
21,144,376
21,945,256
ND
$107,243
$124,390
$145,189
$175,060
$183,474
$287,207
$288,717
$292,543
292,543
306,199
OH
$4,668,106
$7,316,497
$8,953,866
$11,834,654
$12,862,596
$13,812,449
$14,653,307
$15,732,171
16,762,266
16,794,093
OK
$1,656,387
$2,282,191
$2,890,518
$3,902,893
$4,285,048
$5,081,993
$5,890,896
$5,923,857
5,923,857
5,928,122
OR
$1,684,631
$2,749,308
$3,438,455
$4,333,257
$4,722,939
$4,836,281
$5,266,094
$5,719,559
5,902,627
5,943,054
PA
$7,991,467
$12,944,947
$1,693,781
$23,632,455
$26,896,745
$29,471,755
$32,266,464
$37,124,991
38,316,474
39,891,047
Rl
$1,083,242
$1,548,831
$1,843,025
$2,354,312
$2,574,101
$2,814,801
$2,981,815
$3,104,681
3,189,276
3,189,276
SC
$4,516,376
$6,622,883
$8,161,966
$10,934,388
$13,250,895
$16,641,780
$18,086,947
$18,549,396
19,323,103
20,521,015
SD
$112,536
$138,843
$161,507
$205,084
$233,352
$338,771
$372,293
$391,032
705,706
727,255
TN
$3,757,915
$5,736,623
$7,230,546
$9,818,153
$11,468,392
$14,706,935
$16,464,366
$21,178,234
21,178,234
21,178,234
TX
$16,132,517
$25,697,515
$35,149,403
$50,244,224
$56,932,045
$66,476,848
$70,384,189
$68,629,133
70,065,527
73,889,574
UT
$810,043
$1,251,524
$1,542,931
$2,083,114
$2,426,761
$2,788,914
$3,111,672
$3,235,191
3,235,191
3,235,191
VT
$279,529
$342,140
$404,394
$488,047
$510,156
$787,721
$838,895
$883,059
883,059
883,059
VA
$5,365,718
$8,116,678
$10,452,242
$13,099,292
$14,845,195
$18,847,843
$20,770,666
$20,375,565
20,817,878
21,086,328
WA
$3,154,250
$4,898,005
$6,404,980
$8,333,780
$9,019,810
$9,311,929
$10,243,929
$10,986,852
11,121,586
11,198,763
WV
$446,290
$740,356
$937,140
$1,422,541
$1,462,626
$1,705,633
$1,856,487
$1,943,767
2,021,847
2,095,875
WI
$1,840,433
$2,579,528
$3,054,537
$3,812,983
$4,242,502
$4,918,809
$5,290,698
$5,183,308
5,214,471
5,227,607
Death and Dying
The Cost of Health Care
131

TABLE 9.16
Ryan White CARE (Comprehensive AIDS Resources Emergency) Act Title II Grant Awards, 1996–2005 [CONTINUED]
State
Fiscal year 1996
Fiscal year 1997
Fiscal year 1998
Fiscal year 1999
Fiscal year 2000
Fiscal year 2001
Fiscal year 2002
Fiscal year 2003
Fiscal year 2004
Fiscal year 2005
WY
$113,650
$137,940
$169,038
$196,506
$205,536
$329,954
$340,041
$350,383
360,347
369,918
GU
$4,970
$11,608
$11,052
$19,652
$38,809
$116,169
$118,503
$132,268
135,839
142,852
PR
$9,376,181
$12,920,475
$16,793,353
$23,401,013
$25,647,632
$26,646,201
$28,814,408
$30,748,881
31,098,002
31,098,002
VI
$197,360
$191,525
$222,610
$624,935
$667,110
$833,928
$772,935
$976,601
976,601
976,602
AS
$50,000
$50,000
$52,314
52,314
52,360
Ml
$50,000
$51,323
$52,314
52,314
52,360
North Mar
$50,000
$51,323
$54,627
54,627
54,720
RP
$50,000
$50,000
$50,000
50,000
50,000
FSM
$50,000
$50,000
$50,000
50,000
50,000
Totals
$250,414,164
$397,895,000
$504,830,061
$709,904,300
$794,314,000
$874,624,471
$942,189,986
$999,308,000
$1,030,309,284
$1,059,874,618
Notes: GU is Guam, PR is Puerto Rico, VI is Virgin Islands, AS is American Samoa, MI is Marshall Islands, North Mar is Northern Marianas, RP is Republic of Palau, FSM is Federated States of Micronesia.
SOURCE: Adapted from “Ryan White CARE Act Title II Grant Awards,” and “Ryan White CARE Act Title II Fiscal Year 2004 Grant Awards,” in “HHS Awards More than $1 Billion to States to Help Provide Care,
Services and Prescription Drugs for People with HIV/AIDS,” News Release, “Ryan White CARE Act: FY 2005 Title II Awards,” in “HHS Awards Almost $ 1.7 Billion for HIV/AIDS Care,” HHS News, March 2, 2005,
Health Resources and Services Administration, HIV/AIDS Bureau, http://www.hhs.gov/news/press/2005pres/20050302.html (accessed November 7, 2005)
132
The Cost of Health Care
Death and Dying

CHAPTER 10
OLDER ADULTS
THE LONGEVITY REVOLUTION
As of the early twenty-first century, the United States
was on the threshold of a ‘‘longevity revolution.’’
Dr. Robert N. Butler, the first director of the National
Institute of Aging and chairman of the International
Longevity Center, observed that during the twentieth
century, life expectancy rose further and faster than dur-
ing the entire period from ancient Rome (275 BCE, when
life expectancy was about twenty-six years) through the
year 1900.
The combination of better sanitation (safe drinking
water, food, and disposal of waste), improved medical
care, and reduced mortality rates for infants, children,
and young adults accounted for this tremendous increase.
Life expectancy in the United States in 1900 was 47.3
years; by 1970 it had increased to 70.8 years. By 2002 the
National Center for Health Statistics projected that life
expectancy for those born in that year was 77.3 years.
(See Table 10.1.)
THE AGING OF AMERICA
According to the U.S. Census Bureau, 12.4% of the
population (approximately thirty-five million people)
were sixty-five years of age or older in 2000. From just
4% of the total population in 1900, those age sixty-five
and older are projected to account for 20.7% of the
population, or 86.8 million people, in the year 2050.
(See Table 10.2.)
Baby Boomers
The first children born during the post–World War II
‘‘baby boom’’ (1946–64) will be turning sixty-five in the
year 2011. Baby boomers, the largest single generation in
the history of the United States, will help swell the age
sixty-five and older population to approximately 54.6
million in 2020. (See Table 10.2.)
The Oldest Demographic
Americans age eighty-five and older account for the
most rapidly growing age group in the population.
Predictions vary as to how fast this ‘‘oldest old’’ segment
of the population is increasing. The Census Bureau’s
prediction is that there will be approximately 20.9 million
people age eighty-five and older by the year 2050. (See
Table 10.2.) Other demographers forecast more than
twice the Census Bureau’s estimates for this portion of
the general population. Some predict that by mid-century
as many as 48.7 million Americans will be over age
eighty-five.
LEADING CAUSES OF DEATH
AMONG THE ELDERLY
More than six out of every ten people age sixty-five
and over who died in 2002 were the victims of diseases of
the heart, cancer (malignant neoplasms), or stroke (cere-
brovascular diseases). (See Table 10.3.)
Coronary Heart Disease
Coronary heart disease (CHD) is the leading cause
of death in the United States and remains the leading
cause of death among older Americans. Approximately
four out of five people who died of CHD in 2002 were
age sixty-five years or older. In 2002, 576,301 people
age sixty-five and older died of heart disease. (See
Table 10.3.)
The risk of dying from heart disease increases as
we age. The death rate from CHD in 2002 for those
age seventy-five to eighty-four (1,677.2 deaths per
one hundred thousand population) was almost three
times the rate for those age sixty-five to seventy-four
(615.9 per one hundred thousand). For those age
eighty-five and older, the death rate rose sharply to
5,446.8 deaths per one hundred thousand population—
nearly nine times the rate for those age sixty-five to
Death and Dying
133

seventy-four. In 2002 women had a lower incidence of
death from heart disease than did men at all ages.
However, at age eighty-five and over, the death rate
for women from heart disease approaches that of men.
(See Table 10.4.)
Since the 1950s, deaths from heart disease have
consistently declined. (See Table 10.4.) Several fac-
tors account for this decrease, including better control
of hypertension (high blood pressure) and cholesterol
levels in the blood, although the relationship between
high cholesterol and heart disease lessens with age
and in older age reverses its relation to mortality
(B.
A.
Golomb,
‘‘Implications
of
Statin
Adverse
Effects in the Elderly,’’ Expert Opinion on Drug
Safety, vol 4, no. 3, May 2005). Changes in lifestyle,
such as the inclusion of physical exercise and a
healthy diet, help decrease the incidence of heart
disease. The expanding use of trained mobile emer-
gency personnel (paramedics) in most urban areas has
also contributed to the decrease, and widespread use
of
cardiopulmonary
resuscitation
(CPR)
and
new
drugs have increased the likelihood of surviving an
initial heart attack.
TABLE 10.1
Life expectancy at birth, at 65 years of age, and at 75 years of age, by race and sex, selected years 1900–2002
[Data are based on death certificates]
All races
White
Black or African Americana
and year
Both sexes
Male
Female
Both sexes
Male
Female
Both sexes
Male
Female
At birth
Remaining life expectancy in years
1900b, c
47.3
46.3
48.3
47.6
46.6
48.7
33.0
32.5
33.5
1950c
68.2
65.6
71.1
69.1
66.5
72.2
60.8
59.1
62.9
1960c
69.7
66.6
73.1
70.6
67.4
74.1
63.6
61.1
66.3
1970
70.8
67.1
74.7
71.7
68.0
75.6
64.1
60.0
68.3
1980
73.7
70.0
77.4
74.4
70.7
78.1
68.1
63.8
72.5
1985
74.7
71.1
78.2
75.3
71.8
78.7
69.3
65.0
73.4
1990
75.4
71.8
78.8
76.1
72.7
79.4
69.1
64.5
73.6
1991
75.5
72.0
78.9
76.3
72.9
79.6
69.3
64.6
73.8
1992
75.8
72.3
79.1
76.5
73.2
79.8
69.6
65.0
73.9
1993
75.5
72.2
78.8
76.3
73.1
79.5
69.2
64.6
73.7
1994
75.7
72.4
79.0
76.5
73.3
79.6
69.5
64.9
73.9
1995
75.8
72.5
78.9
76.5
73.4
79.6
69.6
65.2
73.9
1996
76.1
73.1
79.1
76.8
73.9
79.7
70.2
66.1
74.2
1997
76.5
73.6
79.4
77.1
74.3
79.9
71.1
67.2
74.7
1998
76.7
73.8
79.5
77.3
74.5
80.0
71.3
67.6
74.8
1999
76.7
73.9
79.4
77.3
74.6
79.9
71.4
67.8
74.7
2000d
77.0
74.3
79.7
77.6
74.9
80.1
71.9
68.3
75.2
2001
77.2
74.4
79.8
77.7
75.0
80.2
72.2
68.6
75.5
2002
77.3
74.5
79.9
77.7
75.1
80.3
72.3
68.8
75.6
s
At 65 year
1950c
13.9
12.8
15.0—
12.8
15.1
13.9
12.9
14.9
1960c
14.3
12.8
15.8
14.4
12.9
15.9
13.9
12.7
15.1
1970
15.2
13.1
17.0
15.2
13.1
17.1
14.2
12.5
15.7
1980
16.4
14.1
18.3
16.5
14.2
18.4
15.1
13.0
16.8
1985
16.7
14.5
18.5
16.8
14.5
18.7
15.2
13.0
16.9
1990
17.2
15.1
18.9
17.3
15.2
19.1
15.4
13.2
17.2
1991
17.4
15.3
19.1
17.5
15.4
19.2
15.5
13.4
17.2
1992
17.5
15.4
19.2
17.6
15.5
19.3
15.7
13.5
17.4
1993
17.3
15.3
18.9
17.4
15.4
19.0
15.5
13.4
17.1
1994
17.4
15.5
19.0
17.5
15.6
19.1
15.7
13.6
17.2
1995
17.4
15.6
18.9
17.6
15.7
19.1
15.6
13.6
17.1
1996
17.5
15.7
19.0
17.6
15.8
19.1
15.8
13.9
17.2
1997
17.7
15.9
19.2
17.8
16.0
19.3
16.1
14.2
17.6
1998
17.8
16.0
19.2
17.8
16.1
19.3
16.1
14.3
17.4
1999
17.7
16.1
19.1
17.8
16.1
19.2
16.0
14.3
17.3
2000d
18.0
16.2
19.3
18.0
16.3
19.4
16.2
14.2
17.7
2001
18.1
16.4
19.4
18.2
16.5
19.5
16.4
14.4
17.9
2002
18.2
16.6
19.5
18.2
16.6
19.5
16.6
14.6
18.0
Specified age
At 75 years
1980
10.4
8.8
11.5
10.4
8.8
11.5
9.7
8.3
10.7
1985
10.6
9.0
11.7
10.6
9.0
11.7
10.1
8.7
11.1
1990
10.9
9.4
12.0
11.0
9.4
12.0
10.2
8.6
11.2
1991
11.1
9.5
12.1
11.1
9.5
12.1
10.2
8.7
11.2
1992
11.2
9.6
12.2
11.2
9.6
12.2
10.4
8.9
11.4
1993
10.9
9.5
11.9
11.0
9.5
12.0
10.2
8.7
11.1
1994
11.0
9.6
12.0
11.1
9.6
12.0
10.3
8.9
11.2
134
Older Adults
Death and Dying

Until the 1990s almost all research on heart disease
focused on white, middle-aged males. Researchers, phy-
sicians, and public health officials agree that more
research as well as prevention efforts should be directed
toward women, racial and ethnic minorities, and older
adults. According to the American Heart Association
(AHA), 38% of women who have heart attacks die within
the first year after the incident, compared with only 25%
of men. The AHA also notes that in recent years physi-
cians and researchers have discovered that the symptoms
of heart attack can be significantly different for women
than for men, suggesting the need for further research and
public education efforts.
Cancer
Cancer (malignant neoplasms) is the second-leading
cause of death among older adults. In 2002, 391,001
people sixty-five and older died of cancer. (See Table
10.3.) The risk of developing many cancers increases
with age and varies by race and ethnicity. (See Table
10.5 and Table 10.6.)
For example, the older a man gets, the more likely he
is to develop prostate cancer. The chance of a fatality
from prostate cancer also rises with age. The American
Cancer Society (Cancer Facts & Figures 2006, Atlanta,
GA, 2006) reports that each year more than 65% of men
newly diagnosed with prostate cancer are older than
sixty-five. The probability of developing prostate cancer
is one in 10,149 for men who are younger than forty;
one in thirty-eight for forty- to fifty-nine-year-olds; and
one in fourteen for men ages sixty to sixty-nine. (See
Table 10.5.)
Stroke
Stroke (cerebrovascular disease) is the third-leading
cause of death and the principal cause of serious dis-
ability among older adults, and its incidence increases
markedly with age. In 2002, 143,293 people age sixty-
five and older died of a stroke. (See Table 10.3.) In
2002 the death rate from stroke for those age sixty-five
to seventy-four was 120.3 deaths per one hundred
thousand. This rate more than triples for each succes-
sive decade of age after that, to 431 deaths from stroke
per one hundred thousand for ages seventy-five to
eighty-four, and 1,445.9 deaths per one hundred thou-
sand population for those eighty-five and older. (See
Table 10.7.)
Stroke is also responsible for late-life dementia,
which, together with Alzheimer’s disease, accounts for
90% of all dementia (the other 10% are reversible demen-
tias caused by conditions such as head injury, alcoholism,
and pernicious anemia). Death rates from stroke have
declined since the 1950s. (See Table 10.7.) Stroke, how-
ever, leaves approximately one-third of the survivors
with severe disabilities, and they require continued care.
DEMENTIA
Older people with mental problems were once
labeled ‘‘senile.’’ However, researchers have found that
physical disorders can cause progressive deterioration of
mental and neurological functions. These disorders pro-
duce symptoms that are collectively known as dementia.
Symptoms of dementia include loss of language func-
tions, inability to think abstractly, inability to care for
TABLE 10.1
1995
11.0
9.7
11.9
11.1
9.7
12.0
10.2
8.8
11.1
1996
11.1
9.8
12.0
11.1
9.8
12.0
10.3
9.0
11.2
1997
11.2
9.9
12.1
11.2
9.9
12.1
10.7
9.3
11.5
1998
11.3
10.0
12.2
11.3
10.0
12.2
10.5
9.2
11.3
1999
11.2
10.0
12.1
11.2
10.0
12.1
10.4
9.2
11.1
2000d
11.4
10.1
12.3
11.4
10.1
12.3
10.7
9.2
11.6
2001
11.5
10.2
12.4
11.5
10.2
12.3
10.8
9.3
11.7
2002
11.5
10.3
12.4
11.5
10.3
12.3
10.9
9.5
11.7
aData shown for 1900–60 are for the nonwhite population.
bDeath registration area only. The death registration area increased from 10 states and the District of Columbia in 1900 to the coterminous United States in 1933.
cIncludes deaths of persons who were not residents of the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
dLife expectancies (LEs) for 2000 were revised and may differ from those shown previously. LEs for 2000 were computed using population counts from census 2000 and replace LEs for
2000 using 1990-based postcensal estimates.
Notes: “—”Data not available. Populations for computing life expectancy for 1991–99 are 1990-based postcensal estimates of U.S. resident population. In 1997 life table methodology
was revised to construct complete life tables by single years of age that extend to age 100. Previously abridged life tables were constructed for 5-year age groups ending with 85 years
and over. Life table values for 2000 and later years were computed using a slight modification of the new life table method due to a change in the age detail of populations received from
the U.S. Census Bureau.
SOURCE: “Table 27. Life Expectancy at Birth, at 65 Years of Age, and at 75 Years of Age, according to Race and Sex: United States, Selected Years 1900–2002,”
in Health, United States, 2005, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, November 2005, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/
hus/hus05.pdf (accessed February 27, 2006)
Life expectancy at birth, at 65 years of age, and at 75 years of age, by race and sex, selected years 1900–2002 [CONTINUED]
[Data are based on death certificates]
All races
White
Black or African Americana
and year
Both sexes
Male
Female
Both sexes
Male
Female
Both sexes
Male
Female
Specified age
Death and Dying
Older Adults
135

oneself, personality change, emotional instability, and
loss of a sense of time or place.
Dementia has become a serious health problem in
developed countries, including the United States, because
older adults are living even longer. In 2000 the Federal
Interagency Forum on Aging-Related Statistics estimated
that approximately 10% of those older than age sixty-
five, 20% of those older than age seventy-five, and nearly
36% of those over age eighty-five suffer from dementia.
Alzheimer’s Disease
Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the single most com-
mon cause of dementia. It is a progressive, degenera-
tive disease that attacks the brain and results in
severely impaired memory, thinking, and behavior.
First described in 1906 by the German neuropatholo-
gist Alois Alzheimer, the disorder may strike people in
their forties and fifties, but most victims are over age
sixty-five.
TABLE 10.2
Projected population by age and sex, selected years 2000–50
[In thousands except as indicated. As of July 1. Resident population.]
Population or percent,
sex, and age
2000
2010
2020
2030
2040
2050
Population
Total
Total
282,125
308,936
335,805
363,584
391,946
419,854
0–4
19,218
21,426
22,932
24,272
26,299
28,080
5–19
61,331
61,810
65,955
70,832
75,326
81,067
20–44
104,075
104,444
108,632
114,747
121,659
130,897
45–64
62,440
81,012
83,653
82,280
88,611
93,104
65–84
30,794
34,120
47,363
61,850
64,640
65,844
85
4,267
6,123
7,269
9,603
15,409
20,861
Male
Total
138,411
151,815
165,093
178,563
192,405
206,477
0–4
9,831
10,947
11,716
12,399
13,437
14,348
5–19
31,454
31,622
33,704
36,199
38,496
41,435
20–44
52,294
52,732
54,966
58,000
61,450
66,152
45–64
30,381
39,502
40,966
40,622
43,961
46,214
65–84
13,212
15,069
21,337
28,003
29,488
30,579
85
1,240
1,942
2,403
3,340
5,573
7,749
Female
Total
143,713
157,121
170,711
185,022
199,540
213,377
0–4
9,387
10,479
11,216
11,873
12,863
13,732
5–19
29,877
30,187
32,251
34,633
36,831
39,632
20–44
51,781
51,711
53,666
56,747
60,209
64,745
45–64
32,059
41,510
42,687
41,658
44,650
46,891
65–84
17,582
19,051
26,026
33,848
35,152
35,265
85
3,028
4,182
4,866
6,263
9,836
13,112
Percent of total
Total
Total
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
0–4
6.8
6.9
6.8
6.7
6.7
6.7
5–19
21.7
20.0
19.6
19.5
19.2
19.3
20–44
36.9
33.8
32.3
31.6
31.0
31.2
45–64
22.1
26.2
24.9
22.6
22.6
22.2
65–84
10.9
11.0
14.1
17.0
16.5
15.7
85
1.5
2.0
2.2
2.6
3.9
5.0
Male
Total
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
0–4
7.1
7.2
7.1
6.9
7.0
6.9
5–19
22.7
20.8
20.4
20.3
20.0
20.1
20–44
37.8
34.7
33.3
32.5
31.9
32.0
45–64
21.9
26.0
24.8
22.7
22.8
22.4
65–84
9.5
9.9
12.9
15.7
15.3
14.8
85
0.9
1.3
1.5
1.9
2.9
3.8
Female
Total
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
0–4
6.5
6.7
6.6
6.4
6.4
6.4
5–19
20.8
19.2
18.9
18.7
18.5
18.6
20–44
36.0
32.9
31.4
30.7
30.2
30.3
45–64
22.3
26.4
25.0
22.5
22.4
22.0
65–84
12.2
12.1
15.2
18.3
17.6
16.5
85
2.1
2.7
2.9
3.4
4.9
6.1
SOURCE: “Table 2a. Projected Population of the United States, by Age and Sex: 2000 to 2050,” in U.S. Interim Projections by Age, Sex, Race, and Hispanic
Origin, U.S. Census Bureau, March 18, 2004, http://www.census.gov/ipc/www/usinterimproj/natprojtab02a.pdf (accessed November 8, 2005)
136
Older Adults
Death and Dying

Dr. Alzheimer’s autopsy of a severely demented
fifty-five-year-old woman revealed deposits of ‘‘neuritic
plaques’’ and ‘‘neurofibrillary tangles.’’ The latter char-
acteristic, the presence of twisted and tangled fibers in
the brain cells, is the anatomical hallmark of the
disease.
SYMPTOMS. AD has been described as ‘‘a demen-
tia of gradual onset and progressive decline.’’ Mild
or early AD is not easily distinguishable from the
characteristics of normal aging—mild episodes of
forgetfulness and disorientation. Gradually, the AD
patient
may
experience
confusion;
language
pro-
blems,
such
as
trouble
finding
words;
impaired
judgment;
disorientation
in
place
and
time;
and
changes in mood, behavior, and personality. The speed
with which these changes occur varies, but eventually
the
disease
leaves
patients
unable
to
care
for
themselves.
In the terminal stages of AD, patients require care
twenty-four hours a day. They no longer recognize family
members or themselves and need help with simple daily
activities, such as eating, dressing, bathing, and using the
TABLE 10.3
Leading causes of death and numbers of deaths, by age, 1980 and 2002
[Data are based on death certificates]
1980
2002
rank order
Cause of death
Deaths
Cause of death
Deaths
Under 1 year
. . .
All causes
45,526
All causes
28,034
1
Congenital anomalies
9,220
Congenital malformations, deformations and 
chromosomal abnormalities
5,623
2
Sudden infant death syndrome
5,510
Disorders related to short gestation and low 
birth weight, not elsewhere classified
4,637
3
Respiratory distress syndrome
4,989
Sudden infant death syndrome
2,295
4
Disorders relating to short gestation 
and unspecified low birthweight
3,648
Newborn affected by maternal complications 
of pregnancy
1,708
5
Newborn affected by maternal 
complications of pregnancy
1,572
Newborn affected by complications of 
placenta, cord and membranes
1,028
6
Intrauterine hypoxia and birth 
asphyxia
1,497
Unintentional injuries
946
7
Unintentional injuries
1,166
Respiratory distress of newborn
943
8
Birth trauma
1,058
Bacterial sepsis of newborn
749
9
Pneumonia and influenza
1,012
Diseases of circulatory system
667
10
Newborn affected by complications 
Intrauterine hypoxia and birth asphyxia
583
of placenta, cord, and membranes
985
1–4 years
. . .
All causes
8,187
All causes
4,858
1
Unintentional injuries
3,313
Unintentional injuries
1,641
2
Congenital anomalies
1,026
Congenital malformations, deformations and 
chromosomal abnormalities
530
3
Malignant neoplasms
573
Homicide
423
4
Diseases of heart
338
Malignant neoplasms
402
5
Homicide
319
Diseases of heart
165
6
Pneumonia and influenza
267
Influenza and pneumonia
110
7
Meningitis
223
Septicemia
79
8
Meningococcal infection
110
Chronic lower respiratory diseases
65
8
. . .
. . .
Certain conditions originating in the 
perinatal period
65
9
Certain conditions originating in the 
perinatal period
84
. . .
. . .
10
Septicemia
71
In situ neoplasms, benign neoplasms and 
neoplasms of uncertain or unknown 
behavior
60
5–14 years
. . .
All causes
10,689
All causes
7,150
1
Unintentional injuries
5,224
Unintentional injuries
2,718
2
Malignant neoplasms
1,497
Malignant neoplasms
1,072
3
Congenital anomalies
561
Congenital malformations, deformations and 
chromosomal abnormalities
417
4
Homicide
415
Homicide
356
5
Diseases of heart
330
Suicide
264
6
Pneumonia and influenza
194
Diseases of heart
255
7
Suicide
142
Chronic lower respiratory diseases
136
8
Benign neoplasms
104
Septicemia
95
9
Cerebrovascular diseases
95
Cerebrovascular diseases
91
9
. . .
. . .
Influenza and pneumonia
91
10
Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
diseases
85
. . .
. . .
Age and
Death and Dying
Older Adults
137

TABLE 10.3
15–24 years
. . .
All causes
49,027
All causes
33,046
1
Unintentional injuries
26,206
Unintentional injuries
15,412
2
Homicide
6,537
Homicide
5,219
3
Suicide
5,239
Suicide
4,010
4
Malignant neoplasms
2,683
Malignant neoplasms
1,730
5
Diseases of heart
1,223
Diseases of heart
1,022
6
Congenital anomalies
600
Congenital malformations, deformations and 
chromosomal abnormalities
492
7
Cerebrovascular diseases
418
Chronic lower respiratory diseases
192
8
Pneumonia and influenza
348
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) disease
178
9
Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
diseases
141
Diabetes mellitus
171
9
. . .
. . .
Cerebrovascular diseases
171
10
Anemias
133
. . .
. . .
25–44 years
. . .
All causes
108,658
All causes
132,495
1
Unintentional injuries
26,722
Unintentional injuries
29,279
2
Malignant neoplasms
17,551
Malignant neoplasms
19,957
3
Diseases of heart
14,513
Diseases of heart
16,853
4
Homicide
10,983
Suicide
11,897
5
Suicide
9,855
Homicide
7,728
6
Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis
4,782
Human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) disease
7,546
7
Cerebrovascular diseases
3,154
Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis
3,528
8
Diabetes mellitus
1,472
Cerebrovascular diseases
2,992
9
Pneumonia and influenza
1,467
Diabetes mellitus
2,806
10
Congenital anomalies
817
Influenza and pneumonia
1,316
45–64 years
. . .
All causes
425,338
All causes
425,727
1
Diseases of heart
148,322
Malignant neoplasms
143,028
2
Malignant neoplasms
135,675
Diseases of heart
101,804
3
Cerebrovascular diseases
19,909
Unintentional injuries
23,020
4
Unintentional injuries
18,140
Cerebrovascular diseases
15,952
5
Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis
16,089
Diabetes mellitus
15,518
6
Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
diseases
11,514
Chronic lower respiratory diseases
14,755
7
Diabetes mellitus
7,977
Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis
13,313
8
Suicide
7,079
Suicide
9,926
9
Pneumonia and influenza
5,804
Human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) disease
5,821
10
Homicide
4,019
Septicemia
5,434
65 years and over
. . .
All causes
1,341,848
All causes
1,811,720
1
Diseases of heart
595,406
Diseases of heart
576,301
2
Malignant neoplasms
258,389
Malignant neoplasms
391,001
3
Cerebrovascular diseases
146,417
Cerebrovascular diseases
143,293
4
Pneumonia and influenza
45,512
Chronic lower respiratory diseases
108,313
5
Chronic obstructive pulmonary 
diseases
43,587
Influenza and pneumonia
58,826
6
Atherosclerosis
28,081
Alzheimer’s disease
58,289
7
Diabetes mellitus
25,216
Diabetes mellitus
54,715
8
Unintentional injuries
24,844
Nephritis, nephrotic syndrome and 
nephrosis
34,316
9
Nephritis, nephrotic syndrome, 
and nephrosis
12,968
Unintentional injuries
33,641
10
Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis
9,519
Septicemia
26,670
Note: “. . .”Category not applicable.
SOURCE: “Table 32. Leading Causes of Death and Numbers of Deaths, according to Age: United States, 1980 and 2002,” in Health, United States, 2005,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, November 2005, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/hus05.pdf (accessed
February 27, 2006)
Leading causes of death and numbers of deaths, by age, 1980 and 2002 [CONTINUED]
[Data are based on death certificates]
1980
2002
rank order
Cause of death
Deaths
Cause of death
Deaths
Age and
138
Older Adults
Death and Dying

toilet. Eventually, they may become incontinent, blind,
and unable to communicate. The course of the disease
varies widely—some patients die within a few years of
diagnosis, while others have lived as long as twenty-five
years.
PREVALENCE. In 2002, 58,289 deaths from AD were
reported for those age sixty-five and older. (See Table
10.3.) Liesi E. Hebert et al reported in ‘‘Alzheimer
Disease in the U.S. Population: Prevalence Estimates
Using the 2000 Census’’ (Archives of Neurology, vol. 60,
TABLE 10.4
Death rates for diseases of the heart, by sex, race, Hispanic origin, and age, selected years 1950–2002
[Data are based on death certificates]
Sex, race, Hispanic origin,
and age
1950a
1960a
1970
1980
1990
2000
2001
2002
All persons
Deaths per 100,000 resident population
All ages, age adjustedb
586.8
559.0
492.7
412.1
321.8
257.6
247.8
240.8
All ages, crude
355.5
369.0
362.0
336.0
289.5
252.6
245.8
241.7
Under 1 year
3.5
6.6
13.1
22.8
20.1
13.0
11.9
12.4
1–4 years
1.3
1.3
1.7
2.6
1.9
1.2
1.5
1.1
5–14 years
2.1
1.3
0.8
0.9
0.9
0.7
0.7
0.6
15–24 years
6.8
4.0
3.0
2.9
2.5
2.6
2.5
2.5
25–34 years
19.4
15.6
11.4
8.3
7.6
7.4
8.0
7.9
35–44 years
86.4
74.6
66.7
44.6
31.4
29.2
29.6
30.5
45–54 years
308.6
271.8
238.4
180.2
120.5
94.2
92.9
93.7
55–64 years
808.1
737.9
652.3
494.1
367.3
261.2
246.9
241.5
65–74 years
1,839.8
1,740.5
1,558.2
1,218.6
894.3
665.6
635.1
615.9
75–84 years
4,310.1
4,089.4
3,683.8
2,993.1
2,295.7
1,780.3
1,725.7
1,677.2
85 years and over
9,150.6
9,317.8
7,891.3
7,777.1
6,739.9
5,926.1
5,664.2
5,446.8
Male
All ages, age adjustedb
697.0
687.6
634.0
538.9
412.4
320.0
305.4
297.4
All ages, crude
423.4
439.5
422.5
368.6
297.6
249.8
242.5
240.7
Under 1 year
4.0
7.8
15.1
25.5
21.9
13.3
11.8
12.9
1–4 years
1.4
1.4
1.9
2.8
1.9
1.4
1.5
1.1
5–14 years
2.0
1.4
0.9
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.7
15–24 years
6.8
4.2
3.7
3.7
3.1
3.2
3.2
3.3
25–34 years
22.9
20.1
15.2
11.4
10.3
9.6
10.3
10.5
35–44 years
118.4
112.7
103.2
68.7
48.1
41.4
41.7
43.1
45–54 years
440.5
420.4
376.4
282.6
183.0
140.2
136.6
138.4
55–64 years
1,104.5
1,066.9
987.2
746.8
537.3
371.7
349.8
343.4
65–74 years
2,292.3
2,291.3
2,170.3
1,728.0
1,250.0
898.3
851.3
827.1
75–84 years
4,825.0
4,742.4
4,534.8
3,834.3
2,968.2
2,248.1
2,177.3
2,110.1
85 years and over
9,659.8
9,788.9
8,426.2
8,752.7
7,418.4
6,430.0
6,040.5
5,823.5
Female
All ages, age adjustedb
484.7
447.0
381.6
320.8
257.0
210.9
203.9
197.2
All ages, crude
288.4
300.6
304.5
305.1
281.8
255.3
249.0
242.7
Under 1 year
2.9
5.4
10.9
20.0
18.3
12.5
12.0
11.8
1–4 years
1.2
1.1
1.6
2.5
1.9
1.0
1.4
1.0
5–14 years
2.2
1.2
0.8
0.9
0.8
0.5
0.7
0.6
15–24 years
6.7
3.7
2.3
2.1
1.8
2.1
1.8
1.7
25–34 years
16.2
11.3
7.7
5.3
5.0
5.2
5.6
5.2
35–44 years
55.1
38.2
32.2
21.4
15.1
17.2
17.6
18.0
45–54 years
177.2
127.5
109.9
84.5
61.0
49.8
50.7
50.6
55–64 years
510.0
429.4
351.6
272.1
215.7
159.3
151.8
147.2
65–74 years
1,419.3
1,261.3
1,082.7
828.6
616.8
474.0
455.9
440.1
75–84 years
3,872.0
3,582.7
3,120.8
2,497.0
1,893.8
1,475.1
1,428.9
1,389.7
85 years and over
8,796.1
9,016.8
7,591.8
7,350.5
6,478.1
5,720.9
5,506.8
5,283.3
White malec
All ages, age adjustedb
700.2
694.5
640.2
539.6
409.2
316.7
301.8
294.1
All ages, crude
433.0
454.6
438.3
384.0
312.7
265.8
257.8
256.0
45–54 years
423.6
413.2
365.7
269.8
170.6
130.7
127.0
128.6
55–64 years
1,081.7
1,056.0
979.3
730.6
516.7
351.8
330.8
324.0
65–74 years
2,308.3
2,297.9
2,177.2
1,729.7
1,230.5
877.8
829.1
807.8
75–84 years
4,907.3
4,839.9
4,617.6
3,883.2
2,983.4
2,247.0
2,175.8
2,112.0
85 years and over
9,950.5
10,135.8
8,818.0
8,958.0
7,558.7
6,560.8
6,157.2
5,939.8
Black or African 
American malec
All ages, age adjustedb
639.4
615.2
607.3
561.4
485.4
392.5
384.5
371.0
All ages, crude
346.2
330.6
330.3
301.0
256.8
211.1
209.0
206.3
45–54 years
622.5
514.0
512.8
433.4
328.9
247.2
242.6
246.0
55–64 years
1,433.1
1,236.8
1,135.4
987.2
824.0
631.2
602.2
605.3
65–74 years
2,139.1
2,281.4
2,237.8
1,847.2
1,632.9
1,268.8
1,245.8
1,192.7
75–84 yearsd
4,106.1
3,533.6
3,783.4
3,578.8
3,107.1
2,597.6
2,569.3
2,449.6
85 years and over
—
6,037.9
5,367.6
6,819.5
6,479.6
5,633.5
5,459.9
5,125.7
Death and Dying
Older Adults
139

no. 8, August 2003) that the prevalence of Alzhei-
mer’s disease and the proportion of severe disease
increased dramatically with age after age sixty-five.
(See Figure 10.1.) While AD can strike as early as
the third, fourth, or fifth decade of life, 90% of
victims are older than age sixty-five when it becomes
apparent.
Hebert and colleagues also noted that the number of
people with AD in the U.S. population and their age
distribution
will
change
substantially
by
the
mid-
twenty-first century. In 2000, 4.5 million people age
sixty-five and older were living with AD. By the year
2050 between 11.3 and 16 million people of this age
group are expected to be affected with the disease. (See
Table 10.8.)
Hebert and colleagues have also determined the
percentage change in numbers of people affected by
AD expected between 2000 and 2025 in each state
(L. E. Hebert et al, ‘‘State-Specific Projections through
2025 of Alzheimer Disease Prevalence,’’ Neurology,
vol. 62, no. 9, May 2004). The ten states predicted to
have the highest numbers of people with AD in 2025—
California, Florida, Texas, New York, Pennsylvania,
Ohio, Illinois, North Carolina, Michigan, and New
TABLE 10.4
American Indian or 
Alaska Native malec
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
320.5
264.1
222.2
200.7
201.2
All ages, crude
—
—
—
130.6
108.0
90.1
89.1
92.0
45–54 years
—
—
—
238.1
173.8
108.5
109.1
104.2
55–64 years
—
—
—
496.3
411.0
285.0
301.1
273.2
65–74 years
—
—
—
1,009.4
839.1
748.2
682.1
638.4
75–84 years
—
—
—
2,062.2
1,788.8
1,655.7
1,384.5
1,422.7
85 years and over
—
—
—
4,413.7
3,860.3
3,318.3
2,895.7
3,162.4
Asian or Pacific Islander malec
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
286.9
220.7
185.5
169.8
169.8
All ages, crude
—
—
—
119.8
88.7
90.6
87.3
89.4
45–54 years
—
—
—
112.0
70.4
61.1
60.1
60.6
55–64 years
—
—
—
306.7
226.1
182.6
162.0
154.2
65–74 years
—
—
—
852.4
623.5
482.5
439.1
422.4
75–84 years
—
—
—
2,010.9
1,642.2
1,354.7
1,273.8
1,252.4
85 years and over
—
—
—
5,923.0
4,617.8
4,154.2
3,688.1
3,841.3
Hispanic or Latino malec, e
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
—
270.0
238.2
232.6
219.8
All ages, crude
—
—
—
—
91.0
74.7
74.6
74.0
45–54 years
—
—
—
—
116.4
84.3
82.9
80.5
55–64 years
—
—
—
—
363.0
264.8
242.2
256.0
65–74 years
—
—
—
—
829.9
684.8
683.7
657.7
75–84 years
—
—
—
—
1,971.3
1,733.2
1,702.7
1,599.5
85 years and over
—
—
—
—
4,711.9
4,897.5
4,784.3
4,301.8
White, not Hispanic or Latino malee
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
—
413.6
319.9
304.8
297.7
All ages, crude
—
—
—
—
336.5
297.5
289.5
289.2
45–54 years
—
—
—
—
172.8
134.3
130.7
133.1
55–64 years
—
—
—
—
521.3
356.3
335.8
327.6
65–74 years
—
—
—
—
1,243.4
885.1
834.7
813.5
75–84 years
—
—
—
—
3,007.7
2,261.9
2,190.4
2,129.9
85 years and over
—
—
—
—
7,663.4
6,606.6
6,195.4
5,994.1
White femalec
All ages, age adjustedb
478.0
441.7
376.7
315.9
250.9
205.6
198.7
192.1
All ages, crude
289.4
306.5
313.8
319.2
298.4
274.5
267.7
261.0
45–54 years
141.9
103.4
91.4
71.2
50.2
40.9
41.5
41.7
55–64 years
460.2
383.0
317.7
248.1
192.4
141.3
134.3
130.6
65–74 years
1,400.9
1,229.8
1,044.0
796.7
583.6
445.2
429.0
414.7
75–84 years
3,925.2
3,629.7
3,143.5
2,493.6
1,874.3
1,452.4
1,407.9
1,368.2
85 years and over
9,084.7
9,280.8
7,839.9
7,501.6
6,563.4
5,801.4
5,582.5
5,350.6
Black or African American femalec
All ages, age adjustedb
536.9
488.9
435.6
378.6
327.5
277.6
269.8
263.2
All ages, crude
287.6
268.5
261.0
249.7
237.0
212.6
208.6
205.0
45–54 years
525.3
360.7
290.9
202.4
155.3
125.0
125.9
124.9
55–64 years
1,210.2
952.3
710.5
530.1
442.0
332.8
323.1
312.3
65–74 years
1,659.4
1,680.5
1,553.2
1,210.3
1,017.5
815.2
768.0
734.0
75–84 yearsd
3,499.3
2,926.9
2,964.1
2,707.2
2,250.9
1,913.1
1,849.6
1,821.9
85 years and over
—
5,650.0
5,003.8
5,796.5
5,766.1
5,298.7
5,207.3
5,111.2
Death rates for diseases of the heart, by sex, race, Hispanic origin, and age, selected years 1950–2002 [CONTINUED]
[Data are based on death certificates]
Sex, race, Hispanic origin,
and age
1950a
1960a
1970
1980
1990
2000
2001
2002
Deaths per 100,000 resident population
140
Older Adults
Death and Dying

Jersey—are the same ten that had the largest numbers
in 2000.
DEPRESSION
According to the American Association of Geriatric
Psychiatry, more than six million of the more than forty
million Americans over the age of sixty-five suffer from
depression. Family members and health care profes-
sionals often fail to recognize depression among the
elderly. Because older people usually suffer from comor-
bidity (the presence of more than one chronic illness at
one time), depression may be masked by the symptoms of
other disorders.
The older adult suffering from depression may mis-
takenly think that depression is simply a reaction to an
illness, loss, or a consequence of aging. Many sufferers
fail to divulge their depression because of the stigma
associated with mental illness.
Suicide
According to Dr. Barry D. Lebowitz, chief of
the Adult and Geriatric Treatment and Preventive
TABLE 10.4
SOURCE: “Table 36. Death Rates for Diseases of Heart, according to Sex, Race, Hispanic Origin, and Age: United States, Selected Years 1950–2002,” in Health,
United States, 2005, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, November 2005, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/hus/
hus05.pdf (accessed February 27,2006)          
American Indian or 
Alaska Native femalec
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
175.4
153.1
143.6
127.0
123.6
All ages, crude
—
—
—
80.3
77.5
71.9
68.2
68.5
45–54 years
—
—
—
65.2
62.0
40.2
42.7
29.7
55–64 years
—
—
—
193.5
197.0
149.4
126.5
124.3
65–74 years
—
—
—
577.2
492.8
391.8
384.2
365.8
75–84 years
—
—
—
1,364.3
1,050.3
1,044.1
934.3
1,002.5
85 years and over
—
—
—
2,893.3
2,868.7
3,146.3
2,510.3
2,372.5
Asian or Pacific
Islander femalec
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
132.3
149.2
115.7
112.9
108.1
All ages, crude
—
—
—
57.0
62.0
65.0
67.9
67.4
45–54 years
—
—
—
28.6
17.5
15.9
18.4
16.4
55–64 years
—
—
—
92.9
99.0
68.8
62.8
61.8
65–74 years
—
—
—
313.3
323.9
229.6
241.7
239.9
75–84 years
—
—
—
1,053.2
1,130.9
866.2
848.7
796.9
85 years and over
—
—
—
3,211.0
4,161.2
3,367.2
3,186.3
3,067.4
Hispanic or Latino 
femalec, e
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
—
177.2
163.7
161.0
149.7
All ages, crude
—
—
—
—
79.4
71.5
71.8
69.7
45–54 years
—
—
—
—
43.5
28.2
27.9
30.2
55–64 years
—
—
—
—
153.2
111.2
107.2
105.7
65–74 years
—
—
—
—
460.4
366.3
363.1
346.4
75–84 years
—
—
—
—
1,259.7
1,169.4
1,155.7
1,090.8
85 years and over
—
—
—
—
4,440.3
4,605.8
4,521.1
4,032.8
White, not Hispanic 
or Latino femalee
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
—
252.6
206.8
200.0
193.7
All ages, crude
—
—
—
—
320.0
304.9
298.4
292.3
45–54 years
—
—
—
—
50.2
41.9
42.7
42.6
55–64 years
—
—
—
—
193.6
142.9
136.0
132.0
65–74 years
—
—
—
—
584.7
448.5
431.8
417.4
75–84 years
—
—
—
—
1,890.2
1,458.9
1,414.7
1,377.2
85 years and over
—
—
—
—
6,615.2
5,822.7
5,601.6
5,384.5
aIncludes deaths of persons who were not residents of the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
bAge-adjusted rates are calculated using the year 2000 standard population.
cThe race groups, white, black, Asian or Pacific Islander, and American Indian or Alaska Native, include persons of Hispanic and non-Hispanic origin. Persons of Hispanic origin may be
of any race. Death rates for the American Indian or Alaska Native and Asian or Pacific Islander populations are known to be underestimated.
dIn 1950 rate is for the age group 75 years and over.
ePrior to 1997, excludes data from states lacking an Hispanic-origin item on the death certificate.
Notes: “—”Data not available. Starting with 2003, rates for 1991–99 were revised using intercensal population estimates based on census 2000. Rates for 2000 were revised based on
census 2000 counts. Rates for 2001 and 2002 were computed using 2000-based postcensal estimates. Age groups were selected to minimize the presentation of unstable age-specific
death rates based on small numbers of deaths and for consistency among comparison groups.
Death rates for diseases of the heart, by sex, race, Hispanic origin, and age, selected years 1950–2002 [CONTINUED]
[Data are based on death certificates]
Sex, race, Hispanic origin,
and age
1950a
1960a
1970
1980
1990
2000
2001
2002
Deaths per 100,000 resident population
Death and Dying
Older Adults
141

Intervention Research Branch of the National Institute
of Mental Health, almost all older people who commit
suicide suffer from depression. Most suicidal older
adults visit their primary care physician during the
month before ending their lives, and approximately
40% visit the doctor in the week before committing
suicide, though frequently for chronic health problems
rather than depression. However, their depression appar-
ently had not been accurately diagnosed or effectively
treated.
Depression is especially common in nursing homes.
Richard N. Jones and his colleagues determined that at
least 20% of nursing home residents suffer from clinical
depression (‘‘Prevalence and Correlates of Recognized
Depression in U.S. Nursing Homes,’’ Journal of the
American Geriatric Society, vol. 51, no. 10, October
2003). The researchers believe that this may be an
underrepresentation of the magnitude of the problem.
They note that depression in long-term care settings
such
as
nursing
homes
is
often
unrecognized.
In
addition, when depression is recognized it is often
undertreated,
treated
inadequately,
or
treated
inappropriately.
Feeling lonely, abandoned, or suffering financial
woes, many depressed nursing home residents end
their lives by nonviolent means such as starving
themselves, failing to take prescribed medication, or
ingesting large amounts of drugs. This type of suicide,
as a result of depression, is different from that com-
mitted by the terminally ill who, not wishing to pro-
long the dying process, refuse life-sustaining medical
treatment.
TABLE 10.5
Probability of developing invasive cancers over selected age intervals, by sex, 2000–02
Birth to 39
40 to 59
60 to 69
70 & older
Birth to death
(percent)
(percent)
(percent)
(percent)
(percent)
All sitesa
Male
1.43 (1 in 70)
8.57 (1 in 12)
16.46 (1 in 6)
39.61 (1 in 3)
45.67 (1 in 2)
Female
1.99 (1 in 50)
9.06 (1 in 11)
10.54 (1 in 9)
26.72 (1 in 4)
38.09 (1 in 3)
Urinary bladderb
Male
.02 (1 in 4,375)
.40 (1 in 250)
.93 (1 in 108)
3.35 (1 in 30)
3.58 (1 in 28)
Female
.01 (1 in 9,513)
.12 (1 in 816)
.25 (1 in 402)
.96 (1 in 104)
1.14 (1 in 88)
Breast
Female
.48 (1 in 209)
4.11 (1 in 24)
3.82 (1 in 26)
7.13 (1 in 14)
13.22 (1 in 8)
Colon & rectum
Male
.07 (1 in 1,399)
.90 (1 in 111)
1.66 (1 in 60)
4.94 (1 in 20)
5.84 (1 in 17)
Female
.06 (1 in 1,567)
.70 (1 in 143)
1.16 (1 in 86)
4.61 (1 in 22)
5.51 (1 in 18)
Leukemia
Male
.15 (1 in 650)
.22 (1 in 459)
.35 (1 in 284)
1.17 (1 in 85)
1.50 (1 in 67)
Female
.13 (1 in 788)
.14 (1 in 721)
.19 (1 in 513)
.78 (1 in 129)
1.07 (1 in 93)
Lung & bronchus
Male
.03 (1 in 3,244)
1.00 (1 in 100)
2.45 (1 in 41)
6.33 (1 in 16)
7.58 (1 in 13)
Female
.03 (1 in 3,103)
.80 (1 in 125)
1.68 (1 in 60)
4.17 (1 in 24)
5.72 (1 in 17)
Melanoma of skin
Male
.13 (1 in 800)
.51 (1 in 195)
.51 (1 in 195)
1.25 (1 in 80)
1.94 (1 in 52)
Female
.21 (1 in 470)
.40 (1 in 248)
.26 (1 in 381)
.56 (1 in 178)
1.30 (1 in 77)
Non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma
Male
.14 (1 in 722)
.47 (1 in 215)
.56 (1 in 178)
1.57 (1 in 64)
2.18 (1 in 46)
Female
.09 (1 in 1,158)
.31 (1 in 320)
.42 (1 in 237)
1.29 (1 in 77)
1.82 (1 in 55)
Prostate
Male
.01 (1 in 10,149)
2.66 (1 in 38)
7.19 (1 in 14)
14.51 (1 in 7)
17.93 (1 in 6)
Uterine cervix
Female
.15 (1 in 657)
.28 (1 in 353)
.15 (1 in 671)
.22 (1 in 464)
.74 (1 in 135)
Uterine corpus
Female
.06 (1 in 1,641)
.72 (1 in 139)
.83 (1 in 120)
1.36 (1 in 74)
2.61 (1 in 38)
Note: Data are for those free of cancer at beginning of age interval. Based on cancer cases diagnosed during 2000 to 2002.
aAII sites exclude basal and squamous cell skin cancers and in situ cancers except urinary bladder.
blndudes invasive and in situ cancer cases.
SOURCE: “Probability of Developing Invasive Cancers over Selected Age Intervals by Sex, US, 2000 to 2002,” in Cancer Facts and Figures 2006, American
Cancer Society, January 2006, http://www.cancer.org/downloads/stt/CAFF06Prob.pdf (accessed February 27, 2006). Copyright 2006 American Cancer Society,
Inc. Reprinted with permission.
142
Older Adults
Death and Dying

In the United States the suicide rate generally increases
with age. In 2002 the ‘‘oldest old’’ (eighty-five years and
older) accounted for the highest rate—eighteen suicides per
one hundred thousand people. Men age sixty-five and older
had a higher rate (31.8 suicides per one hundred thousand),
with the oldest old men (age eighty-five and older) most
likely to commit suicide (50.7 per one hundred thousand).
In contrast, the rate among women age sixty-five and older
was 4.1 suicides per one hundred thousand people, and that
among women age eighty-five and over was 3.8 suicides
per one hundred thousand. (See Table 6.1 in Chapter 6.)
By race, white men over the age of seventy-five
had the highest suicide rate—40.6 suicides per one
hundred thousand people for those ages seventy-five
to eighty-four, and 53.9 per one hundred thousand for
those age eighty-five and older. (See Table 6.1 in
Chapter 6.) One generally held theory about the very
high rates of suicide among white men age seventy-
five and over is that they have traditionally been in
positions of power and thus have great difficulty
adjusting to a life they may consider useless or
diminished.
TABLE 10.6
Cancer incidence and mortality rates by site, race, and ethnicity, 1998–2002
African
Asian American
American Indian
Hispanic/
Incidence
White
American
and Pacific Islander
and Alaska Native
Latino*
All sites
Males
556.4
682.6
383.5
255.4
420.7
Females
429.3
398.5
303.6
220.5
310.9
Breast (female)
141.1
119.4
96.6
54.8
89.9
Colon & rectum
Males
61.7
72.5
56.0
36.7
48.3
Females
45.3
56.0
39.7
32.2
32.3
Lung & bronchus
Males
76.7
113.9
59.4
42.6
44.6
Females
51.1
55.2
28.3
23.6
23.3
Prostate
169.0
272.0
101.4
50.3
141.9
Stomach
Males
10.7
17.7
21.0
15.9
17.2
Females
5.0
9.6
12.0
9.1
10.1
Liver & bile duct
Males
7.4
12.1
21.4
8.7
14.1
Females
2.9
3.7
7.9
5.2
6.1
Uterine cervix
8.7
11.1
8.9
4.9
15.8
Mortality
All sites
Males
242.5
339.4
148.0
159.7
171.4
Females
164.5
194.3
99.4
113.8
111.0
Breast (female)
25.9
34.7
12.7
13.8
16.7
Colon & rectum
Males
24.3
34.0
15.8
16.2
17.7
Females
16.8
24.1
10.6
11.8
11.6
Lung & bronchus
Males
75.2
101.3
39.4
47.0
38.7
Females
41.8
39.9
18.8
27.1
14.8
Prostate
27.7
68.1
12.1
18.3
23.0
Stomach
Males
5.6
12.8
11.2
7.3
9.5
Females
2.8
6.3
6.8
4.1
5.3
Liver & bile duct
Males
6.2
9.5
15.4
7.9
10.7
Females
2.7
3.8
6.5
4.3
5.1
Uterine cervix
2.5
5.3
2.7
2.6
3.5
Note: Data are per 100,000, age-adjusted to the 2000 US standard population.
*Hispanic/Latinos are not mutually exclusive from whites, African Americans, Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders, and American Indians and Alaska Natives.
SOURCE: “Incidence and Mortality Rates by Site, Race, and Ethnicity, US, 1998–2002,” in Cancer Facts and Figures 2006, American Cancer Society, January
2006, http://www.cancer.org/downloads/stt/CAFF06IrMr.pdf (accessed February 27, 2006). Copyright 2006 American Cancer Society, Inc. Reprinted with
permission.
Death and Dying
Older Adults
143

OLDER WOMEN
Women Live Longer Than Do Men
In the United States the life expectancy in 2002 for
females born in that year was 5.4 years more than for
males born the same year—79.9 years and 74.5 years,
respectively. (See Table 10.1.) In 2000 there were eighty-
five men ages sixty-five to sixty-nine for every one
hundred women in the same age span. As both sexes
age, the gap widens. For those age eighty and over, there
were only fifty-two men for every one hundred women.
TABLE 10.7
Death rates for cerebrovascular diseases, by sex, race, Hispanic origin, and age, selected years 1950–2002
[Data are based on death certificates]
Sex, race, Hispanic origin,
and age
1950a
1960a
1970
1980
1990
2000
2001
2002
All persons
Deaths per 100,000 resident population
All ages, age adjustedb
180.7
177.9
147.7
96.2
65.3
60.9
57.9
56.2
All ages, crude 
104.0
108.0
101.9
75.0
57.8
59.6
57.4
56.4
Under 1 year
5.1
4.1
5.0
4.4
3.8
3.3
2.7
2.9
1–4 years
0.9
0.8
1.0
0.5
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.3
5–14 years
0.5
0.7
0.7
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
15–24 years
1.6
1.8
1.6
1.0
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.4
25–34 years
4.2
4.7
4.5
2.6
2.2
1.5
1.5
1.4
35–44 years
18.7
14.7
15.6
8.5
6.4
5.8
5.5
5.4
45–54 years
70.4
49.2
41.6
25.2
18.7
16.0
15.1
15.1
55–64 years
194.2
147.3
115.8
65.1
47.9
41.0
38.0
37.2
65–74 years
554.7
469.2
384.1
219.0
144.2
128.6
123.4
120.3
75–84 years
1,499.6
1,491.3
1,254.2
786.9
498.0
461.3
443.9
431.0
85 years and over
2,990.1
3,680.5
3,014.3
2,283.7
1,628.9
1,589.2
1,500.2
1,445.9
Male
All ages, age adjustedb
186.4
186.1
157.4
102.2
68.5
62.4
59.0
56.5
All ages, crude 
102.5
104.5
94.5
63.4
46.7
46.9
45.2
44.2
Under 1 year
6.4
5.0
5.8
5.0
4.4
3.8
3.1
3.2
1–4 years
1.1
0.9
1.2
0.4
0.3
*
0.3
0.4
5–14 years
0.5
0.7
0.8
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
15–24 years
1.8
1.9
1.8
1.1
0.7
0.5
0.5
0.5
25–34 years
4.2
4.5
4.4
2.6
2.1
1.5
1.6
1.4
35–44 years
17.5
14.6
15.7
8.7
6.8
5.8
5.7
5.3
45–54 years
67.9
52.2
44.4
27.2
20.5
17.5
16.7
16.7
55–64 years
205.2
163.8
138.7
74.6
54.3
47.2
43.4
42.7
65–74 years
589.6
530.7
449.5
258.6
166.6
145.0
140.4
135.0
75–84 years
1,543.6
1,555.9
1,361.6
866.3
551.1
490.8
467.3
445.9
85 years and over
3,048.6
3,643.1
2,895.2
2,193.6
1,528.5
1,484.3
1,380.2
1,317.9
Female
All ages, age adjustedb
175.8
170.7
140.0
91.7
62.6
59.1
56.4
55.2
All ages, crude 
105.6
111.4
109.0
85.9
68.4
71.8
69.2
68.2
Under 1 year
3.7
3.2
4.0
3.8
3.1
2.7
2.3
2.5
1–4 years
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.5
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.3
5–14 years
0.4
0.6
0.6
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.2
15–24 years
1.5
1.6
1.4
0.8
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.3
25–34 years
4.3
4.9
4.7
2.6
2.2
1.5
1.5
1.4
35–44 years
19.9
14.8
15.6
8.4
6.1
5.7
5.4
5.5
45–54 years
72.9
46.3
39.0
23.3
17.0
14.5
13.6
13.6
55–64 years
183.1
131.8
95.3
56.8
42.2
35.3
32.9
32.1
65–74 years
522.1
415.7
333.3
188.7
126.7
115.1
109.3
108.1
75–84 years
1,462.2
1,441.1
1,183.1
740.1
466.2
442.1
428.6
421.2
85 years and over
2,949.4
3,704.4
3,081.0
2,323.1
1,667.6
1,632.0
1,550.4
1,501.5
White malec
All ages, age adjustedb
182.1
181.6
153.7
98.7
65.5
59.8
56.5
54.2
All ages, crude 
100.5
102.7
93.5
63.1
46.9
48.4
46.6
45.7
45–54 years
53.7
40.9
35.6
21.7
15.4
13.6
12.7
12.9
55–64 years
182.2
139.0
119.9
64.0
45.7
39.7
36.1
35.6
65–74 years
569.7
501.0
420.0
239.8
152.9
133.8
128.5
123.8
75–84 years
1,556.3
1,564.8
1,361.6
852.7
539.2
480.0
458.8
437.5
85 years and over
3,127.1
3,734.8
3,018.1
2,230.8
1,545.4
1,490.7
1,386.2
1,327.4
Black or African
American malec
All ages, age adjustedb
228.8
238.5
206.4
142.0
102.2
89.6
85.4
81.7
All ages, crude 
122.0
122.9
108.8
73.0
53.0
46.1
44.6
43.5
45–54 years
211.9
166.1
136.1
82.1
68.4
49.5
48.8
46.5
55–64 years
522.8
439.9
343.4
189.7
141.7
115.4
111.9
110.3
65–74 years
783.6
899.2
780.1
472.3
326.9
268.5
269.2
262.9
75–84 yearsd
1,504.9
1,475.2
1,445.7
1,066.3
721.5
659.2
613.9
587.8
85 years and over
—
2,700.0
1,963.1
1,873.2
1,421.5
1,458.8
1,349.1
1,252.2
144
Older Adults
Death and Dying

TABLE 10.7
American Indian or
Alaska Native malec
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
66.4
44.3
46.1
37.5
37.1
All ages, crude
—
—
—
23.1
16.0
16.8
14.2
15.4
45–54 years
—
—
—
*
*
13.3
12.6
15.4
55–64 years
—
—
—
72.0
39.8
48.6
24.1
34.5
65–74 years
—
—
—
170.5
120.3
144.7
131.5
96.6
75–84 years
—
—
—
523.9
325.9
373.3
247.8
276.4
85 years and over
—
—
—
1,384.7
949.8
834.9
833.0
768.3
Asian or Pacific
Islander malec
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
71.4
59.1
58.0
55.3
50.8
All ages, crude
—
—
—
28.7
23.3
27.2
27.5
25.9
45–54 years
—
—
—
17.0
15.6
15.0
15.9
14.9
55–64 years
—
—
—
59.9
51.8
49.3
46.2
40.4
65–74 years
—
—
—
197.9
167.9
135.6
134.7
112.9
75–84 years
—
—
—
619.5
483.9
438.7
409.8
390.3
85 years and over
—
—
—
1,399.0
1,196.6
1,415.6
1,327.7
1,233.6
Hispanic or Latino malec, e
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
—
46.5
50.5
48.9
44.3
All ages, crude
—
—
—
—
15.6
15.8
15.7
15.0
45–54 years
—
—
—
—
20.0
18.1
18.7
18.6
55–64 years
—
—
—
—
49.2
48.8
43.5
45.0
65–74 years
—
—
—
—
126.4
136.1
127.2
124.6
75–84 years
—
—
—
—
356.6
392.9
386.3
338.5
85 years and over
—
—
—
—
866.3
1,029.9
1,005.6
856.7
White, not Hispanic or
Latino malee
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
—
66.3
59.9
56.5
54.4
All ages, crude
—
—
—
—
50.6
53.9
52.0
51.3
45–54 years
—
—
—
—
14.9
13.0
11.9
12.1
55–64 years
—
—
—
—
45.1
38.7
35.1
34.5
65–74 years
—
—
—
—
154.5
133.1
128.0
123.2
75–84 years
—
—
—
—
547.3
482.3
460.5
441.1
85 years and over
—
—
—
—
1,578.7
1,505.9
1,399.0
1,345.9
White femalec
All ages, age adjustedb
169.7
165.0
135.5
89.0
60.3
57.3
54.5
53.4
All ages, crude
103.3
110.1
109.8
88.6
71.6
76.9
74.0
73.0
45–54 years
55.0
33.8
30.5
18.6
13.5
11.2
10.2
10.4
55–64 years
156.9
103.0
78.1
48.6
35.8
30.2
27.6
27.4
65–74 years
498.1
383.3
303.2
172.5
116.1
107.3
99.9
99.5
75–84 years
1,471.3
1,444.7
1,176.8
728.8
456.5
434.2
421.6
414.1
85 years and over
3,017.9
3,795.7
3,167.6
2,362.7
1,685.9
1,646.7
1,563.5
1,516.9
Black or African
American femalec
All ages, age adjustedb
238.4
232.5
189.3
119.6
84.0
76.2
73.7
71.8
All ages, crude
128.3
127.7
112.2
77.8
60.7
58.3
56.9
55.8
45–54 years
248.9
166.2
119.4
61.8
44.1
38.1
37.3
35.7
55–64 years
567.7
452.0
272.4
138.4
96.9
76.4
74.4
70.1
65–74 years
754.4
830.5
673.5
361.7
236.7
190.9
189.5
181.2
75–84 yearsd
1,496.7
1,413.1
1,338.3
917.5
595.0
549.2
530.3
532.2
85 years and over
—
2,578.9
2,210.5
1,891.6
1,495.2
1,556.5
1,491.2
1,434.3
American Indian or
Alaska Native femalec
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
51.2
38.4 
43.7 
44.0 
38.0
All ages, crude
—
—
—
22.0
19.3
21.5
23.3
21.5
45–54 years
—
—
—
*
*
14.4
15.1
13.5
55–64 years
—
—
—
*
40.7
37.9
30.4
33.1
65–74 years
—
—
—
128.3
100.5
79.5
133.3
112.4
75–84 years
—
—
—
404.2
282.0
391.1
359.9
304.8
85 years and over
—
—
—
1,095.5
776.2
931.5
830.5
689.9
Death rates for cerebrovascular diseases, by sex, race, Hispanic origin, and age, selected years 1950–2002 [CONTINUED]
[Data are based on death certificates]
Sex, race, Hispanic origin,
and age
1950a
1960a
1970
1980
1990
2000
2001
2002
Death and Dying
Older Adults
145

(See Table 10.9.) The U.S. Census Bureau found that in
2000 more than two-thirds of all people older than
eighty-five were women—approximately three million
women, compared with 1.2 million men.
Elderly Women Have More Chronic Diseases
Than Do Elderly Men
Older women are more likely than men of the same
age to suffer from chronic conditions, such as arthritis,
osteoporosis and related bone fractures, AD, and inconti-
nence. Women are also more likely to have more than one
chronic disorder at a time (comorbidity). Arnold Mitnitski
and colleagues note in ‘‘Relative Fitness and Frailty of
Elderly Men and Women in Developed Countries and
Their Relationship with Mortality’’ (Journal of the
American Geriatric Society, vol. 53, no. 12, December
2005) that women, at any given age, were frailer than
men although they had a lower mortality rate.
GERIATRICS
Geriatrics is the medical subspecialty concerned
with the prevention and treatment of diseases in the
elderly. In 1909 Dr. Ignatz L. Nascher coined the term
geriatrics from the Greek ‘‘geras’’ (old age) and ‘‘iatri-
kos’’ (physician). Geriatricians are physicians trained
in internal medicine or family practice who obtain
additional training and certification in the diagnosis
and
treatment
of
older
adults.
Geriatricians
rely
on the findings of researchers and gerontologists (non-
physician professionals who conduct scientific studies
of
aging
and
older
adults)
to
help
older
adults
‘‘maintain the highest possible degree of function and
independence
and
avoid
unnecessary
and
costly
institutionalization.’’
Gerontology was unheard of before the nineteenth
century, when most people died at an early age. Those
who reached old age accepted their deteriorating health
TABLE 10.7
Asian or Pacific
Islander femalec
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
60.8
54.9
49.1
48.2
45.4
All ages, crude
—
—
—
26.4
24.3
28.7
29.8
29.2
45–54 years
—
—
—
20.3
19.7
13.3
11.3
12.6
55–64 years
—
—
—
43.7
42.1
33.3
35.2
32.1
65–74 years
—
—
—
136.1
124.0
102.8
113.2
112.5
75–84 years
—
—
—
446.6
396.6
386.0
359.6
331.7
85 years and over
—
—
—
1,545.2
1,395.0
1,246.6
1,236.8
1,149.8
Hispanic or Latino femalec, e
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
—
43.7
43.0
41.6
38.6
All ages, crude
—
—
—
—
20.1
19.4
19.1
18.4
45–54 years
—
—
—
—
15.2
12.4
13.1
12.0
55–64 years
—
—
—
—
38.5
31.9
28.2
27.6
65–74 years
—
—
—
—
102.6
95.2
89.6
85.6
75–84 years
—
—
—
—
308.5
311.3
310.7
307.2
85 years and over
—
—
—
—
1,055.3
1,108.9
1,061.2
918.5
White, not Hispanic 
or Latino femalee
All ages, age adjustedb
—
—
—
—
61.0
57.6
54.8
53.9
All ages, crude
—
—
—
—
77.2
85.5
82.6
82.1
45–54 years
—
—
—
—
13.2
10.9
9.8
10.1
55–64 years
—
—
—
—
35.7
29.9
27.4
27.2
65–74 years
—
—
—
—
116.9
107.6
100.3
100.2
75–84 years
—
—
—
—
461.9
438.3
425.6
418.4
85 years and over
—
—
—
—
1,714.7
1,661.6
1,577.4
1,536.7
*Rates based on fewer than 20 deaths are considered unreliable and are not shown.
aIncludes deaths of persons who were not residents of the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
bAge-adjusted rates are calculated using the year 2000 standard population.
cThe race groups, white, black, Asian or Pacific Islander, and American Indian or Alaska Native, include persons of Hispanic and non-Hispanic origin. Persons of Hispanic origin may be
of any race. Death rates for the American Indian or Alaska Native and Asian or Pacific Islander populations are known to be underestimated.
dIn 1950 rate is for the age group 75 years and over.
ePrior to 1997, excludes data from states lacking an Hispanic-origin item on the death certificate.
”
SOURCE: “Table 37. Death Rates for Cerebrovascular Diseases, according to Sex, Race, Hispanic Origin, and Age: United States, Selected Years 1950–2002,” in
Health, United States, 2005, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center for Health Statistics, November 2005, http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/
hus/hus05.pdf (accessed February 27, 2006)
Death rates for cerebrovascular diseases, by sex, race, Hispanic origin, and age, selected years 1950–2002 [CONTINUED]
[Data are based on death certificates]
Sex, race, Hispanic origin,
and age
1950a
1960a
1970
1980
1990
2000
2001
2002
Notes: “—”Data not available. Starting with 2003, rates for 1991–99 were revised using intercensal population estimates based on census 2000.  Rates for 2000 were revised based on 
census 2000 counts. Rates for 2001 and 2002 were computed using 2000-based postcensal estimates.  Age groups were selected to minimize the presentation of unstable age-specific 
death rates based on small numbers of deaths and for consistency among comparison groups.
146
Older Adults
Death and Dying

as a part of aging. In the early twentieth century ger-
ontology was born when scientists began to investigate
the pathological changes that accompany the aging
process.
While many developed countries have recognized
the need for more geriatrics education, the United
States continues to lag in offering geriatrics courses
in its medical schools. As of 2003 only 30% of the
ninety-one non-pediatric accredited medical specialties
offered in U.S. medical schools had specific geriatrics
training
requirements.
Among
those
with
specific
requirements, curriculum expectations were considered
modest by the Association of Directors of Geriatric
Academic Programs’ (ADGAP) team at the University of
Cincinnati School of Medicine’s Institute for Health Policy
and Health Services Research (Elizabeth J. Bragg and Gregg
A.
Warshaw,
‘‘ACGME
Requirements
for
Geriatrics
Medicine Curricula in Medical Specialties: Progress Made
and Progress Needed,’’ Academic Medicine, vol. 80, no. 3,
March 2005).
Decline in Numbers of Geriatricians in the
United States
The Alliance for Aging Research has reported that a
tremendous shortage of physicians specializing in geriatrics
exists, including those in the field of psychiatry known as
TABLE 10.9
Sex ratio for population 25 years and over by age, 2000 and 2030
[Men per 100 women]
2000
2030
25 to 54
55 to 64
65 to 69
70 to 74
75 to 79
80 years
25 to 54
55 to 64
65 to 69
70 to 74
75 to 79
80 years
Country
years
years
years
years
years
and over
years
years
years
years
years
and over
United States
98
91
85
79
72
52
98
92
89
86
81
64
SOURCE: Adapted from Kevin Kinsella and Victoria A. Velkoff, “Table 6. Sex Ratio for Population 25 Years and Over by Age: 2000 and 2030,” in An Aging
World: 2001, series P95/01-1, U.S. Census Bureau, November 2001, http://www.census.gov/prod/2001pubs/p95-01-1.pdf (accessed December 12, 2005)
Death and Dying
Older Adults
147

geropsychiatrists. The Institute for Health Policy and Health
Services Research at the University of Cincinnati and
ADGAP estimated that there were only 6,776 active certi-
fied geriatricians practicing in the United States in 2004.
In its May 2003 Training and Practice Update, the
ADGAP notes that Medicare, the primary payer for most
clinical services provided by geriatricians, reduced the
average reimbursement to physicians by 5.4% in 2002.
ADGAP suggested that ‘‘the growing gap between
Medicare reimbursement and the actual costs of delivering
medical care may affect the willingness of physicians to
continue focusing their careers in geriatric medicine and
geriatric psychiatry.’’ The Geriatric Care Act was intro-
duced in 2003, which would help improve payment for
geriatricians. As of mid-2006, the bill had not been passed.
148
Older Adults
Death and Dying

CHAPTER 11
PUBLIC OPINION ABOUT LIFE AND DEATH
LIFE AFTER DEATH
Since the dawn of history, many people have
believed that human beings do not simply cease to exist
upon their death. Numerous religions and cultures teach
that the physical body may die and decompose but that
some element of the person goes on to what many call the
‘‘afterlife.’’
Between 1972 and 1982, when the Roper Center for
Public Opinion Research asked the American public,
‘‘Do you believe there is life after death?’’ 70% said they
believed in an afterlife, and 20% said they did not. In
1996, when the Roper Center asked the same question,
73% of respondents said yes, and 16% said no. A 2002
poll conducted by the National Opinion Research Center
at the University of Chicago, as part of its General Social
Survey, revealed similar results. Seventy-two percent of
those polled said they believed that there is a life after
death, 17% did not, and 11% were undecided. Clearly,
the proportion of the U.S. population believing in an
afterlife appears to have remained relatively consistent
over three decades.
An October 2005 CBS News poll researched what
the most religiously observant Americans said on the
subject
of
afterlife
(http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/
2005/10/29/opinion/polls/main994766.shtml). About nine
in ten of those who attend religious services weekly or
almost every week believe that humans transition to an
afterlife after the physical body dies.
When asked in polls conducted by the Gallup
Organization about an afterlife and what that ‘‘eternal
destination’’ might be, many Americans expressed a
belief in heaven, where people who led good lives are
eternally rewarded after death, and hell, where unrepen-
tant people who led bad lives are eternally punished.
From 1997 to 2004 a majority of Gallup Poll respon-
dents—72% in 1997 and 81% in 2004—acknowledged
a belief in heaven. (See Figure 11.1.) In the 2004
survey 10% were unsure whether they believed in heaven,
and 8% did not believe in it. In addition, a majority of
respondents—56% in 1997 and 70% in 2004—acknowl-
edged a belief that hell exists in the afterlife. (See Figure
11.2.) In the 2004 survey 12% were unsure whether they
believed in hell and 17% did not believe in it.
CONCERNS ABOUT DEATH
Most Americans say they are not afraid of death.
A September 2000 Los Angeles Times poll called
‘‘Aging in America’’ reported by Susan Pinkus, Jill
Richardson, and Elizabeth Armet found that people
over age sixty-five think about and fear death the least,
while those ages eighteen to twenty-nine think about
and fear it the most. Only 7% of those age sixty-five
and older say they are afraid to die, while 20% of
eighteen-
to
twenty-nine-year-olds
express
fear
of
dying.
Although a greater proportion of young people
appear to think about and fear death than older per-
sons, most are not preoccupied with or fearful of it. In
a 2004 Gallup Youth Survey, 1,302 teens ages thirteen
to seventeen years were queried about death. The
largest proportion of respondents (35%) thinks ‘‘hardly
at all’’ about their own deaths. An additional 25%
never think about their own deaths, while 30% only
sometimes think about dying. Only 2% of teens
‘‘almost always’’ think about their own deaths. (See
Figure 11.3.)
In addition, American teens appear to have a rea-
listic attitude about the possibility of their dying at an
early age. In a 2003 Gallup Youth Survey, 48% of
teens ages thirteen to seventeen responded that they
were somewhat likely to die from a car accident before
they reached adulthood. (See Figure 11.4.) This belief
parallels National Center for Health Statistics data,
which show that motor vehicle accidents are the
Death and Dying
149

leading cause of teen death. In contrast, only 24% of
teens thought they were somewhat likely to die at a
young age from violent crime, 21% from disease, and
18% from terrorism.
Fearful Aspects of Dying
Although they may not fear death or spend much
time thinking about their own deaths, Americans are
fearful about some aspects of dying. In a survey pub-
lished in 2001 and conducted by Yankelovich Partners,
Time magazine, and CNN, two-thirds of respondents
expressed much or some concern about dying in pain.
Another two-thirds said they were ‘‘very fearful’’ or
‘‘somewhat fearful’’ of leaving loved ones behind, and
43% of respondents were ‘‘very fearful’’ or ‘‘somewhat
fearful’’ about dying alone.
The Yankelovich Partners/Time/CNN survey found
that the majority of people (73%) would prefer to die at
home rather than in a hospital, hospice, or nursing home.
Despite these expressed wishes to die at home, less than
half (43%) believed they were likely to die at home—
28% thought they were likely to die in a hospital, nursing
home, or hospice.
FIGURE 11.2
FOR EACH OF THE FOLLOWING ITEMS I AM GOING TO READ YOU, PLEASE TELL 
ME WHETHER IT IS SOMETHING YOU BELIEVE IN, SOMETHING YOU’RE NOT 
SURE ABOUT, OR SOMETHING YOU DON’T BELIEVE IN…HELL.
Year
Percent
56%
71%
70%
50
60
70
80
90
100
1997
2001
2004
Public opinion on existence of hell, selected years 1997–2004
SOURCE: Albert L. Winseman, “Belief in Hell,” in “Eternal Destination:
Americans Believe in Heaven, Hell,” The Gallup Poll, May 25, 2004.
Copyright © 2004 by The Gallup Organization. Reproduced by
permission of The Gallup Organization.
FIGURE 11.1
FOR EACH OF THE FOLLOWING ITEMS I AM GOING TO READ YOU, PLEASE TELL 
ME WHETHER IT IS SOMETHING YOU BELIEVE IN, SOMETHING YOU’RE NOT 
SURE ABOUT, OR SOMETHING YOU DON’T BELIEVE IN…HEAVEN.
Year
Percent
72%
83%
81%
*Gallup/Nathan Cummings Foundation and Fetzer Institute Poll
50
60
70
80
90
100
1997*
2001
2004
Public opinion on existence of heaven, selected years
1997–2004
SOURCE: Albert L. Winseman, “Belief in Heaven,” in “Eternal
Destination: Americans Believe in Heaven, Hell,” The Gallup Poll,
May 25, 2004. Copyright © 2004 by The Gallup Organization.
Reproduced by permission of The Gallup Organization.
FIGURE 11.3
How often teens think about death, 2004
ABOUT HOW MUCH OF THE TIME DO YOU THINK ABOUT YOUR OWN DEATH?
Percent
[Asked of teens aged 13–17]
Almost always
Often
Sometimes
Hardly at all
Not at all
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
SOURCE: Linda Lyons, “About How Much of the Time Do You Think
about Your Own Death?” in “One in 10 Teens Thinks Often about Own
Death,” The Gallup Poll, June 29, 2004. Copyright © 2004 by The 
Gallup Organization. Reproduced by permission of The Gallup
Organization.
2%
7%
30%
35%
25%
150
Public Opinion about Life and Death
Death and Dying

The Seriously Ill Have Different Concerns
When patients with advanced chronic illnesses were
asked, in a 1999 survey conducted by Karen E.
Steinhauser for the Program on the Medical Encounter
and Palliative Care, whether they agreed or strongly
agreed about the importance of a variety of end-of-life
issues, their concerns were quite different from those of
the general population. While dying at home appears to
be a priority for many Americans, only 35% of the
seriously ill named dying at home as a priority, making
it last on their list of concerns. Their top priorities were
being kept clean (99%), having a nurse with whom they
felt comfortable (97%), knowing what to expect about
their physical conditions (96%), trusting their physician
(94%), and being free of pain (93%).
In this same survey seriously ill patients also
revealed that they felt it was very meaningful to have
someone who would listen to them (95%), and more than
nine out of ten said it was important to them to maintain
both their dignity (95%) and sense of humor (93%).
Almost all believed it was vital to name someone to make
decisions for them if they became unable to make them
(98%) and to have their financial affairs in order (94%).
They did not wish to be a burden to their families (89%)
or to society (81%). While only half of seriously ill
respondents felt it was important to be able to discuss
their spiritual beliefs with their physicians (50%), more
than two-thirds (69%) wished to meet with a clergy
member, and 85% valued prayer. The highest spiritual
priority for seriously ill patients was coming to peace
with God (89%).
GETTING OLDER
Living to Age One Hundred
National surveys of the adult population by the
Alliance for Aging Research (AAR) have found that
Americans would generally like to live longer. In 2001
six in ten Americans (63%) said they would like to live to
be one hundred years old. Men (68%) and those ages
eighteen to thirty-six (69%) were more likely to want to
live to be one hundred years old. These findings are
similar to AAR studies from 1991 and 1996.
A more recent poll yielded different results. The
October 2005 ABC News/USA Today poll ‘‘Most Wish
for a Long Life—Despite Broad Aging Concerns’’
revealed that only 20% of a random national sample of
one thousand adults wanted to live to be one hundred
years or older. Twenty-three percent stated that they
would like to live into their nineties, and 29% into their
eighties.
Although a majority of Americans polled by the
AAR said they would like to live to be one hundred
years
old,
not
all
expect
to
get
their
wish.
Nonetheless, 90% of people completing an online
survey, and 60% of those who responded by telephone
to a 2001 survey by the AAR, expected to live to be
at least eighty years old. More than half (62%) of
those surveyed online said they expected to live to
be at least ninety years old. Earlier AAR surveys,
conducted in 1991, 1992, and 1996, also showed that
more than half of the respondents (56%, 58%, and
51%, respectively) thought they would live to be at
least eighty years old.
Those surveyed by the ABC News/USA Today
poll were asked how likely they thought it was that
they would live to be one hundred years old and
still have a good quality of life. Thirty-five percent
thought it very or somewhat likely, while 64% thought
it somewhat or very unlikely. One percent had no
opinion.
FIGURE 11.4
HOW LIKELY DO YOU THINK YOU ARE TO DIE FROM EACH OF THESE BEFORE
YOU ARE AN ADULT?
Percent
[Asked of teens aged 13–17]
Car accident
48%
35%
15%
24%
44%
30%
21%
50%
27%
Violent crime
Disease
Terrorism
Plane crash
Suicide
Drug overdose
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
18%
40%
40%
13%
39%
47%
10%
12%
8%
9%
76%
81%
SOURCE: Steve Hanway, “How Likely Do You Think You Are to Die
from Each of These before You Are an Adult?” in “Teens Cast a Wary
Eye on Their Own Mortality,” The Gallup Poll, October 21, 2003.
Copyright © 2003 by The Gallup Organization. Reproduced by
permission of The Gallup Organization.
Teens’ self-assessed likelihood of dying from particular
causes, 2003
Somewhat likely
Not very likely
Not at all likely
Death and Dying
Public Opinion about Life and Death
151

Concerns about Aging
The aging of the baby boomers (the generation born
between 1946 and 1964) and the growing number of
people living longer have focused much attention on
concerns that come with aging. The 2001 AAR survey
mentioned in the previous section found that while
Americans want to live longer, more than half of respon-
dents to the online survey were concerned about losing
their health (61%) and living in a nursing home (51%) in
old age. Becoming a financial burden to their children
(45%) and remaining attractive (46%) concerned less
than half of those surveyed online. The 2005 ABC
News/USA Today poll mentioned in the previous section
asked similar questions and found that respondents were
most concerned about losing their health (73%). More
than half were also worried about losing their mental
abilities (69%) and losing their ability to care for them-
selves (70%). The respondents were also worried about
being a burden to their families (54%) and living in a
nursing home (52%).
Nursing Homes Get Mixed Reviews
During 2001 the NewsHour with Jim Lehrer, the
Harvard School of Public Health, and the Henry J. Kaiser
Family Foundation conducted a national survey about nur-
sing homes. Among other questions, participants were
asked about their willingness to move into a nursing home.
Of the 1,309 adults surveyed, slightly less than half
(47%) said they would not like, but would accept, mov-
ing into a nursing home if they could not care for them-
selves at home, while 43% felt that moving into a nursing
home would be totally unacceptable. Only 10% of the
survey respondents felt they would accept it as the best
thing for themselves. A majority felt that nursing homes
are understaffed, have staff that are often neglectful or
abusive of residents, and are lonely. Almost half (45%)
felt that nursing homes make most people who move into
them worse off than prior to the move. Further, 86% of
respondents believed that ‘‘most people who stay in a
nursing home never go home.’’
In June 2005 the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation
conducted another national survey that included ques-
tions about nursing homes (May/June 2005 Health Poll
Report Survey). When asked if they thought ‘‘that the
quality of nursing homes in this country has gotten better,
gotten worse, or stayed about the same,’’ only 15%
thought they had gotten better. Twenty-four percent
thought nursing homes had gotten worse, while 45% felt
that they had stayed about the same. Sixteen percent did
not answer. Respondents still felt that nursing homes are
understaffed (74%), but 68% believed that nursing homes
‘‘have staff who are concerned about the well-being of
their patients.’’ On the other hand, 60% thought that ‘‘the
staff at nursing homes are often poorly trained.’’
SUICIDE
The General Social Survey 2002 and the General
Social Survey 2004, both conducted by the National
Opinion Research Center at the University of Chicago,
found that 58% of respondents in each survey approved
of suicide if a person had an incurable disease, but only a
small minority approved of it if the person had gone
bankrupt (8% [2002], 11% [2004]), had dishonored his
or her family (9% [2002], 11% [2004]), or was simply
tired of living (15% [2002], 16% [2004]). In comparison,
the same poll from 1977 found that a much lower per-
centage of people (38%) thought suicide was acceptable
if one had an incurable illness. Suicide in other situations
was also found less acceptable in the 1977 survey than in
the 2002 and 2004 surveys.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, suicide is the thirteenth-leading cause of
death globally, the eleventh-leading cause of death in
the United States, and the third-leading cause of death
among U.S. young people ages ten to twenty-four
(Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, vol. 53, no.
22, June 11, 2004). Results of a 2004 Gallup Youth
survey revealed that 22% of the American teens ques-
tioned (ages thirteen to seventeen) had ‘‘ever talked or
thought about committing suicide.’’ Girls were more
likely (28%) than boys (16%) to have had suicidal
thoughts. (See Figure 11.5.) When asked if they had ever
tried to commit suicide, however, only 4% of girls and
9% of boys had. (See Figure 11.6.)
PHYSICIAN-ASSISTED SUICIDE
Many advocates of physician-assisted suicide believe
that people who are suffering from uncontrollable pain
should be allowed to end their lives with a lethal dose of
medication prescribed by their physician. Dr. Marcia
Angell, for example, former executive editor of The
New England Journal of Medicine, claims that ‘‘those
with cancer, AIDS, and other neurologic disorders may
die by inches and in great anguish, despite every effort of
their doctors and nurses.’’ She believes that if all possible
palliative efforts have failed to provide pain relief, then
physician-assisted suicide should be permitted.
In the United States public opinion changed only
slightly with regard to physician-assisted suicide between
2001 and 2004, hovering between 62% and 68% of
respondents to Gallup Values and Beliefs polls (see
Figure 11.7) supporting physician-assisted suicide. In
2005 the percentage dropped to 58%. Results of the same
polls show that, in general, a greater percentage of
Americans support euthanasia—allowing a doctor to
end the life of a patient who is suffering from an incur-
able disease and wants to die, without requiring the
patient to administer the drugs to him- or herself.
152
Public Opinion about Life and Death
Death and Dying

Figure 11.7 shows that support for euthanasia has
increased considerably since the 1940s.
When the results of the May 2005 Gallup Values and
Beliefs poll are analyzed by gender, more men than
women support euthanasia (84% vs. 66%, respectively)
and doctor-assisted suicide (64% vs. 53%, respectively).
In addition, Protestants and Catholics are more suppor-
tive of both procedures than are Evangelical Christians,
and Democrats are more supportive of them than are
Republicans.
Oregon Physician-Assisted Suicide Law
In 1994 Oregon became the first jurisdiction in the
world to legalize physician-assisted suicide when that
state passed its Death with Dignity Act. Under the act,
Oregon
law
permits
physician-assisted
suicide
for
patients with less than six months to live. Patients must
request physician assistance three times, receive a second
opinion from another doctor, and wait fifteen days to
allow time to reconsider.
Before the Death with Dignity Act could take effect,
opponents of the law succeeded in obtaining an injunc-
tion against it. Three years later, in November 1997,
Oregon’s legislature let the voters decide whether to
repeal or retain the law. Voters reaffirmed the Death with
Dignity Act. In August 1997, prior to voters’ reaffirma-
tion of the law, about seven in ten people (69%) surveyed
by the Harris Poll indicated they would approve of a
similar law allowing physician-assisted suicide in their
state. Asked again in 2001 whether they would favor or
oppose such a law in their own state, 61% of respondents
indicated they favored such legislation.
Using Federally Controlled Drugs for Assisted Suicide
After the Death with Dignity Act took effect in
November 1997, Thomas Constantine of the Drug
Enforcement
Administration
(DEA)
announced
that
‘‘delivering, dispensing, or prescribing a controlled sub-
stance with the intent of assisting a suicide’’ would be a
violation of the federal Controlled Substances Act (PL
91–513). Then Attorney General Janet Reno overruled
Constantine.
In November 2001 U.S. Attorney General John
Ashcroft overturned Reno’s ruling in an attempt to again
allow the DEA to act against physicians who prescribe
lethal doses of controlled substances under Oregon’s
physician-assisted suicide law. In December 2001 the
FIGURE 11.5
Survey of teens on thoughts of suicide, 2004
HAVE YOU EVER TALKED OR THOUGHT ABOUT COMMITTING SUICIDE?
[Asked of teens aged 13–17]
22%
Total
Boys
Girls
16% 
84%
78%
28%
72%
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
SOURCE: Coleen McMurray, “Have You Ever Talked or Thought about
Committing Suicide?” in “Nearly Half of Teens Aware of Peer Suicide
Attempts,” The Gallup Poll, May 25, 2004. Copyright © 2004 by The
Gallup Organization. Reproduced by permission of The Gallup
Organization.
Yes
No
Percent
FIGURE 11.6
HAVE YOU EVER TRIED TO COMMIT SUICIDE?
Percent
[Asked of teens aged 13–17]
Total
6%
Boys
Girls
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
93%
4%
96%
9%
90%
Survey of teens on suicide attempts, 2004
SOURCE: Coleen McMurray, “Have You Ever Tried to Commit
Suicide?” in “Nearly Half of Teens Aware of Peer Suicide Attempts,”
The Gallup Poll, May 25, 2004. Copyright © 2004 by The Gallup
Organization. Reproduced by permission of The Gallup Organization.
Yes
No
Death and Dying
Public Opinion about Life and Death
153

Harris Poll asked adults nationwide whether they consid-
ered Attorney General Ashcroft’s effort to overrule the
proposition right or wrong. More than half of respondents
(58%) believed his action was wrong. On April 17, 2002,
U.S. District Judge Robert E. Jones agreed, noting that ‘‘to
allow an attorney general—an appointed executive...—to
determine the legitimacy of a particular medical practice...
would be unprecedented and extraordinary.’’ Jones’s ruling
reaffirmed the Death with Dignity Act. The Justice
Department appealed the ruling to the Ninth Circuit Court
of Appeals. On May 26, 2004, the court upheld Jones’s
ruling against Ashcroft.
In February 2005 the U.S. Supreme Court agreed to
hear the Bush administration’s challenge to Oregon’s
physician-assisted suicide law. The debate of this issue
began in October 2005 in the High Court.
WITHHOLDING NUTRITION AND HYDRATION:
THE TERRI SCHIAVO CASE
The death of Terri Schiavo on April 1, 2005, and the
events leading up to her death resulted in an intense
debate among Americans over end-of-life decisions and
brought new attention to the question of whom should
make the decision to stop life support, most specifically
nutrition and hydration. Terri Schiavo died on April 1,
2005, after her feeding tube was withdrawn days earlier.
Schiavo had been in a persistent vegetative state (PVS)
since 1990. Her husband, Michael Schiavo, believing
that she would never recover and saying that his wife
did not want to be kept alive by artificial means,
petitioned a Florida court to remove her feeding tube.
Her parents, however, believed that she could feel, under-
stand, and respond. They opposed the idea of removing
the feeding tube. After years of legal disputes, the feeding
tube was removed permanently and Shiavo died. (See
Chapter 8.)
Two primary questions emerged as the nation
watched the Schiavo case unfold: (1) If you were in a
PVS would you want to be kept alive by artificial
means?, and (2) Who should have the final say in the
matter if you had not left an advance directive (living
will)? A March 29, 2005, Gallup Poll, ‘‘Americans
Choose Death over Vegetative State’’ notes that 53% of
respondents worry ‘‘a great deal’’ about ‘‘the possibility
of being vegetable-like for some period of time.’’ In
exploring this issue more deeply, the March 13, 2005,
ABC News/Washington Post poll ‘‘Terri Schiavo’’ asked
a random national sample of 1,001 adults: ‘‘If you were
in this condition [that of Terri Schiavo] would you want
to be kept alive or not?’’ Only 8% said ‘‘yes,’’ while 87%
said ‘‘no.’’ When asked who should have the final say,
65% felt that the spouse should have the final say, while
25% believed it should be the parents.
It may be hard to determine the effect of the Terri
Schiavo case on the American public, but in an attempt to
do so, a FOX News/Opinion Dynamics poll of March 30,
2005, asked the question: ‘‘Prior to the recent coverage of
the Terri Schiavo case, had you ever discussed end-of-life
medical decisions with your spouse, family, or friends?’’
A huge majority—78%—reported that they had. Only
20% had not. Thus, a majority of the American public
had dealt with this question prior to it being highlighted
in the media. Nonetheless, the case appeared to generate
strong interest in living wills as suggested by a March 25,
2005, poll by Time magazine/SRBI (a company that
conducts opinion surveys). Results of the survey revealed
that 93% of respondents had heard of a living will, but
only 37% had executed such a document. When those
who had no living will were asked, ‘‘Has the Schiavo
case made you think about drafting a living will or dis-
cussing with your family your wishes for medical treat-
ment should you be unable to communicate them your-
self?’’ 69% responded ‘‘yes.’’
FIGURE 11.7
Percent support for euthanasia (1947–2005) and
doctor-assisted suicide (1996–2005) 
SOURCE: David W. Moore, “Percent Support for Euthanasia and
Doctor-Assisted Suicide,” in “Three in Four Americans Support
Euthanasia: Significantly Less Support for Doctor-Assisted Suicide,”
The Gallup Poll, May 17, 2005. Copyright © 2005 by The Gallup
Organization. Reproduced by permission of The Gallup Organization.
0
1947
37
36
53
65
72
65
62
62
65
58
52
68
72
72
69
75
1950
1973
1990
1996
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
20
40
60
80
Percent
% Euthanasia
% Doctor-assisted suicide
154
Public Opinion about Life and Death
Death and Dying

IMPORTANT NAMES AND ADDRESSES
AARP (formerly the American
Association of Retired
Persons)
601 E St. NW
Washington, DC 20049
1-888-687-2277
URL: http://www.aarp.org
Aging with Dignity
PO Box 1661
Tallahassee, FL 32302-1661
1-888-594-7437
FAX: (850) 681-2481
E-mail: fivewishes@agingwithdignity.org
URL: http://www.agingwithdignity.org
Alzheimer’s Association
225 N. Michigan Ave., 17th Fl.
Chicago, IL 60601-7633
(312) 335-8700
1-800-272-3900
FAX: (312) 335-1110
E-mail: info@alz.org
URL: http://www.alz.org
American Association of Suicidology
5221 Wisconsin Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20015
(202) 237-2280
FAX: (202) 237-2282
URL: http://www.suicidology.org
American Cancer Society
1599 Clifton Rd. NE
Atlanta, GA 30329
(404) 320-33331-800-227-2345
URL: http://www.cancer.org
American Foundation for Suicide
Prevention
120 Wall St., 22nd Fl.
New York, NY 10005
(212) 363-3500
1-888-333-2377
FAX: (212) 363-6237
E-mail: inquiry@afsp.org
URL: http://www.afsp.org
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention
1600 Clifton Rd.
Atlanta, GA 30333
(404) 639-3534
1-800-232-4636
E-mail: cdcinfo@cdc.gov
URL: http://www.cdc.gov
Children’s Hospice International
1101 King St., Ste. 360
Alexandria, VA 22314
(703) 684-0330
1-800-242-4453
FAX: (703) 684-0226
URL: http://www.chionline.org
Health Resources and Services
Administration U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services
5600 Fishers Ln.
Rockville, MD 20857
URL: http://www.hrsa.gov
Compassion & Choices (formerly
Compassion in Dying and End-of-Life
Choices)
PO Box 101810
Denver, CO 80250-1810
1-800-247-7421
FAX: (303) 639-1224
E-mail: info@compassionandchoices.org
URL: http://
www.compassionandchoices.org
The Hastings Center
21 Malcolm Gordon Rd.
Garrison, NY 10524-4125
(845) 424-4040
FAX: (845) 424-4545
E-mail: mail@thehastingscenter.org
URL: http://www.thehastingscenter.org
International Task Force on Euthanasia
and Assisted Suicide
PO Box 760
Steubenville, OH 43952
(740) 282-3810
URL: http://www.internationaltaskforce.org
March of Dimes
1275 Mamaroneck Ave.
White Plains, NY 10605
(914) 997-4488
1-888-663-4637
URL: http://www.marchofdimes.com
National Association for Home Care and
Hospice
228 Seventh St. SE
Washington, DC 20003
(202) 547-7424
FAX: (202) 547-3540
URL: http://www.nahc.org
The National Council on Aging
300 D St. SW, Ste. 801
Washington, DC 20024
(202) 479-1200
1-800-373-4906
FAX: (202) 479-0735
E-mail: info@ncoa.org
URL: http://www.ncoa.org
The National Hospice and Palliative Care
Organization
1700 Diagonal Rd., Ste. 625
Alexandria, VA 22314
(703) 837-1500
1-800-658-8898 (Help Line)
1-800-646-6460 (Service Center)
FAX: (703) 837-1233
E-mail: nhpco_info@nhpco.org
URL: http://www.nhpco.org
National Institute on Aging
31 Center Dr., MSC 2292
Building 31, Room 5C27
Bethesda, MD 20892
(301) 496-1752
1-800-222-2225
FAX: (301) 496-1072
URL: http://www.nia.nih.gov
Death and Dying
155

National Right to Life Committee
512 Tenth St. NW
Washington, DC 20004
(202) 626-8800
E-mail: NRLC@nrlc.org
URL: http://www.nrlc.org
Older Women’s League (OWL)
3300 N. Fairfax Dr., Ste. 218
Arlington, VA 22201
(703) 812-7900
1-800-825-3695
FAX: (703) 812-0687
E-mail: owlinfo@owl-national.org
URL: http://www.owl-national.org
United Network for Organ Sharing
700 N. Fourth St.
PO Box 2484
Richmond, VA 23218
(804) 782-4800
1-888-894-6361
FAX: (804) 782-4817
URL: http://www.unos.org
Visiting Nurse Associations of
America
99 Summer St., Ste. 1700
Boston, MA 02110
(617) 737-3200
FAX: (617) 737-1144
E-mail: vnaa@vnaa.org
URL: http://www.vnaa.org
156
Important Names and Addresses
Death and Dying

RESOURCES
The National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) of
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), in
its annual publication Health, United States, provides a
statistical overview of the nation’s health. The NCHS per-
iodicals National Vital Statistics Reports supply detailed
U.S. birth and death data. The CDC reports on nationwide
health trends in its Advance Data reports, Morbidity and
Mortality Weekly Report, HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report,
Trends in Health and Aging, and Longitudinal Studies of
Aging. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services
report on the nation’s spending for health care.
The U.S. Census Bureau publishes a wide variety of
demographic information on American life. U.S. Interim
Projections by Age, Sex, Race, and Hispanic Origin incor-
porate the results of the 2000 census, and An Aging World:
2001 (2001) provides information on aging.
The Alliance for Aging Research promotes scientific
research on human aging and conducts educational pro-
grams to increase communication and understanding
among professionals who serve the elderly.
In 2004 Partnership for Caring and Last Acts merged
to
create
Last
Acts
Partnership. This
organization
provided education, service, and counseling about end-
of-life care. In 2005 Last Acts Partnership ceased its
activities, and all rights and copyrights to material pro-
duced by Partnership for Caring, Last Acts, and Last Acts
Partnership were obtained by the National Hospice and
Palliative Care Organization (NHPCO). NHPCO’s mis-
sion is ‘‘improving end-of-life care and expanding access
to hospice care with the goal of profoundly enhancing
quality of life for people dying in America and their
loved ones.’’ NHPCO and the Hospice Association of
America both collect data about hospice care.
The United Network for Organ Sharing (UNOS)
manages the national transplant waiting list, maintains
data on organ transplants, and distributes organ donor
cards.
The
primary
purposes
of
the
U.S.
Organ
Procurement and Transplantation Network (OPTN) ‘‘are
to operate and monitor an equitable system for allocating
organs donated for transplantation; maintain a waiting list
of potential recipients; match potential recipients with
organ donors according to established medical criteria
for allocation of organs and, to the extent feasible, for
listing and delisting transplant patients; facilitate the effi-
cient, effective placement of organs for transplantation;
and increase organ donation.’’ The Scientific Registry of
Transplant Recipients (SRTR) evaluates the scientific
and clinical status of organ transplantation in the United
States. Valuable information on these topics is available
in the 2005 OPTN/SRTR Annual Report.
The National Right to Life Committee can provide
a copy of The Will to Live, an alternative living will, while
Compassion
and
Choices
(formed
in
2005
from
Compassion in Dying and End-of-Life Choices) provides
news and bulletins on Oregon’s Death with Dignity Act and
other end-of-life legislation. The American Bar Association
Commission on Law and Aging publishes information
related to advance directives.
For cancer statistics, a premier source is the American
Cancer Society’s annual Cancer Facts and Figures.
Journals that frequently publish studies dealing with
life-sustaining treatment, medical ethics, and medical
costs include Annals of Internal Medicine, Journal of
the
American
Geriatrics
Society,
Journal
of
the
American Medical Association, the Lancet, and the New
England Journal of Medicine.
The Gallup Organization, Harris Interactive, Polling
Report, and Roper Center for Public Opinion Research
have all conducted opinion polls on topics related to death
and dying.
The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation provides a
wealth of information on Medicare, Medicaid, health
insurance, prescription drugs, HIV/AIDS, and nursing
homes.
Death and Dying
157

INDEX
Page references in italics refer to photo-
graphs. References with the letter t fol-
lowing them indicate the presence of a
table. The letter f indicates a figure. If
more than one table or figure appears on a
particular page, the exact item number for
the table or figure being referenced is
provided.
A
‘‘A Definition of Irreversible Coma,’’
Journal of the American Medical
Association, 7
See also Harvard Criteria
Abe Perlmutter, Michael J. Satz, State
Attorney for Broward County, Florida v.,
100
ACP (American College of Physicians)
end-of-life care guidelines, 18
on euthanasia and assisted suicide, 72
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome
(AIDS)
end-of-life care, 19
grants, 129t–130t, 131t–132t
health care costs, 122–123
mortality rates, 23, 28t
Active euthanasia. See Euthanasia and
assisted suicide
Ad Hoc Committee of the Harvard
Medical School, 7–8, 97
ADA (American Dietetic Association), 31
Adkins, Janet, 71
Adolescents. See Children and youth
Advance directives
artificial nutrition and hydration,
82, 93
clarity in, 96
combined laws, 95–96
cultural differences, 19
do-not-resuscitate orders, 29–30
durable powers of attorney for health
care as, 79–82
forms, 80t–82t
history, 77
legislation, 83t–92t, 93f
living wills as, 77–79
pain management, 93–94
Patient Self-Determination Act, 96
See also Durable power of attorney for
health care; Health care agents;
Living wills
Afterlife
ancient view, 1
public opinion, 149
spiritualism, 3
Age and aging
Alzheimer’s disease, 147f, 147t
infant mortality, 44t
leading causes of death, 137t, 138t
mortality rates, 25t, 26t, 27t
mortality rates for heart disease, 139t,
140t, 141t
mortality rates for strokes, 144t,
145t, 146t
mortality rates for suicide, 59t, 60t,
61t, 62f
nursing home residents, 125t
population projections, 136t
population ratio, 147(10.9t)
public opinion, 151–152
See also Older adults
Agents, health care. See Health care agents
AIDS. See Acquired immunodeficiency
syndrome (AIDS)
‘‘Apparent death,’’ 2, 3f
Alzheimer’s disease
health care costs, 125
older adults, 136–137, 139–141, 147f,
147t
See also Dementia
AMA (American Medical Association),
17–18, 72
American Academy of Pediatrics, 50
American College of Physicians (ACP)
end-of-life care guidelines, 18
on euthanasia and assisted suicide, 72
American Dietetic Association (ADA), 31
American Medical Association (AMA),
17–18, 72
American Nurses Association (ANA), 72
ANA (American Nurses Association), 72
Ancient civilizations, 1
Anencephaly, 43–44, 47t
ANH (Artificial nutrition and hydration).
See Artificial nutrition and hydration
(ANH)
Artificial nutrition and hydration (ANH)
legal tests for ending, 31
as life support, 31
state laws, 94f, 95f
withdrawing, 82, 93, 104–105,
104–108, 154
Asch, David A., 70–71
Ashcroft, John, 73–74, 110, 153–154
Assisted suicide. See Euthanasia and
assisted suicide
Assisted Suicide Funding Restriction Act
of 1997, 69
Autonomy, patient. See Patient autonomy
B
Baby boomers, 133
Baby Doe, 48–49, 50
Balanced Budget Act of 1997, 115–116,
119
Barber v. Superior Court of the State of
California, 101
Barendregt, Marie, 75
Belgian Act on Euthanasia, 76
Belgium, 76
Beverly Requena, In the Matter of, 102
Bioethics
anencephaly, 44
brain death, 7
in death and dying, 13–22
euthanasia and assisted suicide,
71–72
life support, 98
medical practice, 16–18
spinal bifida, 44
Death and Dying
159

Birth defects
anencephaly, 43–44
causes, 42–43
costs in treating, 45–47
Down syndrome, 45
infant mortality, 41–42
neural tube defects, 43
Birth Defects and Developmental
Disabilities Prevention Act of 2003, 45
Birth Defects Prevention Act of
1998, 45
Birth weight, low. See Low birth weight
Births, 49t–50t
Black Death, 2
Bootzin, Richard, 11
Born-Alive Infants Protection Act of
2001, 50
Brain anatomy, 10f
Brain death
in anencephalic infants, 43–44
diagnostic criteria, 10t
government criteria, 8–9
Harvard criteria, 7–8, 97
persistent vegetative state and, 9–11
worldwide criteria, 9
Brain injury, 32t
Britton, Willoughby, 11
Brophy, Patricia, 101–102
Buddhism, 16
Bush, Jeb, 107–108
C
CAA (Child Abuse Amendments of
1984), 50
California, 101
Campo, Theresa Ann, 44
Cancer
development probability, 142t
health care costs, 123–124
incidence, 143t
insurance coverage, 124–125
mortality rates, 23, 143t
older adults, 135
Cancer, prostate. See Prostate cancer
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR),
29–30
CARE. See Ryan White Comprehensive
AIDS Resources Emergency Act
(CARE)
Catholicism, Roman. See Roman
Catholicism
Causes of death. See Death causes
Cemeteries, 2–3
Center to Improve Care of the Dying
(CICD), 95, 96
Cerebral insult. See Brain injury
Cerebrovascular disease. See Stroke
‘‘Characteristics of Patients Requesting
and Receiving Physician-Assisted
Death’’ (Meier), 69
Charles S. Soper, as Director of Newark
Developmental Center et al v. Dorothy
Storar, 99–100
Child Abuse Amendments of 1984
(CAA), 50
Child abuse and neglect
handicapped infants, 48–50
religious beliefs, 55
Children and youth
seriously ill, 41–55
suicide among, 62–66, 63t, 64t, 65t,
66t, 67t, 68f, 68t, 152, 153f
thoughts about death, 149–150, 150f,
151f
Children’s Health Act of 2000, 45
Christian Scientists, 14
Christianity, 2, 58
Church of Christ Scientist. See Christian
Scientists
CICD (Center to Improve Care of the
Dying), 95, 96
Claire C. Conroy, In the Matter of,
100–101
Clinical trials, 124
Coma, 31–32, 32f
Coma, irreversible. See Irreversible coma
Communication with the dead. See
Spiritualism
Compassion in Dying v. Washington, 108
Conroy, Claire C., 100–101
Consciousness
disorders, 31–33
See also Minimally conscious state
Consolidated Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act, 37–38
Constantine, Thomas, 73, 153
Consumer Price Index (CPI), 111,
113t–114t
Controlled Substances Act, 73, 110
Coronary heart disease (CHD). See Heart
disease
Costs, medical. See Health care costs
Court cases
Barber v. Superior Court of the State of
California, 101
Charles S. Soper, as Director of Newark
Developmental Center et al v.
Dorothy Storar, 99–100
Compassion in Dying v. Washington, 108
Cruzan, by Cruzan v. Harmon,
105–106
Cruzan v. Director, Missouri
Department of Health, 106–107
In the Matter of Beverly Requena, 102
In the Matter of Claire C. Conroy,
100–101
In the Matter of Philip K. Eichner, on
Behalf of Joseph C. Fox, 103–104
In the Matter of Westchester County
Medical Center, on Behalf of Mary
O’Connor, 104–105
Michael J. Satz, State Attorney for
Broward County, Florida v. Abe
Perlmutter, 100
Patricia E. Brophy v. New England
Sinai Hospital, Inc., 101–102
Quinlan case, 97–98
Superintendent of Belchertown State
School et al v. Joseph Saikewicz,
98–99
Vacco v. Quill, 109–110
Washington v. Glucksberg, 108–109
CPI (Consumer Price Index), 111,
113t–114t
CPR (Cardiopulmonary resuscitation),
29–30
Cruzan, by Cruzan v. Harmon, 105–106,
109
Cruzan, Nancy Beth, 105–107
Cruzan v. Director, Missouri Department of
Health, 106–107
‘‘Cultural Considerations in End-of-Life
Care: How Ethnicity, Age and
Spirituality Affect Decisions When
Death is Imminent’’ (Mazanec and
Tyler), 18
‘‘Cultural Diversity at the End of Life:
Issues and Guidelines for Family
Physicians’’ (Searight and Gafford), 18
Culture, in end-of-life care, 18–19
D
DEA (Drug Enforcement
Administration), 73, 110, 153–154
Death and dying
advance directives, 77–96
bioethics, 13–22
children, 41–55
defining, 7–11
end-of-life care, 23–39
euthanasia and assisted suicide, 19–20,
57–58, 66–76
health care costs, 111–132
in history, 1–7
legal aspects, 97–110
older adults, 133–148
public opinion, 149–154
suicide, 58–66
See also Brain death
Death causes
by age, 137t–138t
infant, 46t
older people, 133–135
organ donors, 39t
potential, 151f
rates for, 23, 24t, 25t–27t
Death rates. See Mortality rates
Decision-making, medical. See Advance
directives; Health care agents
Defining Death: Medical, Legal and Ethical
Issues in the Determination of Death
(President’s Commission for the Study
160
Index
Death and Dying

of Ethical Problems in Medicine and
Biomedical and Behavioral Research), 8
Dementia, 135–137, 139–141
See also Alzheimer’s disease
Department of Health and Human
Services, U.S., 49, 50
Depression. See Mental depression
Dialysis. See Kidney dialysis
Director, Missouri Department of Health,
Cruzan v., 106–107
Disabilities
costs in treating, 45–47, 48t
Medicare coverage, 126t
Discharges, patients from hospice care,
5t, 6t
Ditillo, B.A., 29
Do-not-resuscitate orders (DNR), 29–30,
30t
Donation, organ and tissue. See Organ
and tissue donation and transplantation
Dorothy Storar, Charles S. Soper, as
Director of Newark Developmental
Center et al v., 99–100
Double Effect, Rule of. See Rule of
Double Effect
Drug Enforcement Administration
(DEA), 73, 110, 153–154
Drugs (medications)
in euthanasia and assisted suicide,
73–74, 110, 153–154
insurance, 114
Durable power of attorney for health care
as advance directive, 77
legislation, 83t–92t
living will vs., 79–82
Dying Well: The Prospect for Growth at the
End of Life (Byock), 17
E
EAS (Euthanasia and assisted suicide).
See Euthanasia and assisted suicide
(EAS)
Eastern Orthodoxy, 14
Education for Physicians on End-of-Life
Care Project (EPEC), 17
Eichner, Philip, 103
Eighth Amendment, 97
Elderly people. See Older adults
Emanuel, Ezekiel, 70
End-of-life care
artificial nutrition and hydration, 31
costs, 114–117, 125–126
cultural differences, 18–19
nurses, 28–29
study of, 23–24
teaching, 17, 17t
See also Advance directives; Bioethics;
Hospice care; Palliative care
End-of-Life Choices, 71
End-stage renal disease (ESRD), 120–122
EPEC (Education for Physicians on End-
of-Life Care Project), 17
Equal Protection Clause. See Fourteenth
Amendment
Ethics, medical. See Bioethics
Europe, 75–76
Euthanasia and assisted suicide (EAS)
American Medical Association, 18
classical view, 1–2
detractors, 72
Eastern Orthodox view, 14
in Europe, 75–76
Hippocratic Oath, 16
legalization, 72–75, 75t
life support vs., 109–110
in Nazi era, 57
nurses, 70–71
in Oregon, 73–75, 110, 153–154
patient characteristics, 19–20, 21t
physicians, 19–20, 22t, 68–70
privacy rights, 66–67
pro-life movement, 79
Protestant view, 14
public opinion, 152–154, 154f
Roman Catholic view, 13–14
supporters, 71–72
in United Kingdom, 57
in Washington, 108–109
F
Fear of death, 149, 150
Federal spending. See Government
spending
Feeding tubes. See Artificial nutrition and
hydration (ANH)
Final Exit: The Practicalities of Self-
Deliverance and Assisted Suicide for the
Dying (Humphry), 71
Five Wishes, 78–79
Florida
artificial nutrition and hydration,
107–108
life support refusal, 100
persistent vegetative state, 10–11
Folic acid, 43
Fourteenth Amendment,
108–109
Fox, Joseph, 103–104
Freyer, David, 55
Frileux, S., 67–68
G
Ganzini, Linda, 74–75
Gays and lesbians, 63, 65–66
Gender
cancer development probability, 142t
infant mortality, 43t, 45t
life expectancy, 45t, 134t, 135t
mortality rates, 45t
mortality rates for heart disease, 139t,
140t, 141t
mortality rates for strokes, 144t, 145t,
146t
mortality rates for suicide, 59t, 60t,
61t, 63t
nursing home residents, 125t
population projections, 136t
population ratio, 147(10.9t)
suicide, 59t, 60t
suicide ideation and attempts, 63t, 64t,
65t, 66t, 67t, 68t
Geriatrics, 146–148
See also Gerontology; Older adults
Gerontology, 146–147
See also Geriatrics; Older adults
Giacino, Joseph T., 32
Glucksberg, Washington v., 108–109
Government regulation, 37–39
Government spending, 127t–128t
Great Britain, 57, 76
Greek mythology, 1
H
HAA (Hospice Association of America),
116
Harmon, Cruzan, by Cruzan v.,
105–106
Harvard Criteria, 7–8, 97
Health and Human Services,
U.S. Department of, 49, 50
Health care agents
advance directives, 77, 96
for children, 54–55
Conroy case, 101
Cruzan case, 105–106, 107
end-of-life care, 19
Fox case, 103–104
for infants, 48–50
O’Connor case, 104–105
Quinlan case, 98
role of, 79–80
Saikewicz case, 98–99
Schiavo case, 107–108
state laws, 78f, 93f, 95f
Storar case, 99–100
Health care costs
AIDS, 122–123, 129t–130t, 131t–132t
birth defects and developmental
disabilities, 45–47, 48t
cancer, 123–124
end-of-life, 114–117, 125–126
HIV, 127t–128t
increasing, 111, 112t, 113t–114t
itemized, 115f, 120t
long-term, 117–122
Medicare and Medicaid, 111, 113–119,
116t–117t, 118t–119t, 121 (t9.7),
121 (t9.8), 123t, 125–126
Death and Dying
Index
161

Health care power of attorney. See
Durable power of attorney for health
care
Health insurance
AIDS and HIV coverage, 122–123
supplemental, 113–114
See also Medicaid; Medicare
Heart disease, 23, 133–135, 139t–141t
Heaven, 149, 150f
Hebert, Liesi E., 139–141
Hell (place), 149, 150f
Hemlock Society, 71
Herbert, Clarence, 101
HHS (U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services), 49, 50
Hinduism, 15–16
Hippocratic Oath, 16
Hispanics
births, 49t–50t
infant mortality, 41, 42t, 43t, 44t
low birth rates, 54t
mortality rates, 139t, 140t, 141t, 144t,
145t, 146t
suicides, 59t, 60t, 61t, 63t, 64t
History, death and dying in, 1–6
HIV (Human immunodeficiency virus),
122–123, 127t–128t
Home health care coverage, 117–119,
122t, 124f, 124t
Hoover, Donald, 115
Hospice Association of America
(HAA), 116
Hospice care
discharges, 5t, 6t
history, 4
Medicare and Medicaid, 115–117, 120t
See also End-of-life care; Palliative care
Hospitals, 101–102
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV),
health care costs, 122–123, 127t–128t
Humphry, Derek, 71
Hydration, artificial. See Artificial
nutrition and hydration
I
In the Matter of Beverly Requena, 102
In the Matter of Claire C. Conroy, 100–101
In the Matter of Nancy Ellen Jobes,
102–103
In the Matter of Philip K. Eichner, on
Behalf of Joseph C. Fox, 103–104
In the Matter of Westchester County
Medical Center, on Behalf of Mary
O’Connor, 104–105
Incompetent patients, 98–100
‘‘Increasing Rural-Urban Gradients in
U.S. Suicide Mortality, 1970-1997’’
(Sing and Siahpush), 61
Infant mortality, 41–42, 42t, 43t, 44t,
45t, 46t
Infant prematurity. See Prematurity
Insurance. See Health insurance
Irreversible coma, 7–8
Islam, 15
J
Jansen-van der Weide, Marijke, 20, 69, 70
Japan, 58
Jews. See Judaism
Jobes, John, 102–103
Jobes, Nancy Ellen, 102–103
Jones, Richard N., 142
Jones, Robert E., 73–74
Joseph Saikewicz, Superintendent of
Belchertown State School et al v.,
98–99
Judaism, 15
K
Kaldjian, L.C., 68–69
Karma, 15–16
Kevorkian, Jack, 71–72
Kidney dialysis, 31
Kidney disease, end-stage. See End-stage
renal disease (ESRD)
Koran. See Qur’an
Kubler-Ross, Elisabeth, 4
L
Last Acts Partnership, 57
Lebowitz, Barry D., 141–142
Legislation and international treaties
Assisted Suicide Funding Restriction
Act of 1997, 69
Balanced Budget Act of 1997,
115–116, 119
Belgian Act on Euthanasia, 76
Birth Defects and Developmental
Disabilities Prevention Act of
2003, 45
Birth Defects Prevention Act of 1998,
45
Born-Alive Infants Protection Act of
2001, 50
Child Abuse Amendments of 1984, 50
Children’s Health Act of 2000, 45
Consolidated Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act, 37–38
Controlled Substances Act, 73, 110
do-not-resuscitate orders, 30f
National Organ Transplant Act, 33
Oregon Death with Dignity Act,
73–75, 73t, 110, 153
Pain Relief Promotion Act, 73
Patient Self-Determination Act of
1990, 96
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 49
Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS
Resources Emergency Act, 123,
129t–130t, 131t–132t
Social Security Act of 1935, 111
Termination of Life on Request and
Assisted Suicide (Review
Procedures) Act of 2001
(Netherlands), 76
Terri’s Law, 107–108
Uniform Anatomical Gift Act, 36
Uniform Health Care Decisions
Act, 78
Universal Determination of Death
Act, 9
Levy, David, 103
Liability, physician. See Physicians
Life after death. See Afterlife
Life after Life (Moody), 11
Life expectancy, 41, 45t, 134t–135t
Life support
bioethics, 17–18
brain death, 7
Buddhist view, 16
forms, 29–31
persistent vegetative state, 10–11
pregnancy, 77, 79f
privacy rights, 97–98
Roman Catholic view, 14
withdrawal, 109–110
Living wills
as advance directives, 77–79
durable power of attorney for health
care vs., 79–82
public opinion, 154
state laws, 78f, 94f
Lo, Bernard, 96
Locked-in syndrome, 32
Long-term health care, 45–47, 117–122
Longevity, 133
Low birth weight, 47–48, 51t–53t, 54t
M
March of Dimes Birth Defects
Foundation, 42–43
Massachusetts
on hospital actions, 101–102
on medical treatment refusal, 98–99
MCS (Minimally conscious state), 32, 32t
Mechanical ventilation, 30–31
Medicaid
AIDS care, 122–123
expenditures, 118t–119t, 121t
hospice care, 117, 121t
provisions, 111, 114–115
Medical costs. See Health care costs
Medical education, end-of-life care, 17, 17t
Medical ethics. See Bioethics
‘‘Medical Expenditures during the Last
Year of Life: Findings from the
1992–1996 Medicare Current
Beneficiary Survey’’ (Hoover), 115
Medical insurance. See Health insurance
Medical power of attorney. See Durable
power of attorney for health care
162
Index
Death and Dying

Medicare
end-stage renal disease coverage,
121–122, 126t
expenditures, 116t–117t, 120t, 121t,
123t, 125–126
geriatrics coverage, 148
home health care, 117–119, 124t
hospice care, 115–116, 120t
provisions, 111, 113–114
Medications. See Drugs (medications)
Meier, Diane E., 19–20, 69–70
Mental depression
older adults, 141–144
suicide and, 71–72
Michael J. Satz, State Attorney for Broward
County, Florida v. Abe Perlmutter, 100
Middle Ages, 2
Miller, Lois L., 75
Miller, Sherry, 71–72
Minimally conscious state (MCS), 32, 32t
Missouri, 105–107
Mortality rates
by age and cause, 25t–27t
by cause, 23, 24t
for heart disease, 139t–141t
by race, 45t
See also Infant mortality
Murphy, Patricia, 29
Muslims. See Islam
Mythology, Greek. See Greek mythology
N
Nancy Ellen Jones, In the Matter of, 102–103
National Center on Birth Defects and
Developmental Disabilities
(NCBDDD), 45
National Conference of State Legislatures
(NCSL), 95, 96
National Organ Transplant Act, 33
National Right to Life Committee
(NRLC), 79
National Violent Death Reporting
System (NVDRS), 60–61
Nazi euthanasia program, 57
NCBDDD (National Center on Birth
Defects and Developmental
Disabilities), 45
NCSL (National Conference of State
Legislatures), 95, 96
Near-death experiences, 11
Neglect of children. See Child abuse and
neglect
Netherlands, 20, 22t, 75–76
Neural tube defects, 43–45
New England Sinai Hospital, Inc., Patricia
E. Brophy v., 101–102
New Jersey, 97–98
New York
artificial nutrition and hydration,
104–105
withdrawing life support, 109–110
NRLC (National Right to Life
Committee), 79
Nurses
end-of-life care, 28–29
euthanasia and assisted suicide, 70–71,
72, 75, 75t
Nursing homes
depression among residents, 142
elderly residents, 125t
public opinion, 152
resident statistics, 119–120
rights, 102–103
Nutrition, artificial. See Artificial nutrition
and hydration
Nutrition and Hydration: Moral and
Pastoral Reflections (Committee for
Pro-Life Activities of the National
Conference of Catholic Bishops), 14
NVDRS (National Violent Death
Reporting System), 60–61
O
O’Connor, Mary, 104–105
OCS (Oncology Nursing Society), 71
ODDA (Oregon Death with Dignity Act),
73–75, 73t, 75t, 110, 153–154
Older adults
Alzheimer’s disease, 136–137, 139–141,
147f, 147t
death causes, 133–135
dementia, 135–136
demographics, 133
depression, 141–143
geriatrics, 146–148
women, 144, 146, 147t
See also Age and aging; Geriatrics;
Gerontology
On Death and Dying (Kubler-Ross), 4
Onassis, Jacqueline Kennedy, 18
Oncology Nursing Society (OCS), 71
Onwuteaka-Philipsen, Bregje D., 20, 69, 70
Opinion, public. See Public opinion
OPTN (Organ Procurement &
Transplantation Network), 35f
Oregon, euthanasia and assisted suicide
in, 73–75, 110, 153–154
Oregon Death with Dignity Act (ODDA),
73–75, 73t, 75t, 110, 153–154
Organ and tissue donation and
transplantation
anatomical illustration, 33f, 34f
anencephalic infants, 43–44
donor card, 36f
donors, 7, 38t, 39t
ethics, 33
matching process, 35f
programs encouraging, 38–39
recipients, 37t
regulations, 36–38, 39
statistics, 36
waiting lists, 36t
Organ Procurement & Transplantation
Network (OPTN), 35f
Out-of-body experiences. See Near-death
experiences
P
Pain
euthanasia and assisted suicide, 70
guidelines, 101
See also Palliative care
Pain relief. See Palliative care
Pain Relief Promotion Act, 73
Palliative care
advance directives, 93–95
movement to improve, 29
physician education, 17
physician guidelines, 18
U.S. Supreme Court on, 109
See also End-of-life care; Hospice care
Parental consent. See Health care agents
Partnership for Caring, 57
Passive euthanasia. See Euthanasia and
assisted suicide
Patient autonomy, 18–19, 96
Patient discharges, hospice care, 5t, 6t
Patient privacy. See Privacy rights
Patient Self-Determination Act of 1990
(PSDA), 96
Patricia E. Brophy v. New England Sinai
Hospital, Inc., 101–102
Perlmutter, Abe, 100
Perlmutter, Abe, Michael J. Satz,
State Attorney for Broward County,
Florida v.,100
Persistent vegetative state (PVS)
brain death, 8, 9–11
diagnostic criteria, 10t, 31–32
end-of-life care, 8
health care costs, 120
public opinion on remaining in, 154
treatment, 32
Physician-assisted suicide. See Euthanasia
and assisted suicide
Physicians
bioethics, 16–18
euthanasia and assisted suicide, 19–20,
68–70, 73–76, 75t, 109–110,
152–154
liability, 101
palliative care, 94–95
Plague. See Black Death
Plum, Fred, 103
Population, 136t, 147(10.9t)
Postma, Geertruida, 75
Power of attorney, health care. See
Durable power of attorney for health care
Prayer, 14
Pregnancy, 77, 79f
Premature infants. See Prematurity
Prematurity, 48
Death and Dying
Index
163

Prescription drugs. See Drugs
(medications)
President’s Commission for the Study of
Ethical Problems in Medicine and
Biomedical and Behavioral Research,
8–9
Privacy rights
Cruzan case, 105
euthanasia and physician-assisted
suicide, 66–67
Quinlan case, 97–98
Prostate cancer, 135
Protestantism, 14
Proxies, health care. See Health care
agents
PSDA (Patient Self-Determination Act of
1990), 96
Public opinion
afterlife, 149, 150 (f11.1), 150 (f11.2)
aging, 151–152
death concerns, 149–151, 150f, 151f
euthanasia and assisted suicide,
152–154
nursing homes, 152
suicide, 152
PVS (Persistent vegetative state). See
Persistent vegetative state (PVS)
Q
Quill, Vacco v., 109–110
Quinlan, Joseph, 97–98
Quinlan, Karen Ann, 10, 97–98
Quinlan case, 97–98
Qur’an, 15
R
Race/ethnicity
births, 49t–50t
infant mortality, 42t, 43t, 44t, 45t, 46t
life expectancy, 45t, 134t, 135t
low birth rates, 54t
Medicaid and Medicare payments,
118t, 119t
mortality rates, 45t, 49t
mortality rates for cancer, 143t
mortality rates for heart disease, 139t,
140t, 141t
mortality rates for strokes, 144t, 145t,
146t
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 49
Reincarnation, 15–16
Religion
child health care, 55
death, 2, 13–16
suicide, 58
Renaissance, 2
Renal disease, end-stage. See End-stage
renal disease (ESRD)
Reno, Janet, 73, 153
Requena, Beverly, 102
Respirators. See Mechanical ventilation
‘‘Resuscitating Advance Directives’’
(Lo and Steinbrook), 96
Roman Catholicism, 13–14
Roman civilization, 1–2
Romanticization of death, 3
Rule of Double Effect, 13–14
Rural areas, 61–62
Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS
Resources Emergency Act (CARE),
123, 129t–130t, 131t–132t
S
Saikewicz, Joseph, 98–99
Saikewicz, Joseph, Superintendent of
Belchertown State School et al v.,
98–99
Satz v. Perlmutter. See Michael J. Satz,
State Attorney for Broward County,
Florida v. Abe Perlmutter
Schiavo, Michael, 107–108
Schiavo, Terri, 10–11, 107–108, 154
Scientific Registry of Transplant
Recipients (SRTR)
donors, 38t
matching process, 35f
transplants, 37t
waiting lists, 36t
Sex ratio, population, 146, 147t
Siahpush, Mohammad, 61–62
Singh, Gopal K., 61–62
Social Security Act of 1935, 111
Social workers, 75
Spina bifida, 44–45, 47t
Spiritualism, 3
‘‘The Stand of the Orthodox Church on
Controversial Issues’’ (Harakas), 14
States
advance directives, 77, 78f, 82,
83t–92t, 95–96
artificial nutrition and hydration,
94f, 95f
brain death criteria, 9
do-not-resuscitate orders, 30t
euthanasia and assisted suicide,
72–73, 110
health care agents, 93f
living wills, 77–79
Medicaid hospice care, 121(9.9t)
organ and tissue donation, 38–39
Statistical information
AIDS, 28t, 129t–130t, 131t–132t
Alzheimer’s disease, 147f, 147t
anencephaly rates, 47t
births, 49t–50t
cancer, 142t, 143t
death causes, 46t, 137t–138t
developmental disabilities, 48t
do-not-resuscitate orders, 30t
end-of-life care, 17t
euthanasia and assisted suicide, 21t,
22t, 75t, 154f
health care costs, 112t, 113t, 115f, 120t
heart disease, 139t–141t
heaven, 151f
hell, 150f
HIV-related spending, 127t–128t
home health care, 122t, 124f, 124t
hospice care, 5t, 6t, 120t
infant mortality, 42t, 44t, 45t, 46t
life expectancy, 45t, 134t–135t
low birth weight, 51t–53t, 54t
Medicaid, 118t–119t, 121 (t9.8), 121
(t9.9)
Medicare, 120t, 121t, 123t, 124t, 126t
mortality rates, 24t, 25t–27t, 45t
nursing homes, 125t
organ transplants, 36t, 37t, 38t, 39t
population, 136t
sexes, 147t
spina bifida, 47t
stroke, 144t–146t
suicide, 59t–61t, 62f, 64t, 65t, 66t, 67t,
68f, 68t, 69t, 153f
thoughts about death, 150f
Steinbrook, Robert, 96
Storar, Dorothy, 99–100
Storar, Dorothy, Charles S. Soper, as
Director of Newark Developmental
Center et al v., 99–100
Storar, John, 99–100
Stroke, 135, 144t–146t
Students. See Children and youth
Study to Understand Prognoses and
Preferences for Outcomes and Risks of
Treatments (SUPPORT), 23–24, 28–29
Suffering, 13
Suicide
classical view, 1–2
Islamic view, 15
mental depression, 71–72
older adults, 141–143
public opinion, 152
rates, 59t–61t, 62f, 69t
religion, 58
Roman Catholic view, 13
United States, 60–62
youth, 62–66, 63t, 64t, 65t, 66t, 67t,
68f, 68t, 152, 153f
See also Euthanasia and assisted suicide
(EAS)
Suicide, assisted. See Euthanasia and
assisted suicide (EAS)
Superintendent of Belchertown State School
et al v. Joseph Saikewicz, 98–99
Superior Court of the State of California,
Barber v., 101
SUPPORT (Study to Understand
Prognoses and Preferences for
Outcomes and Risks of Treatments),
23–24, 28–29
164
Index
Death and Dying

Surrogates, health care. See Health care
agents
Switzerland, 76
T
Talmud, 15
Teens. See Children and youth
Temporal lobes, 11
Terminal diseases, health care costs,
122–125
Terminal sedation (TS), 69
Termination of Life on Request and
Assisted Suicide (Review Procedures)
Act of 2001 (Netherlands), 76
Terri’s Law, 107–108
Tissue transplantation. See Organ and
tissue donation and transplantation
Transplantation, organ and tissue. See
Organ and tissue donation and
transplantation
TS (Terminal sedation), 69
Tube feeding. See Artificial nutrition and
hydration
U
UHCDA (Uniform Health Care
Decisions Act), 78, 95
UK (United Kingdom). See Great Britain
Uniform Anatomical Gift Act, 36
Uniform Health Care Decisions Act
(UHCDA), 78, 95
Unitarian Universalist Association, 14
United Kingdom (UK). See Great Britain
United Network for Organ Sharing
(UNOS), 33, 36t, 37t, 38t, 39
Universal Determination of Death Act, 8
UNOS. See United Network for Organ
Sharing (UNOS)
Urban areas, 61
U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS), 49, 50
U.S. Supreme Court
Cruzan case, 106–107
euthanasia and assisted suicide, 66–67,
74, 108–109, 109–110, 154
life support withdrawal, 109–110
privacy rights, 97–98
Utopia (Moore), 13
V
Vacco v. Quill, 109–110
van der Wal, Gerrit, 20, 69, 70
‘‘The Vegetative and Minimally
Conscious States: Consensus-Based
Criteria for Establishing Diagnosis
and Prognosis’’ (Giaciano), 32
Vegetative state (VS), 31, 32
Ventilators. See Mechanical ventilation
W
Waiting lists, organ transplants, 36t
Wantz, Marjorie, 71–72
Washington, 108–109
Washington, Compassion in Dying v., 108
Washington v. Glucksberg, 108–109
Weight, low birth. See Low birth weight
Wijdicks, Eelco F.M., 9
Women, 135, 144, 146
Y
Youk, Thomas, 72
Youths. See Children and youth
Death and Dying
Index
165

