
Deck Building Made Easy
Step By Step Guide on How to Build
Your Deck for All-Year-Round Use

Introduction
Adding a deck to your house may seem difficult, especially cost-wise, but
did you know that you can get value out of building one? Yes, that’s true.
Additionally, some of the benefits of adding a deck to your home include
having space for parties, family gatherings, close supervision for kids and
pets, or simply a place to sit in and enjoy the fresh air or sunshine as you
gaze into your surroundings.
According to a study[1], the number of single family houses in the US that
have decks has risen to 46,000 between 2010 and 2020. This means that
deck building is becoming more popular.
If you are considering adding a deck to your home, you may be wondering:
How do I go about it?
How easy or complex is it?
How long will it take?
What deck style will you build?
What are the materials required, and are they readily available and
affordable?
Do you need permission from the local authorities?
If you have these questions, keep reading this book because it will answer
these questions and guide you on:
How to identify the most suitable style for your home
How to design it
How to plan your budget

The materials and tools needed
The skills to help you complete your project successfully.
And much more
The fact that you are here means you want an aesthetically pleasing deck
that’s durable, big enough for your needs, and that you can build yourself.
Doing this requires you to plan well from start to finish, keeping in mind all
the details for the project.
Some of the topics this book will cover include:
How to measure your deck area accurately.
Factors that determine your deck style
The properties of different types of materials
How to plan for your deck before you begin building
How to budget for your deck
And much more!
Whether this is your first time building a deck or you want to add to the
skills you already have, this is the book for you.
 
PS: I’d like your feedback. If you are happy with this book, please leave a
review on Amazon.
Please leave a review for this book on Amazon by visiting the page below:
https://amzn.to/2VMR5qr 
 

Table of Contents
Introduction
Chapter 1: Types Of Decks And Why Build A Deck
Chapter 2: Materials And Tools For Building Your Deck
Chapter 3: Factors To Consider When Building A Deck
Chapter 4: Deck Safety Tips To Consider
Chapter 5: Laying Out The Deck Area
Chapter 6: How To Build A Deck Using Concrete Block
Chapter 7: How To Build A Raised Wooden Deck
Chapter 8: How To Build A Multi-Level Deck With Led Lights
Chapter 9: Building A Detached Deck With A Pergola
Chapter 10: How To Build A Floating Rooftop Deck
Chapter 11: How To Build A Ground-Level Deck With Led Lights
Chapter 12: The Dos And Don’ts Of Deck Maintenance
Conclusion
 
 
 
 
 

Chapter 1: Types of Decks and Why Build A Deck
Before we get started, let us understand decks and the benefits of building
one:
What is a Deck?
A deck is simply a flat outdoor structure mostly made from wood or timber
and usually connected to a building or house. It is built from the ground up
and elevated by footings, frames, and posts secured in the ground.
You may wonder, when did decks become an in-thing?
Decks were not that popular until the early 1980s, when homeowners with
stylish ideas began to have decks built to their houses as a way of extending
their living space. Before then, decks were simple and not thought of as
much, with most used for grilling. In fact, they were so small that not much
could fit in them. However, decking has evolved over the past two decades,
making decks a much sought-after home-buying detail.
Although deck designs may vary depending on the owner, a deck has five
key parts which are:
1: The deck foundation

The deck foundation is the area that supports the entire deck. No matter
how low or high your deck is, the foundation must be there, which means
you must also build it properly. Without a proper foundation, your deck will
not survive harsh weather like winter and rainy seasons because of the
humidity changes; hence, the deck will be shaky and weak. Most deck
foundations have the following two major parts:
Footings: A footing is a hole you dig into the ground extending
below the frost line and after that, fill it with concrete to support the
deck or posts.
Piers: A deck pier is concrete poured into the footings; it supports
the posts.
The depth of your foundation depends on how deep the frost in your area is
and on the local building code.
2: Framing of the deck

A deck framing is the part of the deck that supports the surface, railings,
and deck stairs. The parts that create the deck framing include:
Joists: The joists rest on the posts and run parallel along the deck to
support the deck boards.
Posts: Posts are usually attached to the piers and footings where they
support the beams and underlying part of the deck. For added
support, the posts are attached to metal brackets connected to the
footings.
Beams: These comprise the horizontal deck boards and play the role
of supporting the joists and the rest of the deck framing.
Ledgers: A ledger is a board that attaches the deck frame to the
house.

Blocking: These are small solid blocks attached between joists to
support stair stringers or posts.
Header joists: Commonly known as a rim joist, a joist header is
attached perpendicular to the joists to support the end of the joists
and fasten them to the board.
3: Deck surface
This comprises the deck flooring, the pieces of board attached to the joists
to form the deck’s surface. Chapter 2 guides you more on decking
materials.
4: Stairs
The stairs are usually attached to the concrete foundation of the deck, and
just like the standard stairs, deck stairs comprise of the following parts:
Treads: These are the flat surfaces of the stairs you step on while
ascending or descending the stairs.

Stringers: These are the sides of the stairs that support the treads and
risers.
Risers: Also called the ‘face’ of the stairs, the risers are the vertical
parts of the stairs.
5: Railings
Finally, we have the railings, the deck’s guard rails that play the role of
keeping people from falling off the deck. However, if your deck is too low
or close to the ground, you may not need to add railings, but if you have
kids and pets, it may be necessary to add them.
To keep kids and pets from squeezing through the railings, add balusters,
the vertical components of the railings.
Why Build A Deck?
Here are some reasons why deck building is important for your house:
Enhances outdoor living
Being indoors can be boring at times, especially since you are already
familiar with every detail of your house. On the other hand, you may not be
up for the idea of a walk outdoors or may not feel like leaving the area
around your house. If that is you, you may well understand the importance
of building a deck for your house?
Whether it’s summer, fall, or spring, a deck allows you to breathe in the
fresh air, take in vitamin D, and spend quality time outdoors without fully
leaving the comfort of your home.
It gives your home an aesthetic appeal
If you understand style, you know well that a deck and style go hand in
hand, especially with modern living. Decks have gone from the small and

simple decks that could only fit a barbecue grill in the 1970s to the large,
modern, and attractive decks we have today.
As a homeowner, there are many ways you can transform your deck to suit
modern living, including incorporating stylish furniture, adding outdoor
pillows, adding rugs and carpets, and having potted plants. These and much
more add beauty to your yard.
Adds value to your home
It may not surprise you to learn that many homebuyers currently prefer
purchasing houses that already have decks. That being the case, if you add a
deck to your house, its value increases if and when you decide to sell it out.
You can add a coat of fresh paint, hanging planters with flowers or herbs, or
an outdoor firepit to help add value to your house.
Acts as an entertaining space
You can enhance your family time with a nice deck too. Instead of playing
cards or monopoly indoors, you can build a nice deck where you gather
with your family to enjoy quality time together.
Also, if you like having guests and friends over for parties or just simple
barbecues, then a deck is a perfect space for people to gather without
feeling claustrophobic!
Besides, having people in your house may lead to potential damages that
may be costly to repair, unlike a deck where damages are less costly. You
can add a barbecue grill to your deck to give it that entertaining space look.
Provides peaceful moments
The mind often wants relaxation, even if only for a minute, and the only
place to experience that peace of mind is away from noises. A deck will
probably offer you that escape —for example, if you are in the middle of an

important discussion that requires you to think first before responding. You
can relax for a moment, gather your thoughts, then go back and inside to
tackle the issue at hand.
On the other hand, a deck can act as an office, especially for at-home
workers, which is handy after the COVID-19 outbreak where working from
home has become common, meaning a deck can double as a place to relax
and a peaceful office!
Types Of Decks
Below are the most common types of decks:
Wraparound deck
Figure 1
As the term suggests, a wraparound deck surrounds the entire house or most
of your house. The advantage of having a wraparound deck is that it allows
you to view your entire property without interruptions. You can also easily
shift your position depending on the sun’s direction.

It will cost $9,350-$39,900 to build a wraparound deck, depending on
materials and labor costs.
 
 
Detached deck
Figure 2
A detached deck is usually low, and as its name suggests, it is not attached
to the house.
Unlike attached decks, you can build a detached deck anywhere, including
open spaces or next to your house or pool. Unlike other attached decks
connected to the building through a ledger board, a detached deck uses a
back beam for support.
Some of the cons of building a detached deck are:
It is more expensive. The average cost of building a detached deck is
around $10-55 per square foot.

If installed poorly, it can start to sag or even become unlevel.
Over time, it can begin moving away from the house.
The advantages of building a detached deck include:
Chances of rot or damage from water are lower.
You can build it anywhere.
Multi-level deck
Figure 3
A multi-level deck has multiple layers of different heights, either joined by
stairs or inclined pathways. The good thing with this type of deck is that
you can extend its space without taking a lot of front or backyard space,
especially if you do not have much space in your compound.
The advantages of building a multi-level deck include:
It creates more functional space for more activities, even with limited
space.

You do not need to level the ground before building a multi-level
deck.
Additional features such as stairs and railings add visual interest to
your home.
Unlike single-level decks where everything is in one place, each
layer has a different space purpose with a multi-level deck. For
example, you can have the layer close to the house as a dining area
extension, while the level below can serve as the grilling area. That
way, you do not have to stumble over furniture or other items when
moving around.
The average cost of building a multi-level deck is $23-$30 per square foot.
Rooftop/over garage deck
Figure 4
A rooftop deck is usually located on top of the building or connected to a
building’s rooftop level. Currently, tempered glass and clear acrylic are used

to allow a clearer view of the surroundings and give the roof decks a more
spacious look. You can also use wooden or metal railings to fence your
rooftop deck.
The benefits of having a rooftop deck include:
You have awesome views.
You have a spacious additional living area
It has more space that you can use for gardening
It is ideal for entertaining friends or guests, especially because of the
view.
It has drainage pipes that drain all water, keeping the walls and
foundation dry.
It costs an average of $ 25,000-$50,000 to build a rooftop deck, depending
on the size, materials, framing, and finishes.

Chapter 2: Materials and Tools for Building Your
Deck
To have a durable and strong deck, you need to use the appropriate
materials. These materials include; hardwood, softwood, treated-timber, and
other non-wood.
Let us look at each briefly.
Softwood Timber
Many deck builders prefer softwood because it doesn’t cost much and it is
readily available. However, some softwoods are unsuitable for building a
deck because they are not dense enough or absorb moisture easily, leading
to rot.
The most popular softwoods that are excellent for deck building include
cedar[2] and redwood[3]. They have a natural resistance to insects, moisture,
and rotting. They are also denser than most softwood varieties.
These two types of softwoods are comparable to hardwood because they
can withstand outdoor conditions and last longer, even for years.
Pressure Treated Wood
Softwood is treatable to make it more suitable for building a deck. Since
most softwoods are less dense and s moisture absorbing, they get damaged
more easily; hence, they need chemical treatment to improve their
hardiness.
You can still use other softwood varieties, but they have to be treated to be
used for your woodwork projects. Pine and Fir are the most common
pressure-treated softwoods.

They are treated by removing all the air and injecting them with chemical
preservatives[4]. This protects the wood against insect infestation and water
damage, making it last longer. Therefore, it is okay to use softwood for your
decking solutions because when it is pressure-treated, it can last for very
long.
Treated softwood is way cheaper than untreated softwood, making it a
popular deck-building choice for many years.
Treated timber has its downside. The chemicals used are highly toxic to
humans and animals. If burnt, such woods release toxic fumes when the
chemicals wear off, irritating the skin. Another major concern of treated
softwood is that it is prone to splintering and cracking.
Altogether, pressure-treated timber is affordable compared to untreated and
hardwood timber. Professionals do not have a problem using the treated
softwood as they have experience handling it.
Hardwood 
Hardwood will make your deck look as natural as possible, will last for
decades, and will not rot. Make an informed choice by looking at the Pros
and Cons of hardwood:
Pros of using hardwood
Tough: Hardwood is very strong and can withstand almost anything,
including heels, claws, or hail.
Durable: Hardwoods are resistant to insects and do not absorb
moisture easily, hence resistant to rotting.
Stable: Hardwoods do not shrink or expand with changes in
temperature and weather like softwoods and treated softwoods.

Fire-resistant: When a hardwood catches fire, it does not emit toxic
smoke.
Luxury look: Hardwood is the best for a luxury feel
and look.
Cons of using hardwood
High Cost: Hardwood is expensive and generally almost twice as
costly as softwood.
Difficult to work with: It can be difficult to drill holes, saw, or even
hammer nails into it, slowing down your installation.
Heat: Because they are dense and dark, hardwoods can get very hot
when the sun is out, meaning your feet may not withstand the heat
coming from your deck.
Maintenance: Regular maintenance by oiling it to preserve its color
is a must-do to keep your deck from turning gray.
Non-wood Framing
It was not until recently that non-wood decking materials became popular.
They are a preference to many because they are inexpensive, durable, low-
maintenance, and visually appealing.
Let us look at a few examples of non-wood decking materials:
Composite

Composite is a material manufactured from wood fibers and recycled
plastic. It is strong, durable, and resistant to rot. One cannot easily slip and
fall on a surface that has a composite. It is also resistant to UV rays and
pests.
It is available in many colors, requires low maintenance, and will look good
throughout the year.
PVC
PVC is plastic and is suitable for decks because they are affordable, strong,
do not splinter, and make very little noise. They are easy to install, making
them a good option for DIY projects. PVC does not rot and is resistant to
insect infestation.
Aluminum

This material doesn’t rot or rust. It is considered the most durable material
for decks that can last long. Its durability and strength are unmatched, with
a very appealing finish. Because it’s lightweight, it is easy to install.
Bamboo
There are two types of bamboo decking, one with woven fibers and one
with non-woven fibers. The woven option is stronger than the non-woven.

Bamboo can withstand many climates and provides a long-lasting deck if
well looked after. As is the case with any other wood, you will have to stain
and seal it with sealant to slow down the fading process.
Bamboo will not do well in marshy areas or regions that experience a lot of
rain and flooding because of mildew. Generally, areas with hot climates are
the most suitable for bamboo decking.
Rubber Paver Tiles
This is made from high-density rubber that is micro-porous, making it very
durable, resistant to wear, and comfortable for your feet. Most come as
interlocks; thus, you can install without using adhesive.
The tricky bit with this type of decking is that when laying it out on the
wood, you have to be careful to avoid water or moisture from getting
trapped between the wood and rubber, as it will lead to wood rot and
accelerate damage to your deck.

Deck Building Tools
To build your deck, you will need the following tools:
Measuring tape
Figure 5

You need one to take measurements of your deck. Have a measuring tape
that’s as long as your deck’s longest dimension.
Hammer
You need a hammer for assembling the boards, pounding corner stakes, and
striking fasteners. Depending on what purpose you need a hammer for, your
seller will advise you on which type to purchase.
Wooden stakes
You can use wooden stakes to measure and mark the exact position of your
deck, thus making it easier to build your deck accurately. Have one wooden
stake for every corner on the deck.
Mason’s line
A mason’s line is useful when laying your deck boards, posts, and footings
as it makes marking and spacing them easier.
Posthole diggers

These are useful when digging holes to install your deck support posts. Go
for heavy postholes diggers because they work easier and cut deeper in the
ground than the light ones.
Wheelbarrow
A wheelbarrow comes in handy when mixing concrete for the foundation or
moving excess soil.
Framing square

A framing square is important for checking if the corners of your deck and
joints on board ends are square.
Board clamps
You need board clamps to hold the joints of the boards in place while
fastening them, especially if you are doing it alone.
Chalk line

If you are building a wraparound deck, you certainly will tire of using a
pencil or chalk to mark the area. That is where a chalk line comes in handy;
it helps you mark such long distances with ease.
Miter saw
You can use a miter saw to cut the boards fast and easily. The good thing is
that it is also specialized to cut at different angles as its blade can move left
or right to produce different angles.
Circular saw

This tool has a round blade edged with sharp metal teeth. You can use it to
cut both wood and metal for your deck.
 
Standard drill
A drill is important when you want to make holes for installing screws or
other fasteners on your deck and comes in handy when you want to do fast
and accurate fastening.
Deck spacer
The boards need a spacing of at least a 1/8-inch apart to give them room to
expand and contract naturally, depending on the humidity changes. That is
where a deck spacer comes in handy. That way, you get to prevent damage
to the boards when they expand later.
Impact driver

You need an impact driver when installing long deck screws into the
wooden boards or when you want to remove the fasteners.

Chapter 3: Factors to Consider When Building a
Deck
Before beginning the actual deck building, here are a few things you need
to consider:
Visit the relevant authorities
Before anything else, visit the relevant building and zoning authority. When
you inform the authority of the type of deck you want to build, you will get
advice and tips as per the building code laws within your locality.
Like most other buildings, a deck is a permanent structure, and whether you
like it or not, the legislature and community have a say in it. They have put
in place systems to guide you on the structure size you can build, the depth
of the foundations, dimensions of railings and stairs, distance between the
buildings and property lines, and much more.
Furthermore, it will save you money. If your structure does not fit into the
area’s building code and the authorities find out, you will have to demolish
it and build another one according to their regulations.
Thus, you are better off visiting them to receive your permit.
When is the best time to build your deck?
It is important to build when the ground is dry and the weather is fine. Early
autumn is a good time because the ground is easy to work on as it is not
frozen. The temperatures are cool, and the environment is dry in many
areas, meaning your deck may be ready for spring.
You could still begin in late spring; however, you will end up working long
hours when the weather is warmer as you try to finish before winter starts.
What purpose does your deck serve?

If you struggle to stay indoors because you live in a mostly hot locality,
building a deck may be a great way to extend your outdoor living. Or
maybe you simply want to entertain friends, dine outdoors, have a jacuzzi,
or even garden. Whatever the purpose of your deck is, it will give you an
idea of what design you want for the structure.
Size and Shape
The purpose of your deck will determine its shape and size. It’s best not to
build one larger than 20% of the square footage of your house so that you
do not overwhelm it visually. But, if your house is large, it is fine to build a
big one.
There are many shapes to choose from. A rectangular deck is the most
basic, but adding angles or curves can be a great way to spruce things up.
The deck will be your space for quite a long time; therefore, add a more
personal and special feel to it.
Approach the design with a theme and then add variations for an aesthetic
appeal.
Allowance For Movement Around Furniture
Think through the space left for movement after placing your furniture,
such as coffee tables, chairs, and deck furniture. There needs to be enough
room for moving around; for example, you should be able to move your
chair when standing up without hitting other items.
Plan well when installing a lounge, kitchen, dining area, etc., to ensure you
can move from one point to another unencumbered.
Deck Site and Accessibility
Your deck should be accessible either from the side, front or through the
back door. The height of the deck should not be the same as that of your

house. It needs to be lower by at least 3 inches.
The site where you want to build your deck needs to be clear of any
obstructions, such as tree roots. Clear the site to fit the intended size of your
deck, and add another 6 to 8 feet to provide room for working.
Also, you’ll need to know where the utility lines are by calling 811[5] to
avoid interfering with them as you build your deck.
Budget For Your Deck
This is a crucial part of the planning process. Decks are not cheap; thus, you
need to find the cost of the materials and tools required. From here, you will
make decisions such as using non-wood materials that are cheaper than real
wood.
Also, you will understand the different types of woods, their properties, and
the best to use according to your budget.
The cost will also depend on the style of deck you settle for; thus, check out
different deck styles and settle on the one that suits your needs.
Planters And Overheads

You are likely to use your deck most during summer; hence, you may need
a pergola. Since you may not be able to sit in the sun for a long time —and
health-wise, it is not recommended— you may need a shade structure.
The pergola is the most popular shade solution. The degree of shade
provided depends on the closeness of the rafters to each other. You may also
add hanging plants on the pergola or have potted plants placed on the
ground to create a welcoming ambiance.
If you can do it yourself
The cost of building a deck is not cheap. For example, building a
wraparound deck cost around $9,350-$39,900, depending on the finishes
and cost of materials. That said, the cost of building one yourself may be
lower than having a professional help build one for you, as you will save on
some costs like labor. However, this also depends on what you want.
Perhaps you don’t want a simple deck, which may require a professional or
experienced person to help you do it. It is all up to you.
Consider the design of your house
This is also important as a deck should be a complementary addition to your
house. For example, keep the color of the railings simple to avoid
distraction from the deck and main house. The deck should also be a natural
extension of your house. Therefore, mind your house’s architecture to
ensure the deck does not seem out of place.
Good View
Build a deck with a good view. You do not want a boring view, but one that
lights up your world. Thus, place it in the direction you will benefit from it
visually.
Safety Considerations

As with any other building project, safety gear will come in handy as it will
protect you while working to avoid potential injuries and possible fatalities.
The following are the basic safety gear you will need to build your deck:
Gloves
Gloves protect your hands against lacerations and cuts when using your
cutting tools that are sometimes sharp.
Face Mask
This protects your respiratory system from dust that forms when sawed or
from concrete dust. Face masks can be slightly uncomfortable, but you
cannot compare the discomfort to the respiratory problems you suffer by
failing to wear one.
Safety Glasses
Can you imagine if sawdust or bits of rock or metal entered your eyes?
Safety glasses protect you from such, and since you will be working
outside, you may need tinted safety glasses.
Ear Protection
You can use either the earplugs or defenders, though the former is cheaper
and more uncomfortable than the latter.
Materials To Use
Today, most people prefer to spend huge amounts of PVC, composites, and
other low-maintenance materials to finish rails and decks.
Yet others will prefer wood surfaces that have a natural appearance and are
high maintenance as they need to be pressure washed and sealed once every
year.
 

 
 

Chapter 4: Deck Safety Tips To Consider
How do you ensure that your deck is safe to use for years to come? Here’s
how.
Make the foundation firm
A deck needs a good and firm foundation, just like every other building. For
your deck to be safe and durable, you must ensure its support posts, frames
or footings, are secured in holes dug deep enough below the frost line,
especially because of winter. Also, pour in concrete piers to support the
posts.
Shallow holes may cause the support posts to move when the soil shifts due
to ground moisture freezing during winter. When the moisture freezes, it
expands, causing the soil to swell and shift, moving the shallow deck posts
in the process.
Check your railings
If you have kids or pets, the last thing you want is them squeezing through
the railings and falling over, especially if your deck is high above the
ground. Instead, your railings should be a safety feature.
That said, ensure the railings are stable and strong enough to support at
least 90kgs from all sides. To confirm they are strong enough, give the
railings a hard push and pull to see if it stays secure and check if the railing
support posts are not more than 72 inches apart.
Other things to consider when installing your railings are;
The height of the railings should at least be 36 inches from the deck
floor.

The diameter of the railings should not be more than 2¼ inches when
hand-gripped.
The space between the balusters of the railings should be 4 inches
apart or less to prevent kids from squeezing through.
Keep termites away
If you want a deck made from wood, you need to prevent termites at all
costs because they eat wood, causing the deck to sag and finally collapse.
The best way to prevent these wood-destroying pests is to place treated
cedar mulch or sand near the deck or ensure that the material you use is
termite-resistant, like composite.
Replace damaged boards
If you notice any cracks in the wood, broken boards, holes caused by
termites, or even wood that has become spongy, it means it is time to
replace the damaged boards.
To know if your deck is rotten, check for mold, wood that breaks easily in
your fingers, or discolored spots on the deck’s underside. Also, a good deck
should not be wobbly or weak so ensure that you replace any board with the
above signs of damage.
Check the stairs
When it comes to decks with stairs at the bottom, you need to be cautious
about the guardrails, especially if you have kids around. Also, make sure
the stairs do not wobble when you take steps to the deck by ensuring that
the risers, treads, or stringers are strong enough and that the area joining the
stairs and the deck is attached securely.
To prevent —especially kids— from tripping, remove any trip hazards like
potted plants and any décor from the stairs.

Ensure the fasteners are in place
Common fasteners for decks are screws and nails. Constantly check that
whatever fastener you use is free of corrosion and secured on the board. If
nails have popped up, replace them immediately and if the screws are loose,
tighten them right away.
If you care for the fasteners but still notice a wobble or creaking sound, call
a professional to check the underlying issue and make the required repairs.
Trim any nearby trees
Trees add visual interest to your home, especially when the flowers
blossom, but they can also pose a hazard if the branches hang too low or too
close to your deck. If you have trees near your house, ensure you trim the
branches regularly as a precautionary measure.
Add lighting
Lighting your deck provides aesthetic beauty and keeps you safe, especially
at night. For example, if you build a multi-level deck or a deck with stairs,
you must be more cautious. To prevent tripping and accidents when it’s
dark, add enough lighting to your deck and get rid of anything that blocks
the lighting, such as potted shrubs and dirt on the fixtures.
Have a maintenance plan for your deck
Please note that when exposed to humidity and harsh weather such as heavy
rains, snow, and heat, even treated wood eventually wobbles. You do not
want to wait until your deck is wobbly and weak before repairing it. As the
saying goes, ‘prevention is better than cure.
Therefore, to keep your deck strong, clean your boards thoroughly with a
mild deck-cleaning product, replace any loose board, and use a water-

repelling sealing product to seal the surface of your board. The sealants also
protect the surface from ultra-violet rays.
Use fire-proof mats
If your deck is wooden, fire can be a real hazard, especially if you want to
host friends and family during Thanksgiving or Easter holidays, and you
may need to use your barbeque grill or fire pit. If this is a must for you, it is
wise to use a fire-proof mat for safety.

Chapter 5: Laying Out the Deck Area
Laying out the location of your deck is an important step because any
wrong measurement means you will demolish it and start all over again,
which is not what you want. This is the point when you double-check until
you are certain your measurements are correct.
After ensuring your scale drawing is accurate and approved by the building
inspector, measure and clear the area where you will build your deck. For
accurate measurements, follow the steps below:
Making Batter Boards
The batter boards are made with two stakes and one piece that runs
horizontally—use 2x4-inch or 1x2-inch boards and a cross piece that is
1x4-inches. If the ground is soft, make the stakes between 16 and 36 inches
long. If the ground is hard, you can make them shorter
Use single screws at each joint to assemble the pieces.

Mark The House

Mark the wall of your house where you will position the posts—mark
outside the framing where the deck will overhang by 1½ inches. Afterward,
measure and mark the points at which the posts will be located, not
forgetting to identify the center of the post.
Drive the batter board into the ground near your house, then pound the
stakes until the crosspiece is 6 inches above the ground.
Position the batter boards
From your house, measure the position of a post and then hammer down a
batter board.
To estimate the location of the remaining posts, place other batter boards 2
to 3 feet beyond your post locations.
For your post locations to be perpendicular to the house, verify the square
of your layout. You can use the three-four-five method.

Using a string, measure 3 feet from one corner, and mark the string.
Do the same with the other side, and also mark the string at the point
it measures 4 feet.
Measure the diagonal distance between the two marks and adjust
until it is 5 feet in distance.
Repeat the process in all the corners.
Mark The Posts
Clear the rocks, vegetation, and weeds within the dimensions you have
measured, and then mark the points at which you will have your posts. You
can use a weed killer to prevent recurrent weed growth.
Your post layout will depend on the design of your deck, the size of the
beams, and the local building codes. From the house, measure the post lines
using extra batter boards and string, and mark the positions on the strings.
Mark the locations you will place your deck blocks or dig if you will be
using the concrete footing method. The concrete footing is a method of
supporting posts for decking whereby you dig holes below the frost line and
place concrete into the holes to support the footings.

Mark on your house, the height of the deck, and the posts. Measure the
thickness of your deck and the width of the deck, of the support beams and
the joists.

Chapter 6: How to Build a Deck Using Concrete
Block
We shall look at how to build a deck using concrete block because it is
cheaper and easier.
Now that you have accurately marked out the area where your deck will be,
let’s go ahead and build a deck.
Tools needed for building a deck:
Hammer
Nail gun
Nails
Brackets
Joists
Support boards
Concrete blocks
Level
Wheelbarrow
Shovel
Circular saw
Step 1: Place the Concrete Blocks
Take your blocks and place them in the area you have marked out. Make
sure the space between each is equal to ensure even weight distribution.
Where your blocks are not level, you may have to do some digging using
your shovel. Use a level to check if the level of the blocks is equal. If it is

not, dig out some dirt from under the block that is too high.
These blocks are quite heavy; hence, you may have to carry them with a
wheelbarrow as you place each on the ground.
Step 2: Place the Support Posts in Each Block
Cut out the posts that are 4 x 4 to be placed in the center of every block so
that they appear standing. Take your 2 x 6-inch boards and run them as
support from one end to the other. The length of the boards depends on the

size of your deck. In this case, 16-inch boards were used because there were
some stairs to work around.
To even the blocks, take a support joist, which in this case was 2 x 8 inches,
and stand it next to each post. Mark the level on each post with a pencil.
Make sure all the posts reach that level. After doing this to all the posts,
place them in each block.
Before going on, it is good to know the size of the joist you will need for
your deck. These are the long boards used as support that run across your
deck, on which the deck boards get attached. The boards are normally 16
inches apart, measured from the center of one board to the center of the
next.
Before buying the timber, if you cannot determine the correct length based
on the load capacity it will carry, do the calculations yourself or ask for help
from a professional.
To calculate the correct length, take the length of the joist and multiply by
1.5 to get the actual length of the support board. In this case, the joist is 2
by 8 inches, multiplied by 1.5 to get approximately 12 feet. Therefore, the
support board should not be longer than 12 feet.
In essence, you need to purchase the appropriate joists that will fit the size
of your deck.
Step 3: Fix the Support Boards

The 2 x 4-inch brackets help attach the support boards to the 4 x 4-inch
posts. This is done by using your hammer or nail gun to nail the boards in
place and attach them to the support boards.
If you do not want a deck off the ground, leave out the 4 by 4-inch posts
and simply place the support boards on the slots in the blocks. There’ll be
no need to attach anything to the blocks because nailing the wood together
will make it secure and stable.
But also, if you will not be using the posts, make sure the blocks are all at
the same level. You can verify this by resting a support board between 2 or
more blocks, then placing your level on top. If any sides need to go lower,
dig a little until they are level.
With the previous deck, after attaching the 4 by 4-inch posts to the support
boards, the foundation is complete.
Step 4: Fasten Your Support Boards

Even if you have the support boards attached to the posts, they are not
stable, at least not yet. They also need reinforcement by connecting them
across. For this, cut more support boards to be in between the long runs.
Measure the distance from one long support board to the other, then cut the
additional board to the required size and nail it in place. Do this at every 4
feet. You could also run some of the 2 by 4-inch boards from the center till
down for added stability.
Step 5: Connect the Decking Floor Boards
Take your deck boards, line them one by one, and nail them down, starting
from the end of the deck that is near the house. In this case, the deck is not
touching the house to allow rain to flow along the edges.

If you wish, you could add stairs, depending on how high the deck is off the
ground. Even a rail can be a good addition.
If some of the boards on the deck are longer than the deck, mark with a
pencil the point at which you will cut, and then use a circular saw to cut off
the extra bit.
Step 6: The Finished Deck
After finishing your deck, you can stain it with your color of choice.

Chapter 7: How to Build A Raised Wooden Deck
After checking with your local codes to know how deep or wide you can
build your deck, you can start building your raised deck.
Step 1: Measuring and marking the area
The first thing you must do is take your chalk line and measure the area
around your house, depending on how you want your deck to look.
Step 2: Digging the footings
In this case, the footings may be approximately 42 inches deep, so dig and
space them appropriately. You can then call the local inspector to check if
they are deep and wide enough so you can proceed with building your deck
without hesitation.
After you dig the footings around the house, fill them with concrete. In this
case, add about 8 inches of concrete at the base of the footings, add little
water and let it set up.
Step 3: Installing the ledger boards
After completing the footings, have the ledger boards in place. Before
attaching the ledger boards, ensure they are level with the wall by marking

the area you want them. You can do so using screws or bolts. Pre-drill the
area you want your ledger boards, then fasten your boards by drilling the
screws through them, after which you can secure the screws with nuts and
bolts.
Alternatively, you can use timber screws, which have the added advantage
of not needing pre-drilling or fastening with bolts and nuts to make them
secure.
Step 4: Installing the joist hangers
Mark the center of the ledger boards and install the joist hangers, ensuring
that you space them 24 inches apart. It is best to use concealed joist hangers
to keep the ledger boards from pushing out of the deck.
After installing the ledger board, you can also add a drip edge on top of the
ledger board to keep rain and moisture from getting behind the board and
instead drip over the front edge of the board.
Step 5: setting the posts

Once done with the ledger boards and joist hangers, you can place the posts
into the footings you dug earlier. By now, the concrete has completely
dried. I hope you dug all your footings an equal distance from the house. If
so, have your posts in place, then use your mason line to check if they are
all straight.
To secure the posts properly, place post brackets onto the concrete, secure
them with nuts and washers, then set pressure plates on top. After that, you
can then secure the posts on the brackets with structural screws ensuring
that they level with the house.
To ensure the posts are level with the house, use a laser level to measure
and mark with a pencil on all posts, then trim the top using a chainsaw.
After trimming the top on all posts, cut the notches for the beams —in this
case, you can have a 3inches by 9¼ inches notch for each post.
Note that the best posts for your deck are the pressure-treated ones.
Step 6: Joining the beam together

In this case, we are using a double beam that is 34 feet long for one side of
the house, so place the beams together and fasten them using 3 inches long
by 10 inches in diameter strong nails. Make sure you space the nails 6
inches apart and that you have one nail at the top and one at the bottom of
the beam for security.
Now, lift the beams and place them on the posts —an extra hand will come
in handy as they are heavy. After positioning them, drill holes through the
post and the beam, then join them with bolts and secure them with nuts and
washers on one side.
Step 7: Installing the deck joist

Place the deck joists 24 inches apart and secure one end of the joist to the
ledger board using strong joist hangers and the other end to the beam using
hurricane ties. Hurricane ties help make the ends more resistant to strong
winds. However, you can still use screws and nails to secure them. After
that, tie your mason line to one end of a joist, mark the ends of each joist,
and trim them off.
Step 8: Installing the boards between joists
In this case, we have 16-foot deck boards sandwiched between the joists.

Take a deck board and place it between two deck joists to be one inch above
the joists. Doing this helps keep the board ends from pulling from the deck.
Fasten each deck board with screws by drilling hem through the joists and
the deck boards, then secure with nuts.
Step 9: Adding the rim joists
Measure and cut the rim joists to length from the cut-off ends of the joists.
Place them on each end of the joists and attach them with wood screws. You
can also fasten with bolts and secure with washers.
Step 10: Installing the decking boards

Finally, install the decking boards. If you want your deck boards
perpendicular to your house, start by laying the first board next to the house
and work away from the house. Place your boards with the bark side facing
down to prevent excess moisture on the bottom side, resulting in wood rot.
Install two screws through the decking boards and joists for each board,
ensuring that the screws are 1-inch apart. For the spacing of each board, you
can use your deck spacers to ensure you have the correct spacing.
Step 11: Installing the railings

After completing the decking, add the railing posts and railings in place.
First, measure and mark the area you want to have your railings and then
cut the posts to length. A common railing has 4×4 posts that are 36 inches
high. Cut off one inch at the top for the top cap. Leave a few inches from
the house when installing the posts.
After placing the first post, drill holes, then drive bolts through the posts
and the deck. Finally, attach the railings and balusters by driving in screws
and bolts through the railings and the posts.
Step 12: Finishing the deck
Your deck and railings are complete, and it is time to add a coating or more
of painting so your deck can look more appealing. The best deck paint for
your deck is Behr Premium Advanced Deckover since it is easy to clean,
splinter-proof, and comes in many varieties of colors. Since they hold up
well on railings, you can use oil-based or latex primers or paints for your
railings.

Chapter 8: How to Build A Multi-Level Deck
With LED lights
A multi-level or multi-tiered deck with cool lighting is a great example of a
stylish deck. However, building one will take more time and effort as its
design is more complicated than a simple deck.
Let us get started with the following steps.
Step 1: Mark the area for the deck
Here, you can use wooden pegs or chalk lines to mark the corners of the
deck, depending on your preference.
Use your mason’s line, tie one end to a peg, and then stretch it to the other
peg to form a perimeter that indicates how wide your deck will be. For
accuracy, use an angle finder to ensure all the corners are at a 90-degrees
angle.
Step 2: Dig and fill the footings

First, mark the areas where the footings will be with a chalk line, then start
digging the holes using a post hole digger. Ensure you do not leave loose
stones or pebbles in the holes, then cut concrete tubes that go into the holes
you have dug. Place the tubes in the holes and ensure that each tube is level.
After that, mix the concrete and add it into the footings. For the upper-level
footings that support the posts, fill them with concrete, and place them. You
do not need posts for the lower-level footings since, according to the design,
the level is low to the ground. Instead, you place metal brackets to support
the beams. Fill the lower-deck holes with concrete, then push bolts into the
concrete with the ends of the bolts sticking out.
Step 3: Install the ledger board
You can start attaching the ledger board for the upper deck to the house
before the concrete dries up. Check that the ledger board is level, then
fasten it with wood screws. Also, install a drip edge behind the board to
prevent rain or moisture from destroying the framing.
Step 4: Attach the beams

By now, the concrete in the footings has dried up, and you can start
installing the beams. First, have the metal brackets in place, that is, the
lower-level footings, and secure them on the bolts you had earlier installed.
For the upper-level deck, have the posts on the footings, attach deck post
brackets to each post and secure them with screws.
After that, start placing the beams on the post brackets, secure them with
screws, and then place the beams for the lower-level deck. Also, secure
them with screws. Ensure all the beams are level.
Step 5: Install upper-level joists and rim joists

Mark points on the ledger board, then install joist hangers on those marked
spots, making sure you space them evenly.
Once you have all the hangers in place, start installing the joists. Ensure you
space them properly and secure the ends with hurricane ties to keep them in
place when winds are strong. Have double joists at the end and middle.
After attaching the joists, measure and cut the rim joists from the joist ends
using your circular saw, then attach to the inner joist using screws. Once
done, you can apply waterproof membrane tape on top of your joists and
rim joists to preserve your deck framing for a long time.
 
 
Step 6: Attach the upper-level decking

First, begin placing the border boards before attaching the inner boards. For
your border boards to meet at the corner or form miter edges at the corners,
cut one of the ends at a 90-degrees angle. After this, fasten them with
screws, then begin attaching the inner boards, taking care to ensure you
space them correctly using a deck spacer.
Step 7: Build lower-level framing and decking
The lower deck framing needs to be done with as well. Measure and mark
the areas where you will have the joists on the beam, then have hurricane

ties in place, after which you then secure the joists into them. Also, make
sure that the joists are doubled.
After that, install the rim joists on both sides using the same method for the
upper-level deck. Make sure you apply the waterproof membrane tape as
you did with the upper-level joists and rim joists.
Now that you have the joists in place, you can install the decking boards
using the same method for the upper-level decking boards.
Step 8: Install the railings
Your deck is not complete without safety railings. First, you must install the
railings posts. Cut notches at the bottom end of each post to ensure they fit
over the deck frame and deck surface. Since we will place handrails over
the railing’s posts, we will subtract one inch from the posts. Also, leave a
space between the balustrades for the stairs down to the lower deck.
Once done attaching the posts, start installing the rails for the upper-level
deck —they must be the same height as the posts. First, attach the base rail
and make sure you use a spacer to ensure the correct height.

After that, attach the spindles, which must not be more than four inches
apart, according to most local codes. Secure all the spindles with screws,
then attach the handrails to the posts with nails.
 
 
Step 9: Building and attaching the stairs
In this case, the distance between the upper deck and lower deck is three
stair steps apart, making stairs necessary. We are also building a stringer
board for attaching the stair stringers by first attaching two pieces of wood
on its back which should go behind the rim joist.
After that, take your miter saw and a piece of wood to build the stair
stringers. The stringers have an L-shape. Also, keep in mind that the top of
the stringers should align with the bottom of the rim joist.
You need to also to attach stair cleats to provide the stairs with more
security and stability. After installing the cleats between each stringer,
screw each cleat to the lower-level deck, then fasten them with screws.
Also, attach the treads with screws.
Step 10: Building lower deck railings

For more security, have the lower deck railings too. Simply follow the same
process of installing the upper deck railings, and with that, you have
yourself a multi-level deck with railings and stairs. You can add a coating of
paint to give it that professional finish.
 
 
Step 11: Installing deck lighting

Because we want a stylish deck, the project is incomplete without lights that
provide just that kind of look. The good thing with the lighting is that it is
easy to add to an already existing deck; you don’t necessarily have to do it
during the construction process.
For this, you need:
Drill bits 7-inches long
Fixtures
Low voltage cable
Fixtures extension cables
Mini wedge dark
Drill
Spade bit
Pencil
Level

Measuring tape
Electrical tape
Rubber mallet
Wire cutters
Using your tape measure, measure the area on your deck stairs where you
would like to install your lights. When measuring, remember that your
lights will look best when evenly spaced, then mark the areas with a pencil.
After that, use your drill bit to drill the hole for your fixtures through your
risers, making sure you hold the drill bit straight. Feed the fixtures cable
through the hole, then place your fixtures in. Ensure you tap them in place
using your rubber mallet. If your fixtures do not fit in properly, you have
not drilled your holes enough; pre-drill them again to avoid cracking your
fixtures during installation. Repeat the process for all fixtures.
Next, install the mini wedge dark on the stairs and deck posts. Measure and
mark the areas you want your fixtures so that they are all even. Use your
spade bit to drill the hole for the cable to go through, then mount your
fixtures in place and secure them with screws for each post.
Add an extension cable to make your connections under the deck and use u-
clips to hold the cable in place. Finally, you are done with deck lighting,
and your deck is now complete and more stylish!
NOTE: Deck lighting is easier if you have a ground rod at least 6-inches
deep in place. This ground rod connects ground electrical systems to the
earth and prevents electric shock during a storm.

Chapter 9: Building A Detached Deck With A
Pergola
As described in chapter one, a detached deck does not connect to the house,
but you can build it near your house or any open space. In this case, we
shall look at how to build it on open ground, and it will be about 12 inches
above the ground.
Step 1: Measure and mark the area
First, you need to choose an open area that is level measuring not less than
10 by 12 feet. After that, use your tape measure and chalk line to measure
and mark out the respective spots where you will have the concrete piers.
Step 2: Dig footing holes

Dig the footings to the required measurements dictated by the area building
authorities. The good thing with detached decks is that you do not
necessarily have to visit the building department for authority as most of
them are built low and not attached to the house.
Once done digging the holes to the required depth, fill them with concrete,
smoothen the top of the footing, and then install the anchor bolts at the
center of the concrete. These anchor bolts attach to the support posts.
Step 3: Attach the posts

First, make sure your posts are strong enough and are at least 6 by 6 inches
in width. Secure post brackets to the footings with the anchor bolts you
installed, then attach the posts to the brackets. Make sure the posts are
secure and plumb. Also, check that the posts are level using a laser level.
Step 4: Set the beam

In this case, the deck has two beams. Each beam will be placed on the two
longest sides of the deck. Calculate the height of your beams, then make
notches on the posts where the beams will lay.
You can then build your beam by bolting two pieces of wood together, then
set each built beam on the posts. Since your beams are probably heavy, you
may need help lifting and placing them on the posts. Ensure they are level
before attaching them to the posts. Pre-drill holes through the beam and
posts to install the beams, then attach them with bolts. Secure them with
nuts and washers.
Step 5: Install the joists
Make sure the joists are straight before installing them to have smooth
decking. Fasten each joist end to the beams using screws, and if necessary,
you can make pilot holes to avoid cracking of the beam ends when
fastening.
Step 6: Attach the deck boards

Before installing the deck boards, attach some waterproof tape to the joists
to prevent water from getting through them when it rains. This step is
especially important as it prevents the joists from cracking when wet,
further resulting in the boards becoming loose.
You can then proceed to install your deck boards. To do it properly, start by
installing the border boards before having the inner boards in place. Also,
fasten the boards by drilling enough screws through the boards and joists.
Step 7: Install the railings and stairs
Do the math on how many steps you need before building the stairs. Next,
you can cut the stringers for the stairs. To do that, transfer your
measurements to a piece of lumber using a framing square. After marking,
use a circular saw to cut out the marked areas.
With one stringer ready, there is no need for you to measure the rest.
Instead, use the cut stringer as a template to cut out the rest but do not cut to
the end. Assemble your stairs on the ground, then install the stringers 16
inches apart for the width of your stairs.

Now you need to attach the stairs to your deck. First, install a stair hanger to
the deck, then temporarily attach your stairs to the deck so you can mark the
position of the post holes. After marking, dig the holes, fill them with
concrete, then install the posts into the holes, ensuring they are level.
Finally, you can attach the stairs to the posts. For the treads, use the deck
boards and attach them to the stairs using screws, then notch the base tread
around the post for a professional finish.
Finally, you can install the railing using the same steps in chapter 8.
Step 8: Building the pergola
Your deck is not complete without a pergola. To start the project, we have
four pieces of timber for the column that are 6 by 6 inches wide; the front
ones are 10 feet long, and the back ones are 12 feet long. Next, cut the
beams to required measurements, then make holes on the columns and
beams. Assemble them both with the beam vertically placed on the top of
the column at the top end, then secure them with 12-inch screws.
After attaching the beam to the back columns, install the post base to the
deck and secure it with post brackets and screws. The next thing you need

to do is lift the attached piece into a standing position and attach each
column to the post base with screws. Do the same for the front.
Next, you need to add rafters to the sides to create a square. Add joist
hangers to the front and back beams, then cut and add the inner rafters.
Secure them with screws through the beams.
To finish the pergola, add plywood to the rafters

Chapter 10: How to Build A Floating Rooftop
Deck
A rooftop deck is also a great idea —if your local code allows you to have
one— because you get to enjoy a great view of the surroundings and create
your own space to relax.
However, you must consider a few things before building a rooftop deck.
Check with your local building department on whether you can build
a rooftop deck in your area. Some local codes may disagree with the
idea, which is why it’s best to ensure you have your information right
to prevent more charges in the future.
Confirm whether your roof structure is strong enough to hold a
rooftop deck with a structural engineer.
Make sure your roof drains well.
If you acquire your permit, you can build your rooftop deck using the
following guidelines. In this case, we are building a floating deck on a flat
roof.
Step1: Gather your materials
Your choice of rooftop deck material is important as rooftop decks
experience harsh and prolonged exposure to sun, wind, and rain. The best
decking material for your deck is modified wood because it is durable and
easy to maintain. For this project, you need:
Carpenter’s pencil chalk
Levels
Mason’s string or a laser level

Circular saw
Hammer mallet
Tape measure
Adhesive drill
Step 2: Measure the layout area
Before installing your deck, it is good to ensure a square layout for best
results. You can do this by verifying the roof corners on whether the surface
for your deck is square. Since the deck sits on the entire roof, there is no
need to take other layout measurements.
Step 3: lay the deck framing
Here, we use sleepers for the deck framing since it is a floating deck.
Sleepers are framing materials placed between the deck surface and ground
or, in this case, the roof. They play the role of supporting the decking and
allowing air and moisture to flow.
We will build the framing by laying flat a piece of lumber on its side, then
taking the joist and placing it on top, which provides a wide surface for
even load distribution.

First, cut your sleepers to length depending on your deck size, then cut the
joists three inches shorter than the sleepers for the material placed 1½
inches on either side. After cutting the pieces, attach them with galvanized
nails.
Step 4: Attach waterproof membrane
Attach the waterproof membrane to the underside of the sleepers to have
some separation between the roof and sleepers. This prevents water from
pooling next to the wood and the roof, causing the deck frame to rot. To do
this, position your sleepers with the underside facing up, then roll the
waterproof membrane on top. Cut the membrane to size.
Step 5: Cut and attach the beam frames

Here. We have four beams cut and attached together using screws or
galvanized nails. Unlike other decks where the beam is directly installed on
the wall, we build the beams separately by attaching all four to form a
square frame. Build as many beam frames as your deck space allows.
Step 6: Cut joist spacers
These joist spacers should run between the joists; use the circular saw to cut
them about 14-inches long.

Step 7: Install the sleepers and joists
Now it is time to attach the sleepers and joists to the beam-frames, and we
do this by placing spacers between the joists. The first thing is to attach two
spacers on both corners of the frame, then install the joists and sleepers by
attaching them with screws. Do the same for all joists and sleepers. Also,
have spacers in the middle for better joists alignment.
After completing the installation, you can add butyl tape on top of the joists.
The tape plays the role of providing protection against water damage on top
of the joists where water is likely to settle.
Step 8: Add fascia boards

At this point, we have installed all the joists to the frames and assembled
them to form the deck shape. Now we shall add fascia boards to cover the
areas with nails so the frame can have a nice finish. So, cut your boards to
length, then attach pre-drill holes on both the boards and the outer frames
and finally attach them using screws.
Step 9: Installing the deck boards
Cut your decking boards to size, then lay them starting with the border
boards before installing the inner ones. For fastening, you can use a

concealed screw jig that inserts the screws so you cannot see them, giving
your boards a clean finish.
Step 8: finishing the deck
Finally, you can add a coating of primer to give your floating deck a
beautiful finish as well as a pergola.

Chapter 11: How to Build A Ground-Level Deck
With Led Lights
Maybe you want a simple but nice deck that you can construct without
building the stairs, railings, and pergolas. Well, a ground-level deck is one
you can construct with minimal time and energy. Here’s how.
Step 1: Dig the footings and add concrete
This is an important step for almost all decking styles. Use your post hole
diggers to dig the holes below the frost line and add concrete to the bottom
of each hole.
Step 2: Set the posts

First, use your builder’s level to check if all the posts are similar in size,
then set them into the holes.
Step 3: Attach the ledger board
The ledger board is attached to the house. Mount the timber on the wall a
few inches from the ground, then attach it with screws.
Step 4: Cut the beams and attach them to posts

Use your tape measure to take the dimensions of all the beams, then cut
them with your circular saw. After that, place them on the posts and fasten
them with screws.
Step 5: Set the beams and posts
At this point, we have already attached the beams with the posts. After that,
we have to set them in place by placing the posts in the holes with the
beams a few inches from the ground. Fasten the ends of each beam together
with screws to form a shape, as seen below. Also, cut two beams and join
them with 4-inch spacers in the middle to form a double-beam placed at the
center of the other beams and parallel to the ledger board.

Step 6: Fill the holes with soil
Fill the holes with the dirt you removed earlier instead of concrete because
if you fill them up with concrete, during winter, the frost will move the
posts up and down since they are just above the frost line. After filling up
the soil, use a spade to level the topsoil.
Step 7: Lay the landscape fabric

The landscape fabric keeps anything from growing under the deck and
allows water to filtrate evenly through its perforations. Before you lay the
fabric, dig trenches on either side of the deck for draining water from the
gutters when it rains.
Step 8: Attach the joists
Measure and cut your joists using a tape measure and circular saw,
respectively, then have them in place as shown. Pre-drill holes through the
beams and joists and fasten them with galvanized screws, then secure the
screws with washers on the outside.
Also, support the ends of the joists and both sides of the center beam with
joist hangers.

Step 9: Install drainage pipe
In this case, we slide a 4-inch PVC pipe under the deck through the trench
we dug earlier, then fit it into the existing downspout to direct water away
from the house.
Step 10: Build and lay the steps

This design has a small step to the deck, so cut the stringers to accept a
wider tread and dig five foundation holes for the stairs.
After digging the holes, set posts into them and place pressure-treated
boards next to the posts to act as the front riser.
Fasten the board with screws on the pre-drilled holes. Also, fasten the steps
with screws using your drill bit or concealed screw jig. Finally, measure and
cut the boards for the steps and install them as shown below. When
attaching the front riser, make a hole for the drainage pipe to pass through.

Step 11: Installing the decking boards
First, square the border boards using your miter square to ensure they can
fit on the ends of the deck framing. Use the deck framing dimensions to cut
the boards. Also, the water spout extends to the deck, so make square
notches where it will go through.

After installing the border boards, measure and cut the rest of the boards
and install them with screws.
Your decking surface is complete, and you can leave it at that or add a coat
of paint or primer for a beautiful finish.
Step 12: Installing the LED lights

Our deck is not complete without lighting. You have to do this before you
attach all the boards, or if you’ve already built it, you can remove just one
board because of the lighting wiring, which runs under the deck.
First, drill holes on the stairs, ensuring you space them evenly. After that,
install the LED lights into the pre-drilled holes, then connect the plug to the
socket and switch it on. Your deck lighting is done!
Note that you need an outdoor socket within 5 meters of your deck.

Chapter 12: The Dos and Don’ts Of Deck
Maintenance
To have a deck that looks good and lasts long, here are things you need to
do and others you must not do.
Dos
You must:
Cleaning
You must clean your deck thoroughly at least once a year using a mild
formula and brush to get rid of mold and mildew. However, check with the
seller on cleaning composite decking material as it has special cleaners.
On the other hand, cleaning once a year may not be enough. Remember that
exposure to elements such as snow and pools of water during a storm may
damage your deck. Therefore, do your best to get rid of the snow from your
deck and avoid letting pools of water sit on your deck too long.
Also, when doing any grilling on your deck, use a grease catcher as grease
stains are hard to remove from the deck surface.
Sealing
Applying sealant on your decking makes it last longer because it prevents
damage from the sun or rain; clear sealants work better than tinted ones.
Before re-sealing your deck, sweep and remove debris and dust first, then
sand it two days after washing and drying. Sanding helps provide a smooth,
clean and absorbent surface for sealants to adhere to.
Regular deck inspections

Make sure you check for any loose fasteners and replace them immediately.
Also, check the decking surface, railings, and stairs for rotting or loose
boards.
Restain the deck when needed
Your deck will start to look dull over the years as the stain begins to fade.
When re-sealing your deck, you can also add a coating or two of a stainer.
When choosing stains, go for an oil-based deck stain as it lasts longer and
requires less maintenance.
Don’ts
Avoid:
Using paints
You may give in to the temptation to use paints as a finishing method
because it certainly looks so good when new. However, avoid using paint if
you can because as good as it looks when new, it will look old, depressed,
or even start peeling after a while, which is not a good appearance. Besides,
when you want to re-seal your deck, you have to remove all the paint,
which is tasking.
To avoid all that, use a semi-transparent primer or synthetic sealants.
Using chlorine bleaches
You want the cleaning job done fast and with ease. Chlorine bleaches play
that role well but using chlorine bleaches with decking is a big NO because
it strips away the woods’ natural colors, giving it a pale look.
Instead, use appropriate cleaning detergents such as mild formulas to clean
your deck.
Using pressure washers

As much as a pressure washer will save you energy and time when
cleaning, it is not ideal for washing your deck as it may damage the wood
or composite deck surfaces. However, if you prefer using a pressure washer,
keep the pressure low to prevent splinting the wood, but never use it on
composite or vinyl surfaces.

Conclusion
The purpose of this book is to identify easy and less time-consuming
decking styles and help you get started on starting decking projects on your
own at home.
Learning that decking can be less challenging for you, especially if you are
an amateur or have no previous experience, certainly motivates you to try it.
Currently, people are learning to do things they thought were left for
professionals, decking being one of them.
Each chapter in this book is a decking mind-opener that helps you know
what to expect even before you get to the practical bit. Reading each
chapter prepares and guides you before you start any decking project.
I hope you enjoyed this book.
 
PS: I’d like your feedback. If you are happy with this book, please leave a
review on Amazon.
Please leave a review for this book on Amazon by visiting the page below:
https://amzn.to/2VMR5qr 
 
 
[1] 
https://www.statista.com/statistics/662216/number-of-single-family-homes-built-with-decks-
usa/#:~:text=This%20statistic%20shows%20the%20number,family%20houses%20with%20decks%2
0built.
[2] 
https://www.ddthometransformations.com/single-post/2017/07/30/the-pros-and-cons-of-using-
cedar-for-your-deck-project
[3] https://www.deseret.com/1993/3/24/19038547/build-a-redwood-deck-like-a-pro

[4] https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wood_preservation
[5] https://call811.com/Start-Here/Homeowners


