www.ebook3000.com

OXFORD WORLD'S CLASSICS 
DEFENCE SPEECHES 
MARCUS Tuu .. IUS CICERO (106-43 Be) was the son of a Roman 
eques from Arpinum, some 70 miles south-east of Rome. He 
rose to prominence through his skill in speaking and his exceptional 
success in the criminal courts, where he usually spoke for the 
defence. Although from a family that had never produced a Roman 
senator, he secured election to all the major political offices at the 
earliest age permitted by law. His consulship fell in a year ( 63) in 
which a dangerous insurrection occurred, the Catilinarian con-
spiracy; by his persuasive oratory and his controversial execution of 
five confessed conspirators, he prevented the conspiracy from 
breaking out at Rome and was hailed as the father of his country. 
Exiled for the executions by his enemy Clodius· in 58 but recalled 
the following year, he lost his political independence as a result 
of the domination of politics by the military dynasts Pompey and 
Caesar. His governorship of Cilicia (sr-so) was exemplary in its 
honesty and birness. Always a firm republican, he reluctantly sup-
ported Pompey in the Civil War, but was pardoned by Caesar. He 
was not let into the plot against Caesar, but was in a sense its inspir-
ation, being seen by now as a symbol of the republic. After Caesar's 
assassination (44), he supported the young Octavian (the future 
emperor Augustus) and led the senate in its operations against Mark 
Antony. When Octavian and Antony formed the 'second trium-
virate' with Lepidus in 43, Cicero was their most prominent victim; 
he met his end with great courage. 
Cicero's speeches are models of eloquence and persuasion; and 
together with his letters they form the chief source for the history of 
the late republic. His philosophical treatises, written in periods 
when he was deprived of his political freedom, are the main vehicle 
by which Hellenistic philosophy was transmitted to the west. His 
prose style raised the Latin language to an elegance and beauty that 
was never surpassed. 
D. H. BF.RRY is Senior Lecturer in Classics at the University of 
Edinburgh. He has published an edition of and commentary on 
Cicero's Pro Sul!a (Cambridge Classical Texts and Commentaries, 
1996) and a revision of M. L. Clarke's Rhetoric at Rome (Routledge, 
1996). A companion volume to this book, Po!itiwl Speeches, is also 
published in Oxford World's Classics. 

OXFORD WORLD'S CLASSICS 
For almost 100 years Oxford World's Classics have brought 
readers closer to the world's great literature. Nom mith over 700 
titles-from the 4,ooo-year-old myths of Mesopotamia to the 
twentieth century's greatest novels-the series makes available 
lesser-known as well as celebrated writing. 
The pocket-sized hardbMks of the early years contained 
introductions by Virginia Woolf, T. S. Eliot, Graham Greene, 
and other literary figures JIJhich enriched the experience of reading. 
Today the series is recognized for its jine scholarship and 
reliabili~)' in texts that span morld literature, drama and poet1y, 
religion, philosophy and politics. Each edition·includes perceptive 
commentary and essential background information to meet the 
changing needs of readers. 
www.ebook3000.com

OXFORD WORLD'S CLASSICS 
CICERO 
Defence Speeches 
Translated mitlz Introductions and Notes I~)' 
D. H. BERRY 
OXFORD 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 

OXFORD 
UNIVERSITY PRESS 
Great Clarendon Street, Oxford oxz 6DP 
Ox lOrd University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. 
h furthers the University's objective of cxccllcncc in research, scholarship, 
and cdUL"ation by publishing worldwide in 
Oxford New York 
Athens Auckland Bangkok Bogota Buenos Aires Calcutt<' 
Cape Town Chcnnai Dar cs Salaam Delhi Florence I long Kong Istanbul 
Karachi Kuala Lumpur Madrid ;\lelbournc :\texico City \1umbai 
Nairobi Paris Sao Paulo Shanghai Singapore Taipei Tokyo Toronto Warsaw 
with associated companies in Berlin Ibadan 
Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University Press 
in the UK and in certain other countries 
Published in the United States 
by Oxford University Press Inc., New York 
© D. H. Berry 2000 
Database right Oxford University Press ('maker) 
First published as an Oxford World's Classics paperback 2000 
Reissued with corrections 2008 
All rights reserved. No part of this publiL"<ltion may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieYal system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, 
without the prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, 
or as expressly permincd by law, or under terms agreed with the appropriate 
reprographics rights organizations. Enquiries concerning reproduction 
outside the scope of the above should be sent to the Rights Department, 
Oxford University Pres~ at the address above 
You must not circulate this book in any other binding or cover 
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
Data available 
I .ibrary of Congress Cataloging in PubliL"<ltion Data 
Cicero, ,\farcus Tullius. 
Defence speeches/Cicero; translated with introduction and notes by D. 1-L Berry. 
(Oxford world's classics) 
Includes bibliographical references. 
l. Cicero, ~larcus Tullius---Translations into English. 2. Speeches, addresses, etc., 
Latin-Translations into English. 3. Defense (Criminal proccdurc)--··Romc~·-Sourccs. I. 
Berry, 0. H. 
II. Title. 
III. o.,J(Jrd world's classics (Oxford University Press) 
PA6.107.A41H7 2001 
875'.01-dc21 
<Kl-040632 
ISBN 978-0-19-95.1790-7 
3 
Typeset in Ehrhardt 
by RefincCatch Limited, Bungay, Suffolk 
Printed in Great Britain by 
Clays Ltd, St hes pic 
www.ebook3000.com

To Courtenay and Sarah LatimCJ; 
and to the memory ofmy mother 

www.ebook3000.com

Acknomledgements 
Abbreviations 
Introduction 
Note on the Translation 
Note on the Latin Text 
Select Bibliography 
Chronology 
CONTENTS 
DEFENCE SPEECHES 
Pro Roscio Amerino ('For Roscius of Ameria') 
Pro Murena ('For Murena') 
Pro Archia ('For Archias') 
Pro Caelio ('For Caelius') 
Pro Milone ('For Milo') 
ExplanatOI:JI Notes 
Glossary 
IX 
X 
XI 
XXXI 
XXXV 
XXXVIII 
xliii 
3 
59 
107 
122 
162 

www.ebook3000.com

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I AM grateful to Professor Jonathan Powell and two anonymous 
readers for their comments on my translation of Pro Ardzia. 
Special thanks to Douglas Cairns, Ian Gibson, Sunit Jilla, Paul 
Knox, Elizabeth Pender, and Perry Savill for their help and friend-
ship during the writing of this book. Friends, like manuscripts, 
should be weighed not counted. 

Cic. Arch. 
Att. 
Brut. 
Gael. 
Fam. 
il1an. 
Mil. 
lvlm: 
Orat. 
Phil. 
Plane. 
Sest. 
S. Rose. 
Plut. Cic. 
Quint. hJSt. 
AC 
AJAH 
AJP 
CJ 
CP 
CR 
Gr:5R 
HSCP 
JRS 
LCM 
RhM 
TAPA 
ABBREVIATIONS 
Cicero, Pro Archia 
Epistulae ad Attiwm 
Brutus 
Pro Caelio 
Epistulae ad familiares 
Pro lege Manilia 
Pro J'v1ilone 
Pro Jl!Iurena 
Orator 
Orationes Philippiwe (Philippics) 
Pro Plancio 
Pro Sestio 
Pro Roscio A merino 
Plutarch, Life ofCiaro 
Quintilian, Institutio aratoria 
L 'Antiquite classique 
A.meriran Journal of Ancient History 
Ameriran Journal of Philology 
Classical Journal 
Classical Philology 
Classiral Review 
Greece and Rome 
Harvard Studies in Classical Philology 
Journal of Roman Studies 
Liverpool Classiw! ;\![onth!y 
Rheinisches kluseum 
Transactions ofthe Ameriwn Philological Association 
www.ebook3000.com

INTRODUCTION 
IN the ancient world, for century after century, public speaking ('ora-
tory') was central to public life, and the ability to influence people 
with the spoken word brought power, money, and fame to the 
speaker ('orator'). Assemblies could be persuaded to pass laws and 
decrees, declare war and peace, assign commands, provinces, and 
even kingdoms, or redistribute land. Debates were real, their out-
comes decided by the force of argument and the power of persua-
sion; there were no parties, as in a modern parliament, dictating to 
politicians the line they should take. The courts, too, were highly 
politicized. Political opponents prosecuted each other for crimes real 
and imaginary, and in this way the persuasive speaker could influ-
ence the course of events, determining who would or would not be 
removed from political life, and reaping the political and financial 
rewards. It was not easy to become a successful orator. Years had to 
be spent mastering the techniques of rhetoric (the term denotes the 
theory, not the practice of speaking). But for those who applied 
themselves, and who possessed in addition an outstanding natural 
ability, the rewards could be great. 
Of all the speakers in the ancient world, Cicero can plausibly be 
reckoned the best. The first-century AD rhetorician Quintilian 
wrote: ' "Cicero" has come to be regarded as the name not of a 
person, but of eloquence itself', adding that 'if a student is a keen 
admirer of Cicero, he will know that he has made real progress' (Jnst. 
ro. r. I rz). Cicero's dates were ro6-43 BC: so he lived through the fall 
of the Roman republic. This was a period of national instability and 
unprecedented political competition, and the power of persuading 
others through speech became as important as it has ever been. 
Cicero rose to prominence not because of his birth (his non-
aristocratic, Italian origin was a severe handicap to him), but because 
of his ability. He could persuade the ordinary citizens of Rome to 
vote down proposals that were in their interest, and he could (it 
seems) persuade just about any jury that black was white. In a ges-
ture of triumph he published his speeches for his contemporaries 
and posterity to admire and imitate. Fifty-eight of these still survive 
today in whole or part. They are in every sense classics-works 

Xll 
Introduction 
which have been read, enjoyed, quoted from, studied, and imitated 
by people in western societies, off and on, for two millennia. And 
in a world in which mass-communication becomes ever more 
important, they retain their interest, relevance, and vibrancy. 
Cicero excelled in both of the two main types of oratory, 'forensic' 
(the oratory of the forum, i.e. of the law courts, also known as 
'judicial') and 'deliberative' (the oratory of the political assemblies); 
a third type, 'epideictic' (the oratory of display), was less important at 
the higher political level at this period. It is just forensic that we are 
concerned with in this collection-and only with a subset of foren-
sic, in fact, since all five orations are speeches for the defence (a 
companion volume, Political Speeches, will contain speeches for the 
prosecution, and deliberative speeches). Many of Cicero's defence 
speeches are masterpieces of oratory, deal with events of historical 
significance, and are of considerable human interest. These five have 
been chosen because they have historically been the best known and 
the most appreciated, Pro Roscio Amerino ('For Roscius of Ameria') 
and Pro Milone ('For Milo') for their rhetorical brilliance at, respect-
ively, the beginning and the end of Cicero's career as an advocate; 
Pro Murena ('For Murena') and Pro Caelio ('For Caelius') for their 
humour (these are perhaps the funniest works of literature to have 
emerged from the ancient world); and Pro Archia ('For Archias') for 
the beautiful encomium of literature which occupies the greater part 
of the speech. Pro Milone is also of particular interest because there 
happens to have survived an independent account of the facts of the 
case-strikingly at variance with Cicero's account-written by the 
first-century AD scholar Quintus Asconius Pedianus. Asconius' 
account is also translated in this volume. 
I will say something below about the courts in which Cicero's 
defences were given. But first an account of his public career is 
required. 
Cicero's Public Career 
Thanks to his voluminous writings, particularly his letters, we know 
more about Cicero than about any other person in ancient history. 
He was the elder son of a wealthy eques from Arpinum, a town about 
70 miles south-east of Rome that had possessed full Roman citizen-
ship since as early as 188 Be; his younger brother Quintus was also to 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction 
Xlll 
pursue a public career with distinction, and share his brother's 
brutal end. Arpinum was notable for being the home town of Gaius 
Marius, the seven-times consul and in 102 and IOI the saviour of 
Rome from the northern invaders; Cicero's paternal grandmother 
was in fact a relation of Marius by marriage. In c.95 the Ciceros 
bought a house in Rome so that the two boys should have the best 
education possible, and Cicero studied rhetoric under the two most 
famous orators of the day, Lucius Licinius Crassus (consul in 95) 
and Marcus Antonius (consul in 99); both men were later rewarded 
by being given parts in one of Cicero's mature rhetorical works, De 
Oratore ('On the orator', 55 BC). During the Social War, Cicero saw 
military service: in 89 he served under Pompey's father, Gnaeus 
Pompeius Strabo, and in 88 he served under Sulla. In 87 Marius 
occupied Rome and murdered his opponents, including Antonius. 
During the Cinnan regime which followed, Cicero continued his 
studies at Rome, studying rhetoric and, less usually, philosophy. In 
82 Sulla recaptured the city, had himself appointed dictator, and 
'proscribed' his enemies by posting in the forum lists of those to be 
killed. It was now (81), at the age of 25, that Cicero undertook his 
first court case, a civil case for Publius Quinctius afterwards pub-
lished as Pro Q}tinctio ('For Q.1inctius'). He lost; but he lost to the 
most distinguished advocate in Rome, Q.1intus Hortensius Hortalus. 
The next year (So) he undertook his first criminal case, Pro Roscio 
Amerino ('For Roscius of Ameria'). This was a defence of a man, 
Sextus Roscius of Ameria, who had been charged with the murder of 
his father. The trial became sensational when Cicero boldly exposed 
the unscrupulous profiteering of one of Sulla's cronies, the freedman 
Chrysogonus, who was behind the prosecution; he won his case and 
became famous overnight. Among the briefs which came to him as a 
result of this success was the politically sensitive defence of the 
freedom of a woman from Arretium (a town in Etruria). This time 
Cicero argued successfully that Sulla had not been justified in strip-
ping Arretium of its citizen rights. Both these cases helped Cicero to 
gain the support of the Italians on whom he relied throughout his 
political career. 
From 79 to 77 Cicero studied abroad. The many cases which he 
had taken on immediately after the Roscius case had damaged his 
health (oratory was physically very demanding), and his defence of 
the woman from Arretium may also have made his absence from 

XIV 
Introduction 
Rome politically expedient. The two brothers travelled to Greece, 
Rhodes, and Asia Minor (to which Quintus, who was also to pursue 
a political career, would later return as governor). They studied 
philosophy in Athens, and Cicero studied rhetoric under Molon of 
Rhodes. Molon, he later maintained, helped him to make his oratory 
a little more restrained, less 'Asianist' (elaborate and florid) in style. 
This toning down of his oratorical style was in keeping with the 
direction in which taste at Rome was moving, and it was also sensible 
in view of the risk to his health. 
In 76 he was elected quaestor at Rome, and he served his term of 
office in western Sicily the following year. Election to the quaestor-
ship brought life membership of the senate, and Cicero was the first 
member of his family to attain this distinction; thus he became in 
Roman terms a 'new man' (novus homo, the first man of a family to 
reach the senate). 
This success was followed up in 70 by his election as plebeian aedile 
for 69. But, more significantly, he decided in 70 to undertake a 
prosecution: having served as an honest quaestor in Sicily five years 
earlier, he was only too happy to help the Sicilians by bringing a 
charge of extortion against the rapacious governor, Gaius Verres, 
who had systematically fleeced the province from 73 to 71. Verres' 
defence, however, was undertaken by Hortensius, who was to be 
consul in 69, and he was also aided by one of the leading families in 
Rome, the Metelli. One Metellus had become Verres' successor in 
Sicily, and made it difficult for Cicero to collect evidence; another 
was to be Hortensius' consular colleague the following year; and a 
third would be praetor in charge of the court if, as the defence 
hoped, the case could be prolonged into 69. But in the event Cicero 
overcame all these obstacles. He collected his evidence quickly, 
delivered a brief opening speech, and then brought out his witnesses. 
In his speech he dwelt upon the political aspect of the case: if some-
one as obviously guilty as Verres were let off, the people would judge 
the exclusively senatorial juries (prescribed by a law of Sulla's) to be 
unfit to try cases, and a law would be passed handing the courts over 
to the equites instead. Once the evidence had been presented, Verres 
went into exile, without waiting to hear more; and Cicero then pub-
lished the speeches he would have gone on to deliver-In Verrem 
('Against Verres') or, in English, the Verrines, a damning and some-
times hilarious expose of Verres' crimes. With this success Cicero 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction 
XV 
took Hortensius' place as Rome's foremost advocate: Hortensius all 
but abandoned the courts, returning only when Cicero had reached 
the consulship, and then as Cicero's partner, not his opponent. 
Cicero's irresistible rise continued. In 67 he was elected praetor, 
by all the centuries (voting units in the centuriate assembly), three 
times over (because the election had to be repeated), and at the 
earliest age permitted by law (he was by now 39). He served his year 
of office as praetor in charge of the extortion court, the scene of his 
success against Verres; and in 66 he also gave his first deliberative 
speech, Pro lege Mani!ia ('For the Manilian law'). Rome had recently 
suffered a serious reverse in the Third Mithridatic War (73-63). 
Public opinion wanted the command of the Roman forces, held by 
Lucullus since the start of the war, to be given to Pompey, who had 
just enjoyed a spectacular success in wiping out the pirates of the 
Mediterranean, and was already on the scene; the traditionalists 
in the senate, however, such as Hortensius, did, not wish to see 
Pompey's career advanced any further. The tribune Gaius Manilius 
proposed a bill to have the command transferred to Pompey, and 
invited Cicero to support it. As a praetor, Cicero could not avoid 
expressing an opinion-and yet he did not wish to alienate either the 
senate or the people, given that he would shortly be standing for the 
consulship. His solution was to give the bill his enthusiastic support, 
while also taking care to compliment Lucullus. The bill was passed, 
Cicero published his speech, and Pompey concluded the war in 63. A 
non-political speech, but a celebrated one, was also delivered in 66, 
Pro Cluentio ('For Cluentius'). This was an oratorical triumph in 
which Cicero, as he afterwards boasted, 'threw dust in the eyes of the 
jury' (Quint. Inst. 2.17.21). The remark should make us aware of the 
deception which may (or may not) be taking place whenever we read 
one of Cicero's defences. 
In 64 he was elected to the consulship for 63, again at the earliest 
age permitted by law (he was 43 in 63). With this success his family 
entered the ranks of the nobility (a 'noble' was a direct descendant of 
a consul through the male line). It was certainly unusual for new men 
to rise as high as the consulship: the last one to do so had been Gaius 
Norbanus twenty years previously. Cicero's consulship was an event-
ful one, and one that afforded further scope for the exercise of his 
oratorical talents. It began with Cicero in four speeches De lege 
agraria ('On the agrarian law') successfully opposing the land 

XVI 
Introduction 
redistributions proposed by the tribune Publius Servilius Rullus; the 
speeches demonstrate Cicero's ability to persuade the people to vote 
down a proposal that was in their interest. He claimed to be a popu-
lar consul acting in the people's interest, but was actually taking a 
conservative line. Now that he had reached the highest place in the 
'sequence of offices' (cursus honorum), he was always to follow the 
conservative, traditional, and republican line which by nature he 
preferred. Having been allowed to join the club, he would defend its 
rules to the death. 
But the major event of Cicero's consulship, and indeed of his life, 
was his controversial suppression of the C:atilinarian conspiracy. The 
conspirators were a small group of failed politicians some of whom 
had ruined themselves financially in their attempts to secure political 
advancement and live up to their social status; some, in marked 
contrast to Cicero, were high-ranking aristocrats. Led by the patri-
cian Lucius Sergius Catilina ('Catiline' in English), they hoped, by 
assassinations, arson, and a march on Rome, to seize power; after 
which they would reward themselves with political office and put 
forward legislation for a general cancellation of debts (there is no 
evidence of any plans for wider reform, or of any genuine social 
concern). The conspiracy began in earnest with C:atiline's failure to 
be elected consul in July, and by mid-November he had thrown in 
his lot with an agrarian rising in Etruria led by one Gaius Manlius, a 
former Sullan centurion. Cicero's vigilance and prompt action saved 
his own life from an assassination attempt and prevented the con-
spiracy from breaking out at Rome-but at the cost of executing 
without trial five leading conspirators (including one ex-consul, 
Publius Cornelius Lentulus Sura), who had been arrested and had 
confessed their guilt. His illegal execution of the five men on 5 
December had the explicit backing of the senate and overwhelming 
public support (he was hailed by Cato as the father of his country), 
and probably saved a great many lives. Nevertheless, it was to lay him 
open to attack for years afterwards, and required him constantly to 
be justifying the action that he had taken (something which has 
unfairly caused him to be perceived as boastful and vain). His publi-
cation in 6o of his four magnificent speeches against Catiline (In 
Catilinam ('Against Catiline') or, in English, the Catilinarians) was a 
major exercise in self-justification. The effectiveness of his attack 
ensured that Catiline's name was blackened for all time. Catiline 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction 
XVII 
himself, together with his army, was destroyed in the field by Cic-
ero's colleague as consul, Gaius Antonius Hybrida, at the beginning 
of62. 
In the midst of the Catilinarian crisis (in November) Cicero also 
found time to undertake the defence of one of the consuls-elect for 
62, Lucius Licinius Murena, who had been prosecuted for electoral 
malpractice by one of the unsuccessful candidates; the law under 
which the case was brought was Cicero's own bribery law, the lex 
Tullia de ambitu, which he had successfully carried earlier in the year. 
Together with Hortensius and Crassus, Cicero secured his acquittal, 
arguing that, in the face of the danger from Catiline, the necessity of 
having as consul an experienced military man such as Murena over-
rode all other considerations. Pro Murena ('For Murena') is Cicero's 
funniest and most enjoyable speech (unless one prefers Pro Caelio). 
Much of it is taken up with making fun of the prosecutors, the 
lawyer Servius Sulpicius Rufus and the Stoic philosopher Marcus 
Porcius Cato, both men for whom Cicero had in reality a consider-
able regard. 
Cicero's suppression of the Catilinarian conspiracy won him 
enormous prestige, and on 1 January 62 he was the first senator to be 
asked for his opinion in the senate: he was viewed as the leading 
senator present (Pompey was still in the east). We have two speeches 
of his from this year, Pro Sul!a ('For Sulla') and Pro Archia ('For 
Archias'). Pro Sulla is a defence of a wealthy aristocrat, the nephew 
of the dictator Sulla (and probably the brother-in-law of Pompey), 
on a charge of participation in the conspiracy; Cicero secured his 
acquittal by arguing that he of all people would hardly have under-
taken his defence if he had believed him to be guilty. In this speech 
we see Cicero seeking to present himself as a mild and compassionate 
person, to counteract his enemies' portrayal of him as cruel and vin-
dictive in his execution of the conspirators. Pro Archia, by contrast, 
is one of the least political of Cicero's forensic speeches. A defence 
not of a Roman aristocrat but of a Syrian poet, Cicero's old teacher, 
on a charge of illegally assuming Roman citizenship, it contains not 
just a legal defence of Archias' claim, but a lengthy encomium of 
literature. This is of great interest to literary historians, and shows 
the degree to which Cicero had to go to present Archias' profession 
to a Roman jury in a favourable light. Archias was acquitted. 
At the end of the year a scandal occurred at Rome which was to 

XV111 
Introduction 
have disastrous consequences for Cicero. A young aristocrat, Publius 
Clodius Pulcher, was discovered to have dressed up in women's 
clothes and attended the festival of the Bona Dea, to which only 
women were admitted, and which was being held at the house of 
Caesar, the pontifex maximus. The suggestion was that he had taken 
advantage of Caesar's absence from his house to commit adultery 
with his wife. Caesar divorced his wife on the grounds that 'Caesar's 
wife must be above suspicion' (Plutarch, Life of Caesar ro.6). At 
Clodius' trial for sacrilege in May 6r, Cicero gave evidence which 
disproved his alibi. Nevertheless, Clodius managed to bribe his way 
to an acquittal; and he was henceforward to be a far more trouble-
some enemy to Cicero than Catiline had been. 
At the end of 6o, Caesar, who was consul-elect for the following 
year, formed a political alliance with Pompey and Crassus con-
ventionally known as the 'first triumvirate'. He tried to persuade 
Cicero to join the alliance: Cicero would have lost his political 
independence, but would have been protected from Clodius and 
from the increasing attacks on his execution of the Catilinarians. He 
preferred to keep his independence-and was to pay for it. In 59 
Caesar sanctioned Clodius' adoption into a plebeian family (he was 
of patrician birth), thus enabling him to stand for election to the 
tribunate of the plebs, the office traditionally sought by popular 
politicians who wished to propose radical legislation or, in conserva-
tive eyes, to stir up trouble. Clodius was duly elected and, as tribune 
in 58, he proposed a bill outlawing anyone who had put a Roman 
citizen to death without trial. The senate put on mourning for Cicero 
and the towns of Italy passed resolutions in his favour. But Clodius, 
who had earlier carried a law to provide the people with free grain for 
the first time, had the support of the urban plebs. More importantly, 
he also had the tacit support of the triumvirs, who were angered at 
Cicero's rejection of their advances and worried that he might lead 
the conservatives in the senate in an attack on their position. The 
consuls Piso and Gabinius did as the triumvirs wanted, and 
instructed the senate to resume normal dress. Cicero's support melt-
ed away, and he himself left for exile in Macedonia on the day that 
Clodius' law was passed. His house in Rome was plundered and 
burned, and Clodius consecrated the site as a shrine to Libertas 
('Liberty'), in order to portray Cicero as a tyrant and to prevent 
rebuilding. 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction 
XIX 
Cicero's exile, which lasted almost eighteen months, was the big-
gest disaster of his life. He had saved Rome, and had been exiled for 
his pains. The charge was executing citizens without trial; yet he had 
been denied a trial himself. In his despair he thought of suicide. 
Publicly he represented his departure as a deliberate act of self-
sacrifice, intended to save Rome from the likelihood of civil war-the 
second time he had saved the city. But privately he felt he should 
have stood his ground. He was recalled to Rome the following year, 
when the triumvirs concluded that Clodius had become an obstacle 
to their plans. His actual return was glorious and gratifying. On 
Pompey's motion the senate passed a decree, unanimous with the 
single exception of Clodius, describing Cicero as the saviour of his 
country; and the people passed a bill authorizing his recall. His 
journey through Italy resembled a triumphal procession: towns 
passed resolutions honouring him, and he was escorted by cheering 
crowds. But he never recovered from the blow to his pride; and, as 
the price of his recall, he had had to assure the triumvirs that in 
future he would serve their interests. 
The speeches he gave in 57 and 56 are known as the Post reditum 
('After his return') speeches. Post reditum in senatu ('in the senate', 
57) and Post reditum ad quirites ('to the citizens', 57) offered thanks 
for his restoration. De domo sua ('On his house', 57) and De haruspi-
cum responsis ('On the answers of the omen-interpreters', 56) dealt 
with the religious aspects of Cicero's feud with Clod ius; Cicero suc-
cessfully persuaded the pontiffs that Clodius' consecration of the 
site of his house in Rome had been invalid, and he secured compen-
sation to allow him to rebuild. Other speeches of this period 
included defences of people who had campaigned for his recall and 
opposed Clodius. Publius Sestius and Titus Annius Milo were trib-
unes in 57 who had used violence against Clodius and worked tire-
lessly for Cicero's recall. Sestius was prosecuted in s6 by dependants 
of Clodius, was defended by Hortensius, Crassus, and Cicero (the 
same team that had defended Murena in 63), and was unanimously 
acquitted. Cicero's Pro Sestio ('For Sestius') contains a full 
exposition of the orator's own political standpoint: the state can be 
divided into patriots and traitors, with Sestius and Milo and the 
majority of Roman citizens of all classes belonging to the former 
category, and Clodius, Piso, and Gabinius to the latter. 
A month later Cicero was to revenge himself on Clodius in a more 

XX 
Introduction 
personal way. A former friend of Clodius', Marcus Caelius Rufus, 
was prosecuted on an array of charges: violence, murder, and the 
attempted poisoning of Clodius' sister, Clodia Metelli, with whom 
Caelius had previously had an affair. Caelius had originally been a 
pupil of Cicero's, before switching allegiance to the Clodii, and now 
that he had broken with the Clodii he was to become a friend of 
Cicero's again. In taking on his defence, Cicero saw his chance to 
hurt Clodius by publicly humiliating his sister, whom he had reasons 
for hating: she had persecuted his family during his exile. In Pro 
Caelio ('For Caelius') the charges are largely ignored, and Cicero 
instead focuses on Caelius' affair with Clodia, portraying her as a 
common prostitute (she was a high-ranking society lady) and hold-
ing her up to ridicule. Ingeniously, he manages to do this while 
exempting Caelius from moral blame. The speech is wonderfully 
funny, and very cruel: Cicero won his case by avoiding the issue and 
making the jury laugh at his enemy. After the trial, Clodia (who has a 
one-in-three chance of being the same person as Catullus' 'Lesbia') 
vanishes from history. 
Cicero owed his recall from exile to Pompey's influence, and in 
return he had reluctantly undertaken to give the triumvirs his polit-
ical support. But he soon detected an apparent rift between Pompey 
and Caesar (who was absent in Gaul from 58 to 49), and decided to 
drive the two men further apart by opposing Caesar. First he pub-
lished an attack on Publius Vatinius which he had made at the time 
of Sestius' trial (In Vatinium, 'Against Vatinius'): Vatinius was a 
legate of Caesar's who as tribune in 59 had procured for him his 
Gallic command. Secondly, he put a motion before the senate calling 
for discussion of Caesar's controversial agrarian law of 59· This 
challenge to Caesar's position did not split the triumvirate as Cicero 
had hoped: instead it drove the three men closer together. They 
reaffirmed their alliance, and Pompey and Crassus held a second 
joint consulship in 55 (they had held the consulship together in 70), 
with commands for each of them to follow afterwards. Caesar's 
command in Gaul was extended for a further five years. 
Cicero now realized that resistance to the triumvirs would be 
futile, and in any case he needed their protection against Clodius' 
continuing attacks; he also felt that the conservatives in the .senate, 
such as Hortensius, were failing to give him their full support. He 
therefore publicly declared his allegiance to the triumvirs: in De 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction 
XXI 
provinciis consularibus ('On the consular provinces', 56) he lavishes 
praise on Caesar and advocates the extension of his Gallic command. 
The later 50s were unhappy years for Cicero. In 54 he had to 
defend Vatinius; although he won, he apparently chose not to pub-
lish his defence. Soon afterwards (in 54 or 53) he was compelled to 
defend Gabinius, the consul of 58 who had allowed Clodius to exile 
him; at least this time he had the satisfaction of losing. In his private 
moments he consoled himself by starting to write a series of philo-
sophical treatises in which he explained the various philosophical 
systems of the Greeks (he was the first person to do this in Latin; the 
work involved formulating a Latin philosophical vocabulary, which 
then became standard). At the same time he began a series of trea-
tises on oratory and rhetoric; some of these works also explore, in 
theoretical terms, his own political philosophy. In 53 (or 52) he was 
gratified to receive, on Hortensius' nomination, an important polit-
ical honour: he was elected to a place in the coll~ge of augurs, in 
succession to Crassus' son, who had been killed with his father at 
Carrhae. 
Clodius during these years had become a powerful independent 
force in Rome with a large popular following. He had assembled a 
gang of thugs and used it to attack his enemies, most of all Cicero, 
and to terrorize the city. His chief opponent was Titus Annius Milo, 
who used similar tactics against him in return. The increasing will-
ingness of politicians to resort to violence to achieve their ends was a 
symptom of the collapse of the republic; in the next decade, urban 
violence would be superseded by civil war. Clodius and Milo had 
fought numerous battles against each other, Milo defending Cicero's 
interests; and in one such battle outside Rome on I8 January 52 
Clodius was accidentally wounded, and then killed on Milo's orders. 
Cicero must have been overjoyed. Amid the chaotic scenes which 
followed, Clodius' supporters cremated his body in the senate-
house, which was burned down. Pompey was appointed sole consul 
to restore order (the violence in Rome had prevented the elections 
for 52 from taking place), and Milo was put on trial and defended by 
Cicero. The evidence for his guilt was unimpeachable, and Pompey 
wanted him removed from public life, so Cicero's defence stood no 
chance of success: he was convicted, and went into exile at Massilia 
(Marseilles). But later in the year public opinion swung against 
Pompey and the Clodians, and in Milo's favour. Milo's accomplices 

XXIl 
Introduction 
were tried and acquitted, whereas Clodius' supporters, who were put 
on trial for the burning of the senate-house, were convicted. Cicero, 
who had played a leading part in these trials, now regarded himself 
and Milo as having been vindicated, and he wrote and published a 
new, more confident version of his unsuccessful defence. This is our 
Pro Milone ('For Milo'), which has always been accepted as the 
oratorical masterpiece that Cicero intended it to be. 
During his consulship in 52 Pompey had legislation passed which 
ruled that consuls and praetors should have to wait at least five years 
before going out to govern their provinces (the purpose of the law 
was to discourage electoral bribery by delaying the period at which a 
magistrate would be able to recoup the money he had spent when 
standing for office). This created a short4erm shortage of provincial 
governors, and as Cicero had not previously held a provincial gover-
norship he was made to serve for a year (51-50) as governor of 
Cilicia, on the south-east coast of Asia Minor (the province also 
included Cyprus). He was very distressed at having to be away from 
the political scene at Rome: his governorship seemed like a second 
exile, and his greatest fear was that his term of office might be 
extended. But he resolved to make the best of the situation by acting 
as a model provincial governor-no easy matter, when fairness to the 
provincials ran directly counter to the financial interests of promin-
ent men at Rome. He also led a successful campaign against the 
brigands of the interior; but on his return to Rome the impending 
civil war prevented him from obtaining the triumph he had hoped 
for. 
At the outbreak of the Civil War in 49 Cicero agonized over what 
to do. He was put in charge of the Campanian coast, but, being 
unable to raise recruits in any number, soon gave up and retired to 
one of his villas. Caesar repeatedly tried to win him over to his side, 
even coming to visit him at home: to win the endorsement of such a 
senior republican would serve to legitimize his position. But Cicero 
could not in conscience give his support to a man who had invaded 
Italy and declared war on his country. On the other hand, he had 
little confidence in Pompey, the man into whose hands the republic 
had been placed: Pompey's decision to abandon Italy and cross over 
to Greece seemed to Cicero a catastrophic misjudgement, and, he was 
disgusted by the motives and behaviour of Pompey's followers. 
Eventually he concluded, despairingly, that his duty was to join 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction 
XXlll 
Pompey in Greece. He crossed over to him in June 49; but once in 
Pompey's camp he declined to accept a command, and irritated the 
Pompeian leaders with his criticisms. He was not present at Pom-
pey's defeat at Pharsalus in August 48, and after Pompey's flight and 
murder he was invited to assume command of the surviving repub-
lican forces, but declined. In October 48 he returned to Brundisium 
in Italy, but it was not until September 47 that he was pardoned by 
Caesar and allowed to move on to Rome. 
Under Caesar's dictatorship there was no free political debate in 
which he could participate, and in any case his advice on political 
matters was not sought; he attended meetings of the senate, but 
without speaking. It was now that he found time to resume work on 
his many philosophical and rhetorical treatises, the bulk of which 
were written during this period; and he also taught rhetoric to aristo-
cratic pupils. These activities helped take his mind ~way from the fall 
of the republic, Caesar's increasing autocracy, and (in 45) the death 
of his beloved daughter Tullia. In September 46 he broke his silence 
in the senate. Caesar had unexpectedly agreed to pardon an enemy, 
one of the most die-hard of the republican leaders, Marcus Claudius 
Marcellus, and Cicero made a speech of thanks. Pro Marcello ('For 
Marcellus') praises Caesar's clemency and urges him to proceed with 
his work of reform; it also sets out Cicero's case to be accepted as a 
mediator between Caesar and the former Pompeians. Pro Ligario 
('For Ligarius', 46) and Pro rege Deiotaro ('For King Deiotarus', 45) 
are other speeches of this period in which Cicero begs Caesar to 
spare Pompeian enemies. In their circumstances of delivery and in 
their tone they are a far cry from the speeches in which Cicero 
addresses a jury and is free to say what he wishes. Here he is address-
ing a monarch in his palace. 
Caesar's autocracy led of course to his assassination in the senate 
on the Ides (I 5th) of March 44, just a few weeks after he had had 
himself made dictator perpetuo ('dictator for life'). Cicero had offered 
discreet encouragement to the assassins, or 'liberators' as he calls 
them, but had not been let into the plot. He was actually present at 
the murder: Brutus raised his dagger and congratulated him on the 
recovery of their freedom. As the last of the senior republicans still 
surviving, Cicero had a symbolic value: he had become a token of the 
republic. And this time we do have evidence for· his joy at the death 
of his enemy (if Pam. 6. I 5 does indeed refer to it). 

XXIV 
Introduction 
After the assassination, political life began again. The surviving 
consul, Mark Antony (in Latin, Marcus Antonius), arranged a 
settlement under which Caesar's assassins would not be prosecuted, 
but his laws and appointments would remain in force. In April, 
however, the situation changed with the arrival in Italy of Caesar's 
principal heir, his rS-year-old great-nephew Gaius Octavius (who 
from his posthumous adoption as Caesar's son is known as Octavian, 
and from 27 is known as the first emperor, Augustus): calling himself 
Gaius Julius Caesar, he showed himself to Caesar's veterans, held 
games in Caesar's honour, and began paying Caesar's legacies to the 
Roman people. In September, Cicero made an enemy of Antony, for 
a relatively trivial reason: Antony had denounced him for his failure 
to attend a meeting of the senate at which posthumous honours for 
Caesar were to be voted. Cicero replied the next day with the First 
Philippic; Antony then delivered a bitter invective against him in the 
senate in his absence; and Cicero wrote (but did not deliver) a savage 
reply, the Second Philippic. This speech attacks and ridicules 
Antony's entire career, but particularly his behaviour under Caesar 
and his appropriation of state funds in the months since Caesar's 
death; it closes with a warning of assassination. It was Cicero's view 
that Antony ought to have been murdered at the same time as 
Caesar: if Cicero had been invited to the feast (i.e. let into the plot), 
there would have been no left-overs (Fam. Io.28.r, 12-4-1). 
In November Antony left Rome for Gaul, which he had taken as 
his province; and Cicero assumed unofficial leadership of the senate. 
In the Third Philippic, he persuaded the senate to approve the refusal 
of Decimus Brutus, the governor of Cisalpine Gaul and one of 
Caesar's assassins, to hand over his legions to Antony; and in the 
Fourth Philippic, delivered before the people on the same day, he 
argued that Antony was in effect a public enemy. At the same time, 
he urged both senate and people to give their support to Octavian. In 
thinking that the young man could be praised, honoured, and then 
disposed of (to his embarrassment, his words (Fam. II.2o.r) were 
reported to Octavian), Cicero made a serious misjudgement. It 
was also unrealistic of him to suppose that Octavian would stay for 
long on the same side as Caesar's assassins. But Antony's destruc-
tion seemed to Cicero the immediate priority, and an alliance with 
Octavian was the only way to bring it about. 
From this point, Cicero controlled events at Rome: nineteen years 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction 
XXV 
after his consulship, he was once again leading the republic at a 
moment of supreme national crisis. In a further ten Philippics 
Ganuary to April 43), he directed the senate in its actions against 
Antony, urging it not to compromise, and presented his view of 
events to the people. It was his 'finest hour'. In April43 Antony was 
defeated near Mutina and declared a public enemy. Cicero, it 
seemed, had saved his country a second time. But events then took 
an unwelcome turn. Antony escaped and succeeded in acquiring 
further legions from Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, the governor of 
Narbonese Gaul and Nearer Spain; and Decimus Brutus was 
deserted by his troops and killed on Antony's orders. Octavian, 
though only 19, demanded the consulship (both consuls had been 
killed in battle); he may have considered having Cicero as his 
colleague, but the evidence for this is doubtful. When his demand 
was refused by the senate, he marched on Rome and, in August, held 
an irregular election and took the consulship, \Vith his uncle as 
colleague. With nothing more to be got from Cicero and the senate, 
he then changed sides, holding a meeting with Antony and 
Lepidus near Bononia. The 'second triumvirate' was formed, and 
the three men gave themselves supreme power for five years, and 
divided out the empire between them. To rid themselves of 
their enemies and raise funds for their veterans they initiated a 
proscription, as Sulla had done in 82. So once again the lists of those 
to be killed were posted in the forum. Cicero met his end, on 
7 December, with great courage. He was 63. His head and hands 
were cut off and displayed on the rostra in the forum-the scene of 
so many of his successes. 
Octavian defeated Antony at Actium in 31, and in 30 he chose 
Cicero's son as his colleague in the consulship. Many years later, as 
the emperor Augustus, he happened to catch his grandson reading 
one of Cicero's books. He took the book, looked through it, and 
handed it back saying, 'He was a master of words, child, a master of 
words and a patriot' (Plut. Cic. 49.3). 
The Criminal Courts 
Before 149 BC trials were held before the people at assemblies. Then 
in 149 the first permanent court (quaestio, 'public inquiry') was 

XXVI 
Introduction 
established, to try charges of extortion. Further courts were added in 
time, both permanent and temporary, with different rules governing 
each one; from 123, the juries seem usually to have been made up 
exclusively of equites. If an individual was accused of a crime, he 
would be brought before the relevant court; or if no court existed to 
try that crime, he could be tried before the people at an assembly (for 
convenience, this discussion will refer to male defendants, although 
women could also be prosecuted). For minor offences, summary 
action might be taken by a magistrate. 
This system of criminal justice, which had been created piece-
meal, was replaced by the dictator Sulla in 81. Seven new permanent 
courts were established to try the major crimes, namely murder and 
poisoning (the first trial to take place in this court \vas that of 
Roscius); 
forgery; 
extortion; 
treason; 
electoral 
malpractice; 
embezzlement; and assault. Each court was presided over by a prae-
tor, but the praetor had no discretion over the sentence: the penalties 
were fixed by law. There was no appeal to the people. The juries were 
composed exclusively of senators. 
Sulla's courts survived virtually unchanged until the principate: 
they were the only reforms of his which lasted. The senatorial juries, 
however, proved controversial (as Cicero implies in Pro Roscio 
Amerino and explains at length in In Verrem I), and in 70 the lex 
Aurelia replaced them with new juries consisting of one-third 
senators, one-third equites, and one-third tribuni aerarii ('treasury 
tribunes'). It is not clear precisely what the tribzmi aerarii were, but 
Cicero treats them as equites (there was probably a lower property 
qualification); essentially, then, the new 'mixed' juries were one-
third senatorial and two-thirds equestrian. This happy compromise 
ended the bitter controversy over whether juries ought to be com-
posed of senators or of equites. Roscius was tried before a senatorial 
jury, but Murena, Archias, Caelius, and Milo were tried before 
mixed juries. 
Later other permanent courts were added to Sulla's original 
seven, for example the court for violence, the court in which Caelius 
was tried, established in (perhaps) 70. There were not enough prae-
tors to preside over these courts, however, so the magistrate in 
charge would be a more junior iudex quaestionis ('court judge'), 
chosen from among those who had been aediles the previot1s year. 
Temporary courts continued to be set up as and when needed, for 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction 
XXVll 
example the sacrilege court, appointed to try Clodius after the Bona 
Dea scandal in 6r. 
There was no public prosecutor at Rome: criminal prosecutions 
were always undertaken by private individuals. A man who had 
broken the law would generally be prosecuted by the person who had 
suffered as a result of his crime: thus Murena was prosecuted by 
Sulpicius, his unsuccessful rival for the consulship of 62. Some-
times, however, he might be prosecuted simply by an enemy, in 
pursuance of a feud (inimicitiae). The courts were one of the princi-
pal arenas in which the business of politics at Rome was played out: 
if you wanted to get rid of a political opponent, you prosecuted him 
and brought about his exile; if you failed, he might then prosecute 
you. No one could be prosecuted while holding a senior public office, 
so politicians would sometimes seek election to a magistracy in order 
to escape an impending prosecution; Clodius and Milo dodged each 
other in this way in the sos. 
Sometimes, again, a man who had broken the law would arrange 
for a friend to prosecute him: the friend would deliberately put up a 
weak case, and he would be acquitted of his crime. But in cases 
where more than one person came forward with the same charge, a 
divinatio ('inquiry') was held, and the jury would decide which one 
should be allo·wed to undertake the prosecution. It was by this means 
that Cicero was chosen to prosecute Verres in 70, rather than Verres' 
crony Caecilius. 
Prosecutors were often young men, hoping to attract attention 
and make a name for themselves. Successful prosecutors, if senators, 
were awarded their victim's insignia ('marks of honour', such as the 
purple-bordered toga (toga praetexta) of a curule magistrate), and 
also acceded to his rank in the senatorial hierarchy; but this must 
have been an invidious honour. It was not advisable for a young man 
to make a habit of prosecuting: it would make him enemies, and 
prosecuting was in any case seen as a hateful business, to be avoided 
unless there were a special reason or duty requiring one to undertake 
it. The best policy was perhaps to prosecute once, so as to be noticed, 
and then keep to defence. This is what Cicero did (with the excep-
tion of one prosecution in 52 or 5 I); and in prosecuting Verres (in 
70) he had the advantage of accusing someone whose guilt was 
manifest and shocking. 
In fifth-century Athens, defendants spoke for themselves in court, 

XXVIll 
Introduction 
employing a speech-writer (logographos) if necessary, but at Rome it 
was more normal to find an advocate (patronus) to speak on one's 
behalf Patronage was a key feature of Roman society: patrons gave 
assistance and protection to their clients, who in return waited on 
their patrons at home and in the street and voted for them at elec-
tions. But of course the situation in court was different in that the 
defendant could be of higher social status than the advocate: Cicero 
was not socially of as high a rank as many of his clients. Advocates 
were not supposed to accept fees or gifts for their services in court 
(this was specifically forbidden by the lex Cim·ia de donis et muneribus 
of 204): they were acting as patrons, out of duty, and not for mercen-
ary motives. Usually, therefore, an advocate would undertake a 
defence in order to repay a favour (Cicero defended various people 
who had supported him in the Catilinarian crisis or at the time of his 
exile); or he would do it in the hope of receiving support at an 
election, or even in the expectation of a legacy. If there was really no 
other kind of repayment that the defendant could make, a low-
interest or interest-free loan might be accepted, as happened when 
Cicero defended Publius Sulla in 62. No one worried very much 
about the lex Cincia, which probably seemed rather quaint. 
The tradition of advocacy had an important effect on the speeches 
that were made. It meant, first, that the speeches would be of a 
highly professional standard: a defendant would naturally seck out 
the most eloquent advocate he could find to speak for him. Secondly, 
advocacy introduces into the speeches an additional, complicating 
element. If a man is defending himself, he will merely have to pres-
ent his own character in a good light and his opponent's in a bad 
light (Roman juries put great weight on a man's character, partly 
because evidence was often unreliable). But if an advocate is speaking 
on behalf of someone else, his speech will naturally seek to make 
capital out of his own character as well as that of the defendant and 
of his opponent. Sometimes the advocate's character and standing 
might compensate for his client's character failings: if the jury like 
the speaker and approve of him, they may perhaps give his client the 
benefit of the doubt. In the speeches of his consulship and after-
wards, Cicero makes much of his own authority (auctoritas): this is 
something he could deploy against an opponent, particularly a 
young one, with devastating results. 
Trials were held in the forum (hence the term 'forensic' oratory), 
www.ebook3000.com

Introduction 
XXIX 
in the open air. The presiding magistrate with his scribes and attend-
ants sat up on a high platform (tribuna[) at the front of the court, 
while the jury probably sat on benches raised only slightly off the 
ground (the ancient evidence on these points is unclear). Facing 
them and also seated on benches \vere the two opposing parties, the 
prosecutors on one side and the defendant with his advocates on the 
other, each party accompanied by their legal advisers (advocates were 
not necessarily experts in the law), family, friends, and witnesses. 
Behind the benches a ring (corona) of bystanders stood to watch the 
performance, allowing the speakers when they wished to turn from 
the jury to address the public directly. 
The defendant wore the shabby dress of mourning and neglected 
to wash or shave. It was taken amiss if he did not comply with these 
requirements. Publius Rutilius Rufus, put on ·trial for extortion in 
92, refused (being a Stoic) to put on mourning, and was convicted. 
The case was famous as a miscarriage of justice by an equestrian 
jury: Rutilius, who had protected the provincials from the exactions 
of the equestrian tax-farmers (publicani), went into exile at Smyrna, 
to live as an honoured citizen among the provincials he was alleged 
to have oppressed. Milo likewise proudly refused to put on mourn-
ing (although he had done so for Sestius in 56), and was convicted. 
The prosecutors' speeches were heard first, then those of the 
defence, and only after the end of the speeches was the evidence 
taken. In his speeches we therefore find Cicero speculating about 
what the evidence is going to be. The only speeches in which he 
refers to evidence as having already been taken are extortion 
speeches. Trials for extortion were held in two stages (separated by 
an adjournment of at least one day, or comperendinatio), so that in the 
speeches of the second hearing reference could be made back to the 
evidence taken at the end of the first hearing. If slaves gave evidence, 
it had to be under torture. They were not allowed, however, to be 
examined against their master, except in trials for incest and in the 
specific case of the Catilinarian conspiracy. The value or worthless-
ness of evidence extracted under torture was a standard topic (locus 
communis) in oratory, and is found a number of times in Cicero's 
speeches. The cruelty of torture was not relevant to the orators' 
arguments, and receives no comment. 
The number of jurors was specified individually for each court, 
but seventy-five seems to have been a usual number, twenty-five 

XXX 
Introduction 
jurors being selected from each of the three categories. Milo, how-
ever, was tried by an entirely different method, under the lex Pom-
peia de vi: 360 jurors heard the evidence (which, contrary to usual 
practice, was taken first); eighty-one of them, chosen by lot, heard 
the speeches; each side then rejected fifteen jurors, and the remain-
ing fifty-one (eighteen senators, seventeen equites, and sixteen tribuni 
aerarii) cast their votes. 
The jurors were not allowed to confer amongst themselves (since 
some might attempt to intimidate others), and they voted in a secret 
ballot immediately after the evidence had been taken. The presiding 
magistrate gave no summing-up (he was unlikely to be an expert in 
the law, and was only holding his office for a single year); he had no 
means of determining or influencing the verdict, and did not vote. 
The jurors were given wax tablets with 'A' (for absolvo, 'I acquit') 
inscribed on one side and 'C' (for condemno, 'I convict') on the other, 
and they would rub out one letter or the other (or both, to abstain), 
and drop the tablet into an urn. The verdict was reached by a 
majority vote; if the votes were equal the defendant was acquitted. 
If the defendant was found guilty, the penalty was officially death. 
But since he was at no point taken into custody, even after the pro-
nouncement of the sentence, it was always possible for him to evade 
his punishment by retiring into self-imposed or 'voluntary' exile in a 
federate (thus technically non-Roman) state. He ceased to be a 
Roman citizen, and suffered aquae et ignis interdictio ('debarment 
from water and fire'), in other words outlawry. Should he ever return 
to Italy, he could be killed with impunity. Exile was therefore not a 
penalty, but a means of avoiding· a penalty (and it was a recourse 
available only to the wealthy: humbler persons seem to have been 
summarily executed). Before the enfranchisement of Italy in 9o-89, 
a convicted criminal could retire to Praeneste (only 23 miles from 
Rome) or Naples, but in the Ciceronian period he would have to 
leave Italy: Massilia (Marseilles), an oasis of Greek culture and 
refined living, was a favoured place, the refuge of both Verres and 
Milo. Criminals' property was supposed to be confiscated, but very 
little seems actually to have been seized. They conveyed it to their 
friends and relatives, and lived out their exile in luxury. To many of 
them perhaps, the heat of the city, the interminable debates in the 
senate, and the constant struggle to keep up with the Luculli were 
things that, in time, they could learn to live without. 
www.ebook3000.com

NOTE ON THE TRANSLATION 
CICERO's orations are not written in the language of ordinary 
speech: instead, they are composed in a highly artificial style which 
must have impressed, astonished, and mesmerized those who lis-
tened to it. Sentences are long, commonly as long as a third of a page 
of a modern printed text and sometimes longer. The style is 'peri-
odic'; that is, once the sentence or 'period' has begun, the listener 
has to wait some time before the various subordinate clauses have 
been delivered and the sense is complete. While the period is evolv-
ing, the listener has certain expectations about how it is going to 
continue and end (grammatically, and in sense);and when it is finally 
completed these expectations are either fulfilled (giving the listener a 
sense of satisfaction) or, more rarely, cheated (startling the listener). 
The clauses which make up the period can sometimes be mere pad-
ding, but this is unusual; often they make the argument more 
impressive or powerful, and in addition they serve to delay the com-
pletion of the period, providing a greater feeling of satisfaction when 
the grammar and sense are finally completed. The clauses them-
selves and the words or groups of words within them are often 
arranged in carefully balanced pairs, sometimes so as to form a con-
trast, or sometimes in a symmetrical pattern; or they can be arranged 
in threes, with increasing weight placed on each item, or greater 
weight placed on the final or second and final item. Formal English 
style also uses these techniques; thus I have written 'impressed, 
astonished, and mesmerized' above, providing more terms than is 
strictly necessary for the sense ('mesmerized', the strongest term 
and therefore placed last, would have sufficed). In periodic style, the 
most important part of the period is the end (the beginning is the 
next most important), because it is here that the sense of completion 
is delivered. In accordance with the techniques of Hellenistic Greek 
oratory, Cicero always makes sure that the ends of his periods, and 
even of the more important clauses ('cola'), sound right: certain 
rhythmical patterns ('clausulae') are favoured and others (mainly 
those which resemble verse) avoided. This 'prose rhythm' is one 
of the most prominent features of his style. Scholars have tried to 
analyse it, with varying results. It must have taken a great deal of 

XXX!l 
Note on the Translation 
training to be able to achieve the appropriate rhythms automatically, 
without thinking about it, in the way that Cicero could (Orat. zoo). 
Roman audiences were discriminating, and appreciated the skilful 
use of prose rhythm: there is an anecdote about a group of listeners 
bursting into applause when an orator produced some striking 
cadences (Orat. 213-14; cf. 168). Besides rhythm, there are many 
other techniques used by Cicero to enliven his prose, such as rhet-
orical questions (questions that do not expect an answer), anaphora 
(repetition of a word or phrase in successive clauses), asyndeton 
(omission of connectives), apostrophe (turning away to address an 
absent person or thing), exclamation, alliteration and assonance, 
wordplay, and metaphor. 
The policy I have adopted in this translation has been to preserve 
as much of Cicero's style and artistry as possible; and I have tried to 
make the translation strike the reader in as near as possible the same 
way as I think the Latin text would have struck its original reader-
ship. I am emphatically not of the view that Cicero's rhetoric must be 
sacrificed in order to achieve readability. It may sometimes be the 
case that reading a translation in which the rhetoric has been pre-
served involves a little more effort than reading one in which it has 
been removed. But Cicero meant his speeches to involve some effort 
on the part of the reader: he was not writing in the language of 
ordinary speech. 
I have chosen to render long Latin sentences by long English ones. 
If a sentence would have struck its original readers as a long one, 
then I think it needs to be rendered by one or more sentences that 
would strike a modern reader as long. So a sentence that is ten lines 
long (i.e. for Latin, long but not excessively long) might best be 
rendered by two English sentences of five lines each (i.e. two sen-
tences that in English are long but not excessively so). To chop up 
the original sentence into five sentences of two lines each, or ten of 
one line each, may conceivably make the text more readable, but it 
will misrepresent the original as surely as if the wrong words are 
chosen in the translation. 
Where possible, I have retained the periodicity of the Latin: I have 
tried to keep the clauses and sometimes even the actual words in the 
same order as they occur in the original. Each word or clause con-
tains an idea, and in the original these ideas are conveyed to the 
reader in a particular order; so the translator should as far as possible 
www.ebook3000.com

Note on the Translation 
XXX111 
avoid doing violence to that order. If a significant idea is withheld 
until the end of a sentence (as commonly happens in periodic style), 
then it is essential that the translator also withhold it until the end; 
shuffling the clauses around for the sake of readability will destroy 
the effect that the author has created. 
Prose rhythm is a feature of the original that cannot normally be 
reproduced. But good English does avoid certain rhythms, and the 
translator can at least ensure that the English he is writing does not 
strike the ear harshly. 
I have retained Cicero's rhetorical devices as far as possible;. C&es-
tions have been translated as questions, exclamations as exclama-
tions, direct speech as direct speech, and indirect speech as indirect 
speech. It is true that we do not use rows of rhetorical questions in 
normal usage, but then neither did the Romans: Roman oratory was 
meant to sound theatrical and high-flown, so a translation ought to 
sound that way too. 
I have tried to reproduce the many examples of alliteration, asson-
ance, wordplay, and metaphor that feature in Cicero's writing. It was 
very often impossible to provide an alliterative effect using the same 
letter as Cicero, and in such cases I have introduced alliteration of 
some other letter; the same may be said with regard to assonance. In 
three places it has been necessary to explain a play on words in the 
explanatory notes. 
I have been careful not to introduce material that has no basis in 
the Latin: however readable such flourishes may be, they have no 
place in the translation. Similarly, I have been careful not to omit any 
of the original. The reader may be unaware of the extent to which 
some translators take liberties in this regard, adding or subtracting 
material in a misguided attempt to ease the flow, and thereby provid-
ing not translation but paraphrase. If Cicero's meaning has been 
correctly understood (not always an easy matter), it ought not to be 
necessary to ease the flow of his writing. 
The translator needs to decide how he is going to render the 
Roman names that are mentioned in the text: prominent Romans 
generally had at least three names (praenomen, nomen, and cognomen), 
but normally only one or two are used when the person is referred 
to. My own practice has been to translate the names exactly as Cicero 
gives them, adding (where necessary) an explanatory note at the end 
of the book giving the full form of the name together with any other 

XXXIV 
Note on the Translation 
relevant information. This allows the translation to present an 
accurate reflection of the Romans' customs of naming. I have, how-
ever, made an exception in Pro Roscio Amerino, in the case of 
Roscius' relations Titus Roscius Magnus and Titus Roscius Capito. 
Cicero refers to the first of these men as Roscius or Titus Roscius, 
and to the second as Roscius, Titus Roscius, Titus Capito, or Capito. 
The scope for confusion here is considerable, and so I have referred 
to the two men as Magnus and Capito throughout. 
Finally, I should mention the paragraphing-the first matter to 
which a translator turns his attention. The medieval manuscripts of 
Cicero's speeches do not preserve Cicero's original paragraphing (if 
there ever was any, which is unlikely), and since the text of Cicero is 
very difficult to divide up, modern editions tend to insert new para-
graphs only every several pages. The decision as to where to start a 
new paragraph requires one to think very hard about the structure of 
the argument, and I have found this almost the most difficult aspect 
of my task. I have re-paragraphed all five speeches afresh, and I hope 
that the new paragraphing will substantially aid the understanding 
of these speeches. 
Translating Cicero's speeches is not an easy task. It is also, I 
believe, a task which involves a heavy responsibility. Far more people 
read Latin authors in translation than in the original, and their 
judgement of the author will be determined by the quality of the 
translation. Cicero is one of the world's greatest writers; but in 
a poor translation his merits will not come across. In this new 
translation I have tried to enable the reader to see him as he really 
is-showy, forceful, funny, and alive. 
www.ebook3000.com

NOTE ON THE LATIN TEXT 
FoR each speech I have translated the most satisfactory extstmg 
edition of the Latin text, with occasional departures from it. These 
editions, and my departures from them, are listed below. The 
numerous differences of paragraphing and punctuation are not 
recorded (such features have no ancient authority, but are added by 
editors according to their understanding of the sense). 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
Text: A. C. Clark, Oxford Classical Text (Oxford, 1905). 
34 
non est ferendum: I translate num estferendum? 
64 
Caelium: I translate Cloelium. 
I 12 
maxime videtur grave: I translate minime videtur !eve. 
I33 
quid praeco enumeraret: I translate praeconem enurztiare. 
14I 
for tunas arasque nostras: I translate fortunasque nostras. 
Pro Murena 
Text: J. Adamietz, Texte zur Forschung, 55 (Darmstadt, I989). 
I7 
Caeliis: I translate Coeliis. 
25 
ab ipsis cautis: I translate ab ipsis his cautis. 
3 I 
tsi qua: I translate aequa. 
37 
omnis: I translate omni. 
42 
tcatenarum: I translate accusatorum. 
43 
Servius: I omit. 
47 
tpraerogationum: I translate promulgationem. 
64 
tseposuisses aut: I translate si dixisses. 
77 
Sin etiam <si> noris tamen ... nomen petis quasi incertum sit: I 
translate Sin iam noris tamen<ne> ... cum petis quasi incertus 
sis? 
86 
idem vos: I translate idem et. 
squalore et sordibus confectus: I translate <in> squalore et sordibus 
confectus morbo. 

XXXVI 
Note on the Latin Text 
Pro Archia 
Text: A. C. Clark, Oxford Classical Text (Oxford, I9II). 
5 
<et Locrenses>: I omit. 
z8 
adornavi: I translate adoptavi. 
31 
iudiciis: I translate ingeniis. 
Pro Caelio 
Text: T. Maslowski, Teubner (Stuttgart and Leipzig, 1995). 
11obilem: I omit. 
I4 facilitatis: I translate facultatis. 
etiam bonis: I translate bonis. 
18 
<eam>: I omit. 
34 
11011 atavum: I translate non abavum 11011 atavum. 
36 
parasti: I translate paratos. 
38 jili: I translate Caeli. 
78 
hominem ... inquinatum: I accept the placing of these words 
after vidistis. 
Pro Milone 
Text of Asconius: A. C. Clark, Oxford Classical Text (Oxford, 1907). 
33.6 
Clodio: I translate Cloelio. 
33.23 
ac Cirero ipse: I translate atque ipse. 
34-13 
Leo. L. Herennius Balbus P. Clodi: I translate Leo, et L. 
Herennius Balbus. P. Clodi. 
34· q-r 5 postulavit; eadem tempore Caelius fami!iam: I translate pos-
tu!avit eadem tempore Caelius; et familiam. 
55.20 
Clodius: I translate C!oelius. 
Text of Cicero: A. C. Clark, Oxford Classical Text (Oxford, 19182). 
27 
a Lanuvinis: I omit. 
quod erat dictator Lanuvi Milo: I omit. 
quae il!o ipso die lzabita est: I omit. 
www.ebook3000.com

Note on the Latin Text 
33 
Clodi: I translate Cloeli. 
35 
Plotia: I translate Plautia. 
46 
omnes scilicet Lanuvini: I omit. 
55 
C/odius ipse Clodius: I translate Clodius. 
57 
terrore: I translate tortore. 
66 
tametsi: I translate quod si tamen. 
75 
Aponio: I translate Apinio. 
96 
anna: I omit. 
XXXVll 

SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY 
Articles (but not books) in foreign languages are excluded. 
General 
Alexander, M. C., Trials in the Late Roman Republic; I 49 BC to so BC 
(Phomix, Suppl. 26; Toronto etc., 1990). 
Atkinson,]. M., Our Masters' Voices: The Language and Bol~)' Language 11( 
Politics (London and New York, 1984). 
Berry, D. H., and Heath, M., 'Oratory and declamation', in S. E. Porter 
(ed.), Handbook of Classical Rhetoric in th.e Hellenistic Period 330 BC-AD 
400 (Leiden, 1997), 393-420 (S. Rose., Mil.). 
Broughton, T R. S., The Magistrates ofthe Roman Republic, i (New York, 
1951), ii (New York, 1952), iii (Atlanta, 1986). 
Clarke, M. L., rev. Berry, D. H., Rhetoric at Rome: A Historical Surve_i 
(London, 1996). 
Classen, C. J., Redzt-Rhetorik-Politik: Untersudzzmgen zu Ciceros rhetori-
sdzer Stmtegie (Darmstadt, 1985) (Mur.). 
Craig, C. P., Form as Argument in Cicero's Speeches: A Stul~}' of Dilemma 
(APA American Classical Studies, 31; Atlanta, 1993) (S. Rose., Cael.). 
Dorey, T A., (ed.), Cicero (London, 1964), esp. ch. 3 by R. G. M. Nisbet 
(S. Rose., Cael., Mil.). 
Douglas, A. E., Ciceri (Oxford, 1979). 
Greenidge, A. H.]., The Legal Procedure of Cicero s Time (Oxford, 1901). 
Gruen, E. S., Roman Politics and the Criminal Courts, I 49-78 BC (Cam-
bridge, Mass., 1968). 
The Last Genemtion of the Roman Republic (London, 1974). 
Habicht, C., Cicero the Politician (Baltimore and London, 1990). 
Jones, A. H. M., The Criminal Courts of the Roman Republic and Principate 
(Oxford, 1972). 
Kennedy, G. A., 'The Rhetoric of Advocacy in Greece and Rome', AJP 89 
(1968), 419-36 (S. Rose.). 
-- The Art ofRhetoric in the Roman World, 300 BC-AD 300 (Princeton, 
1972). 
Laurand, L., Etudes sur le style des discours de Cidron\ 3 vols. (Paris, 
1936-8). 
Ludwig, W., and Stroh, W., (eels.), Eloquence et rhitorique chez Ciceron 
(Entretiens sur l'antiquite classique, 28; Geneva, 1982) (A. D. 'Leeman: 
Mur.). 
www.ebook3000.com

Select Bibliography 
XXXIX 
MacKendrick, P., The Speeches of Cicero: Comext, Law, Rhetoric (London, 
I995) (il!Jur., Arch., Gael., Mil.). 
May, J. M., Trials of Character: The Eloquence of Ciceronian Ethos (Chapel 
Hill and London, I988) (S. Rose., Mur., Gael., Mil.). 
Mitchell, T. N., Cicero: The Ascending Years (New Haven and London, 
I979). 
-- Cicero: 
The 
Senior Statesman 
(New Haven and 
London, 
1991). 
Neumeister, C., Grundsiitze der forensischen Rhetorik gezeigt an Gerichts-
rerlen Ciceros (Munich, I964). 
Powell,]. G. E, and Paterson, J.J., (eds), Cicero the Advocate (Oxford, 
2004) (D. H. Berry: Arch.). 
Rawson, E. D., Cicero: A Portrait (London, 1975). 
Riggsby, A. JVl., 'Did the Romans Believe in their Verdicts?', Rhetorica, IS 
(I997), 235-51. 
. 
Shackleton Bailey, D. R., Onomasticon to Cicero's Speeches2 (Stuttgart and 
Leipzig, I992). 
Solmsen, E, 'Cicero's First Speeches: A Rhetorical Analysis', TAPA 69 
(I938), 542-56 (S. Rose.). 
Stockton, D. L., Cicero: A Political Biography (Oxford, I97I). 
Stroh, W., Taxis und Taktik: Die advokatische Dispositionskunst in Ciceros 
Geridi!Sreden (Stuttgart, I97S) (S. Rose., Gael.). 
Tatum, W.]., The Patrician Tribune: Pub/ius Clodius Pulcher (Chapel Hill 
and London, I999). 
Vasaly, A., Representations: Images of the 11iorld in Ciceronian Oratorv 
(Berkeley etc., I993) (S. Rose., Gael.). 
Wiedemann, T. E. ]., Cicero and the End of the Roman Republic (London, 
I994). 
Winterbottom, M., 'Schoolroom and Courtroom', in B. Vickers (ed.), 
Rhetoric Revalued (Medieval & Renaissance Texts & Studies, I9; New 
York, I982). 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
The following items are additional to the bibliography given by Craig (see 
under 'General'), 27 n. I. 
Donkin, E. H., Cicero: Pro Roscio Amerino2 (London, 1916). 
Harris, W. V., Rome in Etruria and Umbria (Oxford, 1971), 271-4. 
Kinsey, T. E., 'The Dates of the Pro Roscio Amerino and Pro Quinctio', 
A'lnemosyne, 20 (1967), 61-7. 
Kinsey, T. E., 'The Political Insignificance of Cicero's Pro Roscio', LCM 7 
(1982), 39-40. 

xl 
Select Bibliography 
Kinsey, T. E., 'The Sale of the Property ofRoseius of Ameria: How Illegal 
was it?', AC 57 (1988), 296-7. 
Nicol, J. C., Cicero: Pro Roscio Amerino2 (Cambridge, 1934). 
Seager, R. J., 'The Political Significance of Cicero's Pro Roscio', LCM 7 
(1982), ID-12. 
Stock, St G., Cicero: Pro Roscio Amerino2 (Oxford, 1901). 
Pro Murena 
Adamietz, J., Cicero: Pro Murena (Texte zur Forschung, ss; Darmstadt, 
1989). 
Ayers, D. M., 'Cato's Speech against Murena', CJ 49 (1954), 245-53. 
Craig, C. P., 'Cato's Stoicism and the Understanding of Cicero's Speech 
for Murena', TAR4 II6 (1986), 229-39. 
Freese, J. H., Cicero: Pro Murena (London, r 894). 
Heitland, W. E., Cicero: Pro Murena (Cambridge, 1874). 
Macdonald, C., Cicero: Pro Murena (London, 1969). 
Sanclbach, F H., The Stoics2 (Bristol, 1989). 
Pro Archia 
Berry, D. H., 'The Pride and Prejudices of a Roman Jury', Omnibus, 38 
( 1999), 12-14. 
Gotoff, H. C., Cicero's Elegant Szy!e: An Anazysis of the Pro Archia 
(Urbana etc., 1979). 
Porter, W. M., 'Cicero's Pro Archia and the Responsibilities of Reading', 
Rhetorica, 8 (1990), 137-52. 
Reid, J. S., Cicero: Pro Archia2 (Cambridge, r883). 
Taylor, J. H., 'Political Motives in Cicero's Defense of Archias', AJP 73 
( 1952), 62-70. 
Vretska, H. and K., Cicem: Pro Archia (Texte zur Forschung, 31; 
Darmstadt, 1979). 
Wallach, B. P., 'Cicero's Pro Archia and the Topics', RhM 132 (r989), 
313-31. 
Wiseman, T. P., 'Pete nobiles amicos: Poets and Patrons in Late Republican 
Rome', in B. K. Gold (eel.), Literary and Artistic Patronage in Ancient 
Rome (Austin, Tex., 1982), 28-49. 
Pro Caelio 
Austin, R. G., Cicero: Pro Caelio3 (Oxford, 1960). 
Clauss, J. ]., 'The Ignoble Consistency of M. Caelius Rufus', Athenaeum, 
78 (1990), 531-40. 
' 
Dorey, T. A., 'Cicero, Cloclia, and the Pro Caelio', GC5R 5 (1958), 
175-80. 
www.ebook3000.com

Select Bibliography 
xli 
Geffcken, K. A., 'Comedy in the Pro Caelio with an Appendix on the In 
Clodium et Curionem' (Mnemosyne, Suppl. 30; Leiden, 1973). 
Gotoff, H. C., 'Cicero's Analysis of the Prosecution Speeches in the Pro 
Caelio: An Exercise in Practical Criticism', CP 81 (1986), 122-32. 
Ramage, E. S., 'Clodia in Cicero's Pro Caelio', in D. F Bright and E. S. 
Ramage (eds.), Classical Texts and their Traditions: Studies in Honor of 
C. R. Trahman (Chico, Calif., 1984), 201-11. 
--'Strategy and Methods in Cicero's Pro Caelio', Atene e Roma, 30 
(1985), 1-8. 
Skinner, M. B., 'Clodia Metelli', TAPA 113 (1983), 273-87. 
Wiseman, T. P., Catullus and his World: A Reappraisal (Cambridge, 1985), 
chs. 2 and 3· 
Pro Milone 
Berry, D. H., 'Pompey's Legal Knowledge-or Lack of it: Cic. Mil. 70 
and the Date of Pro Milone', Historia, 42 (1993), 502-4-
--'Cicero's Masterpiece?', Omnibus, 25 (1993), 8-IO.' 
Clark, A. C., Cicero: Pro Milone (Oxford, 1895) (also contains a commen-
tary on Asconius). 
Clark, M. E., and Ruebel,]. S., 'Philosophy and Rhetoric in Cicero's Pro 
Milone', Rh.M 128 (1985), 57-72. 
Colson, F H., Cicero: Pro Milone (London, 1893). 
Crawford, ]. W., M. Tullius Cicero: The Lost and Unpublished Orations 
(Hypomnemata, 8o; 1984), 21o-18. 
Dyck, A. R., 'Narrative Obfuscation, Philosophical topoi, and Tragic 
Patterning in Cicero's Pro Milone', HSCP 98 (1998), 219-41. 
Lintott, A. W., 'Cicero and Milo',JRS 64 (1974), 62-78. 
Marshall, B. A., A Historical Commenta1y on Asconius (Columbia, Mo., 
1985). 
Reid,]. S., Cicero: Pro Milone (Cambridge, 1894). 
Ruebel,]. S., 'The Trial of Milo in 52 BC: A Chronological Study', TAPA 
109 (1979), 231-49· 
Settle,]. N., 'The Trial of Milo and the Other Pro Milone', TAP.A 94 
( 1963), z68-8o. 
Stone, A. M., 'Pro A1ilone: Cicero's Second Thoughts', Antichthon, 14 
(1980), 88-111. 
Further Reading in Oxford World's Classics 
Caesar, The Civil War, trans. and ed.]. R. Carter. 
-- The Gallic War, trans. and ed. Carolyn Hammond. 
Catullus, The Poems ofCatullus, trans. and ed. Guy Lee. 
Cicero, The Nature of the Gods, trans. and ed. P. G. Walsh. 

xlii 
Select Bibliography 
Cicero, The Republic and The Lams, trans. Niall Rudd, ed. Jonathan Powell. 
Plutarch, Roman Lives: A Selection 11{ Eight Lives, trans. Robin Waterfield, 
ed. Philip A. Stadter. 
www.ebook3000.com

CHRONOLOGY 
The dates arc BC. 
106 
Cicero born (3 January). 
91-87 Social War; Cicero serves under Gnaeus Pompeius Su·abo (89) and 
Sulla (88); Italians win Roman citizenship (90, 89). 
88 
Sulla occupies Rome. 
88-85 First Mithridatic War. 
87 
Marius and Cinna occupy Rome; domination of Cinna (87-84). 
86 
Marius dies. 
83-81 Second Mithridatic War. 
82 
Sulla occupies Rome and is made dictator (82-81); proscriptions 
(82 to 1 June 81 ). 
81 
Sulla's reforms, including establishment of seven permanent 
criminal courts with senatorial juries; Pro Qpinctio. 
8o 
Pro Roscio /}merino; Cicero defends the freedom of a woman fi·om 
Arrctium (8o or 79). 
79-77 Travels abroad; visits Molon of Rhodes. 
78 
Sulla dies. 
75 
Cicero quaestor in western Sicily; henceforward a senator. 
73-71 Vcrrcs governor of Sicily. 
73-63 Third Mithridatic War. 
70 
Pompey and Crassus consuls; In Verrem; lex Aurelia makes juries 
two-thirds equestrian. 
69 
Cicero plebeian acdile; Pro Fonteio. 
67 
Lucullus relieved of Mithridatic command; lex Gabinia g1ves 
Pompey command against pirates. 
66 
Cicero praetor in charge of extortion court; Pro lege iVlanilia; lex 
Manilia gives Pompey Mithridatic command; Pro Cluentio. 
63 
Cicero consul; De lege agraria; Pro Rabirio perduellionis reo; Cati-
linarian conspiracy; Pro lvlurena; execution of the conspirators 
(5 December). 
62 
Catilinc defeated and killed; Pro Sulla; Pro Ardzia; Bona Dea 
scandal; Pompey returns to Italy. 

xliv 
Chronology 
6I 
Clodius acquitted of sacrilege. 
6o 
Publication of In Cati!inam; formation of 'first triumvirate'. 
59 
Caesar consul; Clodius adopted into a plebeian family; Pro Fiacco. 
58 
Clodius tribune; Cicero exiled; Caesar conquers Gaul (58-5o). 
57 
Cicero recalled; returns to Rome (4 September); Post reditum in 
senatu; Post reditum ad quirites; De domo sua. 
56 
Pro Sestio; In Vatinium; Pro Cae!io; 'first triumvirate' reaffirmed; 
De haruspicum responsis; De provinciis wnsularibus; Pro Balbo. 
55 
Pompey and Crassus consuls; In Pisonem; Cicero begins philo-
sophical and rhetorical works. 
54 
Defends Vatinius; Pro P!ancio; Pro Scauro; defends Gabinius (54 
or 53). 
53 
Crassus killed at Can·hae; Cicero is made augur (53 or 52); Pro 
Rabirio Postumo (53-52). 
52 
Clodius killed by Milo (I8 January); Pompey appointed sole con-
sul; Cicero defends Milo (7 April); publication of Pro Milone (52 
or SI). 
5 I -so Cicero governor of Cilicia. 
so 
Hortensius dies. 
49 
Caesar dictator; Civil War begins; Pompey crosses to Greece (I7 
March); Caesar visits Cicero (28 March); Cicero crosses to Greece 
(7 June). 
48 
Pompey defeated at Pharsalus (9 August) and murdered in Egypt 
(28 September); Cicero returns to Brundisium; Milo and Caelius 
killed in revolt against Caesar. 
47 
Cicero pardoned and allowed to move on to Rome. 
46 
Pompeians defeated at Thapsus (6 February); Cato commits 
suicide; Cicero resumes philosophical and rhetorical works; Pro 
Marcello; Pro Ligario. 
45 
Pompcians defeated at Munda (I7 March); Pro rege Deiotaro. 
44 
Caesar and Antony consuls; Caesar dictator perpetuo (February); 
Caesar assassinated (IS March); Octavius named as his heir; 
Cicero falls out with Antony (September); Philippics I-4· 
43 
Civil War; Philippics 5-I4; Antony declared public enemy (April); 
Octavian occupies Rome and is elected consul (August); forma-
tion of 'second triumvirate'; proscriptions; Cicero murdered 
(7 December). 
www.ebook3000.com

DEFENCE SPEECHES 

www.ebook3000.com

DATE: 80 BC 
PRO ROSCIO AMERINO 
('FOR ROSCIUS OF AMERIA') 
DEFENDANT: Sextus Roscius 
LAw: lex Cornelia de sicariis et venejicis (Cornelian law concerning 
murderers and poisoners) 
CHARGE: murder of Sextus Roscius (defendant's father) 
PROSECUTORS: Gaius Erucius, Titus Roscius Magnus 
DEFENCE ADVOCATE: Marcus Tullius Cicero 
PRESIDING MAGISTRATE: Marcus Fannius 
VERDICT: acquittal 
Pro Roscio Amerino ('For Roscius of Ameria', so calleq to distinguish it 
from the speech for a different Roscius, Pro Roscio comoedo, 'For Roscius 
the comic actor') was Cicero's first speech in a criminal court (§ 59), given 
when he was just 26 years old. In it he bravely spoke out against some of 
the more unsavoury aspects of the Sullan regime (although taking care to 
absolve Sulla himself from blame), and, winning his case, made a name for 
himself which brought him a flood of commissions. The speech shows 
him in a better light than almost any other speech, with the orator placing 
himself in some degree of danger (just how much is disputed) in order to 
save an innocent man falsely accused by his enemies of murdering his 
father. Pro Roscio is also important for being closer than any of Cicero's 
other speeches to the artificial, florid, and often flabby 'Asianist' style 
which was then in fashion; soon afterwards he toned down his manner of 
speaking and developed the more restrained and economical style in 
which the great majority of his speeches are written. 
The trial of Sextus Roscius took place against the background of the 
Sullan regime. In 82 BC Sulla recaptured Rome from the Marians, who 
had held it illegally since 87, and had himself appointed dictator 'to write 
laws and reconstitute the state'. The laws he went on to pass were 
designed to restore to the senate the authority and powers it had possessed 
in the years before the Gracchan reforms nearly half a century earlier. The 
criminal justice system was reorganized: seven permanent courts were set 
up to try the major crimes, and juries were to consist exclusively of 
senators. Sulla also set about the punishment of his enemies. Lists were 
posted in the forum of men to be killed, and bounties were offered to the 
killers. The property of men 'proscribed' in this way was confiscated by 
the state and then sold off cheaply at auction to those prepared to bid for 

4 
Pro Roscio Amerino: Introduction 
it. The sons and grandsons of the proscribed, besides losing their inherit-
ance, were debarred from ever holding magisterial office. Worst of all, the 
proscriptions came to be used not just to remove opponents of the new 
order, but as a means of paying off old scores and satisfying private greed. 
Sulla's supporters were able to amass vast fortunes at the expense of those 
who were, or could be represented as being, Sulla's enemies. 
The proscriptions were officially ended on I June 8r (§ 128). Some 
months later the elder Sextus Roscius, the father of Cicero's client (father 
and son shared the same name), was murdered in Rome while returning 
from dinner. He was a rich man, the owner of thirteen farms at Amcria, a 
hill-town in the south of Umbria, about fifty miles north of Rome. Men 
like him, the leaders ofitalian communities, were cultivated by the Roman 
nobility: the great families relied on such men to deliver them the votes of 
their communities whenever a member of the family was standing for 
office. In return, the Italians could expect favours such as letters of 
recommendation or support in the courts, and also presents and invita-
tions to dinner. Roscius spent most of his time in the city courting his 
patrons, and Cicero tells us that they were some of the most prominent 
families in Rome: the Mete IIi, Servilii, and Scipioncs (§ Is). His son, 
meanwhile, preferred to stay in Ameria, where he looked after the family 
farms. During the civil war between the Marians and Sulla (83-82 Be), 
Roscius supported the winning side, that of Sulla and the nobility. This 
was natural in view of the very close links that his patrons, the Mctclli, 
had with Sulla. Caecilia Metella, who died in 8r, was Sulla's wife, and her 
cousin, Quintus Caccilius iVlctcllus Pius, was consul with Sulla in So, the 
year of the younger Roscius' trial. 
Soon after his father's death, Roscius' inheritance was taken fi·om him 
by two of his relations (§§ 87, 88), Titus Roscius Magnus and Titus 
Roscius Capito. This was done by enlisting the help of Chrysogonus, a 
Greek freedman of Sulla's and, according to Cicero, a man of considerable 
influence. After the murder, Magnus and Capito went to sec Chrysogonus, 
and what Cicero calls a 'partnership' was formed. Chrysogonus had the 
dead man's name posthumously entered into the list of the proscribed; his 
property was then confiscated and put up for sale; Chrysogonus bought it 
for a token price; and Capito was given three of the farms, while Magnus 
took possession of the rest on Chrysogonus' behalf. When young Roscius 
attempted to recover his property and clear his father's name, his enemies 
sought to remove him by the ingenious means of accusing him of his 
father's murder. He therefore went for help to the lVletclli. Judging from 
their failure to speak for him at his trial, they refused to help him; at least 
publicly. Possibly (as some scholars have suggested) the case was' beneath 
their notice; more likely, they did not wish to be associated with a case 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Roscio A merino: Introduction . 
5 
which could be seen as hostile to Sulla. Roscius was, however, gtven 
material assistance by Caecilia Metella (a third cousin of the Caecilia 
Metella who had been Sulla's wife), and Cicero in his speech makes the 
most of this indication of Metellan goodwill. Even so, Roscius must have 
been severely disappointed at the failure of his patrons to offer him more 
conspicuous support. 
The lack of a prominent advocate threw Roscius back on the z6-year-
old Cicero, a man of no influence and, as yet, no oratorical reputation. For 
Cicero, the case presented a great opportunity for him to make a name for 
himself. Many murders had been committed in the recent past, but this 
was the first murder trial to be held for some considerable period of time 
(§§ I I, 28), and the first trial to take place in Sulla's new murder court. 
Public interest in the case was therefore intense-and many people were 
looking for a conviction. The trial also had a political dimension-Cicero 
would need to comment on injustices committed, in Sulla's name-and 
this too would bring him public attention. There was certainly an element 
of risk involved: as we have seen, the defence could not count absolutely 
on the support of the Metelli (like Cicero, some scholars have exaggerated 
the degree of support Roscius received from the nobility). But provided 
he took care to dissociate Sulla from Chrysogonus' wrongdoing, Cicero 
might hope to escape reprisals. He doubtless also found it congenial to 
defend an Italian like himself; and of course he had the great advantage of 
having right on his side. 
Roscius' enemies, then, found a prosecutor, Gaius Erucius, and brought 
a charge of parricide. Parricide (which originally meant the murder of any 
free man, but was later restricted to the murder of close relations, particu-
larly parents) was regarded by the Romans as an especially monstrous 
crime. Their ancestors had therefore devised an appropriately gruesome 
punishment for convicted parricides: they were to be stripped, scourged, 
sewn up in a sack together with dog, a cock, a viper, and a monkey, and 
then thrown into a river or the sea to drown (sec§§ 30 (with note), 70). It is 
extremely unlikely, however, that Roscius, if found guilty, would actually 
have had to undergo this punishment, since it seems only to have applied 
to parricides who confessed their guilt (cf. Suctonius, Augustus 33). 
Instead, he would merely have faced the normal punishment which 
obtained in the criminal courts, officially death, but in practice 'voluntary' 
exile in a federate (thus technically non-Roman) state, followed by inter-
diction (debarment from water and fire, in other words outlawry), to 
prevent him returning to Italy. 
The prosecution's case against Roscius was (as far as we can judge) 
extremely weak. They alleged that he did not get on with his father, and 
had murdered him because he was afraid of being disinherited by him 

6 
Pro Roscio Amerino: Introduction 
(§ 52). But they do not seem to have been able to offer any evidence in 
support of their allegation. Moreover, they would not allow the dead 
man's slaves, who had been with him when he was murdered, to be interro-
gated, since these were now the property of Chrysogonus. The greatest 
weakness in their case, however, was the extraordinary contradiction 
between their actions prior to the trial and the charge they were now 
bringing. Their purchase of the elder Roscius' property assumed that he 
had been proscribed, and hence was lawfully killed-whereas now they 
were prosecuting his alleged killer for murder. If the killing ofRoscius had 
been lawful, their accusation was false. But if his killing had been unlaw-
ful, as was implied by their prosecution, then they could be shown to have 
acted illegally in seizing his property. In these circumstances, it seems not 
a little surprising that they should have brought the charge at all; and 
perhaps they did, as Cicero claims, first try to murder their opponent 
instead (§§ 26-8). But having decided to bring the charge, their strategy 
had to be to avoid all mention of the alleged proscription and the sale of 
the property (§ 5). Evidently they felt confident that the defence would 
also remain silent on these matters. The defence, they reasoned, would 
surely not risk the argument that since Roscius was proscribed, his killing 
was lawful: this might seem to imply that the son did after all kill his 
father, and a jury would be most unlikely to look favourably on such an 
act, however justified in law. 
The prosecution were right in predicting that Cicero would not adopt 
this line of defence. But they were wrong in supposing that he would be 
deterred by fear of Sulla from revealing their misdeeds. In the event, the 
strategy Cicero chose to adopt was to agree that the killing of the elder 
Roscius was unlawful, but nevertheless expose what the prosecution had 
done-that they had added his name to the proscription list for the pur-
pose of illegally acquiring his property, and were now (inconsistently) 
accusing his son of murder in order to prevent him from claiming his 
inheritance. Nor, however, did Cicero stop there. It was a standard rhe-
torical tactic for defence advocates not only to maintain that their client 
was innocent of the crime of which he was accused, but to argue that the 
accusers themselves were the real perpetrators of the crime. This ploy, 
known as antikategoria (Q!.1int. Inst. 3.10.4, 7.2.9), is used (in different 
forms) in several of Cicero's speeches. In this speech, he accuses Magnus 
and Capito themselves of the murder of Roscius (interestingly, however, 
he does not accuse Chrysogonus (§§ 108, 122): that would be going too 
far). He is unable, of course, to substantiate his claim, but he needs only 
to give it a certain plausibility to establish that it need not have,been his 
client who committed the murder. Whether Magnus and Capito were 
really responsible for the murder of Roscius is unknown; it seems 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Roscio A merino: Introduction 
7 
unlikely, however, given that the younger Roscius had not prosecuted 
them for it. 
Cicero's sensational revelation of the background to the case had the 
desired effect and Roscius was acquitted. Whether he went on to recover 
his property is unknown. In the speech, Cicero repeatedly states that 
Roscius is only interested in saving his life, not in recovering his property 
(§§ 7, rz8, 143-4), but it would be naive to suppose (as some scholars have 
done) that Roscius considered himself bound by this after the trial. In any 
case, the argument at§ 127 that technically the property has not been sold 
at all seems to suggest that Roscius is already thinking of claiming his 
inheritance. 
As for Cicero, his defence was greatly admired, and he was now thought 
capable of taking on any case at all (Brut. 312). The nobles were no doubt 
gratified to sec Chrysogonus brought low, and Sulla may have welcomed 
the opportunity to rid himself of a freedman who \lad become too power-
ful. After the trial, Cicero accepted a large number of commissions. These 
included a successful defence of the freedom of a woman from Arretium; 
the case was politically important, more so than the defence of Roscius, 
because it called into question Sulla's disenfranchisement of entire com-
munities (Pro Caecina 97) The speech docs not survive. Later, in 79 BC, 
the strain of so much work forced Cicero to go abroad for the sake of his 
health (Plutarch ( Cic. 3.4) gives as Cicero's reason the need to avoid Sulla, 
and this may have been generally believed at the time; but Cicero himself 
(Brut. 313-14) makes it clear that ill-health was responsible). When he 
returned two years later, he had acquired a manner of speaking which 
would impose less physical strain on him and was also somewhat less 
Asianist in style. 
At the end of his life Cicero spoke of Pro Roscio as a speech in which he 
stood up against the power of Sulla (De ojjiciis 2.51): 
Defences bring the greatest glory and influence, and all the more so if 
the speaker happens to be helping someone who appears to be 
oppressed and persecuted by someone in power. This is the sort of case 
I have often taken on, for example when as a young man I spoke for 
Sextus Roscius of Ameria against the influence of Lucius Sulla when he 
was in power. The speech survives, as you are aware. 
This is not quite an accurate representation of the case, since in his speech 
Cicero takes great care to distinguish between Sulla and his minion, and 
attribute all blame to the latter. The speech, as originally given, cannot 
have been in any way 'against Lucius Sulla': criticism of Sulla would have 
run counter to Cicero's general strategy and would have been instantly 
fatal to the defence. There arc, however, places in the speech where the 

8 
Pro Roscio Amerino: Introduction 
praise of Sulla seems insincere and double-edged (§§ 22, I 3 I), and certain 
passages at the beginning and end of the speech (§§ 3, I 52-4) go much 
further in criticizing the regime than merely exposing the misdeeds of 
Chrysogonus. But these passages, which contrast so strongly with the 
attitude adopted throughout the rest of the speech, arc best explained as 
anachronistic revision. The speech was probably circulated on Cicero's 
return to Rome in 77, after Sulla had died, and it may have been to 
Cicero's advantage when writing it up to represent himself as having 
offered greater resistance to Sulla than had been possible for him at the 
time. His defence of the woman from Arretium, in which he seems 
genuinely to have challenged Sulla's actions, would have made his out-
spokenness in certain parts of the published speech more believable. 
But if Cicero did not speak out against Sulla directly in his original 
speech, he did nevertheless protest against the horrors which were being 
committed in his name. Moreover, he was the only person at the time who 
dared to do so. His defence ofRoscius should therefore be judged an act of 
considerable moral courage. 
www.ebook3000.com

PRO ROSCIO AMERINO 
[I] I imagine you must be wondering, members of the jury, why it is 
that, when there are so many leading orators and men of the highest 
rank present here in court, I of all people should have stood up to 
address you: for neither in age, nor in ability, nor in authority do I 
bear comparison with these men who have remained seated. All 
those whom you see here supporting my client believe that in this 
case a wrong has been perpetrated, arising from an act of 
unprecedented criminality, and that it ought to be resisted; but to 
resist it themselves they have not the courage, considering the 
unfavourable times in which we live. The result is that they attend 
the trial because it is their duty to do so, but say nothing because they 
want to keep out of danger. [2] So am I the boldest man here? Far 
from it. Or am I more attentive to my obligations than everyone else? 
I am hardly so eager even for that distinction that I would wish 
others to be deprived of it. What is it, then, that has driven me more 
than anyone else to undertake the defence of Sextus Roscius? The 
reason is this. If any of these men whom you see here supporting my 
client-highly influential and distinguished figures that they are-
were to speak for Roscius, and were to make any mention at all of 
politics, something which is unavoidable in this case, he would be 
assumed to be saying much more than he actually was saying. 
[3] With me, on the other hand, if I say openly everything that the 
case requires, I shall certainly not find that my speech leaks out and 
becomes public knowledge to the same extent. A second reason is 
this. With the others, their rank and distinction is such that nothing 
they say passes unnoticed, while because of their age and experience 
no allowance would be given for any indiscreet remark they might 
make. But ifl am the one that speaks too freely, what I say will either 
be ignored because I have not yet embarked on a political career, or 
else be pardoned on account of my youth-although not only the 
idea of pardon but even the custom of judicial enquiry has now been 
abolished at Rome!* [4] There is also a third reason. It may be per-
haps that the others were asked to speak in such a way that their 
decision seemed to them to be unaffected by any ties of obligation. In 
my case, however, I was applied to by men who by their friendship, 

IO 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
[sJ 
acts of kindness, and position carried the greatest weight with me, 
and I considered that I could never ignore their kindness to me, nor 
disregard their rank, nor neglect their wishes. 
[5] These, then, are the reasons why I have come forward as advo-
cate in this case. I was not singled out as the one man who could 
speak with the greatest skill, but was simply the only one left who 
could speak with relatively little danger: I was chosen not so that 
Sextus Roscius might have a strong enough defence, but to prevent 
his being abandoned altogether. 
You may ask, perhaps, what that terror and what that great fear 
consists of which is deterring so many distinguished men from com-
ing forward, as is their usual custom, to defend someone's life and 
property. It is not surprising that you should still be unaware of this, 
since the prosecution have deliberately omitted to mention the very 
circumstance which has been the reason for this trial. [6] And what is 
that? The property of the father of my client, Sextus Roscius, is 
\Vorth six million sesterces, and it is from the valiant and illustrious* 
Lucius Sulla, whose name I mention with the greatest respect, that a 
young man, arguably the most powerful man in Rome at the present 
time, claims to have purchased this property f(w two thousand ses-
terces: this man is Lucius Cornelius Chrysogonus! He has a particu-
lar request to make of you, gentlemen. Seeing that he has unlawfully 
seized the extremely valuable and splendid property of another man, 
and seeing that the life of Sextus Roscius appears to him to stand in 
the way of and impede his access to that property, he asks that you 
remove all uneasiness from his mind and release him from all his 
fears. For as long as Sextus Roscius is still unharmed, Chrysogonus 
does not imagine that he can keep possession of the very large and 
valuable inheritance of this innocent man; with Roscius condemned 
and forced into exile, however, he believes that he will be free to 
squander and fritter away his ill-gotten gains. Chrysogonus there-
fore requests that you relieve him of this anxiety which worries and 
torments his mind night and day, and declare yourselves his 
accomplices in this outrageous theft which he has committed. 
[ 7] If this request seems to you, members of the jury, to be tight 
and proper, then I for my part should like to make a small request of 
my own-and one which is, I think, rather more reasonable. First of 
all I ask Chrysogonus to content himself with our wealth and prop-
erty, and not to demand our life-blood as well. Secondly I ask you, 
www.ebook3000.com

[8] 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
II 
gentlemen, to make a stand against the wickedness of criminals, to 
alleviate the misfortunes of innocent men, and in the case of Sextus 
Roscius to repel a danger which threatens every one of us. [8] If, 
however, there comes to light any ground for the accusation, or any 
suspicion of guilt, or even the slightest reason to think that the 
prosecution had any justification for bringing the charge, and if, in 
short, you find any reason at all for the charge other than the prop-
erty which I mentioned, then I have no objection to the life of Sextus 
Roscius being given up to satisfy the greed of these men. But if, on 
the other hand, the only issue is that of satisfying the desires of men 
who are never satisfied, and if the only object of the present struggle 
is to see that the seizure of such a rich and splendid property is 
capped, as it were, by the condemnation of Sextus Roscius, then 
surely not the least sordid aspect of this sordid affair is this: that you, 
by your verdict, given on oath, should be thought of as being the 
most appropriate means by which these men might lay hands on that 
which they have previously been accustomed to obtain by criminal 
violence. You have been raised from the citizen body to the senate 
because of your noble qualities, and have been chosen from the 
senate to be members of this jury because of your high character.* 
Is it really from men such as yourselves that these cut-throats and 
gladiators demand not just that they may escape punishment-for 
that is what they ought to fear and dread from you, considering their 
misdeeds-but also that they may walk out of this court enriched 
and loaded with spoils? 
[9] I feel quite unable to do justice in my speech to these atrocious 
and terrible crimes, or to evoke the proper degree of sorrow at them, 
or to protest against them with the outspokenness that is required: I 
find myself hampered in attempting to do justice to them by my lack 
of talent; and in evoking sorrow, by my youth; and in protesting 
against them, by the times in which we live. I also have reasons to 
feel acutely afraid: there is my own shy nature, and your importance 
and distinction, and then the domineering force of the prosecution, 
and the dangers to which Sextus Roscius is exposed. I therefore 
beg and beseech you, gentlemen, to pay careful attention to what I 
have to say, and listen to me with a sympathetic ear. [ IO] I have put 
my trust in your integrity and good sense, and have taken on a 
greater burden than I think I can manage. If you can in any way 
lighten this burden for me, gentlemen, I shall shoulder it to the best 

12 
Pro Roscio A merino 
[II] 
of my abilities with all the effort and commitment I can muster; but 
if-and I trust this will not happen-you decide to abandon me, 
then my courage will not fail, and the case which I have taken on I 
will do my best to see through to the end. But ifl do not manage it, I 
would rather be crushed by the burden of doing my duty than 
treacherously throw it aside or weakly give up a task which I under-
took as a matter of honour. 
[II] You also, Marcus Fannius, I earnestly entreat to let both us 
and your country see you to be the same man now as the Roman 
people saw you to be when you presided over this court before.* Look 
at the enormous crowd of people that has come to watch this trial: 
you can see what everyone is hoping for, what a yearning there is for 
strict and severe sentences. This is the first murder trial for a long 
time, and in the mean time there have been a large number of truly 
shocking murders. Everyone is therefore hoping that under your 
praetorship this court will be turn out to be fully capable of dealing 
with the bloody crimes that are openly committed every day. [12] In 
other trials it is generally the prosecution who appeal for severity: 
today, however, it is we, the defence, who make such an appeal. We 
ask you, Marcus Fannius, and you, members of the jury, to punish 
wrongdoing with the greatest determination, to show the greatest 
courage in standing up to criminals, and to reflect on the fact that, 
unless you make your views abundantly clear by the verdict you will 
give in this trial, then greed, wickedness, and criminality will become 
so rife that murders will be committed not only in secret, but even 
here in the forum, before your own platform, 1\tlarcus Fannius, 
before your feet, gentlemen, and among the very benches of this 
court. 
[I 3] Do you think that this trial has any other aim except to secure 
official approval for this kind of behaviour? The prosecutors are men 
who have seized the property of the defendant; the defendant is a 
man who has been left by his prosecutors with nothing except utter 
ruin. The prosecutors are men who stood to gain from the murder of 
Sextus Roscius' father; the defendant is a man whose father's death 
brought him not just grief but poverty as well. The prosecutors are 
men who were desperate to kill the defendant; the defendant is a 
man who has brought a bodyguard even to this court, to avoid being 
murdered here before your very eyes. The prosecutors, finally, are 
men whose punishment the people demand; and the defendant is a 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Roscio A merino 
IJ 
man who happens to be the sole survivor of a terrible massacre which 
the prosecutors have perpetrated. 
[q] And to help you see, members of the jury, that the actual 
crimes that have been committed are far more shocking than my 
description of them, I am going to explain to you how the whole 
business has come about, starting from the beginning. This will give 
you a better understanding of the misfortunes which have fallen on 
this innocent man, the criminal acts of the prosecutors, and the 
disastrous condition of our country. 
[I 5] Sextus Roscius, the father of my client, was a citizen of Arne-
ria. In birth, rank, and wealth he was easily the most prominent man 
not only of his town but of the entire district. Moreover, he enjoyed 
the favour of the most high-ranking families at Rome, and was linked 
to them by tics of hospitality. Indeed, he enjoyed not just ties of 
hospitality but had regular day-to-day contact with the Mctelli, Ser-
vilii, and Scipiones*-families which I mention, as I should, out of 
respect for their honour and distinction. And so it was that, of all 
that he possessed, this connection was the only thing that he man-
aged to bequeath to his son: for the son's inheritance was violently 
seized, and is currently possessed, by thieves from within his own 
family, and now the innocent son's life and reputation are being 
defended by the father's hosts and friends. [I 6] The elder Roscius 
had always been a supporter of the Roman nobility. In the recent 
civil disturbance,* therefore, when the pcsition and very existence of 
each and every noble was under threat, he defended their cause, 
more than anyone else in the district, with his devoted efforts, 
enthusiasm, and influence. He did this because he thought it only 
right that he should fight to uphold the honour of those to whom he 
owed his position as the most honourable man among his own 
people. Once victory had been achieved and we were no longer at 
war, the proscriptions began and all over Italy men thought to have 
been on the opposing side were being apprehended. Throughout 
this period Roscius was frequently in Rome and appeared daily in 
the forum in full view of everyone: he looked as if he was celebrating 
the victory of the nobles, rather than being afraid that any disaster 
should happen to him as a result of it. 
[I7] Now the elder Roscius had a long-standing feud with two 
other men from Ameria, also called Roscius: one of these men I can 
now see sitting on the prosecutors' bench, while the other, I hear, is 

Pro Roscio Arnerino 
[18] 
in possession of three farms belonging to my client. Had the elder 
Roscius been able to guard himself against their hostility as much as 
he used to fear it, he would still be alive today. You see, gentlemen, 
he had good reason to be afraid. Let you tell me about these two 
men, Titus Roscius Capito and-the one who is here in court--
Titus Roscius Magnus. Capito is reputed to be an experienced and 
celebrated gladiator, the winner of many prizes; Magnus, on the 
other hand, has recently attached himself to Capito to be trained by 
him. Before this particular fight Magnus was, as far as I know, a mere 
beginner; but now he has easily surpassed his master in wickedness 
and criminality. [18] For while my client Sextus Roscius was at Arne-
ria, and this Magnus here was in Rome-while the son was busy on 
his farms, having devoted himself, as his father wished, to a life in 
the country spent managing the family estate, and Magnus was con-
stantly at Rome-the elder Sextus Roscius was murdered one night 
near the baths of Pallacina* while he was returning from dinner. I 
hope that it is quite clear from the circumstances of the murder on 
whom the suspicion falls; but unless the facts themselves make com-
pletely clear what is at this point still only a suspicion, then please 
judge my client to be implicated in the crime. 
[19] After Sextus Roscius had been killed, the first to bring the 
news to Ameria was a certain Mallius Glaucia, an impoverished 
freedman and a dependant and friend of Titus Magnus here. This 
Glaucia brought the news not to the house of the victim's son, but to 
that of his enemy, Titus Capito. Moreover, although the murder had 
been committed more than a•1 hour after nightfall, Glaucia reached 
Ameria by dawn: in ten hours during the night he raced across fifty-
six miles in gigs laid on in relays. And his purpose was not simply to 
be the first to bring the hoped-for news to the murdered man's 
enemy, but to show him the blood of the man he hated while it was 
still fresh, and present him with the dagger which had been pulled 
out of the body only a few hours before. 
[zo] Four days later, news of these events was brought to Chry-
sogonus in Lucius Sulla's camp at Volaterrae.* The size of the mur-
dered man's fortune was pointed out. The quality of his estate-
consisting of thirteen farms, nearly all of which bordered on the 
Tiber*-was noticed, as was the helplessness and isolation of my 
client. It was represented that, since the father, Sextus Roscius, so 
worthy* and influential a figure, had been killed without any difficulty, 
www.ebook3000.com

[ 2 r] 
Pro Roscio A merino 
IS 
it would be a simple matter to do away with the son, an unsuspecting 
country man who was unknown at Rome-and Magnus and Capito 
promised their help in carrying out the task. [21] Not to detain you 
any longer, gentlemen, a partnership was formed. At this time the 
proscriptions were no longer spoken of, and even those who had 
been afraid of them were now returning home, judging that they 
were no longer in any danger. In spite of this, the name of Sextus 
Roscius, a fervent supporter of the nobility, was entered in the pro-
scription lists. Chrysogonus became the purchaser. Three farms, 
probably the best ones, were made over to Capito, who is in pos-
session of them today. All the rest of the property was seized by 
Magnus here, acting, as he himself says, for Chrysogonus. 
I know for a fact, members of the jury, that all this was done 
without Lucius Sulla's knowledge. [22] Indeed, at a time when he is 
repairing the past and preparing for whatever the future might hold, 
when he alone possesses the means of establishing peace and the 
power of waging war, when everyone looks to him alone, and he 
alone directs everything, when he is occupied with so much import-
ant business that he scarcely even has time to breathe, it is hardly 
surprising if he fails to notice something-especially when there are 
so many men watching to see how busy he is and waiting for their 
opportunity so that, as soon as his attention is distracted, they can do 
something of this kind. Remember also that, although Sulla may be 
'fortunate'*-as he truly is -there is no one so fortunate that he does 
not, in a large household, possess at least one dishonest slave or 
freedman. 
[23] So, as I was saying, this excellent Magnus, Chrysogonus' 
agent, came to Ameria and laid hold of my client's farms. Even 
before the wretched man, distraught with grief, had had time to 
complete his father's funeral rites, Magnus threw him naked from 
his home and flung him headlong, gentlemen, from his ancestral 
hearth and household gods. And that is how Magnus became master 
of this great estate. He who before had lived a penny-pinching exist-
ence when living on his own restricted means became, as so often 
happens, arrogant and spendthrift when he acquired someone else's. 
He carried off much of the property to his own house in full view of 
everyone, but still more he took away in secret; he gave away a great 
deal with a lavish and unstinting hand to those who had helped him; 
and what was left he sold off at auction. 

I6 
Pro Roscio A merino 
[24] This seemed so scandalous to the people of Ameria that there 
were tears and lamentation throughout the town. For a whole series 
of tragic events had taken place before their very eyes. There had 
been the brutal murder of their leading citizen, Sextus Roscius. 
Then there was the shocking impoverishment of his son, who had 
been left so large an inheritance, but whom this wicked criminal had 
not even granted right of access to his father's tomb. After that there 
had been the outrageous sale of the property, its occupation by 
others, theft, plunder, and rewards for accomplices! There was 
nobody who would not rather have seen the whole property go up in 
flames than w·itness Magnus gloating and lording it over what right-
fully belonged to the excellent and well-respected Sextus Roscius. 
[25] The town council therefore immediately passed a decree that 
the ten leaders of the council should go off to see Lucius Sulla and 
make him aware what sort of a man Sextus Roscius had been, lodge a 
complaint against the criminal behaviour of these people, and ask 
him to restore the good name of the dead father and the property of 
the innocent son. Please listen to the actual decree. 
(The daree oftlze tmvn council is read out.) 
The deputation, then, arrived at Sulla's camp. It is clear, gentlemen, 
that these crimes and outrages, as I said earlier, were all committed 
without Lucius Sulla's knowledge. For as soon as the delegates had 
arrived, Chrysogonus went to meet them himself; he also deputed 
certain men of high rank to dissuade them from seeing Sulla in 
person and promise them that he, Chrysogonus, would do every-
thing that they wanted. [26] Chrysogonus, you see, would sooner 
have died than have Sulla made aware of what he had done. The 
delegates were old-fashioned men who judged other people's char-
acters by their own. When, therefore, Chrysogonus promised that he 
would remove Sextus Roscius' name from the proscription lists and 
hand over the farms unoccupied to the son, and when Titus Roscius 
Capito (who was one of the ten delegates) also promised that this 
would be done, they believed it, and returned to Ameria without 
having put their case before Sulla. 
To begin with, Chrysogonus and Capito put the matter off from 
one day to the next, and dragged their feet. Then they took things 
more casually, did nothing, and made the Amerians look lik~;fools. 
Eventually, as was readily inferred, they plotted against the li(e of my 
client, Sextus Roscius, believing that they could no longer hold on to 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Roscio Amerino 
property that did not belong to them as long as its owner was still 
alive. 
[ 27] As soon as Roscius was aware of the situation, he took the 
advice of his friends and relations and fled to Rome. There he took 
refuge with Caecilia,* the sister of Nepos and daughter ofBaliaricus, 
whose name I mention with the greatest respect, and with whom his 
father had been on terms of close familiarity. This woman, gentle-
men, is someone in whom there remain, even in this day and age, 
traces of that old-fashioned sense of duty, preserved as a model for 
others: everyone has always felt it to be so. She received Sextus 
Roscius into her home, destitute as he was, thrown out of his house 
and driven from his property, and seeking to escape the threats and 
weapons of thieves: when everyone else had given him up for lost, 
she came to the help of a friend in trouble. Thanks to her goodness, 
loyalty, and attentive care, his name was entered, while he still lived, 
in the list of the accused, rather than being added, after his murder, 
to the list of the proscribed. 
[28] Once Sextus Roscius' enemies realized that his life was being 
extremely carefully protected and that they had no chance of killing 
him, they made a plan which \vas utterly criminal and reckless: they 
decided to accuse him of murdering his father. They would get hold 
of some experienced prosecutor who would be capable of finding 
something to say, even where there were no grounds whatever for 
considering the defendant to be under suspicion. Secondly, since the 
actual charge gave them no hope of overcoming him, they would use 
the times in which we live as a weapon against him. Because there 
had been no trial for so long, they reasoned, the first man to be 
accused would be certain to be condemned. Chrysogonus' influence 
would ensure that no one would support him. Not a word would be 
said about the sale of the property or about the partnership which 
had been formed. The mere charge of parricide, and the horrific 
nature of such a crime, would be sufficient to destroy him without 
difficulty, since no one would come forward to defend him. 
[ 29] With this plan, or rather driven on by this insanity, they have 
handed over to you the man they had wanted to kill, but were unable 
to, so that you could slaughter him yourselves. 
What shall I complain of first? Where, members of the jury, 
should I choose to begin? What help can I summon, and from 
whom? Should I call on the protection of the immortal gods, or of 

IS 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
[30] 
the Roman people, or of you who at this moment exercise supreme 
authority?* [30] The father outrageously murdered, the family home 
besieged by enemies, property removed, appropriated, and plun-
dered, the son's life endangered and repeatedly attacked by sword 
and treachery! From this long list of enormities, surely there is no 
type of crime that has been left out? Yet they cap and crown these 
misdeeds with further atrocities. They fabricate a charge that defies 
belief, they use my client's own money to bribe people to prosecute 
him and testify against him, and then they give the wretched man a 
choice whether he prefers to offer his throat to Magnus or forfeit his 
life in the most shameful way possible by being sewn up in a sack.* 
They thought he would lack defenders, and he does. But a man who 
is prepared to speak freely and to defend him loyally-which, in this 
case, is all that is needed-this he most certainly does not lack, 
gentlemen! [3 I] In taking on this case I may perhaps have acted 
rashly, carried away by the impetuosity of youth. But now that I have 
taken it on, even though-by Hercules!-all kinds of threats, ter-
rors, and dangers surround me, I will stand up and face them. I have 
firmly resolved not only to say everything that I judge to be relevant 
to the case, but to say it willingly, boldly, and freely. There is nothing, 
gentlemen, that can force me to act out of fear instead of duty. 
[32] For who could be so unprincipled as to realize what has been 
going on and then keep quiet or turn a blind eye? You murdered my 
father,* although he was never proscribed. After you killed him, you 
entered his name in the proscription lists. Me you forcibly evicted 
from my home. And you now are in possession of my inheritance. 
What more do you want? Can you deny that you have come to these 
benches fully armed in order to achieve one of two things: to secure 
my conviction, or to cut my throat? 
[33] By far the most reckless man that we have known in Rome in 
recent times was Gaius Fimbria,* and also the most deranged, as 
everyone agrees-except of course those who are deranged them-
selves. At the funeral of Gaius Marius, it was he who was responsible 
for the wounding of Q!.lintus Scaevola,* the most revered and hon-
oured man in our nation. This is not the place for an extended 
appreciation of Scaevola's merits, and in any case there is nothing I 
could add to what the Roman people are able to remember for them-
selves. After the attack, when Fimbria heard that Scaevolaimight 
recover from his injury, he announced his intention of prosecuting 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Roscio A merino 
19 
him; and when he was asked what charge he was going to bring 
against a man whom no one thought could ever be praised highly 
enough, he is said to have replied, like the madman he was, 'because 
he failed to take the whole of the sword into his chest'.* The Roman 
people never witnessed anything more disgraceful than this, except 
for Scaevola's actual murder, an event so disastrous that it brought 
ruin and destruction on one and all: for Scaevola was killed by the 
very people whose lives he was attempting to save by mediation. 
[34] In the present case, is there not a strong resemblance to what 
Fimbria said and did? You are accusing Sextus Roscius. Why? 
Because he escaped from your hands, because he refused to be mur-
dered. The earlier outrage, I grant you, seems the more shocking, 
because it was committed against Scaevola; but is this recent one 
to be tolerated-because it was committed by Chrysogonus? 
Immortal gods! What is there in this case that actually requires a 
defence? What point is there that calls for the expertise of an advo-
cate, or has such need of the eloquence of an orator? All the same, 
members of the jury, let me unfold the entire case and, having set it 
out before your eyes, subject it to a full examination: this will allow 
you to see clearly what is the point at issue, what I ought to be 
discussing, and what course you ought to follow in coming to your 
decision. 
[35] There are three obstacles, as far as I can make out, facing 
Sextus Roscius today: the charge his opponents have brought, their 
violent behaviour, and their power. The fabrication of the charge has 
been undertaken by the accuser Erucius; the role involving the vio-
lence has been claimed by Magnus and Capito; and Chrysogonus, 
whose influence is the greatest, wields his power against us: I know 
that I must address you on all three of these topics. [36] But how? I 
must not treat them all in the same way, because while the first one is 
my own personal responsibility, the remaining two are matters which 
the Roman people have appointed you to deal with. My job is to 
refute the charge, whereas your duty is to make a stand against 
violence, and to break and destroy the dangerous and unacceptable 
power of men of this type at the very first opportunity. 
[37] Sextus Roscius stands accused of the murder of his father. 
Immortal gods, what an outrageously criminal act, the type of act 
that seems to comprise within it every crime that exists! The philo-
sophers rightly point out that filial duty can be violated by a mere 

20 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
look. What punishment, then, could be devised which would be 
severe enough for a man who had murdered his own parent-a per-
son he was bound by every law, human and divine, to defend with his 
life if necessary? (38] In the case of such a crime as this, so immense, 
so terrible, and so extraordinary, and committed so rarely that, if it is 
ever heard of, it is thought to be a portent or a prodigy, what argu-
ments do you, Gaius Erucius, consider you should use in your accus-
ation? Ought you not to demonstrate the unparalleled wickedness of 
the man you are accusing, his savage and brutal nature, his life given 
up to every kind of vice and crime, a character, in short, irretrievably 
abandoned and depraved? Yet you have made no such accusation 
against Sextus Roscius, not even by way of the conventional attack 
on a defendant's character. 
[39] Sextus Roscius murdered his father. What kind of a man is 
he, then? A mere youth corrupted and led on by men of bad char-
acter? Actually, he is over forty years old. I take it, then, he must be a 
veteran cut-throat, a man who will stop at nothing, and someone 
with considerable experience in committing murder. No, you have 
not heard this even so much as hinted at by the prosecution. Well, 
then, it was his extravagance, his enormous debts, and his 
uncontrolled greed which drove him to commit the crime. But Eru-
cius cleared him of extravagance when he said that Roscius almost 
never went out to dinner; and my client has never been in debt. And 
as for greed, how could this exist in a man who, as the prosecutor 
himself critically remarked, has always lived in the country and spent 
his time farming his land? Such a life is far removed from greed-
but is, on the contrary, very closely linked to duty. [ 40] So what was 
it, then, that prompted Sextus Roscius to commit such an act of 
madness as you attribute to him? 'His father', the prosecutor says, 
'did not like him'. Didn't his father like him? Why ever not? There 
certainly must have been a valid, strong, and obvious reason: for just 
as it is incredible that a son should kill his father without very many, 
very strong motives, it is similarly unlikely that a father should hate 
his son unless he has many strong and compelling reasons for doing 
so. (4r] So let me return again to my original point and ask what 
faults this only son can have had, serious enough to cause his father 
to dislike him. It is quite obvious that there were no such faults. Was 
the father out of his mind, then, seeing that he hated his o,Wn son 
without good reason? Certainly not: he was the most leveJ;_headed 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Roscio Amerino 
21 
man you could think of. It is perfectly clear, therefore, that if the 
father was not mad and the son was not depraved, then the father 
had no reason to hate his son, and the son had no motive for murder-
ing his father. 
[ 42] 'I do not know', the prosecutor says, 'what the reason for the 
hatred was. But I do know that it existed, because previously, when 
the father had two sons, he wanted the one who is now dead to be 
with him all the time, whereas this one he banished to his farms in 
the country.' Now, the problem that Erucius has experienced in 
making a malicious and futile prosecution also applies to me in plead-
ing the strongest of defences. He did not manage to devise any means 
of backing up a charge he had fabricated, whereas I cannot possibly 
find any way of disproving and refuting such a groundless allegation. 
[43] But what is it that you are saying, Erucius? That Sextus Roscius 
handed over so many fine and productive farms to his son to culti-
vate and oversee-in order to banish and punish him? Surely this is 
what heads of families, particularly men of old Roscius' class from 
the country towns, wish for most: that their sons, if they have any, 
should dedicate themselves wholeheartedly to managing their prop-
erty, and devote most of their time and effort to running the family 
estate? [44] Or are you saying that he sent him away to confine him 
in the country, giving him his food and drink at the house and 
stopping all his pleasures? If, however, it turns out that he was not 
only put in charge of running the family estate but was also given 
some of the farms as his own while his father was still alive, then will 
you still describe his life as a banishment to the country and a 
removal? You see, Erucius, how far your line of reasoning differs 
from the actual facts of the matter and the truth. What fathers 
normally do, you stigmatize as being unprecedented; what is done 
out of kindness, you accuse of having been done from hatred; what 
the father granted to his son as a mark of his esteem, you make out 
was done to punish him. [45] It is not as if you are unaware of all 
this. The problem is rather that you are so short of arguments that 
you think you had better speak not only against us, but against the 
way things are, against the way people behave, and against the views 
of everyone. 
Nevertheless, you will say, Roscius had two sons, and kept one of 
them at his side, while letting the other one live in the country. Now 
please do not be offended, Erucius, at what I am about to say: I do 

22 
Pro Roscio A merino 
not mean to cntlcJze you, but to give you a gentle reminder. 
[46] Even if fortune has given you no definite knowledge of who 
your father is,* and has thus deprived you of an understanding of how 
a father feels towards his children, nature has at least endowed you 
with your full share of human feeling, and has added a taste for 
culture, making you no stranger to literature. Let me therefore take 
an illustration from a play. Do you really think that old man in 
Caecilius* thinks less of Eutychus, the son of his who lives in the 
country, than he does of the other one-Chaerestratus, I think he is 
called? That he keeps the one with him in the city as a mark of his 
esteem, but has banished the other one to the country as a punish-
ment? [47] 'Why are you straying into such absurdities?' you will 
ask. As if it would be difficult for me to give you as many names as 
you like of people-my fellow-tribesmen, say, or my neighbours (not 
to stray too far afield)-who want their favourite sons to become 
hard-working farmers! It would, however, be a breach of good man-
ners to mention specific individuals by name, when it is not known 
whether they would be happy for their names to be used in this way. 
In any case, there is no one I could mention who would be more 
familiar to you than Eutychus, and it certainly makes no difference 
to my argument whether I use the name of this young man from 
comedy or that of someone from, say, the territory of Veii. * In fact I 
think that poets make up these stories so that we can see our own 
behaviour represented in other people, and be given a realistic depic-
tion of our daily life. [48] Anyway, turn your attention back to the 
real world, if that is what you want, and consider which occupations 
are most highly praised by heads of families not just in Umbria* and 
the surrounding regions, but in the old towns closer to hand. You 
will see very clearly that the lack of charges that you can substantiate 
has led you to misrepresent as a fault and a defect what is in fact 
Sextus Roscius' greatest virtue. 
And it is not just because their fathers want them to that sons take 
up farming. I happen to know a great many people-and I am sure 
each of you does, too-who are of their own accord fired by a passion 
for farming, and who are convinced that this country existence, 
which you think ought to be a disgrace and a crime, is the most 
honourable and agreeable life possible. [49] As for this RosciuS here, 
how do you rate his enthusiasm for agricultural matters, and his skill 
in them? His relations you see here, good people that they are, tell 
www.ebook3000.com

[so] 
Pro Roscio A merino 
23 
me that he is just as proficient in his own profession as you are in that 
trade of prosecution to which you belong. I realize, however, that 
since Chrysogonus has thought it best to leave him without an estate, 
he might as well forget his profession and drop his passion for farm-
ing. This would be a great pity, and something he does not deserve. 
Nevertheless, he will bear it with equanimity, gentlemen, if you will 
allow him to keep his life and good name. What he is not able to bear, 
however, is that he has been plunged into this crisis because of the 
number and quality of his farms, and that the care with which he has 
cultivated them should be what is most damaging to him. It is bad 
enough for him to have cultivated his farms for others rather than for 
himself, without also being put on trial for having cultivated them in 
the first place. 
[so] You would certainly have made a risible prosecutor, Erucius, 
if you had been born in the clays when men were summoned from 
the plough to be made consul. Believing as you do that it is a crime to 
supervise the cultivation of land, I can imagine what you would have 
thought of the famous Atilius,* who was found by the men who were 
sent to fetch him sowing seed with his own hand: you would have 
judged him to be an utterly disgraceful and dishonourable man! 
But-by Hercules!-our ahcestors took a very different view about 
him and others like him, and it was because they did so that, instead 
of an extremely small and insignificant country, they handed down to 
us one which is very great and prosperous. For they worked on their 
own lands tirelessly, rather than greedily seeking after those of 
others; and by acting in this way they came to acquire land, cities, 
and foreign peoples, and so enlarged their country, this empire, and 
the glory of the Roman people. [51] I am not saying this for the 
purpose of making a comparison with our current investigation. No, 
the point I want to make is this. In the days of our ancestors the most 
distinguished and illustrious men, although they had a duty to 
remain constantly seated at the helm of the state, nevertheless 
devoted a certain amount of time and effort to cultivating their land. 
I therefore believe that one ought to forgive a man who declares 
himself a country man, in that he has always lived in the country, 
especially considering that there is nothing which would have 
pleased his father more, or would have been more agreeable to him-
self, or, in actual fact, more honourable. 
[52] So, Erucius, I take it that the father's intense hatred of his son 

Pro Roscio A merino 
[53] 
is proved by the fact that he let him live in the country! And do you 
have any further proof? 'Yes', he says, 'I do: his father was planning 
to disinherit him.' Ah, I see; now you are saying something which 
may be relevant. For I am sure even you will agree with me that these 
arguments are frivolous and silly which run as follows. 'He never 
went to dinner parties with his father.' Of course he didn't, as he 
never even went into town, except on very rare occasions. 'Hardly 
anyone invited him to their house.' That is not surprising, given that 
he did not live in Rome, and was not in a position to return the 
invitation. [53] You yourself realize that arguments like that are 
worthless. Let us look, then, at the argument we were starting to 
consider, one which constitutes the most solid proof of hatred that 
there could possibly be: 'the father was intending to disinherit his 
son.' I am not going to ask you what his reason was; I will ask you 
how you know it. On the subject of reasons, however, you should 
really have set out and counted up all the father's motives. A con-
scientious prosecutor, bringing such a serious charge, would have 
been duty bound to give an account of all the son's vices and mis-
deeds, in order to explain how the father became so angry that he 
was driven to suppress his natural feelings, to banish from his heart 
all the love that was buried within it, and, finally, to forget that he 
was a father. I do not believe all this could happen unless my client 
here had committed crimes of the greatest seriousness. 
[54] However, I give you leave to pass over these misdeeds which, 
since you say nothing about them, you admit are non-existent. As for 
your saying that the father wanted to disinherit his son, you certainly 
ought to prove it. What evidence do you have to make us think that 
that was the case? You can say nothing that will be true, so at least 
invent something plausible, to make it less obvious what you are 
plainly doing-laughing at the misfortunes of my client and at the 
dignity of this fine jury. The father wanted to disinherit his son. 
Why? 'I do not know.' Did he disinherit him? 'No.' Who stopped 
him? 'He was thinking about it.' Was he? Who did he mention it to? 
'To no one.' To make an accusation of this kind, to bring a charge 
which you arc not only unable to prove but do not even attempt to 
prove-how can this be described, gentlemen, except as an abuse of 
the court, of the law, and of your high authority, perpetrated .\vith a 
view to greed and financial gain? [55] None of us, Erucius, is ignor-
ant of the fact that there is no personal enmity between you and 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Roscio A merino 
25 
Sextus Roscius. Everyone can see why you have appeared before this 
court as his enemy. They know that it is his fortune that has brought 
you here. So what more is there to say? I can at least say this, that 
however eager you may have been for financial gain, you should 
nevertheless have reflected that the view this jury will take of you, 
and the Remmian law,* were also important considerations to take 
into account. 
[56] It is beneficial that there should be, in the state, a large num-
ber of prosecutors, so that crime may be kept in check by fear. This 
is, however, only beneficial so long as the prosecutors do not openly 
make fools of us. A man is innocent, say: he has done nothing, but 
nevertheless has fallen under suspicion. It is a pitiful situation. All 
the same, I can forgive, up to a point, the man who brings a charge 
against him. For because the prosecutor has something to say which 
gives the impression that there is a case to be answered, we do not 
view him as making fools of us in public and kno\vingly bringing a 
false accusation. It is for this reason that we all accept that there 
should be as many prosecutors as possible, because an innocent man, 
if he is prosecuted, can always be acquitted, whereas a guilty man 
cannot be convicted unless he has first been charged. It is better that 
an innocent man be acquitted than a guilty inan escape trial. Food is 
contracted for at public expense for the geese on the Capitol,* and 
dogs are fed there too, so that they can give warning should thieves 
break in. They are of course unable to tell who is a thief and who is 
not, but they will sound the alarm if anyone at all enters the Capitol 
during the night, because this looks suspicious, and will err-since 
they are only animals-on the side of caution. But if the dogs barked 
during the day as well, when people come to worship the gods, I 
think someone would probably break their legs, for raising the alarm 
when there was no cause for it. [57] It is just the same with prosecu-
tors. Some of you are geese, who only honk, and can do no actual 
harm, while others are dogs who can bite as well as bark. We see that 
you are fed. In return, you should direct your attacks against those 
who genuinely deserve it: that is what the people want. In cases 
where it is likely that someone has committed a crime, by all means 
give voice to your suspicion by barking: that also is permissible. If, 
however, you behave in such a way as to prosecute a man for the 
murder of his father without being able to say why or how he did it, 
and bark when there are no grounds whatsoever for suspicion, then 

26 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
[58] 
nobody is actually going to break your legs-but, if I know these 
jurymen at all, they will tattoo your forehead with that letter which 
you prosecutors find so hateful that you also detest the Kalcnds of 
every month.* And they shall do it so indelibly that you will be able to 
accuse nothing for ever afterwards but your own bad luck. 
[58] So, what have you given me to reply to, brilliant prosecutor 
that you arc? And what have you given this jury to make them think 
my client might be guilty? 'He was afraid he was going to be dis-
inherited.' Ah, I sec; but why he should have been afraid of this, no 
one will say. 'His father was contemplating it.' Prove it. There is no 
proof: you do not say with whom he discussed it or to whom he told 
it, nor do you give any reason that might have led you to suspect it. 
When you make this kind of accusation, Erucius, surely \that you arc 
really saying is this: 'I know what I have been paid, but I do not know 
what to say. I thought only of what Chrysogonus told me, that no one 
would come forward to defend this man, and that in times such as 
these no one would clare to breathe a word about the purchase of the 
property or about the partnership.' That misjudgcmcnt led you to 
make this dishonest prosecution. By Hercules, you would not have 
uttered one single word had you thought that anyone would answer 
you! 
[59] I don't know, gentlemen, whether you noticed the offhand 
way in which Erucius launched his prosecution; it was interesting to 
watch. vVhcn he saw who was sitting on these benches I am sure he 
must have asked whether this or that person \Vas going to undertake 
the defence; it certainly never occurred to him that I might do so, 
since I have never spoken in a criminal case before. As soon as he 
found out that no one with any ability or experience was going to 
speak he became so relaxed about it all that he behaved just as his 
fancy took him, sitting down, wandering about, sometimes even call-
ing a boy over to him-to order dinner, I imagine. In a word, he 
treated this panel of jurors and this entire court as if it were one vast 
empty space! Eventually he finished his speech and sat down. I then 
stood up. [6o] He seemed to breathe a sigh of relief that it was only 
me who was going to speak, not one of the others. I began my 
speech. I saw, gentlemen, that he was joking and paying no 
attention-until I named Chrysogonus. As soon as I mentioned the 
name, he instantly jumped up; he seemed astonished. I realized what 
had pricked him. I named Chrysogonus a second and a third time. 
www.ebook3000.com

[6r] 
Pro Roscio A merino 
After that men did not stop running this way and that to inform 
Chrysogonus, I assume, that there was a man in Rome who was 
daring to speak out contrary to his will, that the trial was not going as 
he had anticipated, that the purchase of the property had been 
exposed, that the partnership was being severely criticized, that his 
influence and power were being disregarded, that the jury were pay-
ing close attention, and that the people thought the whole business a 
scandal. [61] You misjudged the situation, Erucius. You can see that 
everything has been turned round: Sextus Roscius is being repre-
sented, if not adequately, at least with free speech; the man you 
thought had been deserted is being defended; those who you 
believed would hand him over to you are instead holding a proper 
trial. So let us see at last that old intelligence and foresight of yours: 
admit that you came here expecting that whgt would take place in 
this court would not be a trial, but a robbery. 
A trial for parricide is being held; the prosecutor, however, gives 
no reason as to why the son should have killed his father. [62] In the 
case of the most trivial offences and the smallest misdemeanours 
such as are becoming more common and are now occurring virtually 
every day, the first and most important question to be asked is what 
was the motive for the crime. In a case of parricide, however, this is a 
question which Erucius does not think it necessary to raise. With 
this particular crime, gentlemen, even when many motives seem to 
coincide and point in the same direction, the charge is not lightly 
believed, nor does the matter depend on idle speculation, nor is any 
attention paid to dubious witnesses, nor is the verdict determined by 
the ingenuity of the prosecutor. On the contrary, it must be proved 
that the defendant has committed many crimes before, and that his 
life has been utterly depraved. Unparalleled wickedness must also be 
demonstrated-and indeed not only wickedness, but the utmost vio-
lence and insanity. But even if all this can be proved, there must exist 
in addition unmistakable indications of the crime: where, how, by 
whose agency, and at what time the murder was committed. And 
unless such proofs are numerous and transparently clear, a crime so 
atrocious, so wicked, and so outrageous cannot possibly be believed. 
[63] For men's tender feelings are strong, the ties of blood are power-
ful ones, and nature herself protests against suspicions of this kind. 
It is without doubt unnatural and monstrous that a being of human 
shape and form should so far surpass the wild animals in savagery as 

28 
Pro Roscio A merino 
to have deprived of the light of day, in the most shocking way pos-
sible, the very people to whom he owes the fact that he too can enjoy 
this light. Even wild animals live at peace with each other, thanks to 
the ties of birth and upbringing, and thanks to nature herself. 
[64] It is said that not many years ago a certain Titus Cloelius 
from Tarracina,* quite a well-known man, went to bed after dinner in 
the same room as his two grown-up sons, and was discovered in the 
morning with his throat cut. No slave or free man was found who 
could possibly be suspected of the crime, while the two grown-up 
sons who had been sleeping next to him said that they had not even 
been aware of what had happened. The sons were then prosecuted 
for parricide. What could have been more suspicious? Was it really 
credible that neither of them saw anything? That someone dared to 
venture into that room, and at a time when the two grown-up sons 
were there and could have easily have seen what was happening and 
offered resistance? There was, moreover, no one else on whom sus-
picion could fall. [65] Nevertheless, once it had been proved to the 
jury that the sons had been found asleep when the door was opened, 
the young men were formally acquitted and cleared of all suspicion. 
For nobody believed that there could have been anyone capable of 
violating every human and divine law by such an outrageous crime, 
and then going to sleep immediately afterwards. Indeed, men who 
have committed so terrible a crime are unable to rest in peace or even 
to draw breath without fear. 
[66] The poets tell of sons who killed their mothers to avenge 
their fathers.* Although they are said to have killed them in response 
to the commands and oracles of the immortal gods, you have read 
how the Furies hound them even so, and never let them rest, because 
they were unable even to fulfil their duty towards their fathers with-
out committing a crime. And that is how it really is, gentlemen. The 
blood of a father or a mother has great power, it is a great bond, and 
it possesses great sanctity. The stain it produces, however small, can 
not only never be washed out, but seeps right into the mind, so that 
the utmost violence and insanity ensue. [67] You should not believe, 
of course, as you so often see in plays, that those who have commit-
ted a treacherous or criminal act are literally hounded and frightened 
out of their wits by the blazing torches of the Furies. No, it is ,above 
all their own wrongdoing and their own terror which torments them. 
Each is hounded and driven mad by the crime he has committed: his 
www.ebook3000.com

[68] 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
29 
own evil thoughts and the stings of his conscience terrify him. These 
are the Furies which stay forever beside the wicked, and which day 
and night exact punishment for the parents from their murderous 
sons. 
[68] It is the very enormity of parricide which, unless it has actu-
ally been proved, makes it impossible to believe. Unless a man's early 
years have been scandalous, unless his life has been defiled with 
every type of corruption, unless his expenditure has been extrava-
gant and accompanied by shame and disgrace, and unless he has 
shown violent criminal behaviour and a recklessness verging on 
insanity, then a charge of parricide will simply not be believed. You 
should also add to that a hatred on the part of the father, a fear of 
punishment at his father's hands, friends of bad character, slaves 
who were party to the crime, a favourable opportunity, and a suitable 
location especially chosen. I would almost go so far as to say that the 
jury should actually see the son's hands stained with the father's 
blood, if they are really to believe a crime so serious, so monstrous, 
and so cruel. [69] It therefore follows that the less credible it is, 
unless it be proved, the more seriously it should be punished, if it is 
proved. 
And so, while there is plenty of evidence to show that our ances-
tors surpassed other nations not only in warfare but in wisdom and 
good judgement too, this is especially demonstrated by the fact that 
they devised a unique punishment for sons who violated their filial 
duty. Consider how much more sensible our ancestors were on this 
point than the men regarded by other nations as supremely wise. 
[ 70] The leading city as far as intelligence is concerned is said to 
have been Athens, during her years of greatness; and in that city the 
wisest man is reputed to have been Solon,* the man who drew up the 
laws which are still in force there today. He, on being asked why he 
had not specified any punishment for the murder of a parent, replied 
that he thought no one would ever do such a thing. People say it was 
sensible of him not to lay down a penalty for an offence that at that 
time had never been committed; had he done so, he might have 
seemed not so much to be outlawing the crime as putting the idea 
into people's heads. But how much wiser our ancestors were! Real-
izing that nothing is so sacred as to be exempt from the possibility of 
criminal violation, they thought out a unique punishment for parri-
cides. Their intention was that those whom nature herself had been 

30 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
unable to keep on the path of filial duty should nevetheless be 
deterred from actually committing a crime by the horrific nature of 
the penalty. They therefore stipulated that parricides should be sewn 
up in a sack while still alive and thrown into a river.* 
[71] What remarkable wisdom they showed, gentlemen! Do they 
not seem to have cut the parricide off and separated him from the 
whole realm of nature, depriving him at a stroke of sky, sun, water, 
and earth-and thus ensuring that he who had killed the man who 
gave him life should himself be denied the elements from which, it is 
said, all life derives? They did not want his body to be exposed to 
wild animals, in case the animals should turn more savage after 
coming into contact with such a monstrosity. Nor did they want to 
throw him naked into a river, for fear that his body, cm·ried down to 
the sea, might pollute that very element by which all other defile-
ments are thought to be purified. In short, there is nothing so cheap 
or so commonly available that they allowed parricides to share in it. 
[72] For what is so free as air to the living, earth to the dead; the sea 
to those tossed by the waves, or the land to those cast ashore? Yet 
these men live, while they can, without being able to draw breath 
from the open air; they die without earth touching their bones; they 
are tossed by the waves without ever being cleansed; and in the end 
they are cast ashore without being granted, even on the rocks, a 
resting-place in death.* 
That is the terrible crime of which you are now accusing Sextus 
Roscius, a crime for which so striking a punishment has been pre-
scribed. Do you really think, Erucius, that you can prove to men like 
these that such a crime has been committed, when you cannot even 
produce a motive? Even if you were accusing my client before the 
actual purchasers of his property and Chrysogonus were presiding 
over the court, you would still have had to come more carefully and 
more fully prepared. [ 73] Can you not see what this case is which is 
being tried, or before whom it is being tried? It is a trial for parricide, 
a crime which cannot conceivably be committed without many 
motives, and it is being held before highly intelligent men who are 
well aware that nobody commits even the most trifling offence with-
out a reason. 
So be it; you cannot produce a motive. Although I ought! to be 
deemed at once to have won my case, I will not insist on my' rights, 
and, since the innocence of my client gives me confidence, I will 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Roscio Amerino 
31 
concede to you what I would not concede in any other case. I will not 
ask you why Sextus Roscius killed his father; instead, I will ask how 
he killed him. Yes, Gaius Erucius, I will ask you 'how?' and I will 
deal with you like this: even though it is my turn to speak,* I am going 
to give you leave to answer me, or to interrupt me, or even, should 
you wish, to ask me questions. [74] How, then, did he kill him? Did 
he strike the blow himself, or did he leave the actual killing to others? 
If you maintain that he did it himself, he was not in Rome. If you say 
he got others to do it, then I ask you who were they? Were they slaves 
or free men? If they were free men, then which men? Did they come 
from Ameria itself, or were they our own Roman cut-throats? If they 
came from Ameria, then who were they? \Vhy are their names not 
given? If they came from Rome, how had Roscius got to know them, 
given that he had not visited Rome for many ·years, and never for 
longer than three clays? Where did he meet them? How did he confer 
with them? What means did he use to persuade them? 'He gave them 
money.' Who did he give it to? Through whom did he give it? Where 
did he get it from, and how much was paid? Is it not by steps such as 
these that one normally gets to the bottom of a crime? 
Do not forget, either, how you portrayed my client's way of life. 
You said that he was an uncouth rustic, that he never spoke to any-
one, that he never went into town. [75] While we are on this point I 
am going to pass over what might have been a very strong argument 
in favour of my client's innocence: that country habits, frugal living, 
and a rough and uncivilized life such as Roscius leads are not the 
usual context in which crimes of this sort originate. Just as you do 
not find every crop or tree growing in every type of soil, so too not 
every type of crime originates in every mode of life. The city breeds 
extravagance; and from extravagance, greed must necessarily arise; 
and from greed, violent behaviour breaks out, producing all manner 
of crimes and misdeeds. The life of the country, on the other hand, 
which you call uncouth, is the teacher of thrift, honest toil, and fair 
dealing. 
[76] But I will leave all that aside. Instead, I will put this question 
to you. You say yourself that my client avoided the company of 
others. Who, then, were the men who helped him to commit so 
terrible a crime, and in such secrecy-and in his absence, too? Many 
charges which are groundless, gentlemen, can still be made to sound 
plausible. But in this case, if there is anything that looks at all 

32 
Pro Roscio A merino 
[77] 
suspicious, I shall be happy to concede that my client is guilty. 
Sextus Roscius was killed in Rome, while his son was in the country 
near Ameria. The son, who knew no one at Rome, sent a letter, let us 
say, to some assassin. 'He called someone to him.' But who, and 
when? 'He sent a messenger.' Which messenger, and to whom? 'He 
persuaded someone, using money, influence, expectations, pro-
mises.' But this is so implausible it is impossible even to fabricate 
such a story; and yet my client is on trial for parricide. 
[77] There remains the possibility that he used slaves to kill his 
father. Immortal gods, what a pitiful and calamitous situation this is! 
With crimes of this sort, the usual means by which innocent defend-
ants clear themselves is by offering their slaves for interrogation.* Is 
Sextus Roscius to be denied this opportunity? You the prosecution 
are in possession of all his slaves. Out of so large a household, Sextus 
Roscius has not been left with even so much as a single boy to bring 
him his meals each day. I now appeal to you, Publius Scipio, and to 
you, Marcus Metellus.* When you were supporting Sextus Roscius 
and acting for him, you will recall that he asked his opponents a 
number of times for two of his father's slaves, so that he could 
submit them for interrogation. And do you also remember Magnus' 
refusal? Where are those slaves, then? Gentlemen, they wait upon 
Chrysogonus. He holds them in high esteem, and places a high value 
on them. Even at this late stage, I demand that they be handed over 
for interrogation, and my client begs and implores that this be done. 
[ 78] So what do you think you are playing at? Why do you refuse? 
Remain undecided, if you can, members of the jury, about who really 
killed Sextus Roscius-whether it was the man to whom Roscius' 
murder brought poverty and risk to his life, the man who has not 
even been allowed to hold an inquiry into his father's death, or 
whether it was those who are shunning an inquiry, who are in posses-
sion of the dead man's property, and who live as murderers and 
support themselves by murder. This entire case, gentlemen, is pitiful 
and shocking, but there is no aspect of it more cruel and unjust than 
this: that the son should be forbidden to interrogate his father's 
slaves as to how his father died. Is he not even to be master of his 
slaves for long enough to be able to question them about his father's 
death? I shall deal with this point in a moment, however: all this has 
to do with Magnus and Capito, and I promised I would spegk about 
their violent behaviour as soon as I had refuted Erucius' charges. 
www.ebook3000.com

[79] 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
33 
(79] Now, Erucius, I return to you. If my client is involved in this 
crime, we must agree that he committed it either with his own hand 
(and you arc not claiming this) or through other people, either free 
men or slaves. vVere they free men? You cannot explain how he came 
to meet them, or how he persuaded them, or where, or through 
whom, or by making what promises or offering what money. I, on 
the other hand, am able to show not only that Sextus Roscius did 
none of these things, but that he was not even in a position to do 
them, since he had not been in Rome for many years, and had never 
even left his estate unless he had a particular reason to do so. Your 
last hope therefore seemed to be the mention of slaves, where you 
could take refuge as if in a safe haven, driven there by all your other 
false accusations. Instead of a haven, however, you have encountered 
a rock, and this has not only made you see the charge rebounding off 
my client, but has made you aware, also, that the suspicion recoils 
entirely upon yourselves. 
[So] So where can the prosecutor take shelter from his lack of 
arguments? 'It was a time', he says, 'when people were constantly 
being killed with impunity. Because there were so many murderers 
about, you were able to commit the crime without any difficulty.' 
Sometimes, Erucius, you seem to me to be wanting two things for 
the price of one: to soak us in a lawsuit, but also to incriminate the 
very men from whom you have received your payment. What are you 
saying? People were constantly being killed? By whom, and on whose 
instructions? Surely you remember that the men who brought you 
here were purchasers of confiscated property? What next? Are we 
unaware that, during these times you mention, the breakers of necks 
and the brokers of property were by and large the same people? 
[81] They used to rush about day and night brandishing weapons, 
they were always in Rome, they spent all their time in plunder and 
bloodshed-shall men such as these hold Sextus Roscius responsible 
for the cruelty and wickedness of that time, and treat the prevalence 
of murderers, whose chiefs and leaders they were themselves, as 
grounds for an accusation against him? Yet Roscius not only was 
never at Rome, he did not even know what was going on in Rome, 
because, as you yourself concede, he was a man who spent all his 
time in the country. 
[82] I am afraid I may become a nuisance to you, members of the 
jury, or appear to have little faith in your intelligence, if I go on 

34 
Pro Roscio A merino 
talking any longer about matters that are so transparently clear. Eru-
cius' entire accusation has, I believe, been disproved-unless of 
course you are waiting for me to refute the charge of embezzlement 
and the other fabricated charges of this kind, which I have not heard 
about until today, and which have only just been mentioned. Erucius 
seemed to me to be rehearsing them from a different speech he was 
getting up against some other defendant, since they had no connec-
tion at all either with the charge of parricide or with the man who is 
now on trial. Since these accusations were made with just a word, it 
will be sufficient to deny them in a word. If he is keeping anything 
back until the witnesses are heard,* there too, as in this part of the 
trial, he will find us better prepared than he anticipated. 
[83] I turn now to a matter which I have no particular eagerness to 
deal with, but which my duty to my client requires me to address. If 
prosecuting was something I enjoyed, I should prefer to prosecute 
other people, people whose condemnation would enable me to 
advance my career.* I have decided, however, not to do this, as long as 
I have a choice. In my view, it is the man who reaches a higher 
position by his own merit who attains the greatest distinction, not 
the man who rises as a result of the disadvantage and ruin of another. 
For the time being, however, let us stop investigating charges that are 
without foundation. Instead, let us try to find out where the crime 
exists, and where it can be discovered. This will allow you to see, 
Erucius, how many suspicious circumstances are needed to prove a 
genuine accusation, even though I do not propose to mention all of 
them, and will only touch upon each one. I would not of course be 
doing this unless I really had to, and you will be able to tell my 
unwillingness from the fact that I will not be pursuing the matter any 
further than my client's safety and my duty to him require. 
[84] Against Sextus Roscius you found no motive; but I find one 
in Magnus. For it is you, Magnus, that I must deal with, since you 
are sitting on the prosecutors' bench and openly declaring yourself 
my adversary. We shall see about Capito later, if he comes forward as 
a witness, as I hear he is ready to do: he will then be told about the 
other such prizes that he has won, prizes he has no idea I have even 
heard of. 
The famous Lucius Cassius,* who was regarded by the }itoman 
people as an .extremely fair and wise judge, always used to;ask the 
same question at the trials over which he presided: 'Who.:stood to 
www.ebook3000.com

[8s] 
Pro Roscio A merino 
35 
gain?' Human nature is such that no one attempts to commit a 
crime without hope of gain. [85] Those who were threatened with 
criminal prosecution used to avoid and dread Cassius when he was 
the president of the court because, in spite of his love of truth, his 
character seemed not so much disposed to mercy as inclined to 
severity. The man who is presiding over this court today is both 
courageous in his opposition to criminal behaviour and merciful 
towards the innocent. Nevertheless, I would be perfectly happy to 
plead Sextus Roscius' case either before the rigorous Cassius himself 
or before 'Cassian' jurors-a designation which even now causes 
defendants to shudder. [86] For, in this case, when the jurors saw 
that the prosecution were in possession of vast wealth, but that my 
client was reduced to utter destitution, they would have no need to 
ask 'Who stood to gain?' It would be transparently obvious: they 
would associate the suspicion of guilt with the plunder, not with the 
poverty. What if, in addition, you had previously been poor? What if 
you were avaricious? What if you were reckless? What if you had 
been the murdered man's worst enemy? Surely we need look no 
further for a motive which would have driven you to commit so 
terrible a crime? And can any of these facts can be denied? Your 
former poverty is such that it cannot be concealed, and the more you 
try to hide it, the more conspicuous it becomes. [87] Your avarice 
you reveal when you team up with a complete stranger and form a 
partnership to do with the property of someone who is a relation of 
yours and your fellow-townsman. As for your recklessness, it can be 
clearly recognized from this fact alone (I leave everything else aside), 
that out of so extensive a conspiracy-by which I mean, out of so 
many cut-throats-you are the only person who has been found 
willing to sit on the prosecutors' bench, and not only let your face be 
seen, but thrust it into view. And you cannot deny that Sextus 
Roscius was your enemy, and that you had serious disputes with him 
over family affairs. 
[88] It remains, gentlemen, to weigh up the probabilities and 
decide which of the two killed Sextus Roscius. Was it the man to 
whom the murder brought wealth, or the man to whom it brought 
destitution? Was it the man who was poor before the murder, or the 
man who was reduced to poverty after it? Was it the man who, 
burning with greed, attacked his own relations, or the man who 
throughout his life knew nothing about making money but only 

Pro Roscio Amerino 
about the fruits of his own toil? Was it the man who was the most 
reckless of the purchasers of confiscated property, or the man who, 
being unused to the forum and the courts, shunned not only the 
sight of these benches, but even the city itself? Finally, gentlemen, 
and in my opinion this is the most relevant consideration of all: was 
it the murdered man's enemy, or his son? 
[89] If you, Erucius, had arguments as numerous and convincing 
as these to use against someone you were prosecuting, how long you 
would speak for! How you would throw yourself about! You would 
run out of time-by Hercules!-long before you ran out of words. In 
fact, there is so much evidence that you could spend whole days on 
each individual point. And I too could do likewise-for without 
wishing to sound conceited, I do not think so little of my talents as to 
suppose that you could speak more fully than I. 
Nevertheless, because of the number of defence advocates that 
there are, I may perhaps be reckoned as just one among many, while 
the battle of Cannae* has made you look like a tolerably good prosecu-
tor. We have seen many men killed, not at the lake ofTrasimene, but 
at the Servilian one.* [90] 'Who was not wounded there by Phrygian 
steel?'* There is no need to list everyone who was killed. There was a 
Curti us, a Marius, and then a Memmius, *all of whom were exempted 
from active service on grounds of age, and finally there was that old 
Priam himself, Antistius,* who was disqualified from fighting not 
only by his age but by the laws too. There were also the multitudes 
who used to prosecute in cases of murder and poisoning, whose 
names nobody mentions because of their insignificance. As far as I 
am concerned, I could wish that all these men were still alive today. 
For there is no harm in having as many dogs as possible when there 
are many people to be watched and many things to be guarded. 
[91] It is quite normal, however, that amid the violence and confu-
sion of war many things happen without the generals being aware of 
it. While he who had overall control* was busy with separate matters, 
there were other men, in the mean time, who were looking to heal 
the wounds inflicted on them. These men behaved as if the country 
were shrouded in everlasting night: they rushed around in the dark-
ness and threw everything into confusion. In fact, I am surprised 
they did not also burn these benches, in order to wipe out every last 
trace of judicial process; they certainly struck down prosecu.tors and 
jurymen alike. Luckily, however, their way of life was such that they 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Roscio A merino 
37 
could not kill every witness, even had they wished to do so. For as 
long as the human race exists, there will be men prepared to prose-
cute them; and as long as our country survives, trials will take place. 
But, as I began to say, if Erucius was undertaking some different 
prosecution, and had available to him the arguments I mentioned, he 
would be in a position to go on speaking indefinitely-and I, gentle-
men, could do likewise. My intention, however, as I have already 
indicated, is to pass over each individual point lightly, merely touch-
ing on it. By doing this, I want to make it clear to everyone that I will 
not be indulging a personal taste for accusing, but rather doing my 
duty for the defence of my client. 
[92] I see, then, that there are a considerable number of motives 
which could have driven Magnus to commit the crime; let us now see 
whether he had any opportunity of committing it. Where was Sextus 
Roscius killed? 'At Rome.' And where were you, l\1agnus, at the 
time? 'At Rome. But what has that got to do with it? There were 
many others there besides me!' But the question we are asking is not 
w·ho, out of the whole population of Rome, killed Sextus Roscius. 
No, what we are asking is this: whether a man who was killed at 
Rome was more likely to have been killed by someone who at that 
time was constantly in Rome, or by someone who had not visited 
Rome at all for many years. 
[93] Let us now take a look at what other factors there are. There 
were at that time a large number of assassins, as Erucius has pointed 
out, and people were being killed with impunity. So who did that 
large number of assassins consist of? They were, I think, either those 
who were involved in purchasing confiscated property, or those who 
were paid by them to kill people. If you think that they were those 
who went after other people's property, then you yourself are one of 
them, since you have made yourself a rich man by taking what 
belongs to us. If, on the other hand, you think they were those whom 
people euphemistically describe as 'hit-men', then ask yourself to 
whom they are bound, and whose dependants they are: I tell you that 
you will find among them someone from your own circle. Say what 
you like to the contrary-and then compare it with my defence. This 
will enable you to see very clearly the contrast between Sextus 
Roscius' case and yours. 
[94] You will say, 'Suppose I was constantly in Rome-what of it?' 
I shall reply, 'But I was never there at all.'* 'I admit I purchased 

Pro Roscio Amerino 
[95] 
confiscated property, but many other people did as well.' 'But I was a 
farmer and country man, as you yourself criticized me for being.' 'If 
I have mixed with assassins, it does not necessarily follow that I am 
one myself.' 'But I, who don't know even a single assassin, am quite 
beyond suspicion on a charge of this nature.' There are a great many 
more points I could use which would demonstrate that you had 
every possible opportunity to commit the crime. I shall pass over 
them, however, partly because I take no pleasure in accusing you, but 
more importantly because, ifl were to relate all the murders like that 
of Sextus Roscius which were committed at that time, I am afraid 
that my speech might appear to be directed not only against you but 
against others as well. 
[95] Let us now look briefly-in the same way as we dealt with the 
other points-at what you did, Magnus, after the death of Sextus 
Roscius. Your actions were in fact so open and transparent that-I 
call heaven to witness, gentlemen!-I would rather not have to speak 
about them. What I am afraid of is that, whatever sort of a man you 
really are, Magnus, people will think I have set out to save my client 
by being completely ruthless towards yourself. However, just when I 
begin to get worried about this, and decide that I want to spare you 
as far as I can short of actually doing damage to my case, I suddenly 
change my mind. What happens is that I think of your incredible 
cheek. The rest of your associates were making themselves scarce 
and keeping out of the way, so as to give the impression that this trial 
would be concerned not with the plunder they had stolen, but with a 
crime committed by my client. And to think that while they were 
doing this, you, on the other hand, were demanding for yourself the 
role of appearing in court and sitting on the prosecutors' bench! All 
you are achieving by this, however, is to ensure that your wickedness 
and effrontery become well known to everyone. 
[96] After Sextus Roscius' murder, who was the first to bring the 
news to Ameria? It was Mallius Glaucia, whom I mentioned earlier, a 
dependant and friend of yours. Why was it his business in particular 
to convey news which was nothing at all to do with you, unless you 
had already formed a plan regarding Roscius' death and his property, 
and had entered into a partnership with some accomplice for the 
purposes of crime and financial gain? 'Mallius brought the no\vs on 
his own initiative.' But what, I ask you, did it have to do wi¥h him? 
Or, if this was not the reason why he went to Ameria, was it purely 
www.ebook3000.com

[97] 
Pro Roscio A merino 
39 
by chance that he was the first to report what he had heard in Rome? 
And what was his reason for going to Ameria? 'I really can't guess,' 
says Magnus. By the time I have finished, there will be no more need 
for guessing! But why was the news brought first to Titus Roscius 
Capito? Sextus Roscius had a house, wife, and children* at Ameria, 
and many relations and kinsmen with whom he was on the best of 
terms. Why then did this dependant of yours, reporting the news of 
your crime, choose to bring it to Capito before anyone else? 
[ 97] Roscius was killed as he was returning from dinner; yet the news 
of his death was known at Ameria before dawn the next morning. 
What was the reason for this incredibly quick journey, this extra-
ordinary speed and hurry? I am not asking who struck the actual 
blow: you need have no worries, Glaucia, on that score. I am not 
going to go through your clothes to see if you have a weapon on you. 
I am not going to search you-I don't think it is any of my business. 
Since I have found out who arranged the murder, ram not worried 
about whose hand it was that struck the actual blow. There is just 
one question which your obvious guilt and the plain facts of the case 
suggest to me: where and from whom did Glaucia hear of the mur-
der? How did he come to know of it so quickly? Suppose he heard of 
it as soon as it happened. What was it that made him travel such a 
long journey in a single night? And if he genuinely had reasons of his 
own for going to Ameria, what great necessity was there that forced 
him to set out from Rome at the time he did, and not rest at all at any 
point during the night? 
[98] When the facts are as clear as this, is it really necessary to seek 
out arguments and draw inferences from them? Do you not seem, 
members of the jury, actually to witness with your own eyes what 
you have been hearing? Do you not see that poor man, unaware of his 
impending doom, returning from dinner? Do you not see the 
ambush in place, the sudden attack? Before your very eyes, carrying 
out the murder, is that not Glaucia? And is he not there too-
Magnus? Is he not with his own hands placing that Automedon* in 
his chariot, to carry the news of his terrible crime and evil victory? Is 
he not begging him to stay awake all night, to show his regard for 
him by trying his hardest, and to bring the news to Capito at the 
earliest possible moment? 
[99] And why was it that he wanted Capito to be the first to hear 
the news? I do not know. But this I can see, that Capito has a share in 

Pro Roscio A merino 
[10o] 
the property: out of the thirteen farms, he is currently in possession 
of the best three. [roo] I hear, moreover, that this is not the first time 
that Capito has been suspected of such dealings. I hear that he has 
won many shameful prizes, but that this is the first major decoration* 
that has been brought to him from Rome. And I also hear that there 
is no means of killing a man that he has not used a number of times: 
he has killed many people with weapons, and many by poison. I can 
even tell you of one man whom-contrary to the tradition of our 
ancestors, since the man was Jess than sixty years of age-he threw 
from a bridge into the Tiber!* If Capito comes forward as a witness-
or rather when he does, since I know that he is going to come 
forward-he will hear about all of this from me. [ror] So let him 
come, and let him unroll that document of his, which I can prove was 
in fact written by Erucius: this is the document which Capito, it is 
said, waved in my client's face, threatening to submit as evidence 
everything it contained. What a distinguished witness, gentlemen! 
What stern dignity-well worth waiting to see! What an honourable 
character, and one whose evidence you should undoubtedly have no 
hesitation in allowing to determine your verdict! It is certainly true 
that we would not be able to see these men's crimes with such clarity 
if they had not themselves been blinded by avarice, cupidity, and 
recklessness. 
[I oz] Immediately after the murder, one of the two* sent a fast 
messenger to his accomplice-or, rather, his master*-at Ameria. By 
this action, even if everyone had been keen to cover up the fact that 
they knew who was responsible for the crime, he himself would 
nevertheless have placed his own palpable guilt before the eyes of all. 
The other one,* if the immortal gods will tolerate such a thing, pro-
poses to give evidence against Sextus Roscius-as though it were 
still a question of whether his words should be believed, and not 
whether his deeds should be punished! Our ancestors established the 
custom that, even in the most trivial cases, no one, however dis-
tinguished, should give evidence where their own interests arc 
involved. [ro3] Not even Africanus,* who declares by his name that 
he has conquered one-third of the world, would give evidence in a 
case which affected himself; for if such a great man as he were to give 
evidence, I would certainly not dare to suggest that there coJ1ld be 
any possibility at all of its not being accepted. But consider npw how 
everything has altered and changed for the worse. Thi~ trial is 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Roscio A merino 
concerned with property and with murder. Yet evidence is going to 
be given by someone who is both a purchaser of confiscated property 
and a murderer, by someone, indeed, who is the purchaser and pos-
sessor of the actual property in question, and who is also the very 
person who arranged the murder of the man whose death is being 
investigated by this court. 
[ro4] So, my good friend,* do you have anything to say? Pay atten-
tion, then, to what I have to tell you. You must take care not to let 
yourself down: you too, just like my client, have a great deal at stake. 
You have committed many crimes, many acts of violence, and many 
outrages, but you have also committed one act of great stupidity, and 
on your own initativc too, not on Erucius' advice: you should not 
have sat on the prosecutors' bench. Nobody, you sec, has any use for 
a prosecutor who just sits and says nothing or, on the other hand, for 
a witness who gets up to speak from the prosecutors' bench. More-
over, had you not joined the prosecution, your greed would have 
been marginally better hidden and concealed. But as it is, what is 
there that anyone could possibly want to hear from you, given that 
your behaviour makes you appear to be deliberately acting in our 
interests and against your own? 
[ws] Now let us consider, gentlemen, what happened immedi-
ately after the murder. Four days after Sextus Roscius had been 
killed, news of his death was brought to Chrysogonus in Lucius 
Sulla's camp at Volatcrrae.* Does anyone at this stage need to ask who 
sent the messenger? Is it not obvious that it was the same man who 
sent him to Ameria? Chrysogonus saw to it that Roscius' property 
was sold at once-although he knew neither the man nor the 
circumstances. But how did it enter into his head to covet the farms 
of a stranger that he had never set eyes on? Usually on hearing this 
sort of story, gentlemen, you would immediately say, 'Some fellow-
townsman or neighbour must have told him. It is generally they who 
pass information: they are usually the ones responsible when people 
are betrayed.' But in this case we are not dealing with mere sus-
picion. [ro6] For I am not going to argue as follows: 'In all prob-
ability, Magnus and Capito told Chrysogonus what had happened, 
since they were already friends of his before this. They did have 
many long-standing patrons and hosts inherited from their ances-
tors, but they had given up treating them with any attention or 
respect, and had taken themselves off instead to become dependants 

Pro Roscio Amerino 
and clients ofChrysogonus.' [107] All this I could say with complete 
truth, but in this case there is no need to draw inferences in this way. 
In fact, I know for certain that they themselves do not deny that they 
were the ones who prevailed upon Chrysogonus to take the property. 
If you see with your own eyes the man who took his share in return 
for information given, then will you have any doubt, gentlemen, who 
supplied the information? So who, then, with respect to this particu-
lar property, are the men Chrysogonus rewarded with a share? Mag-
nus and Capito. And who else is there besides? No one, gentlemen. 
Can there be any doubt, then, that the men who offered the plunder 
to Chrysogonus are those who have subsequently received a share in 
it from him? 
[ 108] But let us now look at what Magnus and Capito did accord-
ing to Chrysogonus' own judgement. If during the course of that 
fight they did nothing worth speaking of, why did he reward them so 
handsomely? If they did nothing but give him the news, surely all he 
needed to do was to thank them, or at most, if he wanted to be 
particularly generous, give them a small token of his appreciation? 
Why, instead, were three extremely valuable farms immediately 
handed over to Capito? Why is Magnus jointly in possession of 
everything else along with Chrysogonus? Surely it is obvious, 
gentlemen, that Chrysogonus granted these spoils to Magnus and 
Capito after looking into and finding out what they had done? 
[109] Capito came to the camp as one of the ten leaders of the 
council.* His behaviour on this deputation will on its own reveal to 
you the man's character, morals, and whole way of life. Unless you 
come to the conclusion, gentlemen, that there is no duty and no law 
so sacred and inviolable that it has not been desecrated and violated 
by his wickedness and treachery, then please judge him to be a most 
honourable man. [IIo] He prevented Sulla from being informed 
about what had taken place. He told Chrysogonus about the plans 
and intentions of his fellow delegates, advised him to make sure that 
the matter was not dealt with publicly, and pointed out that, if the 
sale of the property were annulled, Chrysogonus would lose a great 
deal of money, and he himself would face trial on a capital charge. He 
spurred Chrysogonus on, and at the same time continued to mislead 
his fellow delegates. He repeatedly warned him to be on his;'guard, 
while cunningly holding out false hopes to the others. He ma,de plans 
against them with Chrysogonus, and he told Chrysogonus of their 
www.ebook3000.com

(I II) 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
43 
own plans. He came to an agreement with Chrysogonus as to his own 
share of the proceeds, while all the time giving the delegates one 
excuse after another to delay their obtaining access to Sulla. In the 
end, through his recommendation, advice, and intervention Capito 
managed to ensure that the delegates never did see Sulla. Deceived 
by his promise-or rather his broken promise, as you will be able to 
learn from the delegates themselves, if the prosecution decide to call 
them as witnesses*-they went home again, taking with them a false 
hope instead of a positive result. 
[I I I] In private matters, if someone showed even minor neg-
ligence in the execution of a trust*-to say nothing of deliberate 
fraud for his own profit or advantage-he was considered by our 
ancestors to have acted in a highly dishonourable manner. Legal 
proceedings for breach of trust were therefore established, and in the 
case of a conviction the disgrace was no less extreme than it was in 
cases of theft. This was no doubt because, in matters in which we are 
not able to be involved personally, the good faith of our friends is 
substituted for our own efforts; and if someone abuses that con-
fidence, then he is attacking a safeguard which is common to all, and 
is thus, as far as lies within his power, undermining the fabric of 
society. For we cannot do everything for ourselves: each man is more 
useful than the next one in some particular task. That is why friend-
ships arc formed, so that the common good may be advanced by 
mutual services. [I I z] Why accept a trust, if you are going to neglect 
it or turn it to your own advantage?* Why offer to help me, and then 
under the guise of service do me a disservice and thwart my inter-
ests? Stand aside: I will find someone else to manage my business. 
You are taking on a burden which you think you can support, but it is 
one which seems by no means insignificant to men whose abilities arc 
themselves by no means insignificant.* 
That is why breach of trust is a disgraceful offence, because it 
violates two things that are extremely sacred: friendship and good 
faith. A man does not normally choose someone to be a trustee 
unless he is a friend, nor does he trust someone unless he considers 
him to be true to him. It is therefore the act of a totally degraded 
character both to destroy a friendship and at the same time to 
deceive someone who would not have been harmed had he not 
placed his trust in him. [I I3] Do you not agree? Even in .matters of 
minor importance someone who has been negligent in the execution 

44 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
(I I4] 
of a trust incurs a penalty involving the most extreme disgrace. In a 
case as important as the present one, therefore, when someone, 
entrusted with the task of safeguarding the reputation of a dead 
father and the fortunes of his living son, goes on instead to bring 
ignominy on the dead man and penury on the one who is still alive, 
can we really consider such a man to have a place among honourable 
men, or indeed among the living? In private matters of minor 
importance, even mere negligence is open to prosecution for breach 
of trust and is liable to a penalty involving official disgrace. This is 
because, if everything is as it should be, it is the beneficiary of the 
trust, and not the trustee, who can alford to be negligent. In a case as 
important as the present one, however, where the trust was officially 
commissioned and set up, we have a trustee who has not merely 
injured some private arrangement out of negligence but has defiled 
and polluted the sanctity of the entire deputation by his treachery. 
What penalty, I ask you, is to be inflicted on such a man, and with 
what sentence is he to be condemned? 
[I I4] Suppose that Sextus Roscius had privately entrusted the 
matter to Capito, arranging that Capito should settle everything with 
Chrysogonus and come to an agreement with him, and that he had 
given Capito discretion to pledge Sextus' word if he judged it to be 
necessary. If Capito, having accepted the commission, then turned it 
to his own advantage in any way at all, however trivial, surely this 
would lead to his being convicted by an arbitrator,* and he would 
both be required to make restitution, and also forfeit his good name 
entirely? [IIS] As it is, however, it was not Sextus Roscius who 
entrusted the matter to him. It is far more serious than that: what 
happened was that Sextus Roscius himself, together with his reputa-
tion, his life, and all his property, was officially entrusted to Capito 
by the town council. And Capito, moreover, has not just turned the 
commission to his own advantage in some minor way: he has turned 
my client right out of his property, has bargained for three farms for 
himself, and has shown as little respect for the wishes of the town 
council and all his fellow-townsmen as he has for his own word. 
[I I6] Now take a look at the rest of his actions, members of the 
jury, and you will see that there is no crime imaginable with which he 
has not defiled himself. It is considered extremely disgractful to 
deceive one's partner in matters of minor importance, justf as dis-
graceful as the case I have just been talking about. And it is l;'ight that 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Roscio Amerino 
45 
such deception should be so regarded, because a man who has 
entered into partnership with someone else assumes that he has 
associated himself with someone who will be a help to him. In whose 
good faith can he trust, if he is injured because of the bad faith of the 
man he has trusted? Besides, the offences which it is hardest to guard 
against are the ones which merit the strictest punishment. With 
strangers we can be reserved, but our close friends must necessarily 
know a great deal more about us. As for a partner, how can we 
possibly take precautions against one? If we even so much as feel 
anxious about him, then we are committing a violation against the 
law of duty. Because of this, our ancestors were quite right to regard 
the man who deceived his partner as having no place among honour-
able men. 
[I I 7] It was not, however, a single partner in· a financial deal that 
Capito deceived; that, although a serious offence, might have been 
somehow tolerable. On the contrary, it was nine extremely honour-
able men, his partners in the same task, deputation, duty, and com-
mission, that he led on, deceived, deserted, handed over to their 
enemies, and cheated with every kind of fraud and treachery. These 
men could have had no suspicion of his criminal purpose; it was not 
for them to feel anxious about their partner in an official duty; they 
were blind to his wickedness; they trusted his empty promises. And 
so it is that these most honourable men, as a result of his trickery, are 
now deemed to have shown insufficient caution and foresight. He, on 
the other hand, who was first a traitor and then a deserter, who first 
revealed the plans of his partners to their enemies and then made 
common cause with those enemies, continues to threaten and 
intimidate us, while in the mean time he has enriched himself with 
three farms as a reward for his crime. 
In a life such as this, members of the jury, you will also find, 
among so many other disgraceful outrages, the crime which is the 
subject of this trial. [II 8] Your inquiry ought, I suggest, to proceed 
on this basis: where you discover that many acts of greed, many acts 
of violence, many acts of dishonesty, and many acts of treachery have 
been committed, you should conclude that crime, also, lies concealed 
among all those outrages. There is nothing concealed, though, about 
this particular crime. It is all so visible and open to view that it does 
not have to be inferred from the other crimes Capito is known to 
have committed. Indeed, if anyone were to question his responsibility 

Pro Roscio A merino 
[r r9] 
for any of those other crimes, it could actually be proved from the 
fact of his having committed this one. So what do you think, gentle-
men? Do you think that that trainer of gladiators has retired com-
pletely from his profession, or that this pupil of his is in any way 
inferior in skill to his master? No: their greed is equal, their 
unscrupulousness parallel, their impudence the same, their reckless-
ness twin. 
[I I9] Now that you have learned about the trustworthiness of the 
master, you must also learn about the reasonableness of the pupil. I 
said earlier that the prosecution have repeatedly been asked to hand 
over two slaves for interrogation.* But you, Magnus, have always 
refused. Let me put this question to you: were those who made the 
request unworthy of having it granted? Or did the man on whose 
behalf they made it fail to arouse your sympathy? Or did the request 
itself seem to you unjustified? Those who made it were the most 
high-ranking and honourable men in our nation, and I have already 
mentioned their names.* Their way oflife and standing in the eyes of 
the Roman people are such that, whatever they should choose to say, 
there is no one who would think it unreasonable. Moreover, they 
made their request on behalf of an utterly wretched and unfortunate 
man, who would even be prepared to offer himself for interrogation 
under torture,* just so long as an inquiry was held into the death of 
his father. [rzo] The request, furthermore, was of a type whereby 
your refusal to grant it amounted to an admission of guilt. This 
being the case, I ask you why you refused it. When Sextus Roscius 
was killed the slaves were present. I am not concerned either to 
accuse the slaves or to exculpate them. But your opposition to their 
being submitted for interrogation is suspicious; and the fact that you 
are placing such a high value on them can only mean that they know 
something which would be disastrous to you were they to reveal it. 
'It is unfair to interrogate slaves against their master.' But that 
would not be happening: it is Sextus Roscius who is on trial! And if 
they were interrogated about Roscius, they would not be being exam-
ined against their master, since you say that you are their master now. 
'They arc with Chrysogonus.' Yes, indeed: Chrysogonus is so cap-
tivated by their culture and sophistication that he wanted these 
men-little more than labourers, trained at Ameria by a/ rustic 
householder-to mix with his own beautifully mannered and cultur-
ally aware young boys, selected out of a large number oLthe most 
www.ebook3000.com

[I2r] 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
47 
refined households. [rzr] No, that is not how it is, gentlemen. It is 
not likely that Chrysogonus admired the education and culture of 
these slaves, or that he appreciated their diligence and loyalty in 
household matters. There is something that is being concealed-and 
the more keen the prosecution are to suppress it and hide it from 
view, the more blatant and conspicuous it becomes. 
[rzz] So is it because he wants to conceal his own crime that 
Chrysogonus is unwilling for the slaves to be interrogated? Far from 
it, members of the jury: I do not think I should be directing all my 
accusations at everybody. As far as I am concerned, I do not suspect 
Chrysogonus of anything of the kind, and this is not something 
which it has only just occurred to me to say. You will recall that at the 
outset* I divided up my case as follows. First there was the charge, 
which was left entirely to Erucius to undertake; and then there was 
the violence, that role being assigned to Magnus and Capito. Any 
misdeed, crime, or murder that is discovered ought therefore to be 
attributed to those two. As for Chrysogonus, we maintain that his 
excessive influence and power are obstructing our case, that it cannot 
possibly be tolerated, and that it should not only be checked by you, 
but punished, since it is in your power to do so. [r23] Let me give 
you my own view. If a man wants witnesses to be interrogated who it 
is certain were present at the scene of a murder, then we can infer 
that he is someone who is eager for the truth to be discovered. But if 
a man refuses this, then by his actions he unquestionably admits his 
own guilt, even if he does not go so far as to admit it in words. I said 
at the beginning,* gentlemen, that I wished to say no more about 
these men's crime than the case required and necessity itself 
demanded. For there are many allegations which could be made, and 
each of them could be supported by many arguments. But I cannot 
spend time or pains on something that I am doing unwillingly and 
out of necessity. The points which simply could not be passed over 
in silence I have lightly touched upon, gentlemen; but those which 
rest on suspicion and which, if I began to discuss them, I should 
have to treat at length, these I leave to your intelligent conjectures. 
[r24] I return now to that golden name* of Chrysogonus, beneath 
which the whole partnership has taken shelter. On this subject, 
members of the jury, I do not see how I can say anything-but, 
equally, I do not see how I can say nothing. If I say nothing, I 
relinquish perhaps the most important part of my case; but if I say 

Pro Roscio Amerino 
[I2S] 
anything, I am afraid that not only Chrysogonus (I am not worried 
about that in the least) but others too might think they are being 
attacked. Nevertheless, I do not think that the nature of the case 
requires me to say much about the purchasers of confiscated 
property in general: for this case is unique and unprecedented. 
[125] The purchaser of Sextus Roscius' property was Chry-
sogonus. Let us first pose this question: on what grounds was 
Roscius' property sold, and how could it have been sold? In asking 
this question, members of the jury, I am not seeking to argue that it 
is shocking that the property of an innocent man should have been 
put up for sale. If that issue should ever be raised and freely dis-
cussed, there are more important people than Sextus Roscius on 
whose behalf such a complaint could be made. No, what I am asking 
is simply this: how, according to the law relating to proscription, 
whether it is the Valerian law or the Cornelian*-I am not familiar 
with it, and do not know-how, according to that law, could the 
property of Sextus Roscius have been sold? [rz6] The wording of the 
law is said to run: 'THAT THE PROPERTY, EITHER OF THOSE WHO 
HAVE BEEN PROSCRIBED'-and Sextus Roscius was not one of 
those-'OR OF THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN KILLED WITHIN THE 
ENEMY'S LINES, SHOULD BE SOLD.' Throughout the whole period 
when there were any opposing lines, Roscius was within those of 
Sulla; it was only afterwards, when all the fighting was over and 
peace had been completely restored, that he was killed, at Rome, as 
he was returning from dinner. If he was lawfully killed, then I admit 
that the sale of his property was also lawful. But if it is accepted that 
he was killed contrary to all the laws, the new laws as well as the old 
ones, then I demand to know by what right, by what means, and by 
what law the property was sold. 
[127] Do you ask whom I am speaking against, Erucius? Not 
against the person you would like, and think I am actually speaking 
against: for Sulla has been freed from blame at every point, both by my 
speech from its very beginning, and by his own outstanding merit. I 
declare that, on the contrary, it is Chrysogonus who bears responsi-
bility for everything-that he lied, that he pretended Sextus Roscius 
was a bad citizen, that he said he had been killed with the enemy, that 
he prevented Lucius Sulla from being made aware of the facts py the 
delegates from Ameria. Finally, I even have a suspicion t,hat the 
property was never in fact sold at all; this I will show l~ter on,* 
www.ebook3000.com

[rz8] 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
49 
gentlemen, if you will allow me to do so. [ r z8] For I believe that the 
law specifies the date up until which proscriptions and sales could 
take place, namely the first of June. Some months after that, Roscius 
was killed and his property is said to have been sold. Either, then, the 
sale has not been entered in the public accounts, in which case we are 
being cheated by this crook more cleverly than we had realized;* or 
alternatively, if it has been entered in the public accounts, then these 
accounts must somehow have been tampered with, since by law it 
was not possible for the property to be sold. 
I am aware, members of the jury, that I am examining these mat-
ters prematurely, and that I am straying from the point at issue: 
when I should be trying to put Sextus Roscius' life out of danger, all 
I am doing is attending to a damaged fingernail. For he is not con-
cerned about money, nor docs he take account of any advantage of 
his own: he reckons that he will easily put up with his poverty, so 
long as he is freed from this unwarranted suspicion and this fabri-
cated charge. [rzg] But I would ask you to appreciate, gentlemen, 
when listening to what little I have left to say, that I am speaking 
partly for myself and partly for Sextus Roscius. The aspects which 
strike me as scandalous and intolerable, and which I regard as affect-
ing all of us unless we keep a look out, all these I bring up on my own 
account, because of the sense of anguish I feel in my heart. Those 
matters, on the other hand, which relate to my client's life and 
situation-what he wishes to be said on his behalf and the outcome 
that will satisfy him-this, gentlemen, you shall hear at the very end 
of my speech. 
[130] Leaving Sextus Roscius aside for the moment, I have several 
questions that I want to put to Chrysogonus for myself. First of all, 
why has the property of a very fine citizen been sold? Next, why has 
the property been sold when its owner was neither proscribed nor 
killed with the enemy, given that the law specifies that these are the 
only cases in which sales are to be held? Next, why was the property 
sold long after the date specified in the law? Next, why was it sold for 
so little? If Chrysogonus docs what wicked and dishonest freedmen 
usually do and tries to pin the blame for all this on his patron, he will 
gain nothing by it. For everyone is well aware that many people have 
committed many crimes which Lucius Sulla, being preoccupied with 
his important public duties, either disapproved of or knew nothing 
about. [r3r] Is it right, then, in situations like this, that something 

so 
Pro Roscio A merino 
should be overlooked through inadvertence? It is not right, gentle-
men, but it cannot be helped. If Jupiter Best and Greatest, by whose 
nod and command earth, sea, and sky are governed, has often done 
harm to men by violent winds, wild storms, excessive heat, or 
unbearable cold, and has destroyed their cities and ruined their 
crops, we do not regard any of these disasters as arising from a divine 
intention to cause destruction, but rather from the sheer size and 
power of nature. But on the other hand, the blessings we share, the 
light we enjoy, and the air we breathe, these we view as given and 
bestowed upon us by Jupiter. During the time we are discussing, 
Lucius Sulla was single-handedly ruling the country, governing the 
world, and, after recovering our empire by force of arms, was 
strengthening its majesty with new laws: should we therefore be 
surprised, gentlemen, if, at such a time, there were certain things 
that escaped his notice? One might just as soon express surprise that 
human intelligence has failed to attain what divine power is unable to 
achieve. 
[ r 32] But let us leave aside the past: surely it is obvious to anyone, 
fl·om what is actually happening at this very moment, that the man 
who has contrived and engineered this whole business is Chry-
sogonus alone? It was he who arranged for a charge to be brought 
against Sextus Roscius; it was out of respect for him that Erucius 
said he was undertaking the prosecution .. . *[There is a large gap in 
the text here. Several fragments are presen,ed in the sdzolia as folloms.] 
... in the district of Pallacina ... he was very much afraid ... he 
dodges the question, however, and says that he ... by hand, farms 
with farms ... at this point I want those men to hear ... 
[Here the text resumes.] ... they think that they have a country 
house which is well ordered and meets their requirements, those 
men who reside in the territory of the Sallentini or the Bruttii,* where 
news reaches them scarcely three times in a year. 
[r33) And here you have the other one,* making his way down 
from his residence on the Palatine. To refresh his spirits, he also has 
a delightful country seat outside Rome, and in addition a number of 
farms, all very good ones, and close to the city. His house is crammed 
with vessels of Corinthian and Delian bronze, including that kettle-
urn for which he recently paid so high a price that passers-by who 
heard the auctioneer calling out the bids assumed that a f¥m was 
being sold. How much embossed silver, how much embroidered 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Roscio Amerino 
51 
cloth, how many paintings, how many statues, and how much marble 
do you suppose there is in that house of his? As much, of course, as 
could be seized from many distinguished families in times of civil 
disorder and pillage and piled up inside a single building! 
As for his household slaves, how many he has and what their 
various specialities are, what can I say? [I 34] I do not mention such 
common-or-garden trades as cooks, bakers, litter-bearers: to refresh 
his spirits and ears, he has so many slaves that the whole neighbour-
hood resounds every day with singing voices, strings, and pipes, and 
at night with revelling. With a way of life like this, gentlemen, can 
you imagine what daily expense, what extravagance is involved, and 
what festivities take place? They are respectable ones, naturally, in a 
house of this kind-if it can in fact be called a house, and not a 
factory of vice and lodging for every type of scandal. 
[135] And look at the man himself, gentlemen, how, with his hair 
carefully styled and soaked in perfume, he flits about the forum, 
escorted by a large band of citizens in togas!* See how he looks down 
on everyone, how he thinks that no one is more important than he is, 
how he considers that only he is successful, and only he is powerful. 
Nevertheless, if I felt inclined to go into everything that he does, and 
everything he attempts to do, then I fear, gentlemen, that someone 
who has not fully grasped the facts of the case might assume that I 
intended to impugn the nobility and the victory their cause has 
achieved. 
Of course, if there were anything in that cause that I disagreed 
with, I would be fully within my rights in criticizing it. For I have no 
fear that anyone could think of me as having been ill-disposed to the 
interests of the nobility. [136] Those who know me are aware that, 
once my greatest hope-that an agreement be reached-had 
proved impossible, I then strove, in my own small way, for the vic-
tory of the side which afterwards proved victorious. For was there 
anyone who failed to grasp what was happening-that the highest 
honours were being disputed between inferior men and men of high 
status? In such a contest, it would have been a bad citizen indeed 
who failed to attach himself to those on whose survival both the 
dignity of our nation at home and its authority abroad depended. 
And I am delighted, gentlemen, and extremely happy that this has 
been achieved, and that everyone has had their honour and rank 
restored to them-and I appreciate that all this has been done by the 

52 
Pro Roscio A merino 
will of the gods, the commitment of the Roman people, and the 
wisdom and guidance and good fortune* of Lucius Sulla. [ 137] As to 
the fact that punishment was inflicted on those who fought against 
us by every means in their power, it is not my business to find fault 
with this; and as to the granting of rewards to the valiant men who 
gave outstanding service in what they did, this has my full approval. 
Those were the aims, in my opinion, for which we were fighting, and 
I am happy to declare that that was the side to which I gave my 
support. But if it is the case that all this happened and a war was 
started in order that the worst class of men should enrich themselves 
with other people's wealth and make an assault on the property of 
every single person; and if one should be forbidden not only to put a 
stop to it by action but even to censure it-with words-if this is how 
the matter stands, then the Roman people have not been restored and 
rehabilitated by the recent war, but, on the contrary, defeated and 
crushed. 
[138l But that is far from being the case. That is not what hap-
pened, members of the jury. If you make a stand against these men, 
not only will the cause of the nobility remain undamaged, it will 
actually be promoted. For those who want to criticize the current 
state of affairs complain that Chrysogonus has too much power, 
whereas those who wish to praise it deny that he has been given any. 
And there is no excuse for anyone to be either so stupid or so dishon-
est as to say, 'I could wish it were allowed-then I would have said 
this.' Well, you can say it! 'I would have done this.' You can do it: no 
one is stopping you. 'I would have voted this way in the senate.' 
Vote-only do so as justice requires, and everyone will approve. 'I 
would have given this verdict.' Everyone will praise you, if your 
verdict is right and proper. 
[139] As long as it was necessary and the situation demanded it, 
one man controlled everything; but once he had appointed magis-
trates and passed laws, everyone received back the responsibility and 
standing they had previously held. And if those who have received it 
back want to hold on to it, they will be able to keep hold of it for ever. 
But if they commit or condone such acts of murder and looting/and 
such excessive and prodigal extravagance-! do not want to say 
anything too harsh against them, if only to avoid a bad omenf but I 
will just say this: if those nobles of ours fail to show themselves 
watchful and good and valiant and merciful, then they will have to 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Roscio A merino 
53 
resign their distinctions* in favour of those who do possess these 
qualities. 
[140] They should therefore stop saying that someone who has 
openly spoken the truth has spoken treasonably; they should stop 
making common cause with Chrysogonus; they should stop thinking 
that, if Chrysogonus' interests are damaged, then theirs, too, are 
affected; they should reflect how lamentable and shameful it is that 
they, who could not endure the splendour of the equestrian order,* 
should submit to the domination of an utterly worthless slave. This 
domination, gentlemen, has in the past been exercised in other fields,* 
but now you should be able to see what road it is constructing for 
itself and what course it is preparing: it is aiming at your good faith, 
at your oath, at your verdicts, at what is virtually the only thing left 
in the state that is uncorrupted and intact. [ q:I] Does Chrysogonus 
really imagine that he has some influence in this area too? Does his 
desire for power extend this far? What a lamentable and sickening 
state of affairs! My feeling of outrage does not-by Hercules!-arise 
from any fear that Chrysogonus may actually have some influence. 
No, my complaint is simply that he has had the audacity to suppose 
that he could incline men such as yourselves to bring about the 
destruction of an innocent man. 
Did the nobility, then, fulfil our hopes and recover the country by 
arms and the sword simply in order to allow their freedmen and 
petty slaves to ransack our goods and property just as it suited them? 
[ 142] If they did, then I admit that I was wrong to prefer their cause, 
I admit that I was mad to have sided with them (although I did so, 
gentlemen, without actually taking up arms myself). But if, on the 
other hand, the victory of the nobles is to be seen as a glory and a 
blessing for our country and the Roman people, then what I am 
saying ought to be extremely welcome to all the finest and noblest 
citizens. But should anyone conclude, on hearing Chrysogonus being 
criticized, that his own interests and cause are being damaged, then 
he does not understand his cause-and he has formed a fine idea of 
what his interests are! For the cause, if it stands up to each and every 
scoundrel, will become ever more glorious; and the unprincipled 
supporter of Chrysogonus, who thinks that he shares a community 
of interest with him, is in reality damaging his own interests, because 
he is cutting himself off from this glory which the cause is winning. 
[ 143] But all that I have just been saying, as I told you before, was 

54 
Pro Roscio A merino 
[1441 
said in my own name: the state of our country, my own feelings of 
indignation, and the wrong which these men have committed all 
forced me to speak out. Sextus Roscius, for his part, feels no indigna-
tion at any of this, he accuses no one, he makes no complaint about 
the loss of his inheritance. A farmer and country man with little 
knowledge of the world, he believes that all these actions for which 
you claim that Sulla was responsible were done according to custom, 
law, and the universally recognized principles of justice. All he 
desires is to be able to walk from this court freed from blame and 
cleared of this outrageous charge. [1441 If he can only be relieved of 
this unwarranted suspicion, he declares that he will bear the loss of 
all his property with equanimity. 
Roscius begs and entreats you, Chrysogonus, if from his father's 
considerable fortune he has spent nothing on himself, if he has 
defrauded you of nothing, if he has made his entire property over to 
you in good faith and has counted it all out and weighed it up, if he 
has handed over to you the clothes in which he stood and the ring* 
from his finger, and if he has kept back nothing whatsoever from you 
with the sole exception of his own naked body-then please allow 
him, innocent as he is, to live out his life in poverty, dependent on 
the support of his friends. [145] You are in possession of my farms,* I 
am living on the charity of others: I accept it, both because my heart 
is resigned to it and because I must. My house is open to you, but 
closed to me: I bear it. You have the use of my large household, I 
have not a single slave: I put up with it and think it tolerable. What 
more do you want? Why do you persecute me? Why do you attack 
me? In what way am I thwarting your desires? What interests of 
yours am I blocking? How am I standing in your way? If it is for the 
sake of the spoils that you are wanting to kill a man, you have already 
despoiled him. What more are you asking for? If it is out of personal 
enmity, what enmity can you possibly feel towards a man whose 
farms you took before you even knew him? If it is out of fear, how 
can you fear anything from someone who, as you can see, is quite 
unable to defend himself on his own against such a terrible wrong? 
But if it is your acquisition of the property of Sextus Roscius which 
makes you d~termined to destroy his son, are you not showing your-
self to be afraid of something which you have less reason to fear/than 
anyone else*-that at some point in the future the children pf the 
proscribed may be given their fathers' property back? 
. 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Roscio A merino 
55 
[146] You do an injustice,* Chrysogonus, if, in seeking to hold on to 
what you have purchased, you place more trust in my client's death 
than you do in what Lucius Sulla has achieved. But if you have no 
reason for wanting this unfortunate man to be struck down by so 
great a calamity, if he has already handed over to you everything he 
possesses except the actual breath in his body, and has kept back out 
of his father's property nothing whatsoever for himself, not even the 
merest keepsake, then-by the immortal gods!-what is the purpose 
of this excessive cruelty, this monstrous savagery of character? What 
robber was ever so wicked, what pirate so barbaric that, when he 
could have taken the spoils complete and intact without bloodshed, 
he nevertheless preferred to strip them off soaked in blood? 
[147] You know full well that my client has nothing, aspires to noth-
ing, can do nothing, has never dreamt of opposing your interests; and 
yet you attack him-a man whom you cannot possibly fear, nor 
ought to hate, and who you see has nothing furthd that you can take 
from him. Unless, of course, you think it shocking that the man you 
threw naked from his inheritance as from a shipwreck should be 
sitting here in court, as you see him, with clothes on his back! As if 
you can be unaware that he is being both fed and clothed by Caecilia,* 
the daughter of Baliaricus and sister of Nepos, a lady of the utmost 
respectability! Despite having an illustrious father, highly exalted 
uncles, and a most accomplished brother, nevertheless, woman 
though she is, she has herself displayed manly distinction of her 
own, and has demonstrated that, great as is the honour conferred on 
her by these eminent relations, she has conferred on them, through 
her noble actions, no less glory in return. 
[ 148] Or perhaps it is the fact that my client is being properly 
defended that makes you feel so outraged? Believe me, if, in return 
for the generous hospitality shown by his father, his family friends 
had all been willing to appear and had ventured to speak openly on 
his behalf, then he really would have a proper defence. But if each of 
them were to punish you in proportion to the injustice you have 
done and the extent to which your prosecution is threatening the 
national interest, then I can assure you-by Hercules!-you would 
not be standing where you are now! As it is, however, the defence 
that my client is receiving is one that the prosecution have no reason 
at all to resent, and they could not possibly view themselves as being 
overcome by superior force. 

s6 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
[I49] My client's domestic needs are being seen to by Caecilia. 
His business in the forum and in court, on the other hand, has been 
undertaken, as you see, gentlemen, by Marcus Messalla. * If he were 
old enough, and up to the physical demands of the task, Messalla 
would speak for Sextus Roscius himself. But since his youth, and the 
natural modesty which does credit to one so young, prevent him 
from speaking, he has entrusted the case to me, knowing that I have 
his interests at heart and have a duty to be of service to him. It is, 
however, thanks to his perseverance, advice, influence, and hard work 
that the life of Sextus Roscius has been rescued from the hands of 
the purchasers of confiscated property and entrusted instead to the 
votes of a jury. Yes, gentlemen, it was for nobles such as Messalla that 
most of the citizens took up arms. Their aim was to restore to their 
rightful position in the state the sort of nobles who would act as you 
see Messalla doing-who would defend the rights of the innocent, 
who would stand up against injustice, and who would prefer to exer-
cise whatever influence they possessed in saving rather than destroy-
ing their fellow men. If everyone who has been born into that level of 
society were to act like this, our country would be suffering less from 
them, and they themselves would be less resented. 
[I so] But if we cannot induce Chrysogonus, members of the jury, 
to be satisfied with our property and not to insist on taking our life as 
well; if he cannot be dissuaded, even after taking away everything 
that was ours, from seeking to deprive us also of the light which is 
common to all; and if he does not think it enough to satisfy his greed 
with money without blood, too, being offered to assuage his cruelty; 
then, gentlemen, there is only one place of refuge, only one hope left 
for Sextus Roscius, and it is the same as that which is left for our 
country-your own traditional goodness and mercy. If this holds 
strong, we can all, even now, be saved. But if the cruelty which is 
currently endemic in our country should harden and embitter your 
hearts as well (and that surely cannot happen), then it is all over, 
gentlemen. It would be better to spend one's life among wild animals 
than amid such savagery. 
[I 5 I] Is this really the purpose for which you have been destined, 
is it really for this that you have been chosen-to condemn people 
whom purchasers of confiscated property and cut-throats hav~ not 
succeeded in murdering? Good generals, when they join battlelposi-
tion troops at the point where they expect the enemy to flee, So that 
www.ebook3000.com

[!52] 
Pro Roscio A merino 
57 
they can launch an unexpected attack on anyone who runs away from 
the battlefield. I imagine these purchasers must be thinking along 
the same lines, that men such as yourselves are seated here for the 
purpose of catching anyone who escapes from their clutches. May 
the gods forbid, gentlemen, that this court, to which our ancestors 
gave the name 'council of state',* should be thought a bastion for 
purchasers of confiscated property! [I 52] Do you not realize, 
gentlemen, that the sole aim of these proceedings is to get rid of the 
children of the proscribed by fair means or foul, and that the first 
step in this process is to be achieved through your sworn oath and 
this attack on Sextus Roscius? Is there any doubt about who the 
guilty party is, when on the one side you can sec someone who, 
besides being the prosecutor, is a purchaser of confiscated property, a 
personal enemy of the accused, and a cut-throat, while on the other 
you see an impoverished son, highly esteemed by his relations, a man 
to whom not only no blame at all but not even the suspicion of it can 
possibly be attached? Can you see anything else at all that counts 
against Roscius, except for the fact that his father's property has 
been sold? 
[ r 53] But if you do indeed favour that cause and pledge your 
support to it, if you are sitting there precisely so that the children of 
those whose property has been sold may be brought before you, 
then-by the immortal gods!-take care, gentlemen, that you do 
not seem to have instigated a new and far crueller proscription.* 
Although the first proscription was directed against those in a posi-
tion to take up arms, the senate was nevertheless unwilling to under-
take it: it was afraid that the council of state might appear to have 
sanctioned measures more extreme than those of our ancestors. This 
new proscription, on the other hand, is directed against the children 
of the proscribed and against little babies in their cradles; and unless 
you reject it and repudiate it by your verdict in this trial, then-by 
the immortal gods!-think what may happen to our country! 
[154] Men who are wise, and endowed with the authority and 
power which you possess, have a particular duty to cure those ills 
from which our country is particularly suffering. There is no one 
among you who is not conscious that the Roman people, who used to 
be thought merciful to their enemies abroad, are currently suffering 
from cruelty at home. Remove this cruelty from our nation, gentle-
men. Do not allow it to continue any longer in this country of ours. It 

ss 
Pro Roscio Amerino 
[154] 
is an evil thing, not only because it has done away with so many 
citizens in a most dreadful manner, but because it has taken away the 
feeling of compassion from even the mildest of men, by accustoming 
them to troubles. For when we are witnessing or hearing of some 
dreadful event every hour, even those of us who arc tender-hearted 
by nature find that, through constant contact with unpleasantness, 
we lose all sense of humanity. 
www.ebook3000.com

PRO MURENA 
('FOR MURENA') 
DATE: late November 63 BC 
DEFENDANT: Lucius Licinius Murcna 
LAW: lex Tullia de ambitu (Tullian law concerning electoral malpractice) 
CHARGE: electoral malpractice during campaign for consulship of 6z 
PROSECUTORS: Servius Sulpicius Rufus, Marcus Porcius Cato, Servius 
Sulpicius, Gaius Postumius 
DEFENCE ADVOCATES: ~1intus Hortensius Hortalus, Marcus Licinius 
Crassus, Marcus Tullius Cicero 
PRESIDING MAGISTRATE: unknown 
VERDICT: acquittal 
The circumstances of Pro Nlurena arc quite different from those of Pro 
Roscio /}merino. In Pro Roscio (So BC) we saw the z6-ycar-old Cicero, not 
yet launched on a political career, undertaking his first criminal case. 
\Vhcn he delivered Pro Murena (63 uc), on the other hand, he was one of 
the year's two consuls, having attained each political office in turn at the 
earliest age permitted by law. In Pro Roscio Cicero made himself known as 
a speaker; by the time he was consul, however, he had been established for 
some seven years as Rome's foremost orator. And whereas Sextus Roscius 
was merely a farmer from one of the Italian towns, Lucius Licinius 
Murcna was a prominent politician and general from a senatorial family, 
recently elected to succeed Cicero in the consulship of 62. 
There is a contrast in the guilt of the two men, too. Roscius was trans-
parently innocent of the crime of which he was accused . .lVlurcna, on the 
other hand, accused of having secured his election to the consulship by 
bribery, was fairly evidently guilty. Fortunately for him, however, his trial 
coincided with a dangerous military emergency, the Catilinarian conspir-
acy, and .lVlurena was a man with a proven military record. Only days 
before the trial began, news had arrived that Lucius Sergius Catilina 
('Catilinc' in English), one of Murcna's unsuccessful rivals for the consul-
ship, had taken command of a hostile army in Etruria (cf. §§ 79, 84). In 
these circumstances it would clearly have been an act of madness for the 
Romans to send one of their consuls-elect into exile (the Greeks had been 
accustomed to act in this way, but the Romans never). This allowed Cicero 
to claim, with justice, that the national security, not the technical question 
of Murcna's guilt, was the overriding factor in the case. The jury agreed, 
and Murena was unanimously acquitted. Cicero, then, docs appear in this 

6o 
Pro .Murena: Introduction 
speech to have used his eloquence to secure the acquittal of a guilty 
defendant. But Pro Murena is far from being a dishonourable defence. 
Murena's family (like that of Titus Annius Milo) came from Lanuvium 
in Latium, about twenty miles south of Rome. His father, grandfather, 
and great-grandfather had all been praetors, but until Murena himself no 
member of the family had attained the consulship. This did not make 
Murena (like Cicero, whose family had been entirely non-senatorial) a 
'new man'; but it did mean that his family was not classed as belonging to 
the nobility. Murena's father, also named Lucius Licinius Murena, was 
the general who provoked the Second Mithridatic War (83-81 BC), was 
defeated, and returned to Rome for a triumph (events grossly mis-
represented by Cicero in this speech); it was under his command that the 
young Murena gained his first military experience. 
In 74 Murena held the quacstorship, and spent the year serving under a 
provincial governor. Then from 73 he served as a legate under Lucius 
Licinius Lucullus, to whom he was related (Att. 13.6.4), in the Third 
.Mithridatic War (73-63 Be); Lucullus placed him in charge of the sieges 
of Amisus in 72 and of Tigranoccrta in 69. We arc not told when his 
service came to an end, only that he served 'for many years' (§ 8g); but 
there is no reason to suppose that he did not continue to serve under 
Lucullus until the latter's replacement in 67. In 66 he stood successfully 
for the praetorship; during his year of office (65) he held the prestigious 
post of praetor urbanus (city praetor) and gave extravagant games. He then 
went on to govern a province, Transalpine Gaul (64-63). Finally, in the 
first half of 63, he returned to Rome to stand for the consulship. Lucullus' 
veterans, meanwhile, had come to Rome for a triumph, and with their 
help, together with that of the Umbrian towns from which he had 
recruited soldiers on his way out to his province the year before, Murena 
was elected consul for 62. 
The other candidates in the consular election of 63 were Servius Sulpi-
cius Rufus, Decimus Junius Silanus, and Lucius Sergius Catilina. Sul-
picius' career had been exactly contemporaneous with that of Murcna. He 
had been quaestor in charge of the port of Ostia in 74 and praetor in 
charge of the embezzlement court in 65, but after his praetors hip he had 
declined to take a province. His entire career had been spent in Rome, 
where he had established himself as a great jurist, a reputation he still 
retains among students of Roman law. Silanus' earlier career is unknown, 
although he had made a previous attempt at the consulship in 65 (Att. 
r. r .2). He was fortunate, as we shall see, to have been the brother-in-law 
of Marcus Porcius Cato, being the husband of Cato's half-sister Servilia. 
As for Catilinc, he had been a legate under Sulla in 82-So, praetor ih 68, 
and governor of Africa in 67-66. In 66 he had been unable to stand for the 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Jl!Iurena: Introduction 
61 
consulship because he did not return from Africa in time; in 65 he was 
prevented by a trial for extortion; and in 64 he lost to Cicero. The election 
of 63 was to be his final attempt. Of the four candidates, two, Sulpicius 
and Catiline, were patricians, and so legally could not both be elected 
(every year at least one consul had to be a plebeian). But in the event it was 
the two plebeians, Murena and Silanus, who were successful. 
The election campaign was notable for the bribery and other illegal 
practices resorted to by at least some of the candidates. The existing law 
on electoral malpractice was the lex Calpumia (67 Be), which imposed a 
penalty of expulsion from the senate, permanent disqualification from 
public office, and payment of a fine. When, during the campaign, the 
extent of the candidates' malpractice became known, Cicero, as consul, 
was pressed into obtaining from the senate a decree which clarified the lex 
Ca!purnia by enumerating the practices which would be considered viola-
tions of it. This was done at the request of all the candidates, none of 
whom could decently resist the decree once it had been proposed. After 
the decree was passed, however, the candidates continued their campaigns 
exactly as before. At this point Sulpicius, who was probably the only 
candidate to keep within the law (and who perhaps had a greater respect 
for law in general than his fellow candidates), began to despair of being 
elected. Instead, his plan became to wait until the election was over and 
then prosecute one of his successful rivals. If the patrician Catiline were 
elected, he would have to prosecute him, since Sulpicius was a patrician 
himself; but otherwise he would have a free choice between Murena and 
Silanus. Then, having unseated one of the newly elected consuls, Sulpi-
cius would stand in the supplementary election which would be held to fill 
the vacancy. Such was his plan. He also demanded a new, more rigorous 
bribery law, and persuaded his friend Cicero, who had been supporting his 
campaign, to propose one. The lex Tullia was duly passed. It did not 
contain all the proposals that Sulpicius wanted, but it was an advance on 
the lex Calpurnia, and it added to the penalties of that law a further 
penalty, exile for ten years. 
Sulpicius was not, however, the only politician who disapproved of 
bribery. His views were shared by the austere Cato, who had just been 
elected to a tribunate for 62 (his year of office would begin on IO Decem-
ber 63, some weeks in advance of the consular year, which began on 
I January). Cato was a great-grandson of the elder Marcus Porcius Cato 
(the new man from Tusculum who became consul in 195 and censor in 
184), and he resembled his distinguished ancestor in his uncompromising 
traditionalism and in the severity of his moral outlook. But Cato was also 
(unlike his ancestor) an adherent of the Stoic school of philosophy. It was 
not unusual for Roman aristocrats at this time to have an interest in 

62 
Pro Murena: Introduction 
philosophy, whether in Stoicism or in its rival, Epicureanism; what was 
unusual was the extent to which Cato allowed his Stoic beliefs to dictate 
his actions and dominate his life. It is impossible for us to tell precisely 
what brand of Stoicism Cato chose for his own, and therefore to what 
degree Cicero's portrayal of Cato's philosophy in Pro ;\1urena is mis-
representation, but the strength of Cato's commitment to Stoicism is not 
in doubt. Cato, then, joined Sulpicius in protesting against the usc of 
bribery, and he announced publicly that he would prosecute any candidate 
whom he found acting illegally-although he would make an exception, he 
said, in the case of Silanus, since Silanus was his brother-in-law! This 
qualification may seem to us laughable (since it effectively proclaimed 
Silanus' guilt) and hypocritical, but this is to misunderstand Roman mor-
ality: prosecuting was a hateful business, and loyalty to one's own family 
was a moral imperative (except, of course, in ca.ses where it conflicted with 
the national interest). In ruling out the prosecution of a relation, Cato was 
merely conforming to the old-fashioned Roman-ness which was a mark of 
his character, and which no one at the time would have considered 
reprehensible. 
Bribery, then, was one cause for concern in the run-up to the consular 
election of 63. Another was the alarming behaviour of Catiline. When 
Cato announced his intention of prosecuting Catiline, the latter replied to 
the effect that if he were ruined by a conviction in the courts, he would sec 
that he brought the whole country down with him. Then, shortly before 
the election was due to take place, he gave an inflammatory address at his 
house, recommending himself as someone who was prepared to go to any 
lengths on behalf of the poor and desperate, among whom he included 
himself. This was reported to Cicero by his spies, and Cicero persuaded 
the senate to postpone the election in order that they could discuss the 
speech Catiline had made. So the senate met, and Catiline, called upon to 
justify himself, far from denying what he had said, made another speech in 
the same vein. To Cicero's dismay, the senate then declined to take any 
effective action, and the election therefore went ahead without further 
delay. Catiline attended with a gang of armed men. Cicero, who was 
presiding, came with a bodyguard, and ostentatiously wore a large cuirass. 
He did this partly to register his disagreement with the senate about the 
nature of the threat posed by Catiline, and partly to bring home to the 
people the danger that Catiline represented. The result of the election was 
the best that Cicero could have hoped for. His friend Sulpicius was not 
successful, but that had been expected. The more important objective was 
to keep Catilinc out, and a timely swing to Murena produced this re~ult. 
As in 64, when Catiline was defeated by Cicero himself~ the people yoted 
for new blood in preference to decayed and unworthy aristocracy. 
r 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Murena: Introduction 
It was now time for Sulpicius to prosecute one of the successful candi-
dates, and he decided he would join forces with Cato, who was also intend-
ing to prosecute. Cato would not prosecute Silanus, and so it was lVlurena 
against whom Sulpicius brought his charge. Two others joined the pros-
ecution: Servius Sulpicius and Gaius Postumius. Servius Sulpicius was a 
young man and apparently the son of one of Murena's friends (§ s6): he 
was not, thercf(nc, the son of Scrvius Sulpicius Rufus, but was probably 
one of his relations. As for Gaius Postumius, he stood for the praetorship 
of 62, but then withdrew his candidature(§ 57). Cicero claims that he was 
one of his own friends (§ 54), and also that he was a long-time friend and 
neighbour of Murena's late father (§ 56). It has been suggested that he 
may have been a relation of Servius Sulpicius Rufus' wife, perhaps her 
brother; that would explain his presence among Murcna's prosecutors. 
Catiline, for his part, responded to his election defeat by forming a 
conspiracy against the state. He could have chosen instead to wait for 
Murena's conviction and then stand against Sulpicius at the supplemen-
tary election which would follow; but he had evidently run out of 
patience, hope, and cash. We know little of what happened in August and 
September; in September the senate seems to have discussed Catilinc's 
conspiracy, but there was as yet no hard evidence against him. In October 
a military rising took place in Etruria under one Gaius Manlius. The 
senate passed the emergency decree and made military preparations; but 
still there was nothing to incriminate Catiline. Then on 6 November 
Catilinc held a secret meeting at which he arranged for Cicero to be 
assassinated at his home early the following morning; Cicero, however, was 
warned beforehand by his spies, and the assassins arrived to find the 
consul's doors closed against them. Cicero then went to the senate, where 
he denounced Catilinc in the First Catilinarian; Catilinc fled from Rome 
the same day, and Cicero reported his departure to the people in the 
Second Catilinarian (Cicero's four Catilinarians have survived, but were 
not written up until6o BC, and arc thus in some respects anachronistic). A 
week or so later, the news reached Rome that Catiline had joined Manlius' 
army; and Catiline and Manlius were declared public enemies. It was at 
this crucial juncture that the trial of Murena, which had been many 
months in preparation, finally opened. 
The Catilinarian conspiracy was a serious blow to Murena's prosecu-
tors, since it made it difficult if not impossible for them to argue that 
Murena's conviction was in the national interest: the defence would be 
able to point out that both consuls would be needed to defend Rome 
against Catilinc. Sulpicius, however, had set his hopes of the consulship 
on a successful prosecution, and was not inclined to give up yet; in 
any case, Catiline's conspiracy had removed a candidate from the 

Pro Murena: Introduction 
supplementary election that would be held afterwards. One might perhaps 
have expected Cato to see that the defeat of Catiline was the more im-
portant priority, especially since he was shortly afterwards to prove 
implacable in his opposition to the conspirators. But Cato was not a 
man to change his mind (§§ 61-2): he had said he would prosecute, and 
therefore would do so. 
Murena was defended by ~intus Hortensius Hortalus, Marcus 
Licinius Crassus, and Cicero. Hortensius had been Rome's leading orator, 
until he lost to Cicero in the Verres trial of 70 BC; his oratorical style was 
of the florid, 'Asianist' variety. He became consul in 69, and then, avoiding 
the courts, settled down to life as one of the senior conservatives in the 
senate: he supported his friend Lucullus, and in 66 opposed the appoint-
ment of Pompey to the command against Mithridates that Lucullus had 
held. When Cicero became consul, Hortensius returned to the courts, and 
the two men worked together thereafter: the defence of Murena was their 
second collaboration (the first being their defence of Gaius Rabirius earl-
ier in the year). Hortensius' support for Lucullus explains his acceptance 
of the case: lVlurena was very much Lucullus' man, and Lucullus attended 
the trial and gave Murena his backing(§ zo). 
Crassus' motives were similar to those of Hortensius: he too was a 
supporter of Lucullus against Pompey. He had been an enemy of Pom-
pey's since 71, when Pompey had claimed the credit for the suppression of 
Spartacus, which was largely Crassus' achievement. The two men were 
consuls in 70 (in spite of the fact that Pompey was technically six years too 
young), after which Pompey went on to further commands, against the 
pirates in 67 and against Mithridates in 66, while Crassus remained in 
Rome. By the time of Murena's trial, the war against Mithridates was 
over, and Pompey would before long be returning to Rome. This gave 
Crassus cause for concern: when Sulla had returned from fighting 
Mithridates in 82 he had made himself dictator and proscribed his 
opponents. Crassus would therefore have judged it in his interest to have 
as consul an experienced general who had fought under Lucullus and who 
owed a debt of gratitude to himself. Moreover, Catiline was in the field, 
and the senate would have to decide who should be sent against him. With 
Murena as consul, there would be a suitable general available, and so 
Pompey, if he should return before Catiline were suppressed, would be 
prevented from assuming a further command. 
Cicero, on the other hand, was more favourably disposed to Pompey, 
and had no wish to offend him ( cf. § 34). Moreover, he was a friend of the 
prosecutor Sulpicius, and had supported him in the election campaign; 
and he was in addition the author of the lex Tullia under which M6rena 
was charged. There were therefore good reasons for him not to take/on the 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Murena: Introduction 
6s 
case, particularly at a time when he was heavily occupied with other mat-
ters. Why, then, did he accept it? The suggestion that he wanted to have a 
consul in his debt to protect him from future attacks on his handling of 
the Catilinarian conspiracy seems very doubtful: the act which left Cicero 
open to attack for ever afterwards, his execution of the conspirators on 5 
December, had not yet taken place. So his main reason is more likely to 
have been that he saw it as his responsibility as consul to ensure that two 
successors would be in place on I January to defend Rome against Catiline 
(§§ 4-5, 79-82). If Murena were convicted, the new year would open with 
only Silanus as consul, and his time would be taken up with arranging the 
supplementary election necessary to fill the vacancy. Moreover, Catiline 
had taken up arms, and a military man, such as Murena, would be needed 
to defeat him. Pompey was away in the east, and Silanus, about whom 
little is known, may have been ineffectual (he vacillated in the debate of 5 
December). Cicero was uniquely aware of the d~nger of the Catilinarian 
threat. He had just survived an assassination attempt, and through his 
spies he knew more of Catiline's plans than others did. It therefore seems 
reasonable to accept that his determination to stand up to Catiline was the 
main factor in his decision to defend Murena. But there were no doubt 
secondary motives too. Cicero's partners in the defence, Hortensius and 
Crassus, were prominent conservatives, and Cicero, having reached the 
top of the political ladder, now wished to join their number. And yet, as a 
new man, he also felt a duty towards other men of a similar background to 
his own. lVlurena was not a new man himself, but he nevertheless came 
from a family in which no one had attained the consulship. In defending 
him, therefore, Cicero was in the unusual position of being able both to 
help one of his own kind and to earn the goodwill of the senior 
conservatives in the senate. 
The speeches for the defence were given in order by Hortensius, 
Crassus, and Cicero (§§ 48, 54); in speaking last, Cicero was following his 
usual custom (Bmt. 190; Orat. 130). Cicero's speech used both humour, to 
undermine the high moral status of the prosecutors, and seriousness, to 
emphasize the danger from Catiline. Cato was heard to remark, 'Gentle-
men, what an amusing consul we have!' (Plutarch, Life ofCato the Younger 
zr.s; id. Demosthenes and Cicero compared 1.5). Cicero's delivery of the 
speech, however, is said to have fallen below his usual standards, because 
he had stayed up all night preparing it (Plut. Cic. 35.3); but this has had no 
discernible effect on the speech as we have it. Murena's acquittal was 
unanimous: the jury accepted that the national interest required it (Pro 
Fiacco 98; cf Q!.1int. Inst. 6. 1.35). 
Murena, then, was consul in 6z. But by the time he took office, Cicero 
had already crushed the Catilinarian conspiracy at Rome. Shortly after the 

66 
Pro J\!Iurena: Introduction 
trial was over, Cicero, with Murena's help (De domo sua I34), acquired the 
documentary evidence that he needed to prove the guilt of Catiline's 
leading associates in the city. Five conspirators were interrogated in the 
senate on 3 December; they confessed their guilt and honours were voted 
to Cicero, who was hailed as the father of his country. That evening Cicero 
reported these events to the people in the Third Catilinarian. Then on 
5 December the senate debated what was to be done with the five men. 
It was Cato who rallied a wavering senate and persuaded it that the men 
should be executed at once, forfeiting their legal right to a trial (Cicero's 
Fourth Catilinarian was delivered on this occasion). Cicero had them exe-
cuted the same day. Cato then took up his tribunate on IO December-
along with his political opponent Quintus Caecilius Metellus Nepos. 
l\'1urena himself took office on I January. Cicero, meanwhile, was being 
attacked by Nepos for the executions. After a clash between the two of 
them on 3 January, Cato hailed Cicero as the father of his country. As for 
Murena, he defended Cato against Nepos and treated him with every 
courtesy (Plutarch, Life of Cato the Younger 21.6, 28.2-3). He did not, 
however, play any part in the final defeat of Catiline in the field: that was 
undertaken by Cicero's consular colleague Gaius Antonius Hybrida, 
whose command against Catiline (§ 84) was continued into 62. 
After his consulship, nothing more is heard of Murena. Sulpicius 
remained a good friend of Cicero, but had to wait until 5 I to become 
consul; and Cato never reached the consulship at all. 
www.ebook3000.com

PRO MURENA 
[ 1] On that day, members of the jury, on which, after taking the 
auspices, I informed the centuriate assembly of Lucius Murena's 
election to the consulship, I offered up to the immortal gods the 
traditional prayer established by our ancestors, that the election 
should augur well and happily for myself, my honour, and my office, 
and for the Roman people and plebs. Today I offer Jhe same prayer 
to those same immortal gods, that this same man may retain his 
consulship together with his civil status, that your opinion and ver-
dict may reflect the wishes and votes of the Roman people, and that 
the outcome for yourselves and for the Romanpeople may be peace, 
tranquillity, harmony, and concord. But if that traditional election 
prayer, made sacred by the consular auspices, contains as much force 
and religious power as the dignity of our country demands, then I 
have prayed that the election over which I presided should also turn 
out luckily, happily, and successfully for the men on whom the con-
sulship had been bestowed. [ 2] Since this is the case, gentlemen, and 
since the full power of the immortal gods has either been made over 
to you or at least shared with you, I, who recently entrusted a consul 
to the immortal gods, now entrust him to your protection, so that he, 
after being both declared consul and defended by the voice of one 
and the same man, may preserve the gift of the Roman people and, 
with it, the safety of yourselves and all Roman citizens. 
And since, in fulfilling this duty, my devotion to the defence, and 
even the fact that I have undertaken the case at all, has been criti-
cized by the prosecution, I propose, before I begin to speak for 
Lucius Murena, to say a few words on my own behalf. Nly reason for 
doing this is not that I judge defending my own actions to be more 
important to me at this time than defending my client. Rather, I 
believe that, by securing your approval for the action I have taken, I 
will be able to repel with greater authority the attacks which my 
client's enemies have made on his honour, his reputation, and every-
thing that he has. 
[3] I shall reply first, on the question of where my duty lies, to 
Marcus Cato-a man who orders his life according to a fixed set of 
rules, and who weighs up the respective claims of every duty with 

68 
Pro Murena 
the greatest of care. Cato objects that it is wrong for me to have 
anything to do with Lucius Murena's defence, seeing that I am a 
consul and the author of the law on electoral malpractice,* and have 
displayed such severity during my consulship.* His criticism has 
moved me greatly, and has made me demonstrate-not only to you, 
gentlemen, as I am very much obliged to do, but also to Cato himself, 
being the stern and upright man that he is-the rational grounds for 
the action I have taken. 
So let me ask you, Marcus Cato, who could be a more appropriate 
person to defend a consul than a consul? Who in our entire nation 
can or should be more closely connected with me than the man to 
whom I am now handing over this country, preserved by great efforts 
of mine and at great danger to myself, for him to preset-ve? When 
property that has been formally sold* by one man to another is then 
claimed as his own by a third party, it is the man who has sold the 
property, and who has undertaken to guarantee its title, who ought to 
take the responsibility if a court decides in the third party's favour. 
This being the case, it is all the more appropriate that when a consul 
designate is put on trial, it should be the consul, the man who 
announced his successor's election, who should be the person who 
takes responsibility for this gift of the Roman people, and also the 
one who guards it from danger. [4] And if, as happens in some states,* 
an advocate were officially appointed to undertake the defence, and 
the defendant were someone who had attained the highest office, 
then the man who would be chosen to defend him would be someone 
who held the same office himself, and so could bring just as much 
authority to his defence as he could practical skill. People who are 
just putting into harbour from the open sea usually make great 
efforts to give others who are leaving harbour information about 
storms, pirates, and geography. This is because nature makes us well 
disposed towards those who are about to undergo the same dangers 
through which we ourselves have passed. Now that I have come 
through a severe buffeting* and am nearly within sight of land, how 
do you expect me to feel towards this man who I see must undergo 
the most violent political storms himself? Accordingly, if it is the 
mark of a good consul not only to be aware of what is happening now 
but also to see what is going to happen in the future, I shall reve~ at a 
later point how important it is for our national security that thire be 
two consuls in place on the first of January.* [5] If this is h,bw the 
www.ebook3000.com

[6] 
Pro ;Wurena 
6g 
situation is, it ought not to have been a case of duty summoning me 
to defend a personal friend so much as our country summoning the 
consul to defend the safety of the nation. 
As for the fact that I carried the law on electoral malpractice, I did 
indeed carry it-but in doing so I did not repeal that other law of 
mine, by which I bound myself long ago, the 'law on defending 
citizens in danger'. If I were to accept that bribery had taken place 
and argue that there was nothing wrong in that, I would indeed be 
acting improperly, even if someone else had carried the law. But 
since my defence is that the law has not been broken, how does my 
passing of the law undermine my case? 
[6] Cato objects that my present defence of Lucius Murena is 
inconsistent with the severity I showed* towards Catiline when he 
was plotting the destruction of our country ·from within the city 
walls: by my words* and virtually by my official authority, I drove him 
out of Rome. But I have always been happy to play' the part of mercy 
and compassion which nature herself taught me. As for that mask of 
strictness and severity, I never sought it: it was thrust onto me by the 
state, and I wore it during the serious national crisis as the dignity of 
my office demanded. But if at that time, when the state required me 
to show force and severity, I overcame my nature and displayed, 
unwillingly, the sternness that was expected of me, then surely now, 
when every consideration urges me to show compassion and human-
ity, I ought to be eager to yield to my character and normal practice? 
But on the question of my duty to speak for the defence and your 
grounds for prosecuting, I shall perhaps have something to say about 
this in another part of my speech. 
[ 7] But the complaint, gentlemen, of that extremely learned and 
distinguished man, Servius Sulpicius, has affected me no less than 
Cato's criticism: he says that he is deeply and bitterly hurt that I 
should have forgotten our close ties of friendship and defended 
Lucius Murena against himself. I want very much, gentlemen, to 
explain myself to him, and to call on you to judge between us. For it 
is a serious matter to be accused of violating a friendship, if the 
accusation is true; and even if it is not, it is not something which can 
simply be ignored. 
In your election campaign, Servius Sulpicius, I admit that, 
because of our friendship, I had a duty to lend you my full support-
and I believe that I did fulfil that duty. When you were campaigning 

Pro Murena 
[8] 
for the consulship, I failed you in nothing that could have been asked 
of a friend, or of a man of influence, or of a consul. But that time is 
past. The situation is different now. This is what I think and believe: 
in opposing Murena's election, I owed you all the help that you 
ventured to ask of me; but in opposing his civil status, I owe you 
nothing at all. [8] Even though I supported you when you were going 
for the consulship, now that you are going for Murena himself it is 
no longer my duty to help you in the way I did. And the view that 
when our friends are prosecuting we may not speak for the defence is 
not merely a view that cannot be applauded: it is one that is com-
pletely unacceptable, even if the person we propose to defend is a 
total stranger. My friendship with Murena, members of the jury, is 
both intimate and long-standing; it will not be overridden by Servius 
Sulpicius, in a case involving Murena's civil status, simply because it 
was my friendship with Servius that I put first in an election in 
which the two of them were standing. 
But even if Murena were not my friend, his personal standing and 
the distinction of the office that he has attained would nevertheless 
have branded me with the stigma of arrogance and cruelty had I 
refused to defend a man of such distinction-both his own and that 
conferred by the Roman people-in a case involving such risk to 
himself. For it would be neither permissible nor honourable for me 
not to devote my efforts to helping men faced with prosecution. 
Since I have received greater rewards for these efforts of mine than 
anyone before me, I feel that to abandon one's labours after obtaining 
the honours to which they led* would be the act of a calculating and 
ungrateful man. [9] If, however, I am allowed to give up my work, 
and if I may let you take the responsibility for my doing so, and if I 
can avoid criticism for being idle, or disgrace for acting arrogantly, or 
blame for showing a lack of humanity, then certainly I shall gladly 
give it up. But if shunning hard work denotes sloth, rejecting suppli-
ants arrogance, and abandoning one's friends shamelessness, then 
this case is one which no one who is hard-working or compassionate 
or loyal to duty could possibly refuse. 
There is a straightforward comparison you can make, Servtus, 
with your own field of study. If you feel duty-bound to provide legal 
opinions even to your friends' opponents w·hen they consult you, and 
if you feel outraged when a former opponent to whom yo,fi have 
given legal advice loses his case, then do not be so unfai~· as to 
www.ebook3000.com

[IO) 
Pro Murena 
maintain that my fount of knowledge should be closed even to my 
friends, while yours is even open to your enemies. [ ro] Moreover, if 
our friendship had prevented me from taking on this case, and if the 
same had happened with the illustrious Quintus Hortensius and 
Marcus Crassus, and also with all the others who, I know, greatly 
value your goodwill, then the result would be that a consul designate 
would have no one to defend him-and this in a country in which 
our ancestors intended that no one, however humble, should ever be 
in need of someone to stand up for his interests! For my part, 
gentlemen, I should consider myself wicked had I deserted a friend, 
cruel had I deserted a man in trouble, arrogant had I deserted a 
consul. Nevertheless, every concession that is owed to friendship I 
shall freely concede; and I shall deal with you, Servius, as though it 
were my own dear brother, whom I am extremely fond of, standing 
in your place. I do have an obligation to duty, to loyalty, and to 
conscience, but I shall temper this with the recollection that it is 
against the efforts of a friend as well as for the safety of a friend that I 
am speaking. 
[II] I gather, members of the jury, that the prosecution is divided 
into three parts. The first consists of an attack on my client's private 
life, the second of a comparison of the merits of the rival candidates, 
and the third of the charges of electoral malpractice. Of these three 
parts, the first, which ought to have been the most damning, was in 
fact so flimsy and trivial that it is clear that it was the standard 
convention among prosecutors rather than any genuine grounds for 
criticism that forced the accusers to mention Lucius Murena's pri-
vate life at all. 
Asia* has been made an accusation against him. But he did not seek 
out this province for pleasure and luxurious living: he passed 
through it in the course of his military service. If, as a young man, he 
had not chosen to serve under his father, who was our commander 
there, people would have thought him afraid of the enemy or of his 
father's command, or else would have concluded that his father had 
disowned him. Sons who have not yet assumed the toga of manhood 
ride on the horses at their father's triumphs.* Do you really think, 
then, that Murena should have declined to honour his father's tri-
umph with the military prizes he had won and, since his father's 
successes had in fact been achieved jointly by both of them, virtually 
to share the triumph with him? [12] Yes, gentlemen, he was indeed 

Pro Murena 
in Asia, and that most valiant man, his father, found him an invalu-
able help in moments of crisis, a comfort in times of strain, and a son 
to be proud of in the hour of victory. And if Asia should give rise to a 
suspicion of luxurious living, it is not the fact of never having seen 
Asia that deserves praise, but of having lived there modestly. It was 
therefore wrong of the prosecution simply to accuse Murena with 
the word 'Asia': this is a province which has brought praise to his 
family, fame to his stock, and honour and glory to his name. Instead, 
they should have brought up some specific outrage or dishonour that 
he committed in Asia or brought home from Asia. However, by 
serving in that war-the greatest and indeed the only war that the 
Roman people were fighting at that time-he gave proof of his val-
our; by serving of his own free will under his father's command he 
gave proof of his sense of duty; and by completing his service with 
his father's victory and triumph he gave proof of his good fortune. 
There is no place at all in any of this for slander: there is room only 
for praise. 
[13] Cato calls Lucius Murena a dancer. Such a reproach, if true, 
denotes an energetic prosecutor-but if false, a scurrilous slanderer. 
A man of your stature, Marcus Cato, ought to be above picking up 
slanders from off the street or from idlers' tittle-tattle, nor should 
you call a consul of the Roman people a dancer unless you can 
produce strong evidence. What you need to do is to look around for 
the other vices which would also have to exist in someone who could 
rightly be accused of being a dancer. Hardly anyone dances when he 
is sober, unless he happens to be insane, nor when alone, nor at a 
respectable, decorous gathering. First there needs to be extended 
partying, a charming venue, and an array of pleasures-and only 
then comes dancing. Do you seize upon what must necessarily be the 
culmination of all vices, but make no mention of those lesser ones 
without which it could not conceivably exist? You have given evi-
dence of no disgraceful partying, no love affairs, no carousing, no 
self-indulgence, no extravagance. The fact is that you cannot find 
any sign of those so-called pleasures-or rather vices. Do you really 
think, then, that you can find the shadow of luxurious living where 
you cannot find the substance? 
[14] So there is nothing that can be said against Lucius Mur~na's 
private life, nothing whatsoever, I tell you, gentlemen. I am dttfend-
ing a consul designate against whom no deceit, no greed, no .r~each-
www.ebook3000.com

(IS] 
Pro Murena 
73 
cry, no cruelty, and no offensive language at any point in his life can 
be alleged. So far, so good: the foundations of my defence have been 
laid. I have vindicated the moral character of my client not by prais-
ing him-that can come later-but by the tacit admission of his 
enemies. Having done this, it will be easier for me now to proceed to 
the comparison of the merits of the rival candidates, which was the 
second part of the prosecution. 
[I 5] I am aware, Servius Sulpicius, that you possess the very 
highest qualifications of birth, integrity, industry, and all the other 
qualities that a man needs if he is to put himself forward for election 
to the consulship. I know, too, that Lucius Murena possesses equal 
qualifications-so exactly equal that his standing could not possibly 
be exceeded by your own, nor yours by his. Nevertheless, you have 
expressed contempt for Lucius Murena's family, while extolling 
your own. If, in making this point, you put forward the argument 
that nobody is well born unless he happens to be a patrician, you will 
make it seem as though there ought to be another secession of the 
plebs to the Aventine!* But if it is the case that distinguished and 
honourable plebeian families do exist, then please note that both 
Lucius Murena's great-grandfather and his grandfather were prae-
tors,* and his father, after capping his praetorship with a magnificent 
and richly deserved triumph,* smoothed Murena's way to the consul-
ship, since, in seeking this office, the son was only claiming what had 
been his father's due. 
[I6] As for you, Servius Sulpicius, your noble birth* is indeed 
outstanding, but it is better known to literary scholars and histor-
ians; the people and the voters are not so familiar with it. Your 
father was indeed only of equestrian rank, and your grandfather was 
not renowned for any brilliant deed.* As a result, no one nowadays 
would learn of your noble status through casual conversation: the 
information has to be dug up from ancient records. This is why I 
have always included you in my own circle,* because, although only 
the son of a Roman equestrian, you have shown by your ability and 
your own determined efforts that you are fit to be thought of as 
eligible for the highest office. Moreover, I have never considered 
Quintus Pompeius,* a most valiant soldier but a new man, to be of 
any less merit than the extremely noble Marcus Aemilius.* For it 
requires the same spirit and talent to pass on to one's descendants, 
as Pompeius did, a distinction which one has not inherited as to 

74 
Pro Murena 
renew by one's own ability, like Scaurus, the almost forgotten mem-
ory of one's family. 
[ 17] I used to think, members of the jury, that I had by my own 
efforts succeeded in ensuring that brave men should not have to face 
criticism for the inferiority of their birth; for I have often drawn 
attention not only to valiant men of old such as Curius, Cato, and 
Pompeius, but to more recent ones like Marius, Didius, and Coelius.* 
I myself, too, broke down the gates of the nobility, which had been 
shut for so many years,* so that access to the consulship should be 
open in the future, as it was in our ancestors' time, as much to ability 
as to noble birth. But when I did this I little thought that when a 
consul designate from an old and distinguished family was being 
defended by a consul who was the son of a Roman equestrian, the 
prosecution would be talking about newness of family.* In my case, I 
was standing for the consulship against two patricians, one an utterly 
reckless traitor, the other a forbearing· and altogether excellent man; I 
nevertheless defeated Catiline in merit, and Galba* in popularity. If it 
was wrong for me as a new man to defeat them, then surely people 
who disliked or envied me would not have been slow in coming 
forward. [I 8] Let us, therefore, stop talking about birth, since in this 
respect Sulpicius and Murena are equally distinguished. Instead let 
us move on to other matters. 
'Murena was a candidate for the quaestorship at the same time as I 
was, and I was elected ahead of him.'* I need not reply to every 
objection. You will all of course appreciate that, while there may be a 
number of candidates of equal merit, only one can obtain the first 
place. The candidates' respective merit and the order in which their 
election is announced are not the same thing. This is because the 
elections are announced serially, whereas the merit of the various 
candidates may very often be identical. In any case, the duties which 
you and Murena were allotted in your quaestorships were just about 
of equal importance. Murena received, under the Titian law,* a quiet, 
peaceful province; you were given the post which always produces an 
outcry when the quaestors draw lots-Ostia, a duty which does not 
bring one popularity and fame so much as trouble and nuisance. 
During your quaestorships you each became less well known to the 
public because the lot gave neither of you a field in whiciV your 
talents could be exercised and made known. 
; 
[19] The period that followed* has been made a focus of di,Spute. It 
www.ebook3000.com

[zo] 
Pro Murena 
75 
was spent by each of the two men in an entirely different way. Ser-
vius soldiered with me here at Rome, giving legal opinions, drawing 
up documents, and providing advice-a life full of anxiety and 
bother. He studied civil law, stayed up all hours, spared no pains, put 
himself at the service of a great many people, tolerated their stupid-
ity, stomached their arrogant behaviour, and put up with those who 
were awkward. He lived for others, not for himself. That one man 
should work so hard at a profession that will benefit so many other 
people is highly creditable and also widely appreciated. [zo] But 
what of Murena meanwhile? He served as a legate under that most 
valiant and wise man, the great general Lucius Lucullus.* In that 
posting he led an army, engaged in pitched battles, joined in close 
combat, defeated numerous enemy forces, took some cities by storm 
and others by siege, and in crossing that Asia of yours, so crammed 
with wealth and pleasures, he left behind not a trace of avarice or 
luxurious living; in that greatest of wars his conduct was such that 
he performed many great deeds without his commander-while his 
commander performed none without him. This I venture to assert in 
Lucius Lucullus' presence, and in case you should think that he has 
given me leave, in view of the danger which my client is currently 
facing, to go further than the truth, I can assure you that everything 
is vouched for in official despatches. In these despatches Lucius 
Lucullus is far more generous in his praise of Murena than any 
commander who was either self-seeking or jealous would have 
needed to be when writing about the contributions made by the 
officers under him. 
[ 2 r) In each of the two men there exists the greatest honour, the 
greatest merit; and, if Servius will allow me, I shall give them exactly 
equal credit. But he does not allow me. He derides the military 
profession, he attacks Murena's command in its entirety, and he 
believes that obtaining the consulship is simply a matter of unflag-
ging devotion to these day-to-day duties of ours. 'So', he says, 'you 
have been off with the army, and have not set toot in the forum for 
years. You have been away for all that time and now, returning after 
such a prolonged absence, are you really going to compete for office 
with men who have virtually been living in the forum?'* First of all, 
Servius, do you not realize how sick people sometimes get of our 
constant presence, how fed up they become with us? In my case, it 
was, I admit, extremely advantageous to me that my popularity was 

Pro Murena 
[22] 
there for all to see, but I did have to work very hard to prevent people 
becoming bored with me, and you no doubt have done likewise. 
Nevertheless, a spell of absence-and of being missed-would have 
done neither of us any harm. 
[ 22] But let us leave all that aside and return to our comparison of 
careers and qualifications. How could anyone possibly doubt that 
military distinction counts for far more, when one is aiming at the 
consulship, than eminence in civil law? You are up at the crack of 
dawn to give legal opinions to those who consult you, he to bring his 
army to its destination in good time. You are woken by the cry of the 
cock, he by that of the bugle. You set out the line you will take, he 
sets up his line of battle. You ensure that your clients are not taken 
by surprise, he that cities and camps are not taken. He has a know-
ledge of how to keep off the enemy's forces, you of how to keep off 
rainwater.* He is occupied in extending boundaries, you in defining 
them. And surely-1 must say what I feel-military ability counts 
for more than ability in any other field. For it is this which has given 
the Roman people the brilliant name they have; it is this which has 
bestowed everlasting glory upon our city; it is this which has induced 
the world to submit to our command. All our city affairs, all these 
fine pursuits of ours, the applause and the hard work here in the 
forum, all lie beneath the guardianship and protection of military 
strength. The moment the slightest alarm sounds, our cultured 
occupations instantly fall silent. 
[23] And since you appear to me to be kissing your knowledge of 
the law· just as if it w·ere a baby daughter of yours, I am not going to 
let you carry on believing-quite wrongly-that this whatever-it-is 
that you have worked so hard to master is in any way remarkable. It is 
because of your other qualities-self-control, dignity, fairness, 
integrity, and all the rest-that I have always considered you to be 
exceptionally deserving of the consulship and every other office. As 
for the fact that you have learned civil law, I will not say that you have 
wasted your time exactly, but I will say that in that field of study 
there lies no paved highway to the consulship. 
Every skill that serves to secure for us the favour of the Rorrtan 
people needs to have two things: a prestige which impresses, and a 
usefulness which pleases. [ 24] The greatest prestige resides in,those 
with outstanding military reputations because such men are q'~dited 
with protecting and upholding our entire empire and government. 
www.ebook3000.com

[zs] 
Pro Murena 
77 
They have the greatest usefulness, too, since it is by the decisions 
they take and the dangers they face that we are able to enjoy our 
national life and our own private affairs. Another skill that com-
mands respect and carries considerable prestige, and has often 
proved critical in the choice of a consul, is ability in public 
speaking-the ability to use good judgement and eloquence to sway 
the minds of the senate, the people, and those who sit on juries. A 
consul is needed who can, when necessary, use his ability in speaking 
to check the frenzy of tribunes, to calm the excitement of the people, 
and to oppose state handouts.* It is hardly surprising that this skill 
has enabled many men, even those who were not nobles, to attain the 
consulship, especially seeing that ability in speaking produces very 
deep gratitude, very strong friendships, and very great popularity. 
In the profession which you practise, Sulpicius, there is nothing of 
any of this. [ 25] First of all, there can be no prestige in such a narrow 
field of study. For the matters with which it deals are trivial, nearly 
always to do with individual letters and the dots between words. 
Secondly, even if your profession was treated with some respect by 
our ancestors, it fell into contempt and was totally rejected once your 
secrets had been divulged. At one time, few people knew whether 
legal business could be transacted, since there was no calendar avail-
able.* The lawyers had enormous power, and were consulted even 
about the day as if they were Chaldaean astrologers. But then a 
scribe, one Gnaeus Flavius, came along and pecked out the crows' 
eyes:* by learning off the individual days he was able to supply the 
people with a calendar and so rob those cautious lawyers of their 
knowledge. The lawyers were furious. Their fear was that, with the 
calendar out in the public domain and known to everyone, legal 
business could be transacted without them. So that they could 
remain indispensable, they therefore thought up various legal formu-
las. [26] It would be perfectly possible for someone to say, 'The 
Sabine farm belongs to me,' and another to say, 'No, it belongs to 
me,' then the hearing would take place. But the lawyers wouldn't 
have it. 'The farm', says the lawyer, 'which is in the territory which 
is called Sabine.' Long-winded enough, you might think. But look 
what comes next. 'I declare that, according to the legal rights of the 
Roman citizenry, it belongs to me.' And then what? 'I therefore 
summon you from the court to join hands* at the property.' The 
defendant is at a loss to know how to reply to so verbose a litigant. 

Pro Murena 
But then the very same lawyer crosses over to the other side of the 
court, like a Latin piper.* 'Seeing that you have summoned me from 
the court', he says, 'to join hands at the property, I, therefore, sum-
mon you there in turn.' Meanwhile, to stop the praetor getting too 
good an opinion of himself and actually saying something off his 
own bat, a jingle was thought up for him too. Here is a particularly 
ridiculous extract: 'The witnesses for both parties being present, I 
indicate your route. Follow the route.' Our learned friend remains on 
hand to point out the route to be followed. 'Return by that route.' 
They return, escorted by the same guide. It no doubt already seemed 
nonsensical, even in the days when our ancestors wore beards,* for 
people who had turned up at the right place to be told to go away 
again, and then, when they had gone away, to be told to come back at 
once to where they had started from. Everything was dressed up 
with absurdities of this kind, such as: 'Whereas I see you before the 
court' and 'Will you not state the grounds on which you base your 
claim to the property?' As long as these procedures were a secret, 
one had to go and consult those who knew about them; later on, 
however, once they had been made generally available and had been 
examined and turned inside out, they were found to be not only 
completely devoid of common sense, but also filled to the brim with 
trickery and foolishness. [ 27] A great many points had been set dowP 
in the laws with perfect clarity; but these were mostly twisted and 
perverted by the lawyers' ingenuity. For instance, our ancestors 
intended that all women, because of the weakness of their judgement, 
should be subject to the authority of guardians. But the lawyers 
thought up types of guardian which would be subject to the authority 
of women. Our ancestors were concerned that religious ceremonies 
should not die out. But the lawyers ingeniously found old men to 
undergo secular marriages,* in order to make the ceremonies die out. 
In short, in every branch of civil law, they abandoned the spirit of the 
law while holding fast to the letter. Thus, because they had come 
across the name 'Gaia' used as an example in the treatises of someone 
or other, they thought that all women who underwent a secular mar-
riage were actually called 'Gaia'.* As for myself, I have long found it 
extraordinary that so many of the finest legal brains should not yet 
have managed, even after so many years, to make up their minds' as to 
whether one ought to say 'two days from now' or 'the dap after 
tomorrow', 'judge' or 'arbitrator', 'case' or 'lawsuit'. 
www.ebook3000.com

[zS] 
Pro Murena 
79 
[ 28] So, as I said, your profession -consisting as it does entirely of 
fictions and fabrications-has never conferred the prestige required 
for the consulship, much less the necessary popularity. Something 
that is universally available, and just as accessible to my opponent as 
to myself, cannot conceivably win you gratitude. You have therefore 
lost not only the means to confer a favour but also the 'May I ask 
your advice?' with which you were for so long approached. No one 
can be thought learned if his field of knowledge is one which has no 
relevance outside Rome, or even in Rome when the courts are not in 
session. So no one can be considered an expert, since in a subject 
with which everyone is familiar there is no scope at all for disagree-
ment. Nor can the subject be said to be a difficult one, given that it is 
entirely contained within a very small number of perfectly straight-
forward texts. If, therefore, you persist in provoking me, extremely 
busy as I am,* I shall set myself up as a lawyer within three days. For 
questions which depend on a form of words are all written down 
somewhere or other-and nothing has been written so exactly that I 
could not add to it 'which is the point at issue'. Oral advice, on the 
other hand, can be offered with little or no risk: if you gave the right 
answer, you would be seen as having made the same reply as the great 
Servius,* and if you answered otherwise, people would think you had 
recognized a difficult point of law and were dealing with it. 
[29] Accordingly, not only does military glory-of which you 
speak so slightingly-carry more prestige than those formulas and 
processes of yours, but public speaking, also, far and away outstrips 
the profession which you practise, so far as election to high office is 
concerned. It seems to me that many men have started out with a 
strong preference for my profession, but when in due course they 
found they were not up to it, they sank to yours. They say of Greek 
musicians that the singers who accompany the reed-pipe are the ones 
who failed with the lyre.* So it is with our professions: those who do 
not make it as orators resort to the study of law. Public speaking has 
to do with great efforts, great questions, great prestige, and over-
whelming influence. Clients consult you about their state of health, 
as it were, but they consult orators about their actual life .. Moreover, 
your opinions and rulings are often overturned by a speech, and 
cannot be upheld unless an orator speaks in their favour. On the 
subject of oratory, if I had achieved very much in that department 
myself I would certainly not be praising it so extravagantly. As it is, 

So 
Pro Murena 
[30] 
however, I am not referring to myself at all, but to those who are now 
or have in the past been great speakers. 
[3ol There are therefore two professions which can raise a man to 
the highest peak of distinction, that of a general, and that of a good 
orator. The latter maintains the beauties of peace, while the former 
repels the dangers of war. There are of course other virtues which 
carry considerable weight in themselves-justice, good faith, mod-
esty, self-control-and everyone recognizes that you, Servius, pos-
sess these to an outstanding degree. But I am talking now about the 
professions that lead to high office, not about the personal qualities 
which each man possesses. The moment that any fresh crisis sounds 
the call to arms, the other professions that we practise are all dashed 
from our hands. For as that brilliant poet* and exceptional authority 
declares, 'when battle is begun, from our midst is driven' not only 
your long-winded pretence of knowledge but also that mistress of 
the world, 'wisdom' herself. 'The question is decided by force: the 
orator is thrust aside' -and not just the one who is tiresome and 
wordy, but even the one who is 'good: the uncouth soldier is loved'. 
Your profession lies completely abandoned: 'they do not go from 
court to join hands:* it is with the sword', he says, 'that they claim 
back their property.' If this is so, Sulpicius, then let the forum yield 
to the camp, peace yield to war, the pen yield to the sword, the shade 
yield to the sun-and may first place in our nation be given to that 
profession thanks to which our nation itself occupies first place in 
the world. 
[3 I] But Cato objects that I am making too much of this in my 
speech, and that I have forgotten that the whole of that war against 
Mithridates* was fought against a load of women. My own view is 
very different, members of the jury, but I shall be brief on this 
subject, since it is not on this point that my case turns. If we are to 
look down on all the wars that we have fought against the Greeks, 
then we will have to scoff at the triumphs of Manius Curius over 
King Pyrrhus, of Titus Flamininus over Philip, of Marcus Fulvius 
over the Aetolians, of Lucius Paullus over King Perseus, of Quintus 
Metellus over the false Philip, and of Lucius Mummius* over the 
Corinthians. But if, on the other hand, these were wars of the great-
est importance, and the victories with which they were concfuded 
were greatly to be welcomed, why do you deprecate the peoples of 
Asia and an enemy such as Mithridates? 
· 
www.ebook3000.com

[32] 
Pro 1Wurena 
8r 
Historical accounts show that perhaps the greatest war fought by 
the Roman people was the one against Antiochus.* The victor in that 
war was Lucius Scipio, and the glory he thereby acquired was equal 
to that which had been won by his brother Publius. For Publius, after 
conquering Africa, boasted of his glory through the name he 
assumed, and Lucius, likewise, took the same glory for himself from 
the name of Asia. [32] Marcus Cato,* your great-grandfather, also 
showed outstanding bravery in that war; and since he was, I am 
convinced, a man who possessed the same qualities as I now see in 
you, he would never have gone out with Scipio had he thought that 
they were to fight against 'a load of women'. lVloreover, the senate 
arranged with Publius Africanus that he should accompany his 
brother as a legate, and this was not long after he had himself driven 
Hannibal out of Italy, thrown him out of Africa, defeated Carthage 
and so freed our country from extreme danger. They would certainly 
not have done this had they not considered the war an important and 
difficult one. 
Yet if you think carefully what Mithridates was capable of, what 
he actually achieved, and what kind of a man he was, you will surely 
rate this king more highly than any of the others that the Roman 
people have fought against. Lucius Sulla, an aggressive, energetic, 
and not inexperienced general (to say the least), the commander of 
an extremely large and courageous army, allowed Mithridates to go 
away in peace,* despite his having brought war into the whole of Asia. 
Lucius Murena, my client's father, pursued him* with the greatest 
persistence and pertinacity, and left him constrained, more or less, 
but not crushed. This king, after spending some years making the 
necessary plans and preparing his forces for war, had such high 
hopes for himself that he fully expected to link the Atlantic Ocean 
with the Black Sea and the forces of Sertorius* with his own. 
[33] When the war came, both consuls were sent out:* one was to go 
after Mithridates, the other to defend Bithynia. The operations of 
the latter were disastrous on both land and sea, and served greatly to 
enhance both the king's military strength and his reputation. Lucius 
Lucullus' activities, on the other hand, were so successful that it is 
impossible to recall any war that was fought on a larger scale or 
conducted with greater intelligence and bravery. The whole thrust of 
the war was at this stage directed against the walls of Cyzicus, since 
Mithridates thought that this city would become his gateway to Asia, 

82 
Pro Murena 
[34] 
and that when he had broken it down and forced it open the entire 
province would lie at his feet. Lucullus, however, succeeded in 
ensuring that the city of our most loyal allies held out against the 
king, and that his forces were all used up on the protracted siege. 
And what about that naval battle off Tenedos? The enemy fleet, led 
by the most determined commanders, was making for Italy* at full 
speed, puffed up by hope and courage: do you really think that this 
was a small-scale encounter, a trivial skirmish? I leave out the 
battles, I pass over the assaults on towns; even after he was at long 
last driven from his kingdom, Mithridates still had sufficient intelli-
gence and influence to be able to win over the king of the Armenians 
and thus make good his position again with fresh troops and 
resources. 
If it were now my task to talk about our army and its commander, 
there are a great many important battles of which I could remind 
you; but that is not our present concern. [34] I do say this, however: 
if this war, if this enemy, if that king had really been so contemptible, 
then the senate and Roman people would not have thought it neces-
sary to take such trouble over it when it broke out; nor would Lucius 
Lucullus have pursued it, and with such distinction, over so many 
years; nor would the Roman people have been so enthusiastic in 
bestowing on Gnaeus Pompeius the task of bringing it to an end. Out 
of all the countless battles which Pompeius has fought, the fiercest 
and most strongly contested was, I think, the one that he fought 
against the king.* And after escaping from this battle and taking 
refuge in the Bosporus* where our army could not reach him, never-
theless, in desperate straits and on the run, Mithridates kept his 
royal title. That is why Pompeius, despite having driven the enemy 
from his borders and all his known bases and having taken over his 
kingdom,* nevertheless set so much store by the life of this one man. 
Although everything that Mithridates had ever controlled, come 
near to controlling, or aspired to control had fallen into his victorious 
hands, even so Pompeius did not consider the war to be won until he 
had driven him from life itself. 
Is this, Cato, the enemy you scorn? One whom so many genei·als 
have fought against in so many battles over so many years? One 
whose very existence, even after he had been ejected and thrmyn out 
of his kingdom, was thought to pose so serious a threat thav'it was 
not until his death had been reported that the war was jud~d truly 
www.ebook3000.com

[35] 
Pro Murena 
over? Such, then, was the war in which my client Lucius Nlurena 
was acknowledged to be an officer of the most outstanding courage, 
the highest intelligence, and the greatest industry; and I maintain 
that the service he gave was at least as strong a qualification for the 
consulship as my own efforts here in the forum. 
[35] But, you say, in the election for the praetorship Servius was 
declared elected ahead of Murena.* Are you really trying to tell the 
people that once it has placed a man in a certain position in the poll 
in one election, it is then obliged, as if under contract, to place him 
in the same position in all subsequent elections? What strait, what 
Euripus* can you think of that has so many eddies, such great and 
multifarious movements of current as would compare with the great 
turbulances and tides that elections have? A day's interruption or 
night's intervention often throws everything into confusion, and it is 
not unknown for the merest whisper of a rumour to make everyone 
change their mind. Often, and for no apparent reason, things do not 
go the way you expect, and sometimes even the people are surprised 
at the way something turns out -as if they had not themselves been 
responsible. [36] There is nothing more fickle than the masses, noth-
ing more unfathomable than people's intentions, nothing more mis-
leading than the entire process of an election. Who would have 
thought that Lucius Philippus, a man of the highest ability, industry, 
popularity, and nobility, could be defeated by Marcus Herennius?* 
That ~1intus Catulus, so outstandingly cultured, wise, and honour-
able, could be defeated by Gnaeus Mallius?* That Marcus Scaurus, a 
man of the greatest dignity, an outstanding citizen, and a truly cour-
ageous senator, could be defeated by Quintus Maximus?* Not only 
were these outcomes totally unexpected, but even once they had 
occurred no one could understand why they had come about. 
Storms often occur when there is some recognized indication in the 
sky, but they also quite often happen without warning, for no obvi-
ous reason and without any apparent cause. In the same way, in this 
tempest of popular elections, there is often some indication which 
enables you to see what has caused it, but often, too, the reason is 
unclear, and the storm seems to have blown up purely by chance. 
[37] But if I must provide an explanation, there were two things 
which Murena, in his campaign for the praetorship, suffered seri-
ously from the lack of, but which were both of considerable benefit 
to him when he came to stand for the consulship. One was games, the 

Pro Murena 
expectation of which had been brought about by certain rumours 
and by the deliberate suggestion of his rivals for office. The other 
thing he lacked was the presence in Rome of those who had been 
with him in his province and throughout his period of service* and 
who had seen his generosity and courage at first hand: for they had 
not yet returned home. Both of these advantages fortune held back 
for him until he stood for the consulship. When the time came for 
that, Lucius Lucullus' army, which had come to Rome for his tri-
umph,* was on hand to support Lucius Murena at the elections; and 
as for his not having put on games, a factor which had hampered 
Murena in his campaign for the praetorship, this deficiency had been 
made up for by the extremely lavish games he put on in the course of 
his year as praetor. 
[38] You surely do not regard the backing of the soldiers and the 
military vote as being of negligible use and help when one is standing 
for the consulship? In terms of sheer numbers the soldiers are 
important, then one must take into account the influence they have 
over those they know, and then there is also the fact that all Roman 
citizens are strongly inclined to follow the lead of the soldiers when 
electing a consul. At the consular elections it is generals that are 
elected, not interpreters of words. So talk of this kind carries great 
weight: 'He looked after me when I was wounded. He gave me a 
share of the spoils. He was our general when we took that camp, 
when we fought that battle. He never made a soldier put up with 
more hardship than he was prepared to endure himself. He was 
brave, and he had luck on his side.' How important do you think this 
sort of talk is for securing a reputation and backing? If at these 
elections people are so superstitious that up to now the vote of the 
first century has always proved a sure omen of the final result,* is it 
any wonder that in this case a much talked-about reputation for luck 
has proved decisive? 
It may be that you consider such matters trivial (although they arc 
in fact of the first importance) and attach more weight to the urban 
vote than to that of the soldiers. But, if so, you can hardly show the 
same contempt for the high quality of Murena's games and' the 
magnificence of the spectacle, since this was unquestionably of 
enormous help to him. Do I need to point out that the peogle and 
the ignorant masses adore games? It is hardly surprising that ~hey do. 
And yet this point on its own proves my case: for elections, like 
www.ebook3000.com

[39] 
Pro Murata 
ss 
games, have to do with the people and the masses. So if the people 
derive pleasure from magnificent games, it is hardly surprising that 
Lucius Murena's, which were indeed magnificent, improved his 
standing with the people. [39] As for us, pressure of work keeps us 
away from the pleasures enjoyed by the people, and in any case our 
work itself provides us with many alternative sources of pleasure; 
but, despite this, we do in fact enjoy the games, and find ourselves 
drawn to them. And if we enjoy the games, why should you be 
surprised that the uneducated masses enjoy them? [ 40] It was not 
just its status that my friend the valiant Lucius Otho* gave back to the 
equestrian order, but its source of enjoyment too. That is why his law 
about the games is the most popular law of all-because it restored 
to that most honourable order, along with its prestige, the full 
enjoyment of its pleasure. Games, then, do give people pleasure, 
believe me, and not only those who admit it, but even those who 
pretend otherwise. I was aware of this when I was standing myself, 
because I too had a rival who had put on games. But if I, who had 
myself put on three sets of games when I was aedile, was neverthe-
less alarmed by Antonius' games,* do you really think that that silver 
spectacle of Murena's, which you scoff at, did you no damage, espe-
cially when you, as it happened, had put on no games at all? 
[ 41] Let us assume, however, that all these factors are equal, that 
service in the forum counts for the same as service in the army, that 
the urban vote counts for the same as the military, and that having 
given extremely magnificent games is equivalent to never having 
given any games at all. But would you then go on to maintain that in 
your respective praetorships there was no difference between what 
you and Murena were assigned?* Murena was allotted the post which 
all your friends wanted for you, that of civil jurisdiction. This is a 
post in which the importance of the task wins one glory, and the 
dispensing of justice wins one gratitude; in this office a wise praetor, 
such as Murena was, avoids causing offence by judging impartially, 
and attracts goodwill by listening to the litigants sympathetically. It 
is an excellent job to get, and one which fits the holder for the 
consulship: it enables him to win a reputation for fairness, honesty, 
and helpfulness, and all this is ultimately crowned by enjoyable pub-
lic games. [42] And what were you allotted? Dismal and grim, the 
embezzlement court. On the one side you find nothing but tears and 
filth,* on the other accusers and informers. Unwilling jurors must be 

86 
Pro Jl!Iurena 
[43] 
compulsorily summoned and kept on against their will. A scribe is 
found guilty, and you alienate the entire profession. A favour from 
Sulla* is criticized, and many brave veterans, practically an entire 
section of society, turn against you. Heavy damages are awarded: the 
winner forgets, the loser remembers. 
Lastly, you refused to take a province. Having done the same 
myself when I was a praetor and again in my consulship, I am in no 
position to criticize. All the same, Lucius J\rlurena's province* won 
him many useful favours and a glorious reputation. On his way out, 
he raised troops in Umbria; the political situation gave him the 
opportunity to show generosity, and this allowed him to acquire the 
support of the many tribes which are made up of Umbrian towns.* 
Then, while in Gaul, by his sense of fairness and his dedication to 
the task he enabled our men to recover debts which they had previ-
ously written off. You, meanwhile, were at Rome and, naturally, were 
helping your friends. I do not deny it. But just think for a moment: 
the support of friends docs sometimes tend to become less enthusi-
astic when they see those they have been supporting turning down 
provinces.* 
[ 43] What I have shown, members of the jury, is that Murena and 
Sulpicius were equally well qualified to stand for the consulship, but 
were not equally lucky as regards the official duties they were allot-
ted. I shall now state explicitly the respects in which my friend was 
the weaker of the candidates, and now that he has lost the election I 
shall say in your hearing what I often said to him in private when he 
still had a chance. 
I repeatedly told you, Servius, that you had no idea how to cam-
paign for the consulship, and I used to say to you that in everything 
that I saw you say and do-and with such spirit and resolution, 
too-you gave me the impression of being a courageous prosecutor 
rather than a serious candidate. First, the terrifying threats of pros-
ecution which you used to utter daily may be the mark of a man of 
spirit, but they make the people think you have no chance of winning 
and they weaken the enthusiasm of your friends. I do not know how; 
but it always turns out-and this has been noticed not once or twice, 
but a great many times-that as soon as a candidate for office is 
understood to be contemplating a prosecution, he is believed JjO have 
given up all hope of being elected. [44] So, then, do I not approve of 
seeking redress when one has been wronged? Of course I .~4pprove, 
www.ebook3000.com

[45] 
Pro !VIurena 
very strongly; but there is a time for campaigning and a time for 
bringing prosecutions. I like a candidate, particularly a candidate for 
the consulship, to be escorted to the forum and to the Campus 
Martius with great hopes, great enthusiasm, and great crowds. I do 
not like him to be looking for evidence: that's a sure sign of impend-
ing defeat. Nor do I want him to be gathering witnesses instead of 
voters, or making threats instead of compliments, or protests instead 
of greetings, especially given this new practice according to which 
almost everyone now chases round the houses of all the candidates 
trying to tell from their faces how much confidence and potential 
each one seems to have. [45] 'Do you see how downcast and des-
pondent he is? He's down, he has given up hope, he has thrown his 
spears away.' The rum our spreads. 'Have you heard? He's planning a 
prosecution, looking for evidence against the other candidates, try-
ing to find witnesses. I'm voting for someone else: this one's obvi-
ously given up.' Close friends of this type of candidate are dismayed 
and their enthusiasm cools; they give the whole thing up for lost, or 
else keep back their help and influence for the trial and the 
prosecution. 
A further consequence is that the candidate cannot put his whole 
heart into his campaign, or devote all his time, trouble, and effort to 
it. He has to be thinking about his prosecution; and this is no trivial 
concern for him, but unquestionably the most important one he has. 
It is no small matter to collect together everything you need to drive 
a man from his country,* particularly if he is neither weak nor 
defenceless, and can rely on the help that he can provide himself, and 
that of his friends, and even that of people he does not know. For all 
of us rush to defend those in danger, and as long as we are not openly 
declared enemies we will fulfil, even to perfect strangers if they are 
in danger of forfeiting their civil status, the duties and responsi-
bilities that we otherwise owe only to our closest friends. [46] I 
myself have first-hand experience of the trouble involved in cam-
paigning for office, in mounting a defence, and in preparing a pros-
ecution, and I can tell you what is the chief feature of each of these 
tasks: in campaigning it is commitment, in defending it is duty, and 
in prosecuting it is sheer hard work. That is why I am certain that it 
is quite impossible for the same man to organize and martial a pros-
ecution and a campaign for the consulship at the same time, and do 
justice to both of them. Few men can manage either one of these 

88 
Pro Murena 
[47] 
tasks, no one both. In your case, when you had turned aside from the 
race for office and had switched your attention to prosecuting, you 
imagined that you could carry out both tasks at once. How wrong 
you were! In fact, once you had set about giving notice of your 
prosecution, was there ever a single day which was not completely 
taken up with that project? 
You demanded a law against electoral malpractice-quite 
unnecessarily, since there was already in existence the very strictly 
worded Calpurnian law.* Nevertheless, your wishes and standing 
were deferred to. That law,* taken as a whole, would perhaps have 
fortified your case, had you been prosecuting a guilty defendant. As 
it happened, all it did was wreck your campaign. [ 4 7] You were heard 
to demand a stricter penalty for the masses:* this merely stirred up 
the poorer classes against you. You wanted exile for our order: the 
senate acceded to your demand, although it was not happy about 
imposing, at your insistence, a harsher penalty for senators in gen-
eral. The plea of ill-health* was also penalized. This alienated a good 
many people: some would be required to exert themselves to the 
detriment of their health, while others, in addition to suffering from 
ill-health, would also have to forfeit* whatever enjoyment their lives 
still held for them. 
So who was it, then, who brought in these measures? It was some-
one who deferred to the senate's authority and to your own personal 
wish-and who also had least to gain from them himself.* As for the 
further proposals which a packed senate rejected (as I very much 
hoped it would), do you seriously believe that they did you only 
trivial damage in your campaign? You demanded that the votes be 
mixed up, that the Manilian law be proposed, and that influence, 
rank, and votes be equalized.* Respectable men, men of influence in 
their neighbourhoods and towns, took it badly that a man such as 
yourself should be fighting to abolish all distinctions of rank and 
prestige. You also wanted the jury to be nominated by the prosecu-
tion,* so that people's private hostilities, which are currently con-
tained within silent feuds, should burst out into the open and attack 
all our finest men. [ 48] All these proposals of yours paved your/ way 
to a prosecution, but blocked your path to the consulship. 
That was the greatest of all the blows inflicted on your caqjpaign, 
as I warned you at the time; and my most able and fluent friend, 
Quintus Hortensius, has discussed it fully and authoritatively. 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Murena 
89 
Indeed, my task has been made harder by the place I have been given 
in the order of speaking: for both Hortensius and Marcus Crassus, a 
man of the greatest rank and diligence and oratorical skill, have 
spoken before me. In giving the last of the speeches, I am not dealing 
with any particular part of the defence, but am saying whatever I 
think appropriate about the case as a whole. Inevitably, therefore, I 
am covering the same points, more or less, as my partners covered, 
but I am doing my best, members of the jury, not to bore you. 
But what sort of an axe-blow, Servius, do you think you inflicted 
on your campaign when you terrified the Roman people into being 
afraid that Catiline* would be elected consul? You were busy prepar-
ing your prosecution, and had abandoned and jettisoned your cam-
paign. [49] People saw you making enquiries; you looked glum your-
self, and your friends looked downcast. Peopk,noticed the spying, 
the taking of evidence, the quiet words with witnesses, the meetings 
with assistant prosecutors-activities which undeniably raise doubts 
about a candidate's intentions. At the same time they could see Cati-
line, lively and enthusiastic, escorted by a crowd of young men, 
guarded by informers and cut-throats, buoyed up by the hopes of his 
soldiers and the promises he claimed my colleague* had made to him, 
and borne along by an army of colonists from Arretium and 
Faesulae*-a uniform rabble, but distinguished by the inclusion of 
men of a very different sort, those ruined in the time of Sulla.* The 
rage in his face, the criminality in his eyes, and the insolence in his 
speech gave the impression that the consulship was already con-
firmed as his and laid down for him at his house. Murena he looked 
on with contempt. As for Sulpicius, he counted him more as his 
prosecutor than as a rival, threatening him with violence and men-
acing the state. 
[so] You do not need me to remind you of the fear which this 
inspired in all loyal citizens, or the despair that the whole country 
felt at the prospect of Catiline's election: you can remember it your-
selves. You will recall what that unspeakable gladiator was widely 
reported to have said at a meeting held at his house-that there 
could be no true defender of the poor who was not also poor himself; 
that people who were poor and in trouble should not trust the prom-
ises of the rich and trouble-free; that those who wished to recoup 
what they had spent and recover what they had forfeited* should look 
at the size of his debts, the limits of his possessions, and the lengths 

Pro Murerta 
(51] 
to which he was prepared to go; and that the man who was to be the 
leader and standard-bearer of the desperate should be the one who 
was the least afraid and most desperate himself 
[51] When this speech had become public knowledge, you will 
recall that the senate, on my proposal, passed a decree calling off the 
following day's election in order to give us the opportunity to debate 
these matters in the senate. On the next day, therefore, at a well-
attended meeting of the senate I called on Catiline to rise and asked 
him to comment, should he wish to do so, on the matters that had 
been reported to me. But he, forthright as ever, instead of attempting 
to clear his name, incriminated and trapped himself After that he 
said that the state had two bodies, one feeble with a weak head, and 
the other one strong but with no head at all, and that this latter body, 
provided that it showed itself deserving of him, would never be 
without a head so long as he lived. The packed senate gave a groan, 
but nevertheless failed to pass a decree severe enough to reflect the 
shocking nature of what had taken place. Some of the senators failed 
to take a strong line because they saw nothing to fear, others because 
they were afraid of everything. Catiline, jubilant, rushed out of the 
senate-house in triumph-a man who should never have been 
allowed to leave it alive, especially in view of the fact that, at a 
meeting of the senate only a few days before, he had told the valiant 
Cato, who was threatening him and announcing his intention of 
prosecuting him, that if his own fortunes should be set on fire, he 
would put out the flames not with water but by destruction.* 
[52] I was extremely worried by this, and I knew, moreover, that 
Catiline had already formed a conspiracy and was bringing men 
armed with swords down to the Campus Martius. I therefore went 
down to the Campus Marti us myself with a very strong bodyguard 
of the bravest men, and wearing that large and conspicuous cuirass. I 
wore this not in order to protect myself, since I knew that Catiline's 
practice was not to strike at the flank or the stomach, but at the head 
and neck. My aim was, rather, to make all loyal citizens aware of the 
situation. When they saw their consul afraid and in danger, they 
would surely rush to his aid and protection-and this is exactly what 
happened. 
People thought that you, Servius, were not really botheril}g with 
your campaign, and they could see that Catiline was ablaze 'Yith lust 
for power and the expectation of it. Everyone who wanted ~b rid the 
www.ebook3000.com

[53] 
Pro Murena 
91 
country of that pestilential villain therefore went over at once to 
Murena. [53] In consular elections, sudden swings of opinion are 
important, particularly when the swing is towards a good man who 
has many other points in his favour. Murena had the advantage of an 
extremely honourable father and ancestors, a youth entirely beyond 
reproach, a most distinguished period as a legate, and a praetorship 
in which his dispensing of justice had won him approval, his games 
popularity, and his province distinction. He had worked hard at his 
campaign, nor had he given way to anyone's threats, or made threats 
against anyone himself. Is it any wonder, then, that Catiline's sudden 
hope of being elected proved an enormous boost for Murena? 
[54] It now remains for me to deal with the third subject of my 
speech, the charges of electoral malpractice. These have already been 
disposed of by those who spoke before me, but lam going to go over 
them again, because this is what Murena wants. In dealing with this 
subject I shall reply to Gaius Postumius-a friend of mine and a man 
of great distinction-on the evidence of the distributing agents and 
on the money that has been seized. I shall also reply to that talented 
and loyal young man, Servius Sulpicius, on the equestrian centuries.* 
And I shall reply to Marcus Cato, a man who excels in every virtue, 
on the charge that he has personally brought, on the decree of the 
senate,* and on the national interest. 
[55] But before I do this I must briefly voice the distress that has 
suddenly come over me at Lucius Murena's plight. I have often 
before been led, members of the jury, by the troubles of others as 
well as my own day-to-day worries and labours to regard as fortunate 
those who, free from the pursuit of ambition, follow a life of ease and 
tranquillity. And in this particular case, when I see the terrible and 
totally unexpected dangers that Lucius Murena is now facing, I am 
so affected that I cannot deplore strongly enough either the common 
lot of all of us or the unhappy situation in which Murena finds 
himself. All that he was trying to do was to rise one step higher than 
the office* repeatedly attained by his family and his ancestors; yet this 
has caused him to risk losing everything that he has inherited as well 
as all that he has won for himself. In this way his eagerness to win 
new honours has brought him to the point where he is in danger of 
losing even those he already possesses. [56] And if that were not bad 
enough, gentlemen, this is particularly painful to him, that his 
accusers are not men who have turned to prosecuting out of personal 

92 
Pro Murena 
[57] 
feelings of enmity, but men who have turned to enmity out of a 
personal desire for prosecuting. I leave out Servius Sulpicius,* who, I 
know, is motivated not by any wrong that Lucius Murena has done 
to him but by their rivalry for office. Apart from him, the prosecu-
tors include a friend of Murena's father, Gaius Postumius, a long-
time neighbour and friend, as he himself admits: he mentioned a 
number of reasons for their friendship, but could offer none at all 
why they should be enemies. The prosecutors include Servius Sul-
picius,* the son of Murena's close companion, who ought to be 
devoting his abilities instead to protecting his father's friends. And 
the prosecutors include Marcus Cato, who has never been at odds 
with Murena over anything at all, and who has been born into such 
an elevated position in our nation that he ought to be devoting his 
talents and his resources to the defence of many people, of strangers 
even, and scarcely ever to the destruction even of an enemy. 
[57] I shall reply, then, to Postumius first, who as a candidate for 
the praetorship throwing himself at a candidate for the consulship 
seems to me somehow like a circus rider throwing himself at a four-
horse chariot.* If his fellow candidates did not violate the law, then he 
acknowledged their superior claims when he withdrew his candida-
ture. But if, on the other hand, one of them did commit an act of 
bribery, then he is indeed a friend worth having, who would seek to 
avenge an injury done to someone else, but not one done to himself! 
(On the charges of Postumius, and those of the young Se~·viliS. )* 
[58] I come now to Marcus Cato, who is the mainstay and bulwark 
of the entire prosecution. This man is in fact such a stern and force-
ful prosecutor that I am far more afraid of his influence than I am of 
his allegations. With such a prosecutor as this, members of the jury, 
my first prayer shall be that his rank, that his impending tribunate,* 
and that the impressiveness and dignity of his whole life may do no 
harm whatsoever to Lucius Murena; and next I shall pray that those 
sterling qualities of Marcus Cato's, acquired by him expressly for the 
purpose of helping many people, may not be used to hurt Murena 
alone. When Publius Africanus prosecuted Lucius Cotta,* he had 
been consul twice and had destroyed the two terrors which thteat-
ened our empire, Carthage and Numantia. He was, in addition, a 
man of the greatest eloquence, the greatest devotion to duty, "hd the 
greatest integrity; and the authority he possessed equalled/that of 
the entire Roman empire-an empire upheld, indeed, by/his own 
www.ebook3000.com

[59] 
Pro Murena 
93 
exertions. And yet I have often heard people older than myself say 
that this overwhelming power and status that Africanus possessed 
proved in the event to be a factor very much in Lucius Cotta's 
favour. For what happened was that the wise men who were serving 
as jurors at the time were not prepared to see a man apparently 
convicted as a result of the excessive power of his opponent. 
[59] And what about Servius Galba?* Was it not the case, as history 
relates, that the Roman people rescued him from the clutches of 
your great-grandfather, the valiant and successful Marcus Cato, who 
was doing his best to destroy him? In our country, both the entire 
people and its wise and far-sighted jurors have always been opposed 
to prosecutors with too much power. For my part, I do not think a 
prosecutor should impose his dominance on a court, or any strong 
pressure that he may have, or his overwhelming authority, or his 
excessive influence. Such advantages should all be used for saving 
the innocent, for protecting the powerless, and for helping people in 
trouble: for imperilling and for ruining Roman citizens they should 
be cast aside. [6o] If someone, then, were perhaps to say that Cato 
would not have elected to prosecute unless he had already come to a 
judgement about the case, my answer is this: it will be creating an 
unfair precedent, gentlemen, and an appalling situation for men on 
trial if a prosecutor's opinion is to count as some sort of presumption 
of guilt against the defendant. 
Holding, as I do, Cato, a very high opinion of your moral stand-
ards, I could not possibly fault your judgement; but there are per-
haps a few respects in which I could shape and improve it slightly. 
'You do not make many mistakes,' the old teacher said to the great 
warrior, 'but some mistakes you do make. I can put you right.'* But I 
cannot put you right. In fact, I could say with complete truth that 
you make no mistakes whatsoever, nor is there anything at all in 
which you appear to need correction-only a little gentle modifica-
tion. Nature herself has made you a great and elevated human being, 
fashioned for integrity, seriousness, self-control, greatness of char-
acter, fairness, and for every virtue. And yet she has added to all that 
a philosophy which is neither moderate nor mild but, it seems to me, 
rather more harsh and inflexible than either reality or human nature 
can tolerate. 
[6r] Now, since I am not making this speech before an ignorant 
rabble* or before some gathering of rustics, I shall be a little more 

94 
Pro Murena 
[62] 
bold in discussing those cultural studies with which you and I are so 
familiar, and which we find so agreeable. You should be aware, mem-
bers of the jury, that these superlative, godlike qualities which we see 
in Marcus Cato are his very own; but as for the qualities which we 
sometimes find lacking in him, their absence is due not to nature, but 
to his teacher. For there was once an extremely intelligent man, 
Zeno,* whose disciples are known as Stoics. Let me quote you some 
typical sayings and precepts of his. 'The wise man is never influ-
enced by favour, and never forgives someone who has done wrong.' 
'No one ever feels pity unless he is a fool or an idiot.' 'A true man is 
never prevailed upon or appeased.' 'Only wise men are handsome, 
however deformed they may be; rich, however destitute; kings, how-
ever much a slave.' As for those of us who are not wise men, they call 
us runaways, exiles, enemies, lunatics even. 'All misdeeds are equal: 
every transgression is an unspeakable crime. The man who strangles 
a farmyard cock without good reason commits no less a crime than 
the man who strangles his father.' 'The wise man never supposes 
anything, never regrets anything, is never mistaken, never changes 
his mind.' 
[62] Marcus Cato, a man of the greatest intelligence, was induced 
by the most learned authorities to seize on this philosophy not, like 
most people, simply as a topic for discussion, but as a guide to life. 
The tax-farmers make some request.* 'Make sure you are not influ-
enced by favour!' Some wretched and desperate people come to beg 
for help. 'You will be an unspeakable criminal if you are led by pity to 
do anything for them.' Someone admits he has done wrong and asks 
forgiveness for what he has done. 'It is an unspeakable crime to 
forgive.' But it was only a small transgression. 'All misdeeds are 
equal.' You made some remark. 'It is fixed and unalterable.' But your 
remark was not based on fact, but on supposition. 'The wise man 
never supposes anything.' All right, you went wrong somewhere: he 
thinks you spoke maliciously. It is from philosophy like that that we 
arrive at this sort of thing: 'I cleclarecl in the senate that I would 
prosecute a candidate for the consulship.' But you spoke in anger. 
'The wise man', he says, 'is never angry.' All right, you sale! it 
because you had to at the time. 'It is dishonest', he says, 'to deceive 
by lying; to change one's mind is shameful; to be prevailed tfpon is 
criminal; to feel pity is disgraceful.' 
r 
[63] My own teachers, on the other hand-for I will adnjh, Cato, 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Murerza 
95 
that I too as a young man lacked confidence in my own abilities and 
sought the reassurance of philosophy-my own teachers, I tell you, 
were moderate and reasonable men, followers of Plato and Aristotle. 
Their view is that the wise man can sometimes be influenced by 
favour; that a good man does feel pity; that there are distinct classes 
of misdeed which merit different punishments; that a man of con-
sistent principles docs have room for forgiveness; that the wise man 
himself often supposes something which he docs not know for cer-
tain, that he is angry once in a while, but yet can be prevailed upon 
and appeased, that he does occasionally alter what he has said if that 
is the better course, and that he does sometimes change his mind. All 
virtues, they believe, are tempered by what they call the 'mean'.* 
[64) If some happy chance had brought you, Cato, with all your great 
qualities, to these teachers, you would not have.turned out better or 
more courageous or more self-controlled or more just*-such a thing 
is impossible!-but you would have been a little more disposed to 
kindness. You would not have prosecuted a thoroughly decent man 
of the highest rank and integrity who is not a personal enemy of 
yours and has never harmed you in any way. You would instead 
have judged that, because fortune had appointed Lucius Murena 
and yourself as guardians of the same year,* you and he were con-
sequently tied together by a kind of political bond. And as for 
those heated words which you spoke in the senate, either you 
would not have said them at all, or, if you had said them, you 
would afterwards have interpreted them in a more conciliatory 
way. 
[65] You yourself have of late been stirred up by some mental 
impulse, carried away by the force of your character and ability, and 
set ablaze by your recent philosophical studies; but I venture to 
predict that in due course experience will influence you, time will 
soften you, age will mellow you. In fact those masters of yours and 
teachers of virtue seem to me to have deliberately extended the 
bounds of moral duty a little further than nature intended, their 
purpose being that in our minds we should strive for perfection, and 
so at least make it to the point we ought to reach. 'Never forgive!' 
No, forgive some things, but not everything. 'Never be influenced by 
favour!' No, stand fast against favour, when duty and good faith 
require. 'Do not be moved by pity!' Certainly not, if this 
means relaxing your rigour; but there is nevertheless some merit in 

Pro Murena 
[66] 
compassion. 'Hold fast to your opinion!' Of course, unless your 
opinion is trumped by a better one. 
[66] The great Scipio* is a case in point. He was not ashamed to do 
what you are doing and keep a man of great learning, Panaetius,* in 
his household. However, Panaetius' conversation and teachings, 
although precisely the same as those in which you take such pleasure, 
did not make Scipio stricter but, as old men have told me, much 
milder. And out of those who shared that same philosophy, who was 
more affable than Gaius Laelius, who more charming? Who was 
more dignified than he was, who wiser? I could say exactly the same 
about Lucius Phil us and about Gaius Galus;* but let me take you back 
now to your own house. Can you think of anyone more obliging, 
more sociable, and more temperate, in every sphere ofhuman soci-
ety, than your great-grandfather Cato?* When you were speaking 
impressively and truly about his outstanding virtue you said that you 
had a model at home for you to imitate. You do indeed have that 
model set before you at home, although it has been easier for his 
character to pass to you, who are descended from him, than it has 
been for it to come to any of us. All the same, it is there as a model for 
me to imitate just as much as for you. If, however, you were to 
sprinkle some of Cato's ease and affability onto your own sternness 
and severity, those qualities of yours would not become better-
since they are perfect already-but they would at least be more 
agreeably seasoned. 
[67] So, to return to the point at which I began: strike Cato's name 
out of the case, set his power to one side, ignore his influence-
influence which in a trial should either be used for an acquittal or not 
at all-and come to grips with me on the actual charges. What is 
your accusation, Cato, what charge are you bringing to the court, 
what do you allege? Electoral malpractice? That is not something I 
defend. You criticize me for defending the crime which I penalized 
by law.* But it was malpractice that I penalized, not innocence: mal-
practice I will gladly join you in prosecuting, if that is what you 
want. You pointed out that the senate, on my proposal, passed a 
decree* that it should be deemed a violation of the Calpurnian taw if 
men were paid to meet the candidates, if they were hired to escort 
them, if seats at gladiatorial games were given out wholt)$;ale by 
tribes, or if lunches were likewise given out wholesale. So tne senate 
ruled that these practices, if engaged in, should be deemed ,~iolations 
www.ebook3000.com

[68] 
Pro Murerm 
97 
of the law. This decree, while it humoured the candidates, was quite 
unnecessary. For the crucial question is whether these practices did 
in fact take place: if they did, then no one doubts that they were 
illegal. [68] It is absurd to leave as uncertain something that is doubt-
ful but make a ruling on something that no one is in any doubt about. 
Moreover, this decree of the senate was passed at the request of all 
the candidates, so one cannot tell from it whom it benefited and 
whom it hurt. Prove, therefore, that these practices were engaged in 
by Lucius Murena: if you can, I shall gladly concede that they were 
illegal. 
'Large numbers of people went out to meet him on his return 
from his province.'* This is quite normal when the man is someone 
who is standing for the consulship-and in any case people surely go 
out to meet anyone who is coming back home? .\What did that huge 
crowd consist of?' First of all, even if I were unable to give you a 
complete account of it, what is so surprising about farge numbers of 
people having gone out to meet such a great man on his arrival, and 
particularly a candidate for the consulship? It would have been far 
more surprising if they had not gone out to meet him. [69] And if I 
were to tell you that many of them had been asked to go-something 
which is in no way out of the ordinary -surely that would hardly be 
a crime, or even surprising? In our country, where it is common 
practice for us, when asked, to escort the sons of the humblest citi-
zens almost at the crack of dawn from the furthest parts of the city to 
the forum,* would people really be unwilling to go to the Campus 
Marti us at nine o'clock, especially when asked in the name of such a 
great man? And if all the trading companies went too-those to 
which many of the jurors* sitting here belong? And if there were 
many members of our own most honourable order? And if that 
entire race of office-seekers, so eager to please and so determined 
that nobody should enter the city without due honour, if finally our 
own prosecutor Postumius himself went to meet him with a hefty 
following of his own, then what is so surprising about the huge 
crowd that resulted? I need not mention Murena's clients, his neigh-
bours, his fellow-tribesmen, and Lucullus' entire army, which had 
come to Rome at that time for a triumph.* I will say just this: crowds 
have never been unwilling to provide this service without payment, 
and not just for men of high standing, but for anyone at all who 
might want it. 

Pro iYiurena 
[ 70] 'But he was escorted by large numbers of people.' Prove that 
they were paid, and I will admit the charge. That apart, what do you 
find to criticize? 'What does he need an escort for?' he says. Are you 
asking me why he needs something that all of us have always made 
use of? Poor people have only one means available to them of earning 
favours from our order or of paying us back, and that is by helping us 
and escorting us around when we are standing for office. It is neither 
realistic nor fair to expect members of the equestrian order or our 
own to spend whole days attending those of their friends who are 
candidates. If our house happens to be crowded with such people, or 
if we are sometimes accompanied down to the forum by them, or if 
they deign to walk the length of a public hall with us, we think that 
they are paying us great attention and respect. It is by contrast our 
humbler friends with time on their hands who provide the sort of 
constant attendance that is generally given to men of substance who 
are in a position to confer a favour. (71] So do not take away from the 
lower class of men this fruit of their devotion, Cato. Allow those who 
look to us for everything to have something which they can give us in 
return. If poor people have nothing except their votes, then their 
support counts for nothing, regardless of whether or not they do 
vote.* As they are always saying themselves, they cannot give 
speeches for us, act as our guarantors, or invite us to their homes. All 
these are things they ask for from us, and they think that what we 
give them cannot be repaid in any other way except by their service. 
This is why they opposed the Fabian law, which concerns the num-
ber of people in an escort, as well as the decree of the senate passed 
in the consulship of Lucius Caesar.* There is in fact no penalty which 
could prevent the poorer people from respecting this time-honoured 
\vay of fulfilling their obligations. 
[ 72] 'But seating was given out by tribes and invitations to lunch 
distributed wholesale.' Murena abstained entirely from such prac-
tices, members of the jury, and his friends engaged in them only in 
moderation, and as far as custom allows. Nevertheless, this reminds 
me how many votes, Servius, these complaints in the senate lost us.* 
For when was there ever a time, in living memory or in the memory 
of our fathers, when people did not want, whether from self-
interested motives or out of simple generosity, to give their friends 
and fellow-tribesmen seats in the circus or the forum?* These are the 
I 
rewards and benefits that poorer people receive from thejf fellow-
www.ebook3000.com

[73] 
Pro Murena 
99 
tribesmen by time-honoured custom. [73] [A jew words are missing.] 
... gave seats to his fellow-tribesmen on one occasion when he was 
an aide-de-camp, what will they make of our leading men who have 
provided whole blocks of seats in the circus for theirs? 
All these charges to do with escorts, seating, and lunches were 
attributed by the public to an excessive keenness on your part, 
Servius, and Murena is defended against them by a senatorial 
decree.* 'How so?' The senate surely does not regard it as a crime if 
people go out to meet a candidate, does it? 'No, but it does if they are 
paid to do so.' So, prove that they were. And if a crowd escorts a 
candidate? 'No, but it does if it has been hired.' So, show that it was. 
And if seats are provided at shows or invitations to lunch given out? 
'Not at all, but it does if they have been given out wholesale, all 
over the place.' And what do you mean by 'wholesale'? 'To all and 
sundry.' So if Lucius Natta,* a young man of the highest social 
standing-and we can see where his loyalties lie al~eady, and what a 
great man he is destined to become-wanted to show generosity to 
the equestrian centuries* both because of his tie of kinship with 
Murena and with an eye to his future prospects, that cannot reflect 
adversely on his stepfather, or form the basis of any charge against 
him. Likewise, if a Vestal virgin, a relation of Murena's and his close 
friend, gave him her seat at the gladiatorial games,* then she acted out 
of a sense of duty, and he is free from blame. All such favours are the 
duties required of friends, the benefits that are owed to the poor, and 
the obligations expected of candidates. 
[74] But Cato disputes with me coldly, like a Stoic. He says that it 
is wrong to purchase goodwill with food; he says that in choosing 
magistrates men's judgement should not be perverted by pleasure. 
So if a man invites someone to dinner because he is standing for 
election, is he to be condemned? 'Of course,' he says. 'Are you telling 
me that you would seck the supreme power, the supreme authority, 
and the government of the country by pandering to men's senses, 
making their characters go soft, and tempting them with pleasures? 
Was it', he continues, 'a job as a pimp that you were seeking from a 
bevy of pampered young boys, or power over the whole world from 
the Roman people?' That is a revolting way of talking: it is alien to 
our custom, way of life, habits, and our very nation. For neither the 
Spartans, the originators of your way oflife and speech,* who recline 
on bare wood for their daily meals, nor the Cretans, who do not even 

IOO 
Pro Atfurena 
[75] 
recline at all when they eat, have done any better in preserving their 
states than the Romans, who set aside time for pleasure as well as for 
work. Indeed, the latter were destroyed by our army in a single 
attack, while the former* hold onto their discipline and laws only 
thanks to the protection afforded by our empire. [75) So do not speak 
with such excessive harshness, Cato, against the customs of our 
ancestors. These customs are vindicated both by the facts of the 
matter and by the great length of time that our empire has endured. 
There was in our fathers' time a learned man from the same 
philosophical school as yourself, an honourable and noble man, 
Quintus Tubero.* When Publius Africanus died, his nephew Quintus 
Maximus provided a banquet for the Roman people in his honour; 
and since Tubero was the son of Africanus' sister, Maximus asked 
him if he would provide covers for the couches. But Tubero, being 
an extremely learned man and a Stoic, covered the Carthaginian 
couches* with goatskins and put out Samian crockery,* as if it was the 
death ofDiogenes the Cynic* that was being commemorated, not that 
of the godlike Africanus-a man, indeed, whom Maxim us praised at 
his funeral by thanking the immortal gods that he had been born into 
this country rather than any other, since it was inevitable that wher-
ever Africanus was, there the seat of empire would be. Such a man 
was Africanus; and in the commemoration of his death the Roman 
people objected to Tubero's ill-judged philosophy. [76] And so it was 
that a very fine and honourable citizen, despite being the grandson 
of Lucius Paull us and, as I said, the son of Publius Africanus' sister, 
was defeated in the election for the praetorship thanks to those goat-
skins. For although the Roman people cannot abide private extrava-
gance, they love public display. They do not care for lavish banquets, 
but they like shabbiness and penny-pinching even less. And they 
distinguish as to the appropriateness of duties and occasions, observ-
ing an alternation of work and pleasure. 
You say that in choosing magistrates people should not be influ-
enced by anything except a candidate's merit. You, however, 
although a man of the highest merit yourself, do not observe this rule 
in your own case. Why otherwise do you ask people to help you and 
give you their support? You ask me to entrust myself to you, so that 
you will be put in charge of me.* But do you really think the request 
ought to be coming from you? Should it not be the ot~er way 
round-me asking you to undergo toil and danger for 111~' protec-
www.ebook3000.com

[n] 
Pro Murena 
IOI 
tion? [77] And what about your use of a prompter?* This involves 
cheating and deceiving people. For if we accept that it is honourable 
to address your fellow citizens by name, then it follows that it must 
be shameful if your slave knows them better than you do. But if you 
do already know them, do you really have to address them with the 
help of a prompter, while you are standing for election, as though 
you did not know them?* And what about your greeting them as if 
you knew them personally when you have in fact been prompted? 
And again, your greeting them in a much more ofThand way once 
you have been safely elected? These practices, if judged by the nor-
mal rules of political life, are all right and proper; it is only if care-
fully weighed against the precepts of philosophy that they would be 
found to be corrupt. 
The Roman plebs, therefore, should not be deprived of the bene-
fits of games, gladiatorial shows, and banquets, all of which were 
instituted by our ancestors; nor should the liberality of candidates-
the sort that represents bounty, not bribery-be disallowed. 
[ 78] But it was the national interest that led you to undertake the 
prosecution. I accept, Cato, that that was your feeling and suppo-
sition when you came here, but you have slipped up through a lack of 
wisdom.* What I am doing, members of the jury, I am doing partly 
because of Lucius Murena's position and my friendship with him, 
but I also declare and proclaim that I am doing it for the sake of 
peace, tranquillity, concord, freedom, security, and the lives of all of 
us. Listen, listen to a consul, gentlemen-I shall not be presumptu-
ous, I shall only say a consul who spends all his days and nights 
thinking about the national interest! 
Lucius Catilina did not so scorn and despise our country as to 
think he could destroy the state merely with the forces he took out 
with him. The infection of his criminality is spreading more widely 
than anyone realizes, and affects more people. The Trojan horse is 
within our walls, within our walls I tell you-but it will never over-
whelm us as we sleep so long as I am consul. [79] You ask me 
whether I have any fear of Catiline. I have none, and I have taken 
steps to ensure that no one else need fear him either. But his forces I 
see here, these, I tell you, are very much to be feared; and it is not so 
much the army of Lucius Catilina of which we should now be afraid 
as those men who are said to have deserted that army. For they have 
not in fact deserted it at all. Posted by him on the look-out and in 

102 
Pro Murena 
[So] 
ambush, they remain behind, poised above our heads and necks. 
These people want to use your votes to dislodge an honest consul, a 
fine general, and someone by nature and personal circumstances 
bound up with the security of this country, and to topple him from 
his guardianship of the city and his protection of the state. Their 
weapons and treachery I have rebuffed in the Campus Martius,* 
undermined in the forum,* and frequently thwarted even in my own 
home,* gentlemen; and if you hand over one of the consuls to these 
men, they will have achieved far more through your votes than by 
their own swords. 
It is very important, members of the jury, that there be two con-
suls in place on the first of January, and I have worked hard in the 
face of considerable opposition to bring this about. [So] You should 
not imagine that it is by ordinary plans or routine methods or [a fel/J 
JZJords are missing]. It is not a mischievous law that these men are 
aiming at, or a pernicious distribution,* or some damage to the state 
that has at some point been rumoured. No; in this very country, 
gentlemen, plans are under way for the destruction of the city, the 
massacre of the citizens, and the obliteration of the name of Rome. 
And it is citizens, citizens I tell you-if it is right to call them by that 
name-that have plotted and are still plotting these actions against 
their country. Every day I counter their plans, undermine their 
treachery, and resist their crimes. But I warn you, gentlemen: my 
consulship is now coming to an end. Do not take away from me the 
man whose diligence should succeed mine! Do not remove the man 
to whom I am eager to hand over the country unharmed, for him to 
defend against these terrible dangers! 
[SI] And do you not see, members of the jury, what further evil is 
being added to this? It is you, Cato, you to whom I am speaking: 
surely you can see the stormy year of office that you have ahead of 
you? Already at yesterday's public meeting there was thundering the 
pernicious voice of a tribune designate,* your colleague in office-the 
man against whom your own prescient mind took many precautions, 
as did all those loyal citizens who urged you to stand for the tribun-
ate yourself. All the stirrings of the past three years-since the time 
when, as you know, Lucius Catilina and Gnaeus Piso* formed a plot 
to murder the senate-are bursting out during these days, ,during 
these months, and at this very moment. [Sz] What place ~ there, 
gentlemen, what time, what day, what night, when I am not inatched 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Murena 
103 
away and flee away from the traps and swords of those men,* saved 
not just by my own personal precautions, but far more by those of 
the gods? It is not on my own account that they want me killed: what 
they want is for a vigilant consul to be removed from the defence of 
the country. They would want just as much to get rid of you too, 
Cato, if they could find some means of doing so; and, believe me, 
that is what they arc aiming at and striving to achieve. They sec how 
much courage you have, how much brilliance, how much authority, 
and how much power to defend our country. But when they see a 
tribune's power deprived of a consul's influence and support, they 
conclude that, once you are disarmed and weakened, they will have 
less difficulty in destroying you. They are not afraid of the vacant 
consulship* being filled: they see that your colleagues in office will be 
able to prevent this happening. What they hope is that the illustrious 
Decimus Silanus can be thrown to them without a colleague, your-
self without a consul, and the country without any rneans of defence. 
[83] In such a critical and dangerous situation as this, it is your 
duty, Marcus Cato-as someone, it seems to me, born to serve your 
country rather than yourself-to recognize what is going on and to 
preserve in public life a man who will be your helper, protector, and 
ally. He will not be a self-seeking consul, but a consul such as the 
country is crying out for at the present time-fitted by his personal 
circumstances to uphold peace, by his expertise to wage war, and by 
his character and experience to undertake whatever duties you could 
ask of him. 
And yet complete power over this situation rests with you, mem-
bers of the jury. In this trial you hold the whole country in your 
hands: it is yours to direct. If Lucius Catilina with the council of 
criminals that he has taken with him from Rome were able to judge 
the case, he would condemn Lucius Murena; if he were able to kill 
him, he would do so. For his plans require that the country be 
robbed of its defences, that the number of generals available to coun-
ter his madness be reduced, and that greater power to stir up sedi-
tion and discord be granted to the tribunes of the plebs, by the 
removal of their opponent. So shall the most honourable and learned 
gentlemen, chosen from the most distinguished orders,* reach the 
same verdict that that relentless gladiator and public enemy would 
reach? 
[84] Believe me, gentlemen, in this trial you will be voting not just 

104 
Pro i\1urena 
[8sJ 
about Lucius lVlurena's survival, but about your own as well. vVe 
have reached the moment of reckoning. There is no longer any place 
from which we can restore our strength or in which, having fallen, 
we can make a final stand. It is not enough to ensure that our present 
forces are not reduced: we must also acquire fresh ones,* if we can. 
For the enemy is not on the Anio,* which in the Punic \Var seemed 
terrible enough, but in the city, in the forum-immortal gods! I can 
scarcely say it without shuddering-there are even some enemies in 
our country's very sanctuary, some enemies, I tell you, in the senate-
house itself. May the gods grant that my most valiant colleague,* as 
general, may destroy Catiline's unspeakable band of brigands! 
Meanwhile, I, as a civilian, with your help and that of all loyal 
citizens, will by my careful planning scatter and crush this danger 
which the country has conceived and to which it is now on the point 
of giving birth. 
[85] But, I must ask you, what will happen if this crisis slips out of 
our control and is carried over into next year? There will be only one 
consul, and he will be preoccupied not with managing the war but 
with arranging for the vacant consulship to be filled. Already those 
who will hinder him ... [Tizere are gaps in the text here and be/om.] . .. 
that relentless, pestilential monster that is Catiline will burst forth, 
where ... threatens, will suddenly swoop down on the country areas 
outside the city. Frenzy will be found on the rostra, terror in the 
senate-house, conspiracy in the forum, an army in the Campus i\1ar-
tius, and devastation in the countryside. In every home and every 
place we shall fear fire and the sword. All these threats, however, so 
long in preparation, will easily be crushed by the responsible action 
of the magistrates and the watchfulness of private citizens, provided 
that the country is furnished with its proper defences. 
[86] That, gentlemen, is how the matter stands. First of all, then, 
for the sake of the country-which ought to be the most important 
consideration for each one of us-by virtue of my diligent and widely 
recognized watchfulness over the state I warn you, by virtue of my 
position as consul I urge you, and by virtue of the extreme danger 
that we face I implore you, defend the tranquillity, peace, security, 
and lives of yourselves and the rest of the citizens! Secondly, led by 
the duty not just of an advocate, but of a friend too, I ~eg and 
beseech you, gentlemen, to spare a thought for Lucius Murina, that 
unhappy man, exhausted as he is by physical illness* and mental 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro A1urena 
IOS 
torment. Do not overwhelm with fresh grief the congratulations* he 
has recently received! Only a short time ago, honoured by the great-
est gift that the Roman people can bestow, he seemed blessed by 
fortune, being the first man to bring the consulship to an old family, 
and the first to bring it to an extremely ancient town.* Now, however, 
dressed in filth and rags,* exhausted by illness, and devastated by 
tears and grief: he is your suppliant, gentlemen, he calls on your 
good faith, he appeals to your compassion, and he looks to your 
power and your protection. [87] By the immortal gods, gentlemen, 
do not deprive him of the very thing which he judged \vould enhance 
his personal honour, and do not take away all the other distinctions 
that he has won in the past, together with all his rank and fortune! 
Lucius Murena begs and beseeches you, gentlemen, if he has never 
wronged anyone unjustly, if he has never offended anyone's cars or 
acted against their wishes, if he has never been an object of hatred (to 
say the least) either at home or on campaign, then, 'gentlemen, may 
there be a place in your hearts for modesty, may there be a refuge for 
the downcast, and may there be a protection for blameless conduct. 
Having the consulship wrested from one's grasp ought to excite 
considerable pity, gentlemen, for when the consulship is lost, every-
thing else is lost too. At the present time, however, the office of 
consul can attract no envy, for it is exposed to the harangues of 
trouble-makers, the traps set by conspirators, and the weapons of 
Catiline: in short, it alone stands against every danger and against 
every assault. 
[88] I therefore fail to see, gentlemen, what there is in this glorious 
office of consul to cause anyone to envy Murena or indeed any of us; 
but as for this piteous spectacle, it is actually taking place before my 
eyes, and you yourselves are also able to see it and gaze upon it. If 
you strike him down with your votes-may Jupiter avert the 
omcn!-where will the poor man turn? To his home? To see the 
mask* of his illustrious father, which a few days ago he beheld 
wreathed with laurel in his honour, now grieving and disfigured with 
shame? Or to his mother, who only a short time ago, poor woman, 
was kissing a consul when she kissed her son, but is now tormented 
by the worry that she is shortly to behold her son stripped of all his 
honour? [89] But why do I mention his mother and his home when 
the penalty of the new law* deprives him ofhis home, his parent, and 
the company and sight of all his friends? Shall the poor man go into 

I06 
Pro ;Vlurena 
[go] 
exile, then? Where? To the east, where for many years he served as a 
legate, led armies, and performed heroic deeds? But it is deeply 
painful to return in disgrace to a place from which you departed in 
high honour. Or shall he hide himself away at the other end of the 
world, and let Transalpine Gaul, which a short time ago was 
delighted to have him as its governor, sec him once again, grieving, 
mourning, an exile? And if he goes to that province, how will he feel 
when he meets his brother, Gaius Murena?* Imagine the pain of the 
one, the sorrow of the other, and the grief of both of them, imagine 
the change in their fortunes and in their conversation! Only a few 
clays earlier, messengers and letters had spread the news there that 
Murena had been elected consul, and his friends and hosts were 
rushing off to Rome to offer their congratulations-then suddenly 
he appears on the scene in person, announcing his own downfall! 
[go] If such an outcome would be cruel, if it would be pitiable, if it 
would be heartbreaking, if it would be totally out of keeping with 
your clemency and compassion, gentlemen, then preserve the gift 
which the Roman people have bestowed, give the country back its 
consul, and grant this for the sake of Murena's decency, grant it for 
his late father, grant it for his family and stock, and grant it also for 
the highly respectable town ofLanuvium, whose sorrowful represen-
tatives you have seen in large numbers here throughout this trial. Do 
not tear from the ancestral rites of]uno Sospita,* to whom all consuls 
are required to sacrifice, a consul who is her own fellow-townsman 
and hers above all others! If my commendation carries any weight at 
all or my backing any influence, gentlemen, I, a consul, commend 
Murena, a consul, to you; and I can promise and guarantee that he 
will be eager for public harmony, active in his support of loyal cit-
izens, relentless against civil discord, courageous in war, and an 
implacable enemy of this conspiracy which is now rocking the 
country. 
www.ebook3000.com

DATE: 62 BC 
PRO ARCHIA 
('FOR ARCHIAS') 
DEFENDANT: Aulus Licinius Archias 
LAW: lex Papia de peregrinis (Papian law concerning aliens) 
cHARGE: illegal exercise of citizen rights 
PROSECUTOR: Grattius 
DEFENCE ADVOCATE: Ivlarcus Tullius Cicero 
PRESIDING MAGISTRATE: Q!_1intus Tullius Cicero 
VERDICT: acquittal 
Pro Archia is probably the least typical of Cicero's speeches, and is one of 
his most admired. It is a defence, not of a Roman ar(stocrat, but of a 
Syrian poet whose claim to Roman citizenship was disputed. The prose-
cution seem not to have had much of a ease, and Cicero is therefore able 
to establish the technical grounds of Archias' claim within a few para-
graphs (§§ 4-I I). The rest of the speech is then devoted to an encomium 
of literature and this, coupled with the fact that Pro Arcltia is itself a 
literary product of the highest order, has ensured the speech's continuing 
popularity. 
Archias was born at Antioch in Syria, probably in the mid-I20s nc. At an 
early age he became famous throughout the cast as a professional poet 
(writing in Greek), travelling from city to city; some of his poems were 
selected at around this time by Melcager for inclusion in his anthology, the 
Garland (although, since there were several poets named Archias, we can-
not now be certain which poems arc his). In the course of his travels 
Archias came to southern Italy (he was probably doing a round of fes-
tivals), and was granted honorary citizenship by some of the cities he 
visited. He finally arrived at Rome in I02, and was accepted into the house-
hold of the Luculli. The head of the family, Lucius Licinius Lucullus, went 
into exile, probably in I02, after being convicted of misconduct during his 
command in Sicily the previous year, but he had two teenage sons at 
home, Lucius and Ivlarcus, and Archias no doubt assisted with their edu-
cation. His connections were not, however, limited to the Luculli. He was 
sought out by many of the leading men in Rome, among them the Metelli, 
Marcus Aemilius Scaurus, the Catuli, and Lucius Crassus, and Cicero 
tells us that even the great Marius, who otherwise had little time for 
literature, was pleased with Archias' poem on the war against the Cimbri. 
During this period the young Cicero was also lucky enough to receive 

ro8 
Pro Ardzia: Introduction 
instruction from Archias; gratitude towards his old Greek teacher is the 
reason he gives for defending him in this speech. 
Some time later, Archias accompanied JVlarcus Lucullus on a visit to 
Sicily, and on their return journey Lucullus arranged for him to be 
granted honorary citizenship at Hcraclca, a Greek city in Lucania. He 
continued, however, to live in Rome. In l)I the Social \Var broke out: 
Rome's allies (socii) were demanding Roman citizenship, which was 
quickly conceded. The first law by which this was done was the lex Julia in 
go. This was followed in 89 by a fi.Irlher measure, the lex Plautia Papiria, 
which among other provisions extended the citizenship to honorary citi-
zens of federate states not resident in those states but nevertheless resi-
dent in Italy, provided that they reported to one of the praetors at Rome 
within sixty clays. As an honorary citizen of Heraclca, which had been 
allied to Rome since 278, and being long resident in Rome; Archias duly 
reported to the praetor Metellus Pius within the specified period. Thus he 
became a Roman citizen, calling himself, in the Roman fashion, Aulus 
Licinius Archias (the family name Licinius was adopted out of respect for 
his patrons the Luculli). 
He continued to live with the Luculli, accompanying Lucius Lucullus to 
the cast in the 8os and again during the Third iVlithridatic War (73-63 
Be), in the period when Lucullus was in command of the Roman forces 
(73-67). Lucullus' command proved to be highly successful in the early 
stages of the war, but after pursuing Mithriclates into Armenia in 69 he 
began to lose the support of his troops; when his subordinate Gaius 
Valerius Triarius was heavily defeated in 67, he was relieved of his com-
mand, and Pompey was appointed the following year to bring the war to a 
successful conclusion. These events gave rise to great hostility between 
Lucullus and Pompey, and the poem which Archias composed in praise of 
Lucullus' conduct of the war would have served to remind public opinion 
at Rome of the crucial part played by Lucullus in the defeat of 
Mithridates. 
In 6z Archias became the object of a criminal prosecution. In 65 the 
tribune Gaius Papius had carried a law expelling from Rome all non-
citizens who did not have a fixed residence in Italy: residents of Rome, 
therefore, who could not prove themselves Roman citizens, were liable to 
be prosecuted under the law and expelled from the city. The reason why 
Archias should have been prosecuted under this law is uncertain. The 
prosecutor, Grattius, is not otherwise known, but in view of the hostility 
between Lucullus and Pompey he is usually assumed to have been one of 
Pompey's supporters, and the prosecution is therefore interpret~ as an 
attack by a supporter of Pompey on the protege of Pompey:s enemy 
Lucullus. This seems plausible: it is difficult to see why anyope should 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Ardzia: Introduction 
109 
otherwise have wished to call into question Archias' citizenship, which 
had gone unchallenged for twenty-seven years. But Archias was only a 
poet, and it would be too much to suppose that the trial had any great 
political significance. It is perhaps most likely that Grattius was acting on 
his own initiative to avenge an imagined slight to his patron (who was still 
away in Asia)--thc slight being simply that Archias had giYcn Lucullus 
extravagant praise in his poem on the 2\Iithridatic War. 
It used to be assumed that Cicero's defence was an act of hostility 
towards Pompey, but Cicero's policy during this period was, on the 
contrary, to keep in both with the conservatiYes in the senate, such as 
Lucullus, and with Pompey. In this same year he also defended Publius 
Sulla, probably Pompey's brother-in-law, and in April he \Yas seeking to 
form closer tics with Pompey (Fam. 5.7); the one reference to him in Pro 
Arclzia (§ 24) is complimentary. Cicero knew well how to serve one side 
without offending the other: he had clone it before in.Pro lege Manilia (66), 
in \Yhich praise for Pompey is combined with a generous appreciation of 
Lucullus' achievements. In Pro o'lrchia, he successfully avoids political 
controYcrsy by concentrating on the status of literature, and insisting on 
that as the deciding factor in the case. Thus he is able to oblige the 
Luculli, and do a good turn to his old teacher-from whom he expected 
a laudatory poem in return (§§ 28, 3 I)-without risk of damaging his 
relations with Pompey. 
Archias was acquitted, as he surely deserved to be: of Cicero's clients, 
Archias is one of those of whom we can say with most certainty that he 
was innocent of the crime of which he was charged. We hear of him again 
in 6r, presumably still living in Rome, and contemplating writing a poem 
for the Mctclli (Att. I.I6.rs). He appears, however, never to have finished 
the poem on Cicero's consulship to which his former pupil looked forward 
so eagerly. In the end, therefore, Cicero had to make do with only a Latin 
poem-written by himself(De consulatu suo, 6o BC). 

PRO ARCHIA 
[1] Ifl have any natural talent, members of the jury-and I am aware 
how limited it is; or if I have any experience in public speaking-in 
which I do not deny that I am moderately well practised; or if there 
is any technical skill in my oratory which has been derived from 
application and training in the liberal arts-and I admit that I have 
never at any period of my life been averse to such training: if I do 
have any of these capabilities, then Aulus Licinius* here is entitled 
almost as of right to be among the very first to claim from me the 
benefits which they may bring. For when I look back in my mind 
over the time I have lived and recollect the remotest memories of my 
childhood, I am aware that from the earliest point that I can recall it 
was he who was my guide as I undertook and entered upon the 
course of my studies. So if this voice of mine, trained by his 
encotiragement and teaching, has sometimes brought safety to other 
people, I must indeed do all I can to bring help and safety to the very 
man from whom I received the gift which has enabled me to help 
others and to save some. 
[ 2] But in case anyone is surprised to hear me say this, given that 
my client's talents lie not in the theory and practice of oratory but in 
another direction, I should point out that I have never devoted 
myself exclusively to this one art. For all branches of culture are 
linked by a sort of common bond and have a certain kinship with one 
another. [3] Some of you may also be surprised that, in a statutory 
court and at a public trial, when a case is being heard before a praetor 
of the Roman people, a most excellent man,* and before the most 
principled jurors, and with such a large crowd of listeners, I should 
be using a manner of speaking which is out of keeping not only with 
the tradition of the courts but also with the customary style of foren-
sic pleading. If this is so, then I beg of you that you will grant me an 
indulgence in this trial which is appropriate to this defendant here, 
and, I trust, not disagreeable to you-that you will allow inc, speak-
ing as I am on behalf of an eminent poet and a most learned man and 
before this crowd of highly educated people, this civilized jJry, and 
such a praetor as is now presiding, to speak rather more f).-ecly on 
cultural and literary matters, and, as befits the character/of a man 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Archia 
II I 
who because of his life of seclusion and study has had very little to 
do with the hazards of the courts, to employ a somewhat novel and 
unconventional manner of speaking. [4] If I feel that you have 
allowed and granted me this indulgence, I shall certainly convince 
you that Aulus Licinius here should not only not be removed from 
the list of Roman citizens, since he is indeed a citizen, but, were he 
not one, ought to have been added to it. 
As soon as Archias had grown out of childhood and those studies 
which mould the years of boyhood with an outline of culture, he 
devoted himself to literary composition. At Antioch,* first of all, then 
a bustling and wealthy city and overflowing with liberal culture and 
men of the greatest learning (and where he was born, to high-
ranking parents), he quickly began to outshine everybody else by his 
exceptional talents. Later in the other parts of Asia and all over 
Greece his arrival used to cause such a stir that the fame of his 
talents was exceeded by the eagerness with which he was awaited, 
and that in turn was exceeded by the admiration which he excited 
when he finally arrived. [5] Italy* was at that time full of Greek teach-
ing and culture, and in Latium these studies were pursued more 
enthusiastically than they are in the same towns today; while here 
at Rome they were not neglected either, thanks to the untroubled 
political situation. The people of Tarentum, Rhegium, and Neapolis 
accordingly bestowed upon Archias citizenship and other honours, 
and all those who were able to recognize outstanding talent thought 
him worthy of their hospitality and acquaintance. 
It was now, when his enormous fame had spread to places where 
he had never been seen in person, that he arrived in Rome; this was 
when Marius was consul with Catulus.* In these two consuls he 
found men of whom one could supply him with the greatest 
achievements to write about, while the other could give him not only 
achievements but also an appreciative ear. The Luculli* straight away 
received Archias into their house, although even at this time he was 
still of the age when the toga of boyhood is worn.* Indeed, it is a 
tribute not just to his literary talent but to his excellence of character 
that the house which first received him as a very young man is also 
the house which is most familiar to him in his old age. [6] Back in 
those days Archias was regarded with affection by the famous Quin-
tus Metellus Numidicus and his son Pius;* his recitations were 
attended by Marcus Aemilius;* he was constantly in the company of 

II2 
Pro Archia 
Quintus Catulus and his son;* his friendship was cultivated by Lucius 
Crassus;* and as for the Luculli, Drusus, the Octavii, Cato, and the 
entire family of the Hortensii,* he was on the closest terms with all of 
them and was treated by them with the greatest respect. In fact, he 
was courted not only by those who were eager to learn and listen, but 
also by such as pretended to be. 
Some time later, after he had set out for Sicily with Marcus 
Lucullus* and was on his way back from that province with the same 
Lucullus, Archias arrived at Heraclea.* Since this was a town which 
enjoyed the fullest treaty rights with Rome, he wished to be enrolled 
among its citizens; and, being in any case considered worthy of the 
honour on his own merits, he obtained it from the Heracleans 
thanks also to the authority and influence of Lucullus. [ 7] Roman 
citizenship was then bestowed upon him by the law of Silvanus and 
Carbo, which reads: 'IF ANY PERSONS HAVE BEEN ENROLLED AS 
CITIZENS OF THE FEDERATE STATES, IF THEY !-lAVE HAD A 
FIXED RESIDENCE IN ITALY AT THE TIME WI-lEN THE LAW WAS 
PASSED, AND IF TI-lEY HAVE DECLARED THEl'v!SELVES BEFORE A 
PRAETOR WITHIN SIXTY DAYS ... '* Since by this time Archias 
had had a fixed residence in Rome for many years, he declared 
himself before the praetor Quintus Metellus,* who was a close 
friend of his. 
[8] If I am to speak about nothing except Archias' citizenship and 
the law, I have nothing more to say, and I rest my defence. So which 
of these facts, Grattius, do you think you can disprove? Do you deny 
that Archias was enrolled at Heraclea at the time stated? We have 
present here in court a man of the highest standing and the greatest 
possible conscientiousness and honour, Marcus Lucullus, who 
declares not that he thinks it, but that he knows it; not that he heard 
it, but that he saw it; not that he was present when it was done, but 
that he actually did it himself. We also have here representatives 
from Heraclea, men of the highest rank, who have made the journey 
to Rome specially to attend this trial and have come with written 
instructions and official evidence: they confirm that Archias was 
enrolled at Heraclea. Do you ask me at this point for the public 
records of the Heracleans, which everybody knows were destroyed 
when the public record office was burnt down in the Italian W;lr?* It is 
absurd to say nothing of the proof which we have, but de¢and the 
proof which is not to be had; to keep quiet about what/ men can 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Ardzia 
IIJ 
remember, but insist on documentary evidence; and, when you have 
the conscientious evidence of a highly distinguished man and the 
oath and good f~1ith of a most honourable town, to reject what cannot 
possibly be tampered with, but ask for records which you yourself 
say are often falsified. [9] Or did he not have a fixed residence at 
Rome-he who for so many years before obtaining the citizenship 
had made Rome the seat of all his possessions and his fortune? Or 
perhaps he failed to declare himself? On the contrary, he did do so, 
and his declaration was registered in records which, of all the records 
resulting from the declarations made before the board of praetors,* 
were the only ones to possess the full authority of public documents. 
For it is said that the citizen-lists of Appius* were carelessly main-
tained, and that no trust could be placed in any such records because 
of the unreliability of Gabinius* before he was prosecuted, and 
because of his downfall once he had been condemned. Yet Metellus, 
on the other hand, the most conscientious and orderly of men, was 
so painstaking that he actually went to the praetor Lucius Lcntulus* 
and the panel of judges to say that he was worried at the erasure of a 
single name. These, then, arc the lists of Mctcllus, and in them you 
will find no erasure over the name of Aulus Licinius. 
[ro] That is how the matter stands. What reason do you have, 
then, for doubting his citizenship-especially given that he had been 
enrolled in the citizen-lists of other towns too? When Greek com-
munities were giving out their citizenship for nothing to numerous 
undistinguished individuals, people with low-grade skills or with 
none at all, I suppose that the people ofRhcgium or Locri* or Neapo-
lis or Tarentum, who were used to giving their citizenship to stage 
performers, were unwilling to bestow it upon a man whose talent had 
earned him the greatest glory! And a second point: when the other 
people had somehow smuggled their names into their towns' citizen-
lists not only after the general granting of Roman citizenship* but 
even after the enactment of the Papian law,* and when he by contrast 
did not even make usc of those other lists in which he is enrolled, 
because he always wanted to be counted as a Hcraclcan-under 
circumstances such as these, is Archias really to be driven out? 
[I I] You miss his name on the Roman census lists.* It is, I take it, a 
closely guarded secret that at the time of the last census Archias was 
on campaign with the illustrious general Lucius Lucullus; that dur-
ing the previous one he was away in Asia with the same man who was 

I I4 
Pro Archia 
[ I2] 
then quaestor; and that at the first census after his enfranchisement, 
the one held by Julius and Crass us, no section of the population was 
in fact registered at all. In any case, since the census does not consti-
tute proof of citizenship, but only shows that someone who is regis-
tered was claiming to be a citizen at the time, I should add this: in the 
period in which you allege that Archias even in his own eyes did not 
have the rights of a Roman citizen, he nevertheless frequently made 
a will according to our laws, entered upon inheritances bequeathed 
to him by Roman citizens, and was nominated for a reward from the 
treasury by Lucius Lucullus as proconsul. Go and find some 
stronger arguments, then, if you can-because you are never going 
to be able to refute Archias' claim by citing his own opinions or those 
of his friends. 
[12 J You will no doubt ask me, Grattius, why I am so delighted 
with this man. The answer is that it is he who enables my mind to 
recover from the din of the courts and gives my tired ears a rest from 
the shouting and abuse. How do you imagine I could find material 
for my daily speeches on so many different subjects if I did not train 
my mind with literary study, and how could my mind cope with so 
much strain if I did not use such study to help it unwind? Yes, I for 
one am not ashamed to admit that I am devoted to the study of 
literature. Let others be ashamed if they have buried their heads in 
books and have not been able to find anything in them which could 
either be applied to the common good or brought out into the 
open and the light of day. But why should I be ashamed, gentlemen, 
given that in all the years I have lived my private pastimes have never 
distracted me, my own pleasures have never prevented me, and not 
even the need for sleep has ever called me away from helping anyone 
in his hour of danger or of need? [I 3] Who, then, can justly censure 
or reproach me if I allow myself the same amount of time for pursu-
ing these studies as others set aside for dealing with their own per-
sonal affairs, celebrating festivals and games, indulging in other 
pleasures, and resting their minds and bodies, or as much as they 
devote to extended partying and to playing dice and ball? And I have 
all the more right to engage in such studies because it is from 'them 
that I am able to improve such oratorical ability as I have, an ability 
which has always been at the disposal of my friends when fa<;Cd with 
prosecution. But even if my oratorical powers seem not to a~ount to 
much, I do at least recognize the source from which all thatils highest 
www.ebook3000.com

[q] 
Pro Archia 
IIS 
in them has been drawn. [r4] For had I not in my youth been led by 
the teachings of many, and by all that I read, to the belief that there is 
nothing in life to be sought after more earnestly than excellence and 
honour, and that in the pursuit of these every physical torture and 
every risk of death or banishment should be held of little account, I 
would certainly never have exposed myself to so many great 
struggles and to the daily attacks from desperate men* which I have 
been facing, for the sake of your security. But all books, all the words 
of the wise and all history are full of examples which teach this 
lesson-examples which would all be lying in obscurity, had not the 
light of the written word been brought to them. How many finely 
executed portraits of the most valiant men have the Greek and Latin 
writers left us, and not only for our contemplation but for our emula-
tion! Indeed, I myself, when serving as a magistrate, have always 
kept these men before my eyes, and have modelled myself on them, 
heart and mind, by meditating on their excellences. 
[I sl Someone will no doubt ask: 'Were those great men, then, 
whose virtues have been recorded in books-were they themselves 
experts in that learning which you praise so highly?' It would be 
difficult to state categorically that all of them were. Nevertheless, I 
am sure what my answer should be. I do admit that there have been 
many men of outstanding temperament and ability who were not 
well-read, but who achieved a natural self-possession and dignity of 
character because of their innate, almost godlike endowments. 
Moreover, I would even go so far as to say that character without 
learning has made for excellence and ability more often than learning 
without character. And yet I also firmly maintain this, that when a 
natural disposition which is noble and elevated is given in addition a 
systematic training in cultural knowledge, then something remark-
able and unique comes about. [r6] There were examples of this in 
our fathers' time, the younger Africanus,* a godlike man, and Gaius 
Laelius and Lucius Furius, men of the greatest moderation and self-
control, also the elder Marcus Cato,* a most valiant man and the most 
learned of his day. These great men would surely never have taken 
up the study of literature had it not been of help to them in attaining 
and practising excellence. But suppose one could not point to this 
great benefit, suppose that the study of literature conferred only 
enjoyment: even then, I believe, you would agree that this form of 
mental relaxation broadens and enlightens the mind like no other. 

II6 
Pro Archia 
For other forms of mental relaxation are in no way suited to every 
time, age, and place. But the study of literature sharpens youth and 
delights old age; it enhances prosperity and provides a refuge and 
comfort in adversity; it gives enjoyment at home without being a 
hindrance in the wider world; at night, and when travelling, and on 
country visits, it is an unfailing companion. 
[I 7] It might be that we ourselves have no expertise in literary 
matters, and no taste for them. Even so, we should surely have to 
admire literary attainments when we recognize them in others. Is 
there anyone here who was so oafish and insensitive that he was not 
seriously affected when Roscius* died? Although he was an old man at 
the time of his death, his outstanding skill and pleasing manner 
made us think that he was wholly exempt from our common lot. Yet 
Roscius won such love from all of us merely because of the motions 
of his body: arc we, then, to fail to respond to extraordinary motions 
of the mind and quickness of the intellect? 
[18] How many times, members of the jury, have I seen this 
Archias-1 am going to presume upon your kindness, since you arc 
paying such close attention to me as I speak in this unconventional 
manner-how many times have I seen him, without his having 
written clown so much as a single letter, improvise a large number 
of the finest verses about the topics of the day, and then, when 
asked to do it again, repeat his performance but with different 
words and expressions!* As for his written compositions, which 
were carefully and thoughtfully produced, I have seen them so 
highly acclaimed as to equal the praise given to the ancient writers. 
Should I not love such a man, should I not admire him, and should 
I not think it my duty to defend him by every means possible? 
Indeed, we have it on the highest and most learned authority that, 
whereas the other arts are made up of knowledge, rules, and tech-
nique, a poet is created by nature itself, activated by the force of his 
own mind, and inspired, as it were, by a kind of divine spirit. 
Rightly, therefore, does our own great Ennius* call poets 'sacred', 
because they seem to us to be marked out by a special gift and 
endowment of the gods. [19] So let the name of poet, gentlemen, 
which no barbarian race has ever treated with disrespect, be a 
sacred name among you, the most enlightened of men. Ro¢ks and 
deserts respond to the poet's voice; ferocious wild animals lre often 
turned aside by singing and stopped in their tracks:* shallj\ve, then, 
www.ebook3000.com

[zo] 
Pro Archia 
117 
who have been brought up to all that is best, remain unmoved by 
the voice of a poet? 
The people of Colophon say that Homer was a citizen of their city, 
the Chians claim him as theirs, the Salaminians put in a counter-
claim, while the people of Smyrna arc so confident that he belongs to 
them that they have even set up a shrine to him within their town; 
and there are a great many other places, too, which dispute the 
honour among themselves and fight over it. These cities, then, even 
go so far as to search out a foreigner who is dead, because he was a 
poet: are we, on the other hand, to turn away this man who is alive, 
and who belongs to us both in law and by his own choice? Are we to 
turn away a man who has for long now devoted all his efforts and all 
his talents to celebrating the glory and renown of the Roman people? 
For in his youth Archias touched on the war against the Cimbri,* and 
even won the approval of the famous Gaius Nlarius himself, who was 
thought to have little respect for literature. [zo] But there is in fact 
nobody who is so hostile to the Muses that he would not readily 
allow his own deeds to be immortalized in verse. The famous 
Themistocles, the greatest of the Athenians, when asked which singer 
or performer he most enjoyed listening to, is said to have replied that 
he preferred 'the one who best proclaimed Themistocles' greatness'. 
It was for the same reason that Marius was so fond of Lucius 
Plotius:* he thought that his achievements could be made famous by 
Plotius' talent. 
[21] The Mithridatic War,* a great and difficult undertaking pur-
sued with many changes of fortune on land and sea, has been treated 
by Archias in its entirety. The books he wrote on it cast glory not 
only on the valiant and illustrious Lucius Lucullus, but also on the 
reputation of the Roman people. For it was the Roman people \Vho, 
under Lucullus' leadership, opened up Pontus, fortified though it 
was by the resources of its king and by its geographical position. It 
was an army of the Roman people, led by the same general, which, 
although small in number, routed the countless forces of the Arme-
nians. And it is to the Roman people, again under Lucullus' direc-
tion, that the glory belongs of having rescued and preserved the loyal 
city of Cyzicus from all the assaults of the king and from the very 
mouth and jaws of war. That astonishing naval battle off Tenedos, 
when Lucius Lucullus killed the enemy commanders and sank their 
fleet, will always be spoken of and proclaimed as ours: ours are the 

II8 
ProArdzia 
[22] 
trophies, ours the monuments, ours the triumphs. Those who use 
their talents to write about such events serve therefore to increase the 
fame of the Roman people. 
[ 22] Our own Ennius was held in affection by the elder Africanus, * 
and it is even thought that a marble statue of him was placed on the 
tomb of the Scipios. Yet the praises of a poet shed glory not only on 
the person who is praised, but on the reputation of the Roman 
people also. Cato, the great-grandfather of our Cato,* was praised to 
the skies, and great honour was paid to Rome because of it. In short, 
all those great men like Maximus, Marcellus, and Fulvius* were 
praised, but not without each of us having a share in their glory. It 
was because of this that our ancestors bestowed Roman citizenship 
on the poet who had written these laudations, a man from Rudiae: 
are we, on the other hand, to disenfranchise this man of Heraclea 
who has been sought after by many communities, and legally 
enrolled in ours? 
[23] But if anyone thinks that there is a smaller harvest of glory to 
be reaped from Greek verse than from Latin, he is seriously mis-
taken. Greek is read by almost every nation on earth, whereas Latin 
is confined to its own geographical limits, which are, you must 
admit, narrow. If, therefore, our achievements are limited only by the 
boundaries of the world, then we ought to desire that our glory and 
fame may penetrate as far as our weapons have reached. For literary 
commemoration not only brings honour to the nations whose 
achievements are described, it also acts as the strongest incentive to 
those who risk their lives for the sake of glory, driving them on to 
face danger and endure toil. [24] How many writers Alexander the 
Great is said to have kept with him to record his deeds! And yet, 
when standing before the tomb of Achilles at Sigeum, he said: 
'Lucky young man, to have had Homer to proclaim your valour!' 
And rightly-because, had it not been for the Iliad, the tomb which 
covered Achilles' body would also have buried his memory. Again, 
the man whom we today call Great,* whose good fortune has been 
equal to his valour, did he not confer Roman citizenship upon The-
ophanes of Mytilene, who wrote about his deeds, before a 'full 
assembly of soldiers? And were not those brave men of ours, country 
men and soldiers though they were, so swayed by their love of glory 
that they shouted their approval with a great roar, feeling tl)~t they 
too had a share in the praise which had been heaped on their leader? 
www.ebook3000.com

[25] 
Pro Archia 
119 
[25] If Archias, therefore, had not already been a Roman citizen by 
law, he could not, I take it, have succeeded in being awarded the 
citizenship by some general! Sulla, when giving the citizenship to 
Spaniards and Gauls, would no doubt have turned clown his request! 
And yet we ourselves saw what Sulla did when a third-rate poet of 
the people passed up to him a booklet containing an epigram about 
him, merely something set out as elegiacs: he immediately ordered a 
reward to be given to him from the proceeds of the property he was 
engaged in selling,* but on condition that the poet never wrote any-
thing again. Sulla thought that the efforts of a bad poet nevertheless 
deserved some reward: would he not therefore have actively sought 
out the talent, literary skill, and fluency of Archias? [z6] Again, 
would Archias have failed to obtain what he wanted, either at his 
own request or through the Luculli, from ~Iintus Metellus Pius, a 
close friend of his who had given Roman citizenship to many other 
people? Especially when Metellus was so anxious for his own deeds 
to be written about that he even gave a hearing to some poets from 
Corcluba,* whose style was somewhat coarse and foreign? 
This is in fact something which cannot be denied, and so must not 
be concealed, but should be openly admitted: we are all motivated by 
the desire for praise, and the best people arc the ones who arc most 
attracted by glory. The philosophers who write treatises 'on despis-
ing glory' actually inscribe their own names on those very books! In 
the actual writings in which they scorn publicity and fame they want 
to be publicized and named! [27] Decimus Brutus,* a leading citizen 
and a great general, decorated the entrances to his temples and 
monuments with poems by Accius, who was a close friend of his. 
Then again, the great Fulvius,* who took Ennius with him on his 
staff when he fought against the Aetolians, showed no hesitation in 
devoting the spoils of Mars to the Muses. In a city, therefore, in 
which generals, scarcely before putting aside their arms, have given 
honour to the name of poet and the shrines of the Muses, it would 
indeed be wrong for jurors, wearing the toga of peacetime, to fail to 
respect the honour of the Muses and the well-being of poets. 
[ z8] So that you will do this all the more readily, members of the 
jury, I shall now reveal my feelings to you and own up to what I may 
call my passion for glory-a passion too intense, perhaps, but never-
theless an honourable one. The measures which I took during my 
consulship, with your collaboration, for the security of this city and 

120 
Pro Arclzia 
[zg] 
empire, for the lives of our citizens, and for the country as a whole, 
these have become the subject of a poem on which Archias has now 
started work.* When I heard what he had written I thought it was an 
important project and an agreeable one, and so I engaged him to 
complete the task. For merit looks for no reward for the toil and 
danger which it has to face, save only praise and glory. If you take 
that away, gentlemen, what incentive do we have, in life's brief and 
transitory career, to involve ourselves in great undertakings? 
[29] Certainly, if the mind had no prior conception of posterity, and 
if it were to confine all its thoughts within those same bounds in 
which the span of our life is contained, then it would not crush itself 
under such enormous labours, nor would it be troubled by so many 
sleepless responsibilities, nor have to fight so often for life itself. But 
as things arc, there exists in every good man a kind of noble instinct 
which excites the mind night and day with the spur of fame and 
reminds it that the memory of our name must not be allowed to 
disappear when our life is ended, but must be made to last for ever. 
[30] Or are we all to appear so small-minded as to think that all our 
achievements will cease to exist at the same moment as we do 
ourselves-we who undergo toil and mortal danger in the service of 
the state, and who throughout our whole lives never once stop to 
draw breath in peace and tranquillity? Many distinguished men have 
been careful to leave statues and portraits behind them, likenesses 
not of their minds, but of their bodies: ought we not greatly to prefer 
to leave behind us a representation of our designs and characters, 
moulded and finished by artists of the highest ability? For my part, 
even when I was actually carrying out the actions I took, I considered 
that I was spreading and disseminating a knowledge of them for the 
world to remember for ever. And whether I shall have no awareness, 
after I have died, of the world's memory of me, or whether, as the 
wisest men have maintained, that recollection will indeed touch 
some part of my being, I do at least derive pleasure at this moment 
from the thought and hope that my achievements will be 
remembered. 
[3 I] Therefore, members of the jury, protect a man whose h'on-
ourable character you see confirmed by the high rank of his friends 
and their long-standing friendship with him; whose talent is s,uch as 
you may judge it to be when you observe that it has been sot+ght out 
by men whose own talents are outstanding; and whose ca$e is one 
www.ebook3000.com

[32] 
Pro Arclzia 
121 
which is supported by the sanction of the law, the authority of a 
town, the testimony of Lucullus, and the citizen-lists of Metellus. 
Under these circumstances, gentlemen, if you consider that talents 
such as his deserve the blessing not only of men, but of the gods as 
well, then I entreat you to take him under your protection. He is a 
man who has always done honour to you, to your generals, and to the 
achievements of the Roman people, who has undertaken to give an 
everlasting testimonial of praise to these civil dangers which you and 
I recently faced together, and who follows that calling which has 
always been declared and believed by all men to be sacred: let him 
therefore be seen to have been rescued by your humanity rather than 
injured by your severity. 
[32] As regards the technicalities of the case, I have spoken briefly 
and in a straightforward manner, as is my custom, and I trust that 
you arc all satisfied, gentlemen, with what I have said. As for the part 
of my speech which was out of keeping with th'c forum and the 
tradition of the courts-when I discussed my client's talents and 
literary studies in general-! hope that this has been received in 
good pari: by you, gentlemen, as I know it has been by the man who is 
presiding over this court. 

PRO CAELIO 
('FOR CAELIUS') 
DATE: 4 April s6 BC (trial held on 3-4 April) 
DEFENDANT: Marcus Caelius Rufus 
LAW: lex Plautia de vi (Plautian law concerning violence) 
CHARGE: civil disturbances at Naples; assault on Alexandrians at Puteoli; 
damage to property of Palla; taking gold for attempted murder of Dio, 
then attempted poisoning of Clodia; murder of Dio 
PROSECUTORS: Lucius Sempronius Atratinus, Pub !ius Clod ius (not the 
famous Clodius), Lucius Herennius Balbus 
DEFENCE ADVOCATES: Marcus Caelius Rufus, Marcus Licinius Crassus, 
Marcus Tullius Cicero 
PRESIDING MAGISTRATE: Gnaeus Domitius 
VERDICT: acquittal 
Pro Caelio was delivered exactly seven months after Cicero's return from 
exile. His exile, for having executed five captured Catilinarian conspira-
tors without trial in 63 BC (in Cicero's eyes his greatest achievement), was 
a public humiliation which could not be wholly effaced by his recall, 
however glorious. In the years that followed, Cicero therefore lost no 
opportunity of reinforcing his own stature by publicly attacking the man 
who had exiled him, Publius Clodius Pulcher; and Clodius lost no 
opportunity of harming Cicero. 
Marcus Caelius Rufus was an ambitious young socialite who had ini-
tially been Cicero's pupil and protege, but had later become a friend of 
Clodius and the lover of Clodius' sister Clodia Metelli-a powerful soci-
ety lady who may or may not have been the 'Lesbia' loved by the poet 
Catullus. In s6 BC, however, Caelius had broken with the Clodii and was 
prosecuted by them for violence; Cicero successfully defended him. The 
case allowed Cicero to recapture the allegiance of a promising young poli-
tician and, even more satisfyingly, to damage the reputation of Clodius' 
sister. The speech is highly dishonest in its refusal to address the matters 
at issue (the charges of violence and murder), but is unquestionably a 
masterpiece. 
Caelius was born in (probably) 88 or 87 BC, at Interamnia in Piceni.Im. 
His father was an eques who had possessions in Africa (§ 73); there are 
indications that he did not indulge his spendthrift son as generously;;as the 
latter may have wished. From c. 73 to 63 Caelius served a kind of p~litical 
apprenticeship under Crassus and Cicero: he accompanied then/as they 
! 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Cae!io: Introduction 
123 
went about their business in Rome, and became familiar with the life of 
the forum. In 63, however, he broke away from Cicero to support Catilinc, 
who was making a last bid for the consulship (Crassus was also supporting 
his candidature). But it does not seem likely that he continued to favour 
Catiline once Catiline had lost the election and taken up arms. At all 
events, Caelius was not among those prosecuted for involvement in the 
conspiracy. 
Caelius spent the years 62 to 6o in Africa, in the service of the governor 
Q!.tintus Pompeius Rufus. For well-connected young men who wished to 
sec the world and perhaps make some money at the same time, such 
service was a prized opportunity: Catullus was shortly afterwards to fol-
low the same path when he served under the governor of Bithynia, Gaius 
Memmius, in 57-56. But Caelius still needed to make a name for himself 
before the public at Rome. In April 59 he therefore brought a prosecution, 
probably for extortion, against Gaius Antonius J-Iybrida, Cicero's col-
league in the consulship of 63. Although he had reason to dislike Anto-
nius, Cicero disapproved of the prosecution (Antonius had after all been 
the general nominally responsible for the defeat of Catiline in the field, 
and so an attack on Antonius would be seen as an attack on Cicero's 
consulship). He therefore undertook Antonius' defence; but Caclius won. 
Flushed with this success, Caelius decided it was now time to leave his 
father's house and take up residence in the most fashionable part of the 
city, on the Palatine. He rented an apartment there from Clodius, close by 
the residence of Clodia. Clodia was at this time about 36, and recently 
widowed (her husband Quintus Caecilius Metellus Celer died in 59); and 
she accepted Caclius as her lover. In 58 Clodius was tribune, and suc-
ceeded in exiling Cicero; and in 57 Cicero was recalled. In one of these 
years it is likely that Caelius became quacstor and entered the senate, 
although Cicero says nothing about this in the course of the speech. Then 
at the end of 57, or the beginning of 56, Caclius broke with the Clodii. 
We do not know for certain what happened; but Clodius and his sister 
determined to punish him. 
On I I February s6 Caelius and Cicero again found themselves oppos-
ing each other in court, Caelius prosecuting and Cicero speaking for the 
defence. The defendant was Lucius Calpurnius Bestia, whom Caelius 
accused of electoral malpractice in the praetorian elections of 57, in which 
Bestia had stood unsuccessfully. Cicero had secured his acquittal on four 
previous occasions (we do not know when or on what charges), and this 
time he did so again. But Caelius would not accept defeat. Bcstia was 
making a further attempt at the praetorship, and so Caelius brought a 
second charge against him, presumably for malpractice in the forthcoming 
election (that of 56); Cicero prepared to defend him a sixth time. At this 

124 
Pro Caelio: Introduction 
point Bestia's I7-year-old son Lucius Sempronius Atratinus sought to 
prevent his father's trial from taking place by bringing a charge against 
Caclius: if Caelius were convicted, he would be unable to proceed with his 
action against Bestia. But time was of the essence, and so Atratinus prose-
cuted Caclius in the violence court (quaestio de ·vi): in contrast to other 
cases, trials for violence (vis) could take place even on public holidays. 
Atratinus was joined by two assistant prosecutors, Publius Clodius (not 
the famous Clodius, but a relation or perhaps a freedman) and Lucius 
Herennius Balbus, a friend of Atratinus' father(§ 56). 
Being an experienced orator, Caelius decided to speak on his own 
behalf. But he also arranged for his old mentor Crassus to defend him, and 
for the third member of the team he succeeded in winning over Cicero. 
Cicero may have been difficult to persuade, given Caclius' past links with 
Catiline and Clodius, and his prosecutions of Antonius and Bestia. But 
Caclius was now an enemy of Clodius, and Cicero perhaps felt no deep 
affection for Bestia ( cf. Phil. I I. I I). Cicero \VOtild have been attracted by 
the prospect of placing so talented a politician as Caelius in his debt; and 
the case offered him a heaven-sent opportunity to revenge himself on 
Cloclia, who had persecuted his family during his exile (§ so). So he 
agreed. 
There was an array of charges, most or all of them connected with the 
attempt of the deposed King Ptolemy Auletes of Egypt to recover his 
throne, so we must now turn to consider this, one of the more unsavoury 
episodes in the history of the period. 
In So BC Alexander II of Egypt died, bequeathing his kingdom to 
Rome. The throne was usurped, however, by Ptolemy XII Auletes ('the 
Piper'), who ruled in the knowledge that Rome might lay claim to his 
kingdom, which was very wealthy, at any time. For the next twenty years 
he cultivated the Romans' favour in order to retain his throne-which 
made him unpopular with his subjects, who hated the Romans. Then in 59 
he seized the opportunity presented by the 'first triumvirate' to secure for 
himself formal recognition as king, and 6,ooo talents, a year's revenue, was 
paid to Pompey and Caesar. When Ptolemy tried to exact this sum from 
his people, however, he was deposed and fled to Rome. Once there, he 
borrowed heavily and tried to persuade the senate to provide an army to 
restore him to his throne. But the Alexandrians did not want him back, 
and in 57 they sent to Rome a deputation of one hundred citizens, led 
by the Academic philosopher Dio, to put their case before the seriate. 
Ptolemy's reaction was to bribe, intimidate, or kill the members of the 
deputation: some were assaulted at Puteoli, and at Naples some ;tort of 
uprising may have been organized against them. These events;caused 
great indignation at Rome. As for Dio, he succeeded in reachi~ Rome, 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Caelio: Introduction 
125 
where he stayed at the house of the senator Lucius Lucceius. But during 
his stay there an attempt was made to bribe Lucceius' slaves to murder 
him, and he therefore moved on to the house of Titus Coponius. 
At the end of 57, the senate finally decreed that Ptolemy should be 
restored by the consul Publius Cornelius Lentulus Spinther (a friend of 
Cicero's). But it was then discovered that an oracle in the Sibylline Books 
forbade Ptolemy's restoration, and the senate rescinded its decree; 
Ptolemy at this point retired to Ephesus. Pompey, meanwhile, was agitat-
ing for the command to be given to himself, and early in 56 Dio, still 
staying with Coponius, was murdered. Public anger flared up again, and 
was directed particularly against Pompey, who was thought to have been 
responsible for the murder. 
Various prosecutions then took place. Publius Asicius, said to have been 
Ptolemy's agent, was prosecuted for the murder of Dio, and was success-
fully defended by Cicero (§ 23). Then Caelius was accused, by Atratinus 
and Balbus, and by Publius Clodius. Atratinus, as we have seen, was 
anxious to bring about the exile of the man who \'/as prosecuting his 
father. For the Clodii, on the other hand, the trial was an indirect attack on 
Pompey: it seems likely that Caelius had switched his allegiance from the 
Clodii to Ptolemy and Pompey, and that this was the cause of his rupture 
\vith the Clodii. 
The actual charges brought against Caelius were as follows: 
(i) civil disturbances at Naples, and (ii) assault on the Alexandrians at 
Puteoli. These were probably incidents of violence directed against 
members of the deputation from Alexandria on their arrival in Italy; 
(iii) damage to the property of Palla. Nothing is known of this charge, or 
of Palla; it is possible that his property was damaged in the course of 
the attacks on the deputation; 
(iv) taking gold for the attempted murder of Dio, then the attempted 
poisoning of Clodia. We know much more about these charges, since 
these are the ones that Cicero chooses to answer in his speech. 
Caelius was accused of having borrowed gold from Clodia under f~llse 
pretences, with the intention of bribing Lucceius' slaves to murder 
Dio at Lucceius' house(§§ sr-s). It was further alleged that Clodia 
discovered what Caelius was plotting, and that he, wishing to conceal 
the crime, attempted to poison her with the help of her own slaves 
(§§ s6-69); 
(v) the murder ofDio. Caclius was accused of having been in league with 
Asicius in the actual murder of Dio at Coponius' house (although 
Asicius had been acquitted). 
The trial took place on 3-4 April 56. For the prosecution, Atratinus 

126 
Pro Caelio: Introduction 
spoke first, then Clodius, then Balbus. Atratinus' speech was devoted to an 
attack on Caelius' character and morals: he represented him as effeminate 
(a 'pretty-boy Jason'), loose-living, immoral, profligate, a lover of luxury, 
and well used to committing crimes of bribery and violence. Clodius' 
speech probably went over the charges in detail: he would have deplored 
the treatment of the Alexandrian deputation, criticized Pompey for his 
support of Ptolemy, and referred to the evidence that Clodia would give 
against Caelius at the end of the trial. In particular, she would reveal how 
Caelius' friend Publius Licinius had been caught handing over poison to 
her slaves at the Senian baths. It seems most likely that the prosecution 
indicated that Caelius was on familiar terms with Clodia, but not that he 
had been her lover. Evidently they calculated that the defence would also 
say nothing about this, since it would reflect badly on Caelius' character 
(the situation resembles that at the trial of Sextus Roscius, at which the 
prosecution said nothing about Chrysogonus or the proscription lists, 
confident that the defence would not mention them either). Balbus, in 
closing the case for the prosecution, returned to the subject of Caelius' 
moral delinquency, and also voiced his indignation at Caelius' continuing 
persecution of his friend Bestia. 
The speeches for the defence were given in order by Caelius, Crassus, 
and Cicero; in speaking last, Cicero was again following his usual custom 
(Brut. rgo; Omt. IJO). Caclius' speech was vigorous and full of witty 
gibes: it contained a reference to Clodia as 'the one-penny Clytemnestra', 
i.e. a husband-murderer who sells her sexual favours cheaply (she was 
suspected of having poisoned her husband Metellus Cclcr). Although 
Caelius attacked Clodia's morals in this way, it seems unlikely that he 
admitted to having been her lover-just as the prosecution calculated he 
would not. Caelius and Crassus, it is reasonable to assume, must have 
made some defence against the actual charges, particularly perhaps those 
ones which Cicero does not discuss. 
Cicero's speech, the final speech of the trial, took place on the second 
day, + April. This happened to be the first day of the Megalesian games, 
when the rest of Rome was on holiday. l-Ie therefore decided to compen-
sate the jurors for missing the games by providing them with a speech that 
would be at least as entertaining: this is the speech that we have. In it he 
says little about the charges but concentrates on attacking Clodia (so as to 
discredit the evidence that she will give), sensationally revealing that 
Caclius had formerly been her lover (indeed, Cicero may even exaggerate 
their intimacy). If Caelius was Jason, as Atratinus had rashly claimed, 
then Clodia was Medea (§ 18): it was Caelius, like Jason, who hfl ter-
minated the affair, and now Clodia, like Medea, was hell-bent on 1:evenge. 
Hence the present trial. The prosecution had been confident that Cicero 
! 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Caelio: Introduction 
127 
would reject this line, since it would surely damn Caelius; but Cicero 
manages to assign all the moral delinquency to Clodia, while admitting 
Caclius' involvement with her only obliquely, and not in any memorable or 
easily quotable form. This strategy was completely successful. Cicero 
made it seem as if the charges were a mere pretext: the only reason his 
client was facing them was because he had had the good sense to dissociate 
himself fi·om a woman who was no better than a prostitute. The light-
hearted tone, well suited to the holiday atmosphere in Rome, was used to 
ridicule Clodia and her hangers-on (who might also testify), so that the 
prosecution's most high-ranking witness, and hence their entire case, 
would simply be laughed out of court. The strategy adopted was also 
useful to Cicero in that it minimized the trial's political dimension. Public 
opinion was outraged at the murder of Dio and the treatment of the 
Alexandrian deputation, and yet Pompey was openly supporting 
Ptolemy's cause. Cicero's decision to restrict his attention to the character 
of Clodia enabled him to avoid taking a stance which would set him at 
odds with public opinion or damage his relations with Pompey. 
Caelius was acquitted. This allowed him to proceed with his second 
prosecution of Bestia. Cicero defended Bestia a sixth time and lost; Bestia 
was sent into exile. In the next year, 55, Ptolemy secured his restoration to 
the Egyptian throne by bribing the governor of Syria, Aulus Gabinius, 
with ro,ooo talents (Gabinius was in due course convicted and exiled for 
this, in spite of being defended by a reluctant Cicero). Ptolemy then ruled 
until his death in sr, upon which he was succeeded by his daughter 
Cleopatra, the last of the Ptolemics. 
Caclius became tribune in sz; this was the year in which Publius 
Clodius was murdered, and Caelius was active in helping Cicero defend 
his killers and prosecute his supporters. Then in 50 he was aedile. 
Cicero was away serving as governor of Cilicia at the time, and Caelius 
sent him all the news from Rome in a lively correspondence which has 
survived (Pam. 8). (Everyone who has read this correspondence remem-
bers Caelius' repeated but ultimately unsuccessful pleas to Cicero to send 
him panthers from his province for his games.) When the Civil War 
broke out in 49 Caelius supported Caesar, and was rewarded with the 
office of praetor peregrinus (foreign praetor) in 48. But then things went 
wrong. He put forward radical measures for debt relief against the 
opposition of his colleagues, caused a riot, and was suspended from 
office. Fleeing Rome, he tried, with Titus Annius Milo, to raise southern 
Italy in revolt against Caesar, but was killed by Caesar's troops at Thurii 
(48 BC). 
Atratinus, on the other hand, enjoyed a long and distinguished career, 
becoming consul in 34, and later governor of Africa, being granted a 

!28 
Pro Caelio: Introduction 
triumph on his return from there in 21. He died in AD 7, having very 
nearly outlived Augustus. 
And Clodia? In 45 Cicero unsuccessfully tried to induce her to sell him 
her pleasure-gardens on the Tiber. But apart from that we hear nothing 
about her at all. She simply vanishes from history. 
www.ebook3000.com

PRO CAELIO 
[ r] If~ members of the jury, there should happen to be present among 
us here today anyone who is unfamiliar with our laws, courts, and 
way of doing things, I am sure he would wonder what terrible enor-
mity this case involves, since on a day of festivities and public games,* 
when all other legal business is suspended, this court alone remains 
in session-and he would have no doubt at all that the defendant 
must be guilty of a crime so terrible that, unless action were taken, 
the state could not possibly survive! And if he were then to be 
informed that there is a law* for rebellious and criminal Roman citi-
zens who have besieged the senate-house with arms, used violence 
against the magistrates, and attacked their country, and that under 
this law trials may be held on any day of the year w;ithout exception, 
he would not object to the law, but would enquire what charge it is 
that is before this court. If he were then to be told that no crime, no 
enormity, and no act of violence has been brought before the court, 
but that a brilliantly able, hard-working, and popular young man is 
being accused by the son of someone he has prosecuted once and is 
now prosecuting again,* and that this attack on him is being financed 
by a prostitute,* he would find no fault with the prosecutor's sense of 
filial duty, he would consider that a woman's passions should be kept 
under control, and he would conclude that you yourselves are over-
worked, since even on a public holiday you are not allowed the day 
offi [ z] In fact, if you are prepared to pay close attention and form an 
accurate view of the case as a whole, you will realize, gentlemen, that 
none of the accusers would have taken on this prosecution if they 
had had any choice, nor, having taken it on, would they have had any 
hope of winning, were it not for their reliance on the insupportable 
passion and bitter hatred of some other person.* I shall forgive Atrati-
nus, however, a civilized and altogether excellent young man and a 
friend of mine. He can plead as his excuse either filial duty, or compul-
sion, or his tender years. If he brought the charge voluntarily, I put it 
clown to his sense of filial duty, if he was acting under orders, I put it 
clown to compulsion, and if he expected to gain something from it, I 
put it down to his youthful na·ivety. As for the other accusers, they 
deserve no such indulgence, and must be vigorously opposed. 

IJO 
Pro Caelio 
[3] I think, gentlemen, that the best way of beginning my defence, 
in view of the youth of Marcus Caelius, is to reply to those slanders 
which the prosecutors have come up with in order to discredit him 
and deprive and despoil him of his good name. His father has been 
cited against him in various ways, either as not himself living in a 
manner befitting an equestrian, or as having been treated with insuf-
ficient respect by his son. As regards the first of these points, those 
who know Marcus Caelius* and the older ones among us will appreci-
ate that he needs no words of mine to rebut the charge, in silence, 
himself. Those of us, on the other hand, who arc not so well 
acquainted with him (since his advanced years have long prevented 
him from mixing with us much or coming into the forum) may rest 
assured that whatever distinction a Roman equestrian may possess-
and it can undoubtedly be very great-has always been judged as 
belonging to Marcus Caelius in the fullest measure, and is still so 
judged today, and not just by his own circle but by all those who may 
for whatever reason have come into contact with him. [4] In any case, 
being the son of a Roman equestrian is something that the prosecu-
tion should never have used as a slur before these jurors, or before 
myself as advocate.* 
As regards your point about my client's respect for his father, we 
have our own opinion about that, but the verdict surely lies with the 
parent. Our own opinion you shall hear from witnesses on oath. As 
for what his parents feel, that is made clear by his mother's tears and 
her indescribable grief, and by his father's filth* and all the sorrow 
and distress that you sec in front of you. 
[5] Regarding the further objection that the young man is held in 
low esteem by his fellow-townsmen, the Praetuttians* have never con-
ferred greater honours on anyone in their presence, gentlemen, than 
they have on Marcus Caelius in his absence. Indeed, they elected 
him, while he was away, to their senate and granted him, without his 
asking, certain honours which they refused to the many who did ask 
for them. They have also sent to this trial a deputation of the most 
high-ranking men, fellow senators of mine and Roman equestrians 
too, and these delegates have brought with them an extremely 
impressive and eloquent testimonial. 
I believe I have now laid the foundations of my defence.......,'\vhich 
will be very secure if based on the verdict of my client's own./People. 
For this young man would hardly come before you with an idequate 
www.ebook3000.com

[6] 
Pro Caelio 
I3I 
recommendation if he had incurred the disapproval of a man such as 
his father is, or of a town so distinguished and so important. 
[6] Indeed, ifi may turn to my own situation, it is from just such a 
source that I issued forth to make my own reputation, and this 
forensic labour of mine and my career in general have found a rather 
wider course to public recognition as a result of the recommendation 
and approval of my friends. 
Now as for the slur on his sexual morals and the slanderous 
insults-for they were not proper charges-levelled at him by each 
of the prosecutors, these will never upset Marcus Caelius enough to 
make him wish he had been born ugly! For slanders of this kind are 
commonly directed against any young man of becoming figure and 
appearance. But slander is one thing, prosecution another. Prosecu-
tion requires a basis for a charge, and then to determine the facts, to 
identify the person responsible, to prove the case by argument, and 
back it up with evidence. Slander, on the other hai1d, has no object 
except to insult. If its character is coarse, it is termed abuse, but if 
sophisticated, it is termed wit. 
[ 7] Indeed, I was surprised and disappointed that this part of the 
prosecution was given to Atratinus. For it did not suit him, nor was it 
appropriate for one so young, nor, as you will have noticed your-
selves, did this fine young man's sense of decency allow him to feel at 
home with language of this sort. I should have preferred it if one of 
the more hardened prosecutors among you had taken on the task of 
slandering my client; then I could have contradicted this unfettered 
slander in rather more free, forcible, and natural terms. But with 
you, Atratinus, I shall deal more leniently. Your sense of decency 
leads me to moderate my words, and I ought also to take into account 
the kindness I have shown towards you and your father.* 
[8] I should like, however, to give you a word of advice. First, to 
prevent anyone forming a wrong impression of the sort of person 
that you are, you must be as strict in avoiding intemperate words as 
you are in avoiding shameful deeds. Secondly, you should not say 
against someone else things that you would blush to hear falsely said 
against yourself. For who is there who cannot go down that road if 
they choose? Who is there who cannot direct against your youth and 
grace the coarsest slanders that he pleases? There may be no grounds 
whatever for the suspicion-but there will be grounds for an accu-
sation! The blame for the part you have played lies, however, with 

I32 
Pro Caelio 
those who wanted you to take it on. Credit, on the other hand, is due 
to your sense of decency, because we saw how reluctantly you spoke, 
and also to your talent, because your speech was elegant and 
polished. 
[9] That speech, however, requires only a brief reply. In so far as 
Marcus Caelius' youth could have given any grounds for suspicion, 
let me assure you that it was well protected, first by his own sense of 
decency, and then by the strict upbringing that he received from his 
father. After that, as soon as his father had given him the toga of 
manhood*-and here I will say nothing about myself~ leaving you to 
be the judge of that: I shall only say that his father immediately put 
him in my charge. During this early period of his youth, no one ever 
saw Marcus Caelius in the company of anyone other than his father 
or myself, or at the highly respectable home of Marcus Crassus; and 
all the while he was receiving a principled education. 
[10] As for the charge that Caelius was a friend of Catiline,* he 
should by rights be wholly above any suspicion of that kind. You 
know that he was still very young when Catiline, together with 
myself, was standing for the consulship.* If he ever attached himself 
to Catiline or detached himself from me-even though there were 
many patriotic young men who did become supporters of that vile 
traitor-then let Caelius be reckoned to have been too friendly with 
Catiline. 'But we know that later on* he even became a political 
adherent of his: we could see it with our own eyes.' Who is denying 
it? But at the moment I am only defending that period of youth that 
is by itself unstable, yet threatened by the passions of others. In that 
period, when I was praetor,* Caelius was constantly by my side, and 
did not know Catiline, who was serving as praetor in Africa.* In the 
year that followed Catiline was tried for extortion;* Caelius stayed 
with me, and did not even appear in support of Catiline at his trial. 
The next year was the year in which I stood for the consulship; 
Catiline also stood alongside me. Caelius never attached himself to 
him, and never separated himself from me. 
[I I] So it was only after he had spent many years in the forum 
without any suspicion or any ill repute that he became a supporter of 
Catiline, when Catiline was standing for the second time.* How long 
do you think his youth should have gone on being protected;Back in 
my day a single year sufficed for keeping our arms inside opr togas,* 
and for our physical training on the Campus Marti us, whin we wore 
www.ebook3000.com

[ 12] 
Pro Caelio 
133 
our tunics;* and if we went straight into the army we served a similar 
probationary period, in the camp and on campaign. At that age, 
unless a young man could defend himself by his own strictness of 
conduct and purity of morals, coupled with a stern upbringing and a 
certain inborn virtue, he could not escape a bad reputation (and 
justified, too), however closely his own people kept guard over him. 
But a man who preserved those first beginnings of youth pure and 
undefiled never had aspersions cast on his reputation and morals, 
once he had finally grown up and become a man among men. 
[ 12] Yes, he did support Catiline, after he had spent a number of 
years in the forum, Caelius that is-just as many others did, from 
every class and of every age. For Catiline had, as I am sure you 
remember, a great many indications of the highest qualities*-not 
fully developed, mind you, but sketched in outline. He mixed with 
numerous individuals of bad character; yet he pretended to be 
devoted to the best of men. He had the effect of clegrading those 
around him; yet he could also stimulate them to effort and hard 
work. The fires of passion burned within him; yet he was a keen 
student of military affairs. For my part I do not think the world has 
ever seen a creature made up of such contrary, divergent, and mutu-
ally incompatible interests and appetites. 
[13] Who was more agreeable, at one particular time, to men of 
high rank,* and who more intimate with scoundrels? vVho at one time 
a more patriotic citizen, and who a more loathsome enemy of this 
country? Who more corrupt in his pleasures, and who more able to 
endure hard work? Who more avaricious in rapacity, and who more 
lavish in generosity? That man, gentlemen, had many features that 
were paradoxical. He had a wide circle of friends, and he looked after 
them well. What he had, he shared with everyone. He helped all his 
friends in times of need with money, influence, physical exertion, 
even, if necessary, with recklessness and crime. He could adapt and 
control the way he was to suit the occasion, and twist and turn his 
nature this way and that. He could be stern with the serious, relaxed 
with the free-and-easy, grave with the old, affable with the young, 
daring with criminals, and dissolute with the depraved. [14] And so 
this complex, ever-changing character, even when he had collected 
all the wicked traitors from far and wide, still held many loyal, brave 
men in his grasp by a sort of pretended semblance of virtue. Indeed, 
that dastardly attempt to destroy this empire could never have come 

134 
Pro Caelio 
[I 5] 
into being had not that monstrous concentration of so many vices 
been rooted in certain qualities of skill and endurance. 
Therefore, members of the jury, you should reject the prosecu-
tion's argument, and refuse to allow my client's association with 
Catiline to count against him: this is something he has in common 
with many other people, including some fine patriots. I, I myself, I 
tell you, was almost taken in by him on one occasion,* when I took 
him to be a loyal citizen, eager to be on good terms with all the best 
people, and a dependable and faithful friend. I did not believe his 
crimes until I came upon them with my eyes, or suspect them until I 
had laid my hands on them. IfCaelius was also among his wide circle 
of friends, it is better that he should be angry with himself at his own 
mistake (just as I sometimes am about my own misjudgement of 
Catiline) than that he should have to fear a charge of having been a 
friend of his. 
[IS] So your speech has gone from slanders about my client's 
sexual morality to using the conspiracy to stir up prejudice against 
him. For you implied, although in a hesitant and sketchy manner, 
that because of his friendship with Catiline, he must have been a 
member of the conspiracy. At this point not only did the charge fail 
to hang together, but this fluent young man's speech scarcely did so 
either. So let me ask you, what terrible madness was there that came 
over Caelius? What terrible wound had he suffered, either psycho-
logically or in his personal circumstances? And when was Caelius' 
name ever mentioned in connection with the conspiracy? I do not 
wish to go on for too long discussing matters about which there is 
not the slightest doubt, but this I will say: if Caelius had been a 
member of the conspiracy, or even if he had been anything other 
than implacably opposed to it, he would surely never have used a 
charge of conspiracy* as his preferred means of promoting his youth-
ful abilities. 
[I 6] Apropos of this, I rather think that the question of electoral 
malpractice and the charges relating to political clubs and the distri-
bution of bribes* (since this is the point I have reached) can be 
disposed of in the same way. For if Caelius had really sullied his 
reputation with the unstinted bribery that you speak of~ he would 
hardly have been so insane as to prosecute another person*!for the 
same crime. Nor would he deliberatelv cause someone el%.e to be 
suspected of this crime if he wanted t~ have the freedom" to do it 
www.ebook3000.com

[17] 
Pro Caelio 
135 
himself in the future. Nor indeed, if he thought that he would run 
the risk of being prosecuted for bribery once, would he have prose-
cuted someone else for it a second time. In doing this I admit that he 
has acted unwisely and without my approval. Yet it is the mark of 
this type of ambition that it pursues the innocence of another person 
instead of betraying any apprehension on its own account. 
[I 7] As for the charge of debt, the complaints of extravagance, the 
demands for account-books-see how brief is my reply. A man who 
is under his father's legal authority does not keep accounts. Caelius 
has never once borrowed money from one creditor to pay off 
another. It is one particular form of extravagance that he is charged 
with, his accommodation. This, you say, costs him 3o,ooo sesterces a 
year. Ah, now I understand! The block in which my client rents an 
apartment for, I think, Io,ooo a year has been'put up for sale by 
Publius Clodius. You, wishing to do him a favour, have adjusted your 
lie to suit his purpose.* 
[IS] You have criticized Caelius for moving away from his father's 
house. But at his age that is scarcely something to be criticized. He 
had just won a success in a political case* which, although unwelcome 
to me, was a great victory for him, and he was also at an age when he 
could stand for public office. Moreover, it was not only with his 
father's permission but with his active encouragement that he moved 
away from home. For his father lives a long way from the forum, 
and in order to be able both to visit our houses* more easily and to 
be visited himself by his own people* he took an apartment on the 
Palatine at a moderate rent. 
While on this subject I can repeat what the illustrious Marcus 
Crassus said a little while ago, when he was deploring the arrival of 
King Ptolemy: 'Would that never in Pelion's forest ... '*And I could 
go on with the quotation: 'for never would a wandering woman' have 
caused us all this trouble, 'Medea, sick at heart, wounded by a wild 
passion'. For you will find out, gentlemen, what I shall show you 
when I come to that point-that this Medea of the Palatine* and the 
change of residence was the cause of all this young man's difficulties, 
or rather of all the talk. 
[I9] So, since I have every confidence in your judgement, gentle-
men, I am not in the least afraid of those charges which the prosecu-
tion, as I inferred from their speeches, are fabricating to bolster their 
case. For they gave out that they had a senator* who would testify that 

Pro Caelio 
[zo] 
he had been assaulted by Caelius at the pontifical elections. If this 
person comes forward, I will ask him first of all why he did not take 
legal action there and then; and secondly, if he says he preferred to 
make a complaint rather than go to law, I will ask him why he has 
been produced by yourselves rather than coming forward on his own 
initiative, and why he wished to make his complaint so long after the 
event rather than at the time. If he can supply me with acute and 
astute answers to these questions, I will then ask, finally, from what 
source that senator springs. If it emerges that he himself is his own 
source and origin, I may well be impressed by this, as I generally am. 
But if it turns out that he is merely a rivulet drawn off and derived 
from that very fountain-head* of your prosecution, I shall be 
delighted that, although you have such great influence and resources 
at your disposal, you could nevertheless find only a single senator 
who was prepared to do your bidding. 
(On the witness Fujius. )* 
[zo] Nor, on the other hand, am I in any way frightened of that 
other type of witness-those who operate by night. For the prosecu-
tion said there would be witnesses who would testify that their wives 
were assaulted by Caelius when returning from dinner. What 
impressive witnesses they will be, who will dare to swear this on 
oath, when they will also have to admit that they never started legal 
proceedings regarding these terrible wrongs, even to the extent of 
requesting a meeting and out-of-court settlement! 
You are now in a position, gentlemen, to foresee the whole nature 
of this attack, and when it is launched it will be your duty to beat it 
back. For the accusers of Marcus Caelius are not the same people as 
those who are attacking him: the weapons that are hurled at him in 
public are supplied by an unseen hand. [zr] I am not saying this to 
discredit the prosecutors, who are entitled even to feel proud of what 
they are doing. They are doing their duty, defending those near to 
them, acting as men of spirit do. When injured, they feel aggrieved; 
when angered, they let fly; they fight back when provoked. Men of 
spirit may indeed have just cause for attacking Marcus Caelius. But 
you in your wisdom, gentlemen, will appreciate that you shoul'd not 
on this account be guided by other people's grievances rather than 
by your own sense of honour. 
/ 
You can see what a mass of people there is in the foruni, of how 
many different classes and occupations, what a variety of human-
www.ebook3000.com

[22] 
Pro Caelio 
137 
kind. From such a crowd, how many people do you think there are 
who are used to offering their services, exerting themselves, and 
promising their evidence, on their own initiative, to powerful, 
influential, and persuasive individuals, when they believe that there 
is something those individuals want? [22] If there happen to be some 
such people who have forced their way into the present trial, then 
use your wisdom, gentlemen, to put a stop to their greed! In this way 
you will show that you have taken consideration at one and the same 
time for the safety of my client, for your own consciences, and for the 
general public welfare against dangerous and powerful individuals. 
For my part, I intend to draw you away from witnesses. I will not 
allow the facts of the case, which are unalterable, to be made to rely 
on witnesses' personal inclinations, which can so easily be manipu-
lated, and which can be twisted and distorted \vith no difficulty at 
all. Instead, I shall proceed by means of proofs, anq shall refute the 
charges with indications that are clearer than the light of day. Fact 
will be pitted against fact, reason against reason, argument against 
argument! 
[23] I am very pleased, therefore, that Marcus Crassus has dealt so 
impressively and eloquently with the part of the case that has to do 
with the civil disturbances at Naples, the assault on the Alexandrians 
at Puteoli, and the property of Palla. I could wish that he had also 
spoken about Dio.* But on this last point what can you possibly be 
expecting to hear, given that the perpetrator of the crime has no fear 
of punishment, or even admits his responsibility?* After all, he is a 
king! The man, on the other hand, who is said to have been his agent 
and accomplice, Publius Asicius, * has been acquitted of the deed in a 
criminal trial. So here we have a charge which the guilty party does 
not deny, whereas the man who did deny it has been acquitted of it. 
In these circumstances, do you really think my client has any reason 
to be afraid of the charge when he not only had no involvement in 
the crime but was not even suspected of being involved in it? And 
if the help Asicius received from the strength of his case outweighed 
the harm done to him by the odium of the charge, what harm can 
your slander possibly do to Caelius, who not only has not been 
suspected of this particular crime, but has not even been tainted with 
a bad reputation? 
[24] 'But Asicius was acquitted as a result of collusion.' This point 
is an extremely easy one to answer, especially for me since I was the 

Pro Caelio 
[zs] 
defence advocate. But Caelius' view is that however strong Asicius' 
case is (and he thinks it is very strong indeed), it nevertheless has no 
bearing on his. Nor is this the view of Caelius alone: it is shared by 
two highly civilized and cultured young men, possessed of the most 
virtuous principles and the best literary training, Titus and Gaius 
Coponius, who were more upset than anyone at Dio's death, and 
who were attached to him both by their common devotion to culture 
and civilized values and by the tics of hospitality. Dio, as you have 
heard, was living at Titus' house, and had known him in Alexandria. 
What he or his most worthy brother thinks of Marcus Caclius you 
will discover from themselves, if they arc brought forward to testify. 
[ 25] So let us put all this to one side, and turn at last to the points on 
which the case depends. 
I noticed, members of the jury, that you were listening to my 
friend Lucius Hcrcnnius with close attention. Although it was pri-
marily his ability and his particular manner of speaking that held 
your attention, I was nevertheless afraid at times that that speech of 
his, carefully contrived to suggest guilt, might imperceptibly and 
gently insinuate itself into your minds. For he had a great deal to say 
about luxurious living, a great deal about self-indulgence, a great 
deal about the vices of the young, and a great deal about morals. In 
his life away from the court Herennius is a gentle soul, and elegantly 
exemplifies the familiar charm and good manners which just about 
everyone admires nowadays; but in this trial he has shown himself 
the grimmest type of uncle, moralist, and schoolmaster. He casti-
gated Marcus Caelius as no father ever did his own son; he gave a 
long lecture on licentiousness and profligacy. In short, gentlemen, I 
began to excuse your listening so attentively because I myself was 
shuddering at so grim and so severe a way of talking. 
[z6] The first part of his speech, however, troubled me less. He 
claimed that Caelius was on familiar terms with my friend Bestia, 
that he dined at his house, that he visited him frequently, and that he 
su ppm· ted his campaign for the praetorship. *These allegations do not 
trouble me because they are patently false. For the people. that 
Herennius claimed were present at these dinner parties are all people 
who are either unavailable or else under an obligation to back pim up. 
I am not troubled, either, by his assertion that Caelius is a c,6lleague 
of his in the Luperci.* Clearly the fraternity of the Luperci ,must be a 
savage brotherhood, rustic and wild, an association of b.ickwoods-
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Caelio 
139 
men formed before the invention oflaws and civilization, if its mem-
bers today not only prosecute one another but even allude to their 
common membership in the course of their prosecution, apparently 
afraid in case anyone should be unaware of the connection! [27] But I 
am going to leave out all of this, and pass on to the points that trouble 
me more. 
Herennius' castigation of pleasures was lengthy; it was also calmly 
delivered, more like a disputation than a harangue, which is why it 
was listened to so attentively. As for my friend Publius Clodius,* 
although he threw his weight about very impressively and energetic-
ally and gave a fiery speech in the strongest language and at the top 
of his voice, I found that I thought highly of his oratory without, 
however, being alarmed by it-for I had seen him in a number of 
cases on the losing side. No, it is you, Balbus,* that I must reply to 
first, in all humility, if you will allow me, if it is lawful, that is, for me 
to defend a man who has never refused an invitat.ion to a dinner 
party, who has visited a pleasure-garden, who has used perfume, and 
who has set eyes on Baiae!* 
[28] I have in fact seen and heard of many men in our nation who 
have not merely taken a sip of this kind of life and touched it with 
their fingertips, so to speak, but have devoted the whole period of 
their youth to the pleasures of the flesh, and who even so have 
eventually risen above it all and turned over a new leaf, going on to 
become respected and famous citizens. Everyone agrees that the 
young should be allowed to play around a little, and nature herself 
has been generous in supplying them with youthful passions; and if 
these passions should burst out into the open, then so long as they do 
not upset anyone's life or break up anyone's home they arc generally 
regarded as unproblematic and easy to put up with. [ 29] But it 
seemed to me that what you were trying to do \vas to use the bad 
reputation of young men in general to stir up prejudice specifically 
against Caclius. So all that silent attention which was paid to your 
speech can be put clown to the fact that, while there was a single 
defendant on trial, we were reflecting on the vices of many. 
It is easy to attack luxurious living. Daylight would soon fail me if 
I tried to set f{mh everything that could be said on the topic: corrup-
tion, adultery, wantonness, extravagance-it's a vast subject! Even if 
you have no defendant to accuse but just the vices in general, the 
subject in itself offers scope for a full and damning attack. But wise 

qo 
Pro Caelio 
[30] 
men like yourselves, gentlemen, should not be diverted from the 
person of the defendant himself. Your own strictness and stern 
responsibility give you barbs that you can deploy. The prosecutor 
has aimed these barbs at an abstraction-at vices, at morals, at the 
age in which we live. You, on the other hand, ought not to deploy 
them against an individual defendant, when he has been subjected to 
an unwarranted prejudice not through any fault of his own, but 
because of the failings of many others. 
[30] I shall not venture, therefore, to reply to your criticisms as I 
ought. For I could ask you to make an exception for the young, and 
beg your pardon. But, as I say, I shall not do this: I shall not take 
refuge in my client's youth, and I give up the rights to which anyone 
would be entitled. All I ask is that, whatever general disapproval 
there may currently be concerning young men's debts, dissipation, 
and licentious behaviour-and I know that on this subject there is 
considerable disapproval-my client should not be made to suffer 
for other people's misdemeanours, or for the vices of youth and of 
the age in which we live. And yet, although I am making this request, 
I have no objection to providing the most conscientious answers to 
those charges which actually relate to my client specifically. 
There are two charges, one about gold and one about poison;* and 
behind both of them one and the same person is to be found. Gold 
was taken from Clodia, and poison was sought to be given to 
Clodia-or so the prosecution claim. All the other accusations are 
not charges but slanders, more appropriate to an abusive slanging-
match than to a public trial. 'Adulterer, pervert, dealer in bribes!'-
this is the language of slander, not of prosecution. There is no basis 
for such charges, no foundation; they are insulting remarks thought-
lessly spouted by an angry prosecutor who has no authority for what 
he says. [3 r] But as for the two charges, I can see their originator, I 
can see their source, I can see the specific individual who is their 
fountain-head. Caelius needed gold: he took it from Clodia, he took 
it without any witness being present, and he kept it as long as he 
wanted it. Here I detect the strongest evidence of an extremely close 
friendship! He wanted to kill Clodia: he sought poison, peStered 
those he could for it, somehow obtained it, fixed on a place, and 
conveyed the poison there. Here I detect a bitter hatred, f~llowing 
upon a cruel rupture! 
} 
In this trial, members of the jury, everything has t~ do with 
www.ebook3000.com

[32] 
Pro Caelio 
Clodia, a woman who is not only of noble birth, but notorious. In 
talking about this woman, I shall say only what I need to say to rebut 
the charge. [32] You with your remarkable understanding, Gnaeus 
Domitius,* will appreciate that we are concerned with this woman 
alone. If she denies that she lent gold to Caelius, if she does not 
allege that he obtained poison to use against her, then I am behaving 
outrageously in referring to a respectable mother in terms other than 
those due to a saintly Roman matron. But if this woman is elimin-
ated from the case, the prosecution are left with neither charges nor 
resources with which to attack Marcus Caelius-so surely I as his 
advocate have no choice but to repel those who arc assailing him? 
Indeed, I would do this more vigorously, were it not for the fact that 
I am restrained by my personal enmity with this woman's husband, I 
mean her brother*-I'm always making that mistake! I shall treat her 
gently, then, and go no further than my duty to my client and the 
demands of the case require. Indeed, I never thought I would be 
getting involved in quarrels with women, especially with one who is 
always thought of as every man's friend rather than any man's 
enemy! 
[33] But I should like to ask her first whether she would prefer me 
to deal with her in a stern, solemn, old-fashioned way or in a relaxed, 
easy-going, modern way. If she chooses the severe mode of address, 
then I must call up from the underworld one of those bearded 
ancients-not with the modern type of goatee beard that she takes 
such pleasure in, but the rough type such as we see on antique 
statues and masks*-to castigate the woman and speak in my place 
(for otherwise she might become angry with me!). Let me therefore 
summon up a member of her own family -and who better than the 
famous Caecus?* He, at any rate, will be the least shocked at her, since 
he will not be able to see her! 
[34] If he appears, this is, I am sure, how he will treat her, this is 
what he will say: 'Woman! What do you think you are doing with 
Caelius, with a man much younger than yourself, with someone from 
outside your own family? Why have you been either such a friend to 
him that you lent him gold or such an enemy that you were afraid 
of poison? Did you not notice that your father, or hear that your 
uncle, your grandfather, your great-grandfather, your great-great-
grandfather and your great-great-great-grandfather were all con-
suls? And were you not aware that you were recently the wife of 

Pro Caelio 
[35] 
O!Iintus Metellus,* that illustrious and valiant lover of his country, 
who only had to step out of his front door to surpass virtually every 
one of his fellow citizens in excellence, fame, and standing? Coming 
from such a distinguished family yourself, and marrying into one so 
illustrious, what reason did you have for linking yourself so closely to 
Caelius? Was he a blood-relation, a relation by marriage, a friend of 
your husband? He was none of these. What, then, was the reason-
unless it was some reckless infatuation? And if you were not 
influenced by the masks of the men in our family, did my own 
descendant, the famous O!Iinta Claudia,* not inspire you to rival our 
family's glory in the splendid achievements of its women? Or were 
you not inspired by the famous Vestal virgin Claudia* who, at her 
father's triumph, held him in her arms and so prevented him from 
being pulled down from his chariot by a hostile tribune of the plebs? 
Why was it your brother's vices that influenced you, rather than the 
virtues of your father and ancestors, virtues that have been repeated 
down the generations from my own time not only in the men but 
particularly in the women of our family? Did I destroy the peace 
treaty with Pyrrhus so that you could strike the most disgraceful 
sexual bargains on a daily basis? Did I bring water to the city for you 
to foul with your incestuous practices? Did I build a road so that you 
could parade up and clown it in the company of other women's 
husbands?' 
[35] But why, members of the jury, have I brought on this solemn 
character when there is a danger that Appius might suddenly turn 
round and start accusing Caelius with that censorial severity of his? 
But I shall take care of that later on; and I am confident, gentlemen, 
that I shall be able to defend Marcus Caelius' private life before even 
the strictest judges. But as for you, woman (I am no longer using a 
character, but am speaking to you directly), if you intend to justify 
your actions, your assertions, your charges, your intrigues, your alle-
gations, then you must give a full account and explanation of this 
familiarity, this intimacy, this entire relationship. The prosecutors go 
on about orgies, love-affairs, adultery, Baiae, beach parties, dinner 
parties, carousing, singing, musical entertainments, pleasure-boats-
and they imply that they have your approval for everything they say. 
And since in what appears to be a moment of sheer, unbridJtd mad-
ness you have wanted all this brought up in the forum ancl/in court, 
you must therefore either explain it away and show it to bd untrue or 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Caelio 
143 
else admit that neither your charge nor your evidence is to be 
believed. 
[36] You may, on the other hand, prefer me to deal with you in a 
smart, modern way; if so, this is what I shall do. I shall get rid of that 
harsh and almost rustic old man, and choose instead a different 
member of your family: your youngest brother.* He is the very model 
of smart, modern manners, and he is exceedingly fond of you. 
Indeed, when he was a little boy, being, I assume, of a somewhat 
timid nature and inclined to feel frightened at night for no reason, he 
always used to sleep with you, his elder sister!* So imagine what he 
would say to you: 'What's all this fuss about, sister? Why have you 
gone mad? Why do you protest so much, and make so much of 
nothing?* You happened to notice a boy who lives nearby. You were 
attracted by his fair complexion, his tall figure, his face, his eyes. 
You wanted to see him more often. You sometimes ~pent some time 
with him in the same pleasure-gardens. You are a noble lady and he 
has a stingy, parsimonious father. You want to keep him tied to you 
with your money, but you can't: he kicks against the goad, spurns 
and rejects you, and thinks nothing of your presents. Try somewhere 
else, then! You own pleasure-gardens on the Tiber carefully sited 
where all the young men like to come for a swim. You can pick up 
whatever you fancy there any day you like. So why go on bothering 
this man who is not interested in you?' 
[37] I come to you now, Caelius: it is your turn; and I am going to 
assume a father's authority and strictness. But I am unsure which 
particular father I ought to choose-the harsh, overbearing one in 
Caecilius:* 'Now at last my mind is ablaze, now my heart is heaped 
with anger,' or perhaps this one: 'You wretch, you villain!' Those 
fathers must be made of iron: 'What am I to say? What am I to wish 
for? By doing such disgraceful deeds, you make all my wishes 
vain' -intolerable! A father like that would say, 'Why did you go to 
live so near to that prostitute? Why did you not flee the moment you 
became aware of her allurements?* vVhy have you got to know a 
woman who is a stranger to us? Scatter and squander for all I care! If 
you run out of money, it'll be you that suffers; I have enough to see 
me through the years I have left.' 
[38] To this blunt and morose old man Caelius would reply that 
no passion had led him astray, nor had he deviated from the straight 
and narrow. And what evidence did he have? There had been no 

144 
Pro Caelio 
[39] 
extravagance, no waste, no borrowing from one creditor to pay off 
another. But there were rumours. How many of us can escape such 
rumours, particularly in a city so full of slanderers? And are you 
surprised that this woman's neighbour acquired a bad reputation 
when her own brother was unable to escape unkind gossip?* 
But to a mild and lenient father-the sort who would say, 'He has 
broken open a door: it can be repaired; he has torn someone's 
clothes: they can be mended'*-Caelius' case is an extremely easy one 
to make. For what charge could there possibly be that he would not 
find it easy to defend himself against? I am not at this point saying 
anything against that woman.* But if there were some woman quite 
unlike her who made herself available to everyone, who always had 
some man that she had openly designated as her lover, whose 
pleasure-gardens, house, and place at Baiae were open as of right to 
every lecher, who even kept young men and made up for their 
f~lthers' stinginess by paying them herself; if there were a widowed 
woman living shamelessly, a wayward woman living wantonly, a 
wealthy woman living extravagantly, and a lustful woman living like a 
prostitute, then am I really to think of it as criminal if some man 
should happen to have greeted her a little too freely? 
[39] But someone will object: 'Is this, then, your way of bringing 
up the young? Is this how you educate them? Was it this that the 
boy's father had in mind when he entrusted his son to your care and 
handed him over to you-for him to devote his youth to lustful 
pleasures, and for you to defend that kind of life and pursuits?' For 
my part, members of the jury, if there ever existed a man with so 
firm a mind and a character of such virtue and self-control as to 
reject every pleasure and to dedicate the whole course of his life to 
physical toil and mental exertion, a man who took no pleasure in 
rest, in relaxation, in the pursuits of his contemporaries, in making 
love, or in partying, and who considered that nothing in life was 
worth striving for unless it led to glory and renown-such a man, it 
seems to me, must have been endowed and distinguished with qual-
ities that are more than human. There have indeed been m~n like 
that, or so I believe-men like Camillus, Fabricius, and Curitis,* and 
all the others who built Rome's greatness out of nothing. 
, 
[ 40] But virtues of that kind are not much in evidence l;fowadays: 
you can scarcely now find them in books. The pages whic}\ recorded 
the ancient austerity have themselves wasted away. Andlthis is true 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Caelio 
145 
not just of us Romans, who have adopted this approach to life in 
practice more than we have in theory, but of the Greeks also, men of 
considerable learning who, although not up to achieving great deeds, 
were nevertheless capable of speaking and writing with integrity and 
brilliance; and now that times have changed for Greece,* different 
moral rules have come to prevail. [ 41] For there are some* who have 
asserted that the wise man does everything for the sake of pleasure, 
and learned men have not refrained from talking in this disgraceful 
way. Then there are others who have supposed that virtue can be 
combined with pleasure, thus joining by verbal cleverness two things 
that are entirely incompatible. As for those who have demonstrated 
that the only direct road to glory consists in hard work, they have 
now been virtually abandoned in their lecture-rooms. 
It is certainly true that nature herself has pt:6vided us with many 
temptations which sometimes cause virtue to slunJber and lie still. 
She has presented the young with many slippery paths on which 
they can scarcely set foot or walk upon without some accident or fall. 
She has set out a large assortment of delightful charms to which not 
only the young but even those of maturer years can sometimes suc-
cumb. [ 42] So if you should happen to come across anyone who 
shuns the sight of beauty, who is never attracted by any fragrance or 
touch or taste, who blocks all sweet sounds from his ears, I, perhaps, 
and some of you might consider him the recipient of the gods' 
favour, but most people will reckon him the object of their wrath. 
So let us abandon this unused and neglected path, now blocked 
with branches and undergrowth. Let some allowance be made for 
youth, some freedom given to the young. Let pleasure be not always 
denied, and true and unbending reason not always prevail. Let desire 
and pleasure sometimes triumph over reason, provided that in such 
cases the following rule and limitation be observed. A young man 
should guard his own reputation, and not attack anyone else's. He 
should not squander his inheritance nor cripple himself with high-
interest loans. He should not assault anyone's home and family. He 
should not bring shame upon the virtuous, dishonour upon the 
respectable, or disgrace upon the good. He should threaten no one 
with violence, have nothing to do with plots, and steer clear of crime. 
And finally, when he has heeded the call of pleasure and devoted a 
moderate amount of time to playing around and to the empty desires 
of youth, he should turn at last to his duties at home, to his work in 

Pro Caelio 
[43] 
the courts, and to public life. In this way he will show that satiety has 
caused him to reject, and experience to despise, those things which 
reason, at an earlier time, had not enabled him to disdain. 
[ 43] Indeed, gentlemen, there have been many leading men and 
illustrious citizens, both in our own times and within the memory of 
our fathers and ancestors, who, once their youthful desires had sim-
mered down, went on in their maturity to exemplify the very highest 
virtues. I prefer not to mention any of them by name: you will recall 
them for yourselves. It is not my intention to associate the great 
renown of any valiant and distinguished personage* with even the 
slightest misdemeanour. But if I did wish to do this, I could point to 
many eminent and leading men who were notorious during their 
youth for their licentious behaviour or for their reckless extrava-
gance, the size of their debts, their lavish expenditure, and their 
wanton passions, but whose vices were later so completely eclipsed 
by their many virtues that anyone who wished could explain them 
away on the score of youth. 
[44] But in Marcus Caelius-for I shall now speak more boldly 
about his honourable pursuits, since I also have sufficient trust in 
your wisdom to make certain other admissions to you-in Marcus 
Caelius you will discover no extravagance, no lavish expenditure, no 
debts, and no passion for parties and dens of vice. As for the vice of 
excessive eating and drinking, that is something which not only does 
not diminish but actually increases as a man's life goes on. And as for 
love-affairs and what are called 'amours' -which do not generally 
trouble men of strong character for long (tor such passions wither 
away rapidly and soon)-these have never held him prisoner within 
their grasp. 
[45J You have heard him speaking in his own defence, and you 
have heard him speaking before as a prosecutor* (I say this for his 
defence, not as a boast): with your customary discernment you have 
taken note of his oratorical style, his technical ability, and the rich-
ness of his thought and expression. And it was not merely his natural 
talent that you saw shining out in his oratory-something '':hich, 
even if not backed up by hard work, can nevertheless make its mark 
on its own by its sheer power; no, his oratory contained (un.Jess my 
partiality has clouded my judgement) a theoretical foundatiin based 
on a sound liberal education and perfected by careful and .£mremit-
ting toil. 
/ 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Caelio 
147 
And yet you should realize, gentlemen, that the passions with 
which Caelius is charged and these pursuits about which I have been 
speaking cannot easily exist in one and the same person. For it is 
impossible that a mind given over to passion and hampered by love, 
desire, greed, often by too much money, but sometimes by too little, 
can possibly undertake whatever it is that we manage to achieve in 
speaking, and in the way that we achieve it, and not only as regards 
the physical exertion, but also in terms of the mental effort needed. 
[46] Can you think of any other reason why, when public speaking 
brings such rewards, such personal satisfaction, such renown, such 
influence, and such honour, there are and always have been so few 
people willing to undertake this burdensome profession? All pleas-
ures have to be trampled underfoot, enjoyable recreations, amuse-
ments, fun, and parties have to be renounced, and even conversation 
with one's friends virtually given up. It is theyefore the work 
required that puts people off public speaking and discourages them 
from taking it up, not any lack of talent or childhood training. 
[47] So if Caelius had really given himself up to the kind of life 
that is alleged, would he, when still a young man, have brought a 
prosecution against an ex-consul?* If he shied away from hard work, 
if he were enslaved to pleasure, would he do battle here every day, go 
in search of personal enmities, bring prosecutions, and run the risk 
of being prosecuted himself, and would he also maintain for so many 
months now and in full view of the entire Roman people a struggle* 
for one of two things-his own political survival, or glory? 
'So are you honestly saying, then, that that neighbourhood* gives 
off no tell-tale scent, that public gossip amounts to nothing, that 
Baiae itself has no tale to tell?' Certainly, Baiae talks all right, and not 
only that, it resounds with this report-that the lusts of a single 
woman have sunk to such depths that she does not merely decline to 
seek seclusion and darkness with which to veil her immoralities, but 
openly revels in the most disgusting practices amid crowds of 
onlookers and in the broadest light of day! 
[48] But if there is anyone who believes that young men should 
not be allowed to have relations even with prostitutes, his view is 
undoubtedly a strict one (I will not deny that), but also one that 
deviates both from the permissiveness of the present age and from 
the custom and allowances of our ancestors. For when was such a 
thing not common practice, when was it ever criticized, when was 

Pro Caelio 
[49] 
it ever forbidden, and when was what IS allowed now ever not 
allowed? 
At this point I want to explain what I will be talking about. I shall 
mention no woman by name: that much I shall leave unclear. 
[49] But if a woman without a husband throws open her home to 
every lecher and publicly leads the life of a prostitute, if she is used 
to attending dinner parties given by men to whom she is completely 
unconnected, if she carries on like this at Rome, in her pleasure-
gardens, and among the crowds at Baiac, and if she conducts herself 
in such a way that not only her bearing but also her dress and 
entourage, not only her blazing eyes* and her loose language but also 
her embraces, her kisses, her beach parties, her boating parties, and 
her dinner parties all declare her to be not simply a prostitute but a 
lewd and lascivious prostitute at that-and if some young man 
should chance to take up with her, then would you, Lucius Hcren-
nius, regard that man as an adulterer or as merely a lover, as someone 
who intended to violate her chastity or merely to satiate his own 
appetite? 
[so] I am forgetting the wrongs you have done me, Clodia. I am 
putting aside the memory of the pain you have caused me. The 
cruelties you inflicted on my family when I was away* I choose to 
ignore. So do not think what I said was directed against you. But I do 
want you to answer me this yourself, since the prosecution declare 
that you arc responsible for the charge, and that you arc also their 
witness to it. If a woman did exist like the one I have just been 
describing, a woman quite unlike yourself I hasten to add, one with 
the life and habits of a prostitute, would you consider it so very 
shocking and disgraceful if a young man should have had some 
dealings with her? If, then, you are not this woman, as I prefer to 
believe, what criticism can the prosecution possibly make of Caclius? 
But if they would have it that you are, then what reason do we have 
to be afraid of this charge, when you think nothing of it? Show us, 
therefore, the line we must take in our defence. For either your own 
fundamental decency will make it clear that Caelius has not acted 
immorally, or else your utter lack of decency will provide both him 
and all the rest with an ample means of justifying their behaviour. 
[5 I] Since my speech seems now to have got clear of the ~hallows 
and avoided the rocks, the rest of what I have to say shott1d all be 
plain sailing. Two very serious charges are brought again~f Caelius, 
www.ebook3000.com

[sz] 
Pro Caelio 
149 
both involving the same woman. First there is the gold, which he is 
alleged to have taken from Clodia. And then there is the poison, 
which he is charged with having procured to bring about this same 
Clodia's death.* 
He took the gold, you say, to give to the slaves of Lucius Lucceius,* 
so that they could murder Dio of Alexandria, who was at that time 
staying at Lucceius' house. It is certainly a serious charge, to allege 
that someone plotted to kill envoys or incited slaves to murder their 
master's guest-a plot full of wickedness, full of criminality! 
[52] And in reply to such a charge I should first like to ask whether 
Caelius told Clodia his reason for taking the gold or whether he did 
not. If he did not, then why did she hand it over? If he did, then she 
too is implicated in the crime. Did you dare, then, to fetch the gold 
from out of your chest, to strip of its adornments that Venus of 
yours,* loaded with the spoils from your other lovers, when you knew 
what a terrible crime this gold was wanted for-to bring about the 
murder of an envoy, and to cast on Lucius Lucceius, a man with the 
most scrupulous sense of honour, the everlasting taint of criminality? 
That welcoming heart of yours should never have consented to so 
horrific a crime, that open house of yours should never have aided it, 
that hospitable Venus of yours should never have abetted it. 
[53] Balbus was aware of this point. That is why he said that Clodia 
was kept in the dark, and that Caelius gave her the excuse that he 
needed the gold to pay for some games. But if he was as close a friend 
of Clodia's as you made out when you were lecturing us on his 
morals, then he did without question tell her why he wanted the 
gold; it: on the other hand, he was not so close a friend, then she did 
not give it to him. So if Caelius told you the truth, you shameless 
woman, you knowingly gave him gold to commit a crime; and if he 
did not bring himself to tell you, you never gave it! 
Why, then, do I need to counter this charge with endless argu-
ments? I could point out that the character of Marcus Caelius is 
entirely incompatible with such an atrocious and terrible crime, and 
that it is scarcely credible that such an intelligent and sensible man 
did not realize how stupid it would be to entrust a criminal act of this 
magnitude to unknown slaves belonging to another master. I could 
also put to the prosecution the usual questions regularly asked by 
myself and other advocates: where did the meeting between Caelius 
and Lucceius' slaves take place, and how did Caelius make contact 

Pro Caelio 
[54] 
with them? If it was in person, how rash of him! If it was through 
someone else, then through whom? I could talk you through every 
possible hiding-place where suspicion could lurk, but no motive, no 
location, no opportunity, no accomplice, no prospect of bringing off 
the crime or covering it up, no rational scheme, and no trace what-
ever of such a serious undertaking would come to light. 
[54] These arc the sort of proof~ that orators usc, and they could 
have brought me some benefit (not because of any talent I might 
have, but simply because of my experience and practice in public 
speaking): they would give the impression of having been worked up 
by me on my own and presented in evidence. But to keep matters 
brief I will forgo all such arguments. For I have instead, members of 
the jury, a man whom you will readily accept as a p~1rtncr in the 
sacred bond of your oath, Lucius Lucceius, a man of complete integ-
rity and a most impressive witness.* If so terrible a crime really had 
been directed against his position and his good name by Marcus 
Caelius, he could not have failed to hear of it, could not have ignored 
it, and could not have tolerated it. Or is it conceivable that so civil-
ized a man, with those scholarly interests of his, with all that culture 
and learning, could have ignored a danger which threatened that 
very person to whom he was devoted precisely because of those 
interests that they shared? And would he have failed to protect his 
own guest against a crime which, even if intended against someone 
he did not know, he would have viewed with the utmost seriousness? 
·would he have ignored his own slaves' attempt to commit an act 
which, even if he discovered that strangers were responsible for it, 
would have caused him great distress? ·would he have taken a relaxed 
view of a deed undertaken at Rome and in his own house which, even 
if it had been committed in the country or in a public place, he would 
have denounced in the strongest terms? Would he, as an educated 
man himself, have thought it proper to conceal a plot against a man 
of learning which, even if it were some rustic who was in danger, he 
would not have let pass? 
[55] But why do I detain you any longer, gentlemen? He himself 
has sworn a statement on oath. Please take note of its solemnity, and 
mark carefully every word of his evidence. Read out the evidence of 
Lucius Lucceius. 
' l 
(The e·vidence 1d'Lucius Luaeius is read to the court.) 
/ 
What more do you want? Or perhaps you are waiting foi'· the case 
www.ebook3000.com

[s6J 
Pro Caelio 
itself, and for truth, to speak out with a voice of their own? No, it is 
this that is the defence of the innocent, this is the speech of the case 
itself, this is the sole voice of truth! 
The charg·e itself offers no grounds for suspicion, the facts no 
proof of guilt. The business that is alleged to have been transacted 
has left no trace of what was said or where or when. No witness, no 
accomplice has been named. The entire charge arises out of a 
malevolent, disreputable, vindictive, crime-ridden, lust-ridden 
house. The house which is alleged to have attempted this unspeak-
able crime, on the other hand, is a house of principle, honour, duty, 
and conscience. From this house you have just heard a statement 
made under solemn oath. This will leave you in not the slightest 
doubt about the matter in dispute-whether an impetuous, capri-
cious, and angry woman has fabricated a charge, or whether a 
serious, scholarly, and temperate gentleman has given his evidence 
conscientiously.* 
[56] There remains the charge about poison.* But with this I am 
unable either to discover a beginning· or to unravel an end. For what 
reason could Caclius possibly have had for wanting to poison that 
woman? So that he would not have to return the gold? But did she 
ever ask for it back? To avoid being accused?* But did anyone ever 
consider him to be guilty? And would anyone ever have mentioned 
his name at all if he had not brought a prosecution against somebody 
himself?* .Moreover, you heard Lucius Hcrcnnius say that he would 
not have had a single word to say against Caelius were it not for the 
fact that Caclius has now brought a second prosecution against his 
friend on the same charge as that on which he has already been 
acquitted.* Is it really credible, then, that so horrific a crime* was 
committed for no reason at all? And can you not sec that an 
extremely serious charge* has been fabricated simply in order to 
provide a motive for the second of the two alleged crimes? 
[57] Finally, in whom did he confide, whom did he usc as his 
helper, who was his assistant, who was his accomplice, to whom did 
he entrust so great an undertaking, entrust himself, entrust his own 
life? The woman's slaves? For that is what has been claimed. But do 
you think that my client-whom you certainly credit with some 
intelligence, even though your hostile language denies him other 
qualities-do you think he was really so stupid as to entrust his 
entire fate to someone else's slaves? But what type of slaves were they 

152 
Pro Caelio 
(and this is a very important point): were they slaves whom he knew 
were treated not as other slaves are, but were permitted to enjoy a 
free, easy, and intimate relationship with their mistress? For who is 
not aware, gentlemen, that in a household like this in which the lady 
of the house behaves like a prostitute, in which nothing that goes on 
is fit to be made public, in which perverted lusts, extravagant living, 
and all kinds of outlandish vices and outrages are rife-who does not 
realize that in such a household the slaves are slaves no longer? In 
that household every trust is placed in them, everything is left to 
them, they indulge themselves in the same pleasures as their mis-
tress, they are let into her secrets, and they do quite well for them-
selves out of the spending and extravagance that goes on on a daily 
basis. [58] So was Caelius unaware of all this? If he w:is as intimate 
with the woman as you make out, then he would of course have been 
aware that her slaves were intimate with her too. But if his relation-
ship with her was not as close as you would have us believe, then how 
could he possibly have been on such close terms with the slaves? 
Now regarding the actual poison, what theory is made up about 
that? Where was it sought from, how was it obtained, how, to whom, 
and where was it handed over? The prosecution claim that Caelius 
already had it at home, that he tried it out beforehand on some slave 
that he had bought for the purpose, and that the speedy death of the 
slave demonstrated the poison's effectiveness. [59] Immortal gods! 
Why, when people commit the most terrible crimes, do you some-
times overlook what they have clone, or else postpone retribution to 
some future time? For I saw, I saw with my own eyes and drank down 
that bitter grief-the most bitter, perhaps, that I ever experienced-
on the clay when Q!-1intus Metellus* was snatched from the bosom 
and embrace of his country, when that great man, who considered 
himself born for the service of our empire, only two days after he 
had been at the height of his powers in the senate-house, on the 
rostra, and in our public affairs, when in the prime of his life, in the 
best of health, and in full bodily vigour, was most shamefully torn 
from the company of every loyal citizen and the entire nation. At 
that moment, as he lay dying and his mind in all other respects was 
already overpowered, he kept back his final thought for his cpuntry, 
and fixing his eyes on me as I wept he signified to me in hal;lng and 
dying words how terrible a storm was hanging over my ~ad, and 
how violent a tempest threatened the state.* Then, striking,~ gain and 
www.ebook3000.com

[6o] 
Pro Caelio 
I 53 
again the wall which divided his house from the one where Quintus 
Catulus* had lived, he repeatedly called out Catulus' name, and often 
my own, but most often that of Rome, bewailing not so much the fact 
that he was dying as that Rome, and I too, would henceforward be 
robbed of his protection. [6o 1 And had not so great a man been 
struck down by a sudden, violent crime, just think how he, as a 
senator of consular rank, would have stood up to his deranged 
cousin*-especially given that, when he was consul and his cousin 
was only just starting his revolutionary madness and beginning to 
stir up trouble, he had declared in the senate's very hearing that he 
would kill him with his own hand! So does that woman, coming from 
this of all houses, really have the gall to start debating about the 
celerity* of poison? Will she not rather be terrified of that house, in 
case it should cry out her guilt? Will she not'shudder at the walls 
which know her secret and tremble at the memory of that deadly, 
mournful night? But I return to the charge. Indeed, the reference I 
have made to that illustrious and valiant gentleman has caused grief 
to weaken my voice and sorrow to cloud my mind. 
[6r] It is not stated, however, where the poison came from, or how 
it was obtained. The prosecution allege that it was given to Publius 
Licinius who is here in court, a decent and patriotic young man and a 
friend of Caelius; that an arrangement was made with the slaves for 
them to come to the Senian baths; and that Licinius would join them 
there and hand over the box of poison to them. At this point I want 
to ask first, why was it necessary to arrange to meet at the baths? 
Why did the slaves not simply go to Caelius at his home? If Caelius 
and Clodia were still seeing so much of each other, and were still on 
such friendly terms, then surely there could be nothing suspicious 
about a slave of Clodia's being seen at Caelius' apartment? But if by 
this time a quarrel had arisen between them, their relationship was 
over, and they had split up, then 'that explains the tears'* and there we 
have the reason for all these crimes and charges. 
[62] 'On the contrary,' he says, 'when the slaves reported the plot 
to their mistress and told her of Caelius' treachery, that intelligent 
lady instructed them to promise him whatever he asked. But so that 
Licinius could be caught in the act of handing over the poison, she 
also ordered that the Senian baths be specified as a meeting-place: 
she would send some of her friends there to lie in wait and then 
suddenly, when Licinius had arrived and was handing over the 

I 54 
Pro Caelio 
poison, they would jump out from their hiding-places and arrest 
him.' 
All this, members of the jury, is extremely easy to refute. For why 
had she fixed upon the public baths of all places? I cannot see that 
there would have been any hiding-places there for men in togas! For 
if they were in the forecourt of the baths, they would not have been 
hidden from view; but if they were prepared to stow themselves 
away inside, it would have been rather awkward for them in their 
shoes and outdoor dress, and they might even have been refused 
entry-unless of course that influential lady had made friends with 
the attendant beforehand by means of her usual one-penny 
transaction!* 
[63] It was, let me tell you, with an eager sense of anticipation that 
I kept waiting to discover the identities of those fine fellows who are 
alleged to have witnessed the interception of the poison; and we have 
still not been informed of their names. But I have no doubt that they 
arc very responsible characters. For one thing they arc intimate 
friends of this great lacl.y. Then again, they willingly took on the job 
of being packed away inside the baths, something she could never 
have prevailed on them to do, however influential she might be, had 
they not been men of the very highest honour and respectability. But 
why do I need to discuss the respectability of these witnesses? You 
can judge their character and their diligence for yourselves. 'They 
hid in the baths.' What admirable witnesses! 'Then they jumped out 
by mistake.' What self-control! For the story you have made up is 
that when Licinius had arrived on the scene with the box in his hand 
and was endeavouring to hand it over but had not yet actually clone 
so, then all of a sudden out flew these highly distinguished but 
anonymous witnesses; at which point Licinius, having already 
stretched out his arm to hand over the box, drew it back again at this 
sudden attack and took to his heels. 
How great is the power of truth! How easily it can defend itself, 
unaided, against the ingenuity, craftiness, and cunning of human 
beings, and against their lies and plots! [64] Take, for instance, this 
little elrama, the work of an experienced poetess with a great many 
plays to her credit:* how devoid it is of plot, how lacking in any 
proper denouement! What about all those men (and there mtit have 
been more than a few of them if thev were to arrest LiciniusAvithout 
difficulty and also provide sufficien~ eye-witness evidence)/ why did 
www.ebook3000.com

[6sJ 
Pro Caelio 
ISS 
they let Licinius slip through their hands? Why should it have been 
more difficult to arrest Licinius after he had drawn back from hand-
ing over the box than it would have been if he had actually handed it 
over? The men were, after all, posted where they were precisely in 
order to arrest Licinius, to catch Licinius* in the act either when he 
had the poison on his person or after he had handed it over. That was 
the woman's whole idea, and that was the job of the men she asked to 
help her. And why you say that they mistakenly jumped out too 
soon, I simply cannot fathom. They had been asked to do this and 
had been stationed there specifically for this purpose, to expose 
the poison, the plot, and the crime that was being committed. [6s] 
Could they in fact have chosen a better moment to jump out than 
when Licinius had arrived on the scene and was holding the box of 
poison in his hand? Indeed, ifLicinius had already handed it over to 
the slaves, and the woman's friends had immediately gone out of the 
baths and arrested him, he would surely then have been imploring 
their protection and strenuously denying that it was he who had 
handed over the box. And how would they have proved him wrong? 
By saying that they had seen him? In the first place, that would only 
have served to bring down on themselves the suspicion of having 
committed so terrible a crime. And secondly, they would be claiming 
to have seen what they could not possibly have seen from the point 
where they had been stationed. That is why they revealed them-
selves, instead, at the moment when Licinius had arrived on the 
scene and was getting out the box, stretching out his arm, and hand-
ing over the poison. So here we have the conclusion, not of a proper 
play, but of a mime-of the sort in which, when no one has managed 
to devise a satisfactory ending, someone escapes from somebody 
else's clutches, the clappers sound, and up goes the curtain.* 
[66) I ask, then, why it was that, when Licinius was hesitating, 
dithering, retreating, and trying to flee, those woman-led warriors 
allowed him to slip through their hands? Why did they not arrest 
him, why did they not use his own confession, the testimony of the 
many eye-witnesses who were present, and the cry of the deed itself 
to press home the charge of so terrible a crime? Could they really 
have been afraid that they would not be able to overcome him, they 
being numerous and he all on his own, they strong and he weak, they 
confident and he terrified? 
No arguments counting against my client can be found in the facts 

Pro Caelio 
the trial of Camurtius and Caesernius brought up again just so that 
Vettius' name could be mentioned and that veteran tale about the 
coppers be re-told? Although these two men were certainly not liable 
under the violence law, the crime in which they were implicated was 
so shocking that, whatever law they were charged under, they could 
hardly have extricated themselves from its meshes. 
[72] But returning to Marcus Caclius, why has he been sum-
moned before this court? No charge appropriate to this court has 
been brought against him, nor indeed any charge that is outside the 
scope of the law but nevertheless within the range of your own just 
censure.* His early years were devoted to training, and to those stud-
ies which prepare us for work such as this in the courts, for public 
service, and for honour, glory, and position. He also made friends 
with older men* whose qualities of hard work and self-restraint he 
was very anxious to imitate, and this, together with the pursuits he 
shared with his contemporaries, showed him to be following the 
same course of renown as the best and most high-ranking of our 
citizens. [73] When he had grown a little older and more mature, he 
went out to Africa on the staff of the governor Quintus Pompei us,* a 
highly moral man, and a man who performs all his duties with the 
greatest conscientiousness. Africa was a province in which Caelius' 
father had business interests and property, and Caelius himself 
acquired some experience of provincial government there at an age 
which our ancestors rightly considered suitable. When he left the 
province he was very highly regarded by Pompeius, as you will hear 
from Pompeius' own testimony. 
It was now Caelius' wish to undertake some spectacular prosecu-
tion, so that his hard work should receive its due recognition from 
the Roman people; and in doing this he was following the long-
established custom and precedent set by those young men who 
afterwards went on to become the most distinguished and illustrious 
citizens in the state. [74] I should have preferred it, in fact, if his 
thirst for glory had taken him in some other direction; but it is no use 
complaining about that nmv. He prosecuted my colleague Gaius 
Antonius, whose misfortune it was that the memory of a signal ser-
vice to our country proved of no avail to him, while speculation 
about an intended crime did him harm.* From that point on,,Caelius 
never yielded to any of his contemporaries in his attendan¢e in the 
forum, in his dedication to court cases and the defence of hj~ friends, 
www.ebook3000.com

[75] 
Pro Caelio 
159 
and in the strength of his influence over those with whom he was 
connected. All the benefits that men are unable to obtain unless they 
are alert, sober, and hard-working were obtained by Caelius as a 
result of his industry and application. 
[ 7 5] At this turning-point in his)ife (I am going to trust to your 
sympathy and wisdom, gentlemen, and keep nothing from you), his 
youthful reputation did briefly come a cropper. This was the result 
of his recent acquaintance with that woman, the unfortunate proxim-
ity of their houses, and his unfamiliarity with those forms of pleasure 
which, when they have long been bottled up and have been repressed 
and restrained during one's early years, arc sometimes apt to burst 
out and pour forth all of a sudden. But from this way of life-or 
rather, I should say, fi·om this chatter (since the reality was nothing 
like as bad as people said)-anyway, from this; whatever it was, he 
emerged unscathed and completely broke free and escaped. And 
today he is so far removed fi·om the disgrace of being associated with 
that woman that he is actually having to defend himself against her 
enmity and hatred! 
[76] To put a stop to the gossip about idleness and pleasure that 
had arisen in the mean time-and he did this against my wishes, by 
Hercules, and against my strong opposition, but still he did it-he 
prosecuted a friend of mine* for electoral malpractice. My friend was 
acquitted, but Caelius is now returning to the attack and prosecuting 
him again; he is not listening to any of us, and is showing himself 
more violent than I could have wished. But I am not considering his 
wisdom, a quality not to be expected in a man of his age: it is his 
impetuous spirit, his thirst for success, and his burning desire for 
glory that I am speaking of. In men of our age, such passions are best 
kept in their place, but in young men, as in plants, they give an 
indication of what that virtue will become when it is ripe, and how 
great the fruits of industry will one day be. It has always been the 
case that highly talented young men have had to be reined back fi-om 
glory rather than spurred on towards it; at that age, if their brilliant 
ability bursts into flower, it is not so much grafting as cutting back 
that is required. [77] So if anyone feels that Caelius' energy, spirit, 
and persistence in taking up and pursuing hostilities has gone too far, 
or if even such trivial details as the shade of purple he wears, the 
following he attracts, and the brilliance and sparkle he displays have 
offended anyone, then let me assure you that in due course all these 

160 
Pro Cae!io 
traits will have subsided, and age, experience, and time will have 
mellowed them all. 
I ask you, then, members of the jury, to preserve for our country a 
citizen of sound education, sound principles, and sound loyalties. I 
promise you this and I make this pledge to our country that if I 
myself have served the country adequately, Caelius will never deviate 
from my own political standpoint. This I feel able to promise partly 
because of the friendship that exists between the two of us, but also 
because Caelius has already bound himself personally by the strong-
est guarantees. [78] For it is impossible that a man who has pro-
secuted a senator of consular rank,* alleging that he had done damage 
to our country, should himself turn out to be an unruly citizen of our 
country; and it is equally impossible that a man who will not accept 
the acquittal even of someone already acquitted of bribery* should 
himself go unpunished were he ever to commit that crime. So, 
gentlemen, our country has received from Marcus Caelius two pro-
secutions, to serve either as hostages against dangerous behaviour or 
as pledges of his good intentions. 
This, gentlemen, is a city in which only a few days ago Sextus 
Cloelius* was acquitted-a man whom for two years now you have 
observed as either a participant in civil discord or else its originator, a 
man without money, without credit, without hope, without home, 
and without resources, whose lips, tongue, hands, and entire way of 
life are defiled, a man who personally set fire to a sacred temple,* to 
the census of the Roman people, and to the public records, who 
knocked down the monument of Catulus, demolished my own 
house, and set fire to that of my brother,* and who on the Palatine, in 
full view of the whole of Rome, incited slaves to commit a massacre 
and to burn down the city. In this same city I therefore beg and 
beseech you not to allow Cloelius to be acquitted through a woman's 
influence while at the same time allowing Marcus Caelius to be 
sacrificed to her lust, nor to let it be said that this same woman, 
together with her brother and husband,* has succeeded both in rescu-
ing a depraved brigand and in crushing a young man of the very 
highest sense of honour. 
' 
[79] But when you have set the picture of this young man in front 
of you, place before your eyes also the picture ofhis old and u~happy 
father here; he totally depends on this his only son, he placgs all his 
hopes on him, and he is afraid for him alone. This old lnan is a 
www.ebook3000.com

[So] 
Pro Caelio 
suppliant before your compassion, a slave before your power, and a 
beggar not so much before your feet as before your instincts and your 
sensibilities. Recall the memories you have of your parents or the 
delight you take in your children and raise this man up, so that in 
assuaging another person's grief you may indulge your own filial 
duty or else your own fatherly love. Do not desire, gentlemen, that 
this old man, who is already in his declining years, should meet his 
end prematurely from a wound dealt not by his own fate but by 
yourselves! Do not strike down, as by some sudden storm or tornado, 
this young man who is now in the first flower of his prime and whose 
excellent qualities have already taken root! [So] Save the son for the 
father, the father for the son! Never let it be thought that you have 
scorned an old man whose hopes are now almost at an end, or that 
you have not only failed to help but have actually cast clown and 
ruined a young man with the brightest prospects! If you restore 
Caelius to me, to his family, and to the country, you will have a man 
who is cleclicated, devoted, and bound to you and your children; and 
from all his exertions and labours, it is you in particular, gentlemen, 
who shall reap the abundant and lasting fruits. 

PRO MILONE 
('FOR MILO') 
DATE: 7 April 52 BC (trial held on 4-7 April) 
DEFENDANT: Titus Annius Milo 
LAw: lex Pompeia de vi (Pompeian law concerning violence) 
CHARGE: murder ofPublius Clodius Pulcher 
PROSECUTORS: Appius Claudius Pulcher, Marcus Antonius, Publius 
Valerius Nepos 
DEFENCE ADVOCATE: Marcus Tullius Cicero 
PRESIDING :\IAGISTRATE: Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus 
VERDICT: comiction (by a vote of38 to 13) 
In Pro Caelio (56 BC) we witnessed one incident in the long-running feud 
between Cicero and Publius Clodius Pulcher, the man who had exiled 
him. That feud continued until 52 BC, when Clodius was unexpectedly 
murdered by another of his enemies,_ Cicero's friend Titus Annius Milo, at 
a chance encounter on the Appian Way outside Rome. In the trial which 
followed, Cicero defended Milo and, unusually, lost; Milo went into exile. 
Despite this failure, subsequent events persuaded Cicero that he had won 
a moral victory. He therefore wrote and published an improved (and ana-
chronistic) version of the speech he had given: this is our Pro ;VIi/one, 
Cicero's last surviving forensic speech. It is a magnificent rhetorical set 
piece, and has usually been considered Cicero's masterpiece. 
vVhat makes the speech of particular interest, however, is the survival of 
what we should dearly like to have for all of Cicero's forensic speeches, an 
independent account of the facts of the case. This is contained in the 
commentary by the first-century AD scholar ~1intus Asconius Pedianus 
(the narrative parts of which are translated below). Asconius lived prob-
ably from AD 3 to 88, and wrote under Nero (AD 54-68). He produced 
various works. We know of a book on Virgil, a biography of Sallust, an 
essay on old people-and commentaries on a number of speeches of 
Cicero (how many is not known). These commentaries were written for 
the education of his two sons, to prepare them for a senatorial career; 
presumably he was then persuaded to publish them. Five of the commen-
taries survive: on In Pisonem, Pro Swuro, and Pro ;VIi/one (extant 
speeches), and on Pro Cornelio and In toga candida (lost speeches-
although Asconius' quotations restore them to us in part). His confmen-
tary on Pro ;VIi/one explains the political background, the precise thcts of 
the case, what happened at the trial, and what the result was, wfile also 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro il1ilone: Introduction 
providing information as to how the speech as later published by Cicero 
relates to what Cicero said on the clay. From Asconius' account we can 
appreciate just how untruthful and misleading Cicero's speech is. If we 
had similarly revealing commentaries on his other speeches, we might well 
view Cicero in an entirely different light. But we cannot know. 
Like Lucius Licinius Murcna, Milo came fi·om Lanuvium in Latium. 
He seems to have been an opponent of Clod ius from at least 57, the year in 
which he held the tribunate. On 23 January that year, Clod ius used a force 
of gladiators to block a move to recall Cicero from exile (Clod ius as trib-
une the previous year had brought about his exile on the grounds of 
Cicero's illegal execution of the Catilinarian conspirators when consul in 
63). Milo arrested Cloclius' gladiators, was attacked by Cloclius' gangs, 
attempted to prosecute Clodius for violence and then, after failing in this, 
recruited gangs of his own, probably with the encouragement of Cicero's 
friends. From this point on, Cloclius' and Milo's gangs regularly clashed 
with each other on the streets of Rome, and these battles continued after 
Cicero's triumphant return on 4 September. Milo brought a further pro-
secution for violence against Clodius at the end of the year; but Clodius 
managed to escape by being elected aedile for 56 (magistrates were 
immune from prosecution while holding a senior public office). 
In 56 Clodius in his turn attempted to prosecute Milo (who was no 
longer tribune and therefore open to prosecution). Milo received support 
fi·om Pompey and Cicero; eventually the trial was broken up with violence 
and was not resumed. From this point on we find that Milo and Cicero arc 
close political allies. Cicero defended another of the tribunes of 57, Pub-
lius Scstius, on a charge of violence, and used the occasion to issue a 
rallying-call to all patriots, men such as Scstius and Milo, to defend the 
state, by whatever means necessary, fi·om traitors such as Cloclius. Pompey 
also helped with the defence, and Sestius was unanimously acquitted. 
Shortly after this Milo provided Cicero with a guard for his house: Clod ius 
had demolished it during Cicero's exile, and had been using his gangs to 
attack the workmen who were now rebuilding it. 
In April 56 the 'conference at Luca' took place, a renewal of the alliance 
between the three dominant political figures of the age, Pompey, Caesar, 
and Crassus. This resulted in a political re-alignment at Rome. Cloclius 
became reconciled with Pompey-but not, however, with Milo or Cicero. 
The vendetta between Milo and Cloclius therefore continued. Milo was 
praetor in 55, but we know nothing about his tenure of the office. In 54 
there is evidence that Milo and Pompey were drifting apart; and in 53 
Milo and Clodius were both standing for high office, Milo for the consul-
ship and Clodius for the praetorship. Cicero was strongly supporting 
Milo's campaign: if .Milo became consul, he would be in a position to 

Pro Milone: Introduction 
control Clodius as praetor. Every attempt to hold the elections, however, 
was frustrated by violence, and 52 therefore opened with no curule magis-
trates in place. Matters came to a head at around I .30 p.m. on I 8 January 
52, when Clodius was murdered by Milo's gang near Bovillae, I2 miles 
south of Rome on the Appian Way. 
Asconius relates what happened (Cicero's version is greatly distorted). 
On the day of the murder, Milo left Rome and set off in a coach down the 
Appian Way towards Lanuvium, where he was due to install a priest the 
next clay. His wife was travelling with him, and he also had a bodyguard of 
more than 300 armed slaves, including a number of gladiators. When he 
had passed Bovillae, he met Cloclius coming the other way, returning to 
Rome from Aricia, where he had been addressing the town council. 
Cloclius was on horseback and had a much smaller bodyguard, a mere 
twenty-six armed slaves (Asc. 34 C). Once. the parties had· passed each 
other, Cloclius looke<;l back and happened to catch the attention of one of 
Milo's gladiators, who threw a spear at him and wounded him in the 
shoulder. A full-scale fight then broke out in which Clodius' slaves were all 
either killed or seriously wounded. Cloclius himself was carried into a 
nearby inn. Asconius explicitly states (4I C) that the incident had arisen 
by chance. However, when Milo heard that Cloclius was wounded, he 
decided that it would be safer to kill him than to leave him alive; so he had 
him taken out of the inn, killed, and left lying in the road. All this was 
done under the direction of Milo's gang-leader, Marcus Saufeius. 
The events which followed are also related by Asconius. Clodius' body 
was discovered by a senator, Sextus Teidius, who had it conveyed to 
Rome. It arrived there at dusk (4.30 p.m.), was taken to Clodius' house, 
and was displayed to the crowd by his widow Fulvia. Next day it was 
carried into the forum at the suggestion of two Clodian tribunes, Titus 
Munatius Plancus Bursa and Qpintus Pompeius Rufus, who held a public 
meeting at which they stirred up popular feeling against Milo. Then 
Clodius' gang-leader Sextus Cloelius persuaded the people to carry the 
body into the senate-house and cremate it there. This they did, using 
the senate-house furniture and records to make a pyre, and burning down 
the senate-house in the process. Asconius says that the burning of the 
senate-house caused far greater indignation among the general public 
than the murder of Clod ius. Encouraged by this, iVlilo returned to Rome 
and resumed his campaign for the consulship. 
A few days later, a public meeting was held by another tribune, but a 
supporter of Milo, Marcus Caelius Rufus (the Caclius defended by Cicero 
in 56). Caelius and Milo both claimed that the encounter on the ~ppian 
Way had not arisen by chance: Clodius had set a trap for Milo, \yho had 
then killed him in self-defence. This false account was to form th/ basis of 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone: Introduction 
I6S 
Cicero's defence of Milo when Milo was eventually brought to trial. The 
grounds for this version are given by Asconius (54 C): three days before 
the incident, a senator named ?vlarcus Favonius had reported to Marcus 
Porcius Cato that Clodius had said that Milo would be dead within three 
days. The story is referred to twice in the course of our speech (§§ z6, 44). 
During January, because of the lack of consuls, a series of interreges held· 
office for five days each. Probably in early February the emergency decree 
(senatus consultum ultimum) was passed, together with a further decree 
directing Pompey as proconsul to levy troops. Soon afterwards the Clodi-
ans began legal proceedings against Milo. Two sons of Clodius' brother 
Gaius Claudius Pulcher, both named Appius Claudius Pulcher, made a 
preliminary summons of Milo's slaves. The defence was undertaken by 
Q!intus Hortensius Hortalus, Cicero, Cato, and other prominent con-
servatives. The line they took was that Milo's slaves could not be sum-
moned since they were no longer slaves: Milo had freed them in gratitude 
for saving his life! This reflects the version of events put about by Caelius 
and Milo, that Clodius had set a trap for Milo, but that Milo's spirited 
resistance had allowed him to escape with his life. In addition, Caelius 
summoned the slaves of Clodius and of two other opponents; proceedings 
continued into the intercalary month of twenty-seven days which was 
added this year between February and Ivlarch (the Julian calendar had not 
yet been adopted). 
About thirty days after the murder, one of Milo's rivals for the consul-
ship, Qpintus Metellus Scipio, addressed the senate with a version 
unfavourable to Milo (34-5 C). This is similar to Asconius' (presumably 
truthful) narrative, but with one important difference: Scipio claimed that 
Milo had set a trap for Clodius on his return from Aricia. Both sides 
therefore agreed, contrary to fact, that a trap had been set, but they 
disagreed as to which of the parties was the plotter and which the victim. 
Meanwhile, there was pressure in Rome to appoint Pompey dictator to 
restore order. But the office of dictator had unpleasant associations, evok-
ing memories of Sulla and the proscriptions, and so the senate instead 
made Pompey sole consul. This happened on the twenty-fourth day 
of the intercalary month. Three days later Pompey proposed two new laws 
under which those responsible for the recent acts of lawlessness could be 
tried, a violence law relating specifically to the incident on the Appian Way 
and subsequent events, and a law on electoral malpractice. These laws laid 
down special procedures designed to reduce the possibility of corruption, 
and imposed heavier penalties. Witnesses were to be produced first (in 
contrast to the normal practice), and all speeches were then to take place 
within a single day, two hours being allowed for the prosecution and three 
for the defence. Character references were to be disallowed. Eighty-one 

166 
Pro Milone: Introdurtion 
jurors would sit on the case, but just before the vote prosecution and 
defence would each reject fifteen, leaving a total of fifty-one to decide the 
verdict. These new laws were vigorously resisted by Caclius on the 
grounds that they represented a personal attack on Milo (there already 
existed suitable laws under which Milo could be tried); but ultimately they 
were passed, on 26 March. 
Legal proceedings against Milo began immediately, instituted by 
Clodius' nephews, Appius Claudius Pulcher and his brother of the same 
name. Three actions were lodged at this point, a fourth being added later 
(Asc. 38 C, 54 C). First, Milo was accused under Pompey's violence law 
(lex Pompeia de vi) of the murder of Cloclius. Secondly, he was accused 
under Pompey's law on electoral malpractice (lex Pompeia de ambitu) of 
bribery in his campaign for the consulship. Thirdly, he was accused under 
the law on illegal association (lex Licinia de sodaliciis) of malpractice in his 
campaign. If Milo was found guilty on any one charge, he would retire 
into exile and lose the subsequent cases by default. 
So Milo's trial finally went ahead, under the lex Pompeia de vi, on 4-7 
April. The evidence was taken on the first three days, and the speeches 
given on the fourth day. On the first clay, a prosecution witness, Gaius 
Causinius Schola, gave evidence designed to whip up feeling against Milo 
(Asc. 40 C). Marcus Claudius Marcellus (working with Cicero for the 
defence) tried to cross-examine him, but was shouted clown by the Clodi-
ans. Marcellus and Milo therefore asked that an armed guard attend the 
remainder of the trial (cf. §§ 1-3). On the second and third clays evidence 
was taken from various parties such as the inhabitants of Bovillae, some 
virgins (probably priestesses) from Alba, and members of Cloclius' family 
(the view that Cato gave evidence is in my opinion mistaken; Marcus 
Favonius may have clone). 
The speeches were given on the fourth clay, and all the shops in the city 
were closed. Troops were posted in the forum, and Pompey waited in 
front of the treasury (in the north-west corner of the forum) with a 
military guard. The prosecution-the elder Appius Claudius Pulcher, the 
young Mark Antony (the future triumvir), and Publius Valerius Nepos-
spoke first, within the two hours allotted to them. They claimed that the 
incident on the Appian Way had not arisen by chance: Milo had delib-
erately set out to kill Cloclius (as claimed earlier by Scipio). For the de-
fence, Cicero alone spoke, within his three hours. According to Asconius 
(41 C), some people thought that the best line of defence would be 
that Cloclius' murder was justified by the public interest, and Marcus 
Junius Brutus afterwards wrote up and circulated a hypotheticalj;peech 
for Milo on these lines (cf. ~int. Inst. 3.6.93, ro. 1.23, ro.s.zo)JCicero, 
however, disagreed: if Clodius' removal had been in the publi<fnterest, 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone: Introduction 
then prosecution in the courts, not murder, would have been the proper 
response. Instead, therefore, he based his entire speech (Asc. 4r C) on the 
argument that Clodius had set a trap for Milo, and had then been killed by 
him in self-defence; this was the line which Caelius and Milo had been 
promoting since within a few days of the murder. This original trial 
speech is not the same as the speech which has come down to us. A pirate 
version of the trial speech was still surviving in Asconius' day (Asc. 42 C), 
and indeed for some centuries afterwards, but it has long since been lost. 
The ancient sources disagree over how well Cicero performed on the 
day. Asconius (41 -2 C) says that his speech was received with shouting 
from the Clodians, and that this made him speak 'without his customary 
resolution'. Plutarch and Dio (Greek writers of the first/second and third 
centuries AD respectively) go further. According to Plutarch (Cic. 35), 
Milo arranged for Cicero to be taken early to the court in a litter, so that he 
would not be intimidated by the sight of the soldiers. However, when he 
emerged from the litter and saw the soldiers, 'he was utterly confused and 
hardly began his speech-his body shook and his voice choked', while 
Milo by contrast showed no trace of fear. Dio (40·54.2) tells a similar tale. 
When Cicero saw the soldiers he 'was stunned and filled with alarm, and 
so said nothing of what he had prepared, but after uttering with ditllculty 
a few words that died on his lips, was glad to retire'. Both these accounts 
exaggerate Cicero's discomfiture. Plutarch is making a contrast with 
Milo's courage, and Dio is concerned throughout to portray Cicero in the 
worst possible light. The statement of both writers that Cicero uttered 
just a few words cannot be accepted in view of Asconius' evidence that a 
version of the trial speech was still surviving in his day. But it is no doubt 
true that Cicero's performance fell short of his usual standards, as 
Asconius says. 
After the speeches were concluded, each side rejected fifteen jurors, 
and Milo was convicted by a vote of thirty-eight to thirteen. The jury 
realized that neither Milo nor Clodius had plotted to kill the other; but 
they found that after Clodius had been wounded he was then killed on 
ivlilo's orders. Milo went into exile at Massilia (Marseilles) soon 
afterwards, and his property was confiscated and sold. 
The remaining actions against .Milo now went ahead, and in each one 
he was convicted in his absence. On 8 April he was convicted under 
Pompey's law on electoral malpractice (lex Pompeia de ambitu) of bribery 
in his campaign for the consulship. Then on r I April he was convicted of 
malpractice under the law on illegal association (lex Liciuia de sodaliciis); 
and on the same day he was convicted of the murder of Clod ius under the 
ordinary violence law, the lex Plautia de vi (to which Pompey's law had 
provided an alternative, but which it had not replaced). 

r68 
Pro !VIilone: Introduction 
This was not, however, the end of the story: in the courts the battle 
between Milo's and Clodius' supporters continued unabated. Milo's 
gang-leader Nlarcus Saufeius, who had supervised the attack on the inn 
and Clodius' actual murder, was prosecuted under the lex Pompeia de vi. 
Cicero and Caclius defended him, and he was acquitted by one vote 
(twenty-six votes to twenty-five). He was then charged again, this time 
unclcr the lex Plautia; Cicero defended him, and he was acquitted by a 
larger majority (thirty-two votes to nineteen). On the other hand, Clodius' 
gang-leader Sextus Cloelius was prosecuted under the lex Pompeia for 
taking Clodius' body into the senate-house, and was convicted by a ncar-
unanimous verdict (forty-six votes to five). A number of others were also 
convicted, the majority of them Clodians (Asc. 56 C). Clearly public opin-
ion, previously hostile to Milo, had turned around. Milo had been pun-
ished enough: now the Clodians had to pay for their part in the breakdown 
of law and order. 
On ro December the new tribunes took office: their predecessors 
became private citizens once again, and so were open to prosecution. 
First, ~tintus Pompeius Rufus was prosecuted by Caclius under the le:t: 
Pompeia de vi for the burning of the senate-house; he was convicted and 
went into exile. This gave Cicero considerable personal satisfaction 
because Pompcius had been claiming that Cicero was the moving force 
behind Clodius' murder(§ 47). Next, Titus Munatius Plancus Bursa was 
prosecuted by Cicero under the lex Pompeia, also for the burning of the 
senate-house (both these trials probably took place in January 5 r ). Pom-
pey, whose sympathies had been with the Clodians throughout, tried to 
usc the force of his authority to save him, by submitting a character 
reference in his favour. But under the lex Pompeia, of course, such 
character references were forbidden, and Cato, who was a juror, ostenta-
tiously blocked his cars so that he would not hear the offending 
testimonial (naturally, Cato was among the jurors rejected by the defence 
before the vote was taken). Pompey's interference seems to have counted 
against Plancus: he was convicted unanimously (Phil. 6.ro), and went 
into exile. 
Plancus' conviction delighted Cicero. In a letter to his friend Marcus 
Marius (Fam. 7.2.2-3), he wrote: 
I ask you to believe that this trial gave me more satisfaction than the 
death of my enemy [Clodius ]. To begin with, I prefer to get my revertge 
in a court of law than at sword point. Secondly, I prefer my friend [Milo] 
to come out of it with credit than with ruin. I was especially plea;ed at 
the display of good-will towards me on the part of the honest )lien in 
the face of an astonishing amount of pressure from a very gr~nd and 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone: Introduction 
powerful personage [Pompey]. Lastly, and this may seem hard to credit, 
I detested this fellow far more than Clodius himself. ... I tell you to 
rejoice and be glad. It is a great victory. No braver Romans ever lived 
than those jurymen who dared to find him guilty in spite of all the 
power of the very personage who had em panelled them [Pompey]. 
They would never have done that if they had not felt my grievance as 
their own. 
(tr. D. R. Shackleton Bailey) 
How, then, docs the speech which we have fit into this sequence of 
events? 'Nc have seen that there were two speeches Pro klilone, the original 
trial speech and the speech which has come down to us. Asconius (42 C) 
distinguishes between the two, and says that a version of the trial speech 
was still surviving in his day, having been 'taken down' (exapta). Plutarch 
and Dio, as we have seen, were unaware of the existence of the trial 
speech. It was known to Q!.1intilian (second half of the first century AD), 
however. At one place (!nsf. 4.3.17) he states that he knows the original 
speech, and at another (Inst. 9.2.54) he quotes a passage from a defence of 
Milo by Cicero that docs not occur in our Pro Milone; this could be from 
the trial speech, or from a different speech, De aere alieno Mi/onis ('On 
Milo's debts'). The trial speech is also referred to by the Bobbio scholiast 
on Pro Milone (fourth/fifth century AD). At one place (r 12 Stangl) he says 
of it: 'in it you can sec that everything is broken, unpolished, and rough, 
and filled with the utmost terror', and at another (173 Stangl) he quotes a 
passage which connects with the passage quoted by Q!.1intilian. It is clear, 
then, that the trial speech survived to Q!.1intilian's time and beyond, and 
we may even have two passages from it. It was no doubt a pirate version, 
'taken down' and circulated without Cicero's approval. It may have been 
broken, unpolished, and rough because that is how Cicero's delivery was, 
or, more probably perhaps, because it was hurriedly taken down in court 
and not, like Cicero's other speeches, carefully written up afterwards by 
Cicero himself 
The speech which has come down to us, on the other hand, was written 
by Cicero at a later date, and at his leisure (Dio 40.54.2). Dio has a 
charming anecdote to tell about it (40.54·3). When Cicero had finished the 
speech which has come down to us, he sent a copy of it to JVlilo in exile; 
and Milo wrote back saying that it was lucky for him that the speech had 
not been made in that form in court, because if any defence of that kind 
had been made he would not now be enjoying the excellent mullets of 
Massilia. (Dio goes on to spoil the story by taking Milo's remark, per-
versely, as a joke at Cicero's expense. It is of course a gracious compli-
ment, implying both that Milo has a high opinion of Cicero's oratorical 
ability and that he does not mind at all that Cicero has failed to secure his 

Pro Milone: Introduction 
acquittal (after all, Cicero had done the best he could for him under the 
circumstances; cf. § 100).) 
So what were the differences between the trial speech and our Pro 
Milone? Some scholars have thought that the difference was simply a 
matter of style, a case of a little touching-up, a bit of polishing here and 
there. This clearly cannot be correct, however, because we know from Dio 
that Milo noticed a big difference-one, he thought, which could have 
made the verdict go the other way. lVloreover, Asconius states that Cicero's 
'entire speech' (Asc. 41 C) was based on the self-defence argument, that 
Clod ius had set a trap for Milo, and yet the last third of our speech (§§ 72-
105) is based on the argument that Clodius' murder was justified by the 
public interest. The last third must therefore have been added later, as in 
all probability were§§ 67-7 I (see my note on§ 67). The first two-thirds of 
the speech(§§ 1-66), on the other hand, do correspond in coritent to what 
Asconius claims was actually said, and so may well reflect the trial speech. 
Perhaps in these sections the revision did simply consist of a little 
touching-up, although one also needs to bear in mind the passages from 
Q_uintilian and the Bobbio scholiast which Cicero may have excised when 
writing up the speech for publication. 
Finally, when was our Pro Milone written? A. M. Stone has noticed that 
there is a difference in Cicero's attitude to Pompey (and also to Milo's 
rivals for the consulship ~1intus Metellus Scipio and Publius Plautius 
Hypsaeus) in the two parts of the speech (Antichthon, I4 (1980), 88-IIIj 
further points added by myself; Historia, 42 (1993), 502-4). In§§ I-66 
Cicero gives Pompey unqualified praise, insisting that Pompey is Milo's 
friend and wishes the jury to acquit him. But from § 67 to the end of the 
speech he treats him with barely concealed hostility. He complains that 
Pompey's suspicions regarding Milo are unjustified (§§ 67-8); he warns 
him that he will come to regret his desertion of Milo (§ 69); he makes an 
ironic hint that Pompey lacks expertise in constitutional and political 
matters (§ 70 ); he implies that Pompey failed to stand up to Clodius (§ 73); 
he declares that Milo has done more for his country than any other man in 
history, including the most distinguished contemporary generals (§ 77); 
he suggests that Pompey is being hypocritical in setting up a court 
to try Milo when he must surely have welcomed Clodius' death (§ 79); 
and he implies that Pompey owed allegiance to Clodius and was there-
fore unprepared to act in the public interest (§ 88). These passages 
confirm what we already knew from Asconius, that the last third of/the 
speech is an anachronistic addition. The flattering view of Pompey 
found in the first two-thirds of the speech reflects the stance tal}fn by 
Cicero at Milo's actual trial, when there was still a chance th~t Milo 
might be acquitted. The hostile view of Pompey in the last thircl< on the 
-
' 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone: Introduction 
other hand, reflects Cicero's bitterness towards Pompey after Milo had 
been convicted. 
It looks very much as if the speech was revised and published at a time 
when public opinion had turned against Pompey. The revision must have 
taken place at some point after Milo's trial, and after he had become 
settled in Massilia, but before May 5 r, when Cicero left Italy on good 
terms with Pompey and went out to govern Cilicia. Within this period it 
will have happened at a time when Milo's reputation had recovered suf-
ficiently for the public interest defence to have force, and when Pompey 
had become discredited through his continuing association with the 
Clodians. According to Stone, the most suitable context is the trial of 
Plancus in (probably) January 51: this was the occasion when Pompey, in a 
vain attempt to save a Clod ian ex-tribune whom Cicero himself was pros-
ecuting, broke his own law by submitting a character reference. At§ 70, as 
we have seen, Cicero makes a hint that Pompey lacks expertise in consti-
tutional and political matters. If this is a reference to Pompey's action at 
the trial of Plancus, as I believe it is (sec my first note on § 70), then we 
have confirmation of Stone's hypothesis. The hypothesis is further sup-
ported by the letter of Cicero to Marius quoted earlier (Pam. 7 .2.2-3). In 
the letter, Cicero regards himself as having defeated Pompey and vindi-
cated Milo by having secured a unanimous verdict against Plancus. The 
triumphalism of the letter, and its bitterness towards Pompey, matches 
exactly the tone of defiance in the last third of Pro Milone. Cicero believed 
that by securing Plancus' conviction he had won a moral victory, and it is 
reasonable to infer that it was this which prompted him to write up and 
publish a new, bolder defence of Milo. This new Pro Milone would 
expunge the memory of Cicero's earlier oratorical failure (he may have 
hoped to drive the pirate version out of circulation), and proclaim the 
ultimate success of his and Milo's cause. 
So much, then, for the status and historical context of the published 
speech. Milo remained in Massilia until the Civil War. Although now an 
enemy of Pompey's, he was also opposed to Caesar, and when Caesar 
arrived in Rome in 49 all the exiles were recalled except him. Then in 48 
Milo went to Campania to join his friend Caclius, taking with him such 
gladiators as he still possessed; together they hoped to raise southern Italy 
in revolt against Caesar. But the attempt failed, and at Compsa Milo met 
his end, killed by a stone thrown from the city walls. Caelius was killed by 
Caesar's troops shortly afterwards. 
Asconius' account of Clodius' murder, Milo's trial, and the background to 
these events is given below (the reader should read this before proceeding 
to Cicero's speech). This account is contained in the narrative sections 

Pro ;VIi/one: Asconius' account 
which introduce and conclude Asconius' detailed commentary on various 
passages in the speech. For the commentary itself, not given here, the 
reader is referred to the translation by S. Squires, Asconius: Commentaries 
on Five Speeches of Cicero (Bristol and Wauconda, Ill., 1990). Asconius' 
commentary notes are cited where necessary in my explanatory notes on 
the speech. (Readers who consult the Latin should note that the mistrans-
lation of several dates by Squires and other translators arises out of the 
fact that in 52 B c some of the months had an abnormal number of clays.) 
Passages in Asconius are usually referred to by the page number in A. 
C. Clark's Oxford Classical Text (Oxford, 1907). Thus 'Asc. 30 C' denotes 
page 30 in Clark's Latin text ('C' standing for 'Clark'). 
Asconius' account is as follows. 
ON PRO MILONE 
He gave this speech on 7 April in the third consulship of Gm{eus 
Pompeius. While the trial was in progress, Gnaeus Pompeius had 
posted troops in the forum and all the temples surrounding it, a fact 
which emerges not only from the speech and from histories of the 
period, but also from the book On the Best Type of Orator, which 
goes under Cicero's name. 
THE ARGUMENT 
Titus Annius Milo, Publius Plautius Hypsaeus, and Quintus Metel-
lus Scipio were standing for the consulship, and not only did they 
use large-scale bribery without the slightest concealment but they 
also surrounded themselves w·ith gangs of armed men. Milo and 
Clodius were deadly enemies, since Milo was a close friend of Cicero 
and as tribune of the plebs had worked hard for his recall, while 
Publius Clodius remained implacably opposed to Cicero after his 
restoration and for this reason was strongly supporting Hypsaeus 
and Scipio against Milo. Milo and Clodius with their gangs fought 
continual battles with each other at Rome: each was as ruthless as the 
other, though Milo stood for the better sort of people. Besides, in the 
same year as Milo was standing for the consulship, Clodius was 
standing for the praetorship, and he was well aware that his praetbr-
ship would be powerless if Milo were consul at the same time. 
The consular elections had been long drawn out and could ti>t be 
completed because of this desperate feuding among the cand~lates. 
[31 C] Hence in the month of January there were no con~uls or 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone: Asconius' account 
173 
praetors, and the day of the election was continually put off by the 
same means as before .. Milo wanted the elections completed as soon 
as possible, believing that he enjoyed the support both of the 
respectable classes, because of his opposition to Clodius, and of the 
people, because of his lavish bribery and his enormous expenditure 
on theatrical performances and gladiatorial games (on which, Cicero 
tells us, he used up three inheritances). His fellow candidates, on the 
other hand, wanted the elections put off, and so Pompeius (who was 
Scipio's son-in-law) and the tribune of the plebs Titus Munatius 
had refused to allow a motion to be put before the senate for a 
calling-together of patricians to nominate an interrex (the custom 
was that an interrex should be nominated). 
On r8 January (I think that the Proceedings of the Senate and Pro 
Milone itself, which agrees with it, should be followed, rather than 
Fenestella, who says 17 January) Milo set out for Lanuvium (his 
home town, of which he was at that time dictator) in order to install a 
priest on the following clay. At around I .30 p.m., a little beyond 
Bovillae (near the place where there is a shrine of the Good God-
dess), he came across Clodius, who was returning from Aricia, where 
he had been addressing the town council. Clodius was on horseback 
and was accompanied, as was normal for travellers in those clays, by 
about thirty slaves, unencumbered and armed with swords. He also 
had three companions with him, a Roman equestrian, Gaius Cau-
sinius Schola, and two well-known plebeians, Publius Pomponius 
and Gaius Clodius. Milo was travelling in a coach with his wife 
Fausta, the daughter of Lucius Sulla the dictator, and his friend 
Marcus Fufius. Following them [32 C] was a large column of slaves 
and also some gladiators, including two well-known ones, Eudamus 
and Birria. These were moving slowly at the rear of the column, and 
started an altercation with Publius Clodius' slaves. As Cloclius 
looked back menacingly at the disturbance, Birria pierced his shoul-
der with a spear. Then a fight began, and more of Milo's men ran up. 
The wounded Clodius, meanwhile, was carried into a nearby inn in 
the territory ofBovillae. 
When Milo found out that Clodius had been wounded, he realized 
that it would be dangerous for him if Clodius were to remain alive, 
whereas his death would be a huge relief to him, even if he would 
then have to face punishment as a result. He therefore gave orders 
for him to be turfed out of the inn. (The leader of Milo's slaves was 

174 
Pro Milone: Asconius' account 
Marcus Saufeius.) So Clodius was brought out from hiding and 
finished off with many wounds. His body was left lying in the road, 
because Cloclius' slaves were all either dead or seriously wounded 
and in hiding. It was then picked up by a senator, Sextus Teidius, 
who happened to be returning to Rome from the country: he had it 
taken on to Rome in his litter, while he himself went back to the 
place from which he had come. Clodius' body reached Rome at 4-30 
p.m. It was placed in the atrium of his house, and was surrounded by 
a very large crowd of the lowest classes and slaves, weeping profusely. 
Clodius' wife Fulvia heightened the sense of anger at the deed by 
displaying his wounds and giving her grief full rein. 
At dawn the next clay an even larger crowd gathered, but of the 
same sort of people, although several ·men of distinction were 
observed. Clodius' house, which he had bought from Marcus Scau-
rus some months earlier, was on the Palatine. Here the tribunes of 
the plebs Titus Munatius Plancus (brother of the orator Lucius 
Plancus) and Quintus Pompeius Rufus (grandson of Sulla the dic-
tator through his daughter) [33 C] came rushing. At their instigation 
the ignorant mob carried the naked and trampled body down to the 
forum-positioned as it had been on the couch, so that the wounds 
would be clearly visible-and placed it on the rostra. There Plancus 
and Pompeius, who were supporting Milo's rivals, held a public 
meeting and stirred up anger against Milo. Then the people, led by 
the scribe Sextus Cloclius, carried Publius Clodius' body into the 
senate-house and cremated it using the benches, platfi:H·ms, tables, 
and scribes' notebooks. This set fire to the senate-house itself, and 
the Basilica Porcia which adjoined it was also burnt. The same crowd 
of Cloclians also made an attack on the houses of the interrex Marcus 
Lcpidus (who had been appointed to a curulc magistracy) and Milo 
(who was away), but it was driven off with arrows. Then they got 
hold of the rods of office from the grove of Libitina and took them to 
the houses of Scipio and Hypsaeus, then to Gnaeus Pompei us' prop-
erty in the suburbs, calling on him as consul one moment and as 
dictator the next. 
The burning of the senate-house caused far greater indignation 
among the general public than the killing of Cloclius. Milo was 
assumed to have gone into voluntary exile but, encouraged q§· the 
unpopularity of his opponents, he had returned to Rome ~n the 
night on which the senate-house was burnt. Undeterred, hekarried 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone: Asconius' account 
175 
on with his campaign for the consulship, after openly giving r ,ooo 
asses to each voter by tribe. A few days later the tribune of the plebs 
Marcus Caelius accorded him a public meeting, and himself pleaded 
his cause before the people. Both men claimed that Clodius had set a 
trap for Milo. 
Meanwhile one interrex after another was appointed, since the 
consular elections [34 CJ could not be held because of the candidates' 
continuing disruption and their continuing use of armed gangs. So 
first of all a decree of the senate was passed that the interrex, tribunes 
of the plebs, and Gnaeus Pompeius (who as proconsul remained 
outside the city) should 'take heed that the state should come to no 
harm', and that Pompeius should levy troops throughout Italy. He 
raised a force very rapidly, and then two young men, both named 
Appius Claudius, lodged with him summonses for the slaves of Milo, 
and those of his wife Fausta, to be produced. (T~ese men were the 
sons of Gaius Claudius, who had been Clodius' brother, and this is 
why they were investigating their uncle's death as if on their father's 
authority.) Two Valerii, Nepos and Leo, and Lucius Herennius Bal-
bus also lodged summonses for the same slaves of Fausta and lVlilo. 
At the same time Caelius lodged a summons for the slaves for 
Publius Clodius and those who were with him; he also lodged 
summonses for the slaves of Hypsaeus and Quintus Pompeius. The 
following spoke for Milo: (b.1intus Hortensius, Marcus Cicero, Mar-
cus Marcellus, Marcus Calidius, Marcus Cato, and Faustus Sulla. 
Quintus Hortensius said just a few words to the effect that those who 
had been summoned as slaves were in fact free men, since after the 
recent act of violence Milo had freed them for the reason that they 
had saved his life. All this took place during the intercalary month. 
About thirty days after Clodius had been killed, Quintus Metellus 
Scipio took issue with Quintus Caepio in the senate over Publius 
Clodius' murder. He said that what Milo was saying in his own 
defence was not true; that Clodius had set out with twenty-six slaves 
to address the town council of Aricia; that [35 C] after the senate had 
risen Milo had suddenly hurried off at 10.30 a.m. to meet him with 
more than three hundred armed slaves, and when he was above 
Bovillae had attacked him unexpectedly on the road; that Publius 
Clodius had received three wounds and been carried to Bovillae; that 
Milo had stormed the inn in which he had taken refuge; and that 
Clodius had been dragged out half-dead, killed on the Appian Way, 

Pro !VIi/one: Asconius' account 
and had his ring removed as he was dying. Milo had then gone to 
Clodius' house at Alba, knowing that his young son was there, and, 
finding him already taken away, had interrogated the slave Halicor by 
cutting off his limbs one by one, also murdering the bailiff and two 
other slaves. Of the slaves of Clodius who defended their master 
eleven had been killed, while only two of Milo's had been hurt. On 
the next day Milo had therefore freed twelve slaves who had shown 
the best service and had given I ,ooo asses to each citizen by tribe in 
an attempt to silence the rumours about himself. It was claimed that 
Milo had sent to Gnaeus Pompeius (who was strongly supporting 
Hypsaeus because he had been his quaestor) and had offered to give 
up his campaign for the consulship should he so desire; but Pom-
peius had replied that it was not up to him whether anyone chose to 
stand or not to stand, and he would not obstruct the power of the 
Roman people by offering advice or opinion. Then he had appar-
ently told Milo through Gaius Lucilius, who because of his friend-
ship with Marcus Cicero was a friend also of Milo's, that he was not 
to make him unpopular by asking his advice in this matter. 
Meanwhile people were increasingly saying that Gnaeus Pom-
peius should be made dictator, and that there was no other way of 
solving the the country's problems. [36CJ But the leading senators 
thought it would be safer if he were made consul without a colleague. 
The question was then debated in the senate, a decree of the senate 
was passed on the motion of Marcus Bibulus, and Pompeius was 
made consul by the interrex Servius Sulpicius on the twenty-fourth 
day of the intercalary month; he entered upon his consulship 
immediately. 
Three days later, he put new legislation before the senate. He 
published two bills by decree of the senate, one concerning violence, 
specifically citing the incident on the Appian Way, the burning of the 
senate-house, and the attack on the house of the interrex .Marcus 
Lepidus, and a second concerning electoral malpractice: a heavier 
penalty and a shorter form of procedure were prescribed. Each law 
laid down that witnesses were to be produced first, and that the 
prosecution and defence should each complete their speeches within 
a single day, two hours being allowed to the prosecution and three to 
the defence. The tribune of the plebs Marcus Caelius, an ~-dent 
supporter of Milo, tried to block these laws on the grounds t~&t they 
represented a personal attack on Milo and would be the ruih of the 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone: Asconius' account 
courts. Caclius doggedly kept up his attack on the laws, and Pom-
peius grew so angry that he declared that, if driven to it, he would 
defend the state by force of arms. 
Pompeius was actually afraid of Milo, or else pretended to be 
afraid. For the most part he stayed not at his house but at his prop-
erty in the suburbs, and he kept to the upper parts of it, with a large 
body of troops keeping guard all the way around. Pompei us also on 
one occasion suddenly dismissed the senate, saying he was afraid of 
Milo's arrival. Then at the next meeting of the senate Publius 
Cornificius said that Milo had a dagger strapped to his thigh under 
his tunic. He asked him to bare his thigh, and Milo without hesita-
tion lifted his tunic. Marcus Cicero then exclaimed that all the other 
charges alleged against Milo were of a similar character. 
[37 C] After this the tribune of the plebs Titus Munatius Plancus 
brought Marcus Aemilius Philemon, a freedman of Marcus Lepiclus 
and a well-known man, before a public meeting. Philemon said that 
he had been tra\'elling with four free men and that they had arrived 
on the scene when Cloclius was killed: when they raised an outcry, 
they were kidnapped and taken away, and were confined for two 
months in a country house of Milo's. This story, whether true or 
false, gave rise to considerable ill-feeling against Milo. In aclclition, 
the same Munatius and Pompei us, tribunes of the plebs, brought a 
triumvir capita/is onto the rostra and asked him whether he had 
arrested Galata, a slave of Milo's, in the act of committing murder. 
He replied that the slave had been discovered asleep at the inn, and 
had been arrested as a runaway and brought before him. They 
ordered the triumvir not to return the slave, but next clay the tribune 
of the plebs Caelius and his colleague Manilius Cumanus stole him 
from the triumvir's house and gave him back to Milo. Cicero makes 
no mention of these crimes in his speech, but even so I thought I 
should set them clown, seeing that I had found out about them. 
The tribunes of the plebs ~intus Pompeius, Gaius Sallustius, 
and Titus Munatius Plancus were the main people who held hostile 
public meetings relating to Milo, and these meetings were also 
unfavourable to Cicero, because he was defending Milo so vigor-
ously. Indeed, most of the people were opposed not just to Milo but 
to Cicero too, as a result of his unpopular advocacy of Milo. Later, 
Pompei us and Sallustius fell under suspicion of having settled their 
differences with Milo and Cicero; but Plancus kept up his hostility, 

Pro Milone: Asconius' account 
and [38 C] also stirred up the masses against Cicero. In addition he 
made Pompei us suspicious of Milo, shouting that Milo was prepar-
ing a force to destroy him; as a result, Pompeius constantly com-
plained that plots were being made against him, and openly too, and 
he protected himself with a larger body of troops. Plancus also 
threatened to prosecute Cicero, something previously contemplated 
by Q!.1intus Pompeius. So strong, however, was Cicero's loyalty and 
resolve that neither loss of popularity, nor the suspicions of Gnaeus 
Pompeius, nor the danger of prosecution, nor the weapons which 
had openly been taken up against Milo could induce him not to 
defend him-even though, if he had only defended him slightly less 
enthusiastically, he could have escaped all danger to himself and the 
outrage of the hostile masses, while also winning back the favour of 
Gnaeus Pompeius. 
Pompeius' law was then carried. It contained a clause which said 
that a presiding magistrate should be appointed by a vote of the 
people from among those who had held the consulship; the election 
was held at once, and Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus was appointed 
presiding magistrate. As for the panel of jurors for the court, Pom-
pei us proposed men who everyone agreed were more distinguished 
and upright than any who had previously been proposed. 
Immediately afterwards, Milo was charged under the new law by 
the two young Appii Claudii, the same men who had previously 
summoned his slaves. They also brought a charge of electoral mal-
practice, as did Gaius Ateius and Lucius Cornificius; and Publius 
Fulvius Neratus brought a charge of illegal association. [39 C] The 
last two charges were brought in the expectation that the violence 
trial would take place first and then, it was hoped, Milo would be 
convicted and hence be unable to appear at the later trials. 
There was then an inquiry, presided over by Aulus Torquatus, to 
decide which of the prosecutors should bring the electoral mal-
practice charge. Both presiding magistrates, Torquatus and Domi-
tius, ordered the defendant to appear on 4 April. On that day Milo 
presented himself at Domitius' court, and sent friends to Torquatus' 
court on his behalf; at the latter, Marcus Marcellus pleaded for h{m 
and secured permission for him not to answer the charge of electoral 
malpractice until the violence trial was concluded. At Do!T\ftius' 
court, on the other hand, the elder Appius lodged a summo_As for 
Milo to produce fifty-four slaves, and when he replied that tht slaves 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone: Asconius' account 
179 
named were not in his possession, Domitius, on the advice of the 
jurors, ruled that the prosecutor could select as many of Milo's slaves 
as he wished. The witnesses were then summoned in accordance 
with the law which, as I said earlier, prescribed that witnesses should 
be heard during the three days before the trial took place, that a 
record of their statements should be sealed by the jury, that the 
jurors should all be given notice to appear on the fourth day, and that 
balls with their names written on them should be checked in the 
presence of the prosecution and the defence. Then on the next day 
eighty-one jurors should be selected by lot: those chosen should take 
their seats at once. The prosecution should have two hours for speak-
ing and the defence three hours, and the verdict be declared on the 
same day; but before the votes were cast the prosecution and the 
defence should each reject five jurors from each of the orders, leav-
ing a total of fifty-one to cast their votes. 
[ 40 C] On the first day Gaius Causinius Sch~la appeared as a 
witness against Milo. He said that he had been with Publius Clodius 
when he was killed, and he magnified the horror of the deed as much 
as he could. Marcus Marcellus, when he began to question him, 
became so terrified by the shouting from the Clodian crowd sur-
rounding him that, fearing for his life, he was allowed by Domitius to 
take refuge on his platform. Because of this, Marcellus and Milo 
himself begged Domitius for an armed guard. Gnaeus Pompeius was 
waiting at this time in front of the treasury, and he too was con-
cerned at the uproar. He therefore promised Domitius that on the 
following day he would come down to the forum with a military 
guard, which he did. This frightened the Clodians into allowing the 
witnesses to be heard in silence for the next two days. The witnesses 
were questioned by Marcus Cicero, Marcus Marcellus, and Milo 
himself. Many of the inhabitants of Bovillae gave evidence about 
what had taken place there-the killing of the innkeeper, the storm-
ing of the inn, and the dragging of Clodius' body out into the open. 
In addition, the virgins of Alba stated that a woman they did not 
know had come to them on Milo's instructions to pay a vow, because 
Clodius had been killed. The last to give evidence were Sempronia, 
daughter of Tuditanus and Publius Clodius' mother-in-law, and his 
wife Fulvia; their tears greatly affected those who were standing 
nearby. The court was adjourned at around 2.15 p.m., and then 
Titus Munatius held a public meeting and urged the people to turn 

180 
Pro !VIi/one: Asconius' account 
up in force the next day and not allow Milo to escape, and to show 
their feelings and their grief to the jurors as they went to cast their 
votes. 
On the next day, 7 April, the last day of the trial, [ 4 I C) all the 
shops in the city were closed. Pompeius posted guards in the forum 
and at all its entrances, while he himself took up position, as he had 
done the day before, in front of the treasury, surrounded by a hand-
picked body of troops. Then, at dawn, the jurors were selected by 
lot, and afterwards the whole f()rum was as near to silent as any 
forum can be. Next, before 9 a.m., the prosecutors-the elder 
Appius, Marcus Antonius, and Publius Valerius Nepos-began their 
speeches, taking up the two hours allowed by the law. 
For the defence, only Marcus Cicero spoke. Certain people had 
thought that the charge should be defended on the grounds that 
Clodius' killing was in the country's interest-a line followed by 
Marcus Brutus in the speech which he composed for Milo and pub-
lished as if he had actually delivered it. But Cicero did not agree with 
the view that someone whose conviction would be in the public 
interest could simply be killed without being convicted. So when the 
prosecution claimed (falsely, since the fight had come about by 
chance) that Milo had set a trap for Clodius, Cicero took this up and 
maintained that, on the contrary, Clodius had set a trap for Milo; and 
he based his entire speech on that assertion. In actual fact the inci-
dent occurred as I have described: neither of them had planned the 
fighting on that day, but it had arisen by chance, starting with a brawl 
among the slaves and ending up with the murder. However, it was 
well known that each of them had often threatened the other with 
death, and while Milo was suspected because his entourage had been 
larger than that of Clodius, Clodius' entourage had been less en-
cumbered and better prepared for battle than Milo's. As for Cicero, 
on beginning his speech he was received with shouting from the 
Clodians, who could not be restrained even by fear of the soldiers 
standing round. [ 42 C) This made him speak without his customary 
resolution. That speech of his which was taken down is still in exist-
ence, but this one which we are reading at the moment is so perfectly 
written that it can rightly be considered his best. 
" 
[Asconius' commentmy: not translated here.] 
! 
[53 C) When both sides had finished their speeches, the pt:hsecu-
tion and defence each rejected five senators and the same rtu,bber of 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro JVIilone: Ascorzius' account 
181 
equestrians and tribuni aerarii, so that fifty-one jurors voted. Of the 
senators, twelve voted for conviction and six for acquittal; of the 
equestrians, thirteen voted for conviction and four for acquittal; and 
of the tribuni aerarii, thirteen voted for conviction and three for 
acquittal. It appears that the jury were well mvare that Clodius had 
originally been wounded without Milo's knowledge, but they found 
that once he had been wounded, he was then killed on .Milo's orders. 
Some people believed that Marcus Cato voted for acquittal, [54 C] 
since he had not concealed his opinion that the state had gained by 
Publius Clodius' death, and he was also supporting Milo in his cam-
paign for the consulship and had helped with his defence. Moreover, 
Cicero had referred to him by name in his presence, and had 
appealed to him as a witness to the bet that he had heard fi·om 
Marcus Favonius three days before the murder that Clodius had said 
that Milo would be dead within three days. But on the other hand it 
seemed expedient that a man so notoriously violent as Milo be 
removed from public life. However, no one was ever able to discover 
which way Cato had voted. A verdict of guilty was pronounced, 
largely thanks to the efforts of Appius Claudius. 
On the next day !Vlilo was prosecuted for electoral malpractice 
before Manlius Torquatus and convicted in his absence. In this trial, 
too, the prosecutor was Appius Claudius, who was given the reward 
prescribed by the law, but declined to accept it. His assistant pro-
secutors in this electoral malpractice trial were Publius Valerius Leo 
and Gnaeus Domitius, son of Gnaeus. A few days later Milo was also 
convicted of illegal association before the presiding magistrate Mar-
cus Favonius; the prosecutor was Publius Fulvius Neratus, who was 
given the reward prescribed by the law. Then before the presiding 
magistrate Lucius Fabius he was again convicted of violence in his 
absence; the prosecutors were Lucius Cornificius and (htintus 
Patulcius. Within a very few days Milo set out for exile at Massilia. 
His property realized a twenty-fourth of its value because of the size 
of his debts. 
After Milo, the first to be prosecuted under the same law of Pom-
pei us' was [55 C] Marcus Saufeius, son of Marcus, who had super-
vised the storming of the inn at Bovillae and Clodius' murder. He 
was prosecuted by Lucius Cassius, Lucius Fulcinius, son of Gaius, 
and Gaius Valerius; he was defended by Marcus Cicero and Marcus 
Caelius, \Vho secured his acquittal by one vote. Ten senators voted 

182 
Pro il1ilone: Asconius' account 
for conviction and eight for acquittal; nine Roman equestrians for 
conviction and eight for acquittal; but ten of the tribuni aerarii voted 
for acquittal and only six for conviction. It was clearly hatred of 
Clodius which saved Saufeius, since his case was even weaker than 
Milo's had been, given that he had openly led the storming of the 
inn. A few days later he was then prosecuted again before the presid-
ing magistrate Gaius Considius under the Plautian law concerning 
violence, with the charge that he had occupied a commanding 
position and had been armed (he had of course been Milo's gang-
leader). He was prosecuted by Gaius Fidius, Gnaeus Aponius, son of 
Gnacus, Marcus Seius ... son of Sextus; he was defended by Mar-
cus Cicero and Marcus Terentius Varro Gibba. He was acquitted by 
more votes this time than before, nineteen for conviction but thirty-
two for acquittal; but the situation was the reverse of what it had 
been in the first trial, because this time the equestrians and senators 
voted for acquittal, whereas the tribuni aerarii voted for conviction. 
Sextus Cloclius, at whose suggestion Clodius' body had been 
carried into the senate-house, was prosecuted by Gaius Caesennius 
Philo and Marcus Alfidius and defended by Titus Flacconius. He 
was convicted by a large majority, [56 C] forty-six votes; in all there 
were only five votes for acquittal, two from senators and three from 
equestrians. 
Many others were convicted as well, some attending their trials 
and others failing to answer their summonses. Most of them were 
Clodians. 
www.ebook3000.com

PRO MILONE 
[ r] I realize, members of the jury, that it is disgraceful, when begin-
ning a speech in defence of a man of great courage, to show fear 
oneself, and that it is highly unbecoming, when Titus Annius is less 
concerned for his own survival than for that of his country, not to be 
able to show equal strength of character in pleading his case. But 
even so, the unfamiliar look of this unfamiliar court alarms my very 
eyes, and wherever they happen to light, they search in vain for the 
traditional activity of the forum and the long-established procedure 
of the courts. You the jury are not hemmed in by a ring of spectators, 
as you used to be, nor are we surrounded by the usual packed crowd. 
[ 2] Those guards which you can see in front of all the temples, 
although stationed there to prevent violence, cann~t fail to cause a 
speaker a twinge of alarm. The result is that despite being here in the 
forum and in court, and despite our being surrounded by troops who 
are meant for our protection and arc indeed very much needed, we 
arc nevertheless unable even to be free from fear without also being 
somewhat afraid. 
If I thought that these precautions were directed against Milo, I 
should bow to the inevitable, gentlemen, and conclude that amici so 
great a force of arms speech has no place. But I am relieved and 
reassured by the good sense of the wise and fair-minded Gnaeus 
Pompeius. He would undoubtedly consider it incompatible with his 
own fair-mindeclness to abandon to the weapons of the soldiers 
someone whom he had already entrusted to the votes of a jury, and 
he would likewise see it as incompatible with his own wisdom to arm 
with official authority the hysteria of an excited mob. [3] That is why 
those arms, centurions, and cohorts speak to me not of danger but of 
defence; they encourage me to be not only calm in my mind but 
courageous too; and they promise me not merely protection as I 
make this defence but also a silent hearing. 
As for the rest of the crowd gathered here, it is, inasmuch as it 
consists of Roman citizens,* entirely on our side. You can see the 
people looking on from every direction, fi-om wherever any part of 
the forum happens to be visible. They are eagerly aw·aiting the out-
come of this trial; and there is not a man among them who does not 

Pro Milone 
support Milo's courage and believe that himself, his children, his 
country, and his fortunes are this very day at stake. 
Our opponents and ill-wishers, on the other hand, fall into a single 
class: they are those whom the frenzy of Publius Clodius has fed 
with plunder, arson, and every type of national calamity, and who at 
yesterday's public meeting were urged to dictate to you your verdict 
in this trial. If any shouting should be heard from that quarter, it will 
serve to remind you of the necessity of preserving a citizen who has 
always regarded that class of men and their loud yelling as nothing in 
comparison with your own personal welfare. 
[4] So give me your attention, gentlemen, and lay aside any fear 
that you may have. For if you have ever had the power of judging 
loyal and valiant men, if you have ever had the power of judging 
meritorious citizens, and if specially selected men from the most 
distinguished orders have ever been given the opportunity of dem-
onstrating, by their actions and their votes, that approval of valiant 
and loyal citizens which they have so often expressed in the past by 
looks and words; if that is how it is, then you have at this moment 
complete power to decide whether we who have always upheld your 
authority should linger on in adversity for all time, or whether, after 
being persecuted for years by the most degraded citizens, we are at 
long last to be revived by your good selves, and by your honour, your 
courage, and your wisdom. 
[5] Can you point to or imagine anything, gentlemen, more dif-
ficult, worrying, and trying than the situation in which the two of us 
have been placed? Called to public service by hopes of the most 
honourable rewards, we find ourselves instead living in fear of the 
cruellest punishments. For my part I always believed that Milo 
would have to undergo many other storms and tempests-or at least 
the billows of the public meetings-because he had always taken the 
side of patriots against the disruptive elements. But at a public trial 
and in a court in which the most distinguished men from all the 
orders would be deciding the verdict, I never supposed for a moment 
that Milo's enemies would have the slightest hope of damaging his 
high reputation, still less of bringing about his total ruin, bf the 
decision of such jurors as yourselves. 
[6] In this trial, gentlemen, I shall not seek to defend Titus,Annius 
against the charge by making use of his tribunate and all t!i things 
he has done to protect the state. Unless you actually see With your 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro ;VI if one 
ISS 
own eyes that Clodius set a trap for Milo, I shall not beg you to waive 
the charge for us in consideration of Milo's many outstanding public 
services, nor shall I insist that, since the death ofPublius Clodius has 
proved to be your salvation, you should put it down to the merits of 
Milo rather than to the good fortune of the Roman people. But if I 
succeed in making it as clear as day that it was Clodius who set the 
trap, then I shall go on to beseech and implore you, gentlemen, that, 
even if we lose everything else, we may at least retain the right of 
defending our lives, without fear of punishment, against the 
weapons and criminality of our enemies. 
[ 7] But before I begin talking about the events which you are 
charged with investigating, I feel I need to rebut the views that have 
been repeatedly aired by our enemies in the senate, by trouble-
makers in public meetings, and just now by the prosecutors; when I 
have stripped away the various misapprehensions you will have a 
clear view of the issue that is before the court. What these people are 
maintaining is that a man who admits to having killed another person 
should automatically forfeit the right to look upon the light of day. I 
ask you, what city is it in which people put forward such an idiotic 
point of view? It is of course the city which witnessed as its very first 
capital case the trial of the valiant Marcus Horatius!* He admitted to 
having killed his sister with his own hands, but even so was freed by 
an assembly of the Roman people-and this at a time when our 
country had not yet gained its freedom. 
[8 J Surely everyone knows that, when someone is being tried for 
murder, the deed is either categorically denied, or justified as right 
and lawful? Unless of course you think that Publius Afi·icanus was 
out of his mind when, on being maliciously asked at a public meeting 
by Gains Carbo, \vho was tribune of the plebs, what he thought 
about the death of Tiberius Gracchus, he replied that in his view he 
had been lawfully killed!* And if it is automatically wrong to kill 
Roman citizens who are criminals, then the famous Servilius Ahala, 
Publius Nasica, Lucius Opimius, Gains Marius, and indeed the 
whole senate in the time of my consulship would all have to be 
considered beyond the pale!* And so, gentlemen, it is not without 
good reason that, even in the realm of fiction, the most learned 
writers have handed down the story of one who killed his mother* to 
avenge his f~1ther and who, when the votes of the human jury were 
split, was acquitted not merely by the vote of a god, but by that of 

r86 
Pro Milone 
the wisest of all the gods. [9] The Twelve Tables,* moreover, laid 
down that a thief caught at night might be killed with impunity 
whatever the circumstances, and likewise one caught by day if he put 
up an armed resistance. So who can possibly maintain that any act of 
killing, whatever the circumstances, deserves punishment, when 
sometimes the laws themselves hold out a sword to us for the killing 
of a fellow man? 
If, then, there arc circumstances (and there arc many) in which it 
is lawful to kill a fellow man, then in situations in which a violent 
attack is violently resisted, killing is obviously not only right, but 
unavoidable. A military tribune* in the army ofGaius Marius, a rela-
tion of his in fact, once sexually assaulted a fellow soldier. The 
soldier killed him: decent young man that he was, he preferred to 
risk punishment rather than submit to humiliation. And the great 
Marius freed him from his danger by acquitting him of the crime. 
r I 0 l But when it is a bandit and a brigand that we arc concerned 
with, how could the killing of such a person not be justified? After 
all, what is the point of our bodyguards, our swords? If their use was 
forbidden in all circumstances, we would surely not be allowed to 
have them in the first place. 
There is therefore a law, gentlemen, not one written down any-
where but a natural law, not one that we have learned, inherited, 
and read, but one that we have seized, imbibed, and extracted from 
nature herself, a law for which we were not taught, but made, 
which we know not from instruction but from intuition, the law 
which states that, if any attempt is made upon our lives, if we 
encounter violence and weapons, whether of brigands or enemies, 
then every method of saving ourselves is morally justifiable. 
[I I] When swords are drawn the laws fall silent; they do not 
require you to wait for them, because the man who chooses to wait 
will have to pay an undeserved penalty before he can exact a 
deserved one. And yet the law, with great wisdom, tacitly concedes 
the right of self-defence in that it is not the killing of a man that it 
forbids, but the carrying of a weapon for the purpose of killing. 
Thus, when a court looks not simply at the weapon but at the 
motive, a man who has used a weapon to defend himself }s not 
considered to have had it for the purpose of killing. So let th,~ point 
apply in this particular trial, gentlemen; for I am confidcrt\: that I 
will convince you of my case, if you will only keep in mind the fact 
www.ebook3000.com

[ I2] 
Pro Milone 
(which you could hardly forget) that a bandit may indeed be law-
fully killed. 
[rz] The next point is one repeatedly brought up by Milo's 
enemies, that the act of violence in which Publius Clod ius was killed 
was ruled by the senate to have been against the interests of the state. 
But the senate approved that act, not only by the opinions it 
expressed but by its active endorsement. How often I have pleaded 
this very cause in the senate! And how vociferous and unreserved 
was the approbation of that entire order! For when have there ever 
been, at the best-attended meetings of the senate, as many as four or 
at most five people who did not take JVlilo's side? Those defunct 
harangues delivered by this scorched tribune of the plebs* prove as 
much: every day he stirred up resentment against my 'power', saying 
that the senate decreed not what it felt but what I dictated. As for 
this 'power' of mine, I do wonder whether it ought not to be called 
'modest influence for the good acquired as a result of great services 
to the country' or 'some degree of popularity among loyal citizens 
resulting from this hard work that I do in the courts'; but I do not 
mind what you call it, so long as I can use it to save loyal citizens 
from the madness of traitors. 
[r3] But as for this court, I am not complaining that it is unfair; 
but the senate never thoug·ht it should have been specially set up. 
There were already laws in existence, there were already courts for 
murder and violence, and Publius Clodius' death hardly caused the 
senate so much grief and sorrow that a new court needed to be 
established! When it was a case of his sacrilege and immorality,* the 
senate was denied the power of deciding on the court; now that it is 
his death that we are concerned with, can anyone seriously believe 
that the senate thought that a new court should be set up? 
So why did the senate decree that the burning of the senate-
house, the assault on Marcus Lcpidus' house,* and the killing itself 
were against the interests of the state? Simply because in a free 
country acts of violence between citizens are always against the 
interests of the state. [ 14] Self-defence against violence, although 
sometimes unavoidable, is never something one would wish for. The 
day on which Tibcrius Gracchus was killed, the one on which Gaius 
Gracchus died, and the arms of Saturninus* all did harm to the state, 
despite the fact that the suppression of these men was in the public 
interest. So that is why, once it was established that a killing had 

J88 
Pro .Milone 
taken place on the Appian Way, I did not myself vote that the man 
who had acted in self-defence had acted against the interests of the 
state. Instead, since violence and the setting of a trap were involved, 
I voiced my disapproval of what had occurred, while leaving the 
question of guilt to be decided by a court. 
But if that demented tribune of the plebs* had allowed the senate 
to do as it wished, we should not now have a new court. The senate 
wanted to decree that a trial be held under the existing laws, but with 
special priority given to it. The motion was split in two at the request 
of someone or other (I see no reason to expose everyone's misdeeds), 
and the second part, expressing the senate's wish, failed when it was 
blocked by a purchased veto.* 
[ 1 5] 'But Gnaeus Pompei us, as is shown by his proposing his bill, 
has already pronounced his verdict both on the facts and on the 
whole issue: for the bill which he carried specifically concerned the 
act of violence on the Appian Way in which Publius Clodius was 
killed.' So what was it that he proposed? Obviously, that an inquiry 
should be held. And what is to be the subject of this inquiry? 
Whether the deed was committed? But everyone agrees that it was. 
Or by whom it was committed? But that is perfectly obvious. He 
appreciated, therefore, that even where the deed was admitted it was 
still possible to argue a plea of justification. Had he not appreciated 
this (that the man who admitted the deed could be acquitted), he 
would not, on seeing that we did admit it, have ordered an inquiry, 
nor would he have given you the letter of acquittal with which to 
record your vote as well as the letter of condemnation.* As I see it, 
Gnaeus Pompei us has not only refrained from making any unfavour-
able judgement about Milo, but has actually laid down what it is that 
you ought to be considering as you ponder your verdict. For what he 
has given to the man who admits the deed is not punishment, but the 
chance to clear himself; and this shows that it is not the mere fact of 
the killing which he thinks should be investigated, but the motive. 
[16] And no doubt he will tell us himself whether his action, which 
he took on his own initiative, was meant as a tribute to Publius 
Clodius or simply as a response to the exigencies of the situation. 
A man was once murdered in his own home. He was a man of the 
highest rank, the senate's champion and in those dark days alynost its 
patron, the uncle of this juryman of ours the valiant Ca¥b: I am 
referring, of course, to the tribune of the plebs Marcus Dn/~us.* No 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone 
bill relating to his death was put before the people, and no special 
inquiry was decreed by the senate. Our fathers have told us what an 
outpouring of grief there was in this city when Publius Africanus* 
was struck down one night while resting at his home. Who at that 
time was not grieved, who did not blaze with indignation that the 
man whom everyone wanted to live for ever, if such a thing were 
possible, should not even have been allowed to live out the natural 
term of his life? So was any inquiry set up into the death of Africa-
nus? No. [I71 And why not? Because the crime is the same whether a 
murdered man is famous or unknown. Let there be, in life, a distinc-
tion between the highest and the lowest; but deaths resulting fi·om 
crime should be subject to laws and punishments that are the same 
for all. Unless of course you think that a man who murders his father 
is more guilty of parricide if his father has helchhe consulship than 
if he is of humble rank! Or that the death of Publius Clodius is a 
more serious crime because he happened to have been killed (as the 
prosecution keep reminding us) among the monuments of his 
ancestors-as if the famous A.ppius Caecus* built his road not for the 
use of the public, but as a place where his own descendants might 
attack passers-by with impunity! [I 8] That, I suppose, must be why, 
when Publius Clodius killed a most distinguished equestrian, Mar-
cus Papirius,* on this same Appian Way, the crime was never thought 
to call for punishment. The man, you see, was a noble, among his 
family's monuments, and the man he killed a mere equestrian! But 
now what histrionics are set in motion by this name 'the Appian 
Way'! When that road was bloodied by the murder of an honourable 
and blameless man, the road was never mentioned, but now that it 
has been stained by the blood of a brigand and a murderer, it is 
harped upon incessantly! 
But why do I need to cite such examples as these? A slave of 
Publius Clodius was arrested in the temple of Castor: Clodius had 
posted him there to murder Gnaeus Pompeius.* A dagger was 
wrenched from his hand and he confessed all. From then on Pom-
peius kept away from the forum, away from the senate, and away 
from the public eye; he sought protection behind his own door and 
walls, and not in his rights under the laws and courts. [I 9] But was 
any new bill passed, was any special inquiry decreed? And yet if ever 
the situation, the person, or the times called for such measures, they 
did so with the greatest urgency in this instance. The conspirator 

rgo 
Pro Milone 
[20] 
had been posted in the forum and at the very entrance to the senate; 
death was being plotted for the one man on whose life the safety of 
the state depended; and this was taking place at such a time of 
national crisis that, if Pompeius alone had succumbed, not only 
Rome herself but all the nations of the world would have fallen in 
ruin. Unless of course you think that this crime did not deserve 
punishment because it was not actually brought to completion, as if 
it were the outcome of events, and not men's intentions, that the laws 
take into account! The fact that the plot did not succeed meant there 
was less cause for grief; it certainly did not mean there was less cause 
for punishment. [zo] How many times, gentlemen, have I myself 
escaped from the weapons of Publius Clodius and from his bloody 
hands! But suppose my own good fortune, or that of the country, had 
not preserved me from them: do you really imagine that anyone 
would have set up an inquiry into my death? 
But how idiotic of me to think of comparing Drusus, Africanus, 
Pompei us, and myself with Publius Clodius! What happened in their 
cases could easily be put up with; but no one could calmly accept 
Publius Clodius' death! The senate is grief-stricken, the equestrian 
order is inconsolable, the whole country is worn out with sorrow, the 
towns of Italy are in mourning, the colonies are prostrate, and the 
very fields bewail the loss of a citizen so kind, so good, and so gentle! 
[21] No, members of the jury, that was certainly not the reason 
why Pompeius thought that a special inquiry should be set up. As a 
man of great wisdom with a lofty and almost divine mind, he took 
account of many considerations. He saw that Clodius had been his 
enemy and Milo his friend, and that if he were to participate in the 
general rejoicing himself, there would be a danger that the sincerity 
of his past reconciliation with Clod ius* might be called into question. 
There were many other factors of which he took note, but this one he 
was particularly aware of~ that however strict the terms of his bill 
were, you yourselves would nevertheless deliver a courageous ver-
dict. It was for this reason that he chose the brightest luminaries 
from the most distinguished orders; and it is quite inaccurate to say, 
as some people persist in doing, that in selecting the jtlrors 
he excluded my own friends. Being a man of the highest prin~iples, 
he never contemplated such a thing, and even if he had wish~ it he 
could never, in choosing good men as jurors, have succeeded/This is 
because my influence is not confined to close friendshi~s. Such 
www.ebook3000.com

[22] 
Pro Milone 
friendships can never be very numerous because it is simply impos-
sible for social intimacies to be kept up with a large number of 
people. But ifl do have a measure of influence, this is due to the fact 
that the interests of the state have linked me with all loyal citizens. 
So when Pompeius was selecting the best men from among these 
loyal citizens, realizing as he did that his own reputation would be 
directly affected by the choice he would make, he could not help but 
choose men who were my supporters. 
[22) As for his special wish that you, Lucius Domitius,* should 
preside over this court, he was looking for nothing but fairness, 
decorum, humanity, and good faith. He proposed that the presiding 
magistrate should be a man of consular rank because, I take it, he 
considered that our leading men have a duty to stand up equally to 
the fickleness of the mob and to the boldness of traitors. And from 
those of consular rank you were the man he chose to,appoint because 
ever since your youth you had given the clearest evidence of your 
contempt for the madness of rabble-rousers. 
[23] So, members of the jury, we finally come to the charge and 
the actual issue. If it is not altogether unprecedented for a defendant 
to admit the deed, and the senate has passed no judgement on the 
case which is not to our liking, and the man who actually proposed 
the law, even though the facts of the case were not in doubt, never-
theless wanted the legal question discussed, and jurors were chosen 
and a president appointed who would judge the case fairly and 
wisely-then, gentlemen, it only remains for you to decide which of 
the two set a trap for the other. And to ensure that you will have a 
clear picture of this from the arguments I will be putting forward, 
please listen carefully while I give you a brief account of what took 
place. 
[24) Publius Clodius had decided to devote his praetorship to 
terrorizing the country with every type of criminal behaviour. But he 
saw that the previous year's elections had been so long delayed* that 
when he finally attained the office he would not hold it for more than 
a few months. He cared nothing, as other people do, for the 
advancement in rank that the praetorship would confer: his only 
concern was to avoid having that excellent citizen Lucius Paullus* as 
his colleague, and to have a complete year for tearing the country 
apart. He therefore suddenly gave up his candidature for his proper 
year and transferred it to the following year instead-not, as is usual 

192 
Pro #Iilone 
[25] 
in such cases, because of any religious scruple, but, as he openly 
admitted, so that he should have for his praetorship (that is, for 
ruining the country) a full and complete year. 
[ 25] It occurred to him, however, that his praetorship would be 
weak and pmverless if Milo were consul at the same time; and he saw 
that Milo was on his way to becoming consul, by the unanimous vote 
of the Roman people. He therefore attached himself to the candi-
dates who \vere standing against Milo, but he did so in such a way 
that he was single-handedly in control of their entire campaigns, 
whether they liked it or not-or, as he frequently put it himself: he 
bore the weight of the entire election on his own shoulders. He called 
the tribes together, acted as agent,* and by recruiting the most dis-
reputable of the citizens enlisted a new·Colline tribe.* But the more 
he carried on like this, the stronger Milo's position became. So when 
Clodius, who would stop at nothing, realized that a courageous man 
who was his bitterest enemy would undoubtedly be elected consul, 
when he understood that this had often been signified not just by 
common gossip but by the actual votes of the Roman people,* he 
began to come out into the open and declare publicly that Milo had 
to be killed. [26] He had already brought down from the Apennines 
some savage and barbaric slaves-you saw them yourselves-and 
used them to devastate the public forests and ravage Etruria. His 
intentions were perfectly clear, for he used to assert repeatedly and 
publicly that if Milo's consulship could not be taken from him, at 
least his life could. On many occasions he implied as much in the 
senate, and he said so explicitly in public meetings. And this was not 
all. When the valiant Marcus Favonius* asked him what purpose he 
hoped his violence would serve when Milo was alive to resist it, he 
replied that within three days, or four at the most, Milo would be dead. 
This remark Favonius immediately reported to Marcus Cato here. 
[ 27] Meanwhile Clodius knew (it was not hard to find out) that 
Milo was required by both ritual and law to travel to Lanuvium on 
r8 January to nominate a priest.* So he suddenly set out from Rome 
the day before in order (as the sequel showed) to set a trap for Milo 
in a spot opposite his own estate. His departure from Rome meant 
that he had to abandon a rowdy public meeting* at which his usual 
violence was sadly missed-a meeting he would never hav,l aban-
doned had he not particularly wished to be present at the focene of 
the crime at the crucial moment. 
/ 
www.ebook3000.com

[zS] 
Pro Milone 
I9J 
[ 28] Milo, on the other hand, attended the senate that day* and 
stayed until the meeting was concluded. He then went home, 
changed his clothes and shoes, waited for a bit while his wife (as they 
do!) got herself ready, then finally set off at an hour when Cloclius 
could easily have returned to Rome, had he really intended to do so 
that day. He was met by Clodius travelling light and on horseback, 
with no coach, no baggage, none of the usual Greek companions, 
and without his wife, who almost invariably went with him. By con-
trast, this bandit here,* who had undertaken that journey specifically 
for the purpose of committing a murder, was riding in a coach with 
his wife, wrapped up in a heavy cloak, and accompanied by a large, 
cumbersome, ladylike, and unmilitary array of serving-girls and 
young boys. [29] l-Ie came across Clodius opposite Clodius' estate at 
around 3 p.m. or thereabouts.* Immediately a number of armed men 
launched an attack on him from the higher grou~d, and those of 
them that were in front of him killed the coachman. But Milo threw 
off his cloak, jumped down from the coach, and defended himself 
bravely. The men who were with Clodius had all drawn their swords. 
Some of them ran over to the coach to attack Milo from behind, 
while others, thinking that he had already been murdered, began 
cutting down the slaves of his who were following in the rear. Of the 
ones who kept their heads and showed themselves loyal to their 
master, some were killed, while others, seeing that a fight was taking 
place at the coach, but prevented fi·om going to their master's aid, 
and hearing from Clodius' own lips that Milo had been killed and 
accepting it as true-these slaves of Milo's (and I shall state this 
openly, not in order to deny the charge, but because this is how it 
happened), without their master's command, knowledge, or even his 
presence, did what every man would have wanted his own slaves to 
do in such a situation. 
[30] These events took place exactly as I have described, members 
of the jury. The man who set the trap was overcome, force was 
defeated by force or rather wickedness crushed by virtue. I say noth-
ing of the benefit to our country, the benefit to you, and the benefit to 
all loyal citizens. Nor am I arguing that this should count in Milo's 
t~wour-a man whose fate made him incapable of saving even him-
self without simultaneously saving both the country and yourselves! 
If there was no defence in law for what he did, then I have no defence 
to offer. But if it is true that civilized men are taught by reason, 

194 
Pro Milone 
barbarians by necessity, peoples by custom, and wild beasts by nature 
herself that they should always defend themselves by every possible 
means against all violence to their bodies, persons, and lives, then 
you cannot judge this act to have been wrong without at the same 
time judging that all who fall among brigands deserve to die-
whether it be by those brigands' weapons or by your very own votes! 
[3r] If Milo had taken that view himself, it would surely have been 
preferable to him to offer his throat to Publius Clodius (who had 
attacked him not just once, or then for the first time) rather than 
have it cut by yourselves on the grounds that he had not offered it to 
Clodius for him to cut. 
But I assume that none of you would take that view. The question 
before this court therefore becomes· not whether Clodius was 
killed-for we admit that he was-but whether he was killed law-
fully or unlawfully; and this is a question which has been the subject 
of many trials in the past. It is agreed that a trap was set, and it is this 
which the senate has ruled to have been against the interests of the 
state. But it is not clear which of the two men set the trap. This, then, 
is the matter which you have been appointed to investigate. In 
exactly the same way, the senate censured the deed and not the 
individual, and Pompeius set up an inquiry into the justification, not 
into the facts of the case. So surely the only question before this 
court is which of the two set the trap against the other? That is all. If 
Milo set the trap, let him be punished. But ifClodius set it, my client 
should be acquitted. 
]32] How, therefore, can it be proved that it was Clodius who set a 
trap for Milo? In the case of such a wicked and unspeakable monster 
as Clodius, it is sufficient merely to show that he had a powerful 
motive, and that Milo's death would have presented him with great 
aspirations and great advantages. Accordingly, let Cassius' famous 
test* 'Who stood to gain?' be applied to both these men-although we 
should also bear in mind that no inducement, however great, will 
make a good man commit a crime, whereas a bad man will often be 
made to do so by even a trivial inducement. Now, Clodius did indeed 
stand to benefit in the event of Milo's being killed. For nor' only 
would he avoid having to serve his praetorship under a consul who 
would suppress his criminal designs, but he would actually,~erve it 
under consuls* who, he hoped, if they did not actively M:lp him, 
would at least allow him a free hand in carrying out those mad 
www.ebook3000.com

[33] 
Pro Milone 
I95 
schemes of his that he was contemplating. He reasoned that they 
would have no desire to put a stop to his plans, even if it was within 
their power to do so, since they would be well aware how deeply they 
were obliged to him. And even if they were of a mind to stop him, 
they would perhaps be scarcely capable of suppressing the hardened 
criminality of a man of such long-standing wickedness. 
[33] Or can it really be, gentlemen, that you alone are unaware, 
that you are strangers in this city, that your ears have gone for a walk 
and have failed to pick up the most widespread talk of the town-
that you are ignorant of the laws that that villain was going to have 
foisted and branded on us all? If, that is, you can call them laws, 
rather than firebrands for the burning of our city or plagues to infect 
our country! Show us, show us, please, Sextus Cloelius, that dossier 
of laws that you have, which you are said to "have snatched from 
Clodius' house and to have carried off, like the Palladium,* from amid 
the clashing of arms and the chaos of the night! You clearly intended 
to present this wonderful gift, the tribunate's stock-in-trade, to any-
one you could find who would be prepared to hold that office under 
your direction. See! He looked at me with that menacing glance of 
his that he always used to give when making all manner of threats 
against everyone. That shining light of the senate-house* disturbs 
me! Do you think, then, that I am angry with you, Sextus, when you 
in fact took a far more cruel revenge on my bitterest enemy than my 
own sense of decency would have allowed me to demand? You flung 
Publius Clodius' bloody corpse out of doors, you threw it out into 
the street, you deprived it of masks,* funeral rites, procession, and 
eulogy and left it half-burnt on some ill-omened timber to be torn to 
pieces by dogs in the night, This was a shocking thing to do, and I 
therefore cannot condone it, But since it was against my enemy that 
your cruelty was directed, it would certainly be unreasonable of me 
to be angry with you. 
[34] You have heard, members of the jury, how much it was in 
Clodius' interest for Milo to be killed. So I ask you now to turn to 
consider Milo's situation. How was Clodius' death in his interest? 
What reason was there for him to have wished for Clodius' death, let 
alone to have brought it about? 'Clodius stood in the way of his 
hopes of becoming consul.' But he was well on his way to being 
elected in spite of Clodius' opposition-or rather because of it! In 
fact, Clodius was just as much of a help to him as the support I gave 

196 
Pro Milone 
[35] 
him myself. You were moved, gentlemen, by the recollection of 
Milo's past services to me and to our country, you were moved by my 
tearful appeals, which, as I saw at the time, affected you deeply, and 
you were moved above all by the fear of pressing danger. For was 
there any Roman citizen who could contemplate the prospect of 
Publius Clodius' unfettered praetorship and not be terrified of a 
revolution taking place? And you saw that his praetorship would 
indeed be unfettered, unless there were a consul who possessed both 
the courage and the ability to keep it in check. The entire Roman 
people realized that Milo was the one man who could do this: so how 
could anyone think twice about using his vote to free himself from 
fear and his country from danger? 
But nmv that Clodius is no longer with us, Milo is thrown back on 
more normal means of safeguarding his position. That unique glory, 
enjoyed by him alone, which was increased every day by his opposition 
to Clodius' insane violence, has now, as a result ofClodius' death, been 
taken from him. You have been placed in the happy position of no 
longer having to fear any citizen; but he has lost the opportunity of 
showing his bravery, the means of securing his election, and the eter-
nal source of his glory. For this reason Milo's campaign for the consul-
ship, which could not fail while Clodius was alive, has begun to suffer 
now that he is dead. Clodius' death, then, is not merely something 
that brings Milo no benefit: it is actually doing him harm. 
[35] 'But it was his hatred of Clodius that was his motive; he acted 
in anger, and out of spite; he took revenge for the wrong done to him, 
and exacted punishment for his injuries.' If I say not that these 
motives were stronger for Clodius than they were for Milo, but that 
they were overpowering in Clodius' case and non-existent in Milo's, 
then what more could you ask for? If we leave aside the patriotic 
hatred with which we loathe all traitors, what reason could Milo 
possibly have had for hating Clodius, the raw material of his glory? 
As for Clodius, on the other hand, he had every reason to hate the 
man who had fought for my safety, opposed his mad violence, 
defeated his armed attacks, and also brought an accusation against 
him (Clodius right up until his death was facing a prosecution by 
Milo under the Plautian law*). How do you think that that~ tyrant 
would have reacted to Milo doing all that to him? How inten,ie must 
his hatred of Milo have been, and, in the case of such an unjhst man 
as Clodius, how well justified! 
I 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone 
197 
[36] There remains the argument that Clodius' character and way 
of life speak in his favour, whereas Milo's count against him. 'Clodi-
us never did anything by violence: Milo did everything by violence.' 
So, gentlemen, when I departed from Rome,* to your great distress, 
was it a trial that I went in fear of, and not slaves, weapons, and 
violence? And how could there have been a just reason for my restor-
ation if the reason for my expulsion had not been an unjust one? He 
had, I suppose, served a summons on me, proposed a fine, or brought 
a charge of treason against me! And I, I take it, had had to fear a 
verdict in a case that was shameful or of relevance only to me, instead 
of one that was both glorious and of great concern to yourselves! No: 
I was not prepared to allow my fellow citizens, who had been saved, 
at great danger to myself, by my quick thinking,* then to have to face, 
for my sake, the weapons of slaves and poverty-stricken criminals. 
[37] Indeed I saw, I saw with my own eyes that distinguished lumi-
nary of the state, Quintus Hortensius here, almost murdered by 
some slaves while he was acting in my support;* and in the same 
disturbance that excellent senator Gaius Vibienus,* who was with 
him, was so badly beaten up that he afterwards died. And from that 
point on, when did that dagger of his, which he had inherited from 
Catiline, ever rest? This is a dagger which has been aimed at me, and 
to which I did not allow you to be exposed on my behalf; a dagger 
which plotted against Pompeius;* a dagger which caused the Appian 
Way, the monument of his own family, to be stained with the blood of 
the murdered Papirius;* and a dagger which much later was turned 
back again on me. For not long ago, as you are aware, it very nearly 
made an end of me outside the Regia.* 
[38] What did Milo ever do like that? The violence that came from 
him was aimed solely at preventing Publius Clodius from holding 
the country in the grip of violence, and was resorted to only because 
it was impossible to bring Clodius to trial. And if he had wanted to 
kill him, just think how many excellent opportunities he had, and 
how glorious they would have been! Could he not lawfully have 
avenged himself when he was defending his home and household 
gods from Clodius' attacks? Could he not have done so when his own 
colleague, the valiant and outstanding Publius Sestius,* had been 
wounded? Could he not have clone so when the excellent Q!.1intus 
Fabricius was driven away while proposing a law for my recall, and a 
terrible massacre was perpetrated in the forum? Could he not have 

198 
Pro Jl1ilone 
[39] 
done so when the home of the valiant and fair-minded praetor 
Lucius Caecilius was placed under attack? Could he not have done so 
on that day* on which the law concerning myself was carried, when 
the entire people of Italy, united by their concern for my welfare, 
would have freely acknowledged the heroism of the deed-and when 
even if J\llilo alone had struck the blow the entire nation would have 
claimed the glory for themselves? 
[39] What a moment that was! There was as consul the illustrious 
and valiant Publius Lentulus,* the enemy of Clodius and avenger of 
his crimes, the defender of the senate, the champion of your wishes, 
the guardian of national harmony, and the restorer of my own wel-
fare. There were seven praetors and eight tribunes of the plebs who 
opposed Clodius and supported me.* And there was Gnaeus Pom-
peius, the originator and leader of my restoration, and enemy of 
Clodius. He made an impressive and eloquent pronouncement 
concerning my welfare which commanded the assent of the entire 
senate; he spurred on the Roman people; and he issued a decree 
about me at Capua and thus personally gave the signal to all Italy to 
converge on Rome and bring about my restoration (something for 
which the Italians were most eager, and had been imploring him to 
do). At that time, all Roman citizens, because they were missing me, 
were ablaze with hatred for Clodius, and if anyone had taken it into 
their heads to kill him, the ensuing debate would not have been 
about immunity from prosecution, but about rewards. [ 4ol Yet even 
so Milo restrained himself. Twice he summoned Publius Clodius to 
court;* but not once did he summon him to a trial of force. 
Again, when Milo had returned to being a private citizen and was 
charged before the people by Publius Clodius, *and Gnaeus Pompei us 
was attacked as he was speaking in Milo's support, surely then there 
was not just an opportunity for suppressing Clodius but a reason to 
do so? And recently, when Marcus Antonius* had given all loyal 
citizens the strongest grounds for confidence in our future salvation, 
when that young man of the highest rank had bravely taken on an 
important public duty and had netted the monster Clodius as he 
recoiled from the meshes of a ,trial, what a chance there ·was, 
immortal gods, what an opportunity! When Clodius had fled and 
taken refuge in a dark hidey-hole beneath the stairs, would/it have 
been a difficult job for Milo just to finish off that pestilenti~i villain, 
incurring no blame whatsoever for himself but best~lving the 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone 
199 
greatest glory on Marcus Antonius? [ 41] Again, at the elections in 
the Campus Martius think how many chances Milo had! Clodius had 
broken into the voting enclosures and ordered his men to draw their 
swords and start throwing stones. But when he caught sight of the 
expression on Milo's face he was suddenly seized with panic and fled 
in the direction of the Tiber-while you and all loyal citizens prayed 
that Milo might choose to give a practical demonstration of his 
innate courage. 
So if he was unwilling to kill Clodius at a time when everyone 
would have approved, would he really have wanted to do so at a time 
when some would have objected? And if he did not venture to kill 
him when he could have clone so lawfully, at the perfect time, in an 
ideal place, and without fear of punishment, would he not have 
hesitated to do so unlawfully, at the wrong time, in an unfavourable 
place, and at risk to his life? [ 42] Moreover, gentlemen, this was at a 
time when the struggle for the highest office* was under way and the 
clay of the elections was at hand, a time when we are afraid not just of 
all the adverse comments that might be made about us but of every 
hidden thought (yes, I know well how fearful ambitious men are, and 
also how unbounded and how anxious their longing for the consul-
ship is!), when we are terrified of any rumour, any untrue, made-up, 
or silly story, and when we look searchingly into everyone's eyes and 
expression. There is nothing so weak, so delicate, so fragile or 
changeable as the feeling and attitude of Roman citizens towards us 
politicians. Indeed, it is not only dishonesty on the part of the candi-
dates that makes them angry: they are prone to take exception even 
to exemplary behaviour. 
[ 43] So here was Milo, with the prospect of the election clay 
before him, on which he had placed all his hopes. Did he really 
intend to present himself at the solemn taking of the auspices before 
the centuriate assembly with bloody hands that proclaimed and con-
fessed the wicked crime he had committed? For a man like Milo, that 
is simply incredible. But in the ease of Cloclius it is not to be 
doubted, since he believed that, with Milo dead, he himself would 
rule over all! Again (and this, gentlemen, is the key to criminal 
behaviour), is there anyone who does not know that the greatest 
temptation to crime is the hope that one \viii escape punishment? So 
which of the two nursed such a hope? Milo, who at this very moment 
is on trial for doing a deed that was glorious, or at least unavoidable? 

200 
Pro Milone 
Or Clodius, who held courts and punishments in such complete 
contempt that nothing that nature sanctioned or the laws allowed 
could ever satisfy him? 
[44] But why do I go on producing arguments, why discuss the 
matter further? I call on you, Quintus Petillius,* fine and valiant 
citizen that you are, and I appeal to you as a witness, Marcus Cato-
both of you allotted to me as jurors by some heaven-sent piece of 
good luck. You both heard from Marcus Favonius that Clodius told 
him that Milo would be dead within three days;* and you heard this 
from Favonius before Clodius was killed. Three days after the 
remark was made, the incident occurred. Since Clodius did not hesi-
tate to reveal what he was thinking, can you hesitate to judge what he 
was doing? 
[45] So how was it that Clodius was right about the day? I have 
already told you. It was a straightforward matter for him to find out 
the dates of the regular sacrifices that the dictator ofLanuvium* had 
to perform. He saw that Milo would have to set out for Lanuvium on 
the day he did, and so he left before him. But on which clay?* As I 
have already explained, it was the day of the hysterical public meet-
ing whipped up by a tribune of the plebs in Clodius' pay. And 
Cloclius would never have abandoned such an occasion, such a meet-
ing, and such a riot unless he were hurrying to commit a premedi-
tated crime. So not only did he have no reason for travelling, he 
actually had a reason for staying in Rome. Milo, on the other hand, 
had no means of staying, as he had not only a reason for leaving 
Rome but an obligation to do so. 
Now what if, just as Cloclius knew that Milo would be on the road 
that clay, Milo could have had no idea that Clod ius would be? [ 46] I 
should like to ask first, how could he have known it? You cannot ask 
that question about Clodius. For even if he had asked no one except 
his close friend Titus Patina,* he could still have known that Milo was 
obliged, in his capacity as dictator, to nominate a priest at Lanuvium 
on that very clay.* Indeed, there were a great many others from whom 
he could easily have found this out. But returning to Milo, who 
could he have asked about the elate of Clodius' return? Let u~ sup-
pose that he actually did ask (sec how much I am willing to con-
cede!), even that he bribed a slave, as my friend ~Iintus/ Arrius* 
has alleged. But you only need to read the testimony of four own 
witnesses. There you will find that Gaius Causinius /Schola of 
www.ebook3000.com

[47] 
Pro Milone 
201 
Interamna,* a close friend of Clodius who accompanied him on the 
journey, has stated that Publius Clodius was intending to stay at his 
estate at Alba that day, and only when he was unexpectedly informed 
of the death of Cyrus the architect* did he suddenly decide to set 
out for Rome. And this has been confirmed by another of Publius 
Clodius' fellow-travellers, Gaius Clodius. * 
[4 7] :Members of the jury, please note the important points which 
emerge from this testimony. In the first place, Milo is clearly freed 
from the suspicion of having set out from Rome with the intention of 
setting a trap for Clodius on the road-obviously so, if there was no 
way he was actually going to run into Clodius. The second point 
concerns me (I do not see why I should not deal with my own 
business as well as Milo's). You are aware, gentlemen, that there was 
someone who, in advocating the bill which set up this court, claimed 
that although the killing was done by Milo's hand, the mind which 
plotted it belonged to someone greater. And I, let me tell you, was 
the brigand and cut-throat to whom those abandoned and degraded 
individuals* were referring. But they are refuted by their own wit-
nesses who maintain that Clodius would not have returned to Rome 
that day had he not heard the news about Cyrus. I can breathe again. 
I am cleared. I need not be afraid of appearing to have based my 
plans on something that I could not possibly have foreseen. 
[ 48] I will now move on to the other points. An objection could be 
raised: 'But it follows from your argument that Clodius was not 
planning to set a trap either, since he was intending to stay at his 
estate at Alba.' That would hold true-had he not intended to leave 
the house to commit the murder. It is perfectly clear that the person 
who is said to have brought the news of Cyrus' death did not report 
that at all: instead he reported that Milo was approaching. For what 
was there to report about Cyrus, when Clodius, on departing from 
Rome, had left him already on his death-bed? I also witnessed his 
will: I was there with Clodius. Cyrus had made a will, and did not 
hide its terms from us: he had named Clodius and myself as his 
heirs.* Is it really credible that Clodius should have left Cyrus breath-
ing his last at 9 a.m. on one day, and then be informed of his death as 
late as 2.15 p.m. on the following day? 
[49] All right, let us suppose that it is. What was Clodius' reason, 
then, for rushing off to Rome? Why did he need to take off into 
the night?* Did the fact that he was an heir give him a reason for 

202 
Pro Milone 
[so] 
hurrying? In the first place, there was no reason for him to have to 
hurry. And even if there had been, what could he have gained by 
reaching Rome that night, or lost by not arriving until the following 
morning? Moreover, while Clodius ought to have avoided rather 
than desired entering the city at night, Milo, if he was the bandit you 
say he was, and if he knew that Clodius would reach the city after 
dark, ought to have concealed himself and lain in wait for him. 
[so] He could have killed him by night, and in a dangerous spot 
infested with brigands. If he then denied killing him, no one would 
have disbelieved him-just as now, when he admits it, everyone 
hopes that he will be acquitted. The locality itself~ the haunt and 
hiding-place of brigands, would have taken responsibility for the 
crime, the mute emptiness would have made no accusation, nor 
would the blind night have given Milo away. The finger of suspicion 
would have pointed at the many people whom Clodius had outraged, 
ravaged, and ejected from their property, and at the many more who 
feared the same fate. Indeed, the whole of Etruria would have been 
summoned to answer the charge! fsr] Moreover, it is a fact that on 
the day in question Clodius did look in on his estate at Alba on his 
way back from Aricia. Now let us suppose that lVlilo knew that he 
had been visiting Aricia. In that case he ought to have suspected that 
Clodius, even if he planned to return to Rome that same day, would 
stop off at his country house, which \Vas next to the road. \Vhy, 
then, did he not intercept him before he reached the safety of his 
house or else lie in wait for him at the spot which he \Vould reach at 
nightfall?* 
[S2] Members of the jury, everything points in the same direction. 
To Milo it was even advantageous that Clodius should stay alive, but 
to Clodius the death of Milo was highly desirable, since it would help 
him achieve his ambitions. Clodius had a burning hatred of Milo, 
but Milo had no hatred of Clodius. Clod ius was well used to initiat-
ing violence, but Milo was used only to repelling it. Clodius had 
publicly announced and proclaimed Milo's imminent death, but 
nothing of the kind was ever heard from Milo.* Clod ius knew the day 
on which Milo would be setting off, but Milo did not know the day 
on which Clodius would be returning. Milo's journey was unavoid-
able, but Clodius' on the other hand was even inconvenieqt. Milo 
had openly declared that he would be leaYing Rome on thfo day in 
question, but Clodius concealed the fact that he would be feturning 
www.ebook3000.com

[53] 
Pro Milone 
203 
on that day. Milo did not make a single change to his plans, but 
Clod ius invented an excuse for changing his. Milo, if he were setting 
a trap, would have waited for nightfall close to the city, but Clodius, 
even if he had no fear of Milo, ought still to have been afraid of 
approaching the city after dark. 
[53) Let us now examine the central point-whether the place at 
which they actually met was better suited to Milo or to Clodius as a 
place of ambush. On this point, gentlemen, can there be any further 
doubt or need for reflection? The incident took place in front of 
Clodius' house, where at least a thousand strong men were occupied 
in excavating a basement, a megalomaniac scheme.* In this location, 
and with his enemy occupying a commanding position on the higher 
ground, did Milo really imagine that his own situation was superior, 
and therefore make this spot his particular choice for the battle that 
ensued? Is it not more likely that someone who knew that the situ-
ation was favourable to himself was lying in wait for him here and 
planning an attack? The facts speak for themselves, gentlemen: they 
always carry the greatest weight. 
[54] Now suppose you were not listening to this narrative of 
events but were looking at a painted representation of them: it would 
still be apparent which of the two was the plotter and which had no 
evil intentions. One of the men was riding in a coach, wrapped up in 
a heavy cloak, and had his wife sitting beside him. Which of these-
the clothing, the vehicle, or the travelling-companion-was not a 
serious inconvenience? Could anyone be less prepared for battle than 
a man trussed up in his cloak, encumbered with his coach, and 
virtually tied down by the presence of his wife? Now look at the 
other man, sallying forth from his house, without warning-why? 
And in the evening-what's the need for that? And at a leisurely 
pace-where's the sense in that, especially at that hour? 'He was 
calling in at Pompei us' house.'* To see Pompei us? But he knew he 
was away at his place at Alsium. To look at the house, then? But he 
had been there a thousand times before. Well why then? Simply to 
delay and use up time: he was determined not to leave the area until 
my client should appear on the scene. 
[55] Now please compare the unencumbered brigand's way of 
travelling with Milo's unwieldy entourage. Normally Clodius always 
travelled with his wife, but this time he was without her. Normally 
he travelled in a coach, but this time he was on horseback. He used to 

204 
Pro Milone 
take some wee Greeks with him wherever he went, even when hurry-
ing off to his outposts in Etruria, but this time there were no such 
time-wasters with him. Milo, who normally never travelled with 
such people, happened on this occasion to have some of his wife's 
music boys, and bevies of slave girls. Clodius, on the other hand, who 
normally took prostitutes, rent boys, and tarts with him, on this 
occasion had no one, except such people as you might say had each 
been selected by his fellow.* 
Why, then, was he defeated? Because the traYeller is not ,dways 
~illed by the highwayman, and sometimes the highwayman is even 
killed by the traveller; and because, although Clodius was well pre-
pared and had taken his victims unawares, he could nevertheless be 
described as a woman that had f~1llen among men.* [56] Moreover, 
Milo was never so poorly prepared against him that he did not 
maintain at least a minimum level of preparedness. At the back of his 
mind there was always the thought of how useful his death would be 
to Publius Cl()(lius, how much Clodius hated him, and how Clodius 
would stop at nothing. He knew that a price had been set on his life, a 
price so enormous that he could scarcely call his life his own any 
longer. He therefore made sure never to expose himself to danger 
without taking precautions to protect himself. Remember, too, the 
part that chance plays, remember the unpredictable outcomes that 
battles have and the fact that Mars fights on both sides: often Mars 
has taken the side of the fallen soldier, overcoming and striking down 
the victor even as he strips off the spoils and shouts the cry of 
triumph. Remember also the stupidity of a leader who had just 
emerged from lunch, drunk, his mouth hanging open. He had left 
his enemy cut off in the rear, but it never occurred to him to take 
account of the followers at the end of 1\'lilo's line. They had given up 
their master's life as lost and were ablaze with anger; and when 
Clodius launched into them he met with the punishment which 
those loyal slaves exacted from him in return for their master's 
death. 
[57] Why, then, did he give them their freedom? I suppose he was 
afraid that they might incriminate him, that they might not be' able 
to hold out against the pain, that they might be f()rced by torture to 
admit that Milo's slaves killed Publius Clodius on the AppiavWay!* 
But why should you need a torturer? What is it that you wa¢ to find 
out? Whether he killed him? But he did. Whether it wasf{awful or 
www.ebook3000.com

[sS] 
Pro Milone 
205 
not? That is not the torturer's job. It is f~1cts that are elicited on the 
rack: points of law are established in a court. So the point that has to 
be established in court \Ve are dealing with here, and the fact that you 
want elicited by torture we have already admitted. 
In choosing to ask why Milo freed his slaves instead of why he 
rewarded them so inadequately, you show that you have no idea how 
to fault your opponent. [58] Marcus Cato here, whose utterances are 
invariably resolute and forthright, declared to a rowdy public 
meeting--a meeting brought under control, I should add, by his 
distinguished presence--that slaves who had saved their master's life 
deserved to be given not just their freedom but every kind of reward. 
For when a man O\Ves his life to slaves so devoted, so good, and so 
loyal, what reward can possibly be generous enough? More import-
ant, though, than the saving of his life is the fact that his slaves have 
successfully prevented his cruellest enemies from glutting their eyes 
and hearts on his blood and wounds. Had he not "given them their 
freedom, they would have had to be handed over for torture-the 
men who had saved their master, avenged a terrible crime, and pre-
vented a murder. In all his present troubles, there is nothing that 
brings Milo such consolation as the thought that, if anything should 
happen to himself, at least his slaves will have been given the reward 
they deserve. 
[59] But the interrogations that have now taken place in the Hall 
of Liberty* are prejudicial to Milo. Whose slaves are they, then, that 
have been interrogated? 'Do you need to ask? Publius Clodius', of 
course.' Who called for them to give evidence? 'Appius.'* Who pro-
duced them? 'Appius.' From where? 'From Appius.' Great gods! 
Could any procedure be more rigorous? Clodius really has come 
close to joining the gods (more so than on the occasion when he 
forced himself on their presence) when the inquiry that is held into 
his death is the same as for acts of sacrilege!* Now the reason our 
ancestors were not prepared to have slaves examined against their 
master \vas not because finding out the truth would be impossible, 
but because the practice seemed unworthy, and more repellent even 
than the master's death. But when the prosecutor's own slave is 
examined against the man he is prosecuting, how can the truth 
possibly be obtained? 
[6o] Well then, what was the interrogation like and how did it 
proceed? 'Hey Rufio,'-1 pick a name at random-'be sure and tell 

zo6 
Pro Milone 
[61] 
the truth: did Clodius set a trap for Milo?'* 'Yes.' Off he goes to be 
crucified! 'No.' He gets the freedom he longs for! What, I ask you, 
could be more reliable than this kind of examination? Even when 
slaves are taken away for interrogation the moment a crime has been 
committed, they are still kept apart and put into cells to prevent 
anyone talking to them. These slaves, on the other hand, have been 
kept in the custody of the prosecutor for a hundred days, and were 
then produced by the prosecutor himself. What could be less preju-
diced than this kind of examination, what could be less corrupt? 
[6 I] But it may be that, in spite of the clarity and number of the 
proofs and indications which shed light on the situation, you do not 
yet fully accept that Milo, when he returned to Rome, did so with a 
completely clear conscience, and was not affected by any taint of 
crime, alarmed by any fear, or prostrated by any sense of guilt. If this 
is so, then please recollect-by the immortal gods!-the promptness 
of his return to the city, his entry into the forum when the senate-
house was on fire,* the character he displayed, the expression on his 
face, the words he spoke. He entrusted himself not just to the people 
but to the senate, and not just to the senate but to the protection of 
the public arms, and not just to these but to the power of him* to 
whom the senate had committed the whole country, the entire man-
power of Italy, and all the arms of the Roman people. He would 
certainly never have placed himself in the hands of that person 
unless he had total confidence in his own cause-in the hands, espe-
cially, of someone who heard everything, entertained many fears and 
suspicions, and did believe some of the things that were reported to 
him. Great is the power of conscience, gentlemen, great whether 
one's conscience is clear or guilty! Those who have done nothing 
wrong it renders fearless; but it causes those who have done wrong to 
imagine punishment ever before their eyes. 
[6z] Nor was it without good reason that Milo's cause was consist-
ently approved by the senate: being the intelligent men they were, 
they appreciated the grounds for what he did, his presence of mind, 
and the firmness he showed in defending himself. Or have you for-
gotten, members of the jury, the rumours and speculations that\vere 
put about not just by Milo's enemies but even by certain ignorant 
individuals at the time when we had only just received the 6ews of 
Clodius' death? These people asserted that Milo would noy'venture 
to come back to Rome. [63] For they reckoned that if he hafl acted in 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone 
207 
a fit of anger and excitement and murdered his enemy in a sudden 
blaze of hatred, then he would no doubt have considered the loss of 
his country to be a price worth paying for the death of Publius 
Clodius, since he had had the satisfaction of glutting his hatred with 
the blood of his enemy. Or if he had killed Clodius with the aim of 
setting his country free, then so brave a man would not hesitate, after 
risking his own life to save the Roman people, quietly to submit to 
the laws,* taking with him an undying glory, and leaving to you the 
enjoyment of those blessings which he himself had preserved. There 
were quite a number of people who went so far as to make compari-
sons with Catiline and those monstrosities who followed him. 'He's 
going to burst out,' people said, 'he's going to take up position 
somewhere and declare war on his country.' How unlucky sometimes 
arc those citizens who have deserved well of~ their country, when 
people do not merely fail to remember their distinguished services, 
but even suspect them of treachery! [64] All these rumours that were 
put about were quite groundless; but had Milo committed any act at 
all which he could not honourably and truthfully defend, then I 
agree they would indeed have been true. 
Then as for those slanders that were afterwards heaped upon him, 
slanders which would have overwhelmed anyone conscious of having 
committed even trivial misdemeanours-immortal gods, how stead-
fastly he endured them! Endured them? He did more than that, he 
despised them and thought nothing of them, in a way that no guilty 
man could ever have done, however strong his character, or any 
innocent man, unless he w·ere a person of supreme courage. It was 
suggested that a large quantity of shields, swords, javelins, and even 
bridles might be seized; it was alleged that there was no district in 
the city, no alleyway in which a house had not been rented for Milo; 
that weapons had been transported down the Tiber to his house at 
Ocriculum,* that a house on the slope of the Capitol was crammed 
with shields, and that every place was filled with fire-arrows for 
burning the city. These slanders were not only reported, they were 
almost believed, and not rejected as false until investigation had 
shown them to be so. 
[65] For my part I was full of admiration for the exceptional care-
fulness of Gnaeus Pompeius, but I am going to speak my mind, 
gentlemen. Those to whom the entire government of our country 
has been entrusted are made to hear too much: they cannot avoid it. 

208 
Pro Milone 
[66] 
In fact, Pompcius even had to listen to an attendant who slaughters 
the victims at sacrifices, one Licinius from the Circus Maximus. 
This Licinius claimed that Milo's slaves had got drunk at his place 
and told him that they were involved in a plot to assassinate Gnaeus 
Pompeius; later, he said, one of them had stabbed him with a sword 
to stop him revealing what he had been told. Word was sent to 
Pompeius at his property in the suburbs. I was among the first to be 
summoned, and on the advice of his friends Pompei us referred the 
matter to the senate. Naturally, when our country's and my protector 
was nursing so terrible a suspicion, I could not but be frightened out 
of my wits myself. All the same, I was very surprised that the slaugh-
ter man was believed, that the slaves' admission was taken seriously, 
and that the wound to Licinius' side, a mere pinprick, should be 
treated as a gladiator's blow. [66] I gather, though, that Pompeius 
was not so much taking fright as simply taking care; and he took care 
not just about those matters for which there were grounds for fear, 
but about everything, so that you yourselves should have to fear 
nothing. For example, it was reported that the house of the illustri-
ous and valiant Gaius Caesar had been under siege for a large part of 
the night. No one had heard anything, busy though the place was, 
and no one had been aware of anything; and yet the report was taken 
seriously. I could never have suspected so very brave a man as Gnae-
us Pompei us of being afraid; indeed, my view was that in the case of 
the entire government of our country, a burden that he himself had 
taken on, no amount of vigilance could ever be regarded as excessive. 
Again, at a well-attended meeting of the senate recently held on the 
Capitol, one senator* was produced who declared that Milo was 
carrying a weapon. Then and there, in that most sacred temple,* Milo 
stripped naked. Since the past life of so fine an individual and citizen 
was not enough to demonstrate his innocence, Milo, without a word, 
allowed the facts to speak. All such stories, then, have been found to 
be groundless and malicious fabrications. 
[67] But if Milo is still even now to be feared, what we for our part 
are afraid of is not any longer the charge of murdering Clodius, but 
your own suspicions, Gnaeus Pompeius (yes, I am addressing you, 
and loud enough for you to hear me):* your suspicions, I repeat, are 
what terrify us. If you are afraid of Milo, if you think he ~ now 
contemplating or has ever engineered any criminal attempt upon 
your life, if the call-ups in Italy (as some of your recruitinf/ officers 
www.ebook3000.com

[68] 
Pro Milone 
209 
persist in claiming), if these weapons, if the cohorts posted on the 
Capitol, if the watches, if the patrols, if the picked troops who guard 
your house and person have all been mobilized to counter an attack 
from Milo, and if all these precautions have been planned, organ-
ized, and directed against this single individual, then surely you 
must reckon that he possesses enormous energy, unbelievable cour-
age, and power and resources beyond the capacity of a single indi-
vidual if, that is, it is against him alone that the most eminent general 
has been appointed and the entire state placed under arms. [68] But 
is there anyone who does not appreciate that all the sick and ailing 
parts of the state have been placed in your hands so that you may usc 
these weapons to bring them back to health and strength? 
As for Milo, if he had been given the opportunity, he would 
unquestionably have made it clear to you personally that there has 
never been any greater affection between men than that which he 
feels for you; that he has never shirked any danger in defending your 
standing; that time and again he fought it out with that pestilential 
scourge* in defence of your glory; that his tribunate* had, under your 
guidance, been directed towards my restoration, a cause which was 
close to your own heart; that he had later been defended by you in a 
criminal trial and received your support in his campaign for the 
praetorship;* and that he had always hoped that two men would 
remain his closest friends-you, because of all that you had clone for 
him, and me, because of all that he had clone f()r me. 
But if he should have failed to make this clear to you, if that 
suspicion of yours had implanted itself in your mind so deeply that it 
could never be uprooted, if there was genuinely no way that Italy 
could be free of call-ups and Rome of weapons without Milo suffer-
ing disaster, then without a doubt Milo would surely have departed 
from his country, such is his disposition and character. He would, 
however, have appealed to you, Magnus,* just as he docs now: 
[69] 'You sec how changeable and contrary human life is, how fickle 
and fast-flowing fortune is, what faithlessness there is in friendships, 
what pretences to suit the moment, what desertions by one's nearest 
and dearest in times of trial, and what faint hearts! Yet a time will 
surely come and a day at last will dawn (not, I hope, because of any 
personal misfortune to yourself, but rather in one of those national 
crises with which we ought by now to be well familiar) when you will 
look in vain for the support of a true friend, the loyalty of a person of 

210 
Pro Milone 
complete integrity, and the heroism of the single most courageous 
man in history.' 
[ 70] Gnaeus Pompei us is an expert in constitutional law, historical 
precedent, and the workings of politics,* and he was commissioned by 
the senate 'to sec that the state comes to no harm'*-that brief for-
mula which has always given the consuls all the weapons they need, 
even when they have been granted no actual arms. Could anyone 
seriously believe that such a man, w·hcn an army and the power to 
raise troops had actually been granted to him, would have considered 
it necessary to await the decision of a court before taking action to 
suppress someone who was using violence to overthrow those very 
courts? Clearly Pompcius is fully and completely satisfied that such 
allegations against Milo arc t:1lse, since he proposed a la'v which, as I 
believe, requires you to acquit Milo, and as everyone concedes, at 
least allows you to do so. [7 I] But the fact that he is sitting over there 
surrounded by an official bodyguard is enough to show that he has 
no wish to intimidate you. For what would be more demeaning than 
for him to force you to convict a man whom he was entitled by law 
and precedent to punish himself? No, he and his bodyguard are there 
for your protection, to make it clear to you that, in spite of yester-
day's public meeting,* you are free to cast your votes as you see fit. 
[ 72] The charge of murdering Clodius, members of the jury, gives 
me no cause for concern.* I am not so deranged or so ignorant and 
unaware of your feelings as not to know your thoughts on Clodius' 
death. Suppose that I were not prepared* to refute the charge as I 
have done. It would then be open to Milo, without harming his 
defence, publicly to proclaim a glorious untruth: 'I admit I killed 
him! But the man I killed was not a Spurius Maelius* who, by lower-
ing the price of corn and squandering his own property, appeared to 
have sided too strongly with the plebs and was therefore suspected of 
aiming at tyranny. Nor was he a Tiberi us Gracchus* who deposed his 
colleague from office by revolutionary means. The killers of both 
these men won such glory that their names became famous through-
out the world. No! The man I killed', Milo would dare to say, safe in 
the knowledge that he had freed his country at his own personal tisk, 
'was one whose unspeakable adultery,* actually committed on the 
sacred couches of the gods, was disco~·ercd by women of the ~ghest 
rank. [73] A man whose punishment the senate repeatedly ~ecrced 
to be necessary for the purification of the religious ceremofties that 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone 
2II 
he had defiled. A man whom Lucius Lucullus, after holding an 
investigation, declared on oath he had found guilty of the unspeak-
able crime of incest with his own sister.* A man who used the 
weapons of slaves to drive out a citizen* whom the senate, the 
Roman people, and all the nations had called saviour both of the city 
itself and of the lives of her citizens. A man who gave out kingdoms 
and took them away, and parcelled out the world to anyone he 
pleased.* A man who committed a great many murders in the 
forum, and who used armed force to confine an outstandingly brave 
and f~unous citizen* within his own home. A man who never saw 
anything wrong in any criminal deed or sexual outrage. A man who 
set fire to the temple of the Nymphs* in order to extinguish the 
official revision of the censors' register inscribed in the public 
records. [ 7 +] A man who respected no statute, ·no law, and no prop-
erty boundary. Who went after other people's estates not by bring-
ing false accusations ag·ainst them or by submii:ting claims and 
deposits that were unjustified,* but by deploying camps, armies, and 
military standards. \Vho attempted to use weapons and camps to 
drive from their properties not just the people of Etruria, whom he 
had come to despise utterly, but this very juryman, Publius Varius,* 
a fine and valiant citizen. \Vho roamed around many people's coun-
try houses and suburban properties with architects and measuring 
rods. Who set the Janiculum and the Alps as the boundaries of the 
territory he hoped to acquire. Who, when he failed to induce the 
valiant and worthy equestrian Marcus Paconius* to sell him an 
island in Lake Prilius, suddenly took boat-loads of timber, lime, 
stone, and sand over to the island and, as the owner looked on from 
the shore, proceeded to erect a dwelling on land that was not his. 
Who had the nerve to tell Titus Furfanius* here (immortal gods, 
what a fine man!)-[75J for surely I do not need to mention that 
wretched woman Scantia* or the young Publius Apinius,* both of 
whom he threatened with death if they did not make over their 
suburban properties to him-who told Titus Furfanius that, if he 
did not give him the sum of money he demanded, he would plant a 
body in his house, and so destroy this admirable man's good name. 
Who in the absence of his brother Appius,* a man allied to myself 
by ties of the most loyal friendship, deprived him of the possession 
of his estate. And who, finally, set out to build foundations and 
construct a wall across his sister's forecourt* in such a way as not 

2I2 
Pro Milone 
only to deprive her of the forecourt but to deny her access to and 
from her house entirely.' 
[76] These acts of his had come to be seen as tolerable, even 
though they were directed equally against the state and against pri-
vate individuals, against those far away and against those close to 
home, against strangers and against friends. Nevertheless, the amaz-
ing forbearance of our people, by being put to the test so often, had 
somehow become hardened and insensitive. But as for what was 
already upon us, and what was threatened, how could you possibly 
have either averted it or endured it? Suppose he had obtained mili-
tary power.* I say nothing about the fate of our allies, foreign nations, 
kings, and tetrarchs: you would have been praying that he would 
hurl himself at them rather than at your own land, your houses, and 
your money. Money, did I say? Heaven is my witness, his lusts were 
so unbridled that he would not have refrained from assaulting your 
wives and children! Do you think I am making all this up? It is all 
plain to see, universally known, and established beyond doubt. Do 
you think I am making up the fact that he was on the point of 
enlisting armies of slaves within the city, and that he was going to use 
them to get his hands on the entire government of our country and 
on everybody's personal property? 
[ 77] If, therefore, Titus Ann ius were to hold up his bloody sword 
and shout, 'Come and listen to me, citizens, if you will! I have killed 
Publius Clodius. With this blade and this right hand I have saved you 
from a man whose madness we were unable to curb by any laws or 
courts. I have thereby single-handedly ensured that justice and 
equity, law and liberty, and modesty and decency shall continue to 
exist in our country' -he would, I suppose, have reason to feel 
alarmed about how his fellow citizens might react! For, as things are, 
who does not approve of what he has done, who does not praise it, 
and who does not both declare and believe that Titus Annius has 
done more for this country than any other man in history,* and has 
brought the greatest joy to the Roman people, the whole of Italy, and 
all the nations of the world? I am not able to judge how joyful the 
happiness was that the Roman people experienced at various times in 
the past. But I can say that our age, too, has witnessed many famous 
victories won by gen~rals of the highest distinction, but that rtone of 
these victories has occasioned such long-lasting and ~eartfelt 
~~~oo. 
I 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone 
213 
[ 78] Keep in mind what I am about to say, gentlemen. I trust that 
you and your children will enjoy many blessings in your public lives; 
but as you enjoy each one of them, please reflect that, if Publius 
Clodius had lived, none of them would have come your way. But as 
things are, I have high hopes-and, I believe, well-grounded ones-
that, under this fine consul* that we now have, this year will turn out 
to be a good one for our country, and that disorder will be halted, 
unruly passions checked, and laws and courts established. Surely no 
one is mad enough to suppose that all this could be achieved if 
Publius Clodius were still with us? And again, if we were being ruled 
by a lunatic, do you think you could expect to enjoy any permanent 
right of possession over your own private property? 
Members of the jury, I am not at all concerned that people might 
think I have been carried away by my own personal animosity 
towards my enemy, and that I am giving vent to my feelings about 
him with more zeal than truth. Even though I h~d more reason to 
hate him than others did, he was nevertheless so completely the 
enemy of everyone that the general hatred and my own amounted to 
much the same. Indeed, it is impossible to express, or even conceive, 
the extent of the criminality and destructiveness that existed in that 
one man. 
[79] Look at it like this, gentlemen. I would like you to use your 
imaginations: after all, our minds range freely, and can see whatever 
they choose to, in just the same way as our eyes observe whatever we 
look at. Use your imaginations, then, to visualize what I propose-
that I get you to acquit Milo, but only on condition that Publius 
Clodius comes back to life again. But why are you looking so terri-
fied? In death, the mere thought of him has severely shaken you-so 
what effect do you think he would have on you if he were still living? 
Let me make another point. If Gnaeus Pompeius himself,* whose 
ability and good fortune have always enabled him to achieve what no 
one else can, if Pompei us, I repeat, could have had a choice between 
setting up an inquiry into Publius Clodius' death or bringing 
Clodius back to life, what do you think he would have chosen? Even 
if he had wished for friendship's sake to raise him from the dead, the 
national interest would have prevented him from doing so. You sit 
here, then, to avenge a man whose life you would never restore, if it 
were in your power to do so; and the law under which this inquiry 
was set up is one which, if it had entailed bringing this man back to 

214 
Pro Milone 
[So] 
life, would never have been proposed. So if Milo were the killer of 
such a man as this, and admitted as much, do you really think he 
would have to fear punishment at the hands of those he had set free? 
[So] The Greeks bestow divine honours on those who have killed 
tyrants.* What wonders I have witnessed in Athens and the other 
cities of Greece, what rituals ordained for these men, what music, 
what hymns in their honour! They are venerated with almost the 
same reverence and commemoration as the immortal gods. And will 
you not merely fail to reward a man who has saved so great a country 
and avenged so great a crime, but actually allow him to be led away to 
execution? If he had done the deed, he would admit-and admit, I 
tell you, proudly and willingly-that he had done for the freedom of 
all Romans a deed which ought properly to be not merely admitted, 
but actively gloried in. [S1] And if he does not deny a deed* for which 
he seeks only pardon, would he hesitate to own up to a deed* for 
w·hich he ought to seek to be rewarded with praise? Unless of course 
he had concluded that his preservation of his own life would be more 
agreeable to you than his preservation of yours! And of course by 
owning up to what he has done he would win the most generous 
rewards-if, that is, you chose to show your gratitude. But if his 
action should fail to win your approval (though how could anyone 
not approve of an action that has saved his life?), and if the bravery of 
an extremely courageous individual should fail to receive adequate 
recognition from his fellow citizens, then with a steadfast and 
unwavering spirit he would withdraw hom his ungrateful country. 
And what more striking example of ingratitude could there be than 
for everyone else to rejoice, but for the man who gave them their 
reason for rejoicing to be himself, and he alone, plunged into 
mourning? 
[Sz] All the same, when it comes to putting down traitors, we have 
always shared the view that, since the glory ·would be ours, the dan-
ger and the unpopularity that would also be incurred should be ours 
too. In my own consulship I undertook a bold venture* for the sake of 
yourselves and your children. But do you think I would really have 
deserved any praise for this ifl had supposed that the venture which 
I was undertaking would not involve any great struggle on my part? 
Surely even a woman would have the courage to kill a wick,td and 
pernicious citizen if she thought that there was no danger iti\rolved? 
No, the true hero is the one who knows that he faces unpdpularity, 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone 
215 
death, and punishment, but does not show any less vigour in acting 
to defend his country. It is right for a grateful people to reward 
citizens who have served their country well; and it is right for a man 
of courage not to be induced even by the prospect of execution to 
regret the courageous course that he has taken. [83] Titus Annius 
would therefore make the same admission that Ahala* did, that 
Nasica did, that Opimius did, that Marius did, and that I myself did. 
If the country showed its gratitude, he would be glad; but if it 
showed ingratitude, he would nevertheless in his misfortune derive 
satisfaction from the consciousness of having done right. 
However, the fortune of the Roman people, your own good luck, 
and the immortal gods all claim your gratitude, gentlemen, for this 
blessing that you have received. No one could possibly think 
otherwise-unless there is anyone who docs not believe in the exist-
ence of a divine power or force, or who remains. unmoved by the 
sheer size of our empire, by the sun above our heads, by the move-
ments of the sky and the heavenly bodies, by the world's ordered 
cycle of change, or (most important of all) by the wisdom of our 
ancestors, men who reverently observed the rituals, ceremonies, and 
auspices, and then handed them down to us, their descendants. 
[84] Yes, such a power does undoubtedly exist. It is inconceivable 
that there should exist in these weak and feeble bodies of ours some-
thing that has activity and consciousness, but that it should not exist 
in the great and wonderful workings of nature. Unless of course 
people do not believe in it because it cannot be viewed or 
discerned-as if we were capable of seeing or perceiving clearly the 
nature and position of our own minds, the minds which give us 
knowledge, foresight, and the ability to act and speak as I am doing 
now! It is accordingly this actual power, which has so often brought 
unimaginable blessings and prosperity to this city, that has now 
stamped out and eradicated that pernicious menace. It stirred up his 
mind and drove him to provoke and challenge with violence and the 
sword a man of supreme courage. He was vanquished; but had he 
been the victor he would have been free to do whatever he wished, 
without fear of punishment, for ever afterwards. 
[85] It was not by human planning, gentlemen, nor by any ordin-
ary attention on the part of the immortal gods that this event came 
about. No-by Hercules!-the very spot which witnessed that mon-
ster's fall appears to have roused itself and asserted its rights over 

216 
Pro .Milone 
[86] 
him. To you now, hills and groves of Alba,* to you I appeal and pray, 
and also to you, demolished altars of the Albans, associated with the 
religion of the Roman people and just as ancient-altars which that 
megalomaniac, after felling and levelling the most sacred groves, 
loaded with the gigantic pillars of the basement he was constructing. 
Yours was the sacred presence which exerted itself, yours was the 
force which prevailed against the criminal who had polluted it, and it 
was you, holy Jupiter, vvho from your lofty Latin hill did at last open 
your eyes to punish a man who had so often defiled your lakes, 
groves, and precincts with his many unspeakable immoralities and 
crimes. To you, yes, to you and in your very sight a long-delayed but 
just and richly deserved punishment has been paid. [86] Unless of 
course we are to put this also down to simple coincidence, the fact 
that it was in front of the actual shrine of the Good Goddess on the 
estate of Titus Sertius Gallus,* a conspicuously honourable and 
accomplished young man, in front of, I repeat, the Good Goddess 
herself that he initiated the fight, and so received that first wound by 
which he met his revolting death! And thus it was that he was shown 
not to have been acquitted by that scandalous verdict* but rather kept 
back for this glorious punishrnent. 
And it was precisely the same divine anger which cast this mad-
ness that we have witnessed into his followers' minds and caused 
them to toss his charred corpse out into the street-without masks,* 
without dirges or games, without funeral rites, without weeping, 
without eulogies, without ceremony, covered in blood and dirt, and 
deprived of that final solemnity which even enemies invariably con-
cede. Evidently the gods did not think it right that representations of 
his illustrious ancestors should lend a scrap of dignity to that dis-
gusting murderer, or that his death should be dishonoured in any 
place other than the one in which his life had been condemned. 
[87] As heaven is my witness, I had begun to think that the fortune 
of the Roman people was merciless and cruel, in that she had allowed 
that individual to trample on our country for so many years. He had 
sexually violated the most saCI·ed of religious ceremonies. He had 
broken the most solemn decrees of the senate. He had openly used 
bribery to secure his acquittal when he was on trial. He had attacked 
the senate when he was tribune. He had cancelled measures t\fot had 
been taken for the national security, and which had receifed the 
support of all the orders. As for me, he had driven me ~·om my 
www.ebook3000.com

[88] 
Pro Milone 
2!7 
country, plundered my property, burned clown my home, and per-
secuted my wife and children. He had wickedly declared war on 
Gnaeus Pompeius. He had murdered magistrates and private citi-
zens alike. He had set fire to my brother's home. He had devastated 
Etruria. He had turned many people out of their homes and taken 
their property. And he went on and on and on. Neither Rome nor 
Italy nor the provinces nor our dependent kingdoms could put a stop 
to his madness. At his own house laws were already being inscribed 
which would have made us subject to our own slaves.* ·whatever 
property he coveted, he felt certain that he could get his hands on it 
within a year, no matter to whom it belonged. [88] His schemes were 
opposed by no one except Milo. As for the great man who could have 
resisted him, Cloclius considered that person to be bound over to 
him by their recent reconciliation.* As for Caesar's power, Cloclius 
said that belonged to him. And as for the feeling ?f the respectable 
classes, he had shown his contempt for them by his treatment of me. 
It was Milo, and Milo only, who stood up to him. 
It was at this point that the immortal gods, as I said just now, put 
into that raving lunatic's head the idea of setting a trap for my client. 
There was no other way that that pestilential villain could ever have 
been got riel of. The state, with the powers it had, would never have 
taken its revenge on him. When he became praetor the senate would 
of course have kept him under control! But it failed to do so even in 
the clays when it did take the necessary action, and when Cloclius was 
merely a private citizen. [89] Or would the consuls have shown some 
courage and kept the praetor in check? In the first place Cloclius, 
after killing Milo, would have had the consuls he wanted.* And sec-
ondly, what consul would have ventured to take a firm line with a 
praetor who, when only a tribune, had cruelly persecuted a bnwe ex-
consul?* No, Cloclius would have taken control, ownership, and pos-
session of everything. Incleecl, a new law was discovered at his house 
among the rest of his intended legislation, a law which would have 
made our slaves his own freedmen.* In short, if the immortal gods 
had not put it into his head to try to kill, effeminate sissy that he was, 
a real man of true courage, then today your country would no longer 
exist. 
[go] If he had been praetor, if he had been consul (assuming these 
temples and the city walls themselves could have remained standing 
with him alive, and calmly waited for the year of his consulship!), if 

218 
Pro il1ilone 
he had been merely still living, do you really imagine he would have 
done no harm-considering that even when he was dead one of his 
followers* burned down the senate-house? Have we ever witnessed 
anything more sickening, painful, and distressing than that? The 
temple of sanctity and of majesty and of wisdom and of public 
deliberation, the very head of our city, the protection of our allies, 
the haven of every nation, the seat granted to a single order by a 
united people burned, destroyed, and desecrated-and all this done 
not by an ignorant mob, which would have been upsetting enough, 
but by a single individual? And if he dared to go so far when he was 
serving as a cremator for someone who was dead, what would he not 
have done as a standard-bearer for someone who was alive? Indeed, 
his purpose in throwing the body into the senate-house was so that 
Clodius in death should burn down the building which in life he had 
tried so hard to topple. 
[9 I] And yet there are those who harp on about the Appian Way, 
but say not a word about the senate-house; who think that the forum 
could have been defended against a living man when the senate-
house was unable to stand up to his dead body! Go on, then, raise 
him from the dead, if you can! But will you be able to oppose the 
violence of the living man when you are scarcely able to withstand 
the Furies of his unburied corpse? Unless of course you were suc-
cessful in withstanding the men who converged on the senate-house 
with firebrands and on the temple of Castor with the rods of office,* 
and who overran the forum with drawn swords! You saw the Roman 
people massacred and a public meeting broken up at sword-point-a 
meeting at which people were listening quietly to the tribune Marcus 
Caelius,* a valiant defender of our country's interests, a determined 
advocate in each case that he undertakes, a devoted champion of 
patriotic causes and the senate's authority, and a man of outstanding, 
superhuman, and incredible loyalty to Milo in his present predica-
ment or, one might say, his present good fortune. 
[ 92l But I have now said quite enough about the case itself -and 
about what goes beyond that, perhaps even too much. So what is left, 
except for me to beg and beseech you, members of the jury, to extend 
to this man of courage the mercy for which he does not himself ask, 
but which I, against his wishes, both ask for and implore? If a,hid all 
our weeping you have seen not a single tear from Milo,* if y01j. see his 
expression always the same, his tone of voice and his spee'!h steady 
www.ebook3000.com

[93] 
Pro Milone 
219 
and unchanging, then do not hold this against him. In fact I think 
this ought to make you all the more inclined to help him. In gladia-
torial combats, involving men whose position and lot is that of the 
lowest class, we generally feel contempt for those who are cowardly 
and grovel and beg for their lives, while those who are brave and 
spirited and face their deaths undaunted we prefer to see spared. We 
feel more pity, in other words, for those who do not ask for our mercy 
than for those who beg· for it. How much more will this be true, then, 
when the man in question is not someone of low class but one of our 
most courageous citizens! 
[93] As for me, gentlemen, I feel bowled over and utterly des-
troyed by these words of Milo's which I am perpetually hearing and 
which surround me all day long. 'Farewell,' he says, 'farewell, my 
fellow citizens! May you be safe, prosperous; and happy. May this 
famous city still stand, and this country so dear to me, regardless of 
how she will treat me. May my fellow citize~s enjoy peaceful 
government-without me, since I am not permitted to enjoy it with 
them, but nevertheless because of me. I shall retire and depart. If I 
shall not be allowed to enjoy good government, at least I shall be 
spared bad,* and the first well-ordered and free community* that I 
come to, there I shall take my rest. 
[94] 'All my efforts', he continues, 'have been in vain! All my 
hopes have been dashed! All my dreams have come to nothing! When 
I was tribune of the plebs* and our country was being devastated, I 
devoted myself to the senate, which had been annihilated, to the 
Roman equestrians, whose power had been weakened, and to all loyal 
citizens, who had surrendered their authority in the face of Clodius' 
violence. Could I possibly have imagined, at that time, that these 
people would ever fail to support me? And when I had restored you* 
to your country'-Milo often says this to me-'did I ever imagine 
that there would be no place in that country for myself? Where is the 
senate now, whose followers we were? Where are the Roman eques-
trians,' he says, 'your very own equestrians?* Where is the support of 
the towns, where are the voices of Italy, and where, Marcus Tullius, 
is your eloquent advocacy, which has defended so many others in the 
past? Am I the only person it will fail to help, I, who have so often 
hazarded my life for your sake?' 
[95] But he does not say these words, gentlemen, as I do now-
with tears in his eyes. No, his expression remains just as you see it. 

220 
Pro Milone 
For he refuses to believe that the citizens on whose behalf he acted* 
feel no sense of gratitude; although he does believe that they are 
fearful and on the look-out for every kind of danger. As for the base 
plebeian mob, led by Publius Clodius, which threatened your secur-
ity, this, Milo reminds us, he made his own, to protect your lives. 
And it was not just by strength of character that he controlled it: he 
also used up his three inheritances in winning it over. Nor is he 
worried that, when he has appeased the plebs with games, he should 
then fail to win you over-by his outstanding services to our country. 
The senate's goodwill towards himself, he says, has been demon-
strated many times during these difficult days; and whatever course 
his fortune takes, he will take away with him the greetings, support, 
and kind words of yourselves and the orders which you represent. 
[96] He also remembers that it was only the herald's formal 
announcement, the thing he coveted least, that he failed to secure; it 
was instead the unanimous vote of the people, the only thing he 
desired, that declared him consul. And now, if these proceedings are 
to go against him, he believes that it is merely the suspicion of some 
evil intention* and not guilt on the present charge that will have 
proved his undoing. 
He further points out, correctly, that men who are brave and wise 
do not pursue the rewards of right action so much as right action 
itself; and that everything he has done in his life has been highly 
meritorious-assuming, of course, that there is nothing more hon-
ourable than to deliver one's country from danger. Men who have 
been honoured by their fellow citizens for such services are, he says, 
happy; [97] while those who have performed greater services than 
their fellow citizens are not unhappy. But of all the rewards that 
virtue brings (if we must be calculating rewards), the greatest is 
glory. It is this alone which makes up for the shortness of our lives, 
through the recollection of future generations. It enables us, 
although absent, to be present, and although dead, to live. In short, it 
is this which supplies the steps by which men may seem to climb as 
high as the gods. 
[98] 'The Roman people', says Milo, 'shall always speak of tne. 
Foreign nations shall always speak of me. No age, however distant, 
shall ever fall silent about what I have achieved. Even at thif verv 
moment, although my enemies are lighting the fires of hatred igain;t 
I 
me, my name is spoken of wherever people meet together, anti grati-
www.ebook3000.com

[99] 
Pro Milone 
221 
tude and congratulations are the subject of everyone's talk. I say 
nothing of the festivals that have been celebrated or instituted 
throughout Etruria. Today is, I believe, the hundred and second day* 
since Publius Clodius' death. Not only has the news of that event 
now travelled all the way to the boundaries of the empire of the 
Roman people, but so has the public rejoicing. For this reason,' says 
Milo, 'I do not care where my body may be, since the glory of my 
name exists in every land, and will live there for all time.' 
[99] That is how you speak to me away from the court, Milo, but 
here in court this is what I say to you. Your resolution I cannot praise 
highly enough. But the more superhuman your courage is, the more 
pain I feel at being separated from you. And if you arc indeed taken 
from me, I will not even have the usual solace of being able to feel 
angry at those who are inflicting such a terrible·wound on me. For it 
is not my enemies who will take you away from me, but my dearest 
friends, not those who have on occasion treated me badly in the past, 
but those who have always been good to me. 
Gentlemen, you will never inflict on me a more painful blow than 
this-for what could possibly be as bad? But even this blow will not 
be enough to make me forget the high regard in which you have 
always held me. If, however, you yourselves have forgotten your 
regard for me, or if I have offended you in some way, why do you not 
make me, rather than Milo, pay the price for that? For if any disaster 
should happen to me before I see Milo suffer this awful fate, then my 
life will have been a glorious one. 
[roo] But as things are, Titus Ann ius, there is one consolation that 
sustains me-the thought that there is no duty of love, support, or 
devotion in which I have failed you. I have incurred the hostility of 
the powers that be* for your sake; I have exposed my body and my life 
many times to the weapons of your enemies; I have abased myself as 
a suppliant before many people for your sake; I have risked my own 
property and possessions, and those of my children, by throwing in 
my lot with yours; and today, if any violence has been arranged, or if 
there is to be any life and death struggle, then I claim it as my own. 
What, then, does that leave? What more can I do for you, to repay 
your services to me, except to consider your own fortune, whatever it 
may be, as my o>vn? I shall not refuse it. I shall not say 'no'. And I 
beseech you, gentlemen, either to add to the kindnesses which you 
have bestowed upon me by saving· my client, or to recognize that, if 

222 
Pro A!Ji!one 
[IOI) 
instead you destroy him, all those kindnesses will have been for 
nothing. 
[IOr] Milo remains unmoved by these tears: his strength of mind 
surpasses all belief Exile, he thinks, does not exist, except where 
virtue finds no place. Death he regards as the natural end of life, not 
as a punishment. Let him keep this attitude: it is one that he was 
born with. But as for you, gentlemen, w·hat will your attitude be? 
Will you cherish Milo's memory but expel his person? And is any 
place on earth more worthy to give shelter to his virtue than this one 
which gave it birth?* I appeal to you, valiant gentlemen, you who have 
shed so much blood in defence of our country. I appeal to you, 
centurions, and to you, soldiers of the lower ranks: a citizen, never 
before defeated, is facing the gravest danger! You m•e not mere 
onlookers: you are standing guard over this court and you have 
weapons in your hands. Will you allow such virtue as Milo's to be 
ejected, expelled, and banished from this city? 
[I02] How unhappy I am! What appalling luck I have had! You 
succeeded, .Milo, in obtaining the help of these men in recalling me 
to my country; shall I be unsuccessful in obtaining their help to keep 
you in yours? What shall I say to my children, who count you as their 
second father? What shall I say to you, brother Q_uintus, who are 
now far away,* but who shared those difficult times with me? That, in 
attempting to protect Milo's welfare, I was unable to obtain the help 
of the very men who had enabled Milo to secure my own welfare? 
Unable in what sort of cause? One that was approved by all the 
nations of the world. Unable to protect Milo's welfare from whom? 
From those who had felt the greatest relief at the death of Publius 
Clodius. And on whose advocacy? My own. 
[ IOJ] What terrible crime did I devise or what awful deed did I 
commit, gentlemen, when I tracked down, uncovered, exposed, and 
expunged those indications of our impending destruction?* All my 
troubles, and those of those close to me, derive from that source. 
Why did you want me to return to Rome? Was it so that I could 
watch the expulsion of those by whom my restoration was secured? I 
beseech you, do not let my return be more painful to me than' my 
departure was! For how can I consider myself restored if I am to be 
separated from those who were responsible for securi~ mv 
restoration? 
/ 
-
How I wish that the immortal gods had arranged-forgivt/me, my 
www.ebook3000.com

Pro Milone 
223 
country, for what I am about to say, since I am afraid that the words 
which I am obliged to utter in Milo's defence will constitute a crim-
inal attack on you-how I wish that Publius Clodius had not merely 
remained aliYe but had become praetor, consul, eyen dictator rather 
than that I should have to witness such a spectacle as this! [104] But 
Milo will haw none or it-immortal gods, what a braYe man, and 
one, gentlemen, whom you would do well to save! 'No, no,' he says, 
'it is right for Clodius to haYc paid the penalty he dcscrYed: I am 
prepared, if necessary, to pay one that I do not deserve.' Shall this 
man, born to serve his country, die anywhere other than in his 
country-unless, perhaps, for his country? vVill you hold onto the 
memorials of his spirit, but allow no funerary monument within Italy 
to be set up oYer his body? Will any of you usc his vote to expel from 
Rome a man whom cYcry other city will welcome with open arms? 
[IOS] Fortunate the land that shall accept this p1an! Ungrateful 
Rome, if she shall cast him out! Unhappy Rome, if she shall lose him! 
But I must stop now. I can no longer speak for tears-and my 
client has ordered that tears are not to be used in his defence. But I 
beg and implore you, gentlemen, when you cast your votes, to be 
bold enough to vote the way you feel. Believe me, your courage, 
fairness, and good faith will be strongly approved by the man* who, 
when he picked this jury, was careful to select those who were the 
best, the wisest, and the most brave. 

EXPLANATORY NOTES 
Notes are cued to section numbers in the text. For recurring terms see the 
Glossary. 
PRO ROSCIO AMERINO 
3 although ... abolished at Rome!: this was the first murder trial since 
Sulla's proscriptions (§ I I). Cicero probably added this outspoken and 
abrupt remark when he published the speech. 
6 illustrious: Cicero refers to senators as clarissimi and to equites (less com-
monly) as splenditli. This was a standard convention and in order to 
reproduce it in English I have translated these words throughout (when 
they refer to individuals) as 'illustrious' and 'worthy' respectively. 
8 Y{m lun·e been raised . .. high dwraaer: in 8I BC Sulla had added three 
hundred equites to the senate; he had then enacted a law that juries should 
consist exclusively of senators (previously they had consisted exclusively 
of equites). See note on § I 39 below. 
I I mhen you presided . .. b~fore: this was evidently some years earlier (Cicero 
says below and at§ 28 that there had been no trials for murder for a long 
time); the court will therefore have been not the Sullan murder and 
poisoning court in which Roscius is being tried but its pre-Sullan pre-
decessor, about which nothing is known. At that time Fannius would 
have been iudex quaestionis ('court judge'), and would presumably have 
been an ex-aeclile. 
I 5 the lvfete!li, Servilii, and Scipiones: the C:aecilii Mctelli were the most 
consistently distinguished family in Rome at this period (between I23 
and 109 BC, six members of the [unily attained the consulship); in the 
year of Roscius' trial Quintus C:accilius Ivletellus Pius was consul with 
Sulla (and his first cousin C:accilia Metella, who died in 8I, had been 
Sulla's wife). The following year, 79 BC, the consuls were Publius Ser-
vilius Vatia Isauricus and Appius Claudius Pulcher; Scrvilius was a first 
cousin of the Caecilia l'>'letella who helped Roscius (§§ 27 (where sec 
note), 147, 149), while Pulcher was her brother-in-law. (For a family tree 
of the Metelli, sec J. Carcopino, ,~y!la ou Ia monardzie manquie (Paris, 
I93I), at encl.) The Scipiones were another great hm1ily; their more 
recent members included Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica Serapio,,con-
sul of I I I, and Lucius Cornelius Scipio Asiaticus, consul of 83 (spared 
~s~~-
• 
I6 the recent civil disturbance: the civil war between Sulla and the J\;Iarians 
(83-82 BC). The nobility were on Sulla's side. 
/ 
I8 the baths ofPal/acina: ncar the Circus Flaminius at the south~rn end of 
www.ebook3000.com

S. ROSC.] 
Notes to Pages 14--18 
225 
the Campus Marti us (north-west of the forum), but the precise location 
is unknown. 
20 Vola terrae: a hill-town in northern Etruria in which the Marians held out 
against Sulla for two years (82-80 nc); it was subsequently made a colony 
for Sulla's veterans. 
bordered on the Tiber: a great advantage, allowing the produce of the farms 
to be transported to Rome by boat. 
IPOrthy: sec note on § 6 above. 
22 although Su!!a is j(munate': a play on the name 'Felix' ('the fortunate'), 
which Sulla had assumed upon the death of the younger Marius (son of 
the famous Marius) in 82 BC. Sulla also called two of his children Faustus 
and Fausta ('Lucky'). 
27 Caecilia: Caecilia Mctella, the daughter of Q!-1intus Caecilius Metellus 
Baliaricus, consul of I23, and sister of Quintus Caecilius Metellus 
Nepos, consul of g8; the Metellus who was consul with Sulla in the year 
of Roscius' trial (Q!-1intus Caecilius Metellus Pius) was her third cousin, 
while the following year her brother-in-law and her first cousin were con-
suls together (see note on§ IS above). Her uncles (mentioned at§ 147) 
were Lucius Caecilius Metellus Diadematus, consul in I I7, Marcus Cae-
cilius Metellus, consul in I IS, and Gaius Caecilius Metellus Caprarius, 
consul in I I3. Caecilia was a third cousin of the Caecilia Metella who was 
married to Sulla but died in 81. 
29 you ... supreme autlzoriz)': the jury. 
30 senm up in a sack: the traditional punishment for parricide was to be 
stripped, scourged, sewn up in a sack together with a dog, a cock, a viper, 
and a monkey, and then thrown into a river or the sea to drown. The first 
reliably attested instance of this punishment dates from I02-IOI nc 
(Livy, Epitome 68); it was also imposed by Cicero's brother Q!.iintus when 
governor of Asia in 59 (Epistu!ae ad Quintum fratrem 1.2.5). In this 
speech Cicero speaks about the sack (see also §§ 70-2), but decides 
against mentioning the animals, perhaps for reasons of taste (c[ Oral. 
I07). 
32 You murdered my jilflzer: Cicero speaks in Roscius' persona-an unusual 
and striking device repeated at§§ 94 and I45· 
33 Gaius Fimbria: Gaius Flavius Fimbria was a prominent supporter of 
Marius, joining in his massacre at Rome in 87 BC. Cicero says he 
attempted to murder Scaevola (see next note) at Marius' funeral in 86; 
while he was alive, Marius had protected Scaevola, who was a relation of 
his by marriage. Later in 86 Fimbria went east against Mithridates under 
Lucius Valerius Flaccus, who had succeeded to Marius' place as consul; 
murdering Flaccus, he illegally assumed command, but committed 
suicide in 85 after his army had gone over to Sulla. 
Quintus Swevola: Q)-iintus Mucius Scaevola, consul in 95 and pontifex 
maximus from 89. He served as an exemplary governor of Asia in 97 

226 
Notes to Pages I(j-26 
(S. ROSC. 
(or 94) and, besides being a famous orator, was the author of the first 
systematic treatise on Roman law. He remained in Rome under Marius 
and Cinna, surviving Fimbria's attempt to murder him (sec previous 
note), but was killed by the Ivlarians in 82 to prevent him going over to 
Sulla. Cicero implies below that he was trying to reconcile the two sides 
in order to save the lives of the Marians. Cicero studied under Scacvola 
fi·mn c.86 (De amicitia 1 ). 
33 'because he frtiled ... chest': at the games, if the crowd shouted 'take the 
sword' to a defeated gladiator, he was required to bare his chest to receive 
the death-blow. 
46 no ... knomledge ~(mho yourj(tther is: i.e. Erucius' mother was promiscu-
ous. Insults of this kind were part and parcel of ancient rhetorical 
invective; there need not be any truth in them. 
Caailius: Caecilius Statius (d. 168 Be),, the leading comic playwright 
between Plautus and Terence, and a friend of Ennius. The play referred 
to is his lost I-lypobo!imaeus (The Supjiosititious Son), which was adapted 
from Menandcr. Cicero assumes a knowledge of the plot. EYidently 
Chaerestratus, who liwd in the city, was the supposititious son, and 
Eutychus, who lived in the country, was the legitimate one preferred by 
the father. 
47 the territrny I((' Veii: an agricultural district ten miles north-west of Rome, 
named by Cicero exempli gratia. The Etruscan town of Veii no longer 
existed, having been destroyed by the Romans in 396 BC. 
48 Umbria: the region in which Roscius' home town, Ameria, was situated. 
so Ati!ius: the story was that one Atilius (perhaps Gaius Atilius Regulus, 
consul in 257 and 250) was found sowing on his farm when he was called 
on to undertake a military command, and hence acquired the nickname 
'Serranus' (from serere, 'to sow'). The story will have been invented to 
explain the unusual name. A similar tale was told of Lucius Quinctius 
Cincinnatus, called from the plough to become dictator in 458. 
55 the Remmian lam: the lex Remmia de calumnia (Remmian law concerning 
false accusation), of unknown date. The law imposed penalties for 
malicious prosecution. See note on § 57 below. 
56 the geese on the Capitol: these geese, which were sacred to Juno, had been 
kept at public expense since 390 Be, when by their honking they raised 
the alarm and so prevented the Capitol from being taken by the Gauls. 
57 they mill tattoo ... evoy month: this passage implies that malicious pro-
secutors convicted under the Remmian law (sec note on§ 55 above) were 
tattooed on the forehead with the letter K (the original initial letr~r of 
wlumniator, 'false accuser'). They would have been forbidden to under-
take .rur.ther prosecutions, •:nd the tattoo would have ensur~d t~at any 
appltcatton to prosecute wluch they might make would be reJecfed. (On 
penal tattooing, sec C. P. Jones,.JRS 77 (1987), 139-55·) The let~r K also 
signified the Kalcnds (the first day of the month), on which t~e interest 
www.ebook3000.com

s. Rose.] 
Notes to Pages 28-32 
227 
on debts was due for payment. Cicero implies that Erucius has debts, and 
has therefore taken a bribe to prosecute Roscius. 
64 Titus C!oelius from Tarracina: on the name (wrongly given as 'Caelius' 
at Valerius Maximus 8.1.abs.13) see T. P. Wiseman, CR NS 17 (1967), 
263-4; Wiseman suggests that Cloclius may have been the same man as 
the Titus Cloulius who was a moneyer in c.125 BC. Tarracina was 65 miles 
south of Rome on the west coast of Italy (about half-way between Rome 
and Naples). It had originally been a Volscian town with the name Anxur. 
66 sons ... to avenge their jiztlzers: Orestes (prompted by Apollo) killed 
Clytemnestra to avenge Agamemnon; Alcmaeon killed Eriphyle to 
avenge Amphiaraus. The Romans were familiar with these myths from 
the plays ofEnnius, Pacuvius, and Accius. 
70 Solon: chief archon at Athens in 594-593 BC, and instigator of a wide 
range of political, economic, and social reforms; he was traditionally 
included among the 'Seven Sages' of Greece. His law code formed the 
basis of classical Athenian law; this remained in force under the Romans 
because of Athens' status as a 'free city' (civitas Iibera). 
parricides should be . .. thromn into a river: see note on § 30 above. 
72 For mhat is so fi'ee ... a resting-place in death: near the end of his life, in 
46 Be, Cicero wrote disparagingly of this passage: 'What loud applause 
there was when in my youth I spoke the following passage, one which 
some time afterwards I began to feel was not nearly subdued enough 
(nequaquam sa tis defervisse): [the passage is quoted]. This was the product 
of a young man who was admired not so much for maturity and achieve-
ment as for promise and potential' (Drat. 107). It is nevertheless one of 
Cicero's finest passages. 
73 e1.:e11 though it is my tum to speak: the speeches of the prosecution, and 
then those of the defence, were heard first without interruption; then the 
evidence was taken; and finally a debate (alterwtio) was held between the 
two parties on the points in dispute. Cicero says here that he will allow 
Erucius to debate with him now, without waiting until the a!terwtio. 
77 by o_ffering their slaves/or intermgation: the evidence of slaves and others 
was taken only after the speeches had been given (sec previous note). As 
at Athens, slaves could give evidence only under torture, since it was 
believed that they could not be trusted to tell the truth unless it was 
forced out of them; their evidence was then written clown and read out to 
the jury. However, slaves were not permitted to testify against their mas-
ter, except in cases involving incest and in the specific case of the Catili-
narian conspiracy (63-62 BC). Nor were masters required to hand over 
their slaves to the court if they did not wish to (except in the cases just 
mentioned): neither Cicero nor Fannius could compel Chrysogonus to 
submit his slaves for interrogation. 
Pub/ius Scipio . . . 1Warws Metellus: it is uncertain who these men 
were, and 'J\1arcus' is a conjecture (the praenomen is omitted in the 

228 
Notes to Pages 34--36 
[s. ROSC. 
manuscripts). Publius Scipio could be Publius Cornelius Scipio Nasica, 
praetor in c.93, and Metellus could be Marcus Caecilius Metcllus, the 
praetor of 69. 
82 until the JPitnesses are heard: sec notes above on§§ 73 and 77 (first note). 
83 I should prefer to proserute ... to adrance my wreer: when a senator was 
convicted, his accuser, if a senator himself~ acceded to his victim's rank in 
the senate, or if not a senator, took his victim's insignia of rank. Cicero 
means that, if he really wanted to advance his career by prosecuting, he 
would prosecute senators. Wisely he chose not to do this (until his pro-
secution of Vcn-cs in 70 nc): although prosecuting 1vas an easy way for a 
young man to become noticed, it was also an easy way to make enemies. 
S.j. Lucius Cassius: Lucius Cassius Longinus Ravilla, consul in 127 and cen-
sor in 125. He was famous for his usc of the question nti bono? ('who 
stood to gain?'), and his strictness was. proverbial (hence the popular 
name for his tribunal, swpulus reo rum ('Defendants' rock', suggesting 
shipwreck), and the reference to 'C:assian jurors' in§ Ss). Cicero applies 
the principle wi bono? again at 1Hil. 32 and Phil. 2.35. 
i\9 the battle of' Cannae: this battle, in which a Roman army of So,ooo men 
was destroyed by Hannibal in 216 BC, is used here simply to indicate a 
great massacre. Cicero is referring to the period of Sulla's proscriptions, 
during which, he says, many prosecutors were killed. He claims that 
Erucius' survival gave him a prominence in the law courts which he 
would not otherwise have deserved. 
lake 11( Trasimene ... Sercilian one: Lake Trasimene was the site of 
another defeat inflicted on Rome by Hannibal, in 217 BC. The Servilian 
'lake' was a fountain in the forum, probably situated at the beginning of 
the Vicus Iugarius (the word laws means both 'lake' and 'tank'); it was 
here (and also on the rostra nearby) that the severed heads of the 
proscribed were displayed. 
90 '1Yho 1/){[S not mounded . .. Phr)'gian steel?': a quotation from a tragedy by 
Ennius (it is not certain which one); in the play, the words were spoken by 
the wounded Ulysses to Ajax after Hector had set fire to the Greek ships. 
'Phrygian' stands for 'Trojan'. 
11 Curtius, a kiarius ... a /viemmius: these prosecutors killed in the pro .. 
scriptions cannot be identified with certainty. The words 'exempted from 
active service on grounds of age' explain that it was some time since the 
men had undertaken their prosecutions. They were presumably prosecu-
tors active during the Cinnan regime. 
that old Priam ... Antistius: the identity of this further proscribed im>s-
ecutor, Antistius, is also uncertain. The reference to Priam (king of Troy) 
is mock-heroic, }ndicating Antistius' age and stat_us; Cicero, sh~u~l re~lly 
have chosen a Greek name 111 new of the quotation from I~nnnfS, whtch 
described the wounding of Greeks by Trojans ('Phrygian stsf~l'). The 
reference to Antistius' having been disqualified from fighting;~ that is, in 
www.ebook3000.com

S. ROSC.) 
Notes to Pages 36-43 
229 
the courts) because of the laws suggests that he had been convicted for 
malicious prosecution (see notes on§§ 55 and 57 above). 
91 he IPho had overall control: Sulla. Cicero refers to the period oflawlessncss 
which preceded Sulla's re-establishment of the courts in 81 BC. 
94 'But I IPIIS never there at all': see note on § 32 above. 
96 ll'iji:, and children: it is a little strange that we hear nothing further about 
the elder Roscius' wife (the mother of Cicero's client). The reference to 
'children' need not imply the existence of a daughter, since 'children' was 
sometimes written for 'child' (cf Aulus Gellius 2.13). 
98 Automedon: mock-heroic: Automedon was the charioteer of Achilles. 
100 the first major decoration: literally, 'the first beribboned palm'. A palm 
branch, symbolizing victory, could be decorated with coloured ribbons to 
denote a particularly distinguished victory. 
I can even tel/you . .. into the Tiber!: in mentioning Capito's murder of a 
man by throwing him from a bridge into the, Tiber, Cicero jokingly 
introduces a reference to the festival of the Argei, which took place at 
Rome each year on rs May. At this festival, twenty-seven straw effigies of 
'Argei' (i.e, 'Greeks', the enemy nation at the time when the festival 
originated, in the sixth century) were thrown from the Sublician Bridge 
into the Tiber, in order to propitiate the dead. The Romans themselves 
explained the ceremony as a substitution for human sacrifice. But there 
was also a view, found in Festus (452 Lindsay) and alluded to by Ovid 
(Fasti 5,623-4, 633-4), that the festival was connected with the period 
after the sack of Rome by the Gauls in 390 Be, when men over 6o years of 
age were supposedly thrown from the bridge to prevent their becoming a 
burden on the city; hence the expressions 'thrown from the bridge' 
(depontani) and '6o-year-olds off the bridge' (sexagenarii de ponte). 
Cicero's joke, then, is that the Romans of old would not have approved of 
the murder committed by Capito, because his victim was not old enough 
to be thrown fi·om the bridge. On the festival of the Argei see B. Nagy, 
AJAH ro (1985), r-27. 
102 one of the two: Magnus. 
his master: cf. § 17. 
The other one: Capito. 
103 Ajriwnus: i.e. Scipio Aemilianus (Publius Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus 
Africanus), the consul of 147 and 134, who destroyed Carthage in q6 
and Numantia in 133. Europe, Asia, and Africa constituted the known 
world. 
104 my goodji-iend: Magnus again. 
105 Vola terrae: sec first note on§ 20 above. 
109 the ten leaders I!{ the council: see§ 25. 
r 10 if the prosewtion . , . as witnesses: only the prosecution had the power to 
require witnesses to give evidence; the defence had to rely on evidence 

230 
Notes to Pages 43-50 
(S. ROSC. 
voluntarily given. The prosecution was thus able to intimidate witnesses 
for the defence from coming forward. 
I I I in the execution of a trust: a trust (mandatum) was a contract in which one 
person undertook to do or give something at another's request; it was 
entered into by mutual agreement, and without remuneration. 
I I 2 Why accept a trust ... advantage?: Cicero is not addressing Capito, but an 
imaginary person who is not fit to act as a trustee. 
~y no means ... insignificant: the play on words, which is foreign to 
English, is characteristically Ciceronian. This sentence has been trans-
lated fairly literally because there are doubts about the text. 
1 14 convicted by an arbitrator: civil suits concerned with matters of good faith 
were heard not by a judge (iudex) but by an arbitrator (arbiter), who based 
his decision on considerations of equity rather than law. 
I I9 I said earlier . .. for interrogation: see§ 77·, with first note, above. 
I have ... mmtioned their names: at § 77. 
to offer himself . .. under torture: this would of course have been impos-
sible, since Roscius was not a slave. 
I22 at the outset:§ 35· 
I23 at the beginning: that is, of the part of the speech dealing with 1\!lagnus and 
Capito, i.e. § 83. 
I24 that golden name: a pun on Chrysogonus' name (dzrysos means 'gold' in 
Greek), and an allusion to his profiteering during the proscriptions. 
125 the Valerian lam or the Carnelian: Cicero is referring to (and will shortly 
quote from) a single law, the law which set out the terms of the proscrip-
tions. The uncertainty over the name of the law arises from the fact that 
it was proposed by Lucius Valerius Flaccus but framed by Sulla (82 Be): 
the law was unpopular and controversial, and it had evidently not yet 
been agreed whose name it should bear (see T. E. Kinsey, A1nemosyne, 21 
(I968), 290-2). Cicero parades his ignorance of this law probably because 
he wants to distance himself from a law of which he disapproves; his 
disapproval was shared by the senate(§ I 53). By 70 the law had come to 
be known as the Cornelian law, i.e. was regarded as Sulla's (In Verrem 
2. I. I23). 
127 this IIPill shom later on: Cicero does not return to this point, so it was 
presumably dealt with in the part of the speech which is lost(§ 132). 
128 me are being cheated . .. than T/Je had realized: i.e. the absence of a record of 
sale in the public accounts would confirm Cicero's suspicion that the sale 
never took place. 
132 the prosecution ... : in the gap which follows, to judge from the,cholia, 
Cicero probably expatiated on the questions asked in § 130, ~nd con-
cluded that Roscius' property was never legally sold ( ct: the ,keference 
forwards at § 127). The scholia state that he then proceede~ to attack 
www.ebook3000.com

S. ROSC.] 
Notes to Pages so-57 
231 
Chrysogonus' power and wealth (in the passage beginning 'at this point I 
want those men to hear ... '). 
the territory of the Sallentini or the Bruttii: i.e. the heel (Calabria) or the 
toe (Bruttium) of Italy. 
I33 the other one: i.e. Chrysogonus. 
I35 escorted by . .. citizens in togas: Cicero is indignant that an ex-slave should 
be waited upon by free-born Roman citizens. 
I36 good fortune: see note on§ 22 above. 
I 39 they mill have to resign their distinctions: Cicero is thinking of the law 
courts. Sulla had transferred the responsibility for providing juries from 
the equites to the senate (sec note on § 8 above). Cicero hints that this 
change could one day be reversed, if the senate should abuse their pri-
vilege. Ten years later, Sulla's law was indeed overturned, and the lex 
Aurelia (70 BC) made juries henceforward two-thirds equestrian (i.e. one-
third equites and one-third trilmni aerariz) and only one-third senatorial. 
qo mho could not endure ... the equestrian order: the equites had provided the 
juries for the courts; this privilege was resented by the senate and with-
drawn by Sulla (see previous note). Cicero was himself an eques at this 
date (later becoming a senator in 75 Be). 
exercised in other fields: a reference to the proscriptions and the sales of 
confiscated property. 
I44 the ring: the gold ring which denoted equestrian rank. 
145 You are in possession of my farms: see note on§ 32 above. 
something . . . than anyone else: because of his closeness to Sulla; but 
Cicero's words can also be understood ironically. 
146 You do till injustice: i.e. to Sulla. 
147 Caecilia: see note on§ 27 above. 
I.J.9 1Warcus Messal!a: probably Marcus Valerius Messalla Rufus, the future 
consul of 53 and nephew of the orator Hortensius. He is known from Pro 
Sulla 42 to have stood for the praetorship of 6 I, and since the minimum 
age for the praetorship was 39, he must have been born by 101 BC. This 
would make him 21 in the year of Roscius' trial-too young, as Cicero 
says, to speak for the defence (so there is no need to attribute his silence 
to political caution). During the year, Messalla's sister Valeria married 
Sulla; but whether this was before or after Roscius' trial is unclear. In 62 
Messalla again asked Cicero to undertake a defence, this time of Sulla's 
nephew, Publius Sulla (Pro Sulla 20); the speech survives. 
151 'wuncil ofstate': usually denotes the senate (as at§ 153), but can also refer 
to a court of law. 
153 a nem and fitr crueller proscription: Roscius' father, of course, was not 
proscribed; but Cicero wants (even at the expense of consistency) to give 
his case a wider relevance. This passage(§§ 152-4) was probably revised 
or added by Cicero when he published the speech. 

232 
Notes to Pages 68-71 
PROMURENA 
[MUR. 
3 the la/IJ on electoral malpractice: Cicero's lex Tullia de ambitu (Tullian law 
concerning electoral malpractice), passed during the election campaign 
of 63 (see second note on§ 67 below). 
such severity during my consulship: Cicero's remarks on his severity, here 
and at§ 6, are more readily applicable to his execution of the Catilinarian 
conspirators on 5 December (a week or two after Murena's trial) than to 
his expulsion of Catiline from Rome on 7 November. These passages 
may therefore have been introduced when the speech was written up for 
publication, at a time when Cicero was being criticized for the 
executions. 
When properzv that has been formal(}' sold: Cicero now compares himself to 
a seller who gives the purchaser (Murena) a guarantee of title to the 
property he is selling him (the consulship). Although rather involved, the 
analogy is a good one because it represents Cicero's duty to defend 
Murena as a contractual obligation. 
4 in some states: it is not clear which states Cicero is thinking of. 
a severe buffeting: the Catilinarian conspiracy. 
t/IJo consuls ... on the first of January: if Murena were acquitted, he and 
Decimus Junius Silanus would take office on 1 January 6z; if he were 
convicted, only Silanus would take office, and he would then be occupied 
with arranging the election of Murena's replacement, leaving him no 
time to deal with Catiline. Cicero returns to this point at §§ 79-82. 
6 the severity I shomed: see second note on § 3 above. 
by my nJords: i.e. by Cicero's First Catilinarian, delivered in the senate on 
7 November. 
8 I feel that ... to /IJhich they led: these words are missing in the manu-
scripts; I have restored what I take to be the sense. 
I I Asia: in 84 BC Sulla, who had hastily concluded the First Mithridatic War 
(88-85) so that he could return to Italy and recover Rome from the 
Marians, left the elder Murena in command of Asia. Murena resumed 
hostilities against Mithridates (the Second Mithridatic War, 83-8I), was 
heavily defeated, and returned to Rome to celebrate a triumph (81). The 
younger Murena, Cicero's client, served under his father during these 
discreditable campaigns. The prosecution have accused him of succumb-
ing to the temptations of wealth and luxurious living, for which Asia was 
notorious, during his service there. 
Sons ... at their father's triumphs: if they had not yet assumed the toga of 
manhood (on which see fourth note on Arch. s), the sons of a triumphing 
general would ride on the horses which drew his chariot (unless they 
were too young to ride, in which case they would join their fat~er inside 
the chariot-an illustration of the Romans' love of children); Adult sons 
rode on their own horses behind the chariot. 
/ 
www.ebook3000.com

MUR.) 
Notes to Pages 73-74 
2 33 
IS secession ... to the Aventine: secession (withdrawal) to a hill outside the 
city boundary, generally the Aventine, was the traditional means by 
which the plebeians in the early republic had sought to compel the patri-
cians to redress their grievances; crucially, secession involved refusal to 
enter military service. The first secession, which resulted in the institu-
tion of the tribunate, took place in 494 BC, and the last in 287; five 
secessions are recorded. 
both ... IVere praetors: Murena's great-grandfather Lucius Licinius 
Murena was praetor at some date before I46, and his grandfather of the 
same name at some date before Ioo. 
after capping ... triumph: Murena's father was praetor in c.88. On his 
triumph see first note on § I I above. 
I6 your noble birth: there was a Scrvius Sulpicius Rufus who was military 
tribune with consular power (equivalent to a consul) in 388, 384, and 383 
from whom Sulpicius could have claimed descent, and also various 
Sulpicii who held the consulship in the fifth century. 
your grandjiaher ... any brilliant deed: the wording implies that Sulpi-
cius' grandfather was at least a senator. 
in my oJVn circle: being a new man himself, Cicero helped others in a 
similar position who aimed at a political career. It must have been infuri-
ating for Sulpicius, as a noble and a patrician, to be told that Cicero had 
befriended him because of his disadvantaged birth. 
Quintus Pompeius: the consul of I4I and, in I 3 I, the first plebeian censor. 
Cicero compares him with Murena, who was also a soldier and lacked 
noble birth (although he was not technically a new man, being descended 
from a line of praetors (§ IS)). 
}darms Aemi/ius: Marcus Acmilius Scaurus, consul in I IS, censor in I09, 
and princeps senatus (leader of the senate). His family was patrician, but 
not recently distinguished; Asconius (23 C; sec p. I 72 for explanation of 
Asconius references) says he had to fight for office just as if he were a new 
man (cf. § 36). Cicero is here comparing him with Sulpicius. But a com-
parison can also be made with wlurena: in I I6, Scaurus was prosecuted 
for electoral malpractice by his unsuccessful rival for the consulship, 
Publius Rutilius Rufus (see]. H. D'Arms, Phoenix, 26 (I972), 82-4). He 
was acquitted, and immediately prosecuted Rutilius, unsuccessfully, for 
the same offence. 
I7 for I have often . .. and Coelius: the text is corrupt; I have written what I 
take to be the sense. The six men named by Cicero were all new men who 
made it to the consulship. Manius Curius Dentatus was consul in 290, 
275, and 274, and censor in 272; the elder Marcus Porcius Cato (the 
great-grandfather of Murcna's prosecutor) was consul in I95 and censor 
in I84 (sec second note on Arch. I6); for Pompeius, see fourth note on 
§ I6 above. Gaius Marius was consul seven times between I07 and 86; 
Titus Didius was consul in 98; and Gaius Coelius Caldus was consul in 94-

234 
Notes to Pages 7 4-76 
[MUR. 
17 for so many years: the previous new man to attain the consulship was 
Gaius Norbanus in 83, and before him Coelius in 94· 
nervness offami(y: Murena was not in fact a new man (see fourth note on§ 
16 above); he was, however, not a noble. 
Galba: Publius Sulpicius Galba. Cicero had six competitors at the elec-
tion in 64: besides the patricians Catiline and Galba, there were the 
plebeians Gaius Antonius Hybrida (who was elected with Cicero), 
Lucius Cassius Longinus (the future Catilinarian conspirator), Qyintus 
Cornificius, and Gaius Licinius Sacerdos. Antonius and Cassius were 
nobles; Cornificius and Sacerdos were not noble but came from senatorial 
families; Cicero alone was a new man. See Asc. 82 C. 
18 'Jl!Iurena mas a candidate ... ahead ofhim': Murena and Sulpieius both 
stood successfully for the quaestorship in 7 5 B c. Quaestors were elected 
at Rome by the tribal assembly. After the votes of all thirty-five tribes had 
been recorded, the choice of each tribe' was read out, and as soon as a 
candidate had a majority of the tribes he was declared elected (the pro-
cedure in the centuriate assembly, which elected consuls, praetors, and 
censors, was different: there, a magistrate with a majority would be 
declared elected even before all of the 193 centuries had cast their votes). 
Great importance was attached to priority of election, although Cicero 
tries to downplay its importance here (contrast },;Ian. z; In Pisonem 2; 
Brut. 321). In the years after Sulla, twenty quaestors were elected annu-
ally. They served either on the staff of a provincial governor, like Murena 
(whose province is not known) and Cicero himself (who served in west-
ern Sicily in 75), or in Rome or Italy; usually, they drew lots for their 
post. Sulpicius was allotted the administration of the port of Ostia. 
Cicero is probably correct in saying that this was an onerous job which 
(like most quaestorships, including Cicero's own (Plane. 64-5)) gave the 
holder no opportunity to win popular support. Famines were not the 
norm, and when they occurred the quaestor at Ostia might have his 
duties transferred to a more senior magistrate, as happened to Saturninus 
in 104 BC. 
the Titian lam: perhaps a law of Sextus Titius, tribune in 99· 
19 The period that follo11ml: i.e. 73-66 BC, the period between their quaestor-
ships and praetorships. 
20 Lucius Lucullus: Lucius Licinius Lucullus was consul in 74; from 73 until 
67 he commanded the Roman forces against Mithridates (in the Third 
Mithridatic War, 73-63 sc). Murena was in some way related to him 
(Att. 13.6.4). 
21 'So .. . living in the forum?': Cicero's real view was the same as Sulpi'cius', 
that to become known to the electorate it was essential to remain in Rome 
and be seen in the forum (Plane. 66). But Murena's case requires him to 
take a different line here. 
f 
22 hom to keep off rainmater: flooding caused by poor drainage oftJ resulted 
in lawsuits. 
I 
www.ebook3000.com

MUR.] 
Notes to Pages 77-79 
235 
24 to check the frenzy ... state handouts: a reference to Cicero's defeat of the 
far-reaching agrarian bill of the tribune Publius Servilius Rullus at the 
beginning of the year. Cicero is of course thinking of himself throughout 
this passage on oratory. 
25 At one time ... no mlendar available: legal business could only be trans-
acted on ceruin days of the year; originally, only a few privileged people, 
such as priests, knew which days these were. 
pecked out the crows' eyes: the expression was proverbial, and meant 'to 
catch out the watchful'. Crows watch for young or ailing animals, and 
peck out their eyes; they will look out for their opportunity, for example 
when a ewe is giving birth to a second lamb, and therefore temporarily 
unable to protect the first. Adult sheep can be seen today with only one 
eye, having been attacked by crows as lambs; this sight is becoming less 
common, however, now that ewes increasingly lamb indoors (information 
from Claude Berry). Gnacus Flavius was a scribe of Appius Claudius 
Caecus (sec second note on Gael. 33). He published a book of legal 
formulas (Ius civile Flavianum), and then the legal calendar to which 
Cicero refers here. These services won him the tribunate, followed by the 
aedileship of 304-
26 to join hands: i.e. in a symbolic struggle for ownership. 
a Latin piper: pipers, traditionally Latins rather than Roman citizens, 
crossed from side to side when providing musical accompaniment for 
actors in plays. 
IIJhen our ancestors IIJore beards: the Romans began to shave from 300 BC (in 
Flavius' time). Cf. Gael. 33· 
27 old men ... semlar marriages: property at Rome was often encumbered 
with the expensive and tiresome obligation of performing religious cere-
monies in honour of the family gods. Women property-owners who 
wished to rid themselves of this obligation might find a poor old man 
without heirs, and enter into a secular marriage with him (coemptio, 
literally the formal sale of a woman to a man). She would hand over her 
property, together with the obligations attached to it; he would immedi-
ately return the property to her, but, as head of the family, would retain 
the obligations. The woman would pay the man a pension more than 
sufficient to cover the cost of the ceremonies; and when in due course 
he died, the family would technically die out with him, and thus the 
obligation to perform the ceremonies would cease. 
1vere actually m!!ed 'Gaia': 'Gaia' was used for the woman's name in the 
formula of coemptio. 
28 
extreme~)' busy as I am: Cicero was preoccupied with the Catilinarian 
threat. 
the great Servius: i.e. Sulpicius. Cicero compliments his opponent on his 
knowledge, while nevertheless maintaining that such knowledge is 
valueless. 

Notes to Pages 7g-8I 
[MUR. 
29 the reed-pipe ... the ~yre: the reed-pipe was a wind instrument, so the 
singer sang while someone else played; with the lyre, however, the per-
former played and sang simultaneously, a more difficult task. See ]. T 
Ramsey, CP79 (I984), 22o-5. 
30 that brilliant poet: Q!.Iintus Ennius (see second note on Arch. I 8). The 
quotations arc taken from Annates 247-53 Skutsch. 
they do not . .. join hands: cf. § 26 above (with first note). 
3I that war agaimt Mithridates: Cicero refers to the Third Mithridatic War 
(73-63 BC), in which Murena served under Lucullus (§ 20). 
1Wanius Curius ... Lucius 1Wummius: 1Ylanius Curius Dentatus defeated 
Pyrrhus of Epirus near Malventum in 275; Titus Quinctius Flamininus 
defeated Philip V of Macedon at Cynoscephalae in I97; Marcus Fulvius 
Nobilior defeated the Aetolians in I89; Lucius Aemilius Paullus defeated 
Perseus of Macedon (son of Philip V) at Pydna in I68; Quintus Caecilius 
Metellus Macedonicus defeated Andris.cus, a pretender who claimed to 
be a son of Perseus, in I48; Lucius Mummius sacked Corinth in q6. 
These examples sound impressive, but do not in fact support Cicero's 
case: it will have been the Greeks of Asia Minor that Cato described as 
women, not those of Greece proper. 
Antiodms: Antiochus III of Syria invaded Greece in I93, but was 
defeated by the Romans at Thermopylae in I9I and at Magnesia ad 
Sipylum (in Lydia) in I90. Lucius Cornelius Scipio Asiaticus served at 
Thermopylae and, as consul, won the victory at Magnesia. His more 
famous brother Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus was the conqueror of 
Hannibal at Zama in 202; he accompanied his brother against Antiochus, 
but was unable to hold office himself since he had been consul in I94 (re-
election to the consulship was normally permitted only after a ten-year 
interval). He was the first Roman general to take his cognomen from the 
country he conquered. 
32 Marcus Cato: see first note on§ 17 above. He also served at Thermopylae. 
allowed Mithridates ... in peace: in 85 BC Sulla made a generous treaty 
with Mithridates, the Treaty ofDardanus, because he needed to return to 
Rome quickly to recover it from the Marians. This treaty concluded the 
First Mithridatic War (88-85). 
Lucius Murena ... pursued him: in the Second Mithridatic War (83-8I 
BC). See§§ I I-12, with first note on§ I I above. 
the forces ofSertorius: the rebel Quintus Sertorius held Spain against the 
central government from 82 to 72 BC. Mithridates offered him military 
support in return for recognition of his territorial claims. The date of this 
is uncertain; the winter of 76-75 has been suggested. 
33 both consuls IIJe:e sent out: the consuls of ?4, Lucius Licinius Lu.c~lus ~nd 
Marcus Aurelius Cotta; Lucullus was gtven the command agatqst Mtth-
ridates, Cotta the province of Bithynia. Hostilities did not b~in, how-
; 
ever, until 73· Lucullus relieved Cyzicus in 72; the victory off Tenedos 
www.ebook3000.com

MUR.] 
Notes to Pages 82-85 
237 
(near the mouth of the Hellespont) took place some time before the 
summer of 7 1. 
making for Ita{y: Cicero makes the same claim at Man. 21. If they really 
were making for Italy (which seems unlikely), they had not got very far. 
34 the one that he jimght against the king: the battle of Nicopolis in Pontus 
(66). 
the Bosporus: the Cimmerian Bosporus, connecting the Black Sea with 
the Sea of Azov (in the Crimea). 
his kingdom: Pontus. 
35 But, you say ... ahead of Murena: Sulpicius and Murena were elected in 
66 BC to praetorships for the following year. Praetors were elected by the 
centuriate assembly; on the procedure see notes on§§ 18 above (first note) 
and 38 below. 
Euripus: the narrow strait between Euboea and the Greek mainland, 
notorious for its rapidly changing currents. 
36 Lucius Philippus ... i\!Iarws Herennius: Lucius lV1arcius Philippus was 
defeated by Marcus Herennius, who may have been a new man, in the 
consular elections for 93 Be; he later became consul in 91. 
Quintus Catulus . . . Gnaeus Mal/ius: Quintus Lutatius Catulus was 
defeated by the new man Gnaeus Mallius Maximus in the consular elec-
tions for 105 BC. He was also unsuccessful for 106 and 104, but became 
consul finally in 102. He was noted for his cultural interests, and encour-
aged the poet Archias. 
Marcus Scaurus ... Qpintus 1Waximus: lVlarcus Aemilius Scaurus was 
defeated by Quintus Fabius Maximus Eburnus in the consular elections 
for I 16 BC, but became consul the next year (sec fifth note on§ 16 above). 
37 his period ofserm'ce: when he was a legate under Lucullus in Asia. 
for his triumph: Lucullus' command ended in 67 BC, but his triumph was 
delayed until 63 as a result of popular opposition. 
38 the vote of the first centlii:J' ... the final result: Roman citizens, when voting 
in the centuriate assembly (see first note on§ 18 above), were divided into 
193 centuries, which were grouped into five classes based on wealth. The 
first century to vote was chosen by lot from the first (richest) class; its 
choice of candidate, when announced, had a strong influence on the 
choice of the remaining centuries, who were yet to vote. 
40 Lucius Otho: Lucius Roscius Otho, when tribune in 67 BC, carried a law 
(the lex RoSI'ia tlzeatralis) reserving the first fourteen rows in the theatre 
for the equites (senators sat in the orchestra). At some point in 63 Otho 
was hissed in the theatre for this; Cicero reprimanded the objectors in a 
speech of which one fragment is extant. 
Antonius' games: Cicero's consular colleague Gaius Antonius Hybrida 
had put on games during his praetorship in 66 BC (as Murena was to do 
as praetor the following year). Cicero's three sets of games (to Ceres, 

Notes to Pages 8s-88 
[MUR. 
Liber, and Libera, to Flora, and the Roman games) had been given when 
he was aedile in 69. It is not known whether Antonius was ever aedile. 
41 what you and Murena were assigned: in 65 BC Sulpicius was praetor in 
charge of the embezzlement (puulatus) court, while Murena held the 
prestigious post of praetor urbanus (city praetor). The praetor urbanus was 
the praetor responsible for civil jurisdiction between Roman citizens; one 
of his duties was to put on games, a service which would in due course 
aid his election to the consulship. Newly elected praetors were assigned 
to the eight praetorships by lot. 
42 filth: defendants wore shabby clothing and neglected their personal 
appearance in order to excite the pity of the jurors. Not to do so was a 
sign of arrogance; Milo refused, and was condemned (Plut. Cic. 35). 
A favour from Sui/a: Sulla had rewarded his veterans with confiscated 
land, and they were highly sensitive to the danger of it being returned to 
its previous owners. 
Lucius Murena 's province: after his praetorship he served as governor of 
Transalpine Gaul (64-63 Be). 
the many tribes ... Umbrian tonms: consuls were in fact elected by the 
centuriate assembly, not the tribal assembly (see first note on§ 18 above); 
but the general point that Murena obtained political support in Umbria 
is valid. 
the support . . . turning down provinces: many people would support a 
candidate for office in the hope of receiving a lucrative post once the 
magistrate's year of office was over and he took up a provincial 
governorship. 
45 to drive a man Ji'om his country: Cicero's lex Tullia added a ten-year exile 
to the penalties imposed by the lex Calpumia (see next note). 
46 the . .. Calpurnian law: the lex Calpurnia (67 BC), which imposed expul-
sion from the senate, permanent disqualification from public office, and 
payment of a fine. This law was stricter than its predecessor, the lex 
Cornelia (81?), which merely prohibited those convicted from resuming 
their candidature within ten years. 
That law: the lex Tullia, passed in response to Sulpicius' demands. The 
rest of this paragraph discusses some of its provisions (actual or 
proposed). 
47 a striaer penalty for the masses: for accepting bribes. The poor liked being 
given bribes: it was one of the perks of Roman citizenship. 
The plea of ill-health: pleading ill-health was a legitimate means of avoid-
ing court appearances. In the case of a trial for electoral malpractice, the 
defendant could feign ill-health until his year of office began;;:at which 
point, as a magistrate, he would be immune from prosecutiollf The plea 
was either disallowed or restricted in some way by a provisioft of the lex 
Th~. 
I 
www.ebook3000.com

MUR.] 
Notes to Pages 88-89 
239 
would also have to forfeit: i.e. if condemned by default and exiled. Cicero 
is saying that the abolition of the plea of ill-health had serious con-
sequences for the genuinely ill. Either they would put their health at risk 
by going to court to stand trial (Murena was in fact ill himself: sec§ 86), 
or they would stay at home and be convicted in their absence. 
had least to gain ... himse(( having reached the top of the political ladder, 
Cicero would not have to stand for election again. 
You demanded that . .. votes be equalized: since the meaning is uncertain, I 
have kept the translation literal. Cicero here refers to (and perhaps exag-
gerates the revolutionary nature of) two demands made by Sulpicius but 
rejected by the senate and so not included in the lex Tullia. The first was 
that the class organization in the centuriate assembly (see note on § 38 
above) be reformed in some way: this would have made it more difficult 
for candidates to target their bribery accurately (they would not have 
known in advance which centuries to bribe), and would also have had the 
effect of reducing the disproportionate voting power of the rich. Sec 
C. Nicolet, The World of the Citizen in Republican Rome (London, 1980), 
312 f. (the translation of this passage given there is quite wrong, although 
correct in Nicolet's original French). The second demand concerns the 
Manilian law-not the famous law of 66 nc which gave Pompey his Asian 
command, but an earlier law of the same tribune, Gaius Manilius, which 
distributed the votes of freedmen among all thirty-five tribes (see first 
note on§ r8 above) instead of confining them to the four urban tribes 
(where their voting power was reduced). This law was passed on the last 
day of 67, but immediately annulled by the senate on the first day of 66; 
Cicero claims that Sulpicius wished to revive it (the reading promuZr;a-
tionem is the conjecture ofE X. Ryan, Gymnasium, 101 (1994), 481 f.). 
You also wanted ... by the prosecution: the usual method (sortitio) of 
empanelling juries involved picking names by lot from an annual list; 
prosecution and defence would then each reject a number, and the total 
would be made up again by lot. But there was also an alternative method 
(editio), previously used in the lex (Aci!ia?) repetundarum (123 or 122 uc) 
and later to be used in the lex Licinia de soda!iciis (55), by which the 
prosecution themselves chose names from the list, their selection then 
being modified by the defence's right of rejection. Sulpicius wanted this 
second method to be prescribed by the lex Tullia, but this proposal, too, 
was rejected by the senate. The objection to it that Cicero gives below is 
that it would have allowed the prosecution to select the personal enemies 
of the accused, thus bringing private hostilities out into the open. 
48 Catiline: Catiline was one of the candidates for the consulship of 62. 
Cicero argues that people were afraid that Catiline might win, realized 
that Sulpicius could not defeat him, and so voted for Murena (§ 53). 
49 my mlleague: Cicero's colleague in the consulship, Gaius Antonius 
Hybricla, had previously been an ally of Catilinc. Early in 63, however, 
Cicero had bought his allegiance by exchanging provinces with him, 

Notes to Pages 8g-93 
[MUR. 
giving him the lucrative Macedonia in return for Cisalpine Gaul (which 
he afterwards renounced). 
49 co!onistsji-!nn Arretium and Faesu!ae: Sulla founded colonies of veterans at 
Arretium and Faesulae in Etruria; some of these veterans had fallen into 
debt and supported Catiline (In Cati!inam 2.20; Sallust, Cati!ine 28-4). 
those ruined in the time of Su!!a: i.e. former Marians, having nothing in 
common with the rest of Catiline's supporters. 
so to recoup ... forfeited: referring respectively to the veterans of Sulla 
who had fallen into debt and to the former Marians who had lost their 
property by proscription. 
5 I if his own fortunes ... by destruction: i.e. if he should be successfully 
prosecuted, he would retaliate by destroying the state. In the ancient 
world fires were fought not just with water, but by demolishing the 
buildings in their path. 
54 the equestrian centuries: see § 73· The eighteen centuries of equites 
belonged to the first (richest) class (see note on § 38 above), and their 
votes therefore carried weight. 
the daree of the senate: see§§ 67-8. 
55 the oj/ice: the praetorship (§ I 5). 
56 Servius Su!picius: i.e. Servius Sulpicius Rufus, the defeated candidate and 
main prosecutor. 
Servius Sulpicius: the assistant prosecutor. 
57 a circus rider . .. a four-horse chariot: the driver of the four-horse chariot 
was as superior to the circus rider as the consular candidate was to the 
candidate for the praetorship. Postumius should not have involved 
himself with matters which were properly the concern of his superiors. 
(On the charges . .. young Servius): Cicero's reply to the charges of Pos-
tumius and the younger Sulpicius has been omitted, and this heading 
substituted, by Cicero himself (c( Pro Fonteio 20; Gael. I9). See Pliny, 
Epistu!ae 1.20.7. Detailed discussion of the charges may have been of 
relatively little interest to a readership which read speeches mainly in 
order to appreciate great oratory. 
58 his impending tribunate: Cato had been elected tribune for 62 (and would 
shortly be entering office, on IO December). 
Pub/ius Afi'icanus prosecuted Lucius Cotta: Scipio Aemilianus (Publius 
Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus Africanus) was consul in I47 and I34, and 
destroyed Carthage in q6 and Numantia in I33· His prosecution of 
Lucius Aurelius Cotta (consul in I44), probably for extortion, is said here 
to have taken place after I33, yet is dated by Livy, Epitome 55 to I38. It 
therefore looks as if Cicero, unless simply mistaken, has altered the 
chronology for rhetorical effect. Cotta's acquittal was widely /ttributed 
to briberv. 
f 
~· 
! 
59 Servius Galba: as governor of Further Spain in ISO BC, Servitis Sulpicius 
www.ebook3000.com

MUR.] 
Notes to Pages 93-96 
Galba massacred S,ooo Lusitanian tribesmen after they had surrendered. 
The following year the tribune Lucius Scribonius Libo, supported by the 
elder Cato (see first note on § 17 above), attempted unsuccessfully to 
bring him to trial; Cato afterwards included his speech on the subject in 
his Origines (cf. 'as history relates'). Galba went on to become consul in 
144· 
6o 'You do not make ... put you n~f{ht ': Cicero quotes from an unknown play. 
Phoenix is addressing Achilles, it would seem. 
61 I am not making this speech /;~fore mt ignorant rabble: at De jinilms 4·74 
(written in 45 BC, after Cato's death), we find the following, spoken by 
Cicero to Cato: 'I will not joke with you now as I did when discussing the 
same subject in my defence of Lucius lVlurena, whom you were prosecut-
ing. For my remarks on that occasion were spoken among the ignorant, 
and I also had to play to the gallery a little. But now the subject must be 
dealt with in a less superficial way.' 
Zeno: Zeno of Citium (335-263 Be), the founde1: of the Stoic school of 
philosophy. 
62 The tax-j{trmers make some request: we know of one such request, but it 
dates from two years after Murena's trial. In 61 BC the equestrian tax-
farmers (publicani) who held the contract for raising revenues in Asia 
found themselves unable to collect the agreed amount, and appealed to 
the senate for a revision of their contract; the appeal was opposed by Cato 
(in accordance with his Stoic principles). If this is the incident to which 
Cicero is alluding here, the speech would have to have been revised for 
publication in or after 61, and would contain a glaring anachronism. It is 
more likely, therefore, that the reference is to some earlier clash between 
Cato and the tax-farmers which we do not know about. 
63 the 'mean': the doctrine of Aristotle that all virtues constitute a mid-point 
between two opposing extremes (e.g. courage the mid-point between 
rashness and cowardice). The doctrine has no connection with Plato, 
whose name Cicero has dragged in simply to impress his ignorant audi-
ence (Plato and Aristotle were much more prestigious figures than Zeno). 
64 better ... or more just: the four cardinal virtues were courage (fortitudo ), 
self-control (temperantia), justice (iustitia), and wisdom (prudentia). In 
enumerating Cato's virtues Cicero has pointedly omitted wisdom. 
guardians of the same year: Murena had been elected consul for 62, and 
Cato tribune. 
66 The great Scipio: i.e. Scipio Aemilianus (see second note on§ 58 above). 
On his cultural interests, and on his friends Laelius and Philus 
(mentioned below), see first note on Arch. 16. 
Panaetius: a Stoic philosopher from Rhodes (c.185-109 Be); he was 
befriended by Scipio and lived with him in Rome, then from 129 until his 
death was head of the Stoic school at Athens. He revised Stoicism in the 
light of Platonic and Aristotelian philosophy, making it less inflexible and 

Notes to Pages 96-98 
[MUR. 
more suited to the tastes of Roman aristocrats. His On duty was to 
become the model for the first two books of Cicero's De oj/iciis. Cicero 
naturally does not let on to his audience that the rigid doctrine of Zeno 
had been modified (moral perfection was no longer insisted upon); it may 
be, however, that Cato had a greater attachment than his contemporaries 
to the tenets of early Stoicism. Like Scipio, Cato kept a Stoic philosopher 
in his household, Athcnodorus Cordylion, whom he had with difficulty 
persuaded to come to Rome from Pergamum. 
66 Gaius Galus: Gaius Sulpicius Galus was consul in r66; he wrote a book 
on eclipses. 
Can you think ... Cato?: this is hilariously tongue-in-check. The elder 
Cato (see second note on Arch. r6) was notoriously aggressive and rude. 
67 by law: Cicero's lex Tullia. 
the senate ... passed a derree: this decree of the senate was·passed during 
the election campaign of 63 (as is shown by the references to candidates 
below). It served to clear up any ambiguity about what was and was not 
allowed under the existing law on electoral malpractice, the lex Calpurnia 
(see first note on§ 46 above), by enumerating the practices which would 
be considered violations of it. (Evidently the lex Tullia, which was passed 
at Sulpicius' insistence (§§ 46-7), had not at that stage been passed: thus 
the lex Tullia can be dated to a later stage in the election campaign.) 
68 on his return j/'om his pro·vince: when Murena returned from Transalpine 
Gaul in 63. 
69 to escort . .. to tlze fimmz: when a Roman boy came of age he assumed the 
toga of manhood (see fourth note on Arch. 5), and travelled to the forum 
accompanied by his family and friends; this passage shows that his pati·on 
might go too. 
many oftlze jurors: Cicero is referring to the equites in the jury; the next 
question refers to the senators. 
Luot!lus' entire army ... for a triumph: see second note on § 37 above. 
7 r Ifpoor people . .. JVhether or not they do vote: poor people wishing to pay a 
favour to their patrons could vote for them when they stood for office, 
but such support counted for little because the voting system in the 
centuriatc assembly was weighted in favour of the votes of the rich. Sec 
note on § 38 above. 
the FabianlaJV . .. in the consulship of Lucius Caesar: the Fabian law, which 
is not attested elsewhere, evidently placed a limit on the size of escorts. 
The decree of the senate passed in the consulship of Lucius Julius Caesar 
and Gaius Marcius Figulus, i.e. 64 BC, is probably to be identified with 
the decree of 64 attested by Asconius (7 C) which abolished the, collegia 
(political clubs). The omission of Figulus' name is contrary to th,l normal 
practice. 
/ 
72 lost us: i.e. Sulpicius and his supporter Cicero (cf. § 7). 
/ 
www.ebook3000.com

MUR.] 
Notes to Pages g8-Ioo 
243 
the forum: gladiatorial games were held in the forum and elsewhere 
(Rome had no permanent amphitheatre until 29 Be). 
73 a senatorial decree: i.e. the one mentioned in § 67. Cicero's argument in 
this paragraph is very weak. 
Lucius Natta: Lucius Pinarius Natta, Murena's stepson and the brother-
in-law of Publius Clodius Pulcher. Cicero was proved wrong about him: 
he became pontifex in 58 and promptly consecrated the site of the exiled 
Cicero's house, to prevent it being re-occupied. This earned him Cicero's 
hatred (Att. 4-8a.3). 
the equestrian centuries: see first note on § 54 above. 
if a Vestal virgin ... at the gladiatorial games: Vestal virgins (priestesses of 
Vesta; there were six) had reserved scats at the games. The charge is that 
Murcna's relation (her identity and the relationship are unknown) had 
given him her seat so that he could offer it to someone else in return for 
political support. 
74 the originators ... and speech: Sparta was the chief city of Laconia (in the 
southern Peloponncse), and the speech of the Laconians was sparing or 
'laconic'. 
the latter ... the former: the Cretans were conquered by Quintus Cae-
cilius Metellus (who assumed the cognomen Creticus), but the war in fact 
lasted two years (68-67 BC). The Spartans were permitted to retain their 
own laws and institutions when Greece fell under Roman control in q6. 
75 Qpintus Tubero: Quintus Aelius Tubero was an aristocrat of the highest 
connections: his mother Aemilia was the daughter of Lucius Aemilius 
Paullus (see second note on§ 31 above) and the sister of Scipio Aemili-
anus ('Publius Africanus': see second note on§ 58 above). Despite this, he 
failed to secure election even to the praetorship (the year of his defeat is 
unknown): Cicero will explain why. Quintus Fabius Maximus was the 
son of Quintus Fabius Maximus Aemilianus, another child of Aemilius 
Paullus (and brother of Scipio Aemilianus); he had more success, and 
went on to become consul in 121, when he defeated the Allobroges and 
assumed the cognomen Allobrogicus. Scipio Aemilianus' death occurred 
in 129 BC. 
Carthaginian couches: Tubero covered these with shabby goatskins 
instead of expensive embroidered cloth. It is debated whether the 
couches were of good quality and supplied by people other than Tubero 
or of inferior quality and supplied by Tubero. I take the former view: the 
previous sentence implies that Tubero was asked to provide covers but 
not the couches themselves, and it is Tubero's goatskins, and not the 
couches, that Cicero singles out when he recapitulates below (§ 76). It 
also seems unlikely that Tubero would have had enough couches of his 
own to accommodate 'the Roman people'. My guess is that the couches 
were plundered from Carthage and brought over to Rome by Scipio 
Aemilianus after he destroyed the city in q6 (cf. Isidore, E~ymo!ogiae 

244 
Notes to Pages I00-102 
[MUR. 
20. I I .3); in any case, if the couches were of risibly poor quality, it is hard 
to see why anyone should have put themselves to the expense of trans-
porting them to Rome. The view that Carthaginian couches were of good 
quality is supported by Pliny (Natura/is haoria 33·!44), who says that 
couches of this type were inlaid with silver. The only evidence pointing 
the other way is from Seneca (Epistulae 95·72-3). Seneca classes the 
couches together with the goatskins and the Samian crockery, but he 
may have misinterpreted our passage (perhaps deliberately, to reinforce 
his point); alternatively, a type of couch regarded as of good quality in 
I29 BC may well have been despised by Seneca's time (and Seneca was a 
man of colossal wealth). 
75 Samian crockay: cheap earthenware; silver or Corinthian bronze (an 
alloy of gold, silver, and copper) would have been more appropriate. 
Diogenes the c:)'nic: Diogenes of Sinope founded the Cynic school of 
philosophy in the fourth century sc; he was famous for his squalid but 
true-to-nature way of life. Stoicism developed out of Cynicism. 
76 you mill be put in charge of me: in 62 Cato would be tribune, and Cicero 
would no longer be a magistrate. Cato had evidently approached Cicero 
before the election to ask for his support. 
77 a prompter: a prompter (nomendator) was a slave who accompanied his 
master and informed him of the names of those he met. 
But ifyou do ... you did not knom them?: the text and sense of this 
sentence are very uncertain. 
78 supposition ... lack of zvisdom: yet the Stoic wise man never supposes 
anything (§§ 6I-3). Cicero implied earlier that Cato lacks wisdom (see 
first note on § 64 above); now he says so explicitly. 
79 in the Campus klartius: Cicero's prevention of Catiline's intended 
massacre at the consular elections of July 63 was alluded to at§ 52. 
in the forum: a reference to Cicero's Second Catilinarian, delivered on 8 
November. 
even in my mvn home: the Catilinarians Gaius Cornelius and Lucius Var-
gunteius had attempted to murder Cicero at his home on 7 November. 
So a pernicious 1h1·tribution: e.g. a land bill like that ofRullus (see note on§ 24 
above). 
8I a tribune designate: Quintus Caecilius Metellus Nepos, an enemy of 
Cicero's; like Cato, he was about to take up office as tribune. Cato had 
initially refused to stand for the tribunate, but changed his mind when he 
heard that Nepos was standing. At the end of the year Nepos '!Vas to 
attack Cicero's execution of the Catilinarian conspirators and veto his 
retiring speech; he went on to become consul in 57· 
" 
Gnaeus Piso: Gnaeus Calpurnius Piso held an extraordinary cory{~and in 
Nearer Spain from 65 BC until his murder there the folloling year. 
Subsequently he was accused by Cicero of having asso~ated with 
www.ebook3000.com

MUR.] 
Notes to Pages IOJ-I06 
245 
Catiline; Cicero claimed (absurdly) that Catiline and Piso had plotted to 
murder the senate on 5 February 65 (before Piso set out for Spain). 
82 those men: i.e. the Catilinarians generally. 
the vacant consulship: i.e. the consulship that would be made vacant by 
Murena's conviction. The surviving consul, Decimus Junius Silanus 
(Cato's brother-in-law), would have to arrange for the election of a 
replacement for Murena. According to Cicero, the Catilinarians are con-
fident that they could induce one of the new tribunes to veto the election, 
leaving the state with only a single consul. 
83 the most distinguished orders: senators and equites. 
84 we must also acquire fresh ones: yet 'There is no longer any place from 
which we can restore our strength'. This passage is emotional rather than 
logical. 
the Anio: a river which joins the Tiber 3 miles north of Rome, and was a 
source of the city's water. The Anio was the clos~;st that Hannibal came 
to Rome during the Second Punic War, in 2 I I B c. 
n~y most valiant colleague: Cicero's fellow 
consu~ Gaius Antonius 
Hybrida. His forces destroyed Catiline's army early in 62 BC, but 
Antonius himself took no part in the battle. 
86 exhausted ... by pl~ysiml illness: by referring to Murena's illness, Cicero 
not only excites pity for Murena but also points to the harshness of the 
law under which he is being tried. The lex Tullia disallowed or restricted 
the plea of ill-health: see notes on § 47 above. 
the congratulations: that is, on his election to the consulship. 
an extreme(y ancimt tomn: Lanuvium. 
dressed in filth and rags: see first note on § 42 above. 
88 the mask: wax portrait-masks (imagines) of ancestors who had held 
curule office were kept in cupboards within the atria of the houses of the 
leading families, and were displayed and adorned on special occasions (as 
here on Murena's election to the consulship). Murena's father had held 
the praetorship (§ I 5), a curule magistracy, and had therefore earned the 
'right to a mask' (ius imaginum), i.e. the right to be represented after his 
death among his family's masks. Masks were a sign of high social status: 
Murena would have had several at his house, but Cicero, being a new 
man, would have had none. 
89 the penalty of the new lmv: the lex Tullia imposed a penalty of exile for ten 
years (cf. § 45). 
Gaius kiurena: Murena had left his brother Gaius in charge of Trans-
alpine Gaul when he departed for Rome to stand for the consulship 
earlier in the year. 
90 Juno Sospita: Juno Sospita ('Juno the Saviour') was the chief deity of 
Murena's home town Lanuvium (cf. § 86). She was given a temple at 
Rome in I94 Be; the obligation on the consuls to sacrifice there is not 

Notes to Pages I ID-I I I 
(ARCH. 
mentioned anywhere else. Terracotta fragments from her temple at 
Lanuvium (c.sso Be) are in the possession of the Leeds City Museum 
(currently closed). 
PRO ARCHIA 
r Au/us Licinius: to establish Archias' Roman credentials at the outset, 
Cicero refers to him by his Roman names, without the addition of 
'Archias'. 
3 a most excellent man: the ancient scholia on this passage (175 Stangl) 
reveal that the praetor in charge of the court was Cicero's brother Qtlin-
tus. After his practorship he governed Asia from 6r to 58. 
4 Antioch: Antioch in Syria, the most important city in the Greek east after 
Alexandria. It did not become part of the Roman empire until 64 BC. 
5 lta(y: southern Italy is meant. 
when kiarius was consul with Catu!us: Gaius Marius and Quintus Lutatius 
Catulus were consuls in 102, 1\1arius for the fourth time. Marius had 
concluded the Jugurthinc War in 105, and in 102 defeated the Teutoni at 
Aquae Sextiae. The following year Marius and Catulus defeated the 
Cimbri at Vercellae (sec second note on§ 19 below). Catulus was noted 
for his cultural interests, and two short poems written by him survive. 
Cicero's method of naming the consuls here deviates from the usual 
formula to give greater prominence to Marius. 
The Lum!!i: Lucius Licinius Lucullus and his brother Marcus Terentius 
Varro Lucullus. Lucius was the consul of 74, who fought against Mithri-
dates from 73 until his replacement in 67 (see note on § 21 below); 
Marcus was consul in 73· Their father Lucius Licinius Lucullus (praetor 
in 104 and commander in Sicily in 103) was condemned for misconduct 
in Sicily and went into exile, probably in 102, the year of Archias' arrival 
in Rome. 
when the toga ofboyhood is worn: praetextatus means 'of an age to wear the 
purple-bordered toga'. Roman boys wore the purple-bordered toga (toga 
praetexta, also worn by curule magistrates) until their mid-teens, when 
they formally assumed the toga of manhood (toga virilis). It is impossible 
to believe that Archias had been honoured by Greek states at so early an 
age, and Cicero said above (§ 4) that Archias had already 'grown out 
of childhood' before he began his tour. Cicero is therefore overstating 
Archias' youth. He is also misleading the jury over Archias' nationality 
at this time: since he was not yet a Roman citizen, he would not have 
worn a toga of any type. 
6 Quintus Mete!!us Numidicus and his son Pius: Quintus Caccilius Metellus, 
consul in 109, fought against Jugurtha, king of Numidia, from !09 until 
his replacement by Marius in 107; in 106 he celebrated a tri~ph and 
assumed the cognomen Numidicus. In roo he was exiled for jefusing to 
swear to observe Saturninus' agrarian law, but was recalle<f in 98 as a 
www.ebook3000.com

ARCH.) 
Notes to Pages I I I-I I2 
247 
result of the efforts of his son, also named Quintus Caecilius Metcllus, 
who consequently acquired the cognomen Pius ('Dutiful'). Pius was the 
praetor of 89 from whom Archias received Roman citizenship (§ 7); he 
afterwards became consul in So. He was dead by the time of Archias' 
trial. 
Marws Aemilius: Marcus Acmilius Scaurus, consul in I I 5, censor in I09, 
and princeps senatus (leader of the senate). Cicero admired him as a man 
who had risen to the highest seniority without the advantages of birth 
and wealth (sec fifth note on kiur. I 6). 
Qitintus Catufus and his son: the father has been mentioned above(§ s); the 
son, also named Q!.tintus Lutatius Catulus, was consul in 78 and censor 
in 65. 
Lucius Crassus: Lucius Licinius Crassus, consul in 95 and censor in 92. 
He was a famous orator and an important influence on Cicero, who cast 
him as the principal speaker in his dialogue De oratore. 
Drusus, the Octavii, Cato, and ... the Hortensii: Marcus Livius Drusus 
was a pupil of Lucius Crassus; as tribune in 9I he proposed a series of 
reforms which led to his assassination and precipitat~d the Social War. 
The Octavii included Gnaeus Octavius, the consul of 87. Cato was the 
brother-in-law of Drusus and father of the famous Cato who committed 
suicide in 46. The Hortcnsii included Q!.tintus Hortensius Hortalus, 
Cicero's oratorical rival and, later, partner. 
kian·us Lund/us: see third note on§ 5 above. The date and purpose of his 
visit to Sicily arc unknown. The Scrvilius who was prosecuted, perhaps 
in 9I, by Marcus and his brother Lucius is not likely to have been the 
same man as the Servilius who was praetor in Sicily in I02, and it is 
therefore unlikely that Marcus was travelling to Sicily to collect evidence 
for his prosecution, as has been suggested. See E. Badian, Klio, 66 (I984), 
JOI-6. 
Heradea: in the centre of the instep of Italy, in Lucania. Its treaty with 
Rome was granted in 278 BC (cf. Pro Balbo 2I, so). 
7 IF AN V PERSONS . .. SIXTY' DAY'S: a quotation from the /ex P/autia Papiria 
(89 BC), carried by the tribunes Marcus Plautius Silvanus and Gaius 
Papirius Carbo. The main law by which Rome conceded the citizenship 
to her Italian allies was the lex Julia (90 BC). The lex Plautia Papiria was a 
supplementary law which extended the citizenship to men in Archias' 
position, that is, honorary citizens of federate states not resident in 
those states but nevertheless resident in Italy. The lex Julia evidently 
did not provide for such cases. See A. N. Sherwin-White, The Roman 
Citizenshil (Oxford, I973), I5o--2. 
Qitintus Metellus: Pius (see first note on§ 6 above). 
8 Italian rVar: i.e. the Social War (9I-87 BC), the war between Rome and 
her Italian allies (socii); it resulted in the extension of Roman citizenship 
to all Latin and Italian communities south of the Po. 

Notes to Pages I IJ-I IS 
[ARCH. 
9 the board ofpraetors: there were at this date six praetors each year. Four 
(of 89 Be) are named below: Appius, Gabinius, Metellus (Pius), and 
Lentulus. It appears from this passage that declarations of citizenship 
could be made before any of them (therefore at § 7 PRAETOREM has 
been translated as' A PRAETOR', not 'THE PRAETOR'). 
Appius: Appius Claudius Pulcher (consul in 79), the father of Cicero's 
enemy (from 6I BC onwards) Publius Clodius Pulcher. 
Gabinius: Publius Gabinius, convicted some time before 70 of extortion 
when governor of Achaea (Divinatio in Caecilium 64). 
Lucius Lentulus: Lucius Cornelius Lentulus, evidently praetor in charge 
of a quaestio de civitate (court concerning citizenship). 
10 Locri: Locri was not mentioned at§ 5 when Cicero listed the towns which 
gave Archias their citizenship: it may have dropped out of the manu-
scripts there, or been wrongly added here. 
the general granting ofRoman citizenship: i.e. the lex Julia (see first note on 
§ 7 above). 
the Papian law: the lex Papia (65 BC). This was the law under which 
Archias was being tried. It was carried by the tribune Gaius Papius, and 
sought to expel from Rome all non-citizens who did not have a fixed 
residence in Italy. 
I I the Roman census hils: the census list was a register of all adult male citi-
zens, compiled by the censors in theory every five years, but in practice at 
irregular intervals. The first census after Archias' enfranchisement was 
that of Lucius Julius Caesar and Publius Licinius Crassus in 89, but it 
was abandoned. The next was in 86; this time it was successfully com-
pleted (463,000 citizens were listed), but Archias was not included 
because he was abroad with Lucius Lucullus (see third note on § 5 
above), who was serving under Sulla in the eastern Mediterranean. The 
next census was in 70 (9Io,ooo citizens): Archias was again with Lucul-
lus, on campaign in Asia. Further censuses were attempted in 65 and 64, 
but Cicero ignores them because they were abandoned. 
14 desperate men: an allusion to the Catilinarian conspirators. 
I6 the younger /Uhmnus: Publius Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus Africanus, 
the destroyer of Carthage (146) and Numantia (133), consul in 147 and 
134, and censor in 142. He was noted for his cultural interests and his 
philhellenism, as were his friends Gains Laelius (consul in 140) and 
Lucius Furius Philus (consul in 136). Cicero's dialogue De republim 
idealizes the society of Scipio and his friends, thus giving rise to the 
notion of a 'Scipionic circle', an idea now downplayed by scholars. 
Laelius is given the leading part in Cicero's De amicitia. 
the elder Marcus Cato: Marcus Porcius Cato, consul in 195 and jtensor of 
notorious severity (censors had the power to expel unworthy n\embers of 
the senate) in 184. He was a famous orator and a stern mtfralist, and 
was opposed, in spite of his Greek learning (reflected espepially in his 
www.ebook3000.com

ARCH.] 
Notes to Pages I 16-118 
249 
historical work), to the rapid hellenization which Roman society under-
went during his lifetime. He is the central figure in Cicero's De ;enectute, 
in which Scipio Aemilianus and Laelius also appear. 
I7 Roscius: Quintus Roscius Gallus, a famous actor of tragic and, particu-
larly, comic parts. Cicero hopes that the jury's fondness for Roscius will 
dispose them favourably towards Archias, although the two men were 
artists of quite a different kind, and Archias was a Syrian by birth. Early 
in his career Cicero had spoken in civil cases on behalf of Roscius' 
brother-in-law (Pro Quinctio 77) and, later, Roscius himself; both 
speeches survive, Pro QJtinctio and Pro Roscir1 comoedo. 
I 8 improvise ... 1vords and expressions!: Archias' powers of improvisation are 
mentioned by Quintilian (Jnst. I0.7. I9); but this passage will be the 
source of his information. 
Ennius: ~Iintus Ennius (239-I69 Be), from Rudiae in the heel of Italy 
(§ 22 ), the greatest of the early Latin poets. He was brought to Rome by 
the elder Cato and befriended by the Fulvii Nobiliores, who took him 
on campaign with them and obtained Roman citizenship for him (cf. the 
Luculli and Archias). Ennius' greatest work was the Annales, an epic 
poem on Roman history down to the elder Scipio Africanus. 
I9 Rocks and deserts ... tracks: evoking the myths of Orpheus and Amphion. 
Orpheus charmed animals, trees, and stones with his music; Amphion 
with his caused the walls of Thebes to arise. 
the Cimbri: a German tribe which migrated from north Jutland towards 
Italy, defeating Roman armies in I IJ, C.I09, and IOS before being 
destroyed by Marius at Vercellae in IOI (sec second note on§ 5 above). 
20 Lucius Plotius: Lucius Plotius Gallus was the first person to teach decla-
mation in Latin (c.92 Be). The young Cicero was prevented from study-
ing under him because his mentors (men such as Lucius Crassus: see 
fourth note on § 6 above) thought that his rhetorical training should be 
Greek (Suetonius, De grammaticis et rhetoribus 26). 
2I The Mithridatic War: i.e. the Third Mithridatic War (73-63 Be), fought 
against Mithridates VI of Pontus, Lucius Lucullus relieved Cyzicus in 
72, conquered Pontus between 72 and 70, and took control of part of 
Armenia in 69, after which he lost the loyalty of his troops. The victory 
off Tenedos (near the mouth of the Hellespont) took place some time 
before the summer of 71; Cicero ignores the fact that it was won by 
Lucullus' legate Gaius Valerius Triarius, not by Lucullus himself(Mem-
non 33.1). Cicero makes no mention of Pompey, who concluded the war 
between 66 and 63, after Lucullus had been relieved of his command in 
67. In view of the hostility between Lucullus and Pompey, Archias' poem 
must have stopped short of Pompey's appointment, and Cicero will 
therefore be being over-generous to Lucullus in claiming that Archias 
treated the war 'in its entirety'. 
22 the elder Afi"iranus: Publius Cornelius Scipio Africanus, the conqueror of 

250 
Notes to Pages I I8-I20 
[ARCH. 
Hannibal (202), consul in 205 and 194, and censor in 199. The tomb of 
the Scipios still exists, about a kilometre out of Rome on the Appian Way. 
Although there was accommodation inside for at least eighteen Scipios, 
only three individuals had their statues on the outside of the tomb: the 
elder Africanus, his brother Lucius, and Ennius. See Livy 38.56.4; 
L. Richardson, A New Topographical Dittionilly of Ancient Rome 
(Baltimore and London, 1992), 359 [ 
22 our Cato: i.e. the younger Marcus Porcius Cato (tribune this year, later 
praetor in 54), the man who joined in Murcna's prosecution and who 
committed suicide at Utica in 46. For his great-grandfather Cato the 
censor, see second note on § r 6 above. 
Maximus, !VIarcellus, and Fulvius: other men who were eulogized in the 
Annales of Ennius. Quintus Fabius Maximus Verrucosus (consul in 233, 
228, 215, 214, and 209, censor in 230, and dictator in 221 and 217) was 
one of the leading generals in the Second Punic War, noted for his suc-
cessful policy of avoiding direct confrontation with Hannibal (hence his 
nickname 'Cunctator', meaning 'Delayer', alluded to by Ennius in the 
line 'One man by delaying restored our country to us', Annales 363 
Skutsch). Marcus Claudius Marcellus (consul in 222, 215, 214, 210, and 
208) also fought against Hannibal, and was most famous for his capture 
of Syracuse from the Carthaginians in 21 r. Fabius and Marcellus were 
called the 'shield of Rome' and the 'sword of Rome' respectively. Marcus 
Fulvius Nobilior (consul in r89 and censor in 179) took Ennius with him 
when fighting the Aetolian War during his consulship (§ 27); see second 
note on § I 8 above. 
24 the man whom me today call Great: Pompey, i.e. Gnaeus Pompeius, called 
'Magnus' ('Great') from 8r Be; he took the historian Theophanes of 
Mytilene with him during his Mithridatic campaign (66-63 BC). 
25 the property he was engaged in selling: the reference is to the proscriptions 
of 82-81 BC, in which Sulla's political enemies were killed and their 
property sold at auction. 
26 Corduba: the capital of the province of Baetica (in southern Spain). 
Seneca and Lucan came from Corduba in the first century AD. 
27 Decimus Brutus: Decimus Junius Brutus Callaicus, the consul of 138. He 
won victories in Iberia in 138-136 and was the patron of Lucius Accius 
(r7o-c.85 Be), the tragic poet, whom Cicero knew in his youth. Accius 
wrote the dedication for the temple of Mars built by Brutus to com-
memorate his Spanish victories. 
the great Fulvius: see third note on § 22 above. 
28 a poem on which Archias has nom started work: Archias' poem on Cicero's 
suppression of the Catilinarian conspiracy (63 BC) seems never to have 
come to fruition (Att. r.r6.rs). 
/ 
I 
; 
; 
www.ebook3000.com

CAEL.) 
Notes to Pages I2f)-IJJ 
PRO CAELIO 
r on a day of festivities and public games: Cicero was speaking on 4 April, the 
first day of the ludi Mega lenses (Megalesian games), which lasted until ro 
April. 
there is a lam: the lex Plautia de vi (Piautian law concerning violence), of 
c.7o BC. See note on§ 70 below. 
someone he has prosecuted . .. again: Lucius Calpurnius Bestia, the father 
of Atratinus, whom Caelius had unsuccessfully prosecuted for electoral 
malpractice on I r February. 
by a prostitute: Clodia. 
2 some other person: Clodia again. 
3 Marcus Caelius: the father. 
4 before these jurors ... myself as advocate: two-thirds of the jurors were 
equestrian, and Cicero was from an equestrian fm;nily. 
jiltlz: see first note on Mur. 42. 
5 Praetuttians: Caelius came from Interamnia (Teramo} in the Praetuttian 
territory, in Picenum (on the eastern side ofitaly, north-east of Rome). 
7 the kindness ... your father: Cicero had defended Atratinus' father, 
Lucius Calpurnius Bestia, five times, and was now preparing to defend 
him a sixth time. 
9 the toga of manhood: sec fourth note on Arch. S· 
ro a .fi"iend of Catilille: in §§ ro-rs Cicero attempts to explain away the 
embarrassing fact that Caclius had been a friend of Catiline. This was a 
damning point against Caelius, and it was particularly awkward for 
Cicero to have to defend him on this count since Cicero had been 
unequivocal in his condemnation of Catiline and his supporters over 
many years. 
mas standing for the consulship: in 64 BC. 
later on: in 63 BC. 
when !mas praetor: 66 BC. 
praetor in A.fi"ica: Catiline was governor ('praetor' is used loosely for 
'propraetor') of Africa in 67-66. 
Catiline lvas tried for extortion: in 6s; he was acquitted, allegedly as a 
result of collusion with the prosecutor Publius Clodius Pulcher. Cicero 
had considered defending him (Att. 1.2.r), despite believing him to be 
guilty (Att. I. I. I). 
r I standing ji1r the second time: in 63. 
keeping our arms inside our togas: trainee orators were forbidden to gesticu-
late in the way that experienced orators did. 
wizen me more our tunics: this detail is added purely for the contrast with 
togas. The reader will detect many other such contrasts. 

Notes to Pages IJJ-IJS 
[CAEL. 
I2 a great many indimtions of the highest qualities: in this extraordinary (and 
famous) passage (§§ I 2-q), Cicero argues, in stark contrast to the view 
he takes everywhere else (e.g. in his Catilinarians), that Catiline had good 
qualities as well as bad, and that this enabled him to fool people (like 
Caelius) into giving him their support. This is in fact the characterization 
that we find in Sallust's Catiline: there Catiline possesses many trad-
itional Roman virtues, but has been corrupted by the times in which he 
lived; born several centuries earlier, he might have become a great patri-
otic hero. One suspects that the more complicated and interesting picture 
that we find in these sections and in Sallust is closer to the truth than the 
usual picture we have of Catilinc. 
I 3 men ofhigh rank: definitely a reference to Crass us and Caesar. 
I 4 on one occasion: sec sixth note on § I o above. 
IS a charge of mnspiracy: in April 59 BC Caelius successfully prosecuted 
Gaius Antonius Hybrida, Cicero's colleague in the consulship of 63, on a 
charge connected with his governorship of Macedonia ( 62-60 ), probably 
extortion. Cicero defended him, since Antonius had been the general 
nominally responsible for the defeat of Catiline. Antonius, however, was 
believed to have been a Catilinarian sympathizer (he absented himself 
from the final battle), and Cicero's reference here to 'a charge of conspir-
acy' implies that Caelius had brought up this point against Antonius in 
his prosecution. On the trial, see E. S. Gruen, Latomus, 32 (I973), 30I-
IO. We have a lively extract from Caelius' speech, quoted by Quintilian 
(lnst. 4-2.I23-4); it seems to me to be modelled on Cicero's Verrines (no 
doubt every prosecutor for extortion took these speeches as his model). 
I6 the question of . .. bribes: the prosecution have accused Caclius of bribery 
at an election, but we do not know which one. The likeliest guess is that it 
was at his own election to the quaestorship, which he probably held in 
58 or 57-although Cicero strangely makes no mention anywhere of 
his tenure of this office. Sec G. V. Sumner, Phoenix, 25 (I97I), 247 f. 
The suggestion that the election was the one in 57 at which Lucius 
Calpurnius Bestia stood unsuccessfully for the praetorship can be ruled 
out: Atratinus would hardly have incriminated his father, who was facing 
a second prosecution for this very offence. 
another person: the references to 'another person' and 'someone else' (the 
same word in Latin, but English demands some variety) are all to Lucius 
Calpurnius Bestia, whom Caclius had prosecuted unsuccessfully for 
electoral malpractice on I I February (Cicero defending), and was now 
prosecuting again. 
17 have adjusted . .. his purpose: i.e. have exaggerated the rental incomcJrom 
the property in order to help Clodius achieve a better sale. The property 
was on the Palatine, the rich and fashionable area overlooking the forum 
where Cicero himself lived. 
f 
! 
I8 in a political case: his prosecution of Antonius (sec note on§ rsfobovc). 
I 
our houses: Cicero may be referring to Crassus' house as well a;~ his own. 
www.ebook3000.com

CAEL.] 
Notes to Pages 135-I38 
253 
by his o1vn people: by his friends and his clients, since he aspired to a 
political career. 
'Would that never in Pelion's forest . .. ': this and the following quotations 
are from the opening lines of Ennius' Medea (trag. fr. I03 Jocelyn). 
Crassus was referring (as Cicero says) to the arrival of Ptolemy XII 
Auletes in Rome in 58 BC: this was the first in a series of events which led 
ultimately to the murder of Dio and the prosecution of Caelius. 
Medea ofthe Palatine: Atratinus had rashly called Caelius a 'pretty-boy 
Jason', pulchellus Jason (Fortunatianus, Ars rhetorica 3·7 (=I24 Halm) ); he 
must have referred in some way to the golden fleece. This prompted 
Crassus and Cicero to quote from Ennius' kledea, and allowed Cicero to 
trump Atratinus by comparing Clodia to Medea, a terrifying woman 
driven by her passion to take excessive revenge against the man who had 
rejected her. 
I9 a senator: Quintus Fufius Calenus, a friend of Clodius and later a 
prominent enemy of Cicero's. He became consul in 47. 
that very fountain-head: Clodia. 
(On the mitness F1!fius): as at Mur. 57 (where see seco~d note), Cicero has 
chosen to leave some original material out of the published speech. Here, 
however, it is questionable whether he himself wrote the heading which is 
substituted in its place, since this heading gives the name of the senator, 
whereas Cicero in§ I9 carefully preserves his anonymity. 
23 about Dio: i.e. about the murder of Dio, the leader of the Alexandrian 
deputation, killed at the house of Titus Coponius in Rome at the instiga-
tion of King Ptolemy Auletes. 
or even admits his responsibilizy: Cicero is conjecturing, not stating, that 
Ptolemy admits responsibility for Dio's murder. The wording seems 
intended to confuse. 
Pub/ius Asicius: Publius Asicius was prosecuted for the murder by Gaius 
Licinius Macer C1lvus and successfully defended by Cicero; Calvus' 
speech survived to Tacitus' time, but was not much read (Tacitus, Dialo-
gus 21.2). Caelius was accused of having been in league with Asicius. 
26 He claimed ... for the praetorship: Herennius' complaint is that Caelius 
was a friend of Lucius Calpurnius Bestia (the father of Atratinus), sup-
porting him in the praetorian elections of 57, but that he afterwards 
betrayed him, prosecuting him for electoral malpractice on I I February 
56 (when Cicero secured his acquittal), and then bringing a second 
prosecution ( c[ § s6 ). 
I am not troubled ... in the Luperci: Herennius' complaint here is that 
Caelius has in some way failed to show him the loyalty expected of a 
fellow-member of a religious association, the Luperci; Cicero turns the 
charge around by pointing out that to prosecute one's fellow-member is 
hardly an act of loyalty, and that Herennius, instead of alluding to his 
connection with Caelius in his speech, ought more properly to feel 

254 
Notes to Pages IJ<J-142 
[CAEL. 
ashamed of having prosecuted him. Rome had many religious associ-
ations (soda!itates), and their members were always expected to help and 
support one another. The Luperci were an ancient fraternity of primitive 
origins; at the Lupercalia (rs February) they were required to dress only 
in girdles made from the skins of sacrificed goats and run round the 
Palatine whipping female bystanders with goatskin thongs. In spite of 
this, the Luperci boasted some high-ranking members, including Mark 
Antony; the festival survived until AD 494, when it was turned into the 
feast of the Purification of the Virgin. 
27 Pub/ius Clodius: the prosecutor, not the famous Clodius who was Cicero's 
enemy. 
Balbus: i.e. Lucius Herennius Balbus. Cicero sometimes calls him 
'Herennius' and sometimes 'Balbus'. 
Baiae: a fashionable coastal resort to the west of Naples. Many rich 
Romans owned houses there, and the place had a reputation for luxury 
and decadence. 
30 There are lJlJO charges ... poison: Cicero has now dismissed all the charges 
except the two which he wants to concentrate on, because they concern 
Clodia. These are: (i) the charge that Caelius borrowed gold from Clodia 
under false pretences, intending to bribe Lucceius' slaves to murder Dio 
at Lucceius' house (§§ sr-s); (ii) the charge that Caelius, when Clodia 
had found out what he intended to do with the gold, attempted to poison 
her with the help of her own slaves (§§ 56-69). Cicero's vagueness about 
these charges is of course deliberate. 
32 Gnaeus Dornitius: the presiding magistrate, a man not otherwise known, 
but possibly praetor in 54 (unless he is Gnaeus Domitius Calvinus, who 
was praetor this year; but praetors did not usually preside over violence 
cases). 
I mean her brother: Cicero implies that Clodia is guilty of incest with her 
brother Clodius. The allegation was made against all three of Clodius' 
sisters, but originally only against the youngest of them, Clodia Luculli; 
Catullus (79) also accused his 'Lcsbia' (one of the Clodia sisters: it is not 
known which) of incest with Clodius. See T. P. Wiseman, Catullan Q}tes-
tions (Leicester, 1969), 52-5. Cicero's joke is in bad taste; it is also very 
funny, and very revealing of his hatred of Clodia and her brother. 
33 masks: sec note on Mur. 88. 
the jim10us Caecus: Appius Claudius Caecus, censor in 3 r 2 and consul in 
307 and 296, and the earliest clear-cut personality in Roman history. As 
censor he commissioned the Appian vVay from Rome to Capua and the 
Aqua Appia, Rome's first aqueduct. In 280, when he was old and blind 
(hence the cognomen Caecus ('Blind'), and Cicero's joke in the next 
sentence), he dissuaded the senate from making peace with Pyrrhqs. 
34 Q}tintus Metellus: Quintus Caecilius Metellus Celer, a legate of Pory{pey in 
Asia in 66 (and perhaps 67), praetor in 63, governor of Cisalpine/Gaul in 
62, and consul in 6o; as consul he opposed Clodius' transfer to rhe plebs. 
www.ebook3000.com

CAEL.] 
Notes to Pages 142-146 
2 55 
He was Clodia's cousin as well as her husband; they married in c.79. 
They did not get on, and when he died in 59 she was suspected of having 
poisoned him (cf. §§ 59-60). We have a letter from Metellus to Cicero 
(Fam. 5· I), written in 62; it is haughty and insulting. 
the fimzous Quinta Claudia: when the sacred image of Cybele was being 
transported from its temple at Pessinus in Phrygia to Rome in 204 BC, the 
ship carrying it became grounded in the Tiber; Claudia, however, pulled 
the ship free, thereby demonstrating her chastity, which had been 
questioned. 
the fimwus Vestal virgin Claudia: when her father (or perhaps brother) 
Appius Claudius Pulcher as consul in 143 wished to celebrate a triumph 
for his victory over the Salassi but was prevented by a tribunician veto, 
Claudia saved the triumph by the action which Cicero describes. On 
Vestal virgins see fourth note on Jl1ur. 73· 
36 your youngest brother: Clodius. 
he always used to sleep ... sister: see second note on§ 32 above. 
Why do you ... of nothing?: a line from a comic poet, perhaps Caecilius 
Statius (see second note on S. Rose. 46). 
· 
37 Caeci!ius: see second note on S. Rose. 46. Nothing is known of the comic 
fragments quoted in this paragraph; they are all assumed to be from 
Caecilius, but Cicero says only that the first one is. We lose much by not 
knowing the contexts. 
Why did you go . .. a mare ofher allurements?: these words are not in verse, 
and are not therefore from a comedy (attempts have been made, however, 
to emend them into verse); the words which follow are snatches of verse. 
38 her own brother . .. unkind gossip: sec second note on § 32 above. 
'He has broken . .. be mended': a quotation from Terence, Adelphi IZo-r. 
that IIJoman: Clodia. 
39 Camillus, Fabricius, and Curius: Marcus Furius Camillus (dictator in 396, 
390, etc.) destroyed Veii in 396, doubling Rome's territory; Gaius Fabri-
cius Luscinus (consul in 282 and 278, and censor in 275) won victories in 
southern Italy in the war against Pyrrhus, and expelled an ex-consul 
from the senate for possessing ro pounds of silver tableware; Manius 
Curius Dentatus (consul in 290, 275, and 274, and censor in 272) 
defeated Pyrrhus near lVlalventum in 275. Fabricius and Curius were 
famed for their frugality and incorruptibility. 
40 times have changed for Greece: the Greeks lost their freedom to Rome in 
q6 BC. 
41 For there are some: Cicero refers to the Epicureans, the Academics and 
Peripatetics, and the Stoics respectively. 
43 any valiant ... personage: Cicero may be thinking of Caesar, among 
others. 
45 as a prosecutor: Caelius had prosecuted Lucius Calpurnius Bestia on 

Notes to Pages I 47-IS I 
[CAEL. 
I I February and Gaius Antonius Hybrida back in 59 (see note on § I 5 
above). Cicero had been his teacher, hence the remark about not wishing 
to boast. 
47 a prosewtion against an ex-consul: another reference to Caelius' prosecu-
tion of Antonius. 
maintain ... a struggle: another reference to Caelius' prosecutions of 
Bestia, and to the present trial. 
that neighbourhood: the Palatine, where Caelius and Clodia lived. 
49 her blazing eyes: Cicero refers to Clodia as 'Ox Eyes' (Boopis) in his 
letters to Atticus; the word is an epithet applied in the ·Homeric poems to 
Hera, who was significantly both the wife and the sister of Zeus. 
so when I was away: in exile (58-57 nc). 
5 I First there is the gold . .. C!otlia 's death: cf. § 30, with note, above. 
Lucius Luueius: Dio's host in Rome, until Dio moved on to stay with 
Titus Coponius. Lucceius was a friend of Cicero; he prosecuted Catiline 
unsuccessfully in 64 and supported Cicero in 63. In the sos he took up 
writing history, and Cicero in a famous letter of 55 BC (Pam. s.I2) begged 
him to glorify his achievements. See also Pam. S·I3-IS, letters to and 
from Lucceius in the 40s. 
52 that Venus of yours: Cicero claims that Clodia had a statue of Venus on 
which she kept items of jewellery given to her by her lovers. Unless 
invented, this information will have come from Caelius. 
54 For I have ... a most impressive 1vitness: contrast the line taken at§§ 22 and 
66. 
55 whether an impetuous ... conscientiously: the text as it stands is of course 
illogical. It could be made logical by the insertion of a 'not' (' ... has not 
given his evidence conscientiously'); 'not' is a word easily omitted by 
scribes. But Cicero is quite capable of arguing along the lines of 'Heads I 
win, tails you lose'. 
56 the charge about poison: cf. § 30, with note, above. 
To avoid being auused?: of the attempted murder of Dio at Lucceius' 
house. Clodia would have been a witness to his guilt, so Caelius would 
have had a motive for murdering her. 
And JPould anyone ... himself?: i.e. no one would ever have thought of 
connecting Caelius with the attempted murder of Dio were it not for the 
fact that Caelius had prosecuted Lucius Calpurnius Bestia twice, and his 
son Atratinus had consequently been in need of a charge to bring against 
him. 
Caelius has now brought ... been acquitted: Caelius' first prosecution of 
Bestia for electoral malpractice on I I February was unsuccessful, ,!!nd he 
had now brought a second prosecution on the same charge. Thtfcharge 
had been lodged but the case had not yet come to court. 
f 
so horrific a crime: the attempted poisoning of Clodia. 
j 
; 
www.ebook3000.com

CAEL.] 
Notes to Pages ISI-IS6 
257 
an extreme(y serious charge: the attempted murder of Dio. Cicero says that 
this charge was fabricated simply to provide a motive for the main 
charge, the attempted poisoning of Clodia. 
59 Qpintus Metellus: the husband of Cloclia. He died in 59 BC, and Clodia 
was suspected of having poisoned him. Sec first note on§ 34 above. 
hon> terrible a storm . .. threatened the state: a reference to the tribunate of 
Clod ius and exile of Cicero in s8 BC. 
Quintus Catulus: Quintus Lutatius Catulus, son of the consul of 102 and 
himself consul in 78 and censor in 65. He was the leader of the conserva-
tives in the senate in the 70s and 6os, opposing the lex Gabinia in 67 and 
the lex JI!Ianilia in 66; he also opposed Caesar in 63. His death in 61 or 6o, 
like that ofMetellus in 59, was a serious blow to Cicero and the conserva-
tive cause. 
6o his deranged cousin: Clodius, whose mother was a sister of Metellus' 
father. Cicero goes on to mention Metellus' opposition to Clodius' activ-
ities in 6o Be; this is a reference to Clodius' 'intended transfer to the 
plebs, which took place in the following year. 
the relerity: a malicious pun on the name of Metellus Ccler. 
6r that explains the tears: a quotation from Terence, Andria 126; the phrase 
became proverbial. 
62 her usual one-penny transaction: a quadrans (a low-value copper coin, here 
translated 'penny') was the usual price of admission to the baths; but here 
Clodia is supposed to have received the fee in return for her sexual 
favours rather than paid it as an admission charge. The main point of the 
joke, however, is that it connects with a remark that Caclius had made in 
his speech: he had memorably described Clodia as 'the one-penny 
Clytemnestra' (quadrantaria C(ytaemestra), i.e. a husband-murderer who 
sells her sexual favours cheaply (Quint. Jnst. 8.6.53; cf. Plut. Cic. 29.4 for 
the origin of Clodia's nickname '~1adrantaria' (with note on § 71 
below)). 
64 an experienced poetess . .. to her aedit: it is possible that Cicero's words arc 
to be taken literally, that Clodia did indeed write for the stage (cf. Sest. 
r r6). 
Licinius: Cicero's frequent repetition of the name emphasizes the farcical 
absurdity of the situation. 
65 So here ... up goes the curtain: mime was a crude and makeshift form of 
comic drama, akin to pantomime or vulgar farce; it enjoyed great popu-
larity. Clappers (sea billa) were hinged boards operated with the foot to 
beat time for dancers (for an illustration of them in use see T. P. Wise-
man, Cinna the Poet (Leicester, 1974), pl. 2a). The stage-curtain was 
lowered at the beginning of a performance and raised at the end; while a 
play was in progress, it lay concealed in a trough set into the floor. 
68 It must mean ... pay-o.ff: i.e. it must mean either (i) that the slaves were 
being rewarded for having helped to frame Caelius, or (ii) that the 

zs8 
Notes to Page 157 
(CAEL. 
prosecution wished to remove all possibility of the slaves being interro-
gated under torture and revealing Caelius' innocence (although there was 
no legal obligation on Clodia to submit her slaves for interrogation (sec 
first note on S. Rose. 77), not to do so was seen as an admission of guilt (as 
Cicero says at S. Rose. 120), and so it was better to free them), or (iii) that 
the slaves were being rewarded for their silence regarding Clodia's crimes 
and immoralities. 
69 that .fictitious box ... indecent strny Cicero now makes a connection 
between the box in which the poison was allegedly contained and an 
obscene story which was afterwards told against Clodia. The story is 
unknown: not evenT P. Wiseman is able to recover it (Cinna the Poet, 
170-5). But it must have reflected very badly on Clodia, given that Cicero 
brings it up at such a prominent point in the speech (the end of the 
argumentation, immediately before the conclusion). As for the box 
(the word pyxis denotes a small sealed jar or pill-box), we know from 
Q!intilian (Ins/. 6.3.25) that Caelius produced a pyxis during one of his 
speeches and used it to make an obscene joke (Quintilian thought such 
behaviour undignified). The speech was no doubt Caelius' own defence 
speech; but what the joke was, and how it connects with the story Cicero 
alludes to here, we simply do not know. 
a pemzylliorth of scandal: a pun on Clodia's nickname 'Quadrantaria' (see 
note on § 62 above). In the Latin the pun is contained in the word 
'square' (quadrare), but it is not possible to reproduce it in the translation 
there, so I have instead introduced it here (where the Latin says merely 'a 
certain amount of scandal'). 
70 The Iaiii concerned ... of the conspinuy Cicero points out the absurdity of 
Caelius' being brought to trial under a law designed for use in national 
emergencies such as the insurrection of the consul Lepidus in 78-77 BC 
and the Catilinarian conspiracy in 63-62 Be. He refers to an otherwise 
unattested lex Lutatia carried by Lepidus' opponent and fellow consul 
Q!intus Lutatius Catulus (see third note on § 59 above) in 78. The 
Catilinarian trials, however, are known to have been held under a differ-
ent violence law, the lex Plautia (c.70 BC). The easiest way of explaining 
how Cicero can treat these two separate violence laws as one and the same 
is to assume that the lex Lutatia was an ad hoc measure whose provisions 
were later incorporated into the lex Plautia, and that it was the lex Plautia 
under which Caelius was tried: see D. H. Berry (ed.), Cicero: Pro Sulla 
(Cambridge, 1996), 14-16. 
71 Atiarws Camurtius and Gaius Caesernius: these men are not otherwise 
known, and the identity of the Vettius mentioned below is also unkndwn; 
this paragraph is as obscure to us as§ 6g. It appears that the prosecution 
had cited the conviction of Camurtius and Caesernius under the lex 
Plautia de vi as a precedent for the trial of Caelius under the sam{law. It 
seems that Camurtius and Caesernius had committed a hor.fosexual 
I 
assault on Vettius to punish him for some offence committep against 
www.ebook3000.com

CAEL.] 
Notes to Pages IS8-I6o 
259 
Clodia. That offence may well be the one described at Plut. Cic. 29.4, 
when one of her lovers sent her a purse of copper coins instead of silver, 
this being the origin of the nickname 'Quadrantaria' (see note on § 62 
above); cf. 'that veteran tale about the coppers' below ('veteran', inciden-
tally, is a play on 'Vettius'). Essentially Cicero is asking how the prosecu-
tion can have the stupidity or the cheek to cite the case of Camurtius and 
Caesernius when Clodia had instigated the crime for which thev were 
condemned. 
· 
72 nor indeed . .. just censure: i.e. there is no parallel with the case just cited. 
The law referred to is the lex Plautia de vi (see note on§ 70 above). 
older men: Crassus and Cicero himself. 
73 Quintus Pompeius: Qyintus Pompeius Rufus, praetor in 63 and then gov-
ernor of Africa from 62 until (at the latest) 59· (He is not to be confused 
with the Qyintus Pompeius Rufus who was tribune with Caelius in 52 
and was afterwards successfully prosecuted by him.) 
74 Gaius Antonius . .. did him harm: on Caelius' prosecution of Gaius Anto-
nius Hybrida, sec note on§ IS above. The signal service was Antonius' 
defeat of Catiline (in fact achieved in Antonius' absen'ce by his subordin-
ate Marcus Petreius); the intended crime was his suspected involvement 
with the conspirators. 
76 a fi'iend of mine: Lucius Calpurnius Bestia, successfully defended by 
Cicero on I I February. 
78 a senator ofconsular rank: Antonius again. 
someone alrea1~y acquitted ofbribery: Bestia again. 
Sextus Cloe/ius: the leader of Clodius' gang. He was narrowly acquitted 
on an unknown charge in March s6 nc. The prosecutor was probably 
Titus Annius Milo. On Cloelius see T P. Wiseman, Catu//us and his 
World: A Reappraisal (Cambridge, 1985), 39-41. 
set fire to a sacred temple: the temple of the Nymphs (in the Campus 
Martius). At Mil. 73 Cicero refers to Clodius as 'a man who set fire to the 
temple of the Nymphs in order to extinguish the official revision of the 
censors' register inscribed in the public records' (the crime was presum-
ably authorized by Clodius and carried out by Cloelius). Clodius' motive 
in seeking to destroy 'the official revision of the censors' register' is 
uncertain, but C. Nicolet (The World of the Citizen in Republican Rome 
(London, 198o), 199) has made the attractive suggestion that the revision 
referred to may have been one undertaken by Pompey in his capacity as 
superintendent of the grain supply (57-52 nc). If this revision excluded 
those who had benefited under Clodius' grain law (58 nc), Clodius would 
have had a good reason for wishing to destroy it. 
knocked doiiJn ... that r((my brother: when Cicero had gone into exile in 
s8 BC, Clodius demolished his house on the Palatine together with the 
adjoining portico of Quintus Lutatius Catulus (see second note on "4rch. 

z6o 
Notes to Pages I6o-187 
[MIL. 
5) and consecrated the site (in an attempt to prevent rebuilding); the 
following year he set fire to the house of Cicero's brother Quintus. 
78 her brother and husband: see second note on § 32 above. 
PRO MILONE 
3 inasmuch as ... citizens: Cicero pretends that all the Clodians are slaves. 
7 Marws Horatius: Marcus Horatius killed three Alban champions, the 
Curiatii, in single combat, thereby securing Rome's dominance over 
neighbouring Alba Longa; when his sister wept for one of the Albans, to 
whom she had been betrothed, he killed her and was sentenced to death, 
but was freed on appeal to the people. The story was set in the regal 
period (c.67o sc). 
8 Pub/ius Africanus . . . lawful~y killed: Tiberius Sempronius Gracchus 
was the tribune of 133 sc whose controversial agrarian bill and 
unprecedented attempt to secure re-election to office led to his murder 
and that of his supporters at the hands of the pontifex maximus Publius 
Cornelius Scipio Nasica Serapio (in 133). Publius Africanus (i.e. Publius 
Cornelius Scipio Aemilianus Africanus, the consul of 147 and 134, who 
destroyed Carthage in q6 and Numantia in 133) was Gracchus' cousin, 
brother-in-law, and political enemy; as Cicero says, he was deliberately 
put on the spot by the Gracchan tribune Gaius Papirius Carbo at a 
public meeting (in 130), but was not afraid to express an unpopular 
opinion. 
Servilius Aha/a ... beyond the pale: Gaius Servilius Ahala was famous for 
having killed Spurius Maelius in 439 sc on the grounds that he was 
aiming at tyranny; Nasica was the killer ofTiberius Gracchus (see previ-
ous note); Lucius Opimius was the consul of 121 who suppressed the 
reformer Gaius Gracchus; Gaius Marius as consul suppressed Lucius 
Appuleius Saturninus and Gaius Servilius Glaucia in roo; and in 63 the 
senate recommended execution of the five captured Catilinarian con-
spirators (notice how Cicero transfers responsibility for this from himself 
to the senate). 
one who killed his mother: Orestes killed his mother Clytemnestra to 
avenge his father Agamemnon. According to Aeschylus in the Eumenides, 
he was tried by the Areopagus, with a majority of one for condemnation; 
Athena then equalized the votes and pronounced his acquittal (Cicero's 
version differs slightly and is rhetorically neater). The story had also 
been dramatized by Roman tragedians (ct: S. Rose 66, with note). 
9 The Twelve Tables: the first collection of Roman statutes, compiled in 
45I-450 BC. 
A military tribune: Gaius Lusius, a nephew of Marius. The inciden~ took 
place in 104 BC, and was frequently cited in the rhetorical schoolf"as an 
illustration of justifiable homicide. 
/ 
12 this scorched tribune of the plebs: the Clodian tribune Titus Munatius 
www.ebook3000.com

MIL.] 
261 
Plancus Bursa, who brought Clod ius' body into the forum on 19 January, 
from where it was taken into the senate-house and burnt, together with 
the senate-house itself. Asconius (42 C) says that Plancus addressed the 
crowds outside the senate-house and continued speaking until driven 
away by the flames. Cicero mockingly pretends that Plancus sustained 
burns in the process. 
13 his sacrilege and immora!izv: a reference to Clodius' profanation of the 
rites of the Bona Dea, when he had infiltrated an all-female festival 
disguised as a woman in order (so it was suspected) to commit adultery 
with Caesar's wife Pompeia (62 sc). He was narrowly acquitted the fol-
lowing year, despite Cicero's having disproved his alibi in court (this was 
the origin of the hatred between the two men). The senate had wished 
the jurors to be nominated by the praetor, but in the event they were 
chosen in the usual manner by lot. 
the assault on /v[arws Lepidus' house: shortly after Clodius' death, the 
gangs of Milo's rivals for the consulship, Q!Iintus Metellus Scipio and 
Publius Plautius Hypsaeus, attacked the house of the interrex Marcus 
Acmilius Lcpidus (the future triumvir) when he declined to hold the 
consular elections (Asc. 43 C). (Asconius tells us that ancestral masks, a 
sofa, and some looms were smashed.) 
q 
Tiberius Gracdms . .. Saturninus: see first two notes on § 8 above. 
that demented tribune of the plebs: Plancus. In fact two tribunes interposed 
their veto (see next note). 
The motion ... I~)' a purchased veto: a composite motion was proposed by 
Hortensius, but Q!lintus Fufius Calenus called for it to be taken in two 
parts. The first part, that the killing of Clodius, the burning of the 
senate-house, and the assault on Lepidus' house were against the inter-
ests of the state, was passed, and so became the decree of the senate 
which Cicero has been discussing since§ 12. The second part, that a trial 
should be held under the existing laws but with special priority, was 
vetoed by Plancus and his fellow tribune Gaius Sallustius Crispus (the 
historian Sallust). Sec Asc. 44-5 C. 
15 the letter ... of condemnation: jurors were given wax tablets with 'A' 
(absolvo, 'I acquit') inscribed on one side and 'C' (condemno, 'I convict') 
inscribed on the other. They erased one or other of the letters (or both, to 
abstain) before casting their vote. 
16 A1arcus Drusus: Nlarcus Livius Drusus, who as tribune in 91 proposed a 
series of reforms intended to solve all of Rome's major problems and 
increase the power of the senate. The reforms were almost universally 
opposed, Drusus was assassinated, and the Italian allies, whom Drusus 
had proposed to enfranchise, declared war on Rome (the Social War, 
91-87 BC). 
Pub/ius Africanus: i.e. Scipio Aemilianus (see first note on § 8 above). 
Hostile to the agrarian commission which had been set up by Tiberius 

z6z 
Notes to Pages I8()-I92 
[MIL. 
Gracchus, he succeeded in I29 BC in limiting its powers, and was soon 
afterwards found dead; murder was suspected but not proved. 
I 7 the fizmous Appius Caecus: Clodius' ancestor Appius Claudius Caecus, the 
man who commissioned the Appian Way from Rome to Capua (see sec-
ond note on Gael. 33). The road was lined with tombs; evidently there 
were some Claudian ones close to the spot where Clodius was killed. 
IS Marws Papirius: killed by Clodius in 58 BC. Asconius (47 C) describes the 
circumstances: Clodius had removed the prisoner Tigranes (son of the 
king of Armenia) from Pompey's custody in Rome and was hoping to put 
him on the throne of Armenia; Papirius, a friend of Pompey, was one of a 
number killed in a scuffle on the Appian Way while trying to recapture 
him. 
to murder Gnaeus Pompeius: Asconius (46C) supplies the date of this 
incident, I I August 58 BC. The temple of Castor was at the south-west 
corner of the forum. 
2I his past reconciliationmith Clodius: in 56 BC. 
22 Ludus Domitius: Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus, the consul of 54 and a 
strong conservative (also great-great-grandfather of the emperor Nero). 
As quaestor in 67, he used violence to oppose the law of the tribune 
Gaius Manitius on the votes of freedmen (sec fifth note on Mur. 47), to 
the delight of the senate (Asc. 45 C, with B. A. Marshall's commentary ad 
foe.); it is this to which Cicero is alluding to at the end of the paragraph 
('ever since your youth'). In the sos and 40s he was a prominent oppon-
ent of Caesar. 
24 the previous year's elections ... delayed: the elections for the praetorships 
of 53 ought to have been held in the summer of 54, but were delayed until 
July or August 53· Clodius originally intended to stand in 54 for 53 ('his 
proper year', i.e. the first year for which he was eligible), but changed his 
mind for the reason Cicero gives and chose to stand instead for 52. 
Lucius Pau!lus: Lucius Aemilius Paullus, elder brother of the triumvir 
Lepidus, praetor in 53, and consul in so. 
25 acted as agent: for bribery. 
a neJIJ Co !line tribe: the Colline was one of the four urban tribes. Cicero's 
words are best explained by L. R. Taylor: 'I interpret this to mean that 
Clod ius, who already had a band of followers from the Collina, levied a 
new band from the same tribe' (The Voting Districts of the Roman Republic 
(Papers and Monographs of the American Academy in Rome, 20; Rome, 
I96o), I45 n. so). The common assertion that the Colline tribe was 
composed of the lowest class of citizens is demonstrably false. 
~y the ... Roman people: on the occasions when an election had been 
started but not completed. 
" 
26 Marcus Favonius: opponent of Clodius in 6 I, aedile in 53 or 52, prJtor in 
49; he was an imitator of Cato. It is not clear whether he gave ekidence 
in the trial. 
/ 
www.ebook3000.com

MIL.] 
Notes to Pages 192-197 
27 to nominate a priest: of Juno Sospita, the town's chief diety (see note 
on Mur. 90). This duty fell to Milo in his capacity as dictator (chief 
magistrate) ofLanuvium (Asc. 3I C). 
a rmvt(y public- meeting: Asconius (49 C) tells us that this meeting was held 
on I 8 January and he names his source, the acta senatus (Proc-eedings oft he 
Senate). Cicero, on the other hand, both here and at§ 45, is deliberately 
vague as to whether the meeting was on I7 or IS January: he would like 
the jury to suppose that Clodius actually tore himself away from the 
meeting (hence the ambiguous word relinquere, 'abandon') rather than 
leaving Rome, as he did, the day before it took place. An interpolation 
awkwardly inserted into the text (referring to the meeting) reads 'which 
was held on that same day', i.e. I7 January, an incorrect statement. Clark 
rightly deleted this (and two other interpolations in this section) in his 
I895 edition, but seems to have lost his nerve when he came to publish 
his OCT. 
28 that day: the day of the rowdy public meeting, I8 January. 
this bandit here: Milo (ironic). The account of the ambush which now 
follows should be carefully compared with that or Asconius (3I-2C). 
Cicero's account is a breathtaking fiction. 
29 at around J p.m. or thereabouts: Asconius (3I C) places the incident earlier, 
at around I .30 p.m., the time cited by the prosecution (ctiint. lust. 
6.3-49). Cicero judged it helpful to his case to pretend that the murder 
occurred close to nightfall, at a time too late for Clodius to consider 
returning to Rome (§ 49). 
32 Cassius '.fiunous test: see note on S. Rose. 84-
consuls: Milo's rivals for the consulship Quintus Metellus Scipio and 
Publius Plautius Hypsaeus. 
33 the Palladium: the sacred guardian-statue of Pallas Athena, rescued from 
Troy (according to Roman tradition) by Aeneas. A statue reputed to be 
the Trojan Palladium was preserved at Rome in the temple of Vesta. 
That shining lz~rt;ht of the senate-house: the primary meaning is 'glory of the 
senate-house' (as if Cloelius were a distinguished senator, which he was 
not); the secondary meaning, a reference to Cloelius' responsibility for 
the burning of the senate-house on I9 January, is more obvious. For 
Cloelius sec third note on Cael. 78. 
masks: see note on Mur. 88. They were carried in procession at aristo-
cratic funerals. 
35 Clodius ... P/autian lam: Milo had made two unsuccessful attempts to 
prosecute Clodius under the lex Plautia de vi (Plautian law concerning 
violence: see note on Cael. 70) in 57 BC. Cicero's contention that Milo 
wished to secure Clodius' conviction flatly contradicts the argument he 
has just put forward (§ 34) that Clodius' continuing presence in political 
life was in Milo's interest. 
36 mhen I departed .fi"Oin Rome: into exile (58 Be). 

Notes to Pages I9J-I98 
[MIL. 
36 who had been saved ... by my quick thinking: when Cicero suppressed the 
Catilinarian conspiracy in 63 BC. Cicero is saying that he chose to go into 
exile in 58 in order to prevent Rome becoming embroiled in violent civil 
strife. 
37 Quinws Hortensius ... acting in II(}' support: Hortensius was accompany-
ing a deputation which attempted unsuccessfully to intercede on Cicero's 
behalf with the consuls and the senate before Cicero went into exile (Dio 
38. 16.2-5). 
Gaius Vibienus: otherwise unknown, except from an inaccurate inter-
polation at Asc. 32 C. See, however, T P. \Viseman, A1nemmyne, 16 
(1963), 275-83 on Gaius Vibienus the Arrctine potter. 
a dagger which . .. Pompeius: see§ 18, with second note, above. 
a dagger which . .. Papirius: see§§ 17-18, with notes, above. 
a dagger which ... outside the Regia: the incident referred to is uncertain. 
Asconius (48 C) tentatively connects it with a fight between the sup-
porters of Milo and Hypsaeus on the Sacred Way in 53 BC. The Regia or 
'Royal Palace', traditionally the home of King Numa, was the official 
headquarters of the pontife.r maximus; it was situated where the Sacred 
Way enters the forum. 
38 Pub!t'us Sestius: Publius Sestius and Quintus Fabricius were tribunes with 
Milo, and Lucius Caecilius Rufus was praetor urbanus (city praetor), in 
57; all were active in promoting Cicero's recall. 
on that day: 4 August 57 BC. 
39 Pub/ius Lentulus: Publius Cornelius Lentulus Spinther, consul in 57, 
worked hard to secure Cicero's recall and the restoration of his property. 
The other consul, Quintus Caecilius Metellus Nepos, was Clodius' 
cousin and an old enemy of Cicero's. He was eventually induced to agree 
to Cicero's recall. 
There were seven praetors ... supported me: Cicero failed to receive the 
support of one praetor, Appius Claudius Pulcher (Clodius' eldest 
brother), and two tribunes, Sextus Atilius Serranus Gavianus and 
Quintus Numerius Rufus. 
40 Twice ... to court: see note on§ 35 above. 
Milo . .. by Pub/ius Clodius: Milo's year as tribune ended on 10 December 
57; in February 56 he was then prosecuted by Clodius (who was by now 
an aedile) for misconduct during his year of office. The case was 
disrupted by violence and came to nothing. 
1Warws Antonius: Mark Antony, the future triumvir. He returned from 
Gaul in 53 to stand for the quaestorship (of 52), and supported Milo 
against Clodius, coming close to killing him in the incident which Qicero 
describes below (and again in more detail at Phil. 2.21, 2.49). At,Milo's 
trial, however, he was one of the prosecutors. His quaestorship,~served 
under Caesar in Gaul) did not take place until 51. 
I 
www.ebook3000.com

MIL.] 
Notes to Pages I99-202 
z6s 
42 the highest o.ffice: the consulship. 
44 Quintus Petillius: not otherwise known (not mentioned by Asconius). 
within three dt~)'S: at § 26 Cicero said 'within three days, or four at the 
most'. There was also no mention there ofPetillius. 
45 the dictator r~f Lanuvium: sec§ 27, with first note, above. 
But on mhidz day?: i.e. on which day did Milo (not Clodius) leave Rome? 
Answer: on the day of the public meeting, r8 January. Clod ius left Rome 
the previous day, 17 January (§ 27, with second note, above). In this 
paragraph, as at§ 27, Cicero is determined to confuse his audience. 
46 Titus Patina: unknown. 
011 that ve1y day: untrue: Milo was to have nominated the priest on the 
following clay, 19 January (Asc. 31 C). It is strange that Cicero should 
falsify the chronology here when elsewhere on matters of chronology he 
has told the truth (although in a misleading manner). I therefore wonder 
if the words 'on that verv clav' (illo ipso die) are an interpolation; the same 
words were judged an i.nter.polation at§ 27. Tflis speech overall seems 
quite heavily interpolated (all the interpolations. having a similar 
character and thus probably being the work of the same scribe). 
Quintus Arrius: an ex-praetor (there is uncertainty over his identity). His 
designation as Cicero's friend is most likely ironic. 
Gaius Causinius Sdzola of Interamna: an eques (Asc. 3 r C). Asconius (49 C) 
tells us that it was Causinius who had provided Clodius with his false 
alibi at his Bona Dea trial in 6r BC (sec first note on § 13 above). This 
information is also provided by our interpolator later in the sentence; I 
have omitted the words, with Clark. 
Cyrus the architect: Vettius Cyrus, a Greek architect employed by both 
Cicero and his brother. 
Gaius Clodius: a well-known plebeian (Asc. 31 C), unknown to us. 
47 those abandoned ... individuals: the tribunes Quintus Pompeius Rufus 
and Gaius Sallustius Crispus (Asc. 49-soC). The 'someone' referred to 
in the previous sentence will be Pompeius. At Phil. 2.22 (44 Be) Cicero 
says that no one at the time accused him of being behind Clodius' 
murder; this passage proves him wrong. 
48 he had named . .. as his heirs: only at a later period did it become illegal for 
heirs to act as witnesses. 
49 What mas Clodius' reason ... into the night?: at § 29 (where see note) 
Cicero misrepresented the time of the murder in order to prepare for this 
argument. 
sr Why, then . .. at nightfizll?: i.e. Milo (if he planned to ambush Clodius at 
all) would have chosen to do so either before Clodius reached his estate at 
Alba or at a spot between Alba and Rome, not at Alba itself (where the 
murder took place). 
52 nothing of the kind was ever heard fiwn Milo: not according to Cicero at 
Att. 4·3·5 (57 BC). 

z66 
Notes to Pages 203-205 
[MIL. 
53 at least a thousand ... megalomaniac scheme: it appears that Clodius was 
enlarging his building by creating a basement floor and supporting the 
floor above it on pillars or arches (cf. Sallust, Catiline 13. 1; Horace, Car-
mina 3· 1.33-4); this grandiose project is referred to again at § 85 as 
having involved the obliteration of some ancient altars. Cicero implies 
that Clodius' workmen were available for violence against Milo. An alter-
native interpretation of this sentence would have the basement specially 
constructed in order to accommodate the thousand strong men; this 
seems much less plausible. 
54 'He /Pas calling in at Pompeius' house': Clod ius and Pompey were recon-
ciled in 56 BC (cf. § 21). 
55 each been selected by his fellom: i.e. each man was as disreputable as the 
next. The reference is to a traditional method of selecting a picked body 
of men for military service; it was later employed by Augustus to 
reconstitute the senate. 
a /Poman ... among men: a witty allusion to Clodius' profanation of the 
rites of the Bona Dea, when he had been by contrast a man who had fallen 
among women. 
57 I suppose ... Oil the Appian rVay!: ironic. Cicero wants to refute the 
suggestion that Milo freed his slaves to prevent them giving evidence 
which would damage his case (the defence particularly wished to conceal 
the fact that Clodius had been killed in cold blood on Milo's order). 
Slaves could give evidence only under torture. However, they were not 
permitted to testify against their master(§ 59), nor were masters required 
to hand over their slaves for interrogation if they did not wish to, except 
in some special cases (see first note on S. Rose. 77). Nevertheless, it was 
better to free them, as Clodia did hers, since to refuse to hand them over 
for interrogation was seen as an admission of guilt (see note on Cael. 68). 
59 the Hall of Liberty: this was the headquarters of the censors; its site is not 
known, but it was near the (later) Forum of Caesar (and therefore close to 
the forum). To us there seems a cruel irony in a hall of liberty being used 
as a place for torturing slaves. 
'Appius ': the prosecutor. He was the elder son of Clodius' brother Gaius 
Claudius Pulcher (Asc. 34 C, 41 C), and went on to become consul in 38. 
He made a good job of his prosecution (Asc. 54 C). 
Clodius ... atts of sacrilege!: Cicero has pointed out that it is Clodius' 
slaves who have been interrogated, not Milo's (Milo's had been freed), 
and he now gives two reasons why he regards this situation as absurd. 
First, it is generally only in cases with religious implications (e.g. cases of 
sacrilege) that slaves are permitted to testify against their master. This 
objection is nonsense since the slaves were examined against Milo, not 
Clodius; its purpose seems simply to provide a context for a fl(rther 
reference to Clodius' profanation of the rites of the Bona Dea. (t':icero 
seems to suppose for a moment that Clodius is the defendant; /:f. 'did 
Clodius set a trap for Milo?',§ 6o.) The second reason for the a,flsurdity 
www.ebook3000.com

MIL.] 
Notes to Pages 206-210 
of the proceedings, on the other hand, is valid (and is made much more 
of, taking up the rest of§§ 59-60 ): the prosecution would obviously have 
no difficulty inducing their own slaves to incriminate Milo. 
6o did Clodius set a trap for Milo?: Cicero gives a humorous parody of the 
proper procedure. The questioner was not allowed to ask leading 
questions. 
6I when the senate-house was on fire: Clodius' body was taken into the senate-
house and burnt at Cloelius' instigation on 19 January, the day after the 
murder; the senate-house also caught fire. Milo returned to Rome that 
evening (Asc. 33 C). 
the power of him: i.e. of Pompey. 
63 to submit to the laws: i.e. by leaving Rome and retiring into exile (as Cicero 
did in 58 BC). 
64 Ocriculum: a town on the border of Umbria, forty miles north of Rome. 
The weapons (it was alleged) had been brought down the Tiber to 
Ocriculum from some place further north. 
66 one senator: Publius Cornificius (Asc. 36C). 
that most sacred temple: the temple of Jupiter Best and Greatest. 
67 loud enough for you to hear me: Pompey was sitting in front of the treasury 
(temple of Saturn), at the north-west corner of the forum (Asc. 4I C). It 
is at this point in the speech (beginning of§ 67) that criticisms of Pompey 
start to appear, implying a date of composition some time after Milo's 
trial (most likely January 51 Be); see notes on§§ 70, 73, 77, 79, and 88 
below. The added part, which Asconius (4I C) shows did not feature in 
the original trial speech, begins properly at § 72. §§ 67-7 I are transitional, 
but seem to me to be either wholly or largely hostile to Pompey (therefore 
reflecting the later revision). 
68 that pestilential scourge: Clod ius. 
his tribunate: 57 BC. 
that he had Ia fer ... for the praetors/zip: on the criminal trial, see second 
note on § 40 above; Pompey acted as a character witness for Milo. Milo's 
praetorship was in 55 BC. 
Magnus: Pompey (see note on Arch. 24). 
70 Gnaeus Pompeius is an expert in ... politics: Pompey was in fact notorious 
for his ignorance of such matters (see e.g. Aulus Gellius I4·7·I-3; also 
Pro Balbo I4-15, which I failed to cite in the article referred to below). 
This passage must therefore be ironic; introduced when the speech was 
revised for publication after the trial. I have argued elsewhere that Cicero 
is most likely recalling Pompey's unconstitutional behaviour at the trial 
of Titus Munatius Plancus Bursa in (probably) January 5 I; the reference 
would therefore provide us with a date for the revision of the speech 
(Historia, 42 (1993), 502-4). 
'to see that the state comes to no harm': Cicero quotes the wording of the 

268 
Notes to Pages 2ID-2I I 
(MIL. 
emergency decree (sawtus ronsultum ultimum or 'ultimate decree of the 
senate'), a senatorial decree passed in national emergencies exhorting 
the consuls to take whatever measures they deemed necessary to ensure 
the safety of the state (the responsibility for any action taken lay, however, 
with the consuls, not with the senate). The decree was passed early in 
February 52 BC in response to the rioting which followed Clodius' death. 
Cicero is also thinking here of the passing of the emergency decree 
during his own consulship in 63. He executed the Catilinarian con-
spirators because they were guilty; Pompey has not executed lVlilo 
(the argument runs), therefore must consider him innocent. 
71 yesterday's public meeting: on the previous afternoon (6 April) the tribune 
Plancus had held a public meeting at which he urged the people to turn 
up the next day and make their feelings known to the jurors as they cast 
their votes (Asc. 40 C). 
72 The charge ... no muse for concern: the part· of the speech which was 
added when the speech was revised for publication begins at this point 
(see note on § 67 above). This is the defence which Cicero might have 
made but chose not to, that Clodius' murder was justified by the public 
interest (Asc. 41 C). 
Suppose that I were not prepared: the Latin sentence which begins here 
ends at the end of§ 75· A translator has no option but to chop it up. 
Spurius Mae/ius: a wealthy plebeian who used his own means to relieve a 
corn shortage in 439 BC, was suspected of aiming at tyranny, and was 
killed by Gaius Servilius Ahala. 
Tiberius Gracchus: sec first note on § 8 above. He secured the deposition 
of his fellow tribune Marcus Octavius when Octavius refused to with-
draw his veto of Gracchus' agrarian bill. 
lPhose unspeakable adu!tety: the reference is to Clodius' suspected adul-
tery with Caesar's wife Pompeia at the festival of the Bona Dea in 62 BC. 
73 incest mith his Oll'll sister: see second note on Cael. 32. Lucius Licinius 
Lucullus divorced his wife Clodia (the youngest of Clodius' three sisters, 
all of whom were called Clodia) for adultery in 66 BC. 
a citizen: Cicero, exiled by Clodius in 58 Be. It was by suppressing the 
Catilinarian conspiracy in 63 that Cicero was considered to have saved 
the city from fire and the citizens from slaughter. 
gave out kingdoms ... to anyone he pleased: when tribune in 58, Clodius 
had secured the passage of bills bestowing the title of King on Brogitarus 
of Galatia, deposing King Ptolemy (younger brother of Ptolemy XII1 
Aulctcs of Egypt) from the throne of Cyprus, and assigning the 
provinces of Macedonia and Syria to the consuls Piso and Gabinius. , 
an outstanding{)' brave . .. citizen: Pompey(§ 18). The description of ~·m 
as 'outstandingly brave' can be taken ironically as suggesting ,{hat 
Pompey showed cowardice in failing to stand up to Clodius. 
/ 
www.ebook3000.com

MIL.] 
Notes to Pages 211-214 
set fire to the temple of the Nymphs: see fourth note on Gael. 78. 
74 by submitting claims and deposits that mere unjustified: i.e. by making legal 
claims on property to which he was not entitled (a deposit was required, 
to be forfeited if the claim was unsuccessful). Clodius did not bother to 
go to court to obtain property that he wanted: he simply took it by force. 
Pub/ius Vizrius: identity uncertain. 
1Warcus Paconius: not otherwise known. Lake Prilius was on the coast of 
Etruria, near Rusellae. 
Titus Fwfanius: Titus Furfanius Postumus, a friend of Cicero's and 
governor of Sicily in 45· 
75 Scantia: unknown. 
Pub/ius Apinius: unknown. 
his brother Appius: Clodius' eldest brother Appius Claudius Pulcher. As 
praetor in 57, he took his brother's side against Cicero's. He then became 
consul in 54, governor of Cilicia from 53 to 51· (to be succeeded by 
Cicero, who was appalled by his rapacity), and censor in so. Cicero forced 
himself to remain on good terms with him (when he says 'a man allied to 
myself ... ', he seems to forget that it is Milo who is supposed to be 
speaking). Clark in his commentary remarks that 'Appius has gone down 
to posterity as the only augur who took his art seriously'. 
his sister'sforecourt: the reference has not been explained. Clodius lived on 
the Palatine, and had ambitions to unite the neighbouring properties (the 
houses of Q!.1intus Seius Postumus and Cicero, and the portico of Catu-
lus: see fifth note on Gael. 78) with his own. This involved rebuilding the 
portico of Catulus, possibly extending it across the front of the several 
properties. Beyond the portico of Catulus was, first, the house of Catulus 
(Gael. 59), and then the house ofClodius' middle sister Clodia Metelli. If 
Clodius planned to construct a wall across his sister's forecourt, this 
projected wall may (I suggest) have been a further extension of the 
rebuilt portico of Catulus. 
76 Suppose . .. military pon;er: Clodius had been standing for the praetorship 
at the time of his death. 
77 Titus Annius . .. any other man in hist01y: a thinly veiled slight to Pompey 
and Caesar (as is the final sentence of this section). 
78 this fine consul: Pompey. 
79 If Gnaeus Pompeius himself the rest of this paragraph subtly underlines 
Pompey's hypocrisy in setting up a court to punish a deed which he could 
not in all honesty have regretted. 
So The Greeks . . . killed tymnts: Harmodius and Aristogiton killed Hip-
parchus at Athens in 514 BC; Timoleon killed his brother Timophanes at 
Corinth in the mid-36os BC, and overthrew tyrannies in Sicily. 
81 deny a deed: the killing of Clodius in self-defence. 
oTJJn up to a deed: the deliberate murder of Clod ius, to save his country: 

Notes to Pages 214-218 
[MIL. 
82 a bold venture: Cicero's suppression of the Catilinarian conspiracy, involv-
ing the illegal execution of five of the leading conspirators (63 BC). 
83 Aha/a: see second note on§ 8 above. 
85 hills and groves ofA!ba: Cicero now appeals to the hills and groves of Alba 
(the place where Clodius was killed), the altars of the Albans which 
Clod ius had demolished in the course of his building works (see note on 
§ 53 above), and Jupiter Latiaris. The town of Alba had been destroyed 
many centuries before, but its ancient cults were preserved at nearby 
Bovillae. Jupiter Latiaris ('of Latium') was worshipped on the Mons 
Albanus (the 'lofty Latin hill' mentioned below), the ancient religious 
centre of the Latins. 
86 Titus Sertius Gallus: unknown. 
that swndalous verdict: Clodius' acquittal in the Bona Dea ('Good God-
dess') trial in 6 I B c. 
I!Jithout masks: sec note on ;\!Iur. 88. They were carried in procession at 
aristocratic funerals. (Cicero is repeating what he said at§ 33 but making 
a different point.) 
87 At his OlPn house ... our mPn slaves: this was a proposal (previously put 
forward by the tribune Gains Manilius in 67 BC: see fifth note on Mur. 
47) to distribute the votes of freedmen among all thirty-five tribes instead 
of merely the four urban tribes (Asc. 52 C). See S. Treggiari, Roman 
Freedmen during the Late Republic (Oxford, I969), 49-50, I64-6. Cicero 
says that Clodius was so confident of the law being passed (even though 
he had not yet been elected to the praetorship) that he was already having 
the text inscribed on bronze. At § 89 he adds that Clodius was also 
proposing a large-scale manumission of slaves, with the new freedmen 
becoming clients of himself rather than of their former masters. 
88 As for the great man ... reamciliation: Pompey and Clodius were recon-
ciled in s6 BC (cf. § 2I). The tone here is critical of Pompey for failing 
to stand up to Clodius (cf. § 73). 
89 the comu!s he lPIInted: Quintus Metellus Scipio and Publius Plautius 
Hypsaeus. The reference is slightly scathing. 
a brave ex-consul: Cicero. 
anem !ai!J ... his omn}i"eedmen: sec note on§ 87 above. 
90 one ofhisjol!omers: Cloelius. 
9I the rods of office: the ji75res (bundles of rods, usually with an axe, carried 
by lictors before a magistrate as a symbol of his authority). Their seizure 
by the Clodians is mentioned by Asconius (33 C). The temple of Cas~or 
was at the south-west corner of the forum. 
Marws Cae!ius: Marcus Caelius Rufus, defended by Cicero in 56 Be;;. He 
and Cicero worked together during 52-5 I, defending Milo's suppjl"rters 
in court and prosecuting Clodius'. 
/ 
92 not a single tear Ji"om Milo: Milo refused to wear shabby clotJfng and 
www.ebook3000.com

MIL.] 
Notes to Pages 219-223 
neglect his personal appearance, as custom required (and as he had done 
at Publius Scstius' trial in 56 BC (Sest. 144) ), but remained fearless and 
defiant. Plutarch says that this was not the least cause of his condemna-
tion (Cic. 35). In this paragraph we sec Cicero trying to make amends. 
93 at least I shall be spared bad: i.e. Rome would have had bad government if 
Clodius had lived. The meaning docs not seem previously to have been 
understood. 
we!!-ordered and fi'ee community: Massilia. This passage was patently 
written after Milo had gone into exile. 
94 When I was tribune oftlze plebs: in 57· Milo's and Clodius' gangs fought 
each other, and Milo twice attempted to prosecute Clodius for violence. 
you: Cicero. Milo worked for his recall from exile. 
your Vet:J! Oll'll equestrians: Cicero always cultivated the equites, the class 
from which he himself came. He regarded himself as their guardian, and 
sought to promote harmonious relations between them and the senate 
(concordia ordinum, 'harmony between the orders'). 
95 on n,fwse behalfhe acted: the argument assumes that the killing was inten-
tional. This is consistent with the argument of§§ 72-91, but not that of§§ 
1-66. §§ 92-ro5 therefore belong with§§ 72-91 (the added part), and will 
not have featured in the original trial speech in this form. 
96 some evil intention: against Pompey. 
98 the luau/red and second day: Cicero has miscalculated: it was actually the 
ro1st (7 April). SccJ. S. Ruebel, TAPA 109 (1979), 245-7. 
100 the powers that be: Pompey. 
101 this one which gave it birth: Milo was actually born at Lanuvium, not 
Rome. 
102 who are 110/1) far an>ay: with Caesar in Gaul (54-52 nc). 
103 those indiwtions . . . destruction: a colourful way of referring to the 
Catilinarian conspiracy (63 nc). In this paragraph Cicero refers to the 
conspiracy and its corollary, Cicero's exile and recall (58-57 BC). 
105 by the man: Pompey. 

GLOSSARY 
acta senatus the Proceedings oft he Senate, an official record of senatorial 
proceedings begun in 59 BC. 
aedile the third of the annual magistrates, below consul and praetor. 
There were four aediles, two curule and two plebeian; they were 
responsible for city administration, the corn supply, and for putting on 
public games. Cicero was aedile in 69 BC, and gave three sets of games. 
allies the socii or 'federate states', native Italian communities linked to 
Rome by treaties of alliance; they provided Rome with troops and 
received certain benefits in return. In 91-87 Be they rebelled against 
Rome in the Social War (the war against the socii) and won their goal of 
Roman citizenship and incorporation within the Roman state. 
as a copper coin (plural, asses). 
augur a member of the college of augurs, the official interpreters of 
religious auspices. As with the college of pontiffs, there were fifteen 
members, all high-ranking aristocrats. Cicero was elected to member-
ship in 53 (or 52) BC. 
Campus Marti us the 'Field of Mars', a flood plain to the north-west of 
the city, between the Capitol and the Tiber. It was used for military 
training, for elections, and as the place where the census was taken. In 
Cicero's time it was already starting to be built over. 
censor one of two magistrates elected every five years for a maximum 
period of eighteen months. They conducted the census (register of 
names, ages, and property of all adult male citizens), and revised the list 
of senators and equites by excluding the unworthy; they also leased out 
the right to collect taxes and acted as guardians of public morals. The 
office was of great importance and prestige, and was normally held by 
ex-consuls. 
centuriate assembly the wmitia centuriata, an assembly consisting 
of all Roman citizens divided into 193 'centuries' (military units); it 
elected the consuls, praetors, and censors, and occasionally passed legis-
lation (it passed the law recalling Cicero from exile in 57 BC). The 
centuries were unequally composed so as to give greater voting power to 
the rich, and the voting system also favoured the rich. A result was usually· 
declared before the poorest citizens had had the opportunity to vote. 
colony a town, usually in Italy, founded by official authority and set~ed 
by Roman citizens. 
f 
consul the most senior of the annual magistrates. The two consul/held 
~ 
I 
www.ebook3000.com

Glossary 
273 
office for the calendar year, which (in the absence of any numerical 
system) was named after them. Ex-consuls were called 'consulars' and 
were influential in the senate. Cicero was consul in 63 BC. 
curule magistrates consuls, praetors, censors, and curule aediles were 
known as curule magistrates and enjoyed special privileges, including 
the right to sit on an ivory 'curule' chair (sella cw:ulis). 
dictator in the early republic, an extraordinary magistrate with supreme 
powers appointed in an emergency for a maximum of six months. He 
appointed a deputy who was called Master of the Horse. In the later 
republic, Sulla and Caesar revived the office for their own ends, Caesar 
taking it for life. In some other communities, such as Lanuvium, the 
dictator was simply the chief magistrate. 
equites the members of the Roman upper class who were not senators 
(originally, the equites were the cavalry); there was a property qualifica-
tion of 40o,ooo sesterces. Unlike senators, equites were permitted to 
engage in trade, and some were involved in tax-farming (leasing the 
right to collect taxes for the state). The singular is eques ('an eques'), the 
plural equites; it is often translated 'knight', but in this translation 
'equestrian' is preferred ('an equestrian', 'the equestrians', 'the eques-
trian order'). Cicero came from an equestrian, not senatorial, family, 
and viewed himself as a representative of the equites and defender of 
their interests; but, as a senator, he wished to minimize conflict between 
the two groups and promote 'harmony between the orders' (concordia 
ordinum). 
federate states, see allies. 
freedman an ex-slave. A freedman/freedwoman would normally remain 
a dependant of his/her former master. 
interrex a magistrate appointed from among the patricians to hold office 
for five days if there was no consul; after each five days, a new interrex 
('between-king') would be appointed until new consuls were elected. 
The office dated from the regal period, when the patrician senators 
would take it in turns to hold office for five days until a new king was 
chosen. 
legate a senator serving as an assistant to a general or provincial 
governor. 
magistrate the holder of a public office (technically, however, tribunes 
of the plebs were not magistrates). They arc listed in T R. S. 
Broughton's The Magistrates of the Roman Republic (see Select 
Bibliography). 
new man a novus homo, the first man of a family to reach the senate. 
Cicero was therefore a new man, but Murena, being descended from 
praetors, was not. The senate contained many new men, but few rose 

274 
Glossary 
high (in the first half of the first century Be, only four besides Cicero 
reached the consulship). 
noble a direct descendant of a consul through the male line. Plebeians 
as well as patricians might be noble. Cicero was not a noble; his son 
was. 
patricians members of a select group of Roman clans (gentes). The dis-
tinction dated back to the regal period: it was believed that the patri-
cians were descended from the 100 fathers (pcttres) chosen by Romulus 
to form the original senate. In early Rome, the patricians monopolized 
the priesthoods and the political offices, but by the late republic the 
offices had long been opened up to the plebeians (i.e. non-patricians) 
and, from a practical point of view, patrician birth brought more dis-
advantages than advantages (patricians were ineligible for the offices of 
tribune of the plebs and plebeian aedile: Clodius had to be adopted into 
a plebeian family to become tribune). At the end of the republic, only 
fourteen patrician clans were still in existence. Cicero was not a 
patrician. 
plebeians, see patricians. 
pontifex a member of the college of pontiffs in charge of Rome's religious 
affairs. There were fifteen members, holding office for life, and their 
head was called the pontifex maximus ('chief pontiff'). Caesar was ponti-
fex maximus from 63 BC until his death. The office of pontifex maximus 
still exists: it is held by the Pope. 
praetor the second most senior of the annual magistrates. In the late 
republic there were eight praetors each year. The city praetor (praetor 
urbanus) handled civil suits between citizens and the foreign praetor 
(praetor peregrinus) civil suits between citizens and non-citizens; the 
remaining six praetors presided over the permanent criminal courts 
(not all the criminal courts were presided over by a praetor). Cicero was 
praetor in 66 BC, and presided over the extortion court. After their year 
of office, praetors regularly went out to govern a province as pro-
praetors (consuls did the same as proconsuls). 
Proceedings of the Senate, see acta senatus. 
proconsul a magistrate who was not a consul but was given a consul's 
authority in order to command an army or govern a province. 
quaestor the most junior of the annual magistrates and the first stage in 
the 'sequence of offices' (cursus honorum); election to the quaestorship 
brought entry to the senate. Twenty quaestors were elected annually; 
the two city quaestors were in charge of the treasury, while the rest were 
officials, mainly dealing with financial matters, in Italy and jthe 
provinces. Cicero was quaestor in 75 BC, in western Sicily. 
f 
rostra the speaker's platform in front of the senate house in the for6m. It 
! 
www.ebook3000.com

Glossal)' 
2 75 
was named after the rostra, the bronze prows which adorned it, taken 
from Latin warships captured in 338 BC. 
senate the supreme council of the Roman state, consisting of all ex-
magistrates (except those expelled as unworthy by the censors). The 
senate passed decrees, advised the magistrates, assigned provinces, 
negotiated with foreign embassies, and voted funds, but could not legis-
late. Its most famous (and controversial) decree was the emergency 
decree (senatus consultum ultimum, 'ultimate decree of the senate'), 
passed at moments of civil crisis. The 6oo or so senators enjoyed a 
very high social status (and were forbidden to engage in trade), but only 
a minority were influential in politics: a small number of families pre-
dominated. The senate-house was at the north-east corner of the 
forum, but the senate sometimes met elsewhere. 
sesterce a silver coin, the equivalent of four asses. 
tribal assembly the comitia tributa, an assembly. consisting of all Roman 
citizens divided into thirty-five largely territorial 'tribes' (four urban 
and thirty-one rural); it elected the curule aediles, quaestors, and lower 
officers, and passed some legislation. 
tribesman, see tribal assembly. 
tribune (of the plebs) one of ten annual officers (their year of office 
began on ro December, not r January) elected to protect the interests of 
plebeians (the office was closed to patricians). A tribune could initiate 
and veto laws and senatorial decrees, powers which gave the office great 
political importance. Tribunes of the plebs are not to be confused with 
military tribunes (senior officers in the legions) or with tribuni aerarii. 
tribuni aerarii 'treasury tribunes', originally treasury officials, but from 
70 to 46 BC one of the three classes of jurors, after senators and equites. 
They may be considered as equites; probably there was a lower property 
qualification. 
triumvir capita/is one of three annual officers responsible for executions. 

