    Table of Contents
In addition to the new material (about 6,000 words), all statistics will
be updated and more charts and graphs will be added to provide
insight. 
<strong>Chapter 1. Crash Course on the National Debt</strong> 
This chapter delves into the role of the government in the U.S.
economy. The government must provide certain essential goods
and services for its taxpayers. In turn, the government collects
taxes to pay for these goods and services. But when the
government spends more than it takes in, a deficit occurs, and the
government must borrow to pay for its overspending. This chapter
takes a look at the budget process and the different types of
budgets: balanced, deficit, and surplus. 
<strong>Chapter 2. A Huge Credit Card 
</strong>This chapter introduces the history of the debt and the
issuing agency, the Bureau of the Public Debt. It examines details
of the agency&#146;s financing instruments, Treasury securities,
and savings bonds. Other main topics include the ownership of the
debt, United States versus foreign, and interest payments, which
hamper the government&#146;s ability to balance the budget. 
<strong>**NEW **
Chapter 3. Primer on the Current Global Economy 
Our Interconnected World
--Policies and Events in One Country Affect Other Countries
--The Impact of Weakening Economieson the U.S.
--Trade Downturns
--Declining Income and Jobs
Potential Global Recession
China: Long-term Slowing?
European Debt Crisis

C H A P T E R
Crash Course 
on the 
National 
Debt
Just as in a household, the U.S. federal government operates on an annual budget. 
While households spend money on food, clothing, and shelter, the U.S. 
government spends money on big items such as roads, defense, and education. If 
a household spends more than it earns each year, it must borrow money or dip 
into savings, if available; so does the government. When it spends more than it 
takes in through taxes and other revenues, a deficit occurs and it must borrow 
money. 
This 
chapter 
explores 
budgeting, 
deficits, 
surpluses, 
and 
debt—government style.
1

         CHAPTER Chapter 1 | Crash Course on the National Debt
2
Government-Provided Goods and Services
You are touched by services provided by the U.S. government on a daily basis. 
Did you send or receive a letter today through traditional mail? Then you used 
the services of the U.S. Post Office. Did you travel on a highway? Chances are 
you used the nation’s federal road system. Did you take any prescription 
medicine? If so, the medicine you took is regulated by the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration. Did you buy or sell stock? If you did, that transaction was 
monitored by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. One of the many 
roles of the U.S. government is to provide citizens with essential goods and 
services—usually the types of things average individuals are unable to provide 
for themselves. Providing the goods and services we all have come to expect 
requires the U.S. government to spend money … a lot of money.
There are three levels of government in the United States: local, state, and 
federal. Each level specializes in making unique purchases that are difficult or 
impossible for the average citizen to make. Local governments spend on services 
such as education, police and fire protection, and public transportation. State 
governments spend on education, public welfare, health care, hospitals, and 
highways. The federal government spends on such big-ticket items as national 
defense, transfer payments (such as Social Security and Medicare), various grants 
to state and local governments, and interest payments on the national debt, 
which, along with the deficit, is the focus of this book. 
Unlike most state and local governments, which must balance their operating 
budgets year in and year out, the federal government historically spends more 
than it takes in from taxes, and this practice is what creates a budget deficit. As 
you can see in Figures 1-1 and 1-2, according to the President’s proposed Budget 
of the United States Government, Fiscal Year 2013 (at the time of this writing the 
FY 2013 official budget has not been passed), the federal government will spend 
$3.8 trillion during the fiscal year, yet collect only $2.9 trillion in taxes and 
receipts, resulting in a deficit just under $1 trillion. 
Note: The U.S. government runs on a fiscal year, not a calendar year like the rest of us. 
The federal government’s fiscal year begins October 1 and runs through September 30.
Before I discuss the deficit and debt in more detail, let’s drill down and take a 
look at U.S. government revenues and expenditures. Where is the federal 
government getting this $2.9 trillion? Take a look at the top three revenue 

Deficit
3 
generators in Figure 1-1. The largest source of revenue for the federal 
government in 2013 is individual income taxes, estimated at over $1.3 trillion. 
This is tax paid on personal income. At around $677 billion, the second largest 
source of receipts is Social Security payroll taxes, a tax on employees and their 
employers to fund the Social Security program. Number three, corporate income 
taxes—a tax levied on corporate profits—weighs in at approximately $348 
billion.
Federal Receipts, Fiscal Year 2013
Proposed Budget (in billions of dollars)
Receipts (What the Government Takes In)
Individual income taxes
$1,359
Corporation income taxes
 $348
Social insurance and retirement receipts:
    Social Security payroll taxes
 $677
    Medicare payroll taxes
$214
    Unemployment insurance
$58
    Other retirement
$10
Excise taxes
$88 
Estate and gift taxes
$13
Customs duties
$33
Deposits of earnings, Federal Reserve System
   $80
Other miscellaneous receipts
   $21
    Total receipts
$2,902
Figure 1-1. Federal receipts, 2013. Source: Budget of the U.S. Government, FY 2013, Table S-5, 
“Proposed Budget by Category.” 
Now look at the spending side of the budget, in Figure 1-2. Of the $3.8 trillion in 
outlays, 
the 
top 
three 
expenditures 
are 
substantial. 
Appropriated 
programs—money set aside for a specific purpose, such as defense, regulation, 
highways, and so forth—is the top expediture at an estimated $1.3 trillion, which 
amounts to just over one-third of all spending. The second largest expected 
outlay, listed under mandatory spending, rings in at $820 billion. It is Social 
Security, the federal program of social insurance for the elderly and disabled. 
Medicare, a federal health insurance program for those aged 65 and over (or 
under 65 and physically disabled), at approximately $523 billion, takes the 
number three spot for expected spending.

         CHAPTER Chapter 1 | Crash Course on the National Debt
4
Federal Spending, Fiscal Year 2013
Proposed Budget (in billions of dollars)
Outlays (What the Government Spends)
Appropriated (“discretionary”) programs
$1,261
Mandatory programs:
    Social Security
$820
    Medicare
$523
    Medicaid
$283
    Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP)
$12
    Other mandatory programs
$654
Net interest
$248
Disaster costs
$2
   Total outlays
$3,803
Figure 1-2. Federal spending, 2013. Source: Budget of the U.S. Government, FY 2013, Table S-5, 
“Proposed Budget by Category.” 
Based on the proposed presidential budget, the deficit for fiscal year 2012 will be 
$901 billion. This means that the U.S. government will spend just under $1 
trillion more than what it earns in revenue. How does the government pay for its 
deficit spending? By selling government bonds. These annual deficits, as you 
will see, all contribute to the national debt. Today’s national debt, at over $16 
trillion, is the total of all accumulated deficits less any surpluses. 
Financial Management, Government Style
Another role of the U.S. government is financial management. This large 
responsibility includes levying taxes, borrowing funds when necessary, and 
preparing a budget.
The U.S. government has a financial master plan—a budget—that enables it to 
implement and maintain government programs and deliver services. How does it 
go about financing its expenditures? Government expenditures are financed 
through revenues, largely taxation, and government borrowing. 

Deficit
5 
Taxing
Most government spending is financed via taxation. According to the 16th 
Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, ratified in 1913, Congress is authorized to 
tax personal and business income. It is worth noting that among all U.S. 
government receipts, personal income tax, at nearly 43 percent of the total, 
contributes most to the income of our government. The government is thus able 
to fund a substantial part of its programs—but not all—through the tax base. 
DEBT GLOSSARY

Government deficit: The fiscal-year dollar amount by which government 
spending exceeds government receipts. When a deficit occurs, the 
government must borrow.

National debt: The total dollar amount of outstanding government 
securities; represents accumulated government deficits less accumulated 
government surpluses.
The federal tax on individual and business income is referred to as a progressive 
tax. Another name for this is graduated tax. A progressive tax is one in which the 
tax rate goes up as the tax base increases. In other words, the more money 
individuals and businesses make, the greater percentage they pay in taxes. The 
theory is that high-income individuals and businesses should pay a greater 
amount of taxes proportionally, especially during economically prosperous eras. 
It puts more of the tax burden on the wealthy than on lower wage earners. 
Borrowing
If the government spends more than it takes in through taxes, it becomes a 
borrower. The U.S. government borrows to cover the deficit by issuing Treasury 
securities (debt instruments often just called “Treasuries”). With a national debt 
exceeding $16 trillion, the United States is the biggest borrower on the globe. 
Your share of the national debt is roughly $50,000 at the time of this writing, and 
it is rising each second. This means that every man, woman, and child in the 
United States—all 314 million of us—would have to write a check for $50,000 to 
wipe out the national debt. 

         CHAPTER Chapter 1 | Crash Course on the National Debt
6
What is the process for budgeting trillions of dollars? And why does the U.S. 
government, in most years, accept that it will have a deficit that in turn will 
contribute to the national debt? Read on.
Budgeting
You must understand how the federal budget is prepared to fully comprehend the 
government’s financial situation. Each February, the president submits to 
Congress a proposed budget, which is prepared for the president by the Office of 
Management and Budget (OMB). Congress then debates the budget and, in 
September, passes a budget resolution. On October 1, the federal government’s 
fiscal year begins. Targets for revenue and spending (and as a result, surpluses 
and deficits) are set. The president can either sign or veto the entire budget bill.
The budget can be divided into two different types of spending, discretionary 
(aka, appropriated) and mandatory, the distinction being how the funds are 
allocated by Congress. 
The discretionary budget, which is just over one-third of federal spending, is set 
by Congress, which must decide on the level of spending for discretionary 
programs in a given year. A discretionary program must go through the annual 
appropriations process each year. Types of discretionary programs include 
national defense, education, housing assistance, highways, and foreign aid.
Mandatory spending comprises roughly two-thirds of the federal budget. 
Mandatory spending has been authorized by law and is the result of legislation 
enacted previously. The major part of this spending is for entitlement 
programs—payments that individuals are entitled or guaranteed to receive, based 
on certain qualifications such as age, income, or military status. The largest 
mandatory program is Social Security, which will continue to expand as the 
“baby boomer” population ages, putting a huge strain on the health of the U.S. 
economy. Medicare, the government’s health insurance coverage for people aged 
65 years and older (or under 65 and disabled), is the second largest mandatory 
program. Again, as the baby boomer population ages, the federal government 
will have rising Medicare expenditures, adding more long-term financial 
pressure.
Another mandatory program, Medicaid, jointly funded by the federal and state 
governments, provides health insurance to low-income individuals. It is the third 

Deficit
7 
largest mandatory spending category. Interest on the national debt is also a 
mandatory spending category. This is money that must be paid to those who buy 
Treasuries, which includes investors in the United States and abroad, and the 
central banks of foreign countries. It is the U.S. central bank, the Federal 
Reserve, that is the largest buyer of Treasuries. As of September 5, 2012, the Fed 
held $1.6 trillion in Treasury Securities, pumped up as part of two rounds of QE, 
or quantatative easing, beginning in 2008. The efforts were designed to stimulate 
the economy by buying bonds to keep long-term interest rates low. 
As Figure 1-2 showed, mandatory spending, at over $2 trillion, is a big reason the 
U.S. budget doesn’t balance and creates a deficit. Shouldn’t it be easy to close 
the gap? As a matter of practicality, there are only two ways to reduce the 
deficit—increase the amount of revenue (for example, by collecting more taxes) 
and/or cut spending. The more controversial debate centers on the potential 
necessity to adjust the promises made to people receiving or planning to receive 
Social Security and Medicare. Let’s look at an overview of each of these 
programs and some of the promises made.
Problem Area: Social Security 
The Social Security Act was signed into law by President Roosevelt in 1935. It 
was designed as a social insurance program as an after effect of the depression, 
the intent being to safeguard against poverty in the elderly population (see Figure 
1-3). Social Security provides retirement benefits, plus family (dependents), 
survivor, and disability programs.
This system is a “pay as you go” system, which means that taxes are collected 
from current workers to pay for people currently receiving Social Security 
benefits. This was not a problem in the early years of the system. At the 
beginning, the number of workers paying into the system was far higher than the 
number of people receiving benefits. In 1950, there were 16.5 workers per 
beneficiary. 
Social Security is the major source of income for a majority of senior citizens. In 
fact, according to the Social Security Administration, nine out of ten people aged 
65 and older receive Social Security benefits. In 2011, over 55 million Americans 
received $736 billion in benefits.1
1 Social Security Administration. Fast Facts and Figures about Social Security. Available at 
www.ssa.gov (accessed September 10, 2012).

         CHAPTER Chapter 1 | Crash Course on the National Debt
8
Figure 1-3. The Great Depression was the most severe economic crisis in modern times, causing 
unemployment to exceed 25 percent. Franklin D. Roosevelt promised economic security for the 
elderly, signing the Social Security Act in 1935. Social Security has grown to be the largest U.S. 
government mandatory spending program. Source: Courtesy of the Franklin D. Roosevelt 
Presidential Library and Museum, Hyde Park, New York.
After World War II, there was an explosion in the number of births, referred to as 
the “baby boom.” The baby boomers are the group of people born between 1945 
and 1964—in the United States, 76 million people were born during that span. As 
of 2011, the oldest individuals in that group are now 65, and the rest will eligible 
to begin receiving Social Security benefits over the next 20 years. Baby boomers 
can’t get full Social Security benefits until they turn 66 (1945–1959) or 67 
(1960–1964), but eligibility is on a graduated scale and will not necessarily begin 
on their birthday.
By 2036, the population of older individuals is expected to almost double, from 
41.9 million today to 78.1 million. Today there are 2.9 workers to each Social 
Security beneficiary. In 2036, current projections show, there will be just 2.1 

Deficit
9 
workers to each Social Security beneficiary.2 As the ratio of workers per retiree 
continues to fall, it is questionable whether the government will be able to fufill 
its obligations.
In addition, due to better health care and medicine, people in the United States 
are living longer than ever before. This, too, puts greater strain on the Social 
Security system. When Social Security was in its early stages in 1940, the 
average life expectancy of a 65-year-old was near 14 years. Today the life 
expectancy of a 65-year-old is close to 20 years.3 People now have more years of 
retirement and more time to collect Social Security. To keep up with this trend in 
life expectancy, Congress has increased from 65 to 67 the age at which a person 
is eligible to collect benefits. This begins with individuals born in 1938 or later, 
and gradually rises until it hits 67 for those born after 1959.
Currently, the Social Security system collects more in payroll taxes (FICA taxes) 
than it pays out to beneficiaries. Workers pay 6.2 percent of their wage income, 
up to $106,800, an amount that is matched by their employers. The excess money 
goes into an account called the Social Security Trust Fund. Money that goes into 
the trust fund is invested in U.S. government securities. At the end of 2011, this 
trust fund held $2.7 trillion in securities.4 The government has placed securities 
in the trust fund earmarked for Social Security, but it has spent the money on 
other goods and services. By 2015, it is expected that the Social Security Trust 
Fund will shift from a surplus to a deficit. 
To take funds out of the Social Security Trust Fund to deal with the deficits, the 
government must pay back the securities being held by the trust fund as well as 
the interest due. The financial drain will be so huge that there are only a few 
available choices to deal with this issue: raise taxes, cut spending, increase the 
payroll tax for Social Security, and/or reduce Social Security benefits.
2 Ibid.
3 Ibid.
4 Board of Trustees.The 2012 Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age 
and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Trust Funds, April 25, 2012, 
Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. Available at www.ssa.gov (accessed September 
10, 2012), p.14.

         CHAPTER Chapter 1 | Crash Course on the National Debt
10
Problem Areas: Medicare and Medicaid
As mentioned earlier in the chapter, Medicare is a federal program that provides 
health insurance coverage to people aged 65 or over, or under 65 with 
disabilities. Medicaid is a joint federal and state program, administered by the 
state governments, to provide health insurance to low-income people and 
families. The fiscal concerns about these programs is that with continued 
increases in the U.S. population, people living longer, and the number of medical 
procedures available, these programs are going to place an unbearable drain on 
the government budget in years to come. It is a problem because these health care 
entitlement programs have already been promised. 
In 2012, Congressional Budget Office (CBO) baseline projections show the 
federal government will have net outlays of $486 billion for Medicare, with the 
amount rising to $884 billion by 2022. These obligations are a debt owed by the 
federal government. For the same 10-year period, CBO baseline projections for 
the Medicaid program show 2012 net outlays of $258 billion, with the amount 
rising to $622 billion by 2022—more than doubling in 10 years.
The deficit persists in part due to the federal government’s spending habits, both 
mandatory and discretionary. Although it may not be wise for society to 
eliminate entitlement programs, there are a number of approaches available to 
reduce mandatory spending. Several options are highlighted in Chapter 8, 
including extending the retirement age to receive full Social Security benefits. 
Priorities must be set for annual discretionary spending, with adjustments to 
entitlements. Deficits will not go away until we as a nation adjust our spending 
patterns or increase revenue. 
BUDGET GLOSSARY

Budget deficit: A situation in which government spending exceeds its 
revenue during a given period of time. 

Budget surplus: A situation in which government spending is less than its 
revenue during a given period of time.

Balanced budget: A situation in which government spending is exactly 
equal to its revenue during a given period of time.

Deficit
11 
The Budget Equation: Receipts less Outlays
The current debate over the government budget boils down to the gap between 
spending and receipts, which has been widening over the past few years—and 
not in a good way. Although government spending has increased in recent years, 
the tax and revenue stream has not kept up. 
The budget equation is very simple. When government outlays are higher than 
receipts, a budget deficit exists. When the receipts are higher than the outlays, the 
result is a budget surplus. A balanced budget, in which receipts exactly equal 
outlays, is an extremely rare occurrence. When the government spends more than 
it takes in through taxes during a fiscal year, it “runs a deficit.” Adding all the 
yearly deficits together, less any yearly surpluses, results in the national debt 
figure. So financing the government deficit each year forces the debt upward. 
Over the past few years, the U.S. budget has revealed some harrowing deficit 
numbers, surpassing the $1 trillion mark, partially because of recent changes in 
fiscal policy (see Table 1-1).
Table 1-1. Summary of Receipts, Outlays, and Surpluses or Deficits (in millions of dollars) 
Receipts
Outlays
Surplus or Deficit (–)
2000
$2,025,191
$1,788,950
  $236,241
2001
$1,991,082
$1,862,846
  $128,236
2002
$1,853,136
$2,010,894
  -$157,758
2003
$1,782,314
$2,159,899
  -$377,585
2004
$1,880,114
$2,292,841
  -$412,727
2005 
$2,153,611
$2,471,957
  -$318,346
2006
$2,406,869
$2,655,050
  -$248,181
2007
$2,567,985
$2,728,686
  -$160,701
2008
$2,523,991
$2,982,544
  -$458,553
2009
$2,104,989
$3,517,677
-$1,412,688
2010 
$2,162,724
$3,456,213
-$1,293,489
2011
$2,303,466
$3,603,061
-$1,326,948
Source: Budget of the U.S. Government, FY 2013, Historical Tables, Table 1.1, “Summary of 
Receipts, Outlays, and Surpluses or Deficits: 1789–2017.”

         CHAPTER Chapter 1 | Crash Course on the National Debt
12
At the time of this writing, the United States has a national debt over $16 trillion. 
As mentioned, the debt equals all accumulated deficits less any accumulated 
surpluses. When a deficit occurs, it increases the national debt. The budget for 
fiscal year 2011, for example, increased the national debt by approximately $1.3 
trillion. 
Deficits and Business Cycles 
Yet another role of the federal government is to stabilize the economy, which may 
at times involve increasing the deficit. The macroeconomic objectives of the 
government are to encourage economic growth, minimize inflation, and spur 
employment. The U.S. government attempts to contribute to a strong U.S. 
economy through the execution of economic policies. The government has two 
main choices—fiscal policy and monetary policy. 
Fiscal policy, implemented by the president and Congress, is the adjustment of 
taxation and/or government spending to influence the overall economy. Monetary 
policy is employed by the Federal Reserve Bank (“the Fed”), which manipulates 
the money supply, interest rates, and availability of credit to affect the health of 
the U.S. economy. The strategies that both the Fed and Congress use to achieve 
macroeconomic objectives are hotly debated, and I detail the methods and the 
arguments in later chapters. But regardless of how you feel about the policy 
tools, it is advisable not to view the policies singularly. Often the two strategies 
are utilized together to best achieve economic goals. An advantage of monetary 
policy is that it can assist in improving the economy without increasing the 
deficit. An important component to a strong economy is to have sound monetary 
and fiscal policies.
The government also has powerful tools, called automatic stabilizers, to provide 
the economy with an automatic boost. An automatic stabilizer is government 
spending or taxing that automatically rises or falls with economic activity. For 
example, as personal income rises, so do income taxes. There are many 
economists who favor the use of automatic stabilizers over fiscal policy. 
Automatic stabilizers are a form of nondiscretionary fiscal policy because they 
do not require any specific actions by government. The reason is that stabilizers 
change automatically, based on economic conditions. They are built into the 
structure of the system. It is a government expenditure or revenue that responds 
countercyclically by moving in the opposite direction of the current economic 
cycle. There is no need for approval from Congress or the president to go 
forward with this type of economic policy and consequently no policy lags. 

Deficit
13 
Unemployment insurance and welfare are two major programs that are automatic 
stabilizers; they increase or decrease automatically to offset current economic 
conditions. Here’s an example of how it works. In a recessionary economy, many 
people lose their jobs, causing unemployment compensation to rise. So 
government expenditures increase automatically during recessions. The 
unemployment payments allow people to spend money they would not otherwise 
have, thereby injecting money into the spending stream during an economic 
downturn. Consequently, unemployment compensation helps people maintain a 
somewhat similar spending stream as prior to losing their jobs. Because this 
group of people is still out in the economy spending, this automatic stabilizer 
helps minimize the impact of job losses and makes the cyclical downturn less 
severe.
When the economy is in a recessionary period, welfare payments also rise. 
Again, this is an automatic increase in government spending in response to 
worsening economic conditions. It is a countercyclical action, injecting new 
money into the system during a down time. Based on previously written 
entitlement rules, people must meet specific qualifications for both 
unemployment and welfare. So when the economy is booming again, fewer 
people will be in need of unemployment and welfare, reversing the cycle.
Income tax is also an automatic stabilizer. During a recession, for example, 
income falls and individuals fall into a lower tax bracket. Because of the 
progressive tax system, people pay a decreasing portion of income tax as income 
falls. People now have more funds available to spend on disposable purchases. 
This provides a stimulating impact for the economy and lessens the impact of a 
recession. Conversely, when the economy is strong people will find themselves 
making more money and moving into a higher tax bracket. Due to the 
progressive nature of the tax system, people will pay additional taxes on their 
higher incomes. People now have less cash to spend on disposable purchases, and 
this will slow down the economy. Once again, it is a countercyclical action.
December 2007 Recession
Recessions and the national debt have a definite connection. During a weak 
economy, deficits tend to grow. Rising deficits, in turn, aggravate the growing 
debt burden. As you can see in Table 1-1, over the past decade the country has 
run a deficit every year since 2002. The Business Cycle Dating Committee of the 
National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), a private, nonprofit, 
nonpartisan research organization centered in Cambridge, Massachusetts, 

         CHAPTER Chapter 1 | Crash Course on the National Debt
14
identified December 2007 as the beginning of the most recent downturn in the 
economy. This recession has caused the deficit to burgeon, making the deficit 
and debt a hotly debated topic. 
During the recession, economic activity declined, causing tax revenue to decline. 
This further widened the spread between revenue and expenditures, and the 
country ended up with huge deficits over the past few years. Budget deficits 
typically increase during recessions because tax revenue goes down and 
government spending rises. In this case, the government responded to the 
economic situation with the $787 billion American Recovery and Reinvestment 
Act of 2009; assistance for the financial, housing, and automotive industries; and 
an extension of unemployment benefits. These actions were all designed to pump 
up the economy, but they also further expanded the deficit by increasing spending.
The Business Cycle Dating Committee has determined that the end of the 
recession, a trough in business activity, occurred in June 2009. The December 
2007 to June 2009 recession lasted 18 months and was the longest recession 
since World War II. According to the Business Cycle Dating Committee, “In 
determining that a trough occurred in June 2009, the committee did not conclude 
that economic conditions since that month have been favorable or that the 
economy has returned to operating at normal capacity. Rather, the committee 
determined only that the recession ended and a recovery began in that month.”5
Clearly, the Business Cycle Dating Committee notes this is not a robust 
expansion and many people do not yet feel relief. It is a modest expansion at 
best. Revenue growth is further restrained by the Tax Relief, Unemployment 
Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010. The modest uptick in 
any economic activity will be countered by this $858 billion act, which includes, 
among many items, an extension of the Bush Administration’s tax cuts, 
advantageous tax rates for long-term capital gains and dividends, and favorable 
estate tax laws.
What level and type of fiscal stimulus programs are appropriate to move a 
country out of a recession? During a recession, deficit spending may boost 
aggregate demand and recharge the economy. Government spending and tax cuts 
can increase business activity and create job opportunities. Such programs can 
also lead to deficits and mounting debt. Also, fiscal policies occasionally fail to 
work effectively in stimulating demand, yet the debt remains. The controversy 
5 National Bureau of Economic Research. “Business Cycle Dating Committee, National 
Bureau of Economic Research report, September 20, 2010.” Available at 
www.nber.org/cycles/sept2010.html (accessed April 25, 2011).

Deficit
15 
over fiscal programs and their impact on curing a recession are discussed in 
coming chapters.
In the next chapter, you will learn how the government borrows the additional 
funds that it needs to operate. It is not a new story; in fact, borrowing by the 
federal government dates back to 1791. You will learn about the Treasury agency 
that funds the debt, the Bureau of the Public Debt. Who holds the big credit card 
for the U.S. government? If you own a U.S. Savings Bond—perhaps given to you 
as a birthday or graduation gift—you own a piece of the federal debt. I will also 
explore details of the other debt instruments—Treasury bills, notes, bonds, and 
Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities. Are you interested in the top U.S. 
creditors—China, Japan, and the “oil exporting countries”?  Read on for more 
details. You will also get a peek at the monumental interest payments the U.S. 
government is making—an additional cost of deficit spending.

C H A P T E R
2
A Huge 
Credit Card
In the introduction, I mentioned that the national debt was far too large to put 
on a traditional credit card. But as this chapter will show, the U.S. Treasury 
and its agencies allow the country to spend and borrow, much as an 
individual with a wallet full of credit cards.
The U.S. Constitution gives Congress the power to borrow money on the 
credit of the United States. The U.S. Department of the Treasury (“the 
Treasury”) issues or creates the debt, but it’s the duty of a Treasury 
agency—the Bureau of the Public Debt—to borrow the money needed to 
operate the federal government and account for the debt. The Bureau of the 
Public Debt has the task of managing the debt, including selling the debt, 
making payments to debt holders, and keeping administrative records. Its 
official headquarters is in Washington, DC, with the primary operations and 
computer center located in Parkersburg, West Virginia.
Financing the federal government is largely accomplished by selling govern-
ment bonds. These include Treasury bills, notes, bonds, Treasury Inflation-
Protected Securities (TIPS), and U.S. Savings Bonds, and occasionally war 

Chapter 2 | A Huge Credit Card
18
bonds to help finance war efforts. As you will see, much of our federal debt 
has been incurred to pay for wars throughout our country’s history.
History of the Debt
The Bureau of the Public Debt was organized in 1789. In fact, the Bureau of 
the Public Debt notes its first recorded debt in 1791, at just over $75 million 
to honor Revolutionary War obligations.1 It was founding father, economist, 
and statesman Alexander Hamilton who believed in a strong central 
government and rallied for the government to take on some debt to help meet 
its expenses. He said, “A national debt, if it is not excessive, will be to us a 
national blessing.”2 Hamilton was the chief architect of the U.S. Treasury 
Department, and was named the young nation’s first Secretary of the 
Treasury.
The debt shrank to zero by January 1835, but soon sprang into the millions 
again. It was during the Civil War period that the country saw the debt 
skyrocket. In 1860, the year before the Civil War began, the debt level was 
approximately $65 million, and by the year following the war, 1866, the debt 
had grown to $2.7 billion.
The end of World War I in 1918 brought with it a hefty bill for the payment 
of the war efforts, and the debt hit $27 billion in 1919. The cost of World 
War II multiplied the debt fivefold, from $51 billion in 1940 to $258 billion 
in 1945. The Korean War in the early 1950s caused only a modest uptick in 
the debt, but enough to ignite concerns about the problems associated with 
paying for defense spending. The Vietnam War saw larger increases of the 
debt, rising to near $382 billion by 1970.
It was in 1982 that the total federal debt topped $1 trillion, and by the year 
2000—despite a few years in the late 1990s in which the deficit disappeared 
and the country ran a budget surplus—it had risen to six times that figure. 
With the historic September 11, 2001, terrorists attacks on New York, 
Pennsylvania, and Washington DC, economic progress was thwarted and 
spending escalated for homeland security and the wars in Iraq and Afghan-
istan. The U.S. economy went into a downturn, and President George W. 
1 Bureau of the Public Debt. “Our History.” Available at 
www.publicdebt.treas.gov/history/history.htm (accessed February 6, 2011).
2 TreasuryDirect Kids. “The History of U.S. Public Debt: The Beginning of U.S. Debt.” 
Available at www.treasurydirect.gov/kids/history/history.htm (accessed February 6, 2011).

Deficit
19 
Bush authorized tax rebates and tax cuts during this time to propel the 
economy, and the debt kept growing. In December 2007, the United States 
entered a particularly tough recession. President Obama fired back quickly 
with a $787 billion stimulus program to encourage economic recovery, 
bringing the debt to topple $16 trillion at the end of fiscal 2012. (That figure 
includes the portion held by the government.)
Think Like an Economist
Do you want to think like an economist? Economists are particularly 
interested in the portion of debt that is held by the public. When the total 
federal debt is reduced by the portion held by government agencies, it is 
called debt held by the public. To provide a truer picture of rising debt 
values, Table 2-1 shows the real, inflation-adjusted rise in the debt (in FY 
2010 dollars) held by the public, post-WWII. According to these values, in 
1946 the federal government owed approximately $2.3 trillion to creditors 
who had loaned the government money to fund past deficits. This number 
has risen over the past 64 years to reach over $9 trillion at the end of 2010. It 
is projected to shoot up to over $13 trillion in 2015. 
Table 2-1. Debt Held by the Public in 2010 dollars
Fiscal Year
FY 2010 Dollars (in 
billions)
1946
2,276.4
1950
1,677.3
1955
1,525.0
1960
1,414.9
1965
1,456.9
1970
1,315.5
1975
1,349.2
1980
1,683.0

Chapter 2 | A Huge Credit Card
20
Fiscal Year
FY 2010 Dollars (in 
billions)
1985
2,716.2
1990
3,721.8
1995
4,900.7
2000
4,268.2
2005
5,109.8
2010
9,018.9
2015 
13,243.5 (estimated)
Source: Office of Management and Budget, Analytical Perspectives, Budget of the U.S. 
Government, Fiscal Year 2012, Table 6-1, “Trends in Federal Debt Held by the Public.”
Liberty Bonds
Although government bonds of various types have been offered by the 
Bureau of the Public Debt throughout its history, some of the patriotic bond 
issues are the most memorable. When the United States was preparing to 
enter World War I, Liberty Bonds were introduced and purchasing them 
became a symbol of patriotism by U.S. citizens. The funds from the sale of 
the bonds were used to support the Allied cause in WWI and help pay for the 
war. Later, the face value of the bonds was paid back, plus interest.
A series of four Liberty Bonds were issued by the government during 1917 
and 1918. Each issue was authorized by the government to print and sell a set 
dollar amount of the bonds. The first Liberty Bond met with a rather 
unenthusiastic response, so the Bureau of the Public Debt launched the 
second bond with a carefully planned publicity campaign. Famous artists 
created posters to advertise it, and movie stars hosted Liberty Bond rallies. 
Boy Scouts and Girls Scouts sold the bonds in their communities, and Army 
pilots even traveled around the country doing airplane stunt shows in an 
effort to sell more bonds. Buying the bonds was promoted as being the duty 
of all U.S. citizens. Many of the posters, such as the one shown in Figure 2-1, 
prominently feature the Statue of Liberty in the background, and they have 
become collectible and historic symbols of American patriotism. The second 

Deficit
21 
issued Liberty Bond sold $3 billion in bonds at 4 percent interest, redeem-
able after 10 years.
Figure 2-1. A poster encouraging the sale of government bonds for the second issue of Liberty 
Bonds, “Liberty Loan of 1917” (ca. 1917–1919). Source: The National Archives and Records 
Administration.
War Bonds
Many investors were disappointed with their investment in Liberty Bonds. 
Values fell on the Liberty Bonds, and some investors had to sell the bonds at 
significant losses. So the U.S. government tried a different approach with the 
next war, which was to be a much more expensive undertaking. World War 
II came in at an estimated cost for the United States of $323 billion. The 
Bureau of the Public Debt was heavily involved because roughly $211 billion 
of the total amount was borrowed money.
Much of the borrowing was in the form of nonmarketable debt, or U.S. 
Savings Bonds (also called War Bonds). Savings Bonds were first offered on 
March 1, 1935, and the promotion and sale of bonds associated with the war 

Chapter 2 | A Huge Credit Card
22
was very successful. Savings Bonds were different from Liberty Bonds 
because they were nonnegotiable (not transferable from one party to 
another), registered, and had fixed values. This was great for the small 
investor because the bonds could easily be turned into cash. 
The poster shown in Figure 2-2—“Bonds Build Ships! Buy More 
Bonds”—was only one of many that stressed the responsibility of the public 
to buy bonds to provide financial assistance for fighting WWII. The United 
States relied on its citizens to help with wartime funding. The advertising 
campaign turned out to be a successful strategy because it made investors 
feel secure and gave them a strong feeling of patriotism by helping their 
country. It truly was an appeal for help because the bonds offered rates that 
were lower than could be acquired elsewhere. The War Bonds were zero-
coupon bonds (which are sold at a discount and are redeemed at full face 
value), selling for 75 percent of their face value, in denominations ranging 
from $10 to $100,000. At first they were called Defense Bonds, but when the 
Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor on Dec 7, 1941, the name appropriately 
changed to War Bonds. In the end, 18 percent of the total U.S. debt for the 
war was funded by War Bonds.

Deficit
23 
Figure 2-2. A poster used to promote the purchase of government bonds for the wartime effort 
(1941–1945). Source: The National Archives and Records Administration.
Who Owns the Debt?
The system of selling Treasury securities and bonds to finance the U.S. debt is 
a highly organized process. As previously stated, the U.S. Treasury issues the 
debt, and the Bureau of the Public Debt manages the debt. The current Bureau 
of the Public Debt Commissioner, Van Zeck, aptly explains the agency’s role: 
“In a nutshell, we borrow by selling Treasury bills, notes, bonds, TIPS, as 
well as savings bonds; we pay interest to investors; and, when the time comes 
to pay back the loans, we redeem investors’ securities. Every time we borrow 
or pay back money, it affects the outstanding debt of the United States.”3
3 Bureau of the Public Debt. “Commissioner’s Welcome.” Available at 
www.publicdebt.treas.gov/whoweare/welcome.htm (accessed February 8, 2011).

Chapter 2 | A Huge Credit Card
24
Neither the U.S. Treasury nor the Bureau of the Public Debt makes the 
decisions on how the borrowed funds are spent; Congress decides how the 
money is allocated. The debt ceiling is the cap that Congress imposes as the 
maximum amount of debt that the government may have outstanding. When 
the limit is reached, the Treasury must stop borrowing until Congress raises 
the limit.
Public Debt
The debt is divided into two main categories: debt held by the public and 
intragovernmental holdings (see Table 2-2). The public, which holds roughly 
70 percent of the debt, includes individuals, businesses, pension funds, 
insurance companies, mutual funds, banks, state and local governments, and 
foreign entities.
48392. Total Public Debt Outstanding As of August 31, 2012 
Category
Amount (in millions)
Percentage of 
Debt
Debt held by the public
$11,122,282
69.81%
Intragovernmental holdings
$4,810,953
30.19%
Total public debt outstanding
$15,933,235
100.00%
Source: Bureau of the Public Debt, Debt Position and Activity Report, August 2012. 
Government Debt
As indicated in Table 2-2, the remaining 30 percent of the total public debt 
outstanding is held by U.S. government agencies and trust funds, such as the 
Social Security Administration, Federal Housing Administration, Postal 
Service Fund, Highway Trust Fund, and Federal Disability Insurance Trust 
Fund. These government accounts are among those that accumulate cash 
above and beyond current needs, to pay for future obligations. Cash surpluses 
are generally invested in Treasury debt. Note that interest paid on debt owed 
by one government account to another does not have a net effect on 
government spending.

Deficit
25 
Marketable vs. Nonmarketable Obligations
Debt largely is issued in the form of Treasury securities, including Treasury 
bills, notes, bonds, Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS), and 
Savings Bonds. The bulk of Treasury securities—bills, notes, bonds, and 
TIPS—are marketable because they can be bought and sold in the secondary 
market after they are purchased from the Treasury. These Treasury securities 
are considered liquid because they are traded frequently. Savings Bonds are 
referred to as nonmarketable securities because they are registered to a 
specific owner. They cannot be transferred to other people by market sales.
Treasuries and Savings Bonds are generally considered stable and safe 
investments. Interest on these issues is exempt from state and local taxes but 
is subject to federal tax. All issued government bonds are backed by the full 
faith and credit of the U.S. government. Because of the safety advantage, 
rates and yields on all government obligations tend to be relatively low. As 
Table 2-3 shows, the average rate for marketable and nonmarketable 
obligations is under 3 percent.
Table 2-3. Marketable Debt vs. Nonmarketable Debt As of August 31, 2012
Category
Amount (in millions)
Percentage
Marketables
$10,607,347
66.57%
Nonmarketables
$5,325,887
33.43%
Average interest rate
2.621%
Source: Bureau of the Public Debt, Debt Position and Activity Report, August 2012. 
Marketable Securities
Treasury bills, Treasury notes, Treasury bonds, and Treasury Inflation 
Protected Securites are referred to simply as Treasuries. Although many 
similarities do exist among these instruments, such as liquidity and a wide 
secondary market, there are unique differences such as risk and maturity. The 
U.S. government sells a variety of instruments, to suit investor preferences, 
to finance the debt. Read on to learn more details.

Chapter 2 | A Huge Credit Card
26
Treasury Bills
Treasury bills (called “T-bills” for short) are the government’s short-term 
securities, in that they mature in 1 year or less. Typical instruments are 4-, 
13-, 26-, and 52-week bills. These are also known as 1-month, 3-month, 6-
month, and 1-year bills. Banks and financial institutions tend to be the 
largest purchasers of Treasury bills. Highly liquid, many investors see T-
bills as the least risky investment on the market. Consequently, T-bills 
generally carry a low rate of interest, even compared to Treasury notes and 
bonds.
T-bills are unique Treasury instruments. They do not pay interest but are sold 
at a discount from face value. T-bills are sold in denominations of $100, and 
the maximum purchase is limited to $5 million. A purchaser pays less than 
face value (also called par amount) at the time of purchase, but receives face 
value once the T-bill matures. Investors make money on the spread between 
the discount price and the face value. Technically, these instruments do not 
pay interest. Often this is referred to as implicit interest.
For example, assuming you bought a 1-year T-bill for $980 and its face value 
was $1,000, you would earn $20 at the end of the term. The implicit interest 
can be determined according to the following formula:
(Face value – Price )/Price = implicit interest.
For this simple example, $20/$980 is a 2.04 percent implicit interest.
T-bills can be bought directly from the U.S. Treasury or indirectly through 
banks, brokers, and dealers. They are auctioned electronically every week. 
There are two ways to bid on bills, either competitively or noncompetitively. 
Competitive bidders must go through a bank, broker, or dealer, and can’t buy 
more than 35 percent of the initial offering amount. Noncompetitive bidders 
are limited to $5 million in T-bills. Here’s how it works. 
With a noncompetitive bid, the bidder agrees to take the discount rate or 
yield determined during the auction. The benefit is that the bidder is 
guaranteed to receive the full amount of the bid. 
With a competitive bid, the bidder names the discount rate or yield, but has 
to wait to see if they are a winning bidder. If the bidder’s rate is less than or 
equal to the high discount rate or yield calculated during the auction process, 
the bidder gets the T-bill. But if the bidder’s rate is over the auction rate, the 
bidder won’t be able to purchase any T-bills.

Deficit
27 
The T-bill rate is commonly used as an index for other loans, such as 
business and consumer loans. As interest rates change according to 
underlying economic conditions, so does the T-rate. An adjustable rate loan 
might be tied to the T-bill rate, with a few percentage points commonly 
added to the T-bill rate. So, for example, an adjustable rate loan might be the 
T-bill rate plus three points. Therefore, when the rates on T-bills go up, so do 
many other loan rates.
Treasury Notes and Bonds
Similar to the nickname for Treasury bills, Treasury notes are called T-notes 
and Treasury bonds are called T-bonds. T-notes earn a fixed rate of interest 
every 6 months until the note matures. Notes have a maturity from a 
minimum of 1 year up to a maximum of 10 years. Current note issues are 2, 
3, 5, 7, and 10 years. T-bonds carry a maturity longer than 10 years, currently 
issued with a term of 30 years. Notes and bonds are sold monthly or 
quarterly, depending on the maturity of the issue. When the note or bond 
reaches maturity, the holder receives the face value. 
Notes and bonds are sold in increments of $100, with a minimum purchase of 
$100. In a single auction, an investor can buy up to $5 million in notes or 
bonds by noncompetitive bidding, or up to 35 percent of the initial offering 
amount by competitive bidding (bidding is described in the preceding 
section, “Treasury Bills”).
The price of a T-note or bond may be greater than, less than, or equal to its 
face value. A good rule of thumb to remember is that when interest rates rise, 
bond prices fall. When interest rates fall, bond prices rise. Thus, bond prices 
and interest rates are inversely related. Here is simple example. Assuming 
you own a $1,000 bond paying 3 percent interest, every year you will receive 
a $30 interest payment (or $15 every 6 months). Now further assume that 
new bonds coming to market of similar quality and maturity pay 4 percent. 
The new bonds will provide a $40 interest payment annually, making your 3 
percent bond look less attractive. If you want to sell it, the price of your bond 
will have to fall below its $1,000 par value to increase the interest rate. On 
the other hand, if coupon rates fall and new bonds are selling at a 2 percent 
rate, your 3 percent bond looks great because it is paying $30 a year, and will 
consequently sell over its par value.
Interest rates for T-notes are typically higher than rates for T-bills. Interest 
rates for T-bonds are generally higher than rates for T-notes. Yield curves are 

Chapter 2 | A Huge Credit Card
28
traditionally upward sloping, meaning that the longer the term, the higher the 
interest rate premium. The market rewards investors for committing their 
funds for a longer period of time because there is a great deal of uncertainty 
in the market that may translate into volatility in the value of the security. 
The economy faces global crises, political situations, inflation, output 
problems, and employment issues that can impact the marketplace. Investors 
generally want to be compensated for longer use of their funds because of 
potential risks long term. 
There is also a large secondary market for trading T-notes and T-bonds, so 
they are considered to be highly liquid (easily turned into cash). Liquidity 
also reduces risk since holders can usually sell U.S. government securities 
easily if need be. 
BOND BASICS
If interest rates rise, bond prices fall.
Interest Rates          Bond Prices
ñ      ò
If interest rates fall, bond prices rise.
Interest Rates          Bond Prices
ò      ñ
To place a noncompetitive bid, you may bid through the Treasury directly, or 
use a bank, broker, or dealer. To place a competitive bid, you must use a 
bank, broker, or dealer. When you bid competitively, you specify the yield 
you want, but this does not mean that you will get the bid. With a 
noncompetitive bid, you take whatever yield is determined at auction.
Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS)
As with T-notes and T-bonds, TIPS pay interest every 6 months and return 
the principal on maturity. These were first issued in 1997 to protect 
investors from inflation. If you think traditional treasuries are safe, these 
might be described as super-safe. What makes TIPS different from normal 

Deficit
29 
T-notes and T-bonds is that the return and principal are automatically 
adjusted for inflation. The principal is tied to the Consumer Price Index 
(CPI), an inflationary indicator that measures the change in the cost of a 
fixed market basket of goods and services. Therefore, if inflation rises, so 
does the principal. If inflation falls, so does the principal. TIPS do have a set 
interest rate and pay interest every 6 months. But because the rate is paid on 
principal, the interest rises if the principal increases and falls if the principal 
falls.
When the TIPS reaches maturity, the holder receives the greater of the 
inflation adjusted principal amount or its original par value. The terms can be 
5, 10, 20, or 30 years. You can buy from the U.S. Treasury, a bank, or 
broker. They tend to carry very low interest rates because they carry inflation 
protection. Risk is consequently lower. You can hold the TIPS until it 
reaches its full value, or sell it before maturity in the secondary market.
Nonmarketable Securities: Savings Bonds
Unlike Treasury securities, which have a wide secondary market, U.S. 
Savings Bonds are nonmarketable securities. This means they are sold and 
registered to a specific owner and cannot be traded with other investors. As 
with Treasuries, Savings Bonds are considered extremely safe because they 
are backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government. Like all 
Treasury securities, Savings Bonds are exempt from state and local taxes, 
but, unlike other Treasury securities, all federal taxes may be deferred until 
the Savings Bond is redeemed. Savings Bonds are registered so they can be 
replaced if they are lost or stolen. Two types of Savings Bonds are currently 
available, Series EE and Series I Savings Bonds.
Series EE Savings Bonds
Series EE Savings Bonds pay a fixed rate of interest, which does not 
fluctuate during the life of the bond. These types of bonds can be purchased 
as electronic bonds or paper bonds. You can buy them in paper form from 
banks, or in electronic form from the U.S. Treasury. Either way, the bond 
earns interest each month for 30 years. In both the electronic and paper 
versions, you cannot buy more than $5,000 face value of bonds during any 
calendar year. Paper Series EE Bonds may be bought in denominations of 
$50, $75, $100, $200, $500, $1,000, $5,000, and $10,000. Electronic Series 

Chapter 2 | A Huge Credit Card
30
EE Bonds may be purchased in amounts of $25 (the minimum) or any 
amount up to $5,000.
If you purchase a paper Series EE Bond, you pay half the face value. For 
example, a $25 investment purchases a $50 bond. The bond continues to rise 
in value, and interest is added to the principal. When the bond matures, the 
holder gets the accrued interest plus the purchase price of the bond. On the 
other hand, you pay face value when you purchase electronic Series EE 
Bonds, so a $50 bond costs $50. But you will be paid full value for the bond 
when it matures. You receive interest electronically.
Series I Savings Bonds
Like Series EE, Series I Savings Bonds are available electronically or in a 
paper version. The intent of the security is to protect investors from inflation. 
These bonds are sold at face value with a maturity of 30 years. The earnings 
rate consists of a combination fixed rate that does not change, plus a rate 
connected to the CPI, or Consumer Price Index—an inflation measure. 
Simply speaking, if the inflation rate rises, then the interest rate goes up. 
Conversely, if the inflation rate falls, so does the interest rate on the bond. 
Generally considered very low risk, Series I Bonds protect the earning 
capacity of the bond and rise during periods of inflation. For both paper and 
electronic purchases, the limit is a $5,000 maximum purchase in one calendar 
year. Electronic purchases can be made in amounts of $25 or more up to 
$5,000. Paper bonds sell in $50, $75, $100, $200, $500, $1,000, and $5,000 
amounts.
Foreign Investors
As the U.S. debt burgeons, the nation continues to rely on foreign sources for 
financing. As you can see from Table 2-4, as of June 2012, foreign investors 
held $5,292.3 billion, or $5.3 trillion, of U.S. Treasuries. This is roughly 48 
percent of total privately held debt.
Table 2-4. Top Ten Major Foreign Holders of Treasury Securities (in billions of dollars; 
holdings at end of period)
Country
June 2012
June 2011
China, Mainland
$1,164.3
$1,307.0

Deficit
31 
Country
June 2012
June 2011
Japan
$1,119.3
$881.5
Oil exporters
$261.3
$242.6
Brazil
$242.8
$216.2
Caribbean banking centers
$240.2
$216.2
Taiwan
$191.9
$146.6
Switzerland
$165.7
$118.1
Russia
$157.8
$151.7
United Kingdom 
$139.1
$135.7
Hong Kong
$135.5
$112.4
Grand total for all countries
$5,292.3
$4,690.6
Source: Department of the Treasury/Federal Reserve Board (August 15, 2012).
The amount of the U.S. debt held outside of the United States is at an all-
time high. China, Japan, and the “oil exporters” are the top foreign creditors. 
China, although tapering off purchases during the year, is still the largest 
foreign buyer of U.S. debt. Japan, the second largest holder of Treasury 
debt, has increased its position significantly over the last year at 27 percent. 
The “oil exporters” is a powerful entity, growing its Treasury holdings 8 
percent during that year. The exporting countries include Ecuador, 
Venezuela, Indonesia, Bahrain, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi 
Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, Algeria, Gabon, Libya, and Nigeria.
The largest foreign holder of U.S. Treasury securities, China, currently holds 
$1,164.3 billion in American debt. This means that it holds roughly 10.5 
percent of the debt held by the public. Foreign holdings of Treasury 
securities have increased fivefold from where they stood in 2000 at $1,038.8, 
which was just over 30 percent of the total privately held debt.
So you can see a trend of increasing numbers of Treasury securities held by 
foreign countries and international investors. Foreigners want a portion of the 
U.S. debt because they are dollar-denominated IOUs, currently con-sidered a 
safe haven. Another issue to consider is the cost of using these funds, which 

Chapter 2 | A Huge Credit Card
32
means sending interest payments abroad, as discussed in the next section. 
This money also ends up in the hands of people outside of U.S. borders, 
rather than in the hands of someone in the United States. On the positive 
side, the massive purchases of Treasuries by foreigners have kept interest 
rates at low levels, a cheap form of financing for the United States. However, 
it places the country under increased reliance on the foreign sector to finance 
the deficit spending of the United States.
Interest Payments
Each dollar that the U.S. government borrows, either domestically or from 
foreign creditors, carries an interest cost. As the total amount of debt 
increases, there is a constantly growing interest expense on that debt. One of 
the impacts of deficit financing and rising debt is that the government must 
fund the interest expense each year.
Estimated spending for net interest outlays on the debt in fiscal year 2012 
totaled $241.6 billion. This is a 17 percent increase from fiscal 2011, which 
tallied net interest of $206.7 billion. Net interest is calculated as the interest 
paid to holders of Treasury debt issues less interest received by government 
trust funds. It is affected by both interest rates and the amount of debt 
outstanding. To put these numbers into perspective, note that the entire 
budget receipts for 2012 are estimated to total $2.6 trillion. That means the 
country spent roughly 10 percent of everything taken in during the year just 
on interest costs.
Here are a few more numbers to put this in perspective. Net interest was the 
sixth largest U.S. government outlay by function. Money spent on Social 
Security in 2012 was the highest outlay, at $767.1 billion. National defense 
was next at $737.5 billion, followed by income security at $554.3 billion, 
Medicare at $492.3 billion, and health at $373.8 billion. You can see in Chart 
2-1 that interest is a big part of the government’s budget, about 6 percent of 
the total. Looking at it another way, the entire cost of interest on the debt at 
$241.6 billion could cover the combined spending outlays for Veterans 
Affairs at $125 billion, Transportation at $105 billion, and Disaster Relief 
and Insurance at $11 billion.

Deficit
33 
Chart 2-1. Federal Outlays by Function, 2012
Source: Budget of the U.S. Government, FY 2013, Historical Tables, Table 3.2, “Outlays by 
Function and Subfunction:1962-2017.”
At month end August 2012, interest rates were down. The average rate 
(excluding TIPS) for marketable debt was 1.443 percent, the average rate for 
nonmarketable debt was 3.638 percent, and the overall rate was 2.587. When 
rates start to return to higher levels, the federal interest cost will increase 
dramatically. Interest expenses also are projected to keep growing 
dramatically as the U.S. debt increases. The Treasury anticipates interest on 
the net public debt to grow to $653.6 billion by 2015.
Summary
The United States has been borrowing money to operate the federal 
government since 1791. A staggering amount of money is needed to run the 
United States, and the Bureau of the Public Debt is the government agency 
that sells and manages the debt. There are a number of ways to borrow from 
the public—marketable securities such as T-notes, various bonds and bills, 
TIPS, and nonmarketable securities such as those from the Savings Bond 
program.

Chapter 2 | A Huge Credit Card
34
Who owns this public debt? A lot of U.S. citizens, banks, and institutions, as 
well as the foreign sector, have purchased securities over many years to fund 
our government. Every dollar that is borrowed carries an interest cost—the 
cost of doing business with these people, institutions, and foreign 
governments.
The federal government has many functions in our society. One such 
function is to stabilize our economy, when necessary, such as in times of 
economic turmoil or war. Fiscal policy involves the adjustment of 
government spending or taxation to impact the economy. The government 
characteristically cannot stabilize the economy and keep the budget intact. 
One of the effects of a fiscal policy is that it usually creates a deficit, which 
pushes up the total debt. 
In the next chapter we will investigate our increasingly complex, 
interconnected world. We live in a global economy where product markets 
and financial markets are highly intergrated. Read on to see how a major 
policy shift in one country can impact economies around the world. 

C H A P T E R
Primer on 
the Current 
Global 
Economy
We have already established that the U.S. $16 trillion debt is number one on the 
economic fix-it list. But economies have become increasingly connected; we live 
in an economy that is global. Therefore what happens elsewhere can and does 
affect the United States. We cannot focus only on our own nation’s financial 
picture. In a global economy, financial markets and product markets are highly 
integrated. This means the European debt crisis or China’s trade slowdown can 
stress U.S. markets. And with 24-hour news coverage, world policies—such as 
strict austerity measures in Greece—and events, like the recent two-level 
downgrade of Italy’s debt, can have an immediate impact on the U.S. economy.
3

         CHAPTER  3 | Primer on the Current Global Economy
2
Our Interconnected World 
On July 17, 2012, the words of Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke could 
be heard around the globe. In a 2-hour testimony before the Senate Committee on 
Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, Bernanke gave his semiannual report on 
the state of the economy. According to the powerful Federal Reserve chief, 
ongoing problems in Europe and the fiscal situation in the United States are the 
two biggest risks to U.S. recovery. Bernanke explained our integrated economies, 
saying, “Europe’s financial markets and economy remain under significant stress, 
with spillover effects on financial and economic conditions in the rest of the 
world, including the United States.”1
While Bernanke indicated Europeans have the incentives and resources to resolve 
their crisis, he also encouraged U.S. financial firms to manage the risks 
associated with their exposures to Europe. Bernanke encouraged Congress to 
come up with a credible medium-term plan to shrink the deficit to avert a 
financial crisis. U.S. stock markets dipped during Bernanke’s speech and 
continue to fluctuate constantly with news concerning the European financial 
crisis.
Economies around the world are intertwined like domino pieces. Once you tip 
the first piece, it is difficult to stop the chain of events. The global economy 
functions in a similar manner. A major policy shift or notable event in one 
country can tip economic towers around the world. 
The debt crisis began in Greece several years ago and spread to Ireland, Portugal, 
Spain, and finally, Italy. The weakening of the European economy has had a 
domino effect, touching even the world’s fastest-growing economy of China and 
causing it to slow. Why? A major reason is that China’s biggest export market is 
the European Union. With the European debt crisis, employment problems, and 
declining individual income, China’s exports to these countries are down. And 
the dominos likely will continue to tumble to other Asian countries, which trade 
heavily with China.
1 Ben S. Bernanke, Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress, speech delivered 
before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S. Senate, Washington, 
DC, July 17, 2012, 
http://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20120717a.htm (accessed July 
23, 2012).

Deficit
3 
The Impact of Weakening Economies
Much of the world is still recovering from the 2007–2009 recession, sometimes 
referred to as the “Great Recession.” Many countries have never recovered and 
are being ravaged even further. Most European countries are in a negative growth 
cycle and Portugal, Greece, and Spain are all in recession. Italy is in a double-dip 
recession. Ireland just missed a recession call due to an output revision. These 
five countries, sometimes referred to as PIIGS (Portugal, Italy, Ireland, Greece, 
and Spain), are nations in severe debt and financial crisis, and the domino effect 
they are spreading is technically referred to as financial contagion. Financial 
contagion simply means a financial problem in one country that spreads or 
impacts other countries. The risk of these countries spreading their financial 
contagion across the globe is serious. The excessive debt to GDP numbers will be 
analyzed in Chapter 7, but needless to say the economic climate of these 
countries presents the threat of a global downfall. The rock of economic strength 
and second-largest global economy, China, is showing signs of a slowdown. 
Potential Global Recession 
Is the world in a global recession? That is not an easy question to answer because 
there is no generally accepted definition of a global recession. It is often thought 
of as a prolonged world downturn, a period of economic decline on a global 
perspective, or a widespread financial meltdown. Although most economists 
concur on 2012 that we are not in a true global recession, and signs of a world 
recovery lurk, there are also strong indicators that the scales could be easily 
tipped to a world-wide downturn. Major risks to the global economy do exist and 
are being heavily impacted by the European sovereign debt crisis, so fiscal 
reforms must continue. 
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) benchmarks 3 percent year-over-year 
economic growth or below to indicate a global recession. World growth was 3.9 
percent for 2011, and the IMF projects world output at 3.5 for 2012, and 3.5 for 
2013.2 GDP growth across Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development (OECD) countries—“First World” nations—is projected to slow to 
1.6 percent in 2012, and tick up to 2.2 percent in 2013. 3 
2International Monetary Fund, “World Economic Outlook Update, July 16, 2012,” Available 
at www.imf.org (accessed July 30, 2012).
3Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. Economic Outlook 91, Press 
Conference, Paris, May 22, 2012. Available at www.oecd.org (accessed July 30, 2012).

         CHAPTER  3 | Primer on the Current Global Economy
4
Trade Downturns 
World trade also has taken a downturn. World trade growth is expected to decline 
for the second year in a row, according to the World Trade Organization (WTO). 
It is projected to slow to 3.7 percent in 2012; this from 5 percent trade growth in 
2011, and trade growth of 13.8 percent in 2010.4 Trade was held back in 2011 
due to a number of shocks, including the European debt crisis, severe flooding in 
Thailand, and the Japanese earthquake and tsunami. Europe is a major trading 
partner with the United States and the financial crisis has negatively impacted the 
United States; the flooding in Thailand has made it difficult to obtain technology 
parts, and because Japanese plants account for roughly 12 percent of world car 
production, the earthquake and tsunami have made it difficult to obtain some 
cars. 
Let’s take a look at positive and negative economic points of the European 
countries where the trouble originated. We also check in on China, where trouble 
is brewing.
Portugal
Negative:

Severe recession, and it may grow even worse.

Unemployment has reached 15 percent.

GDP contracted 1.6 percent in 2011, and the IMF predicts it will contract 
3.3 percent for 2012.

Painful austerity plans, including pay cuts for public jobs. Tax increases 
have provoked riots.

Outlook on sovereign debt rated negative by S&P and Moody’s.

Received a €78 billion ($111 billion) bailout from the EU/IMF.
Positive:

The country’s 10-year bond yields dropped from 17 percent to over 10 
percent—an affirmative sign of a level of confidence in the economy.
4World Trade Organization. 2012 Press Releases/658, April 12, 2012, World Trade 2011, 
Prospects for 2012. Available at www.wto.org (accessed July 25, 2012).

Deficit
5 

IMF notes the difficult euro economic environment, but hails Portugal for 
sticking to their target for budget execution. 
Ireland
Negative:

Outlook on sovereign debt rated negative by S&P and Moody’s. 

Received an €85 billion ($108 billion) bailout rescue package from 
EU/IMF.

Bailout package from EU/IMF carries high interest cost—more than 
Portugal and Greece—because it is tied to market rates. 

May require a second bailout due to losses in the banking system.
Positive:

GDP shrank by 1.1 percent in the first quarter of 2012 but grew 0.7 
percent in the fourth quarter of 2011. Previous estimate was a 0.2 percent 
contraction, which would have resulted in a recession. 

In late July 2012, the country returned to a degree of normal routine and 
sold government bonds after a 2-year sabbatical. 

The country hopes to be the first nation to emerge from the debt crisis.

EU leaders agreed to possibly improving terms of the bailout.
Italy 
Negative:

Double-dip recession

Concern over ability to service massive debt.

Strict and widely unpopular austerity measures 

On July 12, 2012, Moody’s downgraded Italian debt two levels, from A3 
to Baa2, expecting the country’s GDP to decline 2 percent during 2012.

Unemployment rate exceeds 10 percent. 

         CHAPTER  3 | Primer on the Current Global Economy
6
Positive:

Bond yields have fallen slightly, lowering the price the country has to pay 
to borrow funds.
Greece 
Negative:

The country has been in a recession since 2009.

Credit agencies downgraded Greece’s debt rating in late 2009. S&P and 
Moody’s classify debt in C categories—signaling substantial risk.

The economy shrank 6.9 percent in 2011.

Already into its second bailout

Unemployment rate exceeds 24 percent. 

Public outrage and riots occurring over severe austerity measures. 

Greece unable to deliver and asks deadline for austerity measures be 
moved from 2014 to 2016.
Positive:

Greece's main industry of tourism remains fairly strong and is forecast to 
grow.
Spain
Negative:

Recession is deepening.

Rates for borrowing rising to excessive levels, a sign that investors are 
questioning the ability of the country to pay back its debt. 

European leaders granted an emergency loan package to bail out banks.

GDP shrank 1.5 percent in 2010, 0.6 in 2011, and Spain’s government 
predicts the economy will continue to shrink until 2014. 

Deficit
7 

S&P rates the outlook as negative and Moody’s is under review—both 
rate bonds in the lower medium grade category. 

Unemployment rate rises above 24 percent.

Austerity measures have touched businesses and consumers.
Positive:

Officials maintain that the country will not need a bailout.
China
Negative: 

Real estate housing bubble potentially ready to burst. 

Housing downturn could force China into a recession.

Economic slowdown in Europe is expected to further slow Chinese growth 
(see Figure 3-1). 

GDP growth was 10.3 percent in 2010, and dropped to 9.5 percent in 
2011. IMF is projecting a GDP growth rate of 8 percent for 2012 and 8.5 
for 2013.

Debt remains from a recent stimulus program.
Positive:

Second largest economy in the world

World’s largest exporter

Strong ratings from S&P and Moody’s 

Largest international holder of U.S. debt

China is stepping up their stimulus program at local levels to counter the 
slowdown. 

         CHAPTER  3 | Primer on the Current Global Economy
8
Figure 3-1. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Timothy 
F. Geithner held a press conference in Beijing, China, following the conclusion of the U.S.–China 
Strategic and Economic Dialogue on May 25, 2010. China’s top trading partner is the European 
Union, followed by the United States. Source: U.S. Department of State.
World Financial Markets
The health of Europe’s banks, particularly in the troubled countries of Portugal, 
Ireland, Italy, Greece, and Spain, has become a major area of concern. 
Unresolved Banking Crises
The banks are in a serious situation where they need substantial recapitalization 
to survive. U.S. banks have been preparing and have already significantly 
reduced their exposure in these countries. Banks in the United States have 
billions of dollars in European exposure through a number of different means 
including sovereign bonds, European businesses, and bank deposits, along with 
other claims such as derivatives, guarantees, and credit commitments. 
Bank of America has been cutting its exposure to Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece, 
and Spain. Their total exposure to these five countries was $16.6 billion on 
December 31, 2010, but fell to $15.3 billion by December 31, 2011.5 Bank of 

Deficit
9 
American has been selling assets and curtailing loans. Other large banks, such as 
JP Morgan Chase and Citigroup, have reduced their exposure in Europe as well. 
But many banking players in the game have not been so proactive. If these 
troubled countries do not fix their banking system, a liquidity crunch—a lack of 
lendable funds—could shock the entire global economy. 
Stock markets in most major countries are interconnected and highly correlated 
as well. When markets drop, it is a bad sign because it leads to a drop in 
economic activity. The European debt crisis has had a negative impact on the 
U.S. stock market, with news of sky-high deficits, recessions, and ballooning 
unemployment rates leading the news. The U.S. and world markets are tuned in 
to news from Europe 24 hours a day for updates in the fiscal drama. Consumers 
and businesses become skittish based on what they hear, hold off on spending, 
and this drags the economy further down.
Declining Income and Jobs 
As seen previously, problems affecting the global economy are widespread and 
interconnected. On top of the list is high unemployment and declining income. At 
the simplest level, to generate income for a tax base, and in turn pay off the 
deficit, people must be employed. Employment will bring economic growth and 
prosperity to the world. The International Labour Organization (ILO) in its 
Global Employment Trends 2012 report, says the number one priority for 
countries is to create more jobs. The fiscal austerity measures are having a 
negative impact on the job market. The ILO finds the global job market situation 
troublesome, and the trends are especially of concern in Europe, where the 
unemployment rate has risen in the majority of the countries since 2010. The 
U.S. labor market recovery has stalled, and the unemployment rate has been 
hovering in the 8 percent range. Even in China, a better-educated working age 
population is searching for employment.6 The world needs to create about 50 
million jobs to reach the pre-2008 crisis level of jobs. According to the ILO, in 
2012 there will be 202 million people unemployed in the world, up 6 million 
from 2011. 
5Bank of America. Form 10-k for fiscal year ended December 31, 2011 (p. 13). Available at 
www.sec.gov (accessed July 30, 2012). 
6 International Labour Organization. 2012 World of Work Report: Summary. Available at 
www.ilo.org (accessed July 27, 2012).

         CHAPTER  3 | Primer on the Current Global Economy
10
Economic Growth Is the Key 
To sum up the situation, in the United States increasing revenue is the key to 
managing the deficit. The more revenue, the more taxes will be collected. The 
economy needs to grow to finance the deficit. And the fact that much of Europe 
is in a recession and China also is slowing is bad news for the United States 
because of our trade links with them. Earnings have been stagnant—U.S. 
businesses have been negatively impacted from the effects of Europe's turmoil 
and China’s slowdown. There is serious spillover from the troubled European 
banking system, stock market, and trade and consumer confidence here at home. 
While the U.S. economy is growing and was technically pulled out of recession 
in 2009, we still need more economic growth and a higher tax base to fight the 
continuing deficit and debt. The economy in the United States is stagnant, and 
needs to be recharged. Our country had a fairly positive GDP uptick at 1.3 in 
2010 and 2.1 in 2011. In the first quarter of 2012, GDP rose to 2.0 and the second 
estimate for the second quarter is 1.7. But remember—the economic health of the 
European nations and China is closely tied to the prosperity of the United States 
One fallen domino over there could quickly topple the wobbling U.S. economy.
In the next chapter we will examine the budget effects of U.S. fiscal policy. It’s a 
cautionary tale, as the percentage of debt held by the public is rising compared to 
the economy’s annual production. This is called the debt-to-GDP ratio, a rough 
indicator of the country’s productive strength to handle the debt repayment. We 
will examine projections by leading economic agencies concerning the deficit, 
debt, and the debt-to-GDP ratio.

C H A P T E R
4
Deficit and Debt 
Projections
There are two ways to influence the economy—through fiscal policy (using 
government spending or taxation to impact the economy) or through 
monetary policy (adjusting money supply and interest rates to impact the 
economy). Some policy makers favor the deliberate actions of fiscal policies, 
others prefer the flexibility of monetary actions, while many advocate a 
powerful combination of the tools. All concur that unlike monetary policy, 
fiscal stimulus actions spur deficits. So let’s take a quick look at how fiscal 
and monetary policy tools work. Then you can decide if the benefits of fiscal 
policies are worth such high deficits.
Fiscal and Monetary Policy
Leave the economy alone and it will correct itself. This was the laissez-faire 
policy advocated by the classical school of economic theory prior to the 
arrival of British economist John Maynard Keynes. After World War I, 
Keynes became a famous advocate of using fiscal policy to thrust a 
country’s economy out of depression. Leaving the economy alone might 
eventually cause it to correct itself, but most Americans want a quicker 

Chapter 4 | Deficit and Debt Projections
36
response and are unwilling to wait for the economy to bloom on its own. 
Enter fiscal policy.
As mentioned, in macroeconomics there are two main policy tools used to 
influence the economy:

Monetary policy: Manipulating the money supply and 
interest rates to influence the economy

Fiscal policy: Adjusting government spending and/or 
taxation to achieve full employment, economic growth, 
and price stability
There’s a huge debate within the economics community: monetary policy or 
fiscal policy—which will be quicker and more powerful to recharge the 
economy? Which strategy works best is a matter of debate among 
economists, politicians, and the public. In the United States, the Federal 
Reserve—the central bank of the United States—is in charge of monetary 
policy. Monetary policy is the process of managing the nation’s money 
supply to influence the economy. The growth rate of money, in turn, affects 
the cost of money and the availability of credit. Fiscal policy is initiated by 
the president and Congress. Each year the president proposes to Congress a 
budget and tax changes for the upcoming fiscal year. This is a blueprint, or a 
starting point, for negotiations with Congress. The president can then accept 
or veto specific acts that Congress has passed.
Since before the onset of the recession in December 2007, the Federal 
Reserve (“the Fed”), with Ben Bernanke at the helm, has been pursuing an 
aggressive expansionary monetary policy to push short-term interest rates to 
low levels and keep the economy healthy. In addition, the Fed has bought 
mortgage-backed securities, Treasury securities, and government agency 
securities in an effort to push long-term rates down and stabilize asset prices. 
Monetary policy can fight inflation, economic slumps, and unemployment 
without incurring deficits. 
Operating on the fiscal-policy side in 2009, the Obama administration ran a 
massive stimulus package aimed at jumpstarting the economy. It included tax 
cuts and large public works programs designed to create jobs and improve 
the infrastructure. For stimulating the economy or to move an economy out 
of a recession, some might argue that fiscal policy tends to be a winner in 
restoring output. 

Deficit
37 
A contractionary fiscal policy is designed to suppress inflation during a 
rising boom period. To dampen demand for goods and services, the 
government decreases government expenditures and/or increases taxes. 
Monetary policy also can be used to dampen the economy. Hiking interest 
rates, for example, can slow an overcharged economy. 
As a compromise, most policy analysts believe that some combination of 
fiscal and monetary policy is needed. The Fed’s main tool of monetary policy 
is open market operations, the buying and selling of government bonds to 
expand or contract money supply. The key advantages of monetary policy 
are its flexibility and timeliness. Monetary policy is conducted at the 
direction of the Fed and can be implemented quickly, whereas the 
implementation of fiscal policy often faces political obstacles that slow it 
down. The impact of fiscal policy cannot be predicted with total accuracy, 
but when used appropriately, the effect on the real economy is direct and can 
influence the broad direction of the economy. Even Fed Chairman Bernanke 
recognizes the importance of using both tools. In his conclusion to a 2009 
speech at the London School of Economics, Bernanke noted, “In the near 
term, the highest priority is to promote a global economic recovery. The 
Federal Reserve retains powerful policy tools and will use them aggressively 
to help achieve this objective. Fiscal policy can stimulate economic activity, 
but a sustained recovery will also require a comprehensive plan to stabilize 
the financial system and restore normal flows of credit.”1
Macroeconomic Goals of Fiscal Policy
As previously stated, fiscal policy is the deliberate use of government 
spending and/or taxation to influence the overall level of economic activity. 
Because fiscal policy involves altering government spending or taxes, both 
of which impact the federal budget, it is linked directly to deficits and the 
national debt. Let’s leave monetary policy behind now and concentrate on 
fiscal policy because of its connection to the deficit. One of the effects of 
utilizing fiscal policy is that the government may have difficulty balancing 
the budget and stimulating the economy simultaneously. In most cases, the 
government will run a deficit, which causes a rise in the national debt. 
1 Ben S. Bernanke. “The Crisis and the Policy Response,” speech delivered at the Stamp 
Lecture, London School of Economics, January 13, 2009. Available at 
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bernanke20090113a.htm.

Chapter 4 | Deficit and Debt Projections
38
John Maynard Keynes (1883–1946), famous British economist and author of 
The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money (1936), is known as 
the father of modern macroeconomics. The predominant theory at the time of 
the Great Depression, known as the classical theory, posits that the economy 
will eventually correct itself. It advocates a laissez-faire policy. Keynes 
disputed that theory and became well-known for promoting active fiscal 
policy to pull the United States out of recession. An advisor to President 
Franklin D. Roosevelt, Keynes encouraged the U.S. government to 
spend—and spend big. And indeed the government did, developing a host of 
programs in the 1930s and 1940s: Social Security, Income Security, and New 
Deal programs designed to encourage spending and overall business activity. 
Keynes felt the free market would not be powerful enough to increase 
aggregate demand during a downturn. He said it was the government’s 
responsibility to stimulate aggregate demand. 
Aggregate demand is the sum of all demand in an economy at a given time 
and price level. Aggregate demand, or gross domestic product (GDP), can be 
calculated by adding spending on consumer goods and services, investments 
by businesses, government spending, and net exports (total exports minus 
total imports). GDP measures the total level of demand for goods and 
services by all category groups within an economy. When total demand 
equals the level of total spending, the economy is in an equilibrium level. 
Using a simple model, let’s assume that net exports are zero. Therefore, we 
have consumer, government, and business spending determining the 
equilibrium level of GDP. Fiscal policy is mainly employed by shifting 
aggregate demand. The government does this by changing spending or 
taxation, or a combination of both.
The Employment Act of 1946 charged the federal government with the 
responsibility of promoting a high level of employment, output, and 
purchasing power. These goals were restated in wider detail in the Full 
Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978, designed to “promote full 
employment, production, and real income, balanced growth, adequate 
productivity growth, proper attention to national priorities, and reasonable 
price stability.”2 Both acts support the government’s use of fiscal policy to 
manage the U.S. economy.
2 Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978, 15 USC § 3101 (1978); excerpt 
from the Bill Summary.

Deficit
39 
Tools of Fiscal Policy
Fiscal policy can be implemented through two major means, adjusting taxes 
and/or making government purchases. There is a third policy option, using 
both tools at the same time. It is a detailed process that can have a powerful 
impact on the economy.
Taxes 
Income taxes are paid as a percentage of income. So, the level of spending by 
individuals and businesses is affected by tax rates. People base their spending 
on after-tax income, or disposable income. Businesses base their 
discretionary spending and investment decisions on after-tax profits. 
If the economy is booming and experiencing inflation, Congress might 
increase taxes. This would result in a reduction in aggregate demand because 
it reduces both consumer spending and business investment. Therefore, a 
higher tax rate reduces business activity and consequently dampens inflation. 
Conversely, by lowering the tax rate for consumers and businesses, 
disposable income and profits will be higher, stimulating the economy and 
helping to reduce unemployment. This fiscal policy would increase aggregate 
demand.
As a fiscal tool, tax cuts have less impact on aggregate demand than 
government spending of the same size has. The reason? Each dollar of 
government spending goes directly into the economy to stimulate GDP. But 
with a tax cut, only a portion will be spent by individuals and businesses; the 
rest will be saved.
A tax credit is another type of tax incentive that can be used to shift 
aggregate demand. An investment tax credit, for example, allows a business 
to use a portion of the price of new capital equipment as a credit to reduce its 
tax liability. Congress might raise the investment tax credit to get the 
economy out of a rut or to revitalize employment. Businesses would be 
incentivized to spend more on investment capital, thereby stimulating 
business activity and raising aggregate demand. To help reduce inflation, 
Congress can decrease the investment tax credit, which restricts business 
activity and lowers aggregate demand.

Chapter 4 | Deficit and Debt Projections
40
Government Spending 
The government can influence aggregate demand either by buying more 
goods and services or by decreasing purchases. If the economy is booming 
and inflation is a problem, Congress might decrease government spending to 
lower aggregate demand. Slower overall business activity dampens inflation. 
On the other hand, the simplest way to raise aggregate demand is to increase 
government spending because the funds flow directly into the economy. If 
unemployment is high, Congress might increase government spending to 
raise aggregate demand.
The Multiplier Effect
The multiplier effect is the idea that spending a dollar, or cutting taxes a 
dollar, will result in even greater returns to the economy. Estimations of 
multipliers attempt to calculate the cumulative effects of fiscal policy actions, 
such as a reduction in taxes or an increase in government spending. When the 
government spends money, that spending translates into income for 
individuals and businesses, who then re-spend that money. The cycle of 
spending results in a cumulative impact of the initial amount on total 
economic activity. 
Tax multipliers are smaller than government spending multipliers because a 
tax cut is not a direct infusion into the economy. A tax cut increases 
disposable income, which then increases consumption. Let’s look at the 
simple government spending multiplier to get a feel for how the process 
works. Every dollar of income is either consumed or saved. The marginal 
propensity to consume (MPC) is the fraction of additional income that 
households will consume versus save (MPS). If the MPC is 0.8 then the 
MPS is 0.2.
The government spending multiplier is 1/MPS or 1/1 – MPC. Assume a $100 
million increase in government spending and an MPC of 0.8. The spending 
multiplier of 1/1 – MPC equates to 1/1 – 0.8, or a spending multiplier of 5. 
Government spending will result in a rise of output by $500 million (5 Í 
$100 million). The larger the MPC, the more powerful the multiplier impact.
Estimates of current-day fiscal multipliers vary widely, but tend to fall under 
3. As an example, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), an investigative 
economic arm of the U.S. government, has utilized macroeconomic 
forecasting models to estimate the impact of the recent Obama stimulus 

Deficit
41 
package (American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 20093). According to 
the CBO, a one-time $1 increase in the purchase of goods and services can 
produce up to $1 to $2.50 of new economic activity. Tax cuts are not as 
stimulative as government spending, according to the CBO. For $1 of 2-year 
tax cuts for lower- and middle-income households, output can rise between 
$0.60 and $1.50. For $1 of 1-year tax cuts for higher-income households, 
output can rise between $0.20 and $0.60.
Discretionary Fiscal Policy
Discretionary fiscal policy is a fiscal policy that is acted on by Congress in 
response to economic conditions. Discretionary fiscal policy may be 
contractionary or expansionary. Discretionary fiscal policy is an attempt to 
influence the overall economy toward high employment and price stability. 
These actions will move the economy in a more expedited manner than 
would be possible if it were left alone.
Contractionary fiscal policy involves decreasing government purchases or 
increasing taxes. If policy makers have concerns about rising inflation, they 
could use contractionary fiscal policy to reduce increasing aggregate 
demand. If people and businesses are spending too freely and price and wage 
increases start to spiral upward, Congress could attempt to dampen spending. 
When the government spends less, fewer funds are available in the economy 
to purchase goods and services. Raising taxes also reduces the amount of 
money in the hands of both consumers and businesses. The resulting 
decreased spending will slow the price and wage spiral. 
Expansionary fiscal policy involves an increase in government spending or a 
decrease in taxes. This would be used to raise aggregate demand, thereby 
boosting employment, but it may also cause some inflation. When the 
government spends, more money is pumped into the economy and people 
have more funds to buy clothes, computers, cars, and food. Businesses will 
have more money for investment and production. Reducing taxes also puts 
more money in the hands of consumers and businesses. It can have an 
inflationary aspect to it if spending erupts.
3 Congressional Budget Office. Estimated Impact of the American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act on Employment and Economic Output from October 2010 Through 
December 2010, February 2011. Available at www.cbo.gov (accessed February 27, 2011).

Chapter 4 | Deficit and Debt Projections
42
Table 4-1 summarizes the impact of both contractionary and expansionary 
policies.
Table 4-1. Discretionary Fiscal Policy Stance
Type of Policy Picture of the EconomyTaxes
Government 
Spending
Contractionary
Booming and inflation
Raised
Lowered
Expansionary
Slowdown or recession
Lowered
Raised
The Supply Siders 
Increasing or decreasing aggregate demand is the mainstay of fiscal policy 
strategies. Nevertheless, there is an alternative economic theory that puts the 
emphasis on supply. Supply side economics focuses on increasing the supply 
of goods and services. It had its heyday during the time of Ronald Reagan’s 
presidency. 
Economist Arthur Laffer (1940– ) was a member of President Ronald 
Reagan’s Economic Policy Advisory Board from 1981 to 1989. Laffer 
promoted tax cuts to businesses and individuals to stimulate investment. The 
supply side theory posits that this will increase employment and long-term 
economic growth. The marginal tax rate is the rate of taxes paid on the last 
dollar earned, and “Laffer’s curve” supported the notion that if the marginal 
tax rate were cut, output would rise. Why? Because firms would invest more 
capital in their businesses and workers would provide more labor. Supply 
siders maintain that as the supply of goods and services rises, prices fall. The 
lower prices encourage people to purchase. The increased output in society 
generates larger tax revenue and thus decreases the budget deficit.
Laffer, commonly referred to as the father of supply side economics, won 
many followers by advocating that a tax cut can increase tax revenue. Sound 
too good to be true? Perhaps. It was tested during the Reagan era; taxes were 
cut deeply during his time in office, and the deficit and national debt rose 
significantly. However, another problem contributed to the situation—the 
plan was not fully implemented, as the tax cuts were accompanied by 
increased government spending. Today, it is widely recognized that tax cuts 
without spending cuts would increase the budget deficit. Although not a 
4

Deficit
43 
mainstream economic fiscal policy, supply side economic policy continues to 
stir discussion in the profession.
Transfer Payments
Some fiscal policy is automatic. Automatic fiscal policy does not require a 
vote by Congress. Transfer payments are government payments for which no 
current productive service or product is exchanged. These include Social 
Security, welfare, and unemployment. Here’s how it works. When the 
economy is in a recession, many people are not working—unemployment is 
high. But the government automatically provides unemployment insurance to 
more people and provides them additional disposable income to spend. Those 
people then have funds to buy groceries, gasoline, clothing, and so forth, and 
the economy is automatically recharged. So transfer payments can help keep 
aggregate demand from falling precipitously. When the economy enters a 
prosperous period, there’s an automatic reduction in transfers, and thus a 
decrease in money coming into the economy. Remember that this form of 
automatic fiscal policy is not a direct dollar injection into spending because 
consumers still have the choice to save a percentage of their transfer 
payments.
Progressive Income Taxes
The federal government’s tax system is progressive. That means the tax rate 
increases as income increases. The tax system is an automatic stabilizer, 
meaning it will smooth out fluctuations in aggregate demand automatically. 
No act of Congress is required. In an expansionary period, greater economic 
activity means individuals and businesses whose income increases are 
thrown into a higher tax bracket. Consequently, a greater percentage of 
income must go to paying taxes. This slows the growth of spending, 
dampening aggregate demand and relieving inflationary concerns. For 
consumers and businesses, when income rises during an expansionary 
period, being pushed into a higher tax bracket is akin to withdrawing a bit of 
money out of one’s piggy bank. The flip scenario occurs when a recession 
appears. Incomes are reduced, and people and businesses fall into lower tax 
brackets. They pay a lower marginal tax rate and contribute less to the 
government’s tax revenue. This is akin to an automatic tax cut, which 
provides more purchasing power to stimulate aggregate demand. For 
consumers and businesses, when incomes are reduced during a recessionary 

Chapter 4 | Deficit and Debt Projections
44
period, being pushed into a lower tax bracket is akin to putting a bit of 
money back in the piggy bank.
Criticism of Discretionary Fiscal Policy
There are definitely some problems associated with implementing fiscal 
policy. The old adage “easier said than done” certainly applies to the various 
fiscal policy tools. Before we examine current and historical examples of 
fiscal policy, let’s look at some of the drawbacks of using fiscal tools. It will 
be a helpful background when evaluating real-life fiscal policies. 
Specifically, there are four concerns that are of note: time lags, the political 
process, human behavior, and crowding out. 
Time Lags
The first issue is that the government must recognize the fact an economic 
problem has developed. By relying on economic data for validation, many 
months may pass before the president and Congress identify a problem. Then 
time must be allocated to developing taxation and government spending 
policies to address the issue. Devising economic policies takes time, and 
funding for such policies needs to be added to the next year’s budget. Central 
to all this is Congress’s approval of the budget. If it is a government spending 
package, it will take time for the money to be spent and multiply throughout 
the economy. If the solution is a tax cut, it may take a very long time for 
spending to actually increase from consumers’ extra disposable income. And 
then, to top it off, the overall picture of the economy could shift again, even 
while the policy is being implemented, and the policy action could actually 
have a negative counter effect on the nation’s economy.
Political Process 
Fiscal policy involves the adjustment of government spending and/or tax 
levels and is controlled by the politicians in Congress. And let’s face it—it is 
never popular when politicians increase taxes and reduce government 
spending. Furthermore, because politicians are beholden to the constituents in 
their respective state or district, they are unlikely to willingly eliminate 
projects that benefit those constituents. Even though a particular fiscal policy 
might be the best action for the United States as a whole, some of the 

Deficit
45 
decisions may not be well received by individuals and businesses. Politicians 
are elected officials, and it is a reality that many are swayed by the vote.
Human Behavior 
There is a great deal of psychology connected to implementing fiscal policy. 
Fiscal policy relies on accurately predicting how people will react, and there 
are no guarantees in how people will behave. For example, a tax cut may be 
made under the assumption that people and businesses will get out and 
spend, thus stimulating aggregate demand. In reality, consumers have a 
choice. They may spend a significant portion of the increase in their dispos-
able income, as expected, resulting in an uptick in output. Or they may 
actually save the additional funds or pay down debt. Just because consumers 
reacted a particular way in the past does not mean that they will always 
follow the same direction, as economic conditions shift.
Crowding Out
As mentioned, when the government cuts taxes and/or increases government 
spending, this is referred to as an expansionary fiscal policy. Expansionary 
fiscal policy is financed by deficit spending. A detrimental effect is that 
interest rates will rise as the government competes for funds to finance its 
deficit. In turn, this makes it more difficult for the private sector to borrow 
money, and thus expansion by the private sector segment is dampened.
History of Fiscal Policies
Looking at U.S. history, we can see that some fiscal policies have been 
highly successful, while others have been partially successful or even 
unsuccessful. Let’s look at some of the more notable fiscal events in history. 
You will see the difficulty of predicting not only the ultimate result of these 
polices, but also if consumers will behave as anticipated.
Great Depression
Fiscal policy came to be used as an economic tool during the Great 
Depression era. To get a picture of just how devastating the Depression era 
was, check out some economic facts. In October 1929, the stock market 

Chapter 4 | Deficit and Debt Projections
46
plummeted 23 percent during a 2-day period, the result of rampant 
speculation and buying stocks on margin. Yet the stock market crash was just 
a symptom of the Depression. There were many causes, such as a contraction 
of the money supply and widespread banking failures, that led to the decline 
in the U.S. economy. The collapse began in the United States but quickly 
turned into a worldwide economic contraction. The downturn was 
particularly significant in the United States, lasting for over a decade across 
the country.
Another driving factor was a momentous drop in spending—aggregate 
demand—leading the country’s business production to be cut in half. At the 
height of the Depression, one-third of the nonfarm workforce was 
unemployed and one-fourth of all workers were unemployed. The human 
suffering and devastation was significant, and among the catastrophic 
statistics, the suicide rate rose considerably during that time period.
During the 1930s, it was the federal government that acted, using fiscal tools, 
to influence the level of aggregate demand. When Franklin D. Roosevelt 
(FDR) stepped into the presidency in 1933, he enacted a variety of programs 
to stimulate the economy, give jobs to people, and initiate reforms so that 
such widespread poverty and devastation would not occur again. Much of 
what FDR initiated was based on the advice of John Maynard Keynes, using 
Keynesian fiscal tools to promote economic growth. Their goal was to put 
money in the people’s hands through the various programs. They believed 
government spending would stimulate the economy.
The New Deal work programs, such as the Work Projects Administration 
(WPA), put unemployed people to work again (Figure 4-1) building schools, 
roads, bridges, and other community projects in most communities across the 
United States. FDR’s policy succeeded in employing millions of workers, 
enabling them to spend and stimulate the economy. The programs were 
widespread—welfare programs, Social Security, banking reforms (including 
deposit insurance), and New Deal Work programs were all used to revive the 
economy.
FDR was cautious not to run large deficits during his tenure. His deficits 
were modest, and in 1937 he actually had a balanced budget. In reality, he 
did not fully utilize deficit spending to cure the Great Depression economy. 
Consequently, it was not until the huge spending increases at the beginning 
of World War II, in 1941, that the economy did finally recover fully. 

Deficit
47 
Figure 4-1. In this January 1939 photograph, a Work Projects Administration (WPA) 
employee receives his paycheck at a construction site. The WPA was the largest and best 
known of the New Deal programs created to employ Americans during the Great Depression. 
At the end of the project, $11 billion had been spent, with 8 million workers completing a 
variety of public projects including parks, schools, roads, and bridges. Source: The National 
Archives, Records of the Works Project Administration.
World War II
The government incurred massive deficit spending in the effort to finance 
World War II. The conclusion of most economists is that it was the 
government’s spending for WWII that finally ended the Great Depression. 
According to the Bureau of the Public Debt,4 government expenditures 
during WWII were roughly $323 billion, and approximately $211 billion of 
this total was borrowed money. The U.S. Treasury Department got in gear to 
help fund this massive spending spree, creating a new security 
instrument—the nonmarketable small-denomination Savings Bond. The 
average worker could afford this security, and purchasing War Bonds, as 
they were called, became a patriotic obligation. Deficit spending had put an 
end to the most severe depression in history, and fiscal policy would now be 
an active tool utilized by the government to restore the economy.
4 Bureau of the Public Debt. “Our History.” Available at 
www.publicdebt.treas.gov/history/history.htm (accessed February 6, 2011).

Chapter 4 | Deficit and Debt Projections
48
Kennedy-Johnson Tax Cut 
An “A” grade goes to the Kennedy–Johnson tax cuts, which were right on 
track in stimulating the economy and largely praised as a successful fiscal 
plan. Historic income tax reductions of $11.5 billion on personal and 
corporate taxes were enacted over a 2-year period in 1964 and 1965. 
President Kennedy’s platform was that the country was not at maximum 
income and employment levels, and that economic growth should increase at 
the rate of 4 percent each year. Kennedy’s fiscal plan spelled out the use of 
deficit spending to stimulate economic activity, and it did bring the predicted 
result of spurring on a sluggish U.S. economy. It wasn’t until after 
Kennedy’s death that President Johnson signed the historic tax reduction bill, 
in February 1964. Johnson aptly used his persuasive skills, asking Americans 
to spend the increase in their incomes from the tax reduction.
Economic Stimulus Act of 2008
In 2008, President George W. Bush signed a $168 billion economic stimulus 
package. It reduced federal revenue by $152 billion in fiscal year 2008, 
followed by $16 billion in fiscal 2009. The intent was to minimize the effects 
of the recessionary downturn precipitated by the worldwide financial crisis 
that began in 2007. The package included tax breaks to businesses for 
equipment purchases, and widely touted tax rebates to individual taxpayers. 
Most people received a $600 tax rebate check, and married couples received 
$1,200. Taxpayers were encouraged to spend their stimulus money to revive 
the economy, and consumer spending was expected to recharge the economy. 
Although low levels of aggregate demand may have increased, the 
overwhelming conclusion is that the stimulus package did not work. The 
stimulus checks ran up the budget deficit and taxpayers did not spend as 
anticipated. Instead, the biggest share of Americans used their money to pay 
down debt or put it into savings. 
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 
2009
President Barack Obama signed the $787 billion American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act (ARRA) in 2009, designed to boost economic activity and 
employment. Its premise was to thwart the recession by creating jobs and 
increasing investment and consumer expenditures. Tax cuts and spending 

Deficit
49 
programs, 
including 
for 
local 
governments, 
energy, 
health 
care, 
infrastructure, science, and education, were targeted to boost economic 
progress. How is it working? Overwhelming evidence suggests the fiscal 
package may have had modest effects. The judge and jury are still out, but 
some recent findings by the CBO suggest the effects are waning.
A recent report released by the CBO during the fourth quarter of 2010 
reveals some interesting findings.5 First of all, the study suggests the cost of 
the recovery package during the fiscal years 2009 to 2019 period will amount 
to a whopping $821 billion. Almost half of this budgetary impact is reported 
to have occurred in fiscal year 2010. The number is on the rise, as this is $7 
billion more than anticipated in the previous quarterly report. The ARRA 
was passed in February 2009, and as of the fourth quarter of 2009 it was 
estimated that the bill had the effect of increasing the number of employed 
people by between 900,000 and 1.9 million. A year later, in the fourth quarter 
of 2010, the range had widened to between 1.3 and 3.5 million people. 
ARRA’s policies impacted fourth quarter 2010 by raising real GDP between 
1.1 and 3.5 percent, and lowered the unemployment rate between 0.7 and 1.9 
percentage points. 
But, according to the CBO report, the effects of the ARRA on output peaked 
in the first half of 2010 and are now retreating, as would be expected. 
Employment and unemployment are forecast to lag slightly behind the effect 
on output, or GDP, but that too is anticipated to fall in 2011. The effect of the 
ARRA policies is estimated to raise real GDP modestly in 2011, between 0.7 
and 2.2 percent. The unemployment rate will be lowered between 0.5 and 1.4 
percentage points. Perhaps most notable is the estimate for future economic 
activity, as reported in the Director’s Blog of the CBO: “During 2012, the 
CBO estimates that the impact on employment and economic output of 
ARRA will be small.”6
A recent update on the projected effects of ARRA for 2012, shows that the 
stimulus package will increase deficits $833 billion over the 2009–2019 
5 Congressional Budget Office. Estimated Impact of the American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act on Employment and Economic Output from October 2010 Through 
December 2010. February 2011. Available at www.cbo.gov (Accessed February 27, 2011).
6 Benjamin Page and Felix Reichling, CBO Macroeconomic Analysis Division, 
“Estimated Impact of ARRA on Employment and Economic Output from October 2010 
through December 2010,” Congressional Budget Office Director’s Blog, February 23, 
2011. http://cboblog.cbo.gov/?p=1852 (accessed February 24, 2011).
l

Chapter 4 | Deficit and Debt Projections
50
period, with more than 90 percent of the budgetary impact occurring by June 
2012. The CBO notes that the effects are diminishing, projecting an impact 
on real GDP at between 0.1 and 0.8 for 2012, along with increase the number 
of employed between 0.2 to 1.2 million. Despite some modest near-term 
benefits, according to the CBO, “ARRA will actually reduce output slightly 
in the long run, CBO estimates—by between zero and 0.2 percent after 
2016.” In addition, the CBO estimates that the act will have no long-term 
effects on employment because of a high rate of use of its labor resources in 
the long run. 7
Debt-to-GDP Ratio
Table 4-2 shows federal government debt as a percentage of GDP. It 
compares gross federal debt and net federal debt (the debt held by the public, 
less the portion of debt internally held by the government) to GDP. GDP tells 
the story of the output of the country. Specifically, it is the market value of 
all final goods and services produced in the economy for a specific time 
period, namely a year. Both are good indicators of a nation’s productive 
ability to handle its debt repayment.
Table 4-2. Federal Debt As a Percentage of GDP
Gross Federal Debt
Net Federal Debt
1940
52.4%
44.2%
1950
94.1%
80.2%
1960
56.0%
45.6%
1970
37.6%
28.0%
1980
33.4%
26.1%
1990
55.9%
42.1%
2000
57.3%
34.7%
2010
94.2%
62.8%
7 Congressional Budget Office. Estimated Impact of the American Recovery and 
Reinvestment Act on Employment and Economic Output from April 2012 Through June 
2012, August 2012. Available at www.cbo.gov (accessed September 12, 2012), p. 8.

Deficit
51 
Gross Federal Debt
Net Federal Debt
2011 
98.7%
67.7%
2012 (estimate)
104.8%
74.2%
2013 (estimate)
107.4%
77.4%
2014 (estimate)
107.8%
78.4%
2015 (estimate)
106.9%
78.1%
2016 (estimate)
105.9%
77.8%
2017 (estimate)
104.7%
77.1%
Source: Budget of the U.S. Government, FY 2013 Historical Tables, Table 7.1, “Federal Debt 
at the End of Year: 1940–2017.”
As Table 4-2 projected, gross federal debt did top 100 percent of the nation’s 
productive capacity in 2012. Roughly, this suggests it would take the country 
the entire value of output—everyone working for a full year—to cover its 
debt level. Table 4-2 also shows that the debt, both gross and net, is rising in 
size relative to GDP. This is a sign that the national debt is expanding in 
relation to its productive strength. It was in 1946, after WWII, that the debt 
reached an alarming all-time high of 121.7 percent gross debt to GDP, and 
108.7 percent net debt to GDP. Other notable periods that pushed the debt-to-
GDP numbers high include the huge tax cuts during the Reagan 
administration (1981–1989), which set the debt on a path of nearly tripling, 
and the 2007 recession, which caused tax revenue to drop, with federal 
spending reaching an all-time high.
U.S. Record Debt
Economists view the net federal debt, relative to GDP, as the most telling 
indicator of economic stability—or economic woe—when it comes to the 
debt level. At the end of 2000, the amount of net federal debt stood at nearly 
35 percent of the economy’s production, but has now risen to over 70 
percent. The 10-year rise starting in 2000, as the debt nearly doubled in size, 
pushed the debt-to-GDP numbers upward. The CBO predicts a continuing 
upward trend, culminating in the high 70 percent range by 2017. And 
according to the CBO, net federal debt is expected to rise to 87 percent of 

Chapter 4 | Deficit and Debt Projections
52
GDP by 2020. Worst-case scenario analysis by the CBO predicts the United 
States will owe 854 percent of GDP by 2080. Although it is perhaps not 
likely the U.S. economy will climb into staggering numbers such as this, it is 
a definite possibility.
What is the proper level of debt to GDP? That is a matter of debate among 
economists. Look around. For 2011, comparisons range widely, from 
163.343 percent for Greece and 80.432 percent for France, to New Zealand at 
8.308 percent and Denmark at 2.636213 percent. Although there is no 
uniform standard, virtually all professional economists comment on the 
startling upward climb of the debt-to-GDP ratio for the United States. In a 
July 2010 International Monetary Fund (IMF) Selected Issues paper 
discussing the financing of U.S. deficits, it is noted, “Under current policies, 
the United States federal debt is projected to grow rapidly due to a 
combination of large budget deficits before and during the crisis, as well as, 
over the medium term, demographic factors and healthcare inflation.” The 
recommendations provided by the IMF, which monitors government debt 
levels, conclude, “As part of the medium term adjustment, the authorities 
would need to raise taxes and/or cut transfers substantially to avoid an 
undesirable escalation of the debt-to-GDP ratio.”8
Any way you report it, the U.S. deficit is huge. The Office of Management 
and Budget (OMB), which is the executive agency division of the Executive 
Office of the President, prepares and administers the federal budget, and 
forms projections for the debt for upcoming years. Take a look at Table 4-3. 
Deficit projections for fiscal year 2012 stand at over $1.3 trillion, falling to 
the $600 billion range beginning in fiscal year 2014. Estimates for the deficit 
as a percentage of GDP hit 8.5 percent for 2012, falling gradually to 3.0 
percent as of 2017. The debt, which closed fiscal year 2011 at roughly $14.8 
trillion, is projected to hit over $21 trillion by 2017, according to the OMB 
numbers. Gross debt as a percentage of GDP stood at 98.7 percent in 2011, 
with estimates showing a slow rise to 107.4 percent by 2014, before 
declining. These are staggering accounts of a country facing budgetary 
challenges. 
Of particular interest, the CBO notes in its report that the economy has 
struggled to pull out of the recession, and recovery is slow since the 
recession ended in June 2009. There have been sharply lower revenues, 
8 International Monetary Fund. United States: Selected Issues Paper, “IMF Country 
Report No. 10/248,” July 2010. Washington, D.C. Available at www.imf.org (accessed 
February 27, 2011), p.56.

Deficit
53 
topped with increased spending, from the financial turmoil and a drop in 
output. The CBO also mentions the aging U.S. population and paying for the 
rising costs of health care. These factors will likely push the federal 
government spending-as-a-percentage-of-GDP figure well above that of 
recent decades. 
The unemployment rate is expected to fall, but it is a gradual process, 
shifting from 8.8 in 2011, to 5.3 percent in 2022. The CBO projects the 
economy will be impacted by the lingering effects of the recession and 
financial crisis over the next 2 years but anticipates real GDP to pick up to a 
modest 4.1 percent in the years 2014 to 2017. Although high by historical 
measures the deficit is projected to start shrinking within the next few years. 
The level of decrease is dependent on the overall recovery of the economy 
and policymakers actions related to taxation and spending policies that are 
scheduled to take effect in 2013 under current law.
Table 4-3. Debt and Deficit Projections by the Office of Management and Budget (in millions 
of dollars)
Gross Federal Debt
Deficit
2010
$13,528,807
$1,293,489
2011 
$14, 764,222
$1,299,595
2012 (estimate)
$16,350,885
$1,326,948
2013 (estimate)
$17,547,936
$901,408
2014 (estimate)
$18,499,909
$667,802
2015 (estimate)
$19,426,503
$609,713
2016 (estimate)
$20,391,198
$648,755
2017 (estimate)
$21,325,493
$612,448
Source: Budget of the U.S. Government, FY 2013 Historical Tables, Table 7.1, “Federal Debt 
at the End of Year: 1940–2016,” and Table 1.1, “Summary of Receipts, Outlays, and 
Surpluses or Deficits: 1789–2017.
The Congressional Budget Office released its annual Budget and Economic 
Outlook for fiscal years 2012 to 2022. As shown in Table 4-4, assuming 
current law remains unchanged, the CBO predicts the federal deficit will dip 

Chapter 4 | Deficit and Debt Projections
54
below $1 trillion beginning in fiscal 2013, and debt held by the public will 
rise to over $15 trillion in fiscal 2022. 
Table 4-4. Congressional Budget Office Baseline Budget Outlook (in billions of dollars)
Debt Held by Public
Deficit
2011 (actual)
$10,128
$1,296
2012
$11,242
$1,079
2013
$11,945
$585
2014
$12,401
$345
2015
$12,783
$269
2016
$13,188
$302
2017
$13,509
$220
2018
$13,801
$196
2019
$14,148
$258
2020
$14,512
$280
2021
$14,872
$279
2022
$15,291
$339
Source: Congressional Budget Office, The Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal Years 2012 
to 2022, Summary Table 1, “CBO’s Baseline Budget Outlook.”
Summary
Monetary policy, at the direction of the Federal Reserve, involves regulating 
money supply and interest rates. Strengths of monetary policy include its 
flexibility and ability to be implemented quickly. To achieve the best results 
for the economy, many policymakers advocate using both monetary and 
fiscal policies. Through fiscal policy, a deliberate act to influence the 
economy, the deficit can rise. Fiscal policy is a powerful tool that the 

Deficit
55 
president and Congress can use to affect output and minimize inflation. 
Automatic stabilizers, too, can affect the deficit situation. 
Federal debt to GDP is a good indicator of a nation’s productive ability to 
pay back its debt. At the end of 2012, gross federal debt stood at 103 percent. 
The projected trend for debt to GDP is upward. This is a negative sign that 
the debt is expanding in comparison to its productive ability.
Should you be worried about the rising debt? Why are there so many 
grassroots groups monitoring our country’s deficit and debt levels? Read on. 
In the next chapter we’ll ponder this crucial question: Do deficits and the 
debt matter? 
j

C H A P T E R
5
Do Deficits and 
the Debt Matter?
The deficit debate has been brewing for decades. 
Notably, it was the thirty-second U.S. president, 
Franklin D. Roosevelt, who was against hiking 
defi!cits. 
FDR 
was 
a 
four-term 
president 
(1933–1945), elected in November 1932, in the midst 
of the devastating Great Depression. During his 
presi!dency, 
FDR 
instituted 
Social 
Security, 
welfare reforms, new banking con!trols, and New 
Deal programs. FDR did incur modest deficits in an 
attempt to restore the economy and assist the 
unemployed. However, “FDR refused to run up the 
deficits that ending the depression required,” 
according to the Eleanor Roosevelt Papers. Early 
efforts did bring recovery to output, but “only 
when the federal government imposed rationing, 
recruited 6 million defense workers (including 
women and African-Americans), drafted 6 mil!lion 
soldiers, and ran massive deficits to fight World 
War II, did the Great Depression finally end.”1

Chapter 5 | Do Deficits and the Debt Matter?
56
Recent Deficit Issues 
Let’s fast-forward to the twenty-first century, 
when the deficit issue has once again taken center 
stage. According to Pulitzer Prize winner Ron 
Suskind’s book, The Price of Loyalty, a notable 
event occurred in late 2002, at a meeting of 
President George W. Bush’s economic team. During 
the meet!ing, with the theme “economic growth,” 
Vice President Dick Cheney chat!ted with the White 
House staff and the economic team. Cheney mentioned 
that cutting the tax on dividends for individuals 
would provide some stimulat!ing effects to the 
economy. 
Treasury 
Secretary 
Paul 
H. 
O’Neill, 
con!cerned that the country didn’t need a second 
round of tax cuts, argued that the government “is 
moving toward a fiscal crisis.” Cheney retorted, 
“Reagan proved that deficits don’t matter.”2 O’Neill 
was shocked by Cheney’s com!ment because he was 
concerned about what a tax cut would do to the 
ris!ing deficits. To O’Neill, deficits clearly 
mattered. 
The 
following 
month, 
Cheney 
called 
O’Neill, told him the president wanted a new team 
on board, and fired him. 
While the deficit in 2002 was relatively low, $158 
billion, compared to more recent deficits, many 
politicians and economists have agreed for years 
with the sentiment expressed by Dick Cheney that 
deficits are not a major con!cern. There is a 
faction of economists and politicians that still 
holds this view. But with the United States facing 
a trillion-dollar deficit for the third straight 
year, the political argument has now shifted. The 
1 The Eleanor Roosevelt Papers. “The Great Depression,” Teaching Eleanor Roosevelt, 
edited by Allida Black, June Hopkins, et al. (Hyde Park, NY: Eleanor Roosevelt National 
Historic Site, 2003). Available at www.gwu.edu/~erpapers/teachinger/glossary/great-
depression.cfm  (accessed September 15, 2012).
2 Ron Suskind. The Price of Loyalty (New York: Simon & Schuster, 2004), p. 291.

Deficit
57 
trend of late is to profess that “deficits do 
matter.” 
Changing Demographics
The U.S. population demographic is one area in 
which everyone is in agree!ment. We are an aging 
society. According to the U.S. Census Bureau, today 
13 percent of the population is 65 years old and 
older. But in 2030, when all of the Baby Boomers 
will have reached retirement age, almost 20 percent 
of the population is projected to be 65 and older. 
The United States needs to focus now on how we are 
going to care for the elderly in future years and 
fund the already-stressed entitlement programs for 
the aged, such as Social Security and Medicaid. 
These 
entitlement 
programs 
for 
retirees 
have 
traditionally been paid by the taxes of current 
workers—a pay-as-you-go system. But by 2030, the 
in!crease in retired workers brings the ratio of 
working age people down to 55 percent, to support 
the projected 20 percent of those 65 and over. That 
means a dramatic decline in the funds coming in to 
support our aging popu!lation. The current forecast 
is that the shifting demographics in the United 
States will likely place a major strain on the 
deficit and national debt, unless a solution can be 
found very soon.
Repercussions of Large Deficits 
At some point in the future, with such large 
deficits, it’s possible that citi!zens and foreign 
governments may lose confidence in the ability of 
the U.S. government to pay back holders of its 
debt instruments. Huge deficits, for example, are 
a red flag when it comes to issuing new debt. 
Traditionally, the Treasury has been able to sell 
debt 
with 
a 
low 
interest 
rate 
because 
its 

Chapter 5 | Do Deficits and the Debt Matter?
58
repayment is backed by the full faith and credit 
of the U.S. government. Treasuries are perceived 
to be risk-free. The United States has never 
de!faulted, so most people believe that it will 
not default on the bonds that it sells. 
But if citizens and other buyers of Treasury 
securities begin to think a de!fault is possible, 
they will either demand exceptionally high interest 
rates or not invest in them at all. This would 
cause a snowball effect. If interest costs rise, 
interest payments will skyrocket, further stressing 
the budget. If con!cerns spread about the safety of 
government bonds, the government will be forced to 
offer higher, more attractive interest rates to 
buyers. It’s a risk-return trade-off for investors. 
Again, if investors perceive government bonds to be 
more risky than other investments, they will demand 
a higher rate of return for the higher risk they 
are being exposed to. 
With a loss of confidence, foreign investors may 
also reduce Treasury invest!ments in a large way, 
which would be a disturbing trend because U.S. 
Treasuries have always been viewed as a safe haven 
worldwide. In addition, the U.S. dollar has always 
been the leader in global financial markets. The 
number one creditor, China, has already reduced its 
holdings significantly over the last year. The 
country held $1,307 trillion in Treasuries in June 
2011 but dropped to just $1,164 trillion in June 
2012. A large retreat would suggest that foreign 
investors lack confidence in the fiscal discipline 
of the largest economy. The effects of the loss of 
confidence may result in an un!predictable world-
wide financial crisis. The United States is the 
world’s eco!nomic leader and, with a GDP over $15 
trillion, has the largest output in the world. That 
size makes the United States capable of helping to 
strengthen the world economic picture or sending a 
financial scare across the globe. A U.S. economy 

Deficit
59 
unable to attract securities buyers would have 
ramifications around the world. The United States 
would lose its financial, monetary, and political 
clout in the international arena.
Projected and Historical Trends of Debt
The historical graph shown in Figure 5-1 gives a 
quick overview of why con!cerns are growing about 
the U.S. debt. The graph shows an important fiscal 
measurement, 
debt 
held 
by 
the 
public 
(which 
excludes the amount of debt held by government 
trust funds and other government accounts) relative 
to GDP. The debt held by the public relative to 
output, or productive capacity, has taken a sharp 
turn upward over the past 10 years. The highest 
level, in 1946, was a product of World War II, and 
if many of the current policies are continued the 
second highest level will be reached by the end of 
2022. 

Chapter 5 | Do Deficits and the Debt Matter?
60
Figure 5-1. Federal debt held by the public as a percentage of GDP. Source: Congressional 
Budget Office, The Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal Years 2012 to 2022, January 2012.
Along with historical trends, Figure 5-1 also shows 
two federal debt projec!tions by the Congressional 
Budget 
Office 
(CBO). 
The 
extended-baseline 
scenario, sometimes called current law projections, 
adheres most closely to current laws of taxation 
and 
spending. 
These 
include 
the 
automatic 
en!forcement of spending cuts and allowing tax cuts 
to expire. The alternative fiscal scenario shows 
the projection if many current laws and policies 
con!tinued. According to recent update to The 
Budget and Economic Outlook (released August 22, 
2012) 
the 
extended-baseline 
scenario 
paints 
a 
gloomy picture, showing that by 2022 the debt held 
by the public could equal roughly 58 percent of 
GDP, high by historical standards. The alternative 

Deficit
61 
fis!cal scenario shows startling numbers, hitting a 
whopping 90 percent of GDP by 2022. Policymakers 
can have a huge impact on the debt path, and under 
the alternative fiscal scenario the debt would 
reach an unsustainable path and do significant harm 
to the economy.
Widespread Concern
The sentiments concerning the exploding deficits 
and rising debt are so strong; many national 
organizations have been formed that are dedicated 
to advocating generationally responsible fiscal 
policy. One prominent group is a nonpartisan 
organization founded in 1992 by the late former 
Senator Paul Tsongas (D-MA), former Senator Warren 
Rudman 
(R-NH), 
and 
former 
U.S. 
Secretary 
of 
Commerce Peter Peterson. The Concord Coalition, as 
it is called, is “dedicated to educating the public 
about the causes and conse!quences of federal 
budget deficits, the long-term challenges facing 
America’s unsustainable entitlement programs, and 
how 
to 
build 
a 
sound 
economy 
for 
future 
generations.”3 
More evidence of the widespread deficit concerns 
mounting across the na!tion has been the outburst 
of unaffiliated groups called Tea Parties. The name 
comes from the Boston Tea Party in 1773, where 
colonists, objecting to a tax on tea levied by the 
British government, dumped 45 tons of tea into 
Boston Harbor. It was a protest not only against 
Britain, but also against the East India Company, 
which 
had 
been 
granted 
a 
monopoly 
on 
the 
importa!tion of tea into the American colonies. In 
early 2009, as U.S. citizens became alarmed by what 
appeared 
to 
them 
as 
out-of-control 
government 
3 The Concord Coalition. “About the Concord Coalition.” Available at 
www.concordcoalition.org/about-concord-coalition (accessed March 27, 2011).

Chapter 5 | Do Deficits and the Debt Matter?
62
spending, self-organized groups began sprouting, 
using the Tea Party name as a basis for their 
political platform. These millions of concerned 
citizens, who believe in limited government, fiscal 
restraint, and lower taxes, hold Tea Party rallies 
to protest excessive government spending and the 
associated higher taxes required to finance such 
spending. The movement is a grassroots en!deavor 
with no specific leader. Without question, former 
Alaskan 
governor 
and 
2008 
Republican 
Vice 
Presidential candidate Sarah Palin is a favorite of 
the movement. Palin was the headline speaker at the 
first Tea Party Con!vention, held in Nashville, 
Tennessee in early 2010. How widespread is the 
political movement? In a USA Today/Gallup poll 
conducted in January 2011, results show 3 out of 10 
Americans identify themselves as supporters of the 
Tea Party movement.4
A more recent poll, in April 2012, shows 41% 
support at least some of the Tea Party’s goals.5
4 Lydia Saad. “Americans Believe GOP Should Consider Tea Party Ideas,” January 31, 
2011. Available at www.gallup.com/poll/145838/americans-believe-gop-consider-tea-party-ideas.aspx 
(accessed March 25, 2011).
5 Scott Clement. “Tea Party Support Stable, but Interest Is Waning,” April 15, 2012. 
Available at www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/behind-the-numbers/post/tea-party-
support-stable-but-interest-is-waning/2012/04/14/gIQAPXyKHT_blog.html (Accessed 
September 15, 2012).

Deficit
63 
AN INTERVIEW WITH BILL FRENZEL
Bill Frenzel is well-versed on the federal debt and deficit issues. He was a U.S. 
Congressman for 20 years, and was the ranking minority member on the House 
Budget Committee. Frenzel served as a special advisor to President Bill Clinton 
on North America Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), was appointed by President 
George W. Bush to the Social Security Commission in 2001 and in 2005, was 
appointed to Bush’s Tax Reform Commission. He is cochairman of the 
Committee for a Responsible Federal Budget, cochairman of the Center for 
Strategic Tax Reform, and a guest scholar at the Brookings Institution. Frenzel 
frames some issues surrounding the debt debate. 
1. Is there a positive side to deficit spending?
Yes. Deficit financing defends us in real emergencies. But running big deficits in 
“normal” times is what has put us in trouble. 
2. Has the U.S. ever found deficit spending useful in a crisis?
Yes. That's how we got through most of our wars (WW II) and some of our 
recessions, and how we supported our financial system (TARP) when it was in 
crisis. 
3. How should we correct current U.S. fiscal woes?
Technically, it’s easy; politically it appears to be next to impossible. Just apply a 
Bowles-Simpson approach, phasing in a negotiated mixture of spending cuts and 
increased revenues, which stress reduction of the large, fast-rising cost drivers, 
with significant “down payments,” near- and long-term targets (10-year goal of 
about 60% debt ratio), and credible enforcement procedures.
4. Can U.S. policymakers learn from other countries that have successfully 
utilized fiscal policy to bolster their economies?
Sure. A number of OECD [Organisation for Economic Cooperation and 
Development] countries have sworn off the “deficit Kool-Aid,” and significantly 
reduced their debt ratios in the last decade. The Oceanics, some of the 
Scandinavians, Switzerland, and The Netherlands are recent examples.

Chapter 5 | Do Deficits and the Debt Matter?
64
The next chapter examines the long-held argument 
that deficits do not mat!ter. That side of the 
debate argues that deficits are of no concern to 
the health of the U.S. economy. Among their 
arguments include the following: 

A popular way to measure the deficit level, the deficit-
to-GDP ratio, is predicted to decline in the future. 

Treasury securities can be issued continually to finance 
the government’s needs, so paying down the debt is not 
imperative. 

Many countries are in a deficit spending mode to ride 
out the global downturn. The United States is not unique 
in its deficit situation. 

Some countries—such as Switzerland, Sweden, and 
Canada—not only have utilized deficit spending but are 
currently showing fiscal strength in a less-than-stellar 
economy. 

Treasury securities used to finance the debt are a major 
investment vehicle in the United States, supply a 
benchmark indicator for use by bankers, and are an 
essential component in employing monetary policy. 
Read on as we explore these arguments supporting 
deficit spending.

C H A P T E R
Deficits Do 
Not Matter
There are economists, business people, politicians, and citizens who maintain 
that deficits do not matter. Here we’ll explore the viewpoint of those who 
maintain that deficits are of no great concern to the health of the U.S. economy. 
Some, in fact, endorse deficit spending and financing as a positive economic 
strategy for the United States.
Public Goods Are a Priority
Deficit financing is often employed to provide goods and services that are 
essential to citizens. These are referred to as public goods. Public goods are 
classified as both nonrival—when a good or service is used by one person, others 
are not deprived from using it—and nonexcludable, when one person cannot 
exclude others from using the good or service. National defense (see Figure 6-1), 
flood control, and the legal system are all examples of public goods. 
6

         CHAPTER 6 | Deficits Do Not Matter
2
Figure 6-1. The government provides public goods such as national defense. The military 
personnel pictured are firefighters from the 374th Civil Engineer Squadron and members of the 
374th Medical Operations Squadron. They are practicing triage during an emergency management 
exercise at Yokota Air Base, Japan, on February 4, 2011. Source: U.S. Air Force, photo by 
Osakabe Yasuo.
Many people can use public goods without interfering with someone else’s use. 
Furthermore, it is difficult to prevent others from using the good or service. 
Flood control is a good example. Flood-control service benefits everyone in a 
certain locale, and providing it only to those who would pay for it is impossible. 
When a community protects one area from flooding, it protects everyone in that 
area. Consequently, this service is provided by the government as part of its role 
as a public goods provider. 
The free-rider problem is the reason why public goods are provided by the 
government and not by private companies. No private firm would have an 
interest in providing flood control because there would be many free riders, 
people who would benefit from the service but would not pay.
Private goods, by contrast, are both rival and excludable. Your fast-food sandwich 
is a rival good because it is purchased only by you and is consumed by you. After 
you eat the sandwich, it is not available for anyone else’s consumption. If you do 
not have money to pay for the sandwich, the fast-food chain excludes you from 

Deficit
3 
receiving the meal. Many goods in our society are private goods provided by 
businesses and people in the free market. 
The government also provides a number of goods and services that fall between 
the public and private classifications. These are called quasi-public or near-
public goods. The government considers these goods or services either necessary 
or beneficial to citizens. They have some characteristics of a public good, and 
some characteristics of a private good. In other words, they do not meet the full 
requirements of nonrival and nonexcludable. This could include a public park 
that charges an admittance fee (see Figure 6-2), or a highway that charges a toll 
for use.
Figure 6-2. The government provides many goods that are quasi-public, such as parks like Mount 
Rushmore National Memorial. People are charged a fee to visit the national park, located in the 
Black Hills of South Dakota. The 60-foot heads of Presidents George Washington, Thomas 
Jefferson, Theodore Roosevelt, and Abraham Lincoln are sculpted into a granite mountain. Source: 
National Parks Service.
The government also provides merit goods (again, often through deficit 
spending), which are goods and services that are provided by the government 
free of charge because they are socially desirable and society does not produce 

         CHAPTER 6 | Deficits Do Not Matter
4
enough on its own. These goods and services are commonly referred to as merit 
goods because they hold special merit for taxpayers. Typically, these types of 
goods have positive externalities—third-party benefits for a society, even though 
not every person is using the good or service. Some examples are museums, 
education, health immunizations, and low-income housing for senior citizens. 
Generally speaking, the spillover effects (secondary effects to those not taking 
part in the economic activity) to third parties, those who are not directly involved 
in the transactions, are not realized but are still actually so great that more of the 
merit goods should be produced. For example, you will benefit if your neighbor 
attends college. You might not think so, and you won’t take his tests for him or 
attend classes, but you will still benefit. He may discover some great medical 
advancement or energy-saving technology that will benefit all consumers. Or he 
might start a new business that boosts economic activity in your city. Therefore, 
the government supports more merit goods—including educational funding—to 
create more third-party positive externalities. Deficit spending is sometimes 
necessary to include these merit goods in the national budget.
Not all externalities are positive, such as smoking, littering, and pollution. If a 
cost is incurred by a third party who is not directly involved in the transaction, a 
negative externality is incurred. Air pollution is a negative externality because 
living near a company’s polluting factory and being exposed to pollutants can 
harm one’s health. This neighbor may not buy any of the company’s products 
and may just be an innocent recipient of the effects of the company’s pollution. 
Negative externalities are costly to society but not to individual businesses. 
Consequently, the government tends to regulate, tax, or fine negative 
externalities so less will be produced. In the case of air pollution, tactics to 
reduce emissions include regulating and taxing companies and issuing tradable 
pollution permits. 
Public goods, quasi-public goods, and merit goods are often associated with 
positive spillover effects. But controlling for negative externalities is also an 
important role for the government, and this, too, forces the deficit upward. 
As our economy has evolved, it has devoted more resources to public goods, 
quasi-public goods, and merit goods. Prior to the 1930s and 1940s, most of the 
goods and services provided by the government were strictly public goods, such 
as national defense, the legal system, and the postal service. Our country had a 
laissez-faire philosophy, meaning that most of society was free from government 
intervention. But since the Great Depression, to prevent such widespread 
devastation from ever occurring again, government involvement in many areas 
has become much more prevalent. Americans have come to expect a host of 

Deficit
5 
services to be provided by the government, and spending beyond the strict public 
goods arena has become the norm. Our government uses deficit financing to 
furnish the goods and services our society has become accustomed to—safe 
highways, police protection, unemployment compensation, health care services, 
energy 
conservation 
programs, 
low-cost 
school 
lunches, 
regulated 
communication and broadcast airwaves, pollution control, and much more. If you 
pay attention, you’ll notice the services provided by our government exist almost 
everywhere you go. And it’s no wonder why: prior to entering World War II in 
1941, U.S. government spending was just under 12 percent of GDP, while today 
it has doubled to over 25 percent.
As a society, we have to this point more or less agreed that some spending on 
public goods and merit goods is worth going into debt for—that the benefits 
outweigh the costs. Many economists and pundits would concur, pointing out 
that we have done this for years and the country is a better place for it. The flip 
side is that the spending has become prevalent, excessive, and indulgent. Many 
believe government spending must be reduced to a bare bones, minimum level, in 
line with society’s basic needs.
Deficit Spending: A Useful Tool During a 
Crisis
In countries around the world and throughout recent history, it has been standard 
practice to deficit finance during times of crisis. During wartime, for example, 
needed goods and services are provided through deficit spending. As you read in 
Chapter 2, the United States raised funds in preparation for World War I by 
selling Liberty Bonds. The war debt climbed to $25 million by the end of the 
war. Fast-forward to WWII; according to the Bureau of the Public Debt, U.S. 
participation was extremely costly at $323 billion. The United States paid for 
military expenses and also lent funds to Britain and other countries fighting 
Germany, and to do so took on debt of $211 billion.1 
As financing for wars shows, we as a nation have been able to rack up large 
deficits, and the wartime production spending spurs economic expansion. 
1 TreasuryDirect Kids, “The History of U.S. Public Debt: The New Deal (1933-1936) to 
World War II (1939-1945),” www.treasurydirect.gov/kids/history/history_ww2.htm (accessed 
February 6, 2011).

         CHAPTER 6 | Deficits Do Not Matter
6
Spending to pull out of an economic glut—a situation in which we have an 
excess of goods and services available—or a recession also falls under the 
category of crisis spending. During a recession, deficit spending may be a great 
way to boost aggregate demand and reinvigorate the economy. When the 
government spends money, output is stimulated and a multiplier effect in the 
economy occurs. Government spending increases economic activity in a greater 
proportion than the amount spent, creating income and job opportunities. For 
example, if the government builds a highway, it creates jobs for many workers on 
the project. Those workers, in turn, will purchase groceries, new homes, clothing, 
and cars. In this example, the supermarket, homebuilder, retail store, and auto 
industry are all stimulated. Workers at these establishments will now be able to 
spend, and thus restart the cycle. Deficit spending can be necessary and even 
beneficial for the United States during crisis situations.
Reasonable Deficit-to-GDP Ratio
A popular way to view the deficit issue is to measure the level of the annual 
deficit relative to GDP (gross domestic product), or the output level of the 
economy. In 2011, U.S. GDP stood at just over $14 trillion and the deficit totaled 
$1.3 trillion, resulting in a deficit-to-GDP ratio of roughly 9 percent. According 
to the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) baseline projections in its January 
2011 Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal Years 2011 to 2021, the deficit-to-
GDP ratio is expected to fall notably in the future. Deficits are expected to fall to 
7 percent of GDP in 2012 and to 3.2 percent by 2021. Contrast that with 1943, 
when the deficit-to-GDP ratio totaled just over 30 percent. Even with a high 
ratio, the WWII era was a period of prosperity for the U.S. economy. As a 
society, we know that the sky does not fall if deficits are huge. The fact that 
benchmark numbers have been very high in the past suggests that current lower 
ranges indicate no need for concern.
Ricardian Equivalence Suggests Deficits Don’t 
Matter
Some concur with an old-time economic theory, the Ricardian equivalence, 
named after English economist David Ricardo (1772–1823). The Ricardian 
equivalence says, simply, that budget deficits do not lead to a change in 
aggregate demand. People know that deficit borrowing needs to be repaid. The 
government can borrow today but will need to tax tomorrow to pay for its 
borrowing. Anticipating a tax increase, people increase their savings in response 
to a rise in deficit spending. Challenges do exist in properly measuring people’s 

Deficit
7 
behavioral responses to deficit spending, and many economists debate the 
constraints underlying this theory. Nevertheless, others contend this theory is 
powerful “food for thought” regarding taxpayers’ response to deficit spending 
and is a close approximation to our real-world actions.
It Isn’t Necessary to Pay Down the Debt
Another common argument by proponents in the discussion of deficit spending 
is that the debt does not need to be paid down. As old debt matures, the U.S. 
Treasury will pay off existing securities. And as the deficit situation calls for 
more funding, the Treasury will issue more securities. Furthermore, interest 
rates are at historically low levels, and it is a great time for the government to 
borrow on the cheap. As a matter of fact, debt is a way of life for many other 
countries, and deficit financing is high in most of the advanced countries around 
the world (notwithstanding the threat of a real debt crisis, such as recently 
occurred in Greece, that made it impossible to roll over the debt, something 
we’ll discuss in the next chapter). Congress can increase the debt limit, and 
Treasury Securities (“Treasuries”) can be issued continually to finance the 
government’s needs and fiscal programs. Those who argue deficits don’t matter 
say it isn’t necessary to pay down the debt, and we shouldn’t worry about it. 
They argue that the debt can be rolled over indefinitely.
Table 6-1 outlines the deficit situation for the general government of the major 
advanced economies. For comparison purposes, the table contrasts the yearly 
budget deficits to GDP. Projections by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
show the top numbers in 2011. Japan is number one on the list with a deficit 
10.1 percent of GDP, followed by the United States at 9.6 percent of GDP. All 
of the major advanced economies ran budget deficits for 2011. Budget deficits 
averaged 6.2 percent of GDP. And although the 2015 deficit projections indicate 
moderation for all major countries, the forecast is a continuing deficit financing 
trend. These figures suggest that other developed countries are in the same 
deficit spending mode as the United States. Many governments are deficit 
spending to get through the global downturn. Because the United States is not 
unique in this pattern, there is no need for worry.
Table 6-1. Major Advanced Economies: Deficit Projections for General Government
 (in percentage of GDP)
2011
2015
Japan 
–10.1
–7.6
United States
-9.6
–4.4

         CHAPTER 6 | Deficits Do Not Matter
8
2011
2015
United Kingdom 
–8.7
–3.6
France
–5.3
–2.2
Canada 
–4.5
–1.5
Italy  
–3.9
–1.5
Germany  
–1.0
-0.2
Source: International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook, April 2012.
LEARN FROM OTHERS 
The United States could learn a lesson from other economies that have 
successfully utilized deficit spending while doing a fiscal about-face. Three good 
examples are Switzerland, Sweden, and Canada. All have achieved fiscal 
discipline. Switzerland is the cream of the crop of fiscal discipline, and a prime 
example of what to do. Burdened by rising deficits, in 2001, Switzerland voted in 
a “debt brake” provision that was adopted in 2003. The rule states the 
government’s budget must balance, adjusted for cyclical conditions over a 
multiyear period. So whenever bad times hit, recessions are allowed, but surpluses 
must exist during a rising economy. In 2003, the debt of Switzerland was reduced 
from 68% to roughly 48% of GDP. Today, Switzerland has a deficit of just 0.2 of 
GDP. 
Sweden hit some very hard economic times 20 years ago with debt as a percentage 
of GDP hitting the 60 to 70 percent marks. Today, the country’s debt has dropped 
to 36 percent of GDP. And although the deficit as a percentage of GDP hit 11.8 
percent in 1993, Sweden now bounces between small surpluses and small deficits. 
A small deficit to GDP is expected for 2012, and the country is expected to be in 
the surplus area by 2014. How did this happen? They followed a tough fiscal 
consolidation program, including a main rule requiring a surplus equal to 1 
percent of GDP on average over the business cycle. 
Just like the United States, Canada implemented a stimulus program during the 
most recent recession. But unlike the United States, Canada has recovered well. 
The International Monetary Fund projects that by 2017, the deficit as a percentage 
of GDP will be almost nil at 0.5. What made the difference? Canada adopted a 
modest stimulus program, easing taxes and implementing no new major programs 
during the recession. Canada has a long track record of fiscal discipline. When the 
economy entered the 2008 recession, it was in a position of fiscal strength with 
modest surpluses. 

Deficit
9 
Treasuries Are a Savings Vehicle
Another advantage of deficit financing is that it provides a huge savings vehicle 
for investors. To finance deficit spending in the United States, the Bureau of the 
Public Debt issues Treasuries and U.S. Savings Bonds. Both are essential 
investments, savings instruments, and at the heart of the U.S. financial 
community. Because they are defined as riskless securities, they are an important 
part of an investment portfolio for risk-adverse consumers who prefer low 
volatility. Further, the majority of interest payments are made domestically, and 
that money remains in the United States to stimulate the economy. 
Treasuries are marketable securities. They can be sold in the secondary market 
quickly and easily, right after purchase. So, for whatever reason or need, if an 
investor wants to generate funds, Treasuries are easy to sell. The Bureau of the 
Public Debt recently opened the investment market even wider, lowering the 
minimum investment in Treasuries from $1,000 to $100. 
U.S. Savings Bonds are nonmarketable and traditionally have been given as gifts 
for life events such as graduations, weddings, and births. They are called 
“nonmarketable” because they are registered to a specific person and can’t be 
traded in the secondary market. Many American workers consider them an 
important part of their employee savings plan, allocating a portion of their 
paycheck to buy Savings Bonds. Savings Bonds can be purchased for as little as 
$25. 
Clearly, Treasuries and U.S. Savings Bonds are important consumer savings and 
investment avenues, as U.S. debt held by the public, in Treasuries and Savings 
Bonds, totals $11 trillion. These securities are guaranteed by the full faith and 
credit of the U.S. government, which has never defaulted. Thus, these securities 
are considered a risk-free investment, though they won’t always maintain their 
full value due to inflation (excluding TIPS, Treasury Inflation-Protected 
Securities, which provide a measure of inflation protection). In a risky economy, 
the appeal of such a sound investment may be even stronger.
Treasuries Provide a Common Index
A beneficial side effect of deficit financing is that Treasury rates provide useful 
benchmark interest rates for bankers. Commercial and mortgage loan officers 
are particularly familiar with Treasuries. Variable-rate commercial loans are 
widely utilized in the banking industry, and T-rates are a key component of a 

         CHAPTER 6 | Deficits Do Not Matter
10
bank’s decision making. Monthly payments, for example, are adjusted—upward 
or downward—depending on an index. A common index for pricing is the 
Treasury. Let’s say you have a commercial loan tied to the prime rate (the best 
rate for strong, credit-worthy customers) plus the 20-year Treasury bond rate. If 
the prime rate is 3.25 percent and the Treasury bond rate is 2 percent this month, 
the rate on your loan will be 5.25 percent.
Treasuries Are Essential to Monetary Policy
Monetary policy involves the actions taken by the Federal Reserve (“the Fed”) to 
influence credit market conditions and interest rates. Along with open-market 
operations, as described in Chapter 4, there are two other tools for monetary 
policy: changing the discount rate and adjusting reserve requirements. Open 
market operations, the buying and selling of government securities, are the main 
tool for activating monetary policy. When the Fed wants to expand the money 
supply and lower interest rates, it buys government securities and thus increases 
reserves in the banking system. This allows banks to make more loans. When the 
Fed wants to raise interest rates, it does so by selling government securities. This 
restricts reserves in the banking system, reducing money supply and making rates 
rise. 
What is the Fed’s main tool used to conduct open market operations? You 
guessed it—Treasury securities. The government uses Treasuries to deficit 
finance, and these very instruments are the essential vehicle for conducting 
monetary policy. Since the global financial crisis, beginning in 2008, the Fed also 
has turned to unconventional monetary policy tools, including purchasing asset-
backed securities such as mortgages. Again, we’ve run up deficits based on these 
practices for decades, while only occasionally eliminating them, and the 
economy usually remains strong or bounces back fairly quickly.
Now that you have read the perspective of those who say deficits do not matter, 
the next chapter investigates the perspective of those who say deficits do matter. 
With the nation’s burgeoning debt, this debate has become very heated. The next 
chapter examines the long-standing arguments against deficit financing, along 
with some new twists, such as the argument that deficit financing increases U.S. 
reliance on foreign creditors. The discussion also will highlight why some feel 
the debt issue matters more than it used to.

C H A P T E R
7
Deficits Do 
Matter
This chapter defends the viewpoint of those who say that deficits are a huge 
concern and do matter. Up to this point, you have learned that continual 
annual deficits have led to a massive national debt. As you’ll see, there are 
many traditional, long-standing arguments against deficit financing, along 
with some newer arguments, such as those related to the dangers of an 
increasing reliance on foreign creditors and the risk of potential downgrades 
of the U.S. debt. Many economists, politicians, and citizens say the debt 
matters more now than it used to. Let’s explore why.
Foreign Share Expands
“We owe the debt to ourselves” used to be the argument proponents of deficit 
financing put forth when contending that the rising national debt posed no 
risk. There is no need to worry, they claimed, because we are in debt only to 
ourselves, and repaying the debt is simply a matter of redistributing income. 
But things have changed. As you learned in Chapter 2, the foreign ownership 
of U.S. debt has risen considerably over the past few years, topping $5.3 
trillion as of June 2012—about a third of the total debt outstanding. The top 

Chapter 7 | Deficits Do Matter
72
creditor nation, China, held $1.164 trillion in treasury obligations, followed 
by Japan with $1.119 billion, and the “Oil Exporters” at $261 billion. As the 
U.S. debt swells, the country continues to rely on oversees sources for 
financing. Foreign debt, at an all time high, is nearing 50 percent of total 
privately held debt, contrasted with 30 percent just a decade prior.
There is a marked upward trend in the amount of Treasury securities held by 
international investors. When this foreign-held debt eventually comes due, it 
is the U.S. taxpayers who will be taxed to pay off the debt. This adds to the 
income of foreigners, and not U.S. citizens. The United States is sending 
interest payments outside its borders, draining money away from the U.S. 
economy. Our tax dollars are being used to pay for the interest on the 
foreign-held debt. 
The United States has been relying increasingly on the foreign sector to 
facilitate its trillion-dollar deficit spending scheme. So far, so good. But if 
foreign investors become sufficiently concerned about investing in a country 
with such high debt levels that they scale back their investments, the U.S. 
government bond market will hit a wall. Some investors, including foreign 
banks, prefer investments in their home country because of a higher comfort 
level concerning economic conditions. If the main foreign buyers of 
Treasuries are no longer interested in purchasing U.S. government bonds, the 
United States will need to entice other investors to take over this significant 
buying role, most likely requiring it to offer an increase in interest rates, 
perhaps at a substantial hike. 
Again, a large amount of debt could hamper the ability of policy makers to 
respond to domestic and international dilemmas. The government may be 
unable to boost spending and cut taxes, when necessary, to expand the 
domestic economy. Further, a significant debt burden may hamper 
preparation for a crisis or limit military spending. Finally, as the 
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) notes, “the reduced financial flexibility 
and increased dependence on foreign investors that would accompany a 
rising debt could weaken the United States’ international leadership.”1 
1 Congressional Budget Office. Federal Debt and the Risk of a Fiscal Crisis, July 27, 
2010. Available at www.cbo.gov/doc.cfm?index=11659 (accessed May 17, 2011).

Deficit
73 
Potential Downgrading of U.S. Debt
A downgrade of the U.S. debt could have devastating financial 
consequences for the overall economy. Moody’s, one of the largest rating 
agencies, continues to rate the U.S. debt as AAA, but on September 11, 
2012, warned a downgrade could be on the horizon. If budget negotiations 
fail to produce policies that produce a “downward trend of the ratio of 
federal debt to GDP over the medium term” Moody’s expects to lower the 
rating.2
On August 5, 2011, Standard and Poor’s made a shocking announcement 
concerning the U.S. government debt ratings. For the first time in history, 
the rating agency removed the country’s top investment grade rating and 
downgraded its long-term debt to AA+, noting increased concern over the 
government’s fiscal position.
Bond ratings are a generally accepted expression of investment risk, with 
AAA-level ratings indicating that an investment is the least risky and thus 
warrants a lower interest rate. Put another way, any downgrade in U.S. debt 
ratings could increase the rate of interest the United States has to pay on 
future debt issues. 
At this point, the downgrade has had minimal impact, at best, on borrowing 
costs. The reason is that the Federal Reserve has been keeping rates at 
historically low levels, and there still is a demand for the perceived safe 
Treasury instruments. But further downgrades could shock rates up as more 
risk is associated with Treasuries. 
According to S&P, “The downgrade reflects our opinion that the fiscal 
consolidation plan that Congress and the Administration recently agreed to 
falls short of what, in our view, would be necessary to necessary to stabilize 
the government’s medium-term debt dynamics.”3 The rating agency is 
concerned about long-term fiscal and economic challenges. 
2 Moody’s. “‘AAA/A-1+’ Rating on United States of America Affirmed; Outlook 
Revised 
to 
Negative,” 
September 
11, 
2012. 
Available 
at 
www.moodys.com/research/Moodys-issues-update-on-the-outlook-for-the-US-
governments--PR_254944 (accessed September 15, 2012).
3 Standard & Poor’s. “United States of America Long-Term Rating Lowered to ‘AA+’ 
Political Risks, Rising Debt Burden, Outlook Negative,” August 5, 2011. Available at 
www.standardandpoors.com/ratings/articles/en/us/?assetID=1245316529563 (accessed 
September 17, 2012).

Chapter 7 | Deficits Do Matter
74
Any additional downgrade could pack a severe blow to our national ego, as 
the United States has always held stellar ratings and historically reigned as 
the world’s largest powerhouse economy. S&P analyzes 128 sovereign 
nations, and only a dozen or so hold its top rating, including England, 
Canada, and Germany. But the United States is at risk of being downgraded 
again unless it enacts an aggressive deficit-reduction plan. As of this writing, 
there has been a lot of talk and political maneuvering regarding a plan, but 
U.S policymakers have yet to agree on a formalized plan.
The issue at stake here is that many investment firms and institutions prefer 
top-rated bonds. With any downgrade, there could be a huge sell-off of U.S. 
government bonds. To sell future Treasuries, investors would need to be 
enticed with a higher interest rate. Remember the risk-return trade-off 
discussed in Chapter 5—to accept more risk, investors must be compensated 
with a higher interest rate. This would mean higher interest payments must 
be added to the national budget each year. Plus, if a downgrade does come, 
the U.S. dollar may weaken as well, as more people may want to sell the 
currency than buy it. 
Global Crisis Illustrates Dangers of High 
Debt
During the worldwide economic downturn of the past several years, many 
countries incurred high deficits because they initiated spending programs to 
stimulate their economies. Although some countries have been successful in 
stimulating output and spurring employment, the debt levels of most countries 
have risen, increasing the chance of sovereign defaults in countries such as 
Greece. 
Moody’s recently bumped the outlook of the entire EU from stable to 
negative, due to outlook downgrades for the United Kingdom, France, 
Germany, and The Netherlands. These countries account for 45 percent of the 
revenue of the EU, and there is concern over their ability to support the 
growing debt crisis. When an economic crisis erupts in a country, debt is 
downgraded, and the government loses opportunities to borrow money at a 
reasonable interest rate. The United States has long enjoyed a strong position 
as the world economic leader. Even though the United States has record 
deficits and a historically high national debt, concern over other countries’ 
fiscal situations has kept up a keen interest in U.S. bonds, allowing the U.S. 

Deficit
75 
government to keep low the rate at which it borrows money. U.S. government 
bonds have long been a sought-after and safe liquid investment vehicle. 
Yet it is helpful to look at the debacle that downgrading has caused in the 
eurozone countries Portugal, Ireland, Italy, Greece, and Spain—recently 
grouped as PIIGS. They are significantly weaker after the latest financial 
downturn. These countries have been plagued with slow to no economic 
growth, high unemployment, fiscal austerity measures that drag on the 
economy, and excessive debt-to-GDP numbers. And with higher borrowing 
costs, it becomes much harder to bring the economy back to life. Policy 
makers, say the United States should take heed to thwart a similar crisis. It 
may be challenging to envision how a major economic crisis could occur in 
the United States, but history has shown that it can happen.
Table 7-1 lists the five PIIGS countries, along with the United States, and 
their government debt as a percentage of GDP—the amount of government 
debt divided by the output of society. Low debt relative to GDP is preferred. 
A number of 100 percent means paying off the debt would require all people 
who are working in a particular country to apply all of their wages for the 
year toward the debt. All of the noted countries, with the exception of Spain, 
have debt-to-GDP numbers that top 100 percent, indicating they owe more in 
debt than they earn each year. High ratios are a sign of fiscal problems, 
signaling that the country may have trouble paying back their debt. And 
although Spain may have the lowest debt-to-GDP of its European peers, 
projections suggest a trend upward to the 100 percent range. 
Table 7-1. Government Debt: Central Government Gross Financial 
Liabilities4 As a Percentage of GDP 
2010
2011
2012
Portugal
103.2
117.6
124.3
Italy
126.5
119.7
122.7
Greece
149.6
170.0
168.8
Ireland
98.4
114.1
121.6
4 According to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “Gross 
financial liabilities refer to the debt and other liabilities (short and long-term) of all the 
institutions in the general government sector.”

Chapter 7 | Deficits Do Matter
76
2010
2011
2012
Spain
67.1
75.3
87.9
United States
98.3
102.7
108.6
Source: Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2012), "Government 
debt", Economics: Key Tables from OECD, No. 21. doi: 10.1787/gov-debt-table-2012-1-en.
Ireland’s debt crisis is fairly recent. It had a good credit history up until 2007. 
Over the next couple of years, the country was hit with an economic 
downturn along with a real estate bubble, which precipitated a massive 
failure in the banking industry. Beginning in April 2009, the country initiated 
a fiscal austerity program. However, deficits remain high and markets remain 
skeptical that Ireland has a workable fiscal plan. Debt to GDP has risen 
roughly fourfold over the past 5 years and the cost of borrowing has 
escalated greatly, to double digits. Because Ireland’s bailout package is tied 
to market rates, its interest cost is even higher than Portugal and Greece. 
Ireland, Portugal, and Greece have received emergency loans from the EU 
and the International Monetary Fund. Portugal has been burdened with low 
competitiveness in the market and excessively high levels of government 
debt. The government has implemented market reforms to encourage market 
demand, yet investors are demanding double-digit interest rates to carry debt. 
The outlook on sovereign debt for Portugal is rated negative by both 
Moody’s and Standard & Poor’s.
Borrowing costs for Greece are at exceptionally high levels. When the global 
recession hit, Greece was already in trouble, with a debt-to-GDP ratio over 
100 percent. The country had experienced years of heavy spending, even 
prior to the economic downturn. The debt and deficit limits are high in 
Greece and exceed the maximum limits set by the eurozone. According to the 
IMF, the country’s economy is forecasted to contract 4.7 percent in 2012. 
Social unrest—violence, riots, and protests—in Greece is growing with the 
debate over fiscal austerity measures, threatening financial devastation.
Italy also has an extremely high debt-to-GDP ratio, at 122 percent. Its 
economy has suffered from low economic growth for many years. The Italian 
government has made an effort to boost spending and encourage the creation 
of new jobs. Yet in the throes of a double-dip recession, the country is 
experiencing unemployment exceeding 10 percent. There is concern in the 
investor community over Italy’s ability to service its massive debt.

Deficit
77 
Spain had a booming economy until late in 2007, when the economy hit a 
steep decline due to a slowdown in construction and consumer spending. The 
banking industry was hit hard because of its large investment in construction 
loans. The government tried stimulus spending, which caused the deficit to 
rise over the eurozone limit. Spain’s current unemployment rate reflects the 
lack of success that move had: over 24 percent—more than triple the rate in 
2007.
Portugal, Greece, Italy, Ireland, and Spain have a major theme in common: 
they have overspent and overborrowed. These countries have accumulated 
too much debt, resulting in low or no economic growth, mass unemployment, 
and high interest rates. Only time will tell if all will emerge from the debt 
crisis. But what is known is that with such a severe debt crisis, economic 
recovery will be a long time in coming. 
Exorbitant Interest 
Assuming government debt in the United States is never repaid, the interest 
alone presents a huge problem. Interest payments stimulate a vicious cycle: 
a growing deficit leads to higher debt, which in turn increases the amount of 
interest payments, which in turn increases the deficit be-cause additional 
interest payments must be included, which leads to even higher debt, and so 
on. 
Growing Interest Payments
Table 7-2 shows the CBO baseline projections (keeping current laws 
governing taxation and spending unchanged) for the next 10 years. Net 
interest represents interest paid by the federal government, offset by interest 
collections from the public and interest received by government trust funds.
You can see the trajectory path for net interest. In 2011, net interest topped 
the $200 billion mark and stood at 1.5 percent of GDP. But it is expected to 
skyrocket, projected to jump over $300 billion in 2016. Deficits are expected 
to rise, bringing a large increase in debt. The CBO expects debt held by the 
public to climb to $13 trillion, or 71 percent of GDP, by the end of 2016. In 
addition, interest rates are forecast to rise from their historically low levels, 
so the cost of carrying the debt will increase, causing interest payments to be 
pushed even higher over the next 10 years. CBO projections show that dollar 
net interest will more than triple between 2012 and 2022, rising from $224 

Chapter 7 | Deficits Do Matter
78
billion to $624 billion. And as a share of GDP, it will rise over one full 
percentage point over the next decade, increasing from 1.4 percent to 2.5 
percent.
Table 7-2. Baseline Budget Projections
Net Interest (in billions)
Net Interest as a Percentage of 
GDP
2011 actual 
$227
1.5
2012
$224
1.4
2013
$231
1.5
2014
$247
1.5
2015
$282
1.6
2016
$341
1.8
2017
$402
2.0
2018
$459
2.2
2019
$513
2.4
2020
$557
2.5
2021
$590
2.5
2022
$624
2.5
Source: Congressional Budget Office, The Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal Years 2012 
to 2022, January 2012, Table 1-3, “CBO’s Baseline Budget Projections.” 
Opportunity Cost High
There is a huge opportunity cost associated with the interest payments. The 
government funds could be better spent on other goods and services that 
bring productive value. The interest payment on the debt represents a rising 
portion of GDP, the productive output of our society. It indicates that an 
increasing percentage of our resources will be going to cover interest. Rising 

Deficit
79 
interest payments will most likely make it necessary for the government to 
reduce spending on beneficial services such as national defense, education, 
and environmental protection services.
Crowding Out
In economic terms, “crowding out” traditionally refers to interest rates. 
Crowding out occurs when heavy government borrowing forces out private 
borrowing. When the government increases the deficit through spending, the 
demand for credit rises as the government borrows by selling Treasuries. The 
theory goes that the government may offer a high rate of interest to attract 
investors. That drives up interest rates across the board and problems develop 
when, at some point, businesses and individuals are unable to afford the 
higher rates they must pay to borrow. The rising government debt results in 
businesses and consumers being “crowded out” of the credit market. 
The crowding out process then reduces private spending and investment. In 
the current economic environment, this has not been an issue. Crowding out 
has not occurred despite record borrowing. Why? The Federal Reserve has 
aggressively purchased bonds and kept interest rates at historically low 
levels. But although crowding out has not been a problem in this economic 
cycle, many say it could come to pass.
Economic Panic
Panic, worldwide global crisis, devastation, turmoil—however you define it, 
rising deficits and the ballooning debt have the potential to result in a host of 
serious economic problems. In the worst case imaginable, a devastating 
economic panic starting in the United States would spread across the globe. 
Hyperinflation—rapid, severe inflation—would occur as the Fed created more 
dollars to pay off debts. Vital government services would be curtailed in an 
attempt to keep up with bond payments, disrupting the economy and causing 
unemployment. A stock and bond sell off on Wall Street would cause the 
stock market to collapse, having a huge impact on other financial markets. 
The United States would have trouble selling government securities and 
would be forced to offer high interest rates to sell what are suddenly deemed 
risky securities. Higher interest payments would add further to the deficit and 
national debt, exacerbating fiscal and economic woes. 
-

Chapter 7 | Deficits Do Matter
80
Although most economists discount the possibility of such a scenario, the 
long-term financial problems associated with entitlement programs such as 
Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid exacerbate the fear associated with 
the rising debt. These programs because they are promised by the 
government, and have been funded in part by workers (except Medicaid), 
will be challenging to modify. But change in all areas, argue many these 
days, is needed to restore the financial health of the country. Reliance on 
these entitlements by U.S. citizens, coupled with the debt trajectory pattern, 
increases the risk for an economic panic.
As discussed in the previous sections, as the nation’s debt grows, there is the 
real possibility investors will lose interest in purchasing government 
Treasuries. The U.S. government may be pushed into a position of paying 
exceptionally high interest rates to attract creditors. Treasury rates are at 
historically low levels now, averaging below 3 percent. The Federal Reserve 
has been actively pursuing an expansionary monetary policy, forcing interest 
rates down. But many believe higher rates are looming on the horizon. This 
would trigger a further expansion of the debt as interest payments would 
grow as well. 
A high level of deficit spending can lead to inflation. Today, the economy is 
operating at less than full employment and inflation levels have increased 
less than 1 percent annually over the past few years. Increased federal 
spending and a reduction in taxes can stimulate demand, while putting 
upward pressure on price levels. Uncontrollable deficit spending can lead to 
inflation. A rise in prices has not occurred yet because the economy has 
considerable slack and is operating below its capacity. If the economy were 
operating at full capacity, then deficit spending could overstimulate the 
economy and spur inflation.
According to ten former members of the President’s Council of Economic 
Advisers, in an open letter published by Politico, “These deficits will take a 
toll on private investment and economic growth. At some point, bond 
markets are likely to turn on the United States—leading to a crisis that could 
dwarf 2008.”5 The group of esteemed economists was commenting on the 
recently released bipartisan National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility 
and Reform report entitled “The Moment of Truth.” (See Figure 7-1) The 
5 Politico. “Unsustainable Budget Threatens Nation,” March 24, 2011. Available at 
www.politico.com/news/stories/0311/51864.html (accessed May 16, 2011).

Deficit
81 
letter was designed to alert readers that the threat of the long-run budget 
deficit is severe and calls for “serious and prompt attention.”
Figure 7-1. Members of the press cover President Barack Obama’s April 14, 2011, meeting in 
the Oval Office with Erskine Bowles and Alan Simpson, cochairs of the National Commission 
on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform. President Obama created the commission to “improve 
the fiscal situation in the medium term and to achieve fiscal sustainability over the long run.” 
Seated on the couch, from left, are Senator Simpson, Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, 
and Office of Management and Budget Director Jack Lew. Source: Official White House 
Photo by Pete Souza.
Limited Flexibility in a Crisis
Operating with such a high level of debt could place the United States in an 
extremely challenging position. It severely constrains, or limits, policy 
makers’ fiscal policy options. If a crisis occurs, such as a new war, a terrorist 
attack, a banking crisis, or an economic depression or recession, the 
exploding deficit levels and rising debt will limit the options Congress has in 
responding to such a crisis. This could prove to be extremely serious, 
particularly if the need arose to respond to or prepare for an international 
incident. As noted by the CBO, “A large amount of debt could also harm 
national security by constraining military spending in times of crisis or 
limiting the ability to prepare for a crisis.”6
6 Congressional Budget Office. Federal Debt and the Risk of a Fiscal Crisis, July 27, 

Chapter 7 | Deficits Do Matter
82
The last major historical crisis was during World War II. At that time, the 
government had the flexibility to deficit spend, borrowing roughly $211 
billion to pay for the war effort. The United States has not faced a tragedy of 
that magnitude since then, but at that point in history, government leaders 
were able to make decisions and preparations for the war effort before the 
United States entered the war. With the amount of debt now at a historical 
high, it is difficult to predict whether the United States would be in a position 
to act as quickly if a similar political threat occurred unexpectedly. The high 
debt, coupled with a heavy reliance on foreign investors, further complicates 
the situation for potential wartime or antiterrorist spending. 
This lack of flexibility is not limited to national security issues. Even the 
most recent downturn (December 2007 through June 2009) was bolstered by 
the $787 billion American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, which at 
the time was economically feasible. Its intent was to restore jobs and 
stimulate economic growth. If another recession is on the horizon, with the 
deficit levels way over $1 trillion, it is questionable if policy makers would 
have taxpayer support to proceed with another economic stimulus package of 
mass proportions.
Burden to Future Generations
The burden of such a large national debt will fall to your children and their 
children. This is a long-time concern with the debt situation and has become 
increasingly important as the portion of debt held by foreigners has risen 
over the past few years. Let’s explore the controversy by way of two 
scenarios.
The first scenario is that the government makes the decision to pay off the 
debt all it once. The government could send out a bill of $50,000—today’s 
per capita cost to retire the debt—to each and every person in the United 
States. Obviously, it would be impossible for most people to pay that 
amount, and therefore it is not a practical way to remedy the indebtedness. 
That leaves the second scenario, repayment by future generations. In this 
scenario, future taxpayers will be taxed to pay off a debt that came from the 
deficit spending of their parents’ and grandparents’ generations. Looked at 
another way, today’s taxpayers are enjoying the increased consumption of 
goods and services provided by the government, but their descendants must 
2010. Available at www.cbo.gov/doc.cfm?index=11659 (accessed May 17, 2011).

Deficit
83 
pick up the tab. Many think this is grossly unfair. Of course, there will be 
some potential benefits to future generations. For example, there may be a 
new national park, museum, or road that future generations will enjoy. 
Scenario number two assumes that the debt will never be paid off. Future 
generations will be taxed hundreds of billions of dollars each year just to 
make interest payments on debt incurred by our current society. On the 
portion that is internally held (U.S. bondholders), this situation involves a 
redistribution of income from the taxpayer to the bondholder. Most taxpayers 
will be taxed to pay the interest on debt, while others will be receiving the 
interest payments as bondholders.
The external debt (the portion owed to foreigners) is roughly one-third of the 
total debt burden at this time. The interest payments going to the foreign 
sector represent enormous sums of money flowing out of the United States, 
and are a major concern to many taxpayers. This involves transferring 
roughly 1 percent of the country’s output outside the United States. Each 
dollar paid in interest to foreign governments, corporations, and individuals 
is one dollar less that is available for U.S. outlays, such as education, 
environmental protection, and roads. 
Promoting Fiscal Irresponsibility
As a matter of principle, most parents teach their children to budget their 
money and not to overspend. Managing finances wisely is an important goal, 
but meeting this goal can be a struggle, particularly during an economic 
downturn. Planning for your financial future should be a top priority. Wise 
money management involves setting financial goals for such things as 
educational expenses, retirement savings, and investments. 
The financial management steps are quite simple: don’t overspend and put 
some funds in savings each month so that you can reach your future financial 
goals. And, of course, if you have incurred debt, take action to pay it down. 
Sadly, for many people, excessive spending and personal debt has become a 
way of life. According to the Federal Reserve, the total consumer debt 
(excluding mortgages) as of July 2012 stands at an overwhelming $2.7 
trillion.7 The National Foundation for Credit Counseling recently released the 
7 The Federal Reserve. “Federal Reserve Statistical Release G.19: ‘Consumer Credit,’” 
September 10, 2012. Available at 
www.federalreserve.gov/releases/g19/current/default.htm (accessed September 15, 2012).

Chapter 7 | Deficits Do Matter
84
2012 Consumer Financial Literacy Survey, which shows that over one-half 
of adults do not have a budget, nor do they track their spending. Over one-
third of Americans do not save any fraction of household income for 
retirement. And one-third of adults, or 77 million Americans, do not pay all 
their bills on time.8
Many people think that just as individuals and families must balance their 
budgets, the federal government must do the same or be held accountable for 
how much they are spending. Although families and the federal government 
are certainly not an apples-to-apples comparison, the analogy does illustrate a 
point. Budgetary belt tightening is often beneficial. For the past few years, 
the U.S. government spent over $1 trillion more than it took in. The federal 
government, having accrued massive debt, sets a fiscally irresponsible 
example for others. People, business entities, and now the federal 
government have become far too accustomed to uncontrolled spending. The 
high-level government attitude that it is okay to spend more than one makes 
perhaps has spilled over to the American population.
And here’s an ironic twist—a so-called “pork project” that may actually 
improve the fiscal acumen of some. In 2010, the U.S. government invested 
$4,283,375 for nine financial literacy and education programs. According to 
the Citizens Against Government Waste, this included $3,150,000 for the 
financial education and prehome ownership counseling demonstration 
project, along with $305,875 for a national program promoting financial 
literacy for the Girl Scouts of the USA.9
Summary
For economists, politicians, and citizens who prefer a smaller government, 
rising deficits and exploding debt come with a high cost. Controlling the 
level of the debt, viewed as essential by many, will be discussed in the final 
chapter. It can be done through a plethora of strategies—eliminating pork 
8 The National Foundation for Credit Counseling and the Network Branded Prepaid Card 
Association. The 2012 Consumer Financial Literacy Survey, Final Report, April 2012 
(prepared by Harris Interactive Inc. Public Relations Research). Available at 
www.nfcc.org/NewsRoom/newsreleases/SIGNIFICANT_GAPS.cfm (accessed September 
15, 2012).
9 Citizens Against Government Waste. 2010 Congressional Pig Book Summary. 
Available at www.cagw.org/reports/pig-book/2010/ (accessed May 14, 2011).

Deficit
85 
projects, reforming Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid, increasing 
taxes, reducing government spending, and balancing the budget. Read on to 
truly get a handle on the national debt.

C H A P T E R
8
Get a Handle on 
the National Debt
If you believe that exploding deficits are a problem and the national debt is 
out of control, then the solution is to become informed and take control of the 
problem. How do we, as a society, go about that process? While virtually 
everyone has an opinion on the debt and its level of gravity, most would 
concur that there are some very basic steps the United States can take to 
address the rising deficits and debt. How these strategies are developed and 
employed can be varied, blended, and adjusted, but each will help give the 
United States a more sound financial footing. This chapter addresses the 
following topics: 

The basic formula to curb deficits

Balancing the budget 

Eliminating pork projects 

Empowering states

Using the debt ceiling as a tool

Reforming entitlement programs

Chapter 8 | Get a Handle on the National Debt
86

Long-term planning
The chapter also highlights the example set by The Concord Coalition, an 
organization that has taken up the call to action and is “getting a handle” on 
the debt.
The Basic Formula to Curb Deficits
The formula for curbing deficits is easy to comprehend. It consists of two 
action items. First, the federal government can increase revenues. Its main 
strategy for doing this is to increase taxes. Second, the federal government 
can decrease spending. There is a third policy solution, which is the 
combination of these two—increase taxes and decrease spending.
The formula is easy to comprehend, but not easy to implement. Why? 
Obviously, increasing taxes is a politically unpopular strategy. Reducing 
government spending may not be well received by the public, either. People 
do not like to see programs and services cut, particularly if it will impact 
them directly. Try telling your elderly next-door neighbor that her Social 
Security benefits will be cut significantly. Or break the news to your friend 
who has been out of work for 6 months, and has a family to support, that his 
unemployment benefits will now be terminated. Cutting government 
spending poses a dilemma for politicians: The cuts are necessary, but they 
are not entirely popular. Although an increase in taxes, a reduction in 
government spending, or a combination of the two may be the best strategy 
for the economy, any choice could cost politicians votes.
Consider the impact of a decrease in taxes. The Bush administration tax cuts 
of 2001 (in the middle of a recession) and 2003 caused the economy to shift 
from surpluses to deficits. The tax cuts expired at the end of 2010, only to 
receive a 2-year extension during the presidency of Obama, a move designed 
to assist in the economic recovery. Those supporting the Bush tax cuts say 
the actions have been effective in stimulating the economy. Opponents say it 
was a disappointing stimulus that did not lead to stronger economic growth. 
What is agreed on is that when the Bush administration cut taxes, it had a 
large impact on the deficit. 
Yet, given the fragile economy, raising taxes to reduce the deficit might not 
be a good idea. In a depressed economy, the effect of raising taxes could 
prove counterproductive to a recovery. Although the gap between revenue 
and spending will lessen, the result could be hard on individuals trying to 

Deficit
87 
survive on less disposable income. Higher taxes could therefore cause more 
businesses to close and further thwart an increase in GDP.
Exactly what options are available to policymakers for curbing the deficits? 
Surprisingly, this question has a myriad of answers. Here is just an example 
of budgetary changes that would put the country on sounder footing. The 
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) recently released a 256-page report, 
Reducing the Deficit: Spending and Revenue Options, containing 105 policy 
options to assist federal lawmakers in evaluating the possible implications of 
policy choices. This report is designed to help citizens and lawmakers 
examine some of the options available to reduce the debt. According to the 
CBO, “If current laws remain unchanged, deficits will total $7 trillion over 
the next decade.”1
The options are divided into three sections in the report: reducing mandatory 
spending, reducing discretionary spending, and increasing revenues. 
Although discretionary spending is governed by Congress’s annual 
appropriation acts, mandatory spending, also called entitlements, is funded 
based on certain qualifications or rules set by Congress. According to the 
CBO, the largest programs in this category are Social Security, Medicare, 
and Medicaid, which together accounted for roughly three-fourths of 
mandatory spending in 2010. 
Table 8-1 shows just a sampling of options suggested by the CBO, 
demonstrating that there are many available choices for cutting spending or 
increasing revenues. Perhaps the most telling point from this sampling chart 
is that every dollar of cost savings or increased revenues really adds up. Of 
course, these choices are going to be politically difficult to get enacted. Who, 
after all, really wants to give up their mortgage deduction?
Roughly half of outlays are discretionary, part of the annual appropriations. 
In 2010, for example, over half of the discretionary spending was on defense. 
Defense spending totaled $689 billion, largely from operations and 
maintenance, military personnel, and procurement. Some people feel military 
spending should not be touched due to safety concerns. Another side says 
defense cuts need to be considered while weighing the effects on military 
capabilities and compromise to national security. In the CBO study, 12 out of 
the 38 discretionary spending options focused on defense. 
1 Congressional Budget Office. Reducing the Deficit: Spending and Revenue Options, 
March 2011. Available at www.cbo.gov/doc.cfm?index=12085 (accessed May 27, 2011).

Chapter 8 | Get a Handle on the National Debt
88
The CBO study points to the fact that there are many options available for 
deficit reduction. The choices will come from the spending side or tax policy. 
To secure the best deficit reduction plan, politicians should put all options on 
the table for discussion. 
Table 8-1. Reducing the Deficit: Sample Spending and Revenue Options
Mandatory 
Spending/Savings
(2012–2021)
Discretionary 
Spending/Savings
(2012–2021)
Revenues/Increase 
in Revenues
(2012–2021)
Option 16: Reduce the floor on 
Federal matching rates for 
Medicaid services (lowering the 
floor would require states with 
higher per-capita income to be 
responsible for a larger share of 
the Medicaid program)
Savings: $8.6 billion
Option 2: Cap increases in 
military basic pay
Savings: $17.3 billion
Option 2: Raise tax rates 
on capital gains
New revenues: $48.5 
billion
Option 18: Raise the age of 
eligibility for Medicare to 67
Savings: $125 billion
Option 20: Limit highway 
funding to expected 
highway revenues
Savings: $85.6 billion
Option 4: Gradually 
eliminate the mortgage 
interest deduction
New revenues: $214.6 
billion
Option 30: Raise the full 
retirement age in Social Security
Savings: $119.9 billion
Option 34: Increase 
payment by tenants in 
Federally assisted housing
Savings: $25.4 billion
Option 9: Include 
investment income from 
life insurance and annuities 
in taxable income
New revenues: $259.5 
billion
Source: Congressional Budget Office, Reducing the Deficit: Spending and Revenue Options, 
March 2011.
Balance the Budget
Perhaps the simplest way to get rid of budget deficits, and consequently the 
growth in the national debt, is to require a balanced budget. Over the past 
few years, with the rise of the debt limit, the discussion of having a balanced-
budget amendment to the U.S. Constitution has emerged. In reality, such an 

Deficit
89 
amendment would be difficult to enforce because it requires balancing a 
future estimated budget. This means next year’s estimated revenues must 
equal next year’s estimated spending. The budget is actually balanced at the 
end of the fiscal year. A balanced-budget amendment would require that 
tough choices be made in the political arena on both the revenue and 
spending sides. 
Back in 1997, support for a balanced-budget amendment was strong, failing 
by a single vote in the Senate. Although quite a few lawmakers supported a 
balanced budget, few economists agreed. In January of 1997, a total of 1,060 
prominent economists, including 11 Nobel Prize winning economists, issued 
a warning statement to the president and Congress. The letter, organized by 
the Economic Policy Institute, said, “We condemn the proposed ‘balanced-
budget’ amendment to the federal constitution. It is unsound and 
unnecessary.”2 Economists 
believe that a forced, balanced-budget 
amendment would cause harm to the U.S. economy. The rationale is that it 
would aggravate recessions, causing distress to an already weak economy.
Balancing the budget would require extreme budget cuts, or tax increases, or 
both. Generally, the problems with such a proposal become apparent when 
addressing the question of what to do if there is a depression or economic 
recession. The government would no longer be able to employ fiscal policy 
to stimulate the economy, because the goal and mandate would be to balance 
the budget. For example, if a recession hits, Congress would not be able to 
pass an economic stimulus package to move the economy, eliminating the 
opportunity to heal the recession with government spending. And in a war or 
other financial crisis? Without some exceptions written into the plan, annual 
spending on wartime production or national defense would be insufficient to 
take care of the country’s defense or security needs. In reality, a clause 
allowing national security protection would be common in a balanced-budget 
amendment. And that might allow an escape hatch for more spending, as 
many things can be lumped under the heading of national security.
New discussion centering on a balanced budget emerged very recently. On 
March 31, 2011, a balanced-budget amendment was cosponsored by all 
Senate Republicans. It required the president to submit a balanced budget to 
Congress every year. The proposal capped government spending at 18 
2 Economic Policy Institute. “Over 1000 Economists Oppose Balanced Budget 
Amendment, Warning It Is ‘Unsound and Unnecessary,’” news release. Available at 
www.ombwatch.org/files/bba/econ.html (accessed June 21, 2011).

Chapter 8 | Get a Handle on the National Debt
90
percent of gross domestic product, required a three-fifths vote to raise the 
national debt limit, and required a two-thirds vote to raise taxes. It also 
allowed exceptions for declarations of war and situations involving a military 
threat. 
This amendment contained strong reforms that severely curtailed the ability 
to implement fiscal policy and thwart a recovery. Recall from Chapter 1 that 
automatic stabilizers are designed to offset fluctuations in the economy 
without direct intervention from Congress. When the economy weakens, for 
example, unemployment payments rise as more people lose their jobs. This 
extra money provides a boost to the economy and helps ease the downturn. It 
also causes government spending to rise. With a balanced-budget 
amendment, automatic stabilizers such as unemployment compensation 
would be limited. The amendment proposal was largely seen as a symbolic 
vote to highlight the growing public concern over the deficit, and on 
November 18, 2011, it was defeated in the House.

Deficit
91 
The Concord Coalition
The management of the federal budget and deficits is a challenging and 
complex public policy issue. In an effort to keep the federal debt from 
become unsupportable by our nation, one organization—The Concord 
Coalition—has given the public a voice and taken on the mission of fiscal 
reform. Harry Zeeve, the National Field Director of The Concord Coalition, 
answered some questions regarding the educational role of this nationwide 
organization, the federal debt, its consequences for the future, and the role of 
concerned citizens.
What is the mission of The Concord Coalition?
We are a nonpartisan, grassroots organization founded in 1992, with the 
mission of challenging elected officials to make the tough political choices 
required to balance the budget and keep it balanced over the long term. 
Cochaired by former Senators Warren B. Rudman (R-NH) and Bob Kerrey 
(D-NE), The Concord Coalition is dedicated to changing the political climate 
by standing up for generationally responsible fiscal policy, honestly balanced 
federal budgets, increased national savings, equitable Social Security and 
Medicare reform, and higher standards of living for future generations of 
Americans. Our staff of budget experts in Washington provides data, 
analysis, and a nonpartisan perspective for news media, interested citizens, 
elected officials, and others. At the same time, our field staff members 
stationed around the country speak to many different organizations, work 
with our volunteers, and encourage more people to become engaged in fiscal 
reform.

Deficit
92 
Why do deficits and debt matter, and why should we care?
Large chronic deficits matter because:

Deficits lower future economic growth by reducing 
national savings.

Deficits increase our dependence on foreign lenders who 
may not always have our best interests at heart.

Deficits increase the burdens on future generations 
through rising debt service costs and fewer productivity-
enhancing investments.

Deficits raise uncertainty about future government 
policies.

Deficits reduce the government's flexibility to deal with 
unexpected developments such as war, recession, and 
other emergencies.
Ignoring these consequences will imperil the well-being of future 
generations. Ultimately, our economy is not growing fast enough to keep up 
with the government’s growing debt. Rising health care costs and an aging 
population will create massive shortfalls that could damage the economy and 
lower living standards unless we can put the country on a more responsible 
fiscal path.
What can an individual, who is concerned about rising deficits and debt, 
do?
Public understanding and engagement are vital in finding solutions. The 
Concord Coalition depends on the initiative of concerned citizens to carry 
the message of fiscal responsibility forward. Telling your representative and 
senators that you support fiscal reform and generational responsibility is 
essential. So is letting them know that everything—spending and 
taxes—must be “on the table” to help rein in future deficits. Individuals can 
help bring others into the national discussion by organizing speeches, 
educational exercises, forums, and meetings with members of Congress. 
Learning about the issues and leading the discussion with friends, family, 
and your community and social media networks are at the heart of what 
everyone can do to ensure that future generations of Americans enjoy 

Chapter 8 | Get a Handle on the National Debt
93
economic prosperity.
Eliminate Pork Projects
Most people would agree that our government spends money on many 
beneficial and much-needed goods and services. Occasionally, though, the 
spending gets out of control, which many people would argue has been the 
case over the past few years. While the economy has taken a dip and the 
revenue stream has fallen, government spending has increased, causing a 
widening of the gap. Spending is often buried in unrelated legislation, with 
many politicians in Congress sending chunks of the annual federal budget 
back to their home districts and states to promote local self-interests, and 
therefore improve their re-election status. This type of spending is sometimes 
referred to as “pork-barrel spending”—government money spent in a 
particular locale that brings advantages to its political representative. The 
projects funded by this spending are known as “pork projects.” One way to 
trim the deficit is to cut out the pork!
Citizens Against Government Waste (CAGW) is a private, nonpartisan, 
nonprofit organization with over one million members. As a taxpayer 
watchdog, the group has many publications highlighting wasteful spending, 
including the well-known annual Congressional Pig Book. In the 2010 
edition of the book, a total of 9,129 pork projects were identified, at a cost of 
$16.5 billion, in the 12 Appropriations Acts for fiscal 2010.3 Compared to the 
nearly $16 trillion national debt, $16.5 billion may not seem like much 
money. Certainly, some projects classified as pork, such as the $300,000 
youth-soccer program aimed at gang prevention, may be worthwhile, even 
life-changing, initiatives. But it is pork-barrel spending as a whole that sets a 
poor example of unrestrained spending. The following are some programs 
identified as pork by CAGW:

$26,360,000 for a fitness facility at Mayport Naval 
Station

$4,900,000 to cover seven projects for smart grid 
technology, the purpose of which is to reduce waste
3 Citizens Against Government Waste, 2010 Congressional Pig Book Summary, 
www.cagw.org/reports/pig-book/2010/ (accessed May 28, 2011).
4 Citizens Against Government Waster, 2012 Congressional Pig Book Summary, 
www.cagw.org/reports/pig-book/2012/ (accessed September 15, 2012).

Deficit
94 

$3,150,000 for a financial education and prehome 
ownership counseling demonstration project

$2,573,000 for potato research in four states, requested 
by five senators and four representatives
According to the 2012 Pig Book:
The good news is that the number and cost of earmarks have 
decreased dramatically since fiscal year (FY) 2010, when the last 
Pig Book was published. The number has dropped by 98.3 percent, 
from 9,129 in FY 2010 to 152 in FY 2012. The cost has decreased 
by 80 percent, from $16.5 billion in FY 2010 to $3.3 billion in FY 
2012, which is the lowest amount since 1992.4
This, of course, has more to do with Congressional gridlock leading up 
to the 2012 elections, but many hail it as a step in the right direction.
Even politicians who are well-intentioned and want keep the reins on fiscal 
spending may fall prey to pork. Bill writers often bury pork projects of 
lawmakers in the spending bill. One politician who makes it his mission to 
watch for wasteful spending is Oklahoma Republican Senator Tom Coburn. 
Coburn puts out an annual Wastebook. In 2010, Coburn identified in his 
report $11.5 billion worth of 100 wasteful pork projects, some of which are 
real shockers. Taxpayers got hit with a bill of $615,000 to make the Grateful 
Dead’s archives free and available to the public. Congress spent $28.5 
million to print the rarely used paper versions of the Congressional Record, 
which is also available online. The National Science Foundation directed 
$239,000 to a study on Internet dating.5
Empower States
A philosophical debate emerged in the recent financial crisis on the 
appropriate balance of power between the federal and state governments. 
Maintaining a smaller federal government by shifting additional power to 
states is one option for handling the national debt and deficit situation. The 
5 Tom Coburn. Wastebook 2010: A Guide to Some of the Most Wasteful Government 
Spending of 2010, December 2010. Available at 
www.coburn.senate.gov/public//index.cfm?a=Files.Serve&File_id=4a184ddb-cd85-4052-b38b-
5a1116acca8c (accessed May 27, 2011).

Chapter 8 | Get a Handle on the National Debt
95
federal government taxes businesses and individuals in each state, then 
appropriates and administers the funds back to the state level for specific 
projects. Many of these items are politically motivated pork projects 
benefiting select states, while others come with high regulatory costs. A 
simple mandate of keeping funds closer to home and allowing states to 
handle taxation needs to carry such projects, could have a beneficial impact 
on the country’s bottom line. States may, after all, understand the needs of 
their constituents better and can devise and administer traditional pass-
through allocations such as arts and cultural programs and job creation 
services. The federal government would thus be allowed to focus on projects 
that have the larger national focus, such as defense and agriculture. 
Debt Ceiling a Useful Tool
The statutory limit on the amount of federal debt is often referred to as the 
debt ceiling. It is a figure set by Congress as the maximum amount of 
borrowing allowed by the federal government. The number is an arbitrary 
credit limit set by Congress, causing some to say that the ceiling has no 
credibility. Regardless, the government cannot legally exceed this debt 
ceiling without defaulting on its loans. Congress has prevented this from 
occurring by periodically raising the statutory limit.
Historical Debt Limit
Placing a statutory limit on the amount of national debt began with the 
Second Liberty Bond Act of 1917. Prior to this time, Congress had to 
authorize each sale of government debt. The $11.5 billion limit set in 1917 
allowed the Treasury to issue long-term Liberty Bonds within that range, 
which helped with the financing of World War I. The debt limits over the 
next two decades also set separate caps for various types of debt. The debt 
limit was $45 billion in 1939, when Congress created the first aggregate limit 
that covered nearly all of public debt, according to the Congressional 
Research Service.6
6 D. Andrew Austin and Mindy R. Levit. “The Debt Limit: History and Recent 
Increases,” January 28, 2010 (Congressional Research Service Report for Congress No. 
RL31967). Available at assets.opencrs.com/rpts/RL31967_20100128.pdf (accessed May 28, 
2011).

Deficit
96 
The debt ceiling has been debated and raised nnnumerous times since thhhen, but   
there have been some more memorable mile markers. In 1945, the debt   
ceiling was raised to $300 billion for ease in financing costs for World War   
II. The debt limit was   increased to just under $1 trillion in 1980. Move   
forward to February 12, 2010, when it   was increased to $14.3 trillion. Thattt is   
a fourteeeen-fold increeease in the paaast 30 years.
Debt Ceiling Crisis
TTThhheee   debate over the debt ceiling became widddespread aaand serious in spring of   
the following yeeear. According to Treasury Seeecretary Tim Geeeithner, the U.S.   
goveeernment would be unable to pay its bills beginning on August 2, 2011, if   
the debt   ceiling was not increased. This reeemark brought a   debate in Congress   
over the issue of risiiing and long-term deficits. Republicans pussshed for   
slashes in spending,   in exchaaange for their yes votes, for the debt ceiling hike.   
Eventually, a complicated agreement was reached annnd signed by President   
Obammma on the same day the money was to run out. The debt ceiling was 
raised from $14.3 trillion to $16.4 trillion, in two stages, while reducing 
budget deficits by at least $2.1 trillion over the next 10 years.
It definitely incites fear when the national debt nears the ceiling. The 
discussion and debate in Congress begins anew over whether the debt limit   
should 
be 
raised 
aaand, 
if 
so, 
by 
how 
much. 
Congress 
has   
always—eventually—iiincreased theee   limit when ttthe debt amount approached   
the ceiling. If the government did not   raise the   limiiit, it   would cause huge   
financial turmoil because the United States would then default on maaannnyyy ooof its   
obligations. Implications of a default would be potentially severe with   
possible ramifications including, among others, an interruption of critical 
governmental operations, a loss of political clout among nations, and huge 
sell-off of stocks on Wall Street. The United States would have difficulty 
selling Treasuries and would need to offer a very high interest rate to entice 
investors to hold the risky securities. The extra interest burden would further 
exacerbate the national debt. 
Sometimes a budget impasse does result in a temporary government 
shutdown. A budget impasse between President Bill Clinton and Republican 
leaders led to partial government shutdowns i  1995 and 1996, whic  lasted
28 days in total. Although not related to the debt limit, the event did
foreshadow some of the pain a debt-ceiling fallout would bring. Thousands
of nonessential federal workers were furloughed, and government parks,
museums, and offices were closed. Congress no doubt remembers he
debacl  and will lik ly work to void another shutdown.
Limit Makes Us Mindful of the Deficit
debt ceiling, which has been aroun  for ne rly a century, forces
politicians to b  mindful of government sp nding and rev nue. If nothing
mor , the limit may function as a useful tool—a wise check and balance. The
political discussions and news coverag  reverberate to taxpayers, putting
more pressure on pol ticians to be fiscally responsible. Taxpayer  should
assist lawmakers in taking ccount of the fiscal situation of the country. If
you feel strongly about the debt ceiling, one way or a other, be sure to write
or e- ail your lawmakers. 
Reform Entitlement Programs
Mandatory spending (displayed in Figure 8-1) accounts for over half of
federal outlays. The l rgest programs in this group are Social Security,
Medicare, and Med caid. Thes
three enti lement programs together
accounted for 74 percent of mandatory spending in f scal year 2010. As part
of the budget, these entitlement programs are growing faster than 
 ther
line item, and are projected to account for an incredible 81 percent of
mandatory spending by 2021, based on current law.

Chapter 8 | Get a Handle on the National Debt
97
Figure 8-1. Breakdown of mandatory spending in 2010. Source: Congressional Budget Office, 
“Reducing the Deficit: Spending and Revenue Options,” March 2011.
This problem is only going to get worse in the coming years, with the aging 
of the baby boomer population and the associated growth in health care 
costs as they reach retirement age. Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, 
and other health care programs are expected to increase from 9.9 percent of 
total GDP in 2010, to 12.0 percent by 2021. This increase is heavily 
attributed to rapid growth in health care costs, according to a recent study 
by the CBO.7 
To reduce the budget deficit significantly in the short and long term, the 
growth of federal mandatory spending must be restrained. The CBO suggests 
several possible approaches to reducing such spending. First of all, 
policymakers could modify the automatic indexation of benefits, by using a 
different index or inflation adjustor. An adjustment could potentially result in 
huge cost savings as mandatory programs typically use some type of 
indexing for inflation to set the annual change in benefits. Another option is 
to alter which populations are entitled to certain benefits or increase 
eligibility age requirements. Last, policymakers could reduce the federal 
government’s share of spending for certain programs.8
7 Congressional Budget Office. Reducing the Deficit: Spending and Revenue Options, 
March 2011. Available at www.cbo.gov/doc.cfm?index=12085 (accessed May 27, 2011).
8 Ibid.

Deficit
98 
Retirement, Health Care, and the Deficit
The majority of politicians seem to agree that the United States has a serious 
debt problem. The political debate is centered on finding the best options to 
reverse direction and place the deficit on a downward trend. There are many 
opinions within Congress, but there does seem to be a large consensus that 
we must move forward with proposals to alter entitlement programs. 
Many proposals to reduce the deficit are focused on the largest U.S. 
entitlement program, Social Security, at $701 billion in outlays during 2010. 
They include changing the retirement age for Social Security and increasing 
the Social Security payroll tax base. “Thinking outside the box” may be 
required to sustain entitlement programs, such as the controversial 2012 
budget plan introduced by Representative Paul Ryan (R-WI), which would 
trim the deficit by $4.4 trillion over the next decade. A highly debated and 
ambitious deficit reduction plan, it includes huge government spending cuts, 
totaling $6.2 trillion over the next 10 years. It contains drastic changes to 
Medicaid and Medicare, but it does not overhaul Social Security.9 Yet it does 
require that if Social Security is not sustainable, the president and Congress 
must legislate a plan for solvency. (You can read more about the Ryan plan 
in Appendix C.)
Another huge concern for Americans is the long-term impact that Obamacare 
will have on the deficit. The CBO estimates that the Patient Protection and 
Affordable Care Act of 2010 (PPACA) will, on net, actually shrink the 
deficit over the next 10 years rather than expand it.
Challenges Facing Social Security
As mentioned in Chapter 1, this federally funded retirement program is 
particularly problematic now because the baby boomer generation is starting 
to reach retirement age. Further, people are living longer than ever before. 
According to U.S. Census Bureau projections, the average life expectancy at 
birth was 70.8 years in 1970, but it is projected to be 78.9 years in 2015 and 
79.5 years in 2020.10 The exhaustion of the Social Security Trust Fund is on 
9 Paul Ryan. “The Path to Prosperity: Restoring America’s Promise, Fiscal Year 2012 
Budget Resolution,” Report to House Committee on the Budget. Available at 
budget.house.gov (accessed June 24, 2011).
10 U.S. Census Bureau. Statistical Abstract of the United States: 2011, Table 102, 

Chapter 8 | Get a Handle on the National Debt
99
the horizon. As a larger portion of the U.S. population enters retirement and 
the number of people in the work force is reduced, the trust fund balances 
will gradually be depleted in the late 2030s. At the end of 2010, there were 
54 million people who received social security benefits, while 157 million 
people were paying into the fund. According to one long-range estimate, by 
2035 there will be 91 million people receiving benefits with 187 million 
workers covered by the program.11 
Let’s explore the age extension and payroll tax options from the CBO report 
Reducing the Deficit: Spending and Revenue Options (March 2011), 
introduced earlier in the chapter. Currently, the earliest age to start receiving 
Social Security retirement payments is 62 years old. According to the CBO 
report, about 40 percent of the population chooses this early option, with the 
majority claiming benefits by age 66. People who opt to take benefits before 
the full retirement age (now age 66, and changes to age 67 for people born in 
1960 and later) receive less than full benefits each month, although they do 
get benefits for a longer period. The CBO proposal suggests raising the 
earliest age for retirement to 64 (for those born after 1960). This would save 
$143.9 billion over the next 10 years. Those in favor of this option point out 
that because of longer life expectancy, people should work to a later age.
Another plan, upping the full retirement age (the age at which one receives 
full benefits), is a highly impactful strategy to reduce the deficit. Workers 
born before 1960 can currently receive full Social Security benefits at age 
66. The CBO suggests raising the age at which workers born in 1973 or later 
become eligible for full retirement to 70. This would trim spending by 
$119.9 billion, making the total savings from age adjustments near $264 
billion.
Social Security is financed by payroll taxes on employers, employees, and 
self-employed individuals. Wages earned, up to a maximum level, are subject 
to the payroll tax. In 2011, the maximum earnings subject to Social Security 
payroll tax is $106,800. Each year the maximum cap goes up, based on an 
“Expectation of Life at Birth, 1970 to 2007, and Projections, 2010 to 2020.” Available at 
www.census.gov/compendia/statab/
2011/tables/11s0103.pdf (accessed June 16, 2011).
11 Board of Trustees. The 2011 Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal 
Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Trust Funds, May 
13, 2011, Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. Available at 
www.ssa.gov/oact/TR/2011/ (accessed June 16, 2011).

Deficit
100 
index. A third proposal by the CBO is to raise the taxable maximum for 
Social Security to $170,000 in 2012 and beyond. This would mean more 
money coming into the Social Security system, increasing revenues by 
$467.8 billion over the next 10 years. Based on this option, the Social 
Security Trust Fund would not be depleted until after 2050.
BEWARE THE “FISCAL CLIFF”
As part of the agreement to raise the debt ceiling by $2.1 trillion to $16.4 trillion, $900 
billion in savings over the next ten years comes from discretionary spending caps. 
Additionally, a bipartisan supercommittee was created to reach a deal on cuts totaling 
at least $1.2 trillion over 10 years. If the committee failed to reach a deal, at the 
beginning of 2013, automatic cuts to domestic spending and defense programs would 
be triggered.
Guess what? The country is now teetering on a fiscal cliff, falling into economic 
disaster unless Congress intercedes because the supercommittee did not reach a deal. 
Employers in the defense industry, where half of the cuts will eventually take 
place—$55 billion in 2013 alone—are already preparing for huge layoffs.
With the stipulated spending cuts and Bush-era tax cuts expiring, this means double 
trouble for an already stagnant economy, potentially pushing the United States into a 
double-dip recession. Policy makers must prepare a long-term, credible, deficit 
reduction plan, not a short-term austerity measure. A plan should be devised to reduce 
the deficit gradually, to avoid further damage to the weathered U.S. economy. 
Conclusions
You now should be able to answer the question posed by this book’s title, 
“Why should I care about the deficit?” Fortunately, the topic of the deficit 
and debt has taken center stage lately, causing more people to become 
concerned. As you’ve now seen, deficit spending can be a useful tool. It can 
accommodate great flexibility for our country’s needs—paying for wars, 
supplying additional funds during a fiscal crisis, providing a safety net for 
U.S. citizens, and pulling the economy out of a recession, among other 
benefits. 
But as you’ve also seen, the deficit and resulting total debt also has the 
potential to throw the United States into economic turmoil and fiscal crisis. It 
needs to be controlled and managed carefully. 

Chapter 8 | Get a Handle on the National Debt
101
Although the economic situation may seem dire to many, the United States 
can still get the debt under control to avoid many of the negative 
consequences. As a nation, we have the knowledge and capability to manage 
the debt and come out economically stronger. The key to managing the 
deficit and debt is to take action now to put the nation on a stronger 
economic path for the future.

A P P E N D I X
A
Voice Your 
Opinion on the 
Debt
It’s a typical pattern for the economy to move through cyclical highs and 
lows. This is referred to as a business cycle. The marketplace will not always 
move at a full-throttle pace. At times, the stock market will dip, business 
profits will stagnate, unemployment will rise, and consumer confidence will 
falter. The economy will move through peaks and troughs, or highs and lows. 
You have no doubt heard the adage, “You have to have bad times to 
appreciate the good times.” This saying holds true with the economy. It will 
eventually correct itself. The stock market will improve. Businesses will 
streamline, and profits will rise. A more efficient and stronger job market 
will emerge. Consumers will become bullish on the economy and start to 
spend again. This cycle of repeating highs and lows is a natural fluctuation, 
consisting of slowdowns followed by pickups in the economy. Government 

Appendix | Voice Your Opinion on the Debt
100
fiscal actions and central bank monetary policy may be used to even out, 
speed up, or slow down the fluctuations.
During a recession, the national debt tends to rise sharply. Lower tax receipts 
from a depressed economy and higher spending via automatic 
stabilizers—such as unemployment insurance—push deficits higher. Actions 
to reduce a downturn in the business cycle, such as government spending, 
stimulus packages, or tax cuts to stimulate business, further exacerbate the 
deficit situation.
The following business cycle chart (Table A-1) shows the duration of peaks 
(the highs of the economy) and troughs (the lows of the economy), and the 
length of business cycles dating back to 1854. 
Table A-1. Business Cycle Expansions and Contractions (duration in months)
Contracti
on
Expansion
Cycle
Peak to 
trough
Previous 
trough to this 
peak
Trough from 
previous 
trough
Peak from 
previous 
peak
Average, all cycles
1854–2009 (33 cycles)
16
42
56
55*
1854–1919 (16 cycles)
22
27
48
49**
1919–1945 (6 cycles)
18
35
53
53
1945–2009 (11 cycles)
11
59
73
66
*32 cycles. **15 cycles.
Source: National Bureau of Economic Research, Business Cycle Expansions and 
Contractions.
Some cycles have been strong and long, such as the Great Depression, which 
ran for 43 months and resulted in a global economic collapse. Other 
downturn cycles have been relatively modest and quick, such as the shortest 
contraction in history which lasted just 6 months, from January 1980 to July 
1980. 
The chart shows the average recession (contraction) has shortened over time, 
and the average expansion has lengthened over time. The most recent 

Deficit
101 
grouping shows there have been 11 business cycles post-World War II 
(1945–2009). The average recession lasts just 11 months, and the typical 
expansion is 59 months. Another way to think about this is that the tough 
times last for close to a year, but the good times roll for almost 5 years.
The most recent recession was called in December 2007. Many economists 
and business people say this has been the toughest recession since the Great 
Depression. This contraction was officially called to an end in June 2009, by 
the Business Cycle Dating Committee of the National Bureau of Economic 
Research, for an 18-month-long recession. Still, the economic recovery since 
then has been weak at best. During the past few years, the government has 
taken in lower tax revenues as business income has faltered and as a result of 
the political decisions to cut taxes. The government has also initiated 
additional government spending policies in an attempt to stimulate demand. 
As discussed in the book, this has caused a widening gap—decreased 
revenues on one hand and increased spending on the other—causing the 
deficit to spiral. 
Has there been too much effort put toward spending policies in an effort to 
stimulate the economy? Some, like economist Paul Krugman, would like to 
have seen even more spending as a means to create more jobs. Others say 
yes, given its negative impact on the deficit and the modest multiplier effects 
produced. As the economy matures, policymakers, along with the public, 
must be educated on the most effective use of fiscal (and monetary) tools to 
smooth out highs and lows in the economy.
The downturn has highlighted some flaws in the economy. In turn, they are 
teaching us valuable lessons related to the federal government:

It is important for the government not to overextend. It 
must practice some level of fiscal austerity, or the debt 
can spiral out of control in a short time period, as we 
have witnessed. 

A political commitment from both parties will be 
necessary to put the debt under control. Many options 
are available—cutting spending, adjusting entitlement 
programs, or raising taxes—and political infighting must 
be put aside to place the economy on a strong path. 

Appendix | Voice Your Opinion on the Debt
102

Although fiscal and monetary policies are available to 
help dampen the economic cycles, it is not an exact 
science. During this recession, a host of monetary and 
fiscal programs were utilized. Policy makers are 
constantly learning from past mistakes and have a goal 
of reaching the optimal and most effective fiscal and 
monetary policies.
Missing from other books on the debt issue is what you can do if you feel it 
is important to reduce the deficit. Or perhaps you are merely interested in 
monitoring the level of the deficit and rising debt level.
Options are available to those who are interested in having a role in the fiscal 
environment. You do not need to be a policy maker to have an impact. The 
public can actually make contributions to the U.S. debt. More practically, we 
also can become educated taxpayers, exercise our right to vote, and submit 
ideas to our congressmen. Interested? Read on.
Make a Monetary Contribution 
If you feel so inclined and are really concerned about the debt, you can “put 
your money where your mouth is.” The Bureau of the Public Debt will 
accept gifts made on the premise that these funds are utilized to apply to the 
debt. 
Gifts to reduce debt held by the public are usually made by concerned 
citizens. As you can see in the following chart, the total of these gifts 
typically run from $1 to $3 million a year. At this point, it’s not enough to 
have a huge impact in the reduction of debt, but it does make a statement that 
citizens are concerned and fearful of the burgeoning debt. After all, the 
contributions are totally voluntary.
Table A-2. Contributions to Reduce the Federal Debt
Fiscal Year to Date
Total
2011
$3,277,369.23
2010
2,840,466.75
2009
3,063,057.05
2008
2,189,358.89

Deficit
103 
2007
2,624,862.42
2006
1,646,209.41
2005
1,455,541.65
2004
664,911.25
2003
1,277,423.40
2002
744,675.06
2001
1,645,082.28
2000
1,868,891.93
Source: Bureau of the Public Debt.
The chart shows that over the past 10 years, the Bureau of the Public Debt 
has seen a substantial increase in payments. There was a low point in 2004, 
with about $665 thousand, but the dollar amount hit over $3 million in 2011. 
These figures include, along with citizen contributions, monies that have 
been left by individuals to the Bureau of the Public Debt from their estates 
after they died.
You can make a contribution online using a credit card, checking, or savings 
account, and it is very easy. The government has instructions at http://pay.gov.
Do you prefer snail mail? Simply write a check payable to the Bureau of the 
Public Debt, and note that it’s a “gift to reduce the debt held by the public.” 
Mail your check to this address:
Attn. Dept G
Bureau of the Public Debt
P.O. Box 2188
Parkersburg, WV 26106–2188.
Become an Educated Taxpayer 
It is important to remember that you are a U.S. taxpayer and this is your 
government. You need to take action and responsibility to ensure that your 
government fulfills its roles and responsibilities in a manner that reflects your 
beliefs. The future of the United States, the world’s economic power-house, 

Appendix | Voice Your Opinion on the Debt
104
is important to each and every one of us. If you are interested in helping 
build and sustain a stronger fiscal environment, there are options available to 
make an impact. 
Although one individual citizen may have only a small influence, the 
combined efforts of all 314,316,802 U.S. residents can be forceful. Just 
imagine if every person in the United States took one action step. Simple 
steps will make a difference. You have the power to potentially alter the 
course of the economy and the nation’s future for your children and your 
children’s children.
Take time to research and learn about the current debt and deficit issues. 
Reading this book has been a good start. The Internet (resources are listed in 
Appendix B), television, newspapers, and social media are packed full of 
government budget, deficit, and debt information. 
Attend a political party event, a government spending forum, or any 
educational seminars. Exchange ideas with friends and family on the 
proper fiscal role for the federal government. Be a spokesperson and share 
your knowledge of the deficit/debt situation with others. Let others learn 
from you. 
Don’t forget the social media. It is a powerful tool for instantaneously 
exchanging information and reaching the masses in a matter of minutes. 
Be sure to monitor the debt situation on a regular basis. Government 
spending, taxation, and the budget are issues that can change quickly. Don’t 
let the material become stagnate. Stay on top of one of the most pertinent 
issues of our times.
Tip: Here’s a way for you to get an idea of the trade-offs necessary if we are ever to 
eliminate the deficit. Visit this web site and fix the budget deficit as you see fit: 
www.nytimes.com/interactive/2010/11/13/weekinreview/deficits-graphic.html.
Vote
The best way to let your voice be heard on matters of the national debt is by 
using your vote wisely. Pay attention to candidates and their views on 

Deficit
105 
taxation, government spending, the deficit, and the national debt. Does the 
candidate have the same fiscal stance as you do? Look at the candidate’s 
platform and past record on budgetary issues. 
Attend political forums and debates. Ask the tough questions: How might 
you reduce the debt? Do you think taxes should be raised or lowered? If you 
are elected, how might you adjust the new budgetary proposal? Do you 
believe the debt has been brought under control?
Contact Your Senator or Congressman
If you have a specific idea or concern about the deficit issue, be sure to 
contact your U.S. senator or state representative. You can also comment on 
current or pending legislation and public policy issues. 
Your letter should be written to deliver clear, well-researched points. A 
bullet-point format is visually appealing, easy to read, and useful for 
emphasizing concerns. Keeping the letter brief and professional will be an 
attention-grabber. 
Following is the address for sending snail mail to your senator:
The Honorable (Name)
United States Senate
Washington, DC 20510
You may also e-mail a U.S. senator by logging on to the U.S. Senate website 
at www.senate.gov and clicking Senators to find the ones from your state. 
When e-mailing your senator, you’ll need to include your return mail address 
and e-mail address.
To contact your state representatives, go to www.congress.org or 
http://writerep.house.gov. By merely plugging in your ZIP code, you will 
find a listing of your representatives. If you prefer snail mail, write to this 
address:
U.S. Representative
The Honorable (Name)
U.S. House of Representatives
Washington, DC 20515

Appendix | Voice Your Opinion on the Debt
106
Remember that simple steps taken by many will help build a fiscally strong 
foundation for the U.S. economy. Appendix B follows with more Internet 
resources to assist in your educational journey.

A P P E N D I X
B
Websites for 
Debt and Deficit 
Information
This appendix lists Internet resources for more information about the U.S. 
debt and deficit. The resources are divided into two categories: government 
agencies and private organizations.
Government Agencies 
www.publicdebt.treas.gov
The Bureau of the Public Debt is a small agency within the Treasury 
Department. The role of the Bureau is to borrow funds for the operation of 
the federal government and to account for the resulting debt.
In 1776, a committee of ten founders took the helm of what would later 
become the Treasury. The group obtained money for the United States from 

Appendix B | Websites for Debt and Deficit Information
108
the governments of France and The Netherlands, via a form of bonds called 
loan certificates. The details found on this website provide a fascinating look 
at the early financial history of our republic.
www.treasurydirect.gov
The U.S. Department of the Treasury Bureau of the Public Debt brings the 
public the TreasuryDirect website. TreasuryDirect is the first and only 
financial services website that lets you buy and redeem securities directly 
from the U.S. Department of the Treasury in paperless electronic form.
You can spend hours perusing this jam-packed website. Take a look at the 
details on T-bills, notes and bonds, and savings bonds. Get an update by 
taking a look at the monthly statement of the public debt. For the super 
inquisitive, learn how Treasury auctions work. The well-known “debt to the 
penny” is updated daily so you can keep a pulse on the current debt situation.
www.whitehouse.gov/omb 
The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) is part of the Executive 
Office of the President of the United States. The OMB’s main role is to assist 
the president in overseeing the preparation of the federal budget and 
supervising the administration of executive branch agencies.
The historical information is top-notch. The site provides data on budget 
receipts, 
outlays, 
surpluses 
or 
deficits, 
debt, 
and 
federal 
employment—largely from 1940 or earlier, up to 2017. Explore some of the 
specific pages on this site, such as the President’s budget, fact sheets on key 
issues, and past budgets.
www.cbo.gov
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) is an agency of Congress. It is the 
role of the CBO to provide Congress with impartial, objective analyses for 
economic and budget decisions, along with estimates to assist in the 
Congressional budget process. 
Be sure to read the reports required for the budget process, “The Budget and 
Economic Outlook,” and “An Analysis of the President’s Budget.” For a 
short, quick summary of the topics related to budgetary analysis, check out 
the always insightful Director’s Blog by Douglas W. Elmendorf, the eighth 

Deficit: Why Should I Care?
109 
director of CBO. A must read is the “Monthly Budget Review,” which 
details government fiscal activity for the month. On the main page, you can 
sign up for e-mail from the CBO, which will always keep you up-to-date on 
releases of new documents, new advisories, and job announcements.
www.fiscalcommission.gov
President Obama set up a bipartisan group called the National Commission 
on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform to find ways to address the country’s 
fiscal challenges, specifically to deal with the rising debt. Cochaired by 
former Republican Senator Alan Simpson and former Clinton White House 
Chief of Staff Erskine Bowles, the meetings of the commission can be 
viewed by clicking “Meetings.” 
In December 2010, the group published a 59-page report titled “Moment of 
Truth: Report on the National Commission of Fiscal Responsbility and 
Reform.” It is a fascinating, detailed plan to reduce the deficit to the tune of 
almost $4 trillion through 2020. Be sure to check out the tough discretionary 
spending cuts, the tax-reform plan, and cuts to Social Security. 
Private Organizations
www.cagw.org 
Citizens Against Government Waste (CAGW) refers to itself as “America’s 
Number #1 Taxpayer Watchdog.” Located in Washington, DC, CAGW is a 
private, nonpartisan, nonprofit entity that touts over one million members. 
The mission of the organization is to “eliminate waste, mismanagement, and 
inefficiency in the federal government.” 
On the home page, you can sign up to be an online member of the 
organization, and receive the monthly newsletter and action alerts. The 
organization is well-known for The Congressional Pig Book, available 
online. It is an annual listing of the pork-barrel projects in the federal budget.
You will find many crazy pork spending “awards” listed by specific year, 
from 1991 through 2012. For example, the 2010 Do You Want Fries with 
That Award: $2,573,000 for potato research in four states, requested by five 
senators and five representatives. Or check out the Sapping the Taxpayers 
Award: $4.8 million for wood utilization research in 11 states, requested by 
13 senators and 10 representatives. In 2012, $5,000,000 went to an 

Appendix B | Websites for Debt and Deficit Information
110
abstinence education program that was not even requested by the Department 
of Education.
www.concordcoalition.org
Founded in 1992, The Concord Coalition is a nonpartisan, nonprofit, 
grassroots organization based in Arlington, Virginia. The mission of the 
organization is stated as “dedicated to educating the public about the causes 
and consequences of federal budget deficits, the long-term challenges facing 
America’s unsustainable entitlement programs, and how to build a sound 
foundation for economic growth.” The Concord Coalition believes informed 
voters will require fiscal responsibility of their elected leaders.
Featured on the website are several must-see areas: Key Questions Voters 
Should Ask Candidates, Fiscal Wakeup Tours, Fiscal Solutions Tour, a 
detailed Issues section, and search capability for an extensive array of 
publications. Be sure to click the “Act” section for a wide variety of 
opportunities for those interested in fiscal control. It has an extensive breadth 
of information for fiscally inquisitive citizens. Scroll through the main tabs: 
Washington Budget Report, Publications, Principles and Priorities Online, 
The Tabulation Blog, and Highlights and Favorites.
www.heritage.org
The Heritage Foundation, founded in 1973, is located in Washington, DC, 
and it has been very influential in public policy. This conservative think tank 
has a mission to “formulate and promote conservative public policies based 
on the principles of free enterprise, limited government, individual freedom, 
traditional American values, and a strong national defense.” The organization 
is nonprofit, supported by more than 710,000 individual, foundation, and 
corporate donors.
The wide variety of research, budget, and spending information is top-notch. 
Check out “ U.S. Debt Hits $16 Trillion,” the blogpost published on 
September 4, 2012, by Romina Boccia, Research Coordinator for Domestic 
and Economic Policy. Or read an Issue Briefing from David Addington, 
Heritage’s vice president for Domestic and Economic Policy, published 
March 14, 2012, entitled “Federal Budget: What Congress Must Do to 
Control Spending and Create Jobs.” 

Deficit: Why Should I Care?
111 
This website/think tank offers insightful reading and will help you get a 
handle on a wide variety of debt, deficit, and budgetary issues. On the main 
web page, you can sign up via e-mail for Heritage’s updates on current 
events and initiatives.
www.urban.org
The Washington, DC-based Urban Institute is a nonpartisan economic and 
social research center. This organization, founded in 1968, “gathers data, 
conducts research, evaluates programs, offers technical assistance overseas, 
and educates Americans on social and economic issues—to foster sound 
public policy and effective government.”
View the Economy and Taxes section, and you will find a multitude of 
publications dealing with proposals to control deficits and reform the 
entitlement programs. For a quick overview of the deficit issue, be sure to 
read “Five Questions: Robert Reischauer, on Reining in Massive Federal 
Deficits.” Reischauer, president of Urban Institute, advocates enacting 
legislation soon to slow the growth of spending and increase taxes. Want 
more? Read on to “Five Questions: Donald Marron on Cutting Tax 
Preferences As the Key to Tax Reform.” Marron, director of the Tax Policy 
Center, educates the reader on redesigning tax preferences, noting “many of 
which are spending programs in disguise.”
www.nber.org
The National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) is a private, 
nonpartisan, 
not-for-profit 
economic 
research 
organization. 
This 
organization, based in Cambridge, Massachusetts, is “dedicated to promoting 
a greater understanding of how the economy works.” NBER has more than 
1,000 professors of economics and business who teach and conduct research 
as NBER researchers. They work on a wide variety of issues that confront 
our society. High-quality research and working papers are produced by this 
select group.
As a plus, the NBER’s Business Cycle Dating Committee maintains a 
chronology of the U.S. business cycle back to 1854. This is the place to 
research the historical data on business cycle recessions and expansions. 
NBER’s Business Cycle Dating Committee also provides information about 
how it chooses the turning points in the economy. Under Data, click 
d

Appendix B | Websites for Debt and Deficit Information
112
“Business Cycle Memos,” and you will find a plethora of information about 
recessions and recoveries. For those who want to be educated in historical 
trends as well as the current cycle, this is the place to be. If you would like to 
receive immediate notice of the announcements of the NBER Business Cycle 
Dating Committee by e-mail, you may register your e-mail address.
Read on to Appendix C to get a glimpse into the blueprint plans of both 
major parties, Republican and Democratic, to tame the debt. Fiscal policies 
have been around for years and this appendix provides and overview of 
deficit plans by presidential administrations. As you can see, sometimes 
fiscal policies work and sometimes they fail miserably.

A P P E N D I X
C
Political
Party Views
of the Debt
The political issue of the day, for both parties, is the faltering economy; and 
at the top of the list of economic issues—the runaway debt. Who is to blame 
for the massive $16 trillion debt and the foreboding $1 trillion plus deficits? 
Both political parties share some culpability. 
Political Parties’ Plans to Reduce the Debt 
and Deficit
While Republicans and Democrats both express grave concern over the debt, 
attempts at compromise have largely failed. If an agreeable plan cannot be 
implemented to tame the debt, then beginning in 2013, automatic spending 
cuts take effect. The spending cuts are expected to achieve about $1.2 trillion 
in savings over 10 years, divided equally between defense and many 

Appendix C | Political Party Views of the Debt
66
domestic programs. We no longer have the luxury of playing the blame 
game. We must work together on some type of compromise, likely involving 
a mix of decreased spending, increased taxes, and entitlement reforms.
As a step toward this goal, in February 2010, President Obama created an 18-
member bipartisan commission to work on a solution. It is called the 
National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, and is often 
referred to as Simpson-Bowles, named after cochairs former Republican 
Senator Alan Simpson and former Democratic White House Chief of Staff 
Erskine Bowles. The President created the bipartisan commission to improve 
the fiscal situation in the medium term and to achieve fiscal sustainability 
over the long run, or to find ways to reduce the mounting debt. Later that 
year the commission’s report was released as a plan to combine spending 
cuts and tax increases. While overwhelming support existed, it did not 
receive the supermajority 14 votes needed to send it to Congress for a vote. 
Still Simpson-Bowles may be used as a model for a potential deal in the 
future. 
A major missed opportunity came in July 2011, when negotiations between 
President Obama and Republican Speaker of the House John Boehner 
ceased. Reportedly, the negotiations—commonly referred to as the “grand 
bargain”—to raise the debt limit included a major package that would have 
cut spending by $3.5 trillion over the next 10 years. It included a major 
overhaul of the budget process, increased tax revenues, and entitlement 
reforms. The two were close to making a deal, and although reports vary on 
the reason, Boehner made a decision to leave the negotiations. Whisperings 
have the President trying to change the deal at the last minute to demand 
additional revenue through tax increases. 
Philosophical Underpinnings
A political novice might wonder what the difficulty is in coming to a 
compromise. We all make concessions on a daily basis—with people at 
work, school, church, and at home. The challenge for politicians is that each 
of the major parties, Republicans and Democrats, comes from different 
stances or philosophies, which makes it a challenge.
Republicans are viewed as the conservative party. They tend to support a 
limited government and are probusiness. Republicans generally believe that 

Deficit
67
supporting private individuals and businesses can be more productive for 
society and can improve the country’s economic growth. And as such, they 
are against an excessive level of government bureaucracy and red tape. 
Competition and self-reliance can improve our economy and society. As a 
rule, Republicans are in favor of cutting government spending, and this 
includes spending on entitlement programs and not increasing taxes. The 
party tends to support tax cuts across the board, at all economic levels. They 
are particularly adamant against tax increases for the wealthy. 
The Democratic Party is seen as more liberal. Democrats tend to support big 
government and are strong supporters of protecting the entitlement programs. 
The party maintains that society and individuals can be bettered and life 
enriched with governmental involvement. Everyone should get a fair chance, 
and government should work for the common good of all. Democrats tend to 
support higher taxation of the wealthy to generate revenue. The party tends to 
support government spending, particularly in the entitlement area, and is 
greatly interested in protecting Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, and 
other social programs.
It is a fact that each party will need to give on some of its long-held beliefs to 
reach an agreement to reduce the deficit. The Republican side must give on 
tax issues, and the Democratic side will need to retreat on entitlement 
program spending. Hence, we have the basic formula that will reduce the 
deficit—an increase in taxes and a reduction in spending. The next 
president—Republican or Democrat—will need to take charge of the 
bipartisan negotiations and reduce the deficit, for the good of our country. 
Incumbent Democratic President Barack Obama favors allowing the Bush-
era tax cuts to expire as well as limiting deductions for high earners. His 
recent budget did contain over $5 trillion in deficit reduction measures over 5 
years, but there was not much give on the entitlement side. Republican 
presidential candidate Mitt Romney believes in capping federal spending at 
20 percent of GDP by 2016, overhauling the tax code, repealing the Patient 
Protection and Affordable Care Act—ObamaCare—and reducing individual 
and corporate tax rates to stimulate our economy. Romney wants to develop 
cost savings by giving more control to the states via a block-grant program, 
and allowing states to innovate in such areas as Medicaid and worker 
retraining. 
PAUL RYAN

Appendix C | Political Party Views of the Debt
68
On August 11, 2012, Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney announced Paul 
Ryan as his vice presidential running mate. Ryan, age 42 years, is a U.S. 
Representative from Wisconsin and the Party’s leader on fiscal reforms. As the 
chairman of the House Budget Committee, Ryan has proposed cost-cutting entitlement 
program reforms in an effort to reduce the U.S. debt.
Ryan’s proposals have come under severe scrutiny from Democrats, who generally 
favor tax hikes for the wealthy, tax cuts on the middle class, and protecting entitlement 
programs. The Democratic Party maintains that Ryan’s plan will harm the poor and 
destroy Medicare. The Republicans contend that the plan will curtail out-of-control 
spending. This plan would cut spending by $6 trillion over 10 years, while President 
Obama’s plan proposes to cut $4 trillion in spending over 12 years.
The most controversial part of Ryan’s plan relates to the restructuring of Medicare, the 
health insurance program for seniors. Ryan proposes leaving traditional Medicare for 
those currently 55 and over, but privatizing Medicare for younger people. Sometimes 
referred to as a voucher program, Ryan proposes giving people a subsidy to buy their 
own health insurance. This would shift additional cost to beneficiaries. 
Medicaid and food stamps would be turned into block grant programs under this 
proposal, giving states a lump sum. Individual states would have large discretion on 
how to spend the funds. 
The plan also calls for a tax code overhaul to the complicated system, eliminating 
many tax breaks, and having only two individual tax rates—10 percent and 25 percent. 
Ryan projects his budget to balance by the year 2040, followed by surpluses. 
Track Record
Generally, you will find that presidents tend to toe the party line, but some do 
diverge. Independent thinking, for the good of our country, is needed. The 
following is a quick look over the past 50 years to see what our presidential 
administrations have done regarding taxes, spending, and the deficit 
situation. You will find some determined, analytical thinkers. 
President
Party
Term of Office 

Deficit
69
John F. Kennedy
Democrat
1961–1963
Debt Action: JFK went against traditional Democratic lines and cut taxes to 
stimulate the economy. It was a successful action. The top marginal tax rates 
were dropped along with capital gains, and as a result, federal tax revenues 
actually rose.
Lyndon Johnson
Democrat
1963–1969 
Debt Action: Taking a traditional Democratic stance, Johnson’s Great 
Society entitlement programs were largely acclaimed and successful, but the 
deficit spiked. Spending on the Vietnam War also intensified the deficit.
 
Richard Nixon
Republican
1969–1974
Debt Action: Nixon accepted deficit spending to stimulate the sluggish 
economy. He stepped away from the traditional Republican Party stance of 
balanced budgets to deal with the turbulent and sagging economy of the early 
1970s. 
Gerald Ford
Republican
1974–1977 
Debt Action: Ford represented the Republican Party by reducing spending on 
many social programs. He was well-known for battling Congress, using his 
veto power to tame spending, and keeping the economy on track. He was 
wary of budget deficits and even opposed a permanent tax cut because he 
was concerned about its long-term impact on deficits. 
Jimmy Carter
Democrat
1977–1981 
Debt Action: Carter attempted to control spending and early on he pledged to 
eliminate deficits. Even though deficits rose during his term in office, he did 
make some tough decisions and cut spending in some major Democratic 
programs.
Ronald Reagan 
Republican
1981–1989 

Appendix C | Political Party Views of the Debt
70
Debt Action: While Republican Ronald Reagan was in office the national 
debt hit $1 trillion. The Reagan era is well-known for supply side 
economics—cutting tax rates to stimulate the economy and generate revenue. 
It was held that the budget could be balanced using this tactic. The economy 
thrived, but so did the debt. When Reagan left office the debt was near $3 
trillion. 
George H. W. Bush 
Republican
1989–1993
Debt Action: George H. W. Bush compromised, accepting a tax increase 
along with spending cuts to reduce the deficit. He went against his platform 
promise of “no new taxes” for the good of the country.
William J. Clinton
Democrat
1993–2001 
Debt Action: The last 3 years of the Clinton administration saw surpluses, the 
last we have seen to the time of this writing. Some suggest that Clinton was 
the recipient of a burgeoning economy and peaking stock market. But early 
on in 1993, Clinton did toe party line with an increase in taxes on high wage 
earners.
George W. Bush
Republican 
2001–2009 
Debt Action: Republican George W. Bush is well-known for the Bush tax 
cuts, a very Republican line. Bush-era tax cuts, also known as the Economic 
Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2001, lowered the marginal tax 
rates for virtually all individuals and families. In addition, the Jobs and 
Growth Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003 accelerated the cuts and added 
reductions in capital gains and dividends. These were designed as temporary 
measures to promote long-term growth because incentives were realigned 
and people would be encouraged to work more. But debate exists over the 
effectiveness of the tax cuts. Ultimately, the economy sagged, recessions hit 
in 2001 and 2007, and deficits rose.
Barack Obama
Democrat
2009–present
 

Deficit
71
Debt Action: Obama passed the $787 billion economic stimulus bill in 2009, 
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, to recharge the economy. 
Stimulating the economy was justified, but most of the stimulus spending 
ended after 2010. Most say the effect of the bill was modest at best—modest 
effects on employment and output. The CBO maintains the results of the 
stimulus spending were gone after 2011. The deficit, due to the impact of 
stimulus spending and the depressed revenues thanks to the “Great 
Recession,” has increased substantially. 

 
Bibliography
Austin, D. Andrew, and Levit, Mindy R. “The Debt Limit: History and 
Recent Increases,” January 28, 2010 (Congressional Research Service Report 
No. RL31967). Available at http://opencrs.com/document/RL31967/2010-
01-28/ (accessed May 28, 2011). Bank of America. “Form 10-K for fiscal 
year ended December 31, 2011”). Available at www.sec.gov (accessed July 
30, 2012).
Bernanke, Ben S. The Crisis and the Policy Response, speech delivered at the 
Stamp Lecture, London School of Economics, London, England, January 13, 
2009. 
Available 
at 
www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech
/bernanke20090113a.htm (accessed February 16, 2011).
Bernanke, Ben S. Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress, 
speech delivered before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban 
Affairs, 
U.S. 
Senate, 
Washington, 
DC, 
July 
17, 
2012, 
www.federalreserve.gov
/newsevents/testimony/bernanke20120717a.htm (Accessed July 23, 2012).
Blackwell, Ken, and Klukowski, Ken. The Huffington Post. “Hatch and Lee’s 
Balanced Budget Amendment: A Win for America,” April 1, 2011. Available 
at www.huffingtonpost.com (accessed May 23, 2011).
The Board of Trustees, Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and 
Federal Disability Insurance Trust Funds. The 2011 Annual Report of the 
Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and 

Bibliography
114
Federal Disability Insurance Trust Funds, May 13, 2011. Washington, D.C.: 
U.S. Government Printing Office. Available at www.ssa.gov/oact/TR/2011/ 
(accessed June 16, 2011).
Board of Trustees. The 2012 Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the 
Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance 
Trust Funds, April 25, 2012. Washington, DC: Government Printing Office. 
Available at www.ssa.gov (accessed September 10, 2012).
Bureau of the Public Debt. “Commissioner’s Welcome.” Available at 
www.publicdebt.treas.gov/whoweare/welcome.htm (accessed February 8, 
2011).
Bureau 
of 
the 
Public 
Debt. 
“Our 
History.” 
Available 
at 
www.publicdebt.treas.gov/history/history.htm (accessed February 6, 2011).
Bussing-Burks, Marie. Money for Minors: A Student’s Guide to Economics. 
Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group. 2008.
Clement, Scott. “Tea Party Support Stable, but Interest Is Waning,” April 15, 
2012. 
Available 
at 
http://www.washingtonpost.com/blogs/behind-the-
numbers/post/tea-party-support-stable-but-interest-is-
waning/2012/04/14/gIQAPXyKHT_blog.html.
Citizens Against Government Waste. 2010 Congressional Pig Book 
Summary. Washington, DC. Available at www.cagw.org/reports/pig-
book/2010/ (accessed May 14, 2011 and May 28, 2011).
Citizens Against Government Waste, 2012 Congressional Pig Book 
Summary, Washington, D.C. Available at www.cagw.org/reports/pig-
book/2012/ (accessed September 15, 2012). 
Coburn, Tom. Wastebook 2010: A Guide to Some of the Most Wasteful 
Government 
Spending 
of 
2010, 
December 
2010. 
Available 
at 
http://www.coburn.senate.gov/public//index.cfm?a=Files.Serve&File_id=4a1
84ddb-cd85-4052-b38b-5a1116acca8c (accessed May 27, 2011).
The Concord Coalition. “About the Concord Coalition.” Available at 
www.concordcoalition.org/about-concord-coalition (accessed March 27, 
2011).
Congressional Budget Office. The Budget and Economic Outlook: Fiscal 
Years 
2012 
to 
2022, 
January 
2012. 
Available 
at 
www.cbo.gov/publication/43539.

Deficit
115 
Congressional Budget Office. Estimated Impact of the American Recovery 
and Reinvestment Act on Employment and Economic Output from October 
2010 Through December 2010, February 2011. Available at www.cbo.gov 
(accessed February 27, 2011).
Congressional Budget Office. Estimated Impact of the American Recovery 
and Reinvestment Act on Employment and Economic Output from April 2012 
Through June 2012, August 2012. Available at www.cbo.gov (accessed 
September 12, 2012).
Congressional Budget Office. Federal Debt and the Risk of a Fiscal Crisis, 
July 27, 2010. Available at www.cbo.gov/doc.cfm?index=11659 (accessed 
May 17, 2011).
Congressional Budget Office. Reducing the Deficit: Spending and Revenue 
Options, March 2011. Available at www.cbo.gov/doc.cfm?index=12085 
(accessed May 27, 2011).
Economic Policy Institute. “Over 1,000 Economists Oppose Balanced 
Budget Amendment, Warning It Is ’Unsound and Unnecessary,’” news 
release. Available at www.ombwatch.org/files/bba/econ.html (accessed June 
21, 2011).
The Eleanor Roosevelt Papers. “The Great Depression,” Teaching Eleanor 
Roosevelt, edited by Allida Black, June Hopkins, et al. (Hyde Park, NY: 
Eleanor 
Roosevelt 
National 
Historic 
Site, 
2003). 
Available 
at 
www.gwu.edu/~erpapers/teachinger/glossary/great-depression.cfm (accessed 
September 15, 2012).
The Federal Reserve. “Federal Reserve Statistical Release G.19: ‘Consumer 
Credit,’” September 10, 2012. Available at www.federalreserve.gov
/releases/g19/current/default.htm (accessed September 15, 2012).
Federal Reserve Board of Governors. “G19, Consumer Credit,” Federal 
Reserve 
Statistical 
Release, 
March 
2011. 
Available 
at 
www.federalreserve.gov (accessed May 14, 2011).
Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978, 15 USC § 3101 (1978).
Gorman, Tom. The Complete Idiot’s Guide to Economics. New York, NY: 
Penguin Group, 2003.
Hoag, Arleen J., and Hoag, John H. Introductory Economics, 2nd edition. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, Inc., 1991.

Bibliography
116
Hubbard, R. Glenn, and O’Brien, Anthony Patrick. Macroeconomics, 3rd 
edition. Boston, MA: Pearson Education, Inc., 2010.
International Labour Organization. 2012 World of Work Report: Summary. 
Available at www.ilo.org (accessed July 27, 2012).
International Monetary Fund. United States: Selected Issues Paper, “IMF 
Country Report No. 10/248,” July 2010. Washington, DC. Available at 
www.imf.org (accessed February 27, 2011).
International Monetary Fund. “World Economic Outlook Update,” July 16, 
2012. Available at www.imf.org (accessed July 30, 2012).
Library of Congress/Thomas. Bill Summary & Status, “95th Congress 
(1977–1978). H.R. 50: Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act.” 
Available at http://thomas.loc.gov (accessed February 19, 2011).
Miller, Roger LeRoy. The Macro View, 16th edition. Boston, MA: Pearson 
Education, Inc., 2012.
Moody’s. “‘AAA/A-1+’ Rating on United States of America Affirmed; 
Outlook Revised to Negative,” September 11, 2012. Available at 
http://www.moodys.com/research/Moodys-issues-update-on-the-outlook-for-
the-US-governments--PR_254944 (accessed September 15, 2012).
National Bureau of Economic Research. “Announcement of June 2009 
Business Cycle Through/End of Last Recession, September 20, 2010.” 
Available at www.nber.org (accessed April 25, 2010).
National Bureau of Economic Research. “Business Cycle Dating Committee, 
National Bureau of Economic Research report,” September 20, 2010. 
Available at www.nber.org/cycles/sept2010.html (accessed April 25, 2011).
National Foundation for Credit Counseling. The 2011 Consumer Financial 
Literacy Survey, Final Report, March 2011. Washington, DC. Prepared by 
Harris Interactive Inc. Public Relations Research. Available at www.ncff.org 
(accessed May 14, 2011).
The National Foundation for Credit Counseling and the Network Branded 
Prepaid Card Association. The 2012 Consumer Financial Literacy Survey, 
Final Report, April 2012 (prepared by Harris Interactive Inc. Public 
Relations Research). Available at www.nfcc.org/NewsRoom/newsreleases
/SIGNIFICANT_GAPS.cfm (accessed September 15, 2012).

Deficit
117 
National Parks Service. “The Great Depression (1929–1939).” Eleanor 
Roosevelt National Historic Site. Available at www.nps.gov (accessed March 
20, 2011).
Office of Management and Budget. Budget of the U.S. Government, Fiscal 
Year 2011. Available at www.budget.gov (accessed February 4, 2011).
Office of Management and Budget. Budget of the U.S. Government, Fiscal 
Year 2012. Available at www.budget.gov (accessed May 1, 2011).
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development. “Economic 
Outlook 91,” Press Conference, Paris, May 22, 2012. Available at 
www.oecd.org (accessed July 30, 2012).
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, “Government 
debt”, Economics: Key Tables from OECD, No. 21, 2012. doi: 10.1787/gov-
debt-table-2012-1-en.
Page, Benjamin, and Reichling, Felix. “Macroeconomic Analysis: Estimated 
Impact of the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act on Employment 
and Economic Output from October 2010 Through December 2010,” 
Congressional Budget Office Director’s Blog, February 23, 2011. Available 
at http://cboblog.cbo.gov/?p=1852 (accessed February 24, 2011).
Parkin, Michael. Macroeconomics, 10th edition. Boston, MA: Pearson 
Education, 2012.
Pennington, Robert L. Economics. Austin, TX: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 
1999.
Politico. “Unsustainable Budget Threatens Nation,” March 24, 2011. 
Available at www.politico.com/news/stories/0311/51864.html (accessed May 
16, 2011).
Rooney, Ben. “U.S. Credit Rating Outlook Lowered by S&P,” April 19, 
2011. Available at CNNMoney.com (accessed May 17, 2011).
Ryan, Paul. “The Path to Prosperity: Restoring America’s Promise, Fiscal 
Year 2012 Budget Resolution,” Report to House Committee on the Budget. 
Available at budget.house.gov (accessed June 24, 2011).
Saad, Lydia. “Americans Believe GOP Should Consider Tea Party Ideas,” 
January 31, 2011. Available at www.gallup.com (accessed March 25, 2011).
Saad, Lydia. “Federal Debt, Terrorism Considered Top Threats to U.S.,” 
June 4, 2010. Available at www.gallup.com (accessed February 4, 2011).

Bibliography
118
Social Security Administration. Fast Facts and Figures about Social 
Security. Available at www.ssa.gov (accessed September 10, 2012).
Social Security Administration. Social Security Basic Facts. Available at 
www.ssa.gov (accessed June 28, 2011).
Standard & Poor’s. “‘AAA/A-1+’ Rating on United States of America 
Affirmed; Outlook Revised to Negative.” April 18, 2011. Available at 
www.standardandpoors.com (accessed May 17, 2011).
Standard & Poor’s. “Global Potential Downgrades: An Increase Globally 
Following the Outlook Revisions to Negative for the U.S. and Japan,” May 
9, 2011. Available at www.standardandpoors.com (accessed May 17, 2011).
Standard & Poors. “United States of America Long-Term Rating Lowered to 
‘AA+’ Political Risks, Rising Debt Burden, Outlook Negative,” August 5, 
2011. 
Available 
at 
www.standardandpoors.com/ratings/articles/en/us
/?assetID=1245316529563 (accessed September 17, 2012).
Suskind, Ron. The Price of Loyalty. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster, 
2004.
TreasuryDirect. “Interest Expense on the Debt Outstanding.” Available at 
www.treasurydirect.gov (accessed February 5, 2011).
TreasuryDirect Kids. “The Basics of Treasury Securities.” Available at 
www.treasurydirect.gov (accessed February 6, 2011).
TreasuryDirect Kids. “The History of the Public Debt: The New Deal (1933-
1936) to World War II (1939-1945).” Available at www.treasurydirect.gov 
(accessed February 6, 2011).
TreasuryDirect Kids. “The History of U.S. Public Debt: The Beginning of 
U.S. Debt.” Available at www.treasurydirect.gov/kids/history/history.htm 
(accessed February 6, 2011).
TreasuryDirect 
Kids. 
“How 
Treasuries 
Work.” 
Available 
at 
www.treasurydirect.gov (accessed February 6, 2011).
U.S. Census Bureau. Statistical Abstract of the United States, 2011, U.S. 
Census 
Bureau: 
Department 
of 
Commerce. 
Available 
at 
www.census.gov/compendia/statab/2011/2011edition.html (accessed June 
16, 2011).

Deficit
119 
U.S. Department of the Treasury. Annual Report on the Public Debt, Fiscal 
Year Ending on September 30, 2009, Title 31, 3130, June 2010. Washington, 
DC. Department of the Treasury.
U.S. Department of the Treasury. “Statement of Treasury Assistant Secretary 
for Financial Markets Mary Miller on Credit Rating Agency Announcements 
Today,” news release, April 18, 2011. Available at www.treasury.gov 
(accessed May 17, 2011).
U.S. Department of the Treasury Financial Management Service. Final 
Monthly Treasury Statement of Receipts and Outlays of the United States 
Government, for Fiscal Year 2010 through September 30, 2010, and other 
periods. Available at www.fms.treas.gov (accessed February 5, 2010).
Wessels, Walter. Barron’s Economics, 4th edition. Hauppauge, NY: Barron’s 
Educational Series, Inc., 2006.
World Trade Organization. 2012 Press Releases/658, April 12, 2012, World 
Trade 2011, Prospects for 2012. Available at www.wto.org (accessed July 
25, 2012).
Zeck, Van. Bureau of the Public Debt. “Commissioner’s Welcome,” October 
8, 2008. Available at www.publicdebt.treas.gov (accessed February 8, 2011).

